Imam Husain (as): a Brief Description and Analysis Tragedy of Karbala As Reported By the Sunnis (part V)
========================================================================================================

He, peace be on him, went on from Batn al Aqaba until he stopped at
Sharaf (for the night). At dawn he ordered his boys to get water and
more (for the journeys When he continued from there until midday. While
he was journeying, one of his followers exclaimed:

"God is greater (Allahu akbar)!"

"God is greater (AllAhu akbar)!" responded al-Husayn, peace be on him.
Then he asked: "Why did you say Allahu akbar?"

"I saw palm-trees," answered the man.

"This is a place in which we never see a palm-tree," a group of his
followers asserted.

"What do you think it is then?" asked al-Husayn, peace be on him. "We
think it is the ears of horses," they answered.

"By God, I think so too," he declared. Then he said: "(So that) we can
face them in one direction (i.e. so that we are not surrounded), we
should put at our rear whatever place of refuge (we can find)."

"Yes," said to him, "there is Dhu Husam over on your left. If you reach
it before them,it will be (in) just (the position) you want." So he
veered left towards it and we went in that direction with him. Even
before we had had time to change direction the vanguard of the cavalry
appeared in front of us and we could see them clearly. We left the road
and when they saw that we had moved off the road, they (also) moved off
the road towards us.

Their spears looked like palm branches stripped of their leaves and
their standards were like birds' wings. Al-Husayn ordered his tents (to
be put up) and they were erected. The people came up; (there were) about
one thousand horsemen under the command of al-Hurr b. Yazid al-Tamimi.
(It was) during the heat of midday (that) he and his cavalry stood
(thus) facing al-Husayn, peace be on him. Al-Husayn, peace be on him,
and his followers were all wearing their turbans and their swords (ready
to fight).

"Provide (our) people with water and let them quench their thirst and
give their horses water to drink little by little," al Husayn ordered
his boys. They did that and they began filling their bowls and cups and
took them to the horses. When a horse had drunk three or four or five
draughts, the water was taken away and given to another horse-until they
had all been watered.

[ Ali b. al Taan al Muharibi reported: ]

I was with al-Hurr on that day, I was among the last of his followers
to arrive. When al-Husayn, peace be on him, saw how thirsty both I and
my horse were, he said: "Make your beast (rawiya) kneel." I thought
rawiya meant water-skin so he said: "Cousin, make your camel (jamal)
kneel." I did so. Then he said: "Drink." I did so, but when I drank,
water flowed from my water-skin.

"Bend your water-skin," said al-Husayn. I did not know how to do that.
He came up (to me) and bent it (into the proper position for drinking).
Then I drank and gave my horse to drink.

Al-Hurr b. Yazid had come from al-Qadisiyya. Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad had
sent al-Husayn b. Numayr and ordered him to take up (his) position at
al-Qadisiyya. Then al-Hurr had been sent in advance with one thousand
horsemen to meet al-Husayn.

Al-Hurr remained positioned opposite to al-Husayn, peace be on him,
until the time for the midday prayer drew near. Al-Husayn, peace be on
him, ordered al-Hajjaj b. Masruq to give the call to prayer. When the
second call to prayer immediately preceding the prayer (iqama) was about
(to be made) al-Husayn came out (before the people) dressed in a
waist-cloth czar) and cloak (rida') and wearing a pair of sandals. He
praised and glorified God, then he said:

People, I did not come to you until your letters came to me, and they
were brought by your messengers (saying), 'Come to us for we have no
Imam. Through you may God unite us under guidance and truth.' Since this
was your view, I have come to you. Therefore give me what you guaranteed
in your covenants and (sworn) testimonies. If you will not and (if you)
are (now) averse to my coming, I will leave you (and go back) to the
place from which I came.

They were silent before him. Not one of them said a word.

"Recite the iqama," he said to the caller for prayer (mu'adhdhin) and
he recited the iqama.

"Do you want to lead your followers in prayer?" he asked al-Hurr b.
Yazid.

"No," he replied, "but you pray and we will pray (following the lead
of) your prayer."

Al-Husayn, peace be on him, prayed before them. Then he returned (to
his tent) and his followers gathered around him. Al-Hurr went back to
the place where he had positioned (his men) and entered a tent which had
been put up for him. A group of his followers gathered around him while
the rest returned to their ranks, which they had been in and which now
they went back to. Each of them held the reins of his mount and sat in
the shade (of its body).

At the time for the afternoon (asr) prayer, al-Husayn, peace be on him,
ordered his followers to prepare for departure. Then he ordered the call
to be made, and the call for the easr prayer was made, and the iqama.
Al-Husayn, peace be on him, came forward, stood and prayed. Then he said
the final greeting (of the prayer) and turned his face towards them
(al-Hurr's men). He praised and glorified God and said:

People, if you fear God and recognise the rights of those who have
rights, God will be more satisfied with you. We are the House of
Muhammad and as such are more entitled to the authority (wilaya) of this
affair (i.e. the rule of the community) over you than these pretenders
who claim what does not belong to them.

They have brought tyranny and aggression among you. If you refuse (us)
because you dislike (us) or do not know our rights, and your view has
now changed from what came to us in your letters and what your
messengers brought, then I will leave you.

"By God," declared al-Hurr, "I know nothing of these letters and
messengers which you mention."

"Uqba b. Siman," al-Husayn, peace be on him, called to one of his
followers, "bring out the two saddle-bags in which the letters to me are
kept."

He brought out two saddle-bags which were full of documents, and they
were put before him.

"We are not among those who wrote these letters to you," said al- Hurr,
"and we have been ordered that when we meet you we should not leave you
until we have brought you to Kufa to 'Ubayd Allah."

"Death will come to you before that (happens)," al-Husayn, peace be on
him, told him. Then he ordered his followers, "Get up and get
mounted."

They got mounted and (then) waited until their women had been
mounted,

"Depart," he ordered his followers. When they set out to leave, the men
(with al-Hurr) got in between them and the direction they were going in.
"May God deprive your mother of you," said al-Husayn, peace be on him,
to al-Hurr, "what do you want?"

"If any of the Arabs other than you were to say that to me," retorted
al-Hurr, "even though he were in the same situation as you, I would not
leave him without mentioning his mother being deprived (of him), whoever
he might be. But by God there is no way for me to mention your mother
except by (saying) the best things possible."

"What do you want?" al-Husayn, peace be on him, demanded.

"I want to go with you to the governor, Ubayd Allah," he replied. "Then
by God I will not follow you." "Then by God I will not let you (go
anywhere else)."

These statements were repeated three times, and when their conversation
was getting more (heated) al-Hurr said: "I have not been ordered to
fight you. I have only been ordered not to leave you until I come with
you to Kufa. If you refuse (to do that), then take any road which will
not bring you into Kufa nor take you back to Medina, and let that be a
compromise between us while I write to the governor,

'Ubayd Allah. Perhaps God will cause something to happen which will
relieve me from having to do anything against you. Therefore take this
(road) here and bear to the left of the road (to) al Udhayb and
al-Qadisiyya."

Al-Husayn, peace be on him, departed and al-Hurr with his followers
(also) set out travelling close by him, while al Hurr was saying to
him:

Al-Husayn, I remind you (before) God to (think of) your life; for I
testify that you will be killed if you fight.

"Do you think that you can frighten me with death?" said al- Husayn,
peace be on him. "Could a worse disaster happen to you than killing me?
I can only speak (to you) as the brother of al-Aws said to his cousin
when he wanted to help the Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant
him and his family peace. His cousin feared for him and said: 'Where are
you going, for you will be killed?' but he replied:

I will depart for there is no shame in death for a young man, whenever
he intends (to do what is) right and he strives like a Muslim,

(Who) has soothed righteous men through (the sacrifice of) his life,
who has scattered the cursed and opposed the criminal.

If I live, I will not regret (what I have done) and if I die, I will
not suffer. Let it be enough for you to live in humiliation and be
reviled.

When al-Hurr heard that he drew away from him. He and his followers
travelled on one side (of the road) while al-Husayn, peace be on him,
travelled on the other, until they reached Udhayb al- Hijanat.
Al-Husayn, peace be on him, went on to Qasr Bani Muqatil. He stopped
there and there a large tent had (already) been erected.

"Whose is that?" he asked. "That belongs to Ubayd Allah b. al-Hurr
al-Jufi," he was told. "Ask him to come to me," he said.

The messenger went to him and said: "This is al-Husayn b. Ali, peace be
on them, and he asks you to come to him."

"We belong to God and to Him we shall return," said 'Ubayd Allah. "By
God, I only left Kufa out of dread that al-Husayn, peace be on him,
would enter Kufa while I was there. By God, I do not want to see him,
nor him to see me."

The messenger returned to him (al-H. usayn). Al-Husayn, peace be on
him, rose and went over to him. He greeted him and sat down. Then he
asked him to go with him. Ubayd Allah b. al Hurr repeated what he had
said before and sought to excuse himself from what he was asking him (to
do).

"If you are not going to help us," al-Husayn, peace be on him, said to
him, "then be sure that you are not one of those who fight against us.
For, by God, no one will hear our cry and not help us without being
destroyed."

"As for that (fighting against you)," he replied, "it will never
happen, if God, the Exalted, wishes."

Then al-Husayn, peace be on him, left him and continued to his camp.
Towards the end of the night, he ordered his boys to get provisions of
water. Then he ordered the journey (to continue). He set out from Qasr
Bani Muqatil.

['Uqba b. Sim'an reported:]

We set out at once with him and he became drowsy while he was on his
horse's back. He woke up, saying: "We belong to God and to Him we will
return. Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds."
He did that twice or three times, then his son, 'Ali b. al-Husayn
approached him and asked: "Why are you praising God and repeating the
verse of returning to Him?"

"My son," he answered, "I nodded off and a horseman appeared to me,
riding a horse and he said: 'Men are travelling and the fates travel
towards them.' Then I knew it was our own souls announcing our deaths to
us."

"Father," asked (the youth), "does God regard you as evil? Are we not
in the right?"

"Indeed (we are)," he answered, "by Him to Whom all His servants must
return."

"Father," said (the youth), "then we need have no concern, if we are
going to die righteously."

"May God give you the best reward a son can get for (his behaviour
towards) his father," answered al-Husayn, peace be on him.

In the morning, he stopped and prayed the morning prayer. Then he
hurried to remount and to continue the journey with his followers,
veering to the left with the intention of separating from (al-Hurr's
men). However al-Hurr b. Yazid came towards him and stopped him and his
followers (from going in that direction) and he began to (exert pressure
to) turn them towards Kufa, but they resisted him. So they stopped
(doing that) but they still accompanied them in the same way until they
reached Ninawa, (which was) the place where al-Husayn, peace be on him,
stopped.

Suddenly there appeared a rider on a fast mount, bearing weapons and
carrying a bow on his shoulder, coming from Kufa. They all stopped and
watched him. When he reached them, he greeted al-Hurr and his followers
and did not greet al- Husayn and his followers. He handed a letter from
Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad to al-Hurr. In it (was the following):

When this letter reaches you and my messenger comes to you, make
al-Husayn come to a halt. But only let him stop in an open place without
vegetation. I have ordered my messenger to stay with you and not to
leave you until he brings me (news of) your carrying out my
instructions.

Greetings.

When al-Hurr had read the letter, he told them: "This is a letter from
the governor Ubayd Allah. He has ordered me to bring you to a halt at a
place which his letter suggests. This is his messenger and he has
ordered him not to leave me until I carry out the order with regard to
you."

Yazid (b. Ziyad) b. al-Muhajir al-Kindi who was with al-Husayn, peace
be on him, looked at the messenger of Ibn Ziyad and he recognized him.

"May your mother be deprived of you," he exclaimed, "what a business
you have come to!" "I have obeyed my Imam and remained faithful to my
pledge of allegiance," (the other man) answered.

You have been disobedient to your Lord and have obeyed your Imam in
bringing about the destruction of your soul," responded Ibn al-Muhajir.
"You have acquired (eternal) shame (for yourself) and (the punishment
of) Hell-fire. What a wicked Imam your Imam is! Indeed God has said: we
have made them Imams who summon (people) to Hellfire and on the Day of
Resurrection they will not be helped. (XXVIII, 41) Your Imam is one of
those.

Al-Hurr b. Yazid began to make the people stop in a place that was
without water and where there was no village.

"Shame upon you, let us stop at this village or that one," said al-
Husayn, peace be on him. He meant by this, Ninawa and al- Ghadiriyya,
and by that, Shufayya."

"By God, I cannot do that," replied (al-Hurr), "for this man has been
sent to me as a spy."

"Son of the Apostle of God," said Zuhayr b. al-Qayn, "I can only think
that after what you have seen, the situation will get worse than what
you have seen. Fighting these people, now, will be easier for us than
fighting those who will come against us after them. For by my life,
after them will come against us such (a number) as we will not have the
power (to fight) against."

"I will not begin to fight against them," answered al-Husayn.

That was Thursday, 2nd of (the month of) Muharram in the year 61
A.H.(680). On the next day, Umar b. Sad b. Abi Waqqas, set out from Kufa
with four thousand horsemen. He stopped at Ninawa and sent for 'Urwa b.
Qays al-Ahmasi and told him: "Go to him (al- Husayn) and ask him: What
brought you, and what do you want?"

Urwa was one of those who had written to al-Husayn, peace be on him,
and he was ashamed to do that. The same was the case with all the
leaders who had written to him, and all of them refused and were
unwilling to do that. Kathir b. Abd Allah al-Shabi stood up - he was a
brave knight who never turned his face away from anything - and said: "I
will go to him. By God, if you wish, I will rush on him."

"I don't want you to attack him," said 'Umar, "but go to him and ask
him what has brought him."

As Kathir was approaching him, Abu Thumama al-Saidi saw him and said to
al-Husayn, "May God benefit you, Abu Abd Allah, the wickedest man in the
land, the one who has shed the most blood and the boldest of them all in
attack, is coming towards you."

Then (Abu Thumama) stood facing him and said: "Put down your sword."

"No, by God," he replied, "I am only a messenger. If you will listen to
me, I will tell you (the message) which I have been sent to bring to
you. If you refuse, I will go away."

"I will take the hilt of your sword," answered (Abu Thumama), "and you
can say what you need to."

"No, by God, you will not touch it," he retorted.
"Then tell me what you have brought and I will inform him for you. But
I will not let you go near him, for you are a charlatan."

They both (stood there and) cursed each other. Then (Kathlr) went back
to Umar b. Sad and told him the news (of what had happened). Umar
summoned Qurra b. Qays al-Hanzali and said to him: "Shame upon you
Qurra, go and meet al-Husayn and ask him what brought him and what he
wants."

Qurra began to approach him. When al-Husayn, peace be on him, saw him
approaching, he asked: "Do you know that man?"

"Yes," replied Habib b. Muzahir, "he is from the Hanzala clan of Tamim.
He is the son of our sister. I used to know him as a man of sound
judgement. I would not have thought that he would be present at this
scene."

He came and greeted al-Husayn, peace be on him. Then he informed him of
'Umar b. Sa'd's message.

"The people of this town of yours wrote to me that I should come,"
answered al Husayn, peace be on him. "However, if now you have come to
dislike me, then I will leave you."

"Shame upon you, Qurra," Habib b. Muzahir said to him, "will you return
to those unjust men? Help this man through whose fathers God will grant
you (great) favour."

"I will (first) return to my leader with the answer to his message,"
replied Qurra, "and then I will reflect on my views."

He went back to 'Umar b. Sa'd and gave him his report. "I hope that God
will spare me from making war on him and fighting against him," said
'Umar and then he wrote to 'Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad:

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. I am (writing this
from) where I have positioned myself, near al Husayn, and I have asked
him what brought him and what he wants.

He answered: 'The people of this land wrote to me and their messengers
came to me asking me to come and I have done so. However if (now) they
have some to dislike me and (the position) now appears different to them
from what their messengers brought to me, I will go away from them.

[Hassan b. Qa'id al-'Absi reported:] I was with 'Ubayd Allah when this
letter came to him, he read it and then he recited:

Now when our claws cling to him, he hopes for escape but he will be
prevented (now) from (getting) any refuge.

He wrote to 'Umar b. Sa'd:

Your letter has reached me and I have understood what you mentioned.
Offer al-Husayn (the opportunity) of him and all his followers pledging
allegiance to Yazid. If he does that, we will then see what our
judgement will be.

When the answer reached Umar b. Sa'd, he said: "I fear that 'Ubayd
Allah will not accept that I should be spared (fighting al- Husayn)."

(Almost immediately) after it, there came (another) letter from Ibn
Ziyad (in which he said):

Prevent al-Husayn and his followers from (getting) water. Do not let
them taste a drop of it just as was done with 'Uthman b. Affan.

At once Umar b. Said sent Amr b al-Hajjaj with five hundred horsemen to
occupy the path to the water and prevent al-Husayn and his followers
from (getting) water in order that they should (not) drink a drop of it.
That was three days before the battle against al- Husayn, peace be on
him.

Abd Allah b. al-Husayn al-Azdi, who was numbered among Bajila, called
out at the top of his voice: "Husayn, don't you see that the water is as
if in the middle of heaven. By God, you will not taste a drop of it
until you die of thirst."

"O God, make him die of thirst and never forgive him", cried al-
Husayn, peace be on him.


