Tragedy of Karbala As Reported By the Sunnis (part Viii)
========================================================

Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan turned back against them but (some) of his men
were killed and the rest retreated to their positions. (The number) of
killed was apparent among the followers of al-Husayn, peace be on him,
because of the fewness of their number while it was not so apparent
among the followers of 'Umar b. Sa'd because of their great number.

The battle (continued to be) fought fiercely and desperately. The
number killed and wounded among the followers of Abu 'Abd Allah
al-Husayn, peace be on him, continued to grow until the sun began to
decline. Al-Husayn and his companions prayed the prayer according to the
rite of the prayer of fear.

Hanzala b. Sa'd al-Shibami advanced in front of al-Husayn, peace be on
him, and called out:

People of Kufa, O people fear for you the same (that happened) on the
Day of Parties. If earforyou on the Day of Summoning [ XL : 30,32 ]. O
people, do not kill al-Husayn, for God will destroy you with punishment.
He who forges a lie will be disappointed. [ XX, 61 ]

He advanced and fought until he was killed, may God have mercy on him.
After that, Shawdhab, retainer (mawla) of Shakir, went forward, (after
saying): "Greetings, Abu 'Abd Allah and may God store his mercy and
blessings for you."

He fought until he was killed, may God have mercy on him. Then came
Abis b. Shabib al-Shakiri. He greated al-Husayn, peace be on him, and
fought until he was killed. Each man of (al-Husayn's) followers
continued to go forward and be killed until there only remained with
al-Husayn, peace be on him, the members of his own House.

His son, Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on them, whose mother was Layla
daughter of Abu Murra b. Urwa b. Masud al-Thaqafi, was (the next) to
advance. He was one of the most handsome men of the time. On that day he
was nineteen years of age. He attacked the enemy declaring:

I am Ali b. al-Husayn b. Ali. By the House of God, we are those rightly
(endowed) with the Prophet.

By God, the son of a spurious son will not judge us. I will strike with
my sword in defence of my father.

I will strike with the blow of a Hashimi, a Qurayshi.

He did that several times, and the Kufans were afraid to kill him. Then
Murra b. Munqidh al-Abdi saw him. He said: "May the felonies of the
Arabs come on me, if he gets past me doing the same as he has been
doing, (and) if I do not deprive his mother of him."

('Ali b. al-Husayn) continued to attack the enemy as he had been doing
but then Murra b. Munqidh came against him and stabbed him. He was
struck down and the enemy fell upon him, cutting him with their swords.
Al-Husayn, peace be on him, went out until he stood over him and said:

May God kill (the) people who killed you, my son. How fool hardy they
are against the Merciful and in violating the sacredness of the family
of the Apostle, may God bless him and his family.

His eyes filled with tears and he said: "There will (only) be dust on
the world after you."

Zaynab, the sister of al-Husayn, peace be on him, came hurrying out,
crying: "My brother, my nephew!"

She came up and threw herself on (her dead nephew). Al-Husayn raised
her head and then led her back to the tent. He told his young (sons):
"Carry your brother back."

They carried him and put him before the tent which they had been
fighting in front of. (Then) one of 'Umar b. Sad's men called 'Amr b.
Subayh shot an arrow at 'Abd Allah b. Muslim b. Aqil. Abd Allah put his
hand to guard his brow.

The arrow struck his hand and penetrated through his brow, and riveted
the hand to it. He was not able to move it when another man came down on
him with a spear, thrust it into his heart, and killed him.

Abd Allah b. Qutba al-Ta'i attacked Awn b. 'Abd Allah b. Ja'far b. Abi
Talib and killed him.

Amir b. Nashhal al-Tamimi attacked Muhammad b. Abd Allah b. Ja'far b.
Abi Talib and killed him.

Uthman b. Khalid al-Hamdam launched himself against 'Abd al- Rahman b.
'Aqil b. Abi Talib, and killed him.

[Humayd b. Muslim reported:]

It was like that among us (i.e. many of al-Husayn's supporters had been
killed by 'Umar b. Sa'd's army) when a young lad came out against us.
His face was young like the first splinter of the new moon and he
carried a sword. He was wearing a shirt and a waistcloth (izar), and a
pair of sandals, one of whose straps was broken. 'Umar b. Sa'd b. Nufayl
al-Azdi said to me: "et me attack him." I said:

Praise be to God, what do you want to do that for? Leave him. While
even one of the family of al-Husayn remains, that will be enough to take
vengeance on you for his (death).

But he insisted: "By God, let me attack him."

So he rushed against him and did not turn back until he had struck his
head with his sword and split it in two. The young lad fell face
downwards and he called out: "O uncle!"

At this, al-Husayn, peace be on him, showed himself just like the hawk
shows itself. He launched into attack like a raging lion and struck Umar
b. Sad b. Nufayl with his sword.

That man tried to fend off the blow with his arm but his arm was cut
off from the elbow, and he gave a great shriek (of pain) which was
(even) heard by the people in the camp. As al-Husayn, peace be on him,
turned away from him, the cavalry of Kufa attacked in order to save him
but they (only succeeded) in trampling him to death beneath the horses'
hooves, and the dust rose.

I saw al-Husayn, peace be on him, standing by the head of the young
lad, looking at his feet and al-Husayn, peace be on him was saying:

May the people who have caused your death perish. For the one who will
oppose them on the Day of Resurrection on your behalf will be your
grandfather (Ali, or great grandfather, i.e. the Prophet).

Then he continued:

By God, it is hard on your uncle that you called him and he did not
answer you, or rather he answered but your cry was (too late) to help
you. For by God, those who kill his relatives are many but those who
help him are few.

Then he carried him in his arms. It is just as if (even now) I am
looking at the two legs of the boy making marks (as they trail) on the
ground. He took him and put him with his son, 'Ali b. al-Husayn, peace
be on them both, and the other members of the household who had been
slain. I asked about the boy and was told that he was al-Qasim b.
al-Hasan b. Ali b. Abl Talib, peace be on them.

Then al-Husayn, peace be on him, sat in front of the tent. He brought
his son, 'Abd Allah b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, who was (just) a baby
and sat him on his knee. But one of the Banu Asad shot an arrow which
slaughtered the child. Al-Husayn, peace be on him, caught the child's
blood in the palm of his hand. When his palm was full, he poured (the
blood) on to the ground and said:

O Lord, if it be so that You have kept the help of Heaven from us, then
let it be because (Your purpose) is better than (immediate help). Take
vengeance on these people who are (such) oppressors.

Then he carried the child and laid him with the (other) members of his
household who had been slain.

(Just then) Abd Allah b. Uqba al-Ghanawi shot an arrow at Abu Bakr b.
al-Hasan b. Ali, peace be on them, and killed him. When al-Abbas b. Ali
saw the number of his family who had been killed, he said to his
brothers on his mother's side, Abd Allah, Ja'far and Uthman:

My brothers through my mother, go forward so that I may see that you
have remained true to God and His Apostle. For you have no children (to
defend).

Abd Allah, may God have mercy on him, advanced and fought fiercely. He
exchanged blows with Hani' b. Shabib al-Hadrami and Hani' killed him.
After him Ja'far went forward and Hani' also killed him. Khawali b.
Yazid al-Asbahi, may God curse him, went against Uthman who had taken
the place of his brother. He fired an arrow at him and brought him down.
One of the Banu Darim attacked him (while he was down) and cut off his
head.

The group then launched an attack against al-Husayn, peace be on him,
and cut off his access to his camp. His thirst became severe, and he set
off towards the dam, trying to reach the Euphrates. In front of him was
his brother, al-'Abbas. However, the calvary of Ibn Sa'd, may God curse
him, blocked his route. Among these was a man from the Banu Darim; he
said to (the cavalry):

Woe upon you! Prevent him from reaching the Euphrates, don't let him
get water.

Then al-Husayn, peace be on him, cried out: "O God, I am thirsty." The
Dariml became angry and shot an arrow at him which lodged in his throat.
Al-Husayn, peace be on him, pulled out the arrow and held his hand below
his throat. Both his palms were filled with blood which he shook away,
then he said:

O God, I complain to You about what is being done to the son of the
daughter of Your Prophet.

Then he returned to his position, while his thirst had become (even
more) severe.

Meanwhile the people had surrounded al-Abbas and cut him off from
(al-Husayn). Single-handed he began to attack them until he was killed,
may God have mercy on him. The two who took part in killing him were
Zayd b. Warqa al-Hanafi and Hahm b. al-Tufail al- Shabsi, after he had
been covered with wounds and could not move.


[ The account of al Abbas death is missing from Tabari ]

When al-Husayn, peace be on him, came back from the dam to his tents,
Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan advanced towards him with a group of his
followers and surrounded him. The fastest of them was a man called Malik
b. al-Nusayr al-Kindi.

He cursed al-Husayn, peace be on him, and struck him on the head with
his sword. (Al-Husayn) was wearing a cap. (The sword) went through it
right into his head and made it bleed. The cap was filled with blood.

Al-Husayn, peace be on him, said to him:

May you never eat or drink with your right hand! May God gather you (on
the Day of Judgement) with those people who are wrong-doers.

Then he threw away the cap and called for a cloth which he tied around
his head. Then he called for another cap, put it on and bound it (in
place).

[ The above portion is missing from the account of Tabari ]

Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan and those who were with him had withdrawn from
him to their (earlier) positions. After a short delay they came again
against him and surrounded him. 'Abd Allah b. al- Hasan b. Alieace be on
them, came out against them, he was only a boy, not yet mature enough to
leave the women. He rushed forward until he stood beside his uncle,
al-Husayn, peace be on him. Then Zaynab, the daughter of Ali, peace be
on him, came after him to stop him, and al Husayn, peace be on him, told
her to stop him. However he refused (to take any notice of her) and
determinedly prevented her (from taking him away). He said: "By God, I
will not leave my uncle."

(At this) Abjar b. Ka'b rushed towards al-Husayn, peace be on him. With
sword (in hand), the young lad said to him: "Woe upon you, you son of an
impure woman, are you trying to kill my uncle?" Abjar struck at him with
his sword.

The boy tried to fend off (the blow) with his arm. The sword cut
through (his arm) to the skin (on the other side). There was the arm
hanging (by the skin). The boy cried out: "O my mother!" Al-Husayn took
hold of him and embraced him. He said to him:

My nephew, try to bear what has come to you and be comforted with the
news that God will unite you with your righteous ancestors.

Then al-Husayn, peace be on him, raised his hand and said:

O God, even as You have made life pleasant for them for a time, divide
them into factions and make them follow the ways of factions and let
their rulers never be pleased with them. They summoned us so that they
might support us and then they became hostile to us and killed us.

**[ Abjar is mentioned as Bahr in Tabari ]**

The foot-soldiers launched an attack from right and left against those
who were left with al-Husayn, peace be on him, until only a group of
three or four remained with him. When al-Husayn, peace be on him saw
that, he called for a pair of dazzling Yemen trousers (sarawil). He tore
them and put them on.

He tore them so that he should not have them plundered after he had
been killed. When al- Husayn, peace be on him, was killed, Abjar b. Kab
set on him, plundered him of the trousers and left him naked. After that
the two hands of Abjar b. Ka'b, may God curse him, became so dry in the
summer that they were like sticks and then soaking wet in the winter so
that they sprinkled drops of water and puss, until God destroyed him.

When nobody except a group of three members of his family was left with
al-Husayn, peace be on him, he moved against the people, while the three
protected him until (all) three were killed. Al-Husayn, was left alone.
Despite being weighed down by wounds in his head and body, he began to
strike against them with his sword and they scattered, to right and
left, away from him.

Then Humayd b. Muslim said:

By God, I have never seen such persistence. His sons have been killed,
and the members of his household and his followers, yet he is still as
brave as ever and he has not allowed his spirit to leave him. When the
soldiers attack him, he fights back with his sword and scatters them to
right and left of him like goats when a wolf comes upon them.

When Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan realised (the position), he called for
the cavalry and they came up at the rear of the foot-soldiers. He
ordered the archers to shoot at (al-Husayn) and they showered him with
arrows until he became (quilted with arrows) like a hedgehog (iZ with
spikes).

He drew back from them and they stood facing him. His sister Zaynab,
came to the door of the tent and called out to 'Umar b. Sad b. Abi
Waqqas: "Woe upon you, Umar. Is Abu Abd Allah being killed while you
(stand by and) watch?" But Umar did not answer. Then she called out:
"Woe upon you (all), is there not a Muslim among you?" But no-one
answered.

Then Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan shouted at the foot soldiers and the
Calvary: "Why are you waiting for the man? May your mothers be deprived
of you!" So they attacked him from every side.

Zura b. Sharik struck him on the left shoulder-blade and cut into it.
Another of them struck him on the shoulder. He fell prostrate on his
face. Sinan b. Anas al-Nakhai stabbed him with a spear and killed him.
Khawali b. Yazid al-Asbahi hurried to him and bent down to cut off his
head but he trembled (too much).

Shamir said to him: "May God crush your arm why are you trembling?"
Then Shamir bent down and decapitated him. He lifted the head (and
handed it) to Khawati saying: "Take it to the commander 'Umar b. Sa'd."
Then they began to plunder (the body of) al-Husayn, peace be on him.
Ishaq b. al-Hayat al-Hadrami, may God curse him, took his shirt. Abjar
b. Ka'b, may God curse him, took his trousers.

Akhnas b. Marthad, may God curse him, took his turban. One of the Banu
Darim took his sword. They plundered his saddle and his camel and they
looted his womenfolk.

[ The name of the plunderers and the plundered objects are different in
Tabari ]

[Humayd b. Muslim reported:]

By God, I did not see one of his women or daughters or the women of his
family who did not have her clothes ripped from her back, taken away and
removed from her forcibly. Then we came to Ali b.

al-Husayn, peace be on them both. He was stretched out on a bed and he
was very ill. Shamir had a group of foot-soldiers with him and they
asked him, "Shall we kill this sick one?" I said: "Praise be to God,
will boys be killed (too)? This is only a youth even though he is what
he is." And I went on (arguing) until I had moved them away from him.

Then 'Umar b. Sa'd arrived and the women cried out and wept in his
face. He ordered his followers: "None of you should enter the tents of
these women nor disturb this sick boy." The women asked him to return
what had been taken from them so that they could clothe themselves
again.

So he commanded that whoever had taken any of their belongings should
return them to them. But by God, none of them returned anything. He then
entrusted charge of the main tent and the tents of the women to a group
(of men) who were ; with him. He said: "Guard (the women) so that none
of them may leave and do not harm them."

After this, he returned to his tent and called out to his followers:
"Who will volunteer (to go) to al-Husayn and make his horse trample on
(al-Husayn's body)?" Ten volunteered. Of these, Ishaq b. Hayyat and
Akhnas b. Marthad trampled on (the body of) al-Husayn with their horses
until they had broken and bruised his back.

Umar b. Sad despatched on that day-it was the day of 'Ashura', - the
head of al-Husayn, peace be on him, with Khawali b. Yazid al-Asbahi and
Humayd b. Muslim al-Azdi, to Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad. Then he ordered the
heads of the remainder of his followers and members of his House (who
had been slain) to be cut off. There were seventy-two heads. He sent
Shamir b. Dhi al-Jawshan, Qays b. Ash'ath and Amr b. al-Hajjaj with
these. They journeyed until they brought them to Ibn Ziyad. He ('Umar b.
Sad) remained there for the rest of that day and the next day until just
after midday.

Then he summoned the people for the journey, and set out towards Kufa.
He took with him the daughters and sisters of al-Husayn, peace be on
him, together with 'Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him. The latter was
still sick with a dysentry and was almost on the point of death.

When Ibn Sad departed, some of Banu Asad, who had been staying at
al-Ghadiriyya went to al-Husayn, peace be on him, and his followers.
They performed the funeral prayer over them. Then they buried al-Husayn
at the place where his tomb still is, and they buried his son 'Ali b.
al-Husayn al-Asghar (the younger) at the foot of the body. They dug
around the area next to the two feet of al-Husayn, peace be on him, for
the martyrs from his House and his followers.

They gathered them together and buried them all together. However, they
buried al-Abbas b. 'Ali, peace be on them both, in the place where he
was killed, on the road to al-Ghadiriyya, where his tomb still is.

**[ These details are not given by Tabari ]**


