Reasons Behind the Commemoration of Imam Al-husain (as)
=======================================================

Assalamu Alaykum,

After reading your article, I realized that the misunderstanding here
is due to accepting what you have heard by some of your Wahhabi friends
without giving it a second thought. What they have provided you as an
argument against the Shi'ites is fully rejected by logic, let alone the
History and Hadith. Had you have think about their argument, you would
never have bought it nor would you have posted it, my friend. However, I
presume that you are searching for the truth, and I will be glad to
share my understanding of the subject with you.

The Shia netters refer to Karbala and what they do at that
time as a celebration of the Martyrdom of Imam Hussein. Any
Muslim must mourn the killing of one of the most beloved
youth to the Prophet (PBUH) as well as one of the most
important Sahabi's, the son of two of the most important
and loved people among the Sahabah (Ali and Fatimah RAA
both). Still, I do not understand why people celebrate the
Martyrdom, I mean I mourne it and I am sad at what
happened, but celebrate is the wrong word.


Brother, if you have tuned to SRI, you would have seen many reasons
behind commemoration of the martyrdom of Imam Husain (AS). Since you
mentioned that this subject has been discussed in SRI and MSA, then you
should have had some idea about these arguments. Do you have any
comments on those arguments?

Let me put it in simple words. If your father (may Allah grant him long
life if he is still alive) dies, what will be your reaction to his
death? If you loved him a lot, you or other members of your family will
cry for him. crying is a sign of missing a highly dear one for a person
who has human heart.

Now, suppose he has been killed on the path of Allah with some noble
ideas to implement. What will be your reaction to his martyrdom? Do you
pass from it as in the case of a simple death? Or you raise your voice
and try to keep his noble ideas alive by REMINDING people of his actions
and thoughts and give them a LESSON on his bravery and sacrifices, and
asking people to join his path and to KEEP ALIVE his noble thoughts?

[ One side remark here is that, just imagine that you and your brothers
and sisters mourn for your father who has been martyred, and meanwhile
some body jumps and accuses you of killing your father because you are
mourning for him and based on his logic mourning is a sign of feeling
guilty of murdering. What will be your reaction to such corrupted logic?
I am really interested to hear from you. ]

Now, let us go further and consider a religious leader who has spent
his lifetime in learning the religion and teaching others the way one
should live and explaining the Islamic duties and thoughts. If such
person is martyred by the tyrannical rulers, then our commemoration will
include a much wider aspect, since this man is no longer a father of an
individual, but rather a father for all those who were benefiting from
his knowledge and guidance.

Finally, if we consider the supreme level of the Prophet Muhammad and
his Ahlul-Bayt who were the best of mankind, the most knowledgeable, the
most illustrious, the most god-fearing, the most pious, the best in
personal virtues, and the most honored before Allah and the leaders for
all the generations till the day of judgment, then one can comprehend
that keeping their path alive is a DUTY upon us as their followers.

By commemorating the martyrdom of Imam Husain (AS), we learn lessons
from his noble thoughts and convictions. Learning about what happened to
him and his companions in the history will provide us a light for the
future. Learning about his actions has inspiring effects on our actions
as well.

The other more puzzling thing is what happens during the celebration.
Again I might be wrong and please correct me in a gentle way if I am.
Usually during this celebration, my Shia brothers start hitting
themselves on the head (Is it at that time or am I wrong ?) until in
some cases they faint or blood starts getting out of their heads.

I have even seen (on TV) pictures of small children being hit or being
made to hit themselves (I admit that those could be fabrications and out
of context pictures but that's what I've seen and I am ready to be
corrected). I ask my Shia brothers and sisters, is this the way to
celebrate ? Why do you hit yourselves ?

I have never heard of small children being hit, nor have ever seen
adults are being hit. What you pictured should be really an amazing
ceremony. No my dear friend, there is no such silly actions. These are
propagated by those who hate to see the remembrance of Ahlul-Bayt, and
they resort to all possible means to mock to Followers of the Members of
the House of the Prophet (PBUH&HF). And you has become their voice
unwittingly, I presume.

Usually the ceremony includes speech by a learned man with regard to
the movement of Imam Husain and his aims and his message. Then the
speech continues to reminding the heart-breaking events of the
catastrophe of Ashura and those who have human heart will cry, and
mourn.

Of course, there are traditions transmitted by Ahlul-Bayt which state,
crying for Imam Husain, or making others to cry for him (through speech
and reminding the events) has a lot of rewards.

In fact, all the prophets of God without any exception cried for Imam
Husain and commemorated Ashura, including Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF).
Not only that, but also the Jinns (unseen creatures) mourn for Imam
Husain. I have mentioned some of traditions affirming this fact in my
previous posts quoting from Sunni collections.

Nonetheless, we affirm that hurting own body is forbidden. Some people
may get very emotional and do that, yet the rest are not to be blamed.
An analogy is the case when a person loses a dear one, where s/he will
cry for him.

Due to the height of emotion one (specially women) may start beating
herself to the extent that it causes harm for her body. This is what is
forbidden, while what has no harm to body (including beating chest) is
allowed. Thus the commemoration can not be questioned by the innocent
overreaction of certain individual(s).

The explanation that I was given (by Non-Shia's mind you), that Shia
hit themselves as a punishemnt that they left Imam Hussein go from
Koufah (?) alone with a few men and did not help him. At the same time
it was them who sent for him to come and lead them to fight for his
right to be the Khalifah.

It is really amazing that you readily accept such rumor without even
giving it a second thought. Even I suppose the Shia killed Imam Husain
in year 61 AH, why should I feel guilty about what some people did in
the history? Even suppose my father killed Imam Husain, then why should
I feel guilty of what my father did? The sin of a sinner will never be
inherited to his offspring.

(The ancestors may have a share of such sin if they mislead their
offspring, but the reverse is never true). Thus such argument that we
cry for Imam Husain since our fathers allegedly killed him would be the
most stupid interpretation on the reason behind commemoration of Imam
Husain (AS). I shouldn't expect any more intelligence from the enemies
of Ahlul-Bayt.

My dear brother, we cry in the memory of Imam Husain, for:

1- all the messengers of God cried for him;

2- all the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt cried for him;

3- we love him more than we love our fathers and our dear ones;

4- he is a Symbol of resistance against tyranny and the leader of the
Martyrs for us;

5- we want to swear allegiance to him and his path and keep aloof from
their enemies;

6- his aims have not been fully achieved and his blood has not been
revenged yet. As such, we keep this event with all its emotion alive
until such time that Imam Mahdi (AS) appears who will cleanse the
surface of the Earth form all such tyrants;

7- condolence to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF) and the members of
Ahlul- Bayt;

8- abiding the instruction of Ahlul-Bayt in remembering this event and
seeking the reward associated with it.

And there are much more reasons that you will find if you switch the
books at your disposal and study some Shi\`ite literature regarding to
Imam Husain (AS).

As for the stupid claim that the Shia killed Imam Husain (AS), I would
like to first ask you what is the definition of Shia. If Shia means all
those who claim to love Ahlul-Bayt, then I can tell you that ALL
Muslims, with no exception from the time of the Prophet till today are
Shia! Even the Wahhabis are Shia by your definition. Shia means
"followers", and as such those who forsake their leader can not be
considered his followers by any stretch of imagination.

The true followers (Shia) of Ahlul-Bayt have always been in minority.
The Shia of Imam Husain were those who stayed with him in Karbala
(beside those who did not have ability to join him due to justifiable
reasons. Examples include, but are not limited to: Ibn Abbas and Jabir
Ibn Abdullah al-Ansari who were both blind at that time.)

Those who fought Imam Husain comprise those you claim to be Tabi'een
(disciples of companions) whom you believe you should follow! Those who
fought Imam Husain were NEVER the followers of Ahlul-Bayt unless you
believe in contradiction. Those who joined the army of Yazid were rather
the followers of Satan.

Yes, some of those who wrote to Imam Husain to come over Iraq, did not
support him later, for the simple reason that they were not his
followers but rather the followers of their own whims. They were people
who were tired of the oppression of the Umayad, and they were looking
for a an easy relief.

Some of them thought if Imam Husain takes over the power and they will
be able to get rid of oppression and more importantly they were thinking
of reaching to money, position in his government. But after the pressure
of the agent of Yazid in Kufah and the enforcement of marshal law, and
when they saw that their lives are in jeopardy and their dreams are
unlikely to take place, they forsook Imam Husain's deputy.

They were no better than Talha and Zubair who supported Imam Ali at the
beginning for their own worldly interests, but when they found that the
Imam will not fulfill such interests for them they went against him and
fought him. Do you ever claim that Talha and Zubair were the Shia of
Ali? Certainly not. Shia means "followers", and those who forsake their
leader can not be considered his followers by any stretch of
imagination.

BTW, you, as a Sunni, acknowledge Imam Ali to be a righteous Caliph.
Does that make you Shia? Certainly not. Similarly, most of those who
were living under the government of Imam Ali were not his followers, and
that was why they rebelled against him for their own worldly interest,
the list include: Aisha/Talha/Zubair and their supporters, as well as
those whom Imam Ali named them al-Khawarij (kharijites) who disobeyed
Imam Ali in the battle of Siffin and announced that Ali is a polytheist
(Mushrik).

No doubt that Imam Ali gave an oath that he will fight and kill all of
them except nine individuals who will be able to escape (one of which
later murdered Imam Ali (AS)), and this exactly happened in the battle
of Nahrawan. Imam Ali never called them Shia, nor the historians claimed
them as such, but you do! The Shia of Imam Ali are those for whom the
Messenger of Allah as follows:

The Messenger of Allah said to Ali: "Glad tiding O Ali! Verily you and
your companions and your Shia (followers) will be in Paradise."

**Sunni references:**

(1) Fadha'il al-Sahaba, by Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, v2, p655
(2) Hilyatul Awliyaa, by Abu Nu'aym, v4, p329
(3) Tarikh, by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, v12, p289
(4) al-Awsat, by al-Tabarani
(5) Majma' al-Zawa'id, by al-Haythami, v10, pp 21-22
(6) al-Darqunti, who said this tradition has been transmitted via
numerous
authorities.
(7) al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar Haythami , Ch. 11, section 1,
p247


Thus the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) used to say the phrase of "Shia
of Ali". This phrase is not something invented later! Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH&HF) said that the true followers of imam Ali will go to Paradise,
and this is a great felicity. Also Jabir Ibn Abdillah al-Ansari narrated
that:

The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said: "The Shia of Ali are the real
victorious in the day of resurrection/rising"

**Sunni references:**

- al-Manaqib Ahmad, as mentioned in:
- Yanabi al-Mawaddah, by al-Qundoozi al-Hanafi, p62
- Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthoor, by al-Hafidh Jalaluddin al-Suyuti, who
quotes
the tradition as follows: "We were with the Holy Prophet when Ali
came
towards us. The Holy Prophet said: He and his Shia will aquire
salvation
on the day of judgment."


The "day of rising" could also refer to the day of rising of al-Mahdi
(AS). But in more general term, it means the day of judgment.

The stupid claim that Shia killed Imam Husain follows that the Prophet
states those who will kill Imam Husain will go to Paradise! Perhaps, you
believe that's why Yazid did so.

Such claim by Wahhabis has been made solely to cover the nasty face of
the tyrannical leaders of that time and to drift the attention from
their horrible crime, and to justify their rule. It will not be
surprising that they have gone as far as saying it was the legitimate
right of Yazid to take all possible action to preserve his dynasty. In
contrast with the claim of these individuals, the Sunni history confirms
that Imam Husain was killed by the direct order of Yazid (LA):

Ubaydullah Ibn Ziyad (the governor of Yazid in Kufah) was leaving Iraq
to Syria after killing the battle of Karbala, with a guard of his
followers. Shuraih (the payroll Judge who gave verdict that the blood of
Imam Husain is Halaal) noticed that he was silent for a long time, he
approached him and said: "O Ubaydullah, I think it bothered you that you
killed Husain?! Ubaydullah said: No! Indeed Yazid had ordered me to
either kill Husain or he (Yazid) will kill me.

Sunni reference: History of Ibn Athir, v4, p140

The above gives evidence to the fact that he was Yazid who gave the
direct order to kill Imam Husain (AS). Later, when the scandal of his
horrible crime and the abuse of the household of the Prophet started
shaking his regime, he condemned the act of Ibn Ziyad in public and
disassociated himself. It has also been reported that:

Yazid ordered the head of Husain brought to Syria, when it was put to
him he started abusing it and beating it with his stick and said the
following Poetry:

I wish that my elders in Badr witness the fear of Khazraj from the
falling of the swords. Then they would have cherished and savored (my
act) and by saying O Yazid may your arm be powerful (for getting revenge
by killing Husain).

**Sunni refernces:**

- Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, end of ch. 11, pp
331-332
- al-Radd Ala al-Muta'assib al-Aneed, by Ibn al-Jawzi, p47-48
- Tarikh Alisalm v5, p18-19

Ibn al-Jawzi comments:

It is not difficult to understand why Ibn Ziyad (the governor of Yazid
in Kufah) fought Husain, but the more surprising was the brutality of
Yazid in abusing the head of Husain and whipping Husain's mouth with his
stick, and ordering to carry the household of the Prophet on camels
without saddle, and many other shameful acts such as displaying his head
in the city.

It is certain that he (Yazid) did not have any intention but to
humiliate (the household of the Prophet) by displaying the head. Such
action is permissible only for al-Khawarij and transgressors. Had not
Yazid have the rancor of the al-Jahiliyyah (the era before Islam) and
the malice of (the defeat of his clan in) the battle of Badr, he would
have respected the head (of Imam Husain) when he had received it and he
would have buried it with shroud.

**Sunni references:**

- Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, end of ch 11, pp 331,
quoted from Ibn al-Jawzi.

- al-Radd Ala al-Muta'assib al-Aneed, by Ibn al-Jawzi, p48

Also Ibn Jawzi in his commentary about Ibn Hanbal's damning of Yazid
said:

"would there be a greater crime than killing Husain?!"

It should be noted that many Sunni scholars allow explicit curse of
Yazid, among them are Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Ibn al-Jawzi. Ahmad proves
his opinion by Quran. (See al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, by Ibn Kathir, v8,
p223; also Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, end of Ch. 11,
pp 331-332; also al-Radd Ala al-Muta'assib al-Aneed, by Ibn al-Jawzi,
p47-48). However, as Ibn Hajar wrote, the least thing that is agreed
upon by ALL the Sunni scholars (including the pseudo ones) is as
follows:

It is unanimously agreed that it is permissible to curse those who
killed Husain (may Allah be pleased with him) and those who ordered his
killing and those who allowed it and those who were pleased with that
action, without explicitly mentioning the name of Yazid.

Sunni reference: Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, end of
ch 11, p334

Let us now see the opinion of the son of Yazid about his father and
grandfather, who was the witness from within the royal family!

...When (Yazid) offered the kingdom (throne) to his son, Muawiyah the
second, in order that the flag of caliphate continues to wave in the
house of Abi Sufyan!!

After his death, Muawiyah the second, gathered the people on a well
known day, he stood in them preaching, he said:

"My grandfather Muawiyah stripped the command from those who deserved
it, and from one who is more justified of it, for his relation to the
Messenger of Allah and his being first in Islam, and that is Ali Ibn Abi
Talib, he (Muawiyah) took over it by your help as you are fully
aware."

"Then following it my father Yazid wore the command after him, and he
did not deserve it. He quarreled with the son of the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah, and by that he shortened his own life... He rode his
whim and hope left him behind." Then he cried and continued:

"Surely, the greatest problems of us is our knowledge of his bad
behavior and his awful ending, and that he killed the progeny (Itrah) of
the Messenger of Allah, and he permitted drinking alcohol, and he fought
in the sanctuary of Mecca, and destroyed the Ka'ba."

"And I am not the one who is dressing up for your command, nor the one
to be responsible for your followers... You choose for yourselves..!!"

**Sunni References:**

- Khulafaa al-Rasool, by Khalid Mohammed Khalid, p531 (The above Quote
included author's punctuation.) - Sawa'iq al-Muhriqah, by Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, end of ch 11, pp 336 Now, please offer these reports to
your Wahhabi friend and see if they to know better than the son of Yazid
as to who killed Imam Husain.

Also Shabrawi wrote in his book that:

"Would any man of reason doubts that Yazid killed Husain?" Sunni
reference: Alethaf, by Shabrawi, pp 62,66

Moreover, In Ibn Abbas's reply to a letter by Yazid, he said:

Do not think that I will forget your crime of killing Imam Husain (AS)
Sunni reference: Tarikh Ya'qubi, v2, p249

Then can any man of reason think that Yazid did not order killing Imam
Husain?!!! The above was just few Sunni documents out of many, to prove
this fact. Please refer to the articles of Br. Abbas which were posted
in SRI for more.

Throughout Islamic history many mass conversions between Sunni and Shia
occured. Two big examples are Egypt (Shia mostly and then mass
conversion to Sunni) and Iran (Sunni mostly at one time and then mass
conversion to Shia).

Dear brother, you have very distorted information for which you have no
evidence. I am afraid, you are confusing between the government and
people.

Most people of Persia were the followers of Ahlul-Bayt from the
beginning of their conversion to Islam. One reason for their tendency to
Shia was the discrimination that Umar enforced between the rights of
Arabs and non- Arabs.

Another reason was the injustice of some governors and their misconduct
that was being carried on in the name of Islam, and so on. This gave
reason to people for searching the truth and they found the shining
light of Ahlul-Bayt and their followers such as Salman al-Farsi who was
also an important factor. However, later, Umayad and Abbasid oppressive
governments continued their injustice to Arabs and non-Arabs alike!

They prosecuted the followers of Ahlul-Bayt in Persia, Iraq, Hijaz, and
other places. The early Sunni government in Iran did not represent the
belief of people as much as the today's governments in Iraq, Lebanon,
Kuwait, United Arab Emirate, Amman, and Bahrain (which are all Shia
dominated) do not represent the belief of their people.

As for the Fatimid rule in Egypt, you should better know that they were
the offshoot of Ismailis. We do not consider Fatimid to be Shia of Imam
Ali at all. They were among the political movements appeared centuries
later. Again the difference between the belief of people and the
government should be noticed. Your claim concerning the conversion in
Egypt is false.

Based on "The Encyclopedia of Islam," the majority of people in Egypt
were Sunnis during the entire reign of Fatimid, and as such, no
conversion occurred when the Fatimid government collapsed. It was
politically started and politically ended.

Thus neither in Iran nor in Egypt mass conversion from Sunni to Shia or
vice versa occurred. No body can force a person to convert into another
religion or school of thought, since belief is in the heart of People
and not in ID.

Those who convert their religion in their heart due to the pressure of
government, did not have religion at all! Recall the existence of many
Arabs inside Hijaz in the Arabian Peninsula (what is now known as the
kingdom of Saudi Arabia) who have been Shia of Imam Ali (AS) from the
time of Imam Ali till now despite the fact that Hijaz has had the most
oppressive regimes since the early history of Islam.


