Tragedy of Karbala As Reported By the Sunnis (part I)
=====================================================

In this series we provide the history of the events of Karbala as
recorded by the Sunnis. Although dampened, and sometimes inaccurate on
the favor of the tyrants, such Sunni documents are the lasting testimony
for the undeniable horrible massacre of the household of the Prophet
(PBUH&HF). The information, unless otherwise specified, are from the
History of al-Tabari.

Few remarks on the History of al-Tabari by the Sunni scholars. Shibli
Numani wrote:

Among books of historical character, an authentic and very
comprehensive book is that of the Imam al Tabari, known was Tarikh
Kabir. Al Tabari is a writer whose scholarly attain- ments and whose
sure and extensive knowledge are unanimiuosly recognised by the
traditionists. His commentary by far is the best of the commentaries.
The well known traditionist, Ibn Khuzaima, says that he knew no man
learned than al Tabari. Al Tabari died in the year 310 A.H - 921 C.E.
Some traditionists, al Sulaimani in particular, have remarked that al
Tabari coined traditions for the Shia. Regarding this charge against al
Tabari, Allama al Dhahabi, in his Mizan al-I'tidal says:

This is an allegation based on false misgivings. The fact is that Ibn
Jarir is one of the most trust worthy Imam.

al-Dhahabi has further remarked:

All the authentic and comprehensive books of history, such as Tarikh al
Kamil and those written by Ibn al Athir, Ibn Khuldun, Abual Fida etc,
are based on his work and abridged Tarikh of al- Tabari.

Sunni reference: Sirah al-Nabi -- The Life of the Prophet, by Shibli
Numani, English version, v1, p25

**The Martrydom foretold**

On the death of Muawiya, when Imam Hussain (as) refused to pledge his
allegiance to Yazeed, he went to the tomb of his grandfather, Prophet
Muhammad (saw, pbuh&hf). He worshipped there for the most of the night,
and also slept there for a while, in his dream he saw the Messenger of
Allah, May Allah bless him and his cleansed progeny, surronded by
angels. The Prophet (saw, pbuh&hf) embraced him and said:

My beloved Hussain, I foresee you when you will be, in the very near
future, covered with your blood, slain at the land of Karballa, while
thirsty, being deprived of water. This will be done to you by people who
claim that they are from my followers.

Imam Hussain (as) in his dream looked at his grandfather and said:

My grandfather, I ask you to admit me into your grave. I do not desire
to go back to the earthly world.

The Messenger of Allah (saw, pbuh&hf) answered him:

My beloved Hussain, there are degrees which you will not acquire except
through martyrdom.

Before he departed to Iraq, he uttered the following words:

I am as eager to join my ancestors as Jacob was eager to join Yousef. I
visualize my body being dismembered by the wolves of the desert which
shall fill from my flesh their empty abdomens and hungry stomachs. The
pleasure of God is our pleasure. We are patient at His trial and he
gives us the reward of the patient. (Men from) the flesh of the
Messenger of God will never part with him. They will join him on the Day
of Judgement, and he will be very pleased by the re-union.

**Yazid's efforts for allegiance**

According to Hisham b. Muhammad (al Kalbi) - Abu Mikhnaf: Yazid
succeeded at the beginning of the month of Rajab in the year 60 (April
8, 680). Al Walid b. Utbah b. Abi Sufyan was governor of Medina, al
Numan b. Bashir al Ansari of al Kufah, Ubaydallah b. Ziyad of al Basrah,
and Amr b. Said b. al as of Mecca.

Yazid's only concern, when he assumed power, was to receive the oath of
allegiance from the individuals who had refused to agree with Muawiyah's
demand for this oath of allegiance from Yazid. Muawiyah had summoned the
people to give an oath of allegiance to him that Yazid would be his
heir. Yazid's concern was to bring their attitude to an end.

When he wrote to al Walid, he wrote to him on a patchment as small as a
rat's ear :

Seize Husayn, Abdallah b. Umar, and Abdallah b. al Zubayr to give the
oath of allegiance. Act so fiercely that they have no chance to do
anything before giving the oath of allegiance. Peace be with you.

Therefore, al Walid sent in the night for al Husayn, peace be on him,
and summoned him (to attend). Al Husayn, peace be upon him, was aware of
what he wanted and so he called a group of his retainers and ordered
them to carry arms.

Imam Hussain, peace be upon him, said:

Al Walid has summoned me (to come to him) at this time (of night). I
cannot be sure that he might not burden me with a matter I may be
unwilling to respond, he is unpredictable man, so remain with me. When I
go to him, sit at the door. If you hear my voice raised, come in to
prevent him from (doing anything to) me.

Al Husayn, peace be upon him, went to al Walid, and Marwan b. al Hakam
was with him. Al Walid gave him news of the death of Muawiya and al
Husayn replied with the formula:

We belong to God and to Him we will return. Then al Walid read out
Yazid's letter and his order to get the pledge of allegiance from him.
Then al Husayn said to al Walid:

I do not see that my pledge of allegiance to Yazid in private would be
sufficient. Wouldn't you prefer me to give it in public so that people
are aware ?

Indeed, said al Walid

So see what you think about that in the morning, suggested al Husayn,
peace be on him.

Go, then, in the name of God but come to us when the people gather,
said al Walid.

By God, interrupted Marwan, if al Husayn leaves you now without giving
the pledge of allegiance, you will never have the same power over him
untill there is a great number of slain men between you and him.
Imprison the man and don't let him leave you untill he has paid homage
(to Yazid), or you have executed him.

At that al Husayn said:

O son of a foreign woman, would you or he kill me? By God you are a
liar.

With that he went out and walked away accompanied by his retainers
untill he reached his house.

You disobeyed me, Marwan told al-Walid, No by God he will never give
you the same opportunity over his life.

Then blame someone other than yourself, said Marwan

Replied al Walid: Indeed, you had chosen for me something which would
have involved the destruction of my own faith. By God, I would not want
all the worldy wealth and dominion which the sun rises and sets over,
(if it involved) killing al Husayn. Glory be to God, should I kill al
Husayn because he said 'I will not swear allegiance" By God, I do not
think that on the Day of Resurrection a man who is (responsible) for the
blood of al Husayn (will weigh) little in the scale of God."

Al Husayn, peace be upon him, spent that night at his house. It was the
night of Saturday when there were three days left on the month of Rajab
in the year 680. Al Walid b. Utba was occupied with sending to Ibn al
Zubayr about the pledge of allegiance to Yazid, and with his refusal to
come to them. Ibn al Zubayr left Medina at night heading for Mecca. In
the morning al Walid sent men after him, he sent a party of eighty horse
men under the command of a retainer of the Banu Umayya. They pursued him
but did not catch up with him, so they returned.

Towards the end of Saturday he sent men to al Husayn, peace be upon
him, to bring him to pledge allegiance to al Walid on behalf of Yazid b.
Muawiya. Al Husayn peace be upon him, said to them:

Come in the morning. Then you will have time to consider the situation
and so shall we.

They left him that night without insisting upon him. He, peace be upon
him, left under the cover of the night, it was the night of Saturday
night with two days left in the month of Rajab, and he headed towards
Mecca accompanied by his sons, his brother's (al Hasan's) sons and his
brothers. There was most of the House except for Muhammad b. al
Hanafiyya.

Al Husayn, peace be upon him, left for Mecca reciting:

Then he left it out of fear while he kept on the lookout. He said: My
Lord, save me from the unjust people. [ XXVIII 21 ]

He kept to the high road and the members of the house suggested: If you
had avoided the high road like Ibn al Zubayr did, the search party could
not follow you. No by God, he replied, I will not leave untill God
judges what He will judge.

When al Husyan, peace be upon him, entered Mecca, his entry occured on
the night of Friday (i.e Thursday), 3rd of the month of Shaban. As he
entered, he recited:

And when he set out towards Madyan, he said: Perhaps my Lord will guide
me in the right path. [ XXVIII 22 ]

Then he stayed there and its inhabitants began to visit him frequently,
as did those who had some to make the lesser pilgrimage and other people
from far and wide. Ibn al Zubayr had settled himself there, near the
Ka'ba, where he used to stand in prayer and perform the
circumbulation.

He came to visit al Husayn, peace be upon him, with the others who came
to visit him. He used to come to him at intervals of two consecutive
days, and sometimes between the two day interval. He was the most
troublesome of God's creatures to Ibn al Zubayr, who realized that the
people of Hijaz would not pledge allegiance to him as long as al Husayn,
peace be upon him, was in the land. He was more capable of commanding
the people's obedience than him, and was more respected.


**Muslim b. Aqil is sent to Kufa**

In response to the messages that Imam Hussain received from the people
of Iraq, asking him to come to them and pledging their full support and
promise to die in his defense, that goes as follows

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
To al Husayn b. Ali, peace be upon them
From Sulayman b. Surad, al Musayyib b. Najaba
Rifa'a b. Shaddad al bajali, Habib b. Muzahir and the
believers and Muslims of his Shia among the Kufans.

Greetings, we praise God before you, other than Whom there is no deity.
Praise be to God Who has broken your enemy, the obstinate tyrant who had
leapt upon this community, stripped it of its authority , plundered its
fay and seized control of it without its consent. Then he had killed the
choice members of it and had preserved the wicked members of it. He made
the property of God a state (divided) among its tyrants and wealthy. He
was destroyed as Thamud were destroyed. (Now) there is no Imam over
us.

Therefore come; through you, may your God unite us under truth. Al
Numan b. Bashir is in the governers palace and we do not gather with him
for the Friday (service). Nor do we accopmany him (out of the mosque)
for the Festival service. If we learn that you will come to us, we will
drive him away untill we pursue him to Syria, if God the Exalted,
wills.

**Imam Hussain's (as) reply was as follows**

In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate From al Husayn b.
Ali,

To the leaders of the believers and the Muslims

Hani and Said have brought me your letters; they are the last two of
your messengers who have come to me. I have understood everything which
you have described and mentioned. The (main) statement of your great men
is: "There is no Imam over us. Therefore come; through you, may God
unite us under truth and Guidance." I am sending you my brother, Muslim
b. Aqil, who is my cousin and my trusthworthy (representative) from my
House.

If he writes to me that the opinions of your leaders and the men of
wisdom and merit among you is united in the same way as the messengers
who have come to me have described and as I have read in your letters, I
will come to you speedily, God willing. For by my life, what is the Imam
except who judges by the Book, one who upholds justice, one who
professes the religion of truth, and one who dedicates himself to the
essence of God.

Greetings.


