Tragedy of Karbala As Reported By the Sunnis (part Iii)
=======================================================

**Martyrdom of Muslim Ibn Aqil**

That same morning the son of that old woman went to 'Abd al- Rahman b.
Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath and told him about Muslim b. 'Aqil being with his
mother. 'Abd al-Rahman went to his father who was with Ibn Ziyad. He
went to him and Ibn Ziyad learned his secret.

"Get up and bring him to me immediately," said Ibn Ziyad to (Muhammad
b. al-Ashath), poking a cane into his side. He sent (Amr b. ) Ubayd
Allah b. Abbas al-Sulam, with him, together with seventy men from the
tribal group of Qays.

They went to the house where Muslim b. Aqil was. When the latter heard
the beating of horses' hooves and the voices of men, he knew that it was
him whom they had come for. He went out against them with his sword
(drawn) as they rushed blindly towards the house. He fell upon them and
struck them with his sword so that he drove them away from the house.
They repeated the attack, and Muslim counter-attacked in the same way.

He and Bakr b. Humran al-Ahmari exchanged blows and Bakr struck
Muslim's mouth, cutting his top lip and slicing down to the lower lip to
knock out two of his teeth. Muslim struck him a terrible blow on the
head and repeated it again, cutting a nerve along his shoulder with a
blow which almost reached his stomach. When the people saw that, they
(went up and) looked down on him (Muslim) from the tops of the houses,
and began to hurl stones at him and to light canes of wood with fire
which they threw from the top of the house. When he saw that, he went
out against them into the lane with his sword unsheathed.

"You can have my guarantee of security," said Muhammad b. al- Ashath,
"don't kill yourself."

But he continued to fight against them saying:

I swear I will only be killed as a free man, although I see death as
something horrible, Or it makes the cold a bitter heat and deflects the
ray of the sun (for ever).

Every man one day will meet an evil, I fear that I will be cheated and
deluded.

"You will not be cheated, deluded or deceived," replied Muhammad b.
al-Ashath. "These people (i.e. the Banu Umayya) are your cousins and
they will not fight against you or strike you."

He had been hurt by stones and weakened by the fighting. He was out of
breath and he was propping his back up against the wall of that house.
Ibn al-Ash'ath repeated the offer of security to him. "Am I granted
security?" he said.

"Yes," he replied and he said to the people who were with him, "he is
given security by me." "Yes," replied the people, except (Amr b.) 'Ubayd
Allah b. al-Abbas al-Sulami.

"I have neither she camel or camel in this (i.e. I will have nothing to
do with it)," he said and he turned aside.

"If you will not grant me security," declared Muslim, "I will not put
my hand in yours."

A mule was brought and he was put on it. They gathered around him and
pulled his sword away. At that he was in despair for his life and his
eyes filled with tears. "This is the first betrayal," he cried.

"I hope no harm will come to you," called out Muhammad b. al- Ashath.
"Is it only hope?" he retorted as he wept. "Where then is your guarantee
of security? Indeed we belong to God and to Him we will return."

"One who has sought for the like of what you have sought for, should
not weep when there befalls him what has befallen you," 'Amr b. 'Ubayd
Allah b. al-'Abbas goaded him.

I would not weep for myself," he replied, "nor would I grieve for my
own death, even though I have not the slightest desire for destruction.
But I am weeping for my family who are coming to me, I am weeping for
al-Husayn and the family of al-Husayn, peace be on them.

Then he went closer to Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath and said:

"O servant of God, by God, I see that you are unable to grant me a
guarantee of security. Yet do you have the goodness to be able to send
one of your men with my message so that it will get to al-Husayn? For I
have no doubt that he has already set out towards you, or will be
setting out soon with his House.

(This messenger) would say:

Ibn 'Aqil has sent me to you. He is a prisoner in the hands of the
people, and he does not expect to see evening before he is killed; and
he says:

Return, may my father and mother be your ransom, with your House and do
not let the Kufans tempt you, for they were the followers of your father
and he desired to leave them even through death and murder. The Kufans
have lied to you. A liar has no judgement.

"By God, I will do that," replied Ibn al-Ash'ath, "and I will inform
Ibn Ziyad that I have given you a guarantee of security."

Ibn al-Ash'ath went with Ibn Aqil to the door of the palace. He asked
permission to enter. Permission was given him and he went in (to see)
Ibn Ziyad. He gave a report about Ibn 'Aqil and Bakr's blow against him,
and about his own guarantee of security to him.

"What (is this about) you and a guarantee of security?" demanded 'Ubayd
Allah, "as if we sent you to guarantee him security when we only sent
you to bring him."

Ibn al-Ashath fell silent.

While Ibn Aqil remained at the palace door, his thirst had become
severe. At the palace door there were people sitting waiting for
permission to enter. Among them were 'Umara b. 'Uqba b. Abi Mu'ayt, 'Amr
b. Hurayth, Muslim b. Amr and Kathir b. Shihab.

There was a jug of cold water placed at the doorway.

"Give me a drink of that water," asked Muslim. "See how cold it is,"
replied Muslim b. Amr, "but by God, you will never taste a drop of it
until you taste the heat of Hell-fire." "Shame on you whoever you are!'
cried Ibn Aqil.

"I am the one who recognized the truth when you denied it; who was
sincere to his Imam when you deceived him; who was obedient to him when
you opposed him. I am Muslim b. Amr al-Bahili."

"Your mother has been bereft of a son," replied Ibn 'Aqil. "How coarse
you are, how rough, how hard your heart is. Man of Bahila, you are more
appropriate for the heat of Hell-fire and to remain there forever, than
I am."

He sat down, propping himself against a wall. 'Amr b. Hurayth sent one
of his boys to bring a jug with a napkin and cup. He poured water into
it and told him to drink. But whenever he went to drink, he filled the
cup with blood so that he was not able to drink. He did that once, and
then twice. When he made as if to drink for the third time, his tooth
fell into the cup.

"Praise be to God," he said, "if it had been a provision granted me (by
God), I could have drunk it." Ibn Ziyad's messenger came out and ordered
him to go to (see) him. He went in but did not greet him as governor.

"Don't you greet the governor?" demanded the guard.

"If he wants my death, what is (the point of) my greeting him with
words of peace?" he replied. "If he did not want my death, my greetings
(of peace) to him would be profuse."

"By my life, you will be killed," declared Ibn Ziyad.

"So be it," he replied. "Indeed, (it will)."

"Then let me make my will to one of my fellow tribesmen. "Do (so)."

Muslim looked at those sitting with Ubayd Allah. Among them was 'Umar
b. Saed b. Abl Waaaas. He said to him: " Umar, there is kinship between
you and me and I have need of you. So you could carry out what I need of
you. But it is secret."

Umar refused to listen to him.

"Why do you refuse to consider the need of your cousinT' asked Ubayd
Allah. So Umar got up with him and sat where Ibn Ziyad could watch both
of them.

"I have a debt in Kufa," said Muslim. 'I borrowed seven hundred dirhams
when I came to Kufa. Sell my sword and armour and pay the debt for me.
When I have been killed, ask Ibn Ziyad to give you my corpse and bury
it. Send to al-Husayn, peace be on him, someone to send him back. For I
have written to him telling him that the people are with him and now I
can only think that he is coming."

"Do you know what he said to me, governor?" Umar said to Ibn Ziyad. "He
mentioned these things."

"The faithful would not betray you," said Ibn Ziyad to (Muslim), "But
the traitor was confided in. As for what you have, it is yours, and we
will not prevent you from doing with it what you like. As for the body
when we have killed it, we do not care what is done with it. As for
al-Husayn, if he does not intend (harm) to us, we will not intend (harm)
to him.

Then Ibn Ziyad said: "Ibn Aqil, you came to the people while they were
all (united) and you scattered them and divided their opinions so that
some of them attacked others."

"No," replied Ibn 'Aqil, "I did not come for that but (because) the
people of the town claimed that your father had killed their best men,
shed their blood and appointed governors among them like the governors
of Choesroe and Caesar. We came to enjoin justice and to urge rule by
the Book."

"What are you (to do) with that, you great sinnerT' cried Ibn Ziyad.
"Why did you not do that among the people when you were drinking wine in
Medina?"

"Me, drink wine! By God, God knows you are not speaking the truth, and
have spoken without any knowledge, for I am not like you have said. It
is you who are more correctly described as drinking wine than me, (you)
who lap the blood of Muslims and kill the life whose killing God has
forbidden and (you are one) who sheds sacred blood on behalf of
usurpation, enmity and evil opinion while he (Yazid) enjoys himself and
plays as if he had done nothing."

"You great sinner (fasiq)," shouted Ibn Ziyad, "your own soul made you
desire what God prevented you from having (i.e. authority) (because) God
did not regard you as worthy of it."

"Who is worthy of it, if we are not worthy of it?' asked Muslim. "The
Commander of the faithful, Yazid,'' answered Ibn Ziyad. "Praise be to
God," called out Muslim. "We will accept God's judgement between us and
you in every circumstance."

"May God kill me, if I do not kill you in such a way as no one in Islam
has (ever) been killed before," retorted Ibn Ziyad.

"You are the person with the most right to commit crimes of innovation
in Islam which have not been committed before," Muslim replied, "for you
will never abandon evil murder, wicked punishment, shameful practice,
and avaricious domination to anyone (else)."

Ibn Ziyad began to curse him, and to curse al-Husayn, Ali and 'Aqil,
peace be on them, while Muslim did not speak to him. "Take him up to the
top of the palace," ordered Ibn Ziyad, "and cut off his head, (throw it
to the ground) and make (his body) follow it (to the ground)."

"By God," said Muslim, "if there was any (real) kinship between you and
me, you would not kill me."

"Where is the man whose head Ibn Aqil struck with (his) sword?" asked
Ibn Ziyad. Then Bakr b. Humran al Ahmari was summoned and he told him:
"Climb up, and you be the one who cuts his head off." He went up with
him. He (Muslim) said: "God is greater (Allahu Akbar)" He sought
forgiveness from God and prayed for blessings on the Apostle, saying:

O God, judge between us and a people who have enticed us, lied against
us and deserted us.

They (took) him to a part which overlooked where the shoemakers are
today. His head was cut off (and thrown down) and his body was made to
follow his head. Muhammad b. al-Ash'ash, then approached 'Ubayd Allah b.
Ziyad and spoke to him of Hani' b. 'Urwa. He said: "You know of the
position of Hani' in the town and of his House in the clan. His people
know that I and my colleague brought him to you. I adjure you before
God, hand him over to me for I would not like (to face) the enmity of
the town and his family."

He promised to do that but then afterwards something occurred to him
and he ordered Hani' (to be) taken (immediately) to the market- place
and (his head) cut off.

Hani' was taken in chains until he was brought to a place where sheep
were sold. He began to shout: "O Madhhij! There is no one from Madhhij
for me today! O Madhh,ij, where is Madhhij?"

When he realised that no one was going to help him, he pulled his hand
and wrenched it free of the chain, crying: "What is there, stick, knife,
stone or bone, with which a man can defend his life?"

(At this) they jumped upon him and tied the chains (more) tightly. He
was told to stretch out his neck but he answered: "I am not so liberal
with my life and I will not help you (to take) my life." A Turkish
retainer (mawla) of Ubayd Allah called Rashid struck him with a sword
but it did not do anything.

"To God is the return, O God to Your mercy and Your paradise," called
out Hani'. Then (Rashld) struck him with another blow and killed him.

Concerning Muslim b. 'Aqil and Hani' b. Urwa, may God have mercy upon
them, Abd Allah b. al-Zubayr al-Asadi said: If you do not know what
death is, then look at Hani' in the market-place and Ibn Aqil:

(Look at) a hero whose face has been covered with wounds and another
who fell dead from a high place.

The command of the governor struck them (down) and they became legends
for those who travel on every road.

You see a corpse whose colour death has changed and a spattering of
blood which has flowed abundantly;

A young man who was (even) more bashful than a shy young woman, was
more decisive than the polished blade of a two- edged sword.

Is Asma' riding in safety a mount which moves at walking pace while
Madhhij urged him to seek vengeance

And Murad wander around him? Are all of them in fear of the questioner
and the questioned?

If you do not avenge your two brothers, then be harlots satisfied with
little.

When Muslim and Hani' were killed, the mercy of God be on them, Ubayd
Allah b. Ziyad sent their heads with Hani' b. Abi Hayya al- Wadi'i and
al-Zubayr b. al-Arwah al-Tamimi to Yazid b. Muawiya He ordered his
secretary (katib) to write to Yazid about what had happened to Muslim
and Hani'. The secretary who was 'Amr b. Nafi' - wrote but he was very
wordy (in his style). He was the first to be wordy in writing letters.
When Ubayd Allah saw the letter, he disliked it.

"What is this prolixity and this excessr' he asked. "Write:

Praise be to God, Who exacted the dues of the Commander of the faithful
and has given him sufficient provisions against his enemy. I (am writing
to) inform the Commander of the faithful that Muslim b. 'Aqil took
refuge in the house of Hani' b. 'Urwa al-Muradi. I set look-outs and
spies on them, concealed men against them, I tricked them until I
brought them out. God gave me power over them. Thus I came upon them and
had them executed. I have sent their heads to you with Hani' b. Abi
Hayya and al-Zubayr b. Arwah al-Tamimi. They are both people who are
attentive and in obedience to you, and of sincerity. Let the Commander
of the faithful ask them about whatever of the affair he may wish; for
they have knowledge and truth.

Farewell. Greetings."

Yazid b. Muawiya wrote (back):

You have not gone beyond what I wanted. You have acted with the
decisive action I wanted. You have launched into the attack with the
violence of man who has control of his emotion. You have satisfied me,
been sufficient for (the task) and corroborated my view of you and my
opinion of you. I have summoned your two messengers and questioned them,
and talked to them.

I found them in their views and merit as you had mentioned. Receive
them both with kindness on my recommendation. I have been informed that
al-Husayn has set out for Iraq. Therefore set look-outs and watches, be
vigilant and detain suspicious (characters). Put to death (any who are)
accused and write to me about any news which occurs. God, the Exalted,
wishing.

Muslim b. 'Aqil's (attempted) rising in Kufa was on Tuesday, 8th of Dhu
al-Hijja in the year 60 A.H. (680). He, may God have mercy on him, was
killed on Wednesday, 9th of Dhu al-Hijja, the Day of Arafa.


