Confessions of Some Forgers
===========================

Unfortunately, as mentioned above, even supposedly good people indulged
in this forgery. Abu Ismah, Faraj bin Abi Maryam al-Marwazi was asked:
"From where have you got all these traditions narrated through 'Ikrimah,
from Ibn 'Abbas, from the Prophet, describing the reward of reciting
each and every *surah* (chapter) of the Qur'an?" He said, "I found
people interested only in the *fiqh* of Abu Hanifah and *maghazi* of Ibn
Ishaq; therefore, I forged these *ahadith* 'for the pleasure of God' to
bring them back to the Qur'an." [^1]

Once forgery of *ahadith* became the norm of the Muslim academic world,
the atheists, *zanadiqah*, and hypocrites exploited it to their full
advantage. They introduced thousands of *ahadith* all supposed to come
down through well-known companions of the Prophet to destroy the fabric
of Islam, to weaken its foundation and bring down the whole edifice. For
example, the well-known atheist, 'Abdu 'l-Karim ibn Abi 'l-'Awja', was
sentenced to death by the governor of Kufa. When he was about to be
killed, he said, "Well, even if you kill me, I have fabricated four
thousand *ahadith* turning *halal* into *haram* and *haram* into
*halal*. By God, I have made you to break fast on the day of fasting and
to fast on the day of *'Id*." [^2]

But this plan could not succeed unless the Muslims were made to believe
that the Qur'an was not collected during the Prophet's time, but was
later collected piecemeal from papers, shreds of pottery and bones, some
twenty three years after the Prophet's death. 

They understood very well the psychology of various groups of the
Muslims, and they presented their anti-Qur'anic themes disguised as a
distinction (*fazilat*) of the *sahabah* (the companions) and the Imams
of Ahlul Bayt in order to mislead the Sunnis or the Shi'as,
respectively. The poison was administered in sherbet and it was
unhesitatingly swallowed. 

The distinction of collecting the Qur'an was given to Hazrat Abu Bakr or
Hazrat 'Uthman. Every fabricator has used his own imagination and it
resulted in a lot of traditions contradictory to each other. 

Sayyid al-Khu'i has reviewed in detail all the traditions concerning the
later days collection of the Qur'an, and has come to the conclusion that
the third Caliph had not "collected" the Qur'an. What he had done was to
unite the Muslims on the recital which was followed in Medina, and
forbid all other recitals, which had sprung up here and there. Those
interested to study this in depth should refer to his *al-Bayan* from p.
187 to p. 278. 

However, once this story of later days collection was established it was
easy to circulate *ahadith* showing that a lot of verses, even some
*surah*s, were lost and could not be found at the time when Hazrat Abu
Bakr and/or Hazrat 'Uthman wanted to collect it in Book form. They
attributed such statements to great companions and wives of the holy
Prophet (peace be upon him & his progeny). 

Mesmerized by those traditions, the Muslims forgot that Allah Himself is
the Protector of His Book and that the Prophet had appointed the Qur'an
as the standard to test the authenticity of traditions. They turned the
table and began testing the authenticity of the Qur'an through those
alleged *ahadith*! 

[^1]: al Bayan, p. 37: Ahmad Amin, Fajru 'l-Islam, p. 215.

[^2]: at-Tabari, Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 6 (Beirut: Mu'assasatu l-A'lami)
p. 299: Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh al-Kamil, vol. 5 (Daru l-Kutubi l-Arabi.
1985) p. 39. 


