Some Ahadith of Omission
========================

It is not possible to give detail of all the verses, sentences and
phrases which allegedly were lost at the time the Qur'an was collected.
A few glaring examples are as follows: 

1. *The thirty-third chapter of the Qur'an*, *al-Ahzab*, is alleged to
have contained 200 or nearly 300 verses, all of which except 73 are said
to have been lost. The claim of 200 verses is attributed to Ummu
'l-mu'minin, 'A'ishah. "It has been narrated by Abu 'Ubayd in
*al-Fada'il* and by Ibn al-Anbari and Ibn Mardawayh from Aishah that she
said, 'The *surah* al-Ahzab was recited in the days of the Prophet two
hundred verses, but when 'Uthman wrote the Qur'an, he was unable to find
more than what is there at present." [^1] Now there are only 73 verses
in this *surah*. 

Hudhayfah is said to claim that 70 verses of this chapter were
lost.[^2]  But Ubayy ibn Ka'b is made to say that this *surah* was equal
to, or even bigger than the second chapter al-Baqarah.[^3] Also,
'Ikrimah (a *tabi'i*, disciple of the companions) has reportedly said
the same.[^4] Now the chapter al-Baqarah contains 286 verses. It means
accordingly that 213 or even more verses were lost, including the verse
of stoning. 

*2. The ninth chapter, at-Tawbah*: It is alleged that two-thirds or
three-fourths of this *surah* has been lost. This report is attributed
to Hudhayfah al-Yamani.[^5] Imam Malik ibn Anas was asked as to why
there is no "*Bismillah*" in this *surah*. He said, "It was lost with
its earlier parts, because it is confirmed that it was equal to *surah*
al-Baqarah in length."[^6]  
 But there are only 129 verses in this *surah* of the Qur'an. 

3. Then come the putetic *surahs* of *al-Hafd* and *al-Khal'* which were
recorded by such famous companions as Ubayy ibn Ka'b and Abu Musa
al-Ash'ari[^7] and which the caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab used to recite
in his *qunut*.[^8] The *surah*s were as follows: 

This English booklet is not the place to show the absurdity of the
sentences in these alleged *surahs*. Some grammatical mistakes in them
clearly show that the people who fabricated them did not know Arabic
well. And these incorrect sentences have been attributed to such Arab
companions as Hazrat Umar, Ubayy ibn Ka'b and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari! 

Anyone interested to see the mistakes and absurdities of these supposed
*surah*s, is advised to see my Arabic booklet *Nazaratun Musta'jilah fi
mas'alati Tahrifi 'l-Qur'an* or better still, Shaykh Muhammad Jawad
al-Balaghi's *Ala'u 'r-Rahman fi Tafsiri 'l-Qur'an* (vol. 1 [Beirut],
pp. 23-24). 

4. *A surah equal to the ninth chapter* *al-Bara'ah*: Abu Musa
al-Ash'ari, a companion of the Prophet, is reported to say, 'We used to
recite a *surah* which we likened to *al-Bara'ah* in length and
severity; but I forgot it, and now remember only this verse: 

(If a son of Adam had two valleys full of wealth he would still covet a
third; and nothing can fill the stomach of a man except dust.)[^9]

5. *Yet another Surah*: The same companion is reported to say, "We used
to recite a *surah* which we likened to one of the *musabbihat*; [^10]
but I forgot it; yet I remember this 'verse' from it:   
 (O you who believe! Why do you say what you do not do? As it would be
recorded as an evidence against you and then you shall be asked about it
on the day of resurrection.)[^11]

6. *Loss of the major part of the Qur'an*: There are a lot of traditions
in Sunni books which show that the Qur'an was much much more than what
the Muslims have in their hands. "At-Tabarani has narrated with
trustworthy chain of narrators from 'Umar ibn al-Khattab that he said,
'The Qur'an is one million and twenty seven thousand
letters..."[^12] But the total of the letters in the whole Qur'an is not
more than 267,053 as is recorded at the end of many editions of the
Qur'an. In other words, three-fourth of the Qur'an was lost! 

And the companion 'Abdullah ibn 'Umar is reported as saying, "None of
you should ever say, 'I have got the whole Qur'an.' And what would make
you know what the whole Qur'an was. Certainly a lot of Qur'an has gone.
One should rather say, 'I have got what has appeared from it."  [^13]

Unfortunately the '*ahadith*' of major or minor deletions are attributed
to many famous personalities of Islam, like Ummu 'l-mu'minin 'A'ishah,
Ummu 'l-mu'minin Hafsah, Ummu 'l-mu'minin Umm Salimah, 'Umar ibn
al-Khattab, 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas, 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, Abdu'r-Rahman
ibn 'Awf, 'Abdullah ibn 'Umar, Zayd ibn Arqam, Jabir ibn 'Abdullah,
Buraydah, Maslamah ibn Makhlad, Abu Waqid al-Laythi, and the aunt of Abu
Amamah ibn Sahl, in addition to the tabi'in (disciples of the
companions) 'Ikrimah and Imam Malik ibn Anas.

These traditions are found in all well-known Sunni books of traditions,
including *as-Sihahas-Sittah* (the six correct books of traditions):
*Sahih al-Bukhari*, *Sahih Muslim*, *Sunan Abi Dawud*, *Sahih
at-Tirmidhi*, *Sunan an-Nasa'i*, *Sunan al-Bayhaqi*, *Musnad* of Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, *Muwatta'* of Imam Malik, *Ta'rikh* of al-Bukhari,
*Fathu 'l-Ba'ri* (Sharh *Sahih al-Bukhari*) of Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani,
*Kanzu 'l-'Ummal* of Mulla 'Ali al-Muttaqi, *Tafsir ad-Durru'l-Manthur*
and *al-Itqan* of As-Suyuti, *Jami'u 'l-Usul*, *al-Muhadarat* of Imam
ar-Raghib al-Isfihani, *Jami 'u 'l-Jawami*, *Hilyatu 'l-awliya*' of
Hafiz Abu Nu'aym and *al-Mustadrak 'alas-Sahihayn* of Imam al-Hakim
an-Nishapuri.[^14]

Also '*ahadith*' were attributed to the Imams of Ahlul Bayt too, and
they found their way into Shi'a books of traditions. In short the Sunni
and Shi'a books of *ahadith* contain a lot of such traditions. But there
is a basic difference between the two sects' respective attitude towards
such traditions. 

[^1]: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 5, pp. 179-180; As-Suyuti,
al-Itqan, vol. 2. p. 25.

[^2]: Al-Bukhari, at-Ta'rikh, as quoted by as-Suyuti in the above books.

[^3]: Az-Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-Kashshaf, vol. 2 (Calcutta: Lees. 1856)
p. 1117: Mulla Ali al-Muttaqi, Kanzu 'l-Ummal. 

[^4]: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 5. p. 179. 

[^5]: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 3. p. 208: al-Itqan, vol. 2.
p. 26: al-Hakim an-Nishapuri, al-Mustadrak alas-Sahihan, vol. 2
(Hyderabad: Dairatul-Ma'arif. 1340 AH) p. 331. 

[^6]: As-Suyuti, al-Itqan, vol. 1, p. 65.

[^7]: As-Suyuti, al-Itqan, vol. 1, p. 65.

[^8]: Ibid, pp. 25-26.

[^9]: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol 1 p 105: Ibn al-Athir. Jami 'u
'l-Usul, vol 3 (Egypt: 1370 AH) p. 8 hadith no. 904.

[^10]: Musabbihat: those surahs which begin with the words. yusabbihu or
sabbih.

[^11]: Jami 'u 'l-usul, vol. 3. p. 8.

[^12]: As-Suyuti, al-Itqan, vol. 2. p 70. 

[^13]: As-Suyuti, al-Itqan, vol 2. p. 25: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru
'l-Manthur, vol 1. p. 106.

[^14]: For details, see Mir Hamid Husayn al-Musawi al-Hindi, Istiqsa'u
'l-Ifham, vol. 2 (Lucknow) the section on tahrif of the Qur'an.


