The Sunni Attitude
==================

Our Sunni brethren's attitude towards such *ahadith* is influenced by
their belief that the traditions of *as-sihah as-Sittah* (the six
correct books of traditions), and especially those found in Sahih
al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim are all correct. Imam an-Nawawi writes in
*Sharh Sahih Muslim*: 

"The fact that the ummah has willingly accepted [the *Sahih al-Bukhari*
and *Sahih Muslim*] has led us to the opinion that it is obligatory
(*wajib*) to act on what is written in these two [books], and this is an
unanimously agreed view. People are obliged to act on a *khabaral-wahid*
(a *hadith* reported by a single narrator) found in other books only
when its chain of narrators is correct; and even then it would not
create but only a strong assumption.

And the same applies to the two *Sahihs*; but these two differ from the
other books in that all that is in these two is correct and there is no
need to examine them; rather it is *wajib* to follow them
unconditionally. But as for the *ahadith* in other books, they will not
be followed until their credentials are checked and they are found to
fulfil the conditions of a correct *hadith*." 

This unconditional blanket acceptance of the *ahadith* found in these
books has compelled our Sunni brothers to accept the theory of
abrogation of recital (*naskhut-tilawah*); that is, they believe that
recital of some verses was abrogated although the law contained in some
of them continues. Two well-known examples of such supposed verses are
the so-called verses of stoning (*rajm*) and of ten or five sucklings,
which are found in *Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih Muslim* and other
books.[^1]

And the *hadith* of *Sahih Muslim* explicitly says: 

"Ummu 'l-mu'minin 'Aisha said, "There was among what was revealed of the
Qur'an (the verse) 'Ten known sucklings create prohibition' (i.e.,
foster relationship). Then it was abrogated by 'five sucklings', and the
Messenger of Allah expired and they were among what was recited of the
Qur'an."[^2]

Ibn Majah has narrated another *hadith* from 'Aishah which explicitly
says that the two verses were lost after the death of the Prophet. She
is reported to say: 'The verse of stoning and of suckling an adult ten
times were revealed, and they were (written) on a paper and kept under
my bed. When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) expired and we were
preoccupied with his death, a goat entered and ate away the paper.[^3]

It needs no great intelligence to see that this theory of abrogation of
recital cannot be of any use in such cases. If a *surah* or verse was
recited in the life of the Prophet and then it was lost either because
the reciters were killed in a battle, or because a goat devoured it or
for any other reason, then the question arises: Who had the right to
abrogate a Qur'anic verse after the Prophet's death? Had any other
prophet come after Muhammad (peace be on him and his progeny)? That is
why Sayyid al-Khu'i has said, "It is clear that the theory of abrogation
of recital (*naskhu 't-tilawah*) is exactly the same as belief in
alteration in and omission from the Qur'an."[^4]

Therefore we have to strictly adhere to the well established principle
that any *hadith* going against the Qur'an must be discarded and 'thrown
to the wall' - if it cannot be reinterpreted in an acceptable way.   
  

[^1]: For the verse of stoning. see Sahih al-Bukhari, vol 4. p 179. 265:
Sahih Muslim,vol. 3. p. 1317: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol 1 (Beirut:
al-Maktab al-Islami. 1969) p. 40: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2 (Cairo
edition) p 853: Muwatta, Imam Malik, vol 2.p 623.For the verse of
suckling, see: Sahih Muslim, vol. 4. p. 167: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru
'l-Manthur, vol. 2. 

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, vol 1. p. 167: As-Suyuti, ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol
2. p. 135. 

[^3]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal. vol. 6. p. 269: Sunan Ibn Majah, p. 626:
Ibn Qutbah, Tawil Mukhtalafi 'l-Hadith (Cairo: Maktaba al-Kulliyat
al-Azhariyya. 1966) p. 310 which has been misprinted as 210-: As-Suyuti,
ad-Durru 'l-Manthur, vol. 2. p. 13.

[^4]: al Bayan, p. 224.


