Abortion is Forbidden
=====================

Protection of man's life is not limited only to postnatal life in Islam,
but it also includes the life of an embryo. In the eyes of Islam life
during the prenatal life (embryos) and even before an embryo is formed
is subject to protection. Depriving an embryo of life through abortion
is a crime and a sin. And he who commits this crime is entitled to
punishment. The existence of mankind starts since joining of two primary
cells. Therefore, according to The Holy Quran destruction of it at any
stage means depriving mankind of life

Islam does not allow abortion for the purpose of birth control (except
in some exceptional or emergency cases). For the life of an embryo in
every stage of evolution/perfection, since the time a sperm is placed
inside a woman's uterus and since the beginning of growth and ultimately
developing into an embryo is fully under the protection umbrella of
Islam and abortion or destruction of embryo is considered a murder and
is unlawful.

In Islam even an embryo which is the result of adultery is protected and
abortion is unlawful. In other words you cannot deprive such embryo of
life either; just because the sexual intercourse was unlawful it does
not justify your terminating the life of the embryo.

Islam does not ban birth control. There is no decree prohibiting a
couple to decide to prevent pregnancy. However, once a woman gets
pregnant the parents have no right to destroy the embryo which means
depriving it of life. Many theology scholars argue that once an embryo
is formed an independent entity with life is emerged, that apart from a
mother independently has the right to have life. And except in emergency
cases determined by the Islamic law nobody even the parents have the
right to deprive and embryo of life.

Even those Islamic scholars who have considered the embryo a part of a
mother's body still argue that nobody has the right to cut any part of
her body and therefore a mother is not allowed to have abortion operated
on her. Apparently if the crime of abortion is committed by a third
party (other than the parents), even it is not done deliberately, still
her/his action is a sin, which entitles her/him to punishment both in
this world and the Resurrection Day.


