Permitted Cases to Deprive Oneself of Life in Islam
===================================================

Although, in the eyes of Islam, the right to life is considered a divine
gift and the most important inherent right of mankind and thus
safeguarding it is a divine duty for both the people and the state.
Using any tools that can totally or partially destroy the source of
mankind, is banned and unlawful.[^1]

But we must not misunderstand that the right to life in Islam is
absolutely without any exceptions. This right enjoys sanctity as long as
the life of another man is not endangered. Or perhaps there is a more
important necessity aimed at perfection of mankind which, as an
exception, might call for termination of somebody's life.

The followings are brief cases of such exceptions:

**A- Retaliation decree:** As explained before, in the eyes of the
enlightening religion of Islam retaliation is not merely depriving the
killer of his life, but the philosophy of its legality is countering
unlawful violation of mankind's right to life, so it is a guarantee to
the survival of mankind. Additionally, retaliation in fact is a just and
fair punishment and a conventional practice. The execution of
retaliation would relief the public's Conscience which was wounded and
not at ease because of a murder.

**B-Abortion if urgency calls:** As explained in details previously
Islam does not only protects right to postnatal life but also prenatal
life (since the earliest stage of formation of embryo in a mother's
uterus.)

In the eyes of Islam life during the prenatal life (embryo's) and even
before an embryo is formed is subject to protection. Depriving an embryo
of life through abortion is a crime and a sin. And he who commits this
crime is entitled to punishment. And deprivation of life will not be
lawful unless due to a proper justification.

But sometimes it is possible that the continuation of pregnancy would be
endangering a mother's life or health or might cause extraordinary
difficulties for the mother. Should urgency rise and in the above cases
abortion is allowed as an emergency as considered the priority, and so
the life of an embryo can be terminated. Also if an embryo is found dead
in the uterus of a mother, abortion would be allowed.

**C-Fighting against God and the Prophet and the corruption on the
Earth:** In Islam a man who practically tries to stand against God and
oppose an Islamic system is considered a belligerent and corruption on
the Earth. A punishment has been defined and determined for him. To what
extent should he be punished depends on intensity, type and extent of
the measures taken by him: If he has committed a murder he deserves
death penalty and execution. The Holy Quran says in this issue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا جَزَاءُ الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ
وَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَسَادًا أَنْ يُقَتَّلُوا أَوْ يُصَلَّبُوا
أَوْ تُقَطَّعَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُمْ مِنْ خِلَافٍ أَوْ يُنْفَوْا
مِنَ الْأَرْضِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ لَهُمْ خِزْيٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَلَهُمْ فِي
الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, the penalty for those who wage war against Allah and His
Messenger and strive upon earth [to cause] corruption is none but that
they be killed or crucified or that their hands and feet be cut off from
opposite sides or that they be exiled from the land. That is for them a
disgrace in this world; and for them in the Hereafter is a great
punishment.*** ***(Quran, 5:33)***

Apparently committing such deeds which (threatens and) infringes upon
the security of the general public and creates fear in people, in
proportion to the extent to which he has acted, would be followed by the
punishment of the convict.

[^1]: Declaration of Human Rights in Islamic Law, Article 2, B.


