Holy War, Symbol of Eternal Life
================================

In Islam Holy War (Jihad) is another important exception for depriving
oneself of life for the sake of God. The persons, who take part in Holy
War in order to materialize, establish and defend divine ideals,
voluntarily endanger their lives, wellbeing or physical health.

Actually, for mankind Holy War is one way to achieve perfection. It is
also the loftiest and most important path toward his transcendental
life.

Giving away the life and belongings for the sake of heightening the word
"Islam", maintaining the limits of the school of thought, freedom,
defending life and property of the oppressed ones, has a high advantage.
The Holy Quran has stressed this in many verses.

God expresses such an advantage in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ عَلَى
الْقَاعِدِينَ دَرَجَةً ۚ وَكُلًّا وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ
وَفَضَّلَ اللَّهُ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ عَلَى الْقَاعِدِينَ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has preferred the mujahideen through their wealth and their
lives over those who remain [behind], by degrees. And to both Allah has
promised the best [reward]. But Allah*** ***has preferred the mujahideen
over those who remain [behind] with a great reward.(Quran, 4:95)***

The rank of a person who takes part in Holy War is so lofty in Islam
that the Prophet (S) said: "Higher than any goodness is goodness where
an individual is killed for the cause of God, and there is no goodness
or advantage higher than that."[^1]

Imam Ali (a.s) refers to Jihad (Holy War) as one of the doors to heaven.
This door has been opened by God to his friends, his followers and to
special people.[^2]

Not only Islam does not consider the deed of the person who takes part
in Holy War as "jumping into the valley from the edge of a cliff,"[^3]
but also considers itself the buyer of his life and property, and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اشْتَرَىٰ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ ۚ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ وَيُقْتَلُونَ ۖ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي
التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنْجِيلِ وَالْقُرْآنِ ۚ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِعَهْدِهِ
مِنَ اللَّهِ ۚ فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُمْ بِهِ ۚ
وَذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, Allah has purchased from the believers their lives and their
properties [in exchange] for that they will have Paradise. They fight in
the cause of Allah, so they kill and are killed. [It is] a true promise
[binding] upon Him in the Torah and the Gospel and the Qur'an. And who
is truer to his covenant than Allah? So rejoice in your transaction
which you have contracted. And it is that which the great attainment is.
(Quran, 9:111)***

Holy war (Jihad) against atheists and hypocrites,[^4] Jihad against the
pagans,[^5] Jihad aimed at expansion of Islam and eliminating enemies
intrigue,[^6] Jihad aimed at fighting against oppression,[^7] Jihad
aimed at defending (the country) against the non-Muslim's invasion[^8]
and finally Jihad due to breach of contract signed by non- Muslims with
an Islamic state.[^9] Not only it is every Muslim's right but also in
the eyes of Islam it is a religious duty and Muslims (except those
having a justifiable excuse) cannot ignore this religious
responsibility.[^10]

Undoubtedly the warrior for Islamic purpose will enjoy eternal spiritual
life, although his destiny may be termination of his worldly physical
life.

[^1]: Political Theology in Islam, p.14.

[^2]: Nahj al- Balaghah, Sermon 24.

[^3]: Quran, 2:195.

[^4]: The Holy Quran, Chapter Al- tawbeh , verse: 73.

[^5]: The Holy Quran, Chapter,Al- tawbeh , verse: 36.

[^6]: The Holy Quran, Chapter,Al-Anfal, verse:39.

[^7]: The Holy Quran, Chapter, Al- hajj , verse:39.

[^8]: The Holy Quran, Chapter, Al- Bacharach, verse:190.

[^9]: The Holy Quran, Chapter, Al- Tawbeh, verses:12 and 13.

[^10]: Quran, Chapter, Al- Tawbeh, verse: 81.


