The Noble and Lawful Defense
============================

Another exception in the decree prohibiting suicide (depriving self of
life) identified in Islam is defending one's own life, belongings or
family. There are numerous quotations from the Prophet (S) expressing
the significance of defending life, property or one's family. Hereunder
we point to one of them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من قاتل دون نفسه حتى يقتل فهو شهيد ، ومن قتل دون ماله فهو شهيد ، ومن
قاتل دون أهله حتى بقتل فهو شهيد ، ومن قتل في جنب الله فهو شهيد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

"He, who fights to defend his own life, till he is killed, is a martyr.
He, who gets killed while defending his own property, is a martyr. He,
who kills to defend his family and gets killed, is a martyr. He, who
gets killed for the cause of God, is a martyr."[^1]

Considering the rank of a martyr, defending the privacy of his life,
property and family, is indicative of the value and significance Islam
regards for countering invasion. Intrusion and oppression, regarding
individual's security and man's family, in such an extent that Islam
allows a man to endanger his own life to defend and save his own and his
family's security, and to fight until he loses his life.

The Prophet (S) in another occasion said: "He, who opposes and resists
tyranny and is seeking justice before being killed he is considered a
martyr."[^2]

This is God's command that emphasizes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا
اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ
مَعَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…So whoever has assaulted you, then assault him in the same way that
he has assaulted you. And fear Allah and know that Allah is with those
who fear Him.*** ***(Quran, 2:194)***

[^1]: Kanz al- Ummal, Vol.4, P.425.

[^2]: Foroo'e Kafi, Vol. 5, P.52.


