Right of Livelihood
===================

Livelihood is considered a part of mankind's right to life. In addition
to the fact that in the Islamic law, deprivation of a man of his life is
forbidden, right of livelihood and enjoying the minimum facilities and
devices to continue life is also considered important.

Islam considers enjoying the primitive but essential means to make
continuation of life possible, important. It has presented comprehensive
and vast programs aimed at materialization of this fundamental and vital
right, especially in the form of an anti-destitution campaign, aimed at
uprooting and eradicating poverty among the individuals of an Islamic
society.

In Islam the anti-poverty phenomena and campaign is considered the
public's duty in the society. Monopolizing policies favored by a certain
group (the rich) as the main obstacle in the way of just and fair
distribution of wealth, facilities and financial resources of a society
is prohibited. Quran explicitly opposes the concentration of a society's
wealth (exclusive ownership of riches) in the hands of a few.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ فَلِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ
وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ كَيْ لَا يَكُونَ دُولَةً بَيْنَ الْأَغْنِيَاءِ
مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And what Allah restored to His Messenger from the people of the
towns - it is for Allah and for the Messenger and for [his] near
relatives and orphans and the [stranded] traveler - so that it will not
be a perpetual distribution among the rich from among you.*** ***(Quran,
59:7)***

Also the individuals of a society are proscribed from doing anything
that contradicts the right of livelihood of mankind in a society and
puts the destitute under pressure and drives them into a difficult
situation. Puts the low-income class and disrupts their lives by
depriving them of the minimum necessities of their lives. For instance,
hoarding routine shopping list items and necessities of life of the
public would be contrary to livelihood of the people and cause
difficulty for them in providing their foodstuff, and to run their lives
has been banned.

The Prophet (S) explicitly said: "Whoever hoards products is a
sinner."[^1]

In another narration the Prophet (S) was quoted as saying: "Whoever
hoards some food for 40 days is apart from God and God detests him."[^2]

[^1]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, Vol .2, P.425.

[^2]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, Vol. 6, P. 368.


