Islam's Measures for Continuation of Life
=========================================

In addition to prohibiting hoarding of everyday grocery needs of the
public, Islam has foreseen (executive, economical and social) tactics,
strategies, arrangements and measures in its anti-poverty campaign to
fight the concentration of earnings and wealth in the hands of certain
numbered people. Enforcement of such tactics would lead to distribution
and adjustments of wealth and would ensure and guarantee social and
economic justice. It would also bridge the gap between the poor and the
rich. It would actually prevent the creation of a deep gap between the
two classes. In other words the class- differences which has caused the
creation of the wealthy class against the destitute or the low-income
class who are weak or incapable of running their lives and the primitive
affairs and maintain and secure the very viable elementary needs in
their lives.

Islam has taken steps to establish and found compulsory or encouraging
financial duties (called entities) to remove deprivation and to provide
elementary life requirements. By providing a spiritual support for such
eco- social entities, is guiding the Islamic society toward improvement
and promotion of living conditions and public's livelihood. Some of such
financial duties (entities) are:

**1- Donation to charity (Enfagh):** Although this act is optional, it
has been repeatedly emphasized by Islam. It is aimed at encouraging the
members of a society to provide the necessities of destitute and the
deprived ones. There are countless quotations from the Prophet (S) and
countless verses in The Holy Quran in this regard. The following is a
sample:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنْفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ
كَمَثَلِ حَبَّةٍ أَنْبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلِّ سُنْبُلَةٍ
مِائَةُ حَبَّةٍ ۗ وَاللَّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ
وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is
like a seed [of grain] which grows seven spikes; in each spike is a
hundred grains. And Allah multiplies [His*** ***reward] for whom He
wills. And Allah is all- Encompassing and Knowing.*** ***(Quran,
2:261)***

Also The Holy Quran blames those who refrain from donating to charity by
helping the needy:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلَا يُنْفِقُونَهَا
فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُمْ بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…. and those who hoard gold and silver and spend it not in the way of
Allah - give them tidings of a painful punishment.*** ***(Quran,
9:34)***

The Prophet (S) said," It is never acceptable that one of you should
sleep having eaten his dinner when one's neighbor is still hungry.”[^1]

Donation in the eyes of Islam has been attached such a great
significance that it is categorized as the top prioritized deeds among
the most privileged worshiping deeds, such as prayer. The word donation
comes immediately after the word "prayer or al-salaat" in several
verses.[^2]

**2-Khums (a Fifth):** One of the financial duties foreseen aimed at
improvement of a destitute life and livelihood as well as especial
urgent spending needs in an Islamic society is khums (a Fifth). Khums is
an imposed donation levied on every Muslim's one fifth of the profit,
turnover, and income. The profit earned by a Muslim because of his
lawful business after reduction of routine living expenses in the period
of one year is subject to khums taxation. The followings are also
subject to khums: treasure, diving, mining (drilling and digging mines),
war booty, wealth mixed with someone else's wealth whose owner is
unknown (money laundering and any money which is not entirely yours),
will be subject to khums.[^3]

The Holy Quran says in this issue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ وَالْيَتَامَىٰ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ
وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ آمَنْتُمْ بِاللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And know that anything you obtain of war booty - then indeed, for
Allah is one fifth of it and for the Messenger and for [his] near
relatives and the orphans, the needy, and the [stranded] traveler, if
you have believed in Allah. (Quran, 8:41)***

**3-Zakaat donation:** Zakaat in the Islamic economical decrees includes
a part of one's belongings. When a wealthy Muslim's riches reach a
certain amount, he must donate a certain part of his savings.[^4]

There are many verses in The Holy Quran about Zakaat. The requirement of
Zakaat has been emphasized after prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ ۚ وَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا
لِأَنْفُسِكُمْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And*** ***establish*** ***prayer*** ***and*** ***give*** ***zakaat,
and*** ***whatever*** ***good*** ***you*** ***put*** ***forward***
***for*** ***yourselves*** ***-*** ***you*** ***will*** ***find***
***it*** ***with*** ***Allah.*** ***Indeed, Allah*** ***of*** ***what***
***you*** ***do, is*** ***Seeing***. ***(Quran, 2:110)***

Also, describing those who assist God, The Holy Quran, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[And they are] those who, if We give them authority in the land,
establish prayer and give zakat and enjoin what is right and forbid what
is wrong. And to Allah belongs the outcome of [all] matters.***
***(Quran 22:41)***

Zakaat can be a source of money from which the followings can be helped:
social security, destitute, poor people, orphans, the unemployed,
passengers and anybody caught by life's bottlenecks.[^5]

**4-Tax (Kheraj):** This tax is levied on farmers. It is an amount out
of the agricultural products, or its value in cash, collected. This tax
is levied on peasants and their agricultural land depending on the
discretion of an Islamic government and according on farmer's or a
landowner's agreement and in favor of the public. When spending this
money the priority must be given to wellbeing of (all) the farmers and
flourishing of the agricultural land.[^6]

**5-Jaziyeh:** this tax is levied on non-Muslims. But non-Muslims here
include only those who are followers of other monotheistic religions
(followers of God's traditions and monotheist prophets). Such taxpayers
have a commitment to pay this tax and to keep the limits of Islam and
Muslims and to respect such boundaries and borders, as their lives and
property is located in the safe and secure boundaries of Islam but they
enjoy the same rights and limits as Muslims.[^7]

**6- Kaffarat:** One of the financial obligations in the Islamic
theology is Kaffarat. It is a property that must be given away to
compensate for some sins such as monetary compensation for murder,[^8]
or monetary recompense for failing to keep or honor a promise,[^9] or
monetary compensation for unlawful hunting.[^10]

In order to concentrate financial resources, the entity of Islamic
Treasury (Beit al-maal) has been foreseen which is the Islamic
government's treasury. The cases of taking money out of this treasury,
and how to spend it, as well as relevant priorities has clearly been
mentioned in the public financial system in Islam. Any discrimination
(abuse) in using the treasury is prohibited.

Certainly, no legal system, has outlined or presented executive plans
and policies for right of viability, continuation of mankind's life as
well as the deprived and needy people's enjoying the life's primary
instruments as clear as Islam.

[^1]: Human Rights in Islamic Law, P.4.

[^2]: Quran, Chapter,Al- Ibrahim, verse: 31, Quran, Chapter, Al-
Bagharah, verse:3, Quran, Chapter, Al- enfagh, verse:3, Quran, Chapter,
Al- hajj, verse:35, etc.

[^3]: Islam and Ownership, p. 21.

[^4]: Analytical Project of Islamic Economy, p. 220.

[^5]: Analytical project of Islamic economy, p. 222.

[^6]: Islam and Ownership, p. 211.

[^7]: Islam and Ownership, p. 211.

[^8]: Quran, 5:45.

[^9]: Quran, 5:89.

[^10]: Quran, 5:95.


