Conclusion
==========

Given what has been explained above, regarding mankind's right to life
in the eyes of Islam, we conclude that: Islam's mentality pays attention
to right to life comprehensive aimed at achieving perfection and
transcendental life materially and spiritually.

Attention to right to life in Islamic school of thought is based on
realism, far from irrational excessive and under-spending behavior, seen
in the Western system's propaganda. when we try to compare the Islamic
Human Rights (over 1400 years old) with the Western Human Rights (200
years old), we notice that Islam's mentality toward the Human Rights
(including mankind's right to life) and also the compiled executive
plans in the Islamic sources for its materialization has caused Islam to
last for eternity during the history. On the contrary, the western the
Human Rights has failed to prove beneficial in this regard.

Below we briefly point to such comparative study:

Islamic Human Rights system regards the right to life a gift from God.
It sees life's value based on human's lofty dignity and decency
(degree). In the eyes of divine schools of thought, whereas the western
Human Rights system depreciates the right to life from the humanistic
approach, while regarding it as low as a mere natural right for mankind.
Consequently, in the Western legal system right to life as an "absolute"
right is unlimited, whereas in the Islamic legal system the continuity
and survival of this right depends on conditions determined by Islam.

The Interpretation of right to life by the Western legal system is
material, without consideration for the spiritual aspect of man's
existence, whereas the Islamic legal system is based on all the aspects
of human existence (both material and spiritual). Actually the human
spiritual life is attached more significance in the eyes of Islam to
such an extent that (in case of a conflict) it has priority over the
material one.

In the international Human Rights Documents, human's life is defined
merely as a "natural right", whereas man's life in Islamic legal system
is identified as both a "right" and a "duty". In the eyes of Islam not
only a man has no right to terminate his life and is responsible for
safeguarding it but also he must (feel responsibility to) protect other
people's lives (be it threatened by natural disasters or causes or
subject to a third party's intrusion, etc). He must rise up to resist
and reject the threat and the intrusion. If he turns a blind eye to it
he is a sinner.

Prohibition decree against abortion (except in urgent cases such as
mother's life being at stake or emergencies determined by the Islamic
Law): One of the privileges of the Islamic laws in regard to
"comprehensive identification" of right to life for humans is paying
attention to human dignity even prior to his birth, whereas in the
Western Human Rights Declaration and documents, disregarding the
sanctity of an embryo, abortion is not forbidden. In most western
nations, deprivation of humans of their lives at the stage before birth
(abortion) is permitted and hence lawful. Sometimes it is even
encouraged.

In the Islamic Human Rights system, because of human dignity, provision
of an appropriate and favorable life for a person is part of his right
to life and is respected.[^1]

Strategies have been foreseen aimed at its materialization, such as
financial sources and duties, inclusive of zakaat, khums, kaffarat and
normal or general donations. But in the Western approach and its Human
Rights system, only "human welfare" has been mentioned along with a very
few other points. There is no mention of or consideration for human
dignity.[^2]

The Islamic school of thought takes care of special classes in the
society including senior citizens (the elderly), women, children, the
sick and the wounded (or disabled) in armed clashes. Also special
attention is paid to prisoners of war (POW's), banning mutilation of
killed soldiers, how to treat POW's and their families. All such things
are indicative of the magnitude and magnificence of Islam, and how Islam
looks at Human Rights. Whereas the Declaration of the Human Rights fails
to adequately cover the above rights.

[^1]: The Islamic Human Rights, Article 2.

[^2]: The Declaration of Human Rights, Article 25.


