Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ وَأُنْثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا ۚ إِنَّ
أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ
خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made
you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the most
noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed,
Allah is Knowing and Acquainted. (Quran, 49:13)***

\*\*\*\*\*

The issue of human rights, for being an inherent one, has a history as
old as human age on the earth. The subject was born when mankind came
into existence on the Earth. The bigger the human society and the
population grew, the vaster the human rights issue was expanded. It has
always been the source of freedom-seeking and freedom-fighting movements
and it remained the eternal and perpetual ideal of mankind.

The historians have unearthed documents in their studies and researches
that are indicative of the fact that mankind stressed its natural rights
and basic freedom and liberty 2000 years before BC.

The emergence of Islam in 610 A.D. not only was the milestone but was a
golden and perpetual chapter in human history. Because of the contents
of its teachings, particularly in human rights, it was welcomed and
accepted by the oppressed people in a vast part of the globe and found
many followers.

According to a well-known researcher, thinker and scholar, Abul A'la
Maududi, the people in the West have the habit of attributing every good
thing to themselves and try to prove that it is because of them that the
world enjoys this and that blessing, while claiming that "they
originated in the West". They also have a habit of pretending that all
the bestowments and privileges are rooted in the West, whereas the very
first historical document on the human rights, Magna Carta of Britain
(The Great Charter of the Liberties of Britain) was issued by John
(England's king at the time) in 1215.

Though the Magna Carta itself came into existence six hundred years
after the advent of Islam, this and the subsequent documents, as valid
and firm evidence, prove that the West is lagging behind Islam on the
issue of the human rights. Its failure to pay attention to human dignity
and its delay in its fight against oppression and tyranny which mankind
has suffered during centuries is evident here.

When you study the concepts of human rights in the Islamic teachings you
realize that it clearly is indicative of the fact that the human rights
system in the Islamic law and the teachings of the Prophet (PBUH) are
much more comprehensive and more perfect than what is claimed in the
West. The reason is the fundamental difference between the two legal
systems of West and Islam, in viewing mankind and his material and
spiritual characteristics. In Islamic law criteria of human's erudition
and wisdom, humanity and spirituality has been paid specific attention
to. On the contrary, West's approach to mankind is not based on
spiritual and ethical factors.

On the other hand, as ethics and religion can play the role of the
strongest support backing the materialization of human rights,
strengthening ethical and religious values in every society will cause
expansion of support for the human rights. On the contrary, ethical
downfall or ignoring religious values, because of having a negative
impact, leads to violation of the human rights. Thus, if laws and
regulations in force are left unsupported by the great spiritual and
ideological support of the individuals in a society, the ultimate
attained consequences will not be favorable. In today's world, failure
of the UN's human rights organizations and the international documents
(declarations) to address religion and religious beliefs has caused it
to fail to develop support of the human rights. The pathetic conditions
stemming from violation of the Human Rights that we witness day-to-day
around the globe is the result of the above fact.

In the series of essays which follow, we intend to briefly introduce
some of the teachings of pure true and real Islam. We try to show the
legitimacy of the Islamic laws, while comparing it with the West's
flamboyant, showy and loud but empty baseless claims, so that everyone
will know how much human being owes to Islamic teachings and to law of
the holy prophet.

**And of God to success**


