The Importance of Right to Life
===============================

Undoubtedly, the phenomenon of life is the most important phenomenon in
the Universe. Among various kinds of lives, the human's life (as the
life of the noblest of all creatures and the excellent entity of
existence) is very important.

Mankind is the most talented creature and that is why his life is
important. Actually what distinguishes the value of the human's life
from that of other creatures, while making him outstanding among other
creatures, are his astonishing and extraordinary physical and spiritual
potentials and talents. Cognition of the magnitude of human who enjoys
wisdom, judgment, insight, discretion, knowledge, will power,
conscience, love, perfectionism and management, is not easy. And these
are only a fraction of it as all these are only a part of the power and
ability of man's life. Compared to other creatures, scope and span of
human's life impact is so vast and astonishing that in various
dimensions without any pause in history, it has always attracted the
attention of scholars and philosophers.

The most important principle of inherent rights is the right to life for
mankind.

This has been unanimously accepted by all schools of thought.

The right to life is one of the inherent and natural rights of mankind.
It is the fundamental of other rights of mankind. There are no other
rights for mankind without the right to life.

Inherent right means no legislated law is required for the existence of
right, and this law is for everyone. Legislated laws in every system and
every society must protect and defend the human's right to life to
provide necessary safety for man.

According to Article 3 of the Declaration of Human Rights, everyone has
the right to life, liberty and security of person.

Furthermore, according to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights "Every human being has the inherent right to life. This
right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of
his life." [Article 6, Item 1. International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights].


