God's Free-hold on Living
=========================

Undoubtedly, God owns the lives of all beings and creatures:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ
أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا ۚ وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[He] who created death and life to test you [as to] which of you is
best in deed - and He is the Exalted in Might, the Forgiving. (Quran,
67:2)***

So every creature and specifically his "life" belong to God. There is no
creature (in the world) that has the power to create life.

Imam Ali (a.s) in one of his sermons said:

"Even if all the animals of the earth, whether birds or beasts, stabled
cattle or pasturing ones, of different origins and species, dull people
and sagacious men -- all jointly try to create (even) a mosquito they
are not able to bring it into being and do not understand what is the
way to its creation. Their wits are bewildered and wandering. Their
powers fall short and fail, and return disappointed and tired, knowing
that they are defeated and admitting their inability to produce it, also
realizing that they are too weak (even) to destroy it."[^1]

Quran emphasizes that creation of life and death is exclusively done by
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ هُوَ أَمَاتَ وَأَحْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that it is He who causes death and gives life.*** ***(Quran,
53:44) ***

The evidence of God's capability in creating life is that he
materialized life from nothing and from death.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآيَةٌ لَهُمُ الْأَرْضُ الْمَيْتَةُ أَحْيَيْنَاهَا وَأَخْرَجْنَا
مِنْهَا حَبًّا فَمِنْهُ يَأْكُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And a sign for them is the dead earth. We have brought it to life and
brought forth from it grain, and from it they eat.*** ***(Quran,
36:33)***

The ownership of life and death, as the most complicated phenomena of
life also belongs to God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي أَحْيَاكُمْ ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ ۗ إِنَّ
الْإِنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He is the one who gave you life; then He causes you to die and
then will [again] give you life. Indeed, mankind is ungrateful.***
***(Quran, 22:66)***

[^1]: Nahj al- Balaghah, Sermon 185.


