Various Types of Life in Islam
==============================

Contrary to other legal systems, in the Islamic legal system, when you
talk about right to life it does not only refer to the physical life.

Although compared to other creatures, great significance is attached to
mankind's physical or material life and its rank is higher than that of
animals and plants, man's spiritual life deserves more significance. It
enjoys a much higher rank. The Holy Quran refers to it as 'Hayate
Tayyebeh':

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً ۖ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever does righteousness, whether male or female, while he is a
believer - We will surely cause him to live a good life, and We will
surely give them their reward [in the*** ***Hereafter] according to the
best of what they used to do.(Quran, 16 :97)***

A good life is what makes human discrete from other creatures. It is a
sign of man's merit compared to the other creatures, because access to
the spiritual life is only possible by mankind. Other creatures do not
benefit from it. The importance of man's material life and the reason
for equalizing it to the life of all mankind is that God determines
right to life for each individual so that while enjoying this divine
gift and benefiting from talents bestowed upon him, man can continue the
evolution and development toward spiritual perfection aimed at achieving
the spiritual life.

Thus, killing a man and depriving him of his life means violation of
'reality of mankind' which is a divine gift and is considered the
grounds for transcendental perfection of mankind. In the eyes of Islamic
school of thought a man not only enjoys the right to material life, he
also has the right to live in a cleansed society free of corruptions and
free of uncontrolled moral behavior, no intrigue, so that he can improve
himself spiritually. Obviously safeguarding his spiritual life is as
important as protection of his material life which has been stressed by
Islam.[^1]

[^1]: Declaration of Human Rights in Islamic Law, Article 17.


