Depriving One of Life is Prohibited
===================================

Violation on others' life and depriving an individual of his right to
live, in the eyes of Islam is the biggest sin. The Prophet of Islam
(PBUH) said: "Seeing the destruction of the world is easier for God than
seeing a believer being murdered."[^1]

Islam promises a killer to stay in hell perpetually:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَقْتُلْ مُؤْمِنًا مُتَعَمِّدًا فَجَزَاؤُهُ جَهَنَّمُ خَالِدًا
فِيهَا وَغَضِبَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَلَعَنَهُ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُ عَذَابًا
عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But whoever kills a believer intentionally - his recompense is Hell,
wherein he will abide eternally, and Allah has become angry with him and
has cursed him and has prepared for him a great punishment.***
***(Quran, 4:93)***

Furthermore, in the Islamic law, the punishment for killing someone
without a legal permit in this world is execution. The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بِالْحَقِّ ۗ
وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَانًا فَلَا
يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ ۖ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنْصُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not kill the soul which Allah has forbidden, except by right.
And whoever is killed unjustly - We have given his heir authority, but
let him not exceed limits in [the matter of] taking life. Indeed, he has
been supported [by the law].*** ***(Quran, 17:33)***

One of the outstanding characteristics of the Islamic law was a serious
fight against the inhuman act and tradition of burying their infant
daughters alive. Before the advent of Islam, the girls used to be buried
alive. But at the advent of Islam it was immediately banned. As Islam
being strictly against it, protested and firmly fought against this
savage vicious crime.

The Holy Quran says: ‘Those who buried these girls alive will be
interrogated on the Resurrection Day. They will be asked: Which sin had
they committed to deserve death?”[^2]

Another vital point is that the Islamic law attaches great significance
not only to the adults' lives but also to children's right to life.

This verse of the Holy Quran is indicative of the significance of this
reality:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلَادَكُمْ خَشْيَةَ إِمْلَاقٍ ۖ نَحْنُ
نَرْزُقُهُمْ وَإِيَّاكُمْ ۚ إِنَّ قَتْلَهُمْ كَانَ خِطْئًا كَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***… And*** ***do*** ***not*** ***kill*** ***your*** ***children***
***for*** ***fear*** ***of*** ***poverty.*** ***We*** ***provide***
***for*** ***them*** ***and for*** ***you.*** ***Indeed,*** ***their
killing*** ***is*** ***ever*** ***a*** ***great*** ***sin.***
***(Quran,*** ***17:31)***

Another issue is that if there are some accomplices who conspire and
commit a murder together, this does not alleviate or lessen the burden
of the crime or the sin of the killers. The Prophet of Islam (S) said:
"Cooperation in killing no matter to what extent will cause
disappointment and distance from God's mercy on the Resurrection
Day."[^3]

Once, during the Prophet's time, a man was killed in the city of Medina
by a group of people. No certain individual was identified as the
killer. So as soon as the Prophet (S) heard the news, he rushed to the
mosque to speak and announced:

"If all the residents of Heaven and Earth participate in killing a
human, they will all suffer punishment.”[^4]

Also forbidding murder and depriving a person of life, is not
exclusively allocated to Muslims, but anyone living under the umbrella
of an Islamic government enjoys this right, but as long as they do not
intend to overthrow the Islamic state to fight against it. Thus, their
blood, property and lives will benefit from this sanctity and thus, will
benefit from the Islamic state's protection. Thus, the Prophet (S) said:
"God will forbid (going to) the Heaven for he who kills a sinner."[^5]

The Islamic ruling against murder is so strict that even if someone
gives shelter to a murderer, he will face strict and severe blame. The
Prophet (S) said: "He who gives shelter to a killer or someone who
causes or paves the way for a murder, he will be condemned by God.”[^6]

This point is also remarkably important in regards to depriving others
of their lives: in the Islamic law reluctance or compulsion does not
justify the act of murder. Therefore if someone is threatened to be
killed should he refuses to commit a murder, his crime is not
justifiable. The threatened person has no right to kill another person,
just to rescue himself from death, as the value of all men is the same
and has sanctity. But the opposite is better, as the Prophet (S) was
quoted as saying: "If you are in a situation where you can prevent a
believer, who says his prayer, from being killed by you (otherwise you
would lose your life), you must prefer to be killed than commit this
crime."[^7]

As repeatedly seen in the history of the holy wars at the advent of
Islam, some self-sacrificing men during the war sacrificed their own
lives by giving their very last date to their comrades in the warfront
who were starving to death to rescue them. Thus they were honored to be
martyrs.

[^1]: Declaration of Human Rights in Islamic Law, Page 24.

[^2]: Quran, 81: 8, 9.

[^3]: Human Rights in Islamic Law, P.44.

[^4]: Islam and the Human Rights, P.490 and Human Rights in Islamic Law,
P. 44.

[^5]: Islam and the Human Rights, P.491.

[^6]: Wasa'il al- Shi'ah, vol. 19, p.15.

[^7]: Kanz al-Ummal, Vol.15, P.22.


