Commentary : Verse 22
=====================

(22) وَلاَ تَنكِحُواْ مَا نَكَحَ آبَاؤُكُم مِّنَ النِّسَاء إِلاَّ مَا
قَدْ سَلَفَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَمَقْتًا وَسَاء سَبِيلاً

22. " And do not marry women whom your father married, except what has
already passed; verily it is indecent and hateful and it is an evil
way."

**Commentary :**

One of the customs in the pre-Islamic era of Ignorance was that
whenever a person passed away, his offsprings would marry their step
mother (their fathers' wife) .

It happened that one of the Helpers, called Abu-Qays, passed away and
his son suggested to marry his step mother. The woman said that she
should ask the matter from the Messenger of Allah (p.b.u.h.) . When she
went to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and told him the matter, this verse was
revealed and prohibited the marriage with step mother.

" And do not marry women whom your father married, except what has
already passed; verily it is indecent and hateful and it is an evil
way."


**Section 4 : Women who may be taken in wedlock Commentary : Verse
23**

"Unlawful to wed blood and foster relations - Not to marry two sisters
at a time - To marry free women - Laws regards wedding slave girls."

(23) حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمْ أُمَّهَاتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُكُمْ وَأَخَوَاتُكُمْ
وَعَمَّاتُكُمْ وَخَالاَتُكُمْ وَبَنَاتُ الأَخِ وَبَنَاتُ الأُخْتِ
وَأُمَّهَاتُكُمُ اللاَّتِي أَرْضَعْنَكُمْ وَأَخَوَاتُكُم مِّنَ
الرَّضَاعَةِ وَأُمَّهَاتُ نِسَآئِكُمْ وَرَبَائِبُكُمُ اللاَّ تِي فِي
حُجُورِكُم مِّن نِّسَآئِكُمُ اللاَّتِي دَخَلْتُم بِهِنَّ فَإِن لَّمْ
تَكُونُواْ دَخَلْتُم بِهِنَّ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ وَحَلاَئِلُ
أَبْنَائِكُمُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ أَصْلاَبِكُمْ وَأَن تَجْمَعُواْ بَيْنَ
الأُخْتَيْنِ إَلاَّ مَا قَدْ سَلَفَ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ غَفُورًا
رَّحِيمًا

23. " Forbidden to you (in marriage) are your mothers, and your
daughters, and your sisters, and your parental aunts and your maternal
aunts, and daughters of your brother and daughers of your sister, and
your mothers that have suckled you, and your foster sisters, and the
mothers of your wives, and your step-daughters who are in your
guardianship (born) of your wives to whom you have gone in, but if you
have not gone in to them, there shall not be a sin on you (to marry
their daughters) , and the wives of your sons who are of your own loins.
And (it is forbidden to you) that you should have two sisters together
(at the same time) , except what has already passed, verily Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."

**Commentary :**

In this verse, those women with whom marriage is forbidden are pointed
out. This prohibition comes forth through three ways: 1) Birth of
progeny, genealogical relationship; 2) marriage, (casual relationship) ;
3) suckling, (foster relationship) .

The marriages with the above mentioned relatives, which had occurred
before the revelation of this verse, were forgiven. The prohibition of
marriage with some relatives had been enjoined in the former divine
religions, too. For example, the Torah, book of Leviticus, Chapter 18,
verses 6 to 23 are as follows:

6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to
uncover their nakedness: I am the LORD.

7. The nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: She is thy
mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

8. The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy
father's nakedness.

9. The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter
of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their
nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

10. The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter,
even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for their's is thine own
nakedness.

11. The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy
father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

12. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister: she is
thy father's near kinswoman.

13. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister: for
she is thy mother's near kinswoman.

14. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother, thou
shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.

15. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she is
thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.

16. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife: it is
thy brother's nakedness.

17. Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter,
neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter,
to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near kinswomen: it is
wickedness.

18. Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to
uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.

19. Also thou shalt not approach uncover to a woman to uncover her
nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.

20. Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife, to
defile thyself with her.

21. And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.

22. Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is
abomination.

23. Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith:
neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it is
confusion.

**Explanations:**

1. The authority of enjoining things to be unlawful (such as alcoholic
liquore, some bargains, and married women) is wholy up to Allah. "
Forbidden to you (in marriage) are your mothers, and your daughters, and
your sisters, and your parental aunts and your maternal aunts, and
daughters of your brother and daughters of your sister, and your mothers
that have suckled you, and your foster sisters, and the mothers of your
wives, ..."

2. Consider the daughters of your wife from her previous husband who
are brought into your house, as your own daughters, and be as a trainee
for them, since you are their father.

"... and your step-daughters who are in your guardianship (born) of
your wives to whom you have gone in, but if you have not gone in to
them, then there shall not be a sin on you (to marry their daughters)
,..."

3. The wives of your sons, who are from your own dynasty, are unlawful
for you to marry, and the wives of your adopted sons, as well. "... and
the wives of your sons who are of your own loins...."

4. The contemporary marriage with two sisters usually draws them toward
personal jealousy and competition and, finally, their love and
affections may be led to detestation. The prohibition may be for this
reason. The verse says:

"... And (it is forbidden to you) that you should have two sisters
together (at the same time) , ..."


This is The End of Part Two


