Commentary : Verse 2
====================

(2) وَآتُواْ الْيَتَامَى أَمْوَالَهُمْ وَلاَ تَتَبَدَّلُواْ الْخَبِيثَ
بِالطَّيِّبِ وَلاَ تَأْكُلُواْ أَمْوَالَهُمْ إِلَى أَمْوَالِكُمْ إِنَّهُ
كَانَ حُوبًا كَبِيرًا

2. " And give the orphans their property, and do not exchange something
bad (of yours) for something good (of theirs) , nor devour their
property along with your own; (for) it is surely a great crime.

**Occasion of Revelation:**

At the time of the Prophet of Islam (p.b.u.h.) , one of the members of
a tribe by the name of Bani-Qatfan had a rich brother, and it happened
that the rich brother passed away.

Then, as a guardian of his brother's orphans, he took his property in
his possession, but when his brother's son matured and demanded it, he
denied returning his right to him. The subject was explained to the holy
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) . Then this verse was revealed, and when the man
heard it, he repented and returned the property to its owner. Then the
man said:" I refuge with Allah from that I be polluted through the great
sin."

**Commentary :
Treachery in Orphans' Property Is Forbidden!**

In any society it happens that, as a result of some events and
accidents, some parents die and there remain some little children from
them. There are three important instructions upon the property of
orphans mentioned in this verse.

1. At first, it instructs as such:

" And give the orphans their property, ..."

This ordinance means that your interference in these properties is in
the rank of a trustee and as an inspector, not as a possessor.

2. The second instruction is to prevent guardians from devouring the
property of orphans. Sometimes it happens that some guardians of the
orphans, under the pretext that changing the property of the orphan is
benefitable for the orphan, or it makes no difference to change it, or
if it remains it will be wasted, take the best and choice parts of the
properties of the orphans and put their own bad and undemanded
properties in their places. The Qur'an says:

"... and do not exchange something bad (of yours) for something good
(of theirs) ,..."

3.The third instruction has been added as follows:

"... nor devour their property along with your own; ..."

This sentence means that: do not mix the property of the orphans with
your own property so that its result ends to the possession of the
whole. Or, do not mix your undesirable property with their good property
so that its result be treading the rights of the orphans. At the end of
the verse, to emphasize and prove the importance of the matter, - that
this kind of transgression to the property of the orphans is a great
sin, it says:

"... (for) it is surely a great crime."


**Commentary : Verse 3**

(3) وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ تُقْسِطُواْ فِي الْيَتَامَى فَانكِحُواْ مَا
طَابَ لَكُم مِّنَ النِّسَاء مَثْنَى وَثُلاَثَ وَرُبَاعَ فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ
أَلاَّ تَعْدِلُواْ فَوَاحِدَةً أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ ذَلِكَ
أَدْنَى أَلاَّ تَعُولُواْ

3. " And, if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards orphans,
then marry those women who seem good to you, two, or three, or four; but
if you (still) fear that you will not act justly (between them) then
(marry) only one or someone your right hands have acquired. That is more
proper, that you may not deviate from equity."

**Occasion of Revelation :**

Before Islam, it was customary in Arabia among many people that they
took the orphan girls to their houses under the name of defraying and
guardianship and then they married them and appropriated their property,
too. They assigned even their dowries less than what the ordinary amount
was, since every thing was in their own hand, and when they felt the
least inconvenience from them, they would easily leave them off. At that
time the verse was revealed and instructed the guardians of the orphans
that they could marry the girl orphans if they observed justice about
them completely.

**Commentary:**

In this verse, another right, out of the rights of the orphans, is
pointed out. It admonishes that at the time of marrying the girl
orphans, if you fear that you cannot observe the right and justice about
the conditions of matrimony, as well as their property, relinguish
marrying them and refer to other women. It says :

" And, if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards orphans, then
marry those women who seem good to you, ..."

Then, it adds that you may choose from among them two or three or four
to marry with. It says :

"... two, or three, or four; ..."

So, immediately after that it continues saying that this is in the case
that you keep the perfect justice. But, if you fear that you do not
observe justice unto those wives of yours, you must suffice to only one
wife, so that you keep away from imposing cruelty and transgression
against others. It says:

"... but if you (still) fear that you will not act justly (about them)
then (marry) only one, ..."

Or, instead of taking a second wife, you may take advantage of the
She-slave that you have, because their conditions are less heavy,
although they must enjoy of their own rights, too. it says:

"... or someone your right hands have acquired. ..."

This action - choosing only one wife or your slave, better prevents you
from cruelty and deviating from the path of equity. It says :

"... That is more proper that you may not deviate from equity."

**Justice about Wives:**

What a man is enjoined to observe in justice about his wife is the
observance of the equity in one's practical conditions and outward
aspects of life, because applying justice in heartily affections is out
of the ability of man. (1)

(1) It can be said that the windom of polypany liens is the following
:

\* 1- The number of death for men in wars and accidents is larger than
that of women and, therefore, some women become windows.
\* 2- Women have monthly periods when no associon occurs.
\* 3- Few of the young men are willing to marry a widow womman.
\* 4- Not all of the hushandes widows are pious or have the power to
control themselves. Therfore, ether for the sonent of the first hushand
, the rights of the widowsshould be ignored, or the problem must be
solved by a project. Thus, basing on some conditions, men can marry a
second wife in order to solve the difficully of the both parties.

**Explanations :**

1. Islam is the supporter of the deprived class of the socity,
especially the orphans, and the girl orphans in particular, emphatically
on the subject of chastity, matrimony, and misusing them.

2. It is not necessary to be assured of inequity of yourself to abandon
marrying the orphans, but probability and fear from it of your own side,
is enough either.

3. In choosing a wife, heartily willing is a principal.

4. On the whole, Islam agrees with conditioned polygamy for men.


