Commentary : Verse 4
====================

(4) وَآتُواْ النَّسَاء صَدُقَاتِهِنَّ نِحْلَةً فَإِن طِبْنَ لَكُمْ عَن
شَيْءٍ مِّنْهُ نَفْسًا فَكُلُوهُ هَنِيئًا مَّرِيئًا

4. " And give women their dowries as a free gift, but if they, of
themselves, be pleased to give up to you something of it, then consume
it with pleasure and wholesomely."

**Commentary :**

Concerning the above verse where this term has been applied, it can be
explained that the Arabic term /nihlah/, as Raqib Esfahani has said, is
derived from /nahl/ in the sense of 'bee'. Since a bee gives honey to
people and expects nothing, so, a present is also called /nihlah/. An
Islamic tradition indicates that the finest properties should be used in
three occasions: 1. Dowry - 2. Hajj pilgrimage -3. Shroud. If you spend
your best properties in paying dower, your offsprings will be of the
righteous. (1)

**Explanations :**

1. Paying dower of the wife (which is her right) is obligatory.

2. Dower sum is not the rate of a lady, but it is a wedding gift and
the sign of affection and friendship.

" And give women their dowries as a free gift, ..."

3. Dowry is the gift of man to the woman, and never it is her cost.
However, we must know that dower is a financial support for the woman at
the probable time of separation and as a compensation of her damage.

4. A woman has the right of possession of her dower. Thus, the parents
and relatives of the lady have no right at all to take it for
themselves.

5. A woman is free to take her dowry or donate it.

"... but if they, of themselves, be pleased to give up to you something
of it, ..."

(1) Atybab-ul-Bayan, commentary, vol.4, p. 12

6. A wholesome wealth is that which whose owner bestows willingly and
pleasantly.

"... but if they, of themselves, be pleased to give up to you something
of it, then consume it with pleasure and wholesomely."

7. The extrinsic consent is not enough, but heartily consent is
essential when the Qur'an says: " of themselves". Then, unwillingly
given or compulsory remits are not valid.


**Commentary : Verse 5**

(5) وَلاَ تُؤْتُواْ السُّفَهَاء أَمْوَالَكُمُ الَّتِي جَعَلَ اللّهُ
لَكُمْ قِيَاماً وَارْزُقُوهُمْ فِيهَا وَاكْسُوهُمْ وَقُولُواْ لَهُمْ
قَوْلاً مَّعْرُوفًا

5. " And do not give the feeble-minded your property which Allah has
made for you a (means of) support, but feed them and clothe them
therewith, and speak to them with kind words."

**Commentary :**

In Islamic literature distrustful winebibbers, in Arabic, are called
/safih/ 'feeble-minded'. Therefore, personal properties and public
properties should not be put under the authority of some unreliable
persons. Some Islamic traditions indicate that the vast sense of the
term "feeble -minded" covers evil-doers, too.

The secret that property should not be given unto their control is that
' property ' is the consistence of the society. Thus, giving any
position, responsibility and secret imformation, upon which the
consistence of the society depends, to the persons who are habitually
wrong-doers, is not right.

**Explanations :**

1. Those who are feeble-minded, winebibbers, and unrestrained should
not be authoritative in economy and wealth.

2. When the feeble-minded have authority over even their own property,
it is economically harmful for your property, too. (It is notable that
the verse says: " your property " and it does not say: their property)
.

"And do not give the feeble-minded your property which Allah has made
for you a (means of) support, ..."

3. In daily affairs, economical expediencies of the society and mental
development ought to be noted to.

" And do not give the feeble-minded your property...."

4. The feeble-minded persons are not admissible to use their properties
themselves.

5. The financial and economical authorities of the system should be
chosen from among some upright and experienced persons.

" And do not give the feeble-minded ..."

6. The contractors of the economical agreements must not be some
wrong-doers and sinners.

7. Wealth is a means of rising-up. Then, if wealth is not utilized as a
means of rising-up in a country, the economical system there is ill and
its excecutor is a feeble-minded person even if he has got P.H.D. in
economics.

8. Wealth is for the consistence of life, economics, and the leaver of
the system.

"... which Allah has made for you a (means of) support, ..."

9. Capitals must not remain stagnantly. The wealth of the orphans and
the feeble-minded persons should also be applied in the current of
production and profitableness, so that its income can be enough for
their lives to run and nothing of their capital would be spent.

"... but feed them and clothe them therewith, ..."

10. The spiritual status and personality of the deprived must be
regarded to.

"... and speak to them with kind words."


