Commentary : Verse 8
====================

(8) وَإِذَا حَضَرَ الْقِسْمَةَ أُوْلُواْ الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى
وَالْمَسَاكِينُ فَارْزُقُوهُم مِّنْهُ وَقُولُواْ لَهُمْ قَوْلاً
مَّعْرُوفًا

8. " And when the relatives and orphans and the needy are present at
the division (of heritage) , give them (something) out of it and speak
to them kind words."

**Commentary :

An Ethical Ordinance**

Certainly this verse has been revealed after the law of division of
heritage, because it says:

" And when the relatives and orphans and the needy are present at the
division (of heritage) , give them (something) , ..."

Though the terms ' orphans ' and ' the needy ' are mentioned in the
abstract form, the purpose of it is the orphans and the needy of the
relatives. Then, at the end of the verse, it says:

"... and speak to them kind words."


**Commentary : Verse 9**

(9) وَلْيَخْشَ الَّذِينَ لَوْ تَرَكُواْ مِنْ خَلْفِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّةً
ضِعَافًا خَافُواْ عَلَيْهِمْ فَلْيَتَّقُوا اللّهَ وَلْيَقُولُواْ قَوْلاً
سَدِيدًا

9. " And let those fear who, if they left behind them weakly children,
would fear on their account, so let them be in awe of Allah, and let
them speak right words."

**Commentary :**

As the Islamic literature denotes, devouring the wealth of orphans has
reflections both in this world and in the coming world. In this world,
as the verse indicates, the damage reaches to the offsprings, and in the
Hereafter, there will be the Hell Fire (which is referred to in the next
verse) . (1)

The meaning of the verse may refer to the prohibition of abnormal
donations and bequests that they bequeath or remit the whole property
they have lest their small and weak children be left in poverty and
misfortane after their death. (2)

Again, the verse may work as a recommendation to those who have
handicaped offsprings in order that, by proper plannings, they would
provide for their future. (3)

**Explanations :**

1. We must substitute the conditions of others with those of ours, to
recognize the pains and difficulties better. We ought to treat the
orphans with a manner that we like our orphans to be treated with it.

" And let those fear who, if they left behind them weakly children,
would fear on their account, ..."

2. Whoever does a wrong action, he himself will receive its fruit.

(1) Tafsir-Nur-uth-Thagalayn, vol. 1, p.730

(2) Majma'-ul'Bayan, vol.3, p.

(3) Tafsir-ul-Kabir, by Fakhr Razi, explanation of the verse.

Transgression against the orphans of other people today will appear in
the form of a custom in the society tomorrow, and it will involve our
own orphans, too.

3. In methods of propagation, affections and innate dispositions should
be utilized, too.

"... if they left behind them weakly children, ..."

4. Beside providing food and clothing, the orphans are in need of love,
affection, and guidance.

"... and let them speak right world."

5. There should be neither treachery in the property of the orphans,
nor shortcoming in their training, nor harshness in speech to them.

"... so let them be in awe of Allah, ..."


