Commentary : Verse 12
=====================

(12) وَلَكُمْ نِصْفُ مَا تَرَكَ أَزْوَاجُكُمْ إِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّهُنَّ
وَلَدٌ فَإِن كَانَ لَهُنَّ وَلَدٌ فَلَكُمُ الرُّبُعُ مِمَّا تَرَكْنَ مِن
بَعْدِ وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصِينَ بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ وَلَهُنَّ الرُّبُعُ مِمَّا
تَرَكْتُمْ إِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّكُمْ وَلَدٌ فَإ ِن كَانَ لَكُمْ وَلَدٌ
فَلَهُنَّ الثُّمُنُ مِمَّا تَرَكْتُم مِّن بَعْدِ وَصِيَّةٍ تُوصُونَ
بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ وَإِن كَانَ رَجُلٌ يُورَثُ كَلاَلَةً أَو امْرَأَةٌ
وَلَهُ أَخٌ أَوْ أُخْتٌ فَلِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا السُّدُسُ فَإِن
كَانُوَاْ أَكْثَرَ مِن ذَلِكَ فَهُمْ شُرَكَاء فِي الثُّلُثِ مِن بَعْدِ
وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصَى بِهَآ أَوْ دَيْنٍ غَيْرَ مُضَآرٍّ وَصِيَّةً مِّنَ
اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَلِيمٌ

12. " And you will have half of what your wives leave, if they have no
child. But if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of what
they leave after (the payment of) any bequest they may have bequeathed
or a debt; and they shall have a fourth of what you leave if you have no
child, but if you have a child, then they shall have an eighth of what
you leave after (the payment of) a bequest you may have bequeathed or a
debt. And if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by neither
parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a sister, then
each of them two shall have a sixth, but if they are more than that,
they shall be sharers in a third after (the payment of) any bequest that
does not harm (others) . (This is) an ordinance from Allah, and Allah is
Knowing, Forbearing."

**Commentary:** Inheritance of Spouses from Each Other:

In this verse, the explanation of the heritance of spouses from each
other is stated. The verse, says:

" And you will have half of what your wives leave, if they have no
child..."

But if they have a child or children, even if they are from another
husband, only one fourth of her property belongs to you. It says:

"... But if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of what
they leave, ..."

This distribution is, of course, after paying the debts of the wife and
fulfilling her bequests upon financial affairs, as the verse says:

"... after (the payment of) any bequest they may have bequeathed or a
debt; ..."

And, if you have not any child, there will be a fourth of your
heritance for your wives. It says:

"... and they shall have a fourth of what you leave if you have no
child, ..."

Then, the portion of your wives will be one eighth of your property,
except for the land the explanation of which is stated in jurisprudent
books. It is in the case that you have a child, even though this child
is from another wife. It says:

"... but if you have a child, then they shall have an eighth of what
you leave...."

This division, similar to the previous division, is also done after the
fulfilment of the bequest you have bequeathed and paying the debts. The
verse, continues saying:

"... after (the payment of) a bequest you may have bequeathed or a
debt. ..."

Then, it states the ordinance of the inheritance of sisters and
brothers, when it says:

"... And if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by neither
parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a sister, then
each of them two shall have a sixth,..."

The Arabic term /kalalah/ is used for the maternal sisters and brothers
who have inheritance from the diseased person. This situation is in the
condition that there remains a maternal brother and sister from the
diseased person. But if they are more than one they will have, on the
whole, one third. That is they must divide one third of the property
among themselves.

"... but if they are more than that, they shall be sharers in a
third..."

Then it adds that this is in the case that the bequest be performed
formerly and the debts be separated from the property.

"... after (the payment of) any bequest. ..."

And, it is in the condition that it does not harm the inheritors
through the bequest or confessing a debt.

"... that does not harm (others) . ..."

So, at the end of the verse, for an emphasis, it says :

"... (This is) an ordinance from Allah, and Allah is Knowing,
Forbearing."

That is, this is a divine order which you must respectedly observe and
He, Who has enjoined you these ordinances, is cognizant of your
interests and expedients, and He is also aware of the intentions of the
testators; yet, in the meantime, He is Forbearing and does not punish
promptly those who treat against His command.


**Commentary : Verse 13**

(13) تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللّهِ وَمَن يُطِعِ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ يُدْخِلْهُ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَذَلِكَ
الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ

13. " These are limits (set) by Allah; and whoso obeys Allah and His
Messenger, He will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to
abide therein forever; and this is the great success."

**Commentary:**

Following the discussion of inheritance in the previous verse, here, in
this verse, the concerning laws are referred to as 'the divine limits',
where it says:

" These are limits (set) by Allah; ..."

These are some limits which are forbidden to pass over or transgress.
Therefore, those who transgress and break the bounds of these laws are
known as sinners and criminals. Then, it speaks about those who respect
these limits by observing them, saying:

"... and whoso obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him into
gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever; ..."

And, at the end of the verse, it adds:

"... and this is the great success."


