Commentary : Verse 14
=====================

(14) وَمَن يَعْصِ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَهُ يُدْخِلْهُ
نَارًا خَالِدًا فِيهَا وَلَهُ عَذَابٌ مُّهِينٌ

14. " And whoso disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses His
limits, He will admit him in Hell-Fire, to abide therein, and he shall
have an abasing torment."

**Commentary :**

In this verse, other side of the coin is discussed about and those
groups, who are opposite to the people mentioned in the previous verse,
are referred to. It says:

" And whoso disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses His
limits, He will admit him in Hell-Fire, to abide therein, ..."

Then, at the end of the verse, the final fate of such people is pointed
out, where it says:

"... and he shall have an abasing torment."

In the former sentence, the bodily punishment of the Lord was referred
to, while in this concluding sentence, which speaks about abasing
torment, the spiritual aspect of that punishment is pointed out.


**Section 3 : Dealing with women Commentary : Verse 15**

Punishment to immoral women and men - Tolerance for repentance -
Unlawful to treat women harshly - Kindness to women enjoined.

(15) وَاللاَّتِي يَأْتِينَ الْفَاحِشَةَ مِن نِّسَآئِكُمْ
فَاسْتَشْهِدُواْ عَلَيْهِنَّ أَرْبَعةً مِّنكُمْ فَإِن شَهِدُواْ
فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ فِي الْبُيُوتِ حَتَّىَ يَتَوَفَّاهُنَّ الْمَوْتُ أَوْ
يَجْعَلَ اللّهُ لَهُنَّ سَبِيلاً

15. " And as for those of your women who are guitly of lewdness, call
to witness four of you (Muslims) against them; then if they bear witness
(to the fact) , confine them to the houses until death takes them away
or Allah makes some way for them."

**Commentary :**

The punishment of filthy women who have husband and are polluted with
lewdness is pointed out in the above verse, where it says: " And as for
those of your women who are guitly of lewdness, call to witness four of
you (Muslims) against them; ..."

"Then, the verse continues saying:"

"... then if they bear witness (to the fact) , confine them to the
houses until death takes them away ..."

Thus, the punishment of lewdness for the women who have husband has
been assigned 'life imprisonment' in this verse. But, immediately after
that, it says:

"... or Allah makes some way for them."

From the above mentioned sense, it is understood that this ordinance
had been a temporary ordinance, because later the holy Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) issued the divine ordinance of 'stoning', the explanation of
which is found in Islamic literature and the books of jurisprudence
where you may refer to it.


**Commentary : Verse 16**

(16) وَاللَّذَانَ يَأْتِيَانِهَا مِنكُمْ فَآذُوهُمَا فَإِن تَابَا
وَأَصْلَحَا فَأَعْرِضُواْ عَنْهُمَا إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ تَوَّابًا
رَّحِيمًا

16. " And when two of you commit it (lewdness) punish them both, but if
they repent and amend, then turn aside from them. Verily Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy) , the Merciful."

**Commentary :**

In this verse the ordinance of fornication is stated. It indicates that
the man and woman, who have not spouses and commit this indecent action,
lewdness, both must be punished. It says :

" And when two of you commit it (lewdness) punish them both; ..."

The punishment mentioned in this verse is a general punishment, while
verse No. 2 from Sura Nur, No. 221, which assigns one hundred stripes
for each of the two parties, can be a commentary and an explanation upon
the above verse.

At the bottom of the verse, it points to the matter of repentance and
forgiveness about these kinds of sinners, and says:

"... but if they repent and amend, then turn aside from them. Verily
Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy) , the Merciful."

In the meantime, it is understood from this ordinance that the persons
who have repented of their faults should never be blamed for their
former sins.


