Section 1 : the Apostle Muhammad -a Warner To the Whole World Commentary : Verse 1
==================================================================================

The Apostle (Muhammad) a Warner to the whole world (Mankind) - There is
no son nor any partner to Allah - The knowledge accommodated in the
Qur'an - The Apostle, disbelieved and called an imposter

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

1. تَبَارَكَ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْفُرْقَانَ عَلَي عَبْدِهِ لِيَكُونَ
لِلْعَالَمِينَ نَذِير

1. "Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan (The Distinction of right
and wrong) upon His servant that he may be a Warner to the worlds;"

**Commentary:**

The Qur'anic word /tabaraka/ may be is derived from the word /baraka/
in the sense of 'stable' and 'fixed'. Or it is possible that it is
derived from /barakat/ that means 'abundant goodness'. It implies that
He Who descended the Holy Qur'an is the source of many blessings and one
of His blessings, as an example, is this very descending of the Qur'an.
Yes, what blessing is more important than the divine law that has led
milliards of people from darkness to the light of guidance in the course
of history?

The Qur'anic word /nuzul/ means to send down at once and immediately,
if it is in the form of the word /'anzalna/, and it means to send down
gradually if it is in the form of the word /nazzala/. But the holy
Qur'an has enjoyed both kinds of descending; one time is in the Night of
determination (Honour) in which Qur'an was revealed to the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) at one instance, about which, it says: "Surely, We sent it
(the Qur'an) down on the Night of Honour."[^1] And the other time is done
gradually during 23 years.

The .Qur'an says: "And (it is) Qur'an which We have divided (in
sections) so that you may read it to the people at a slow pace and We
have sent it down gradually in portion."[^2] And in another occurrence it
says: "... He Wh33o sent down the Furqan (the Distinction of right and
wrong) upon His servant... "[^3]

Anyway, the Qur'an has come from a blessed source, thus, through the
first verse, it says:

"Blessed is He Who sent down the Furqan(The Distinction of right and
wrong) upon His servant that he may be a Warner to the worlds;"

It is interesting that the blessedness of Allah's Essence is introduced
by descending of Furqan, that is Qur'an, the separator of truth and
falsehood. This shows that the best favour and blessing is that man has
got a means for cognition, knowing the difference between truth and
falsehood.

[^1] Sura Al-Qadr, No. 97, verse 1

[^2] Sura Al-'Issra', No. 17, verse 106

[^3] The verse under discussion

Another interesting thing is that the Qur'anic word Furqan has
sometimes been used in the sense of Qur'an and sometimes it means the
miracles that distinguish truth from falsehood. Sometimes it is applied
to Torah, but here, with regard to the context of this verse and the
other verses, it means the Qur'an.

In some narrations we read that when Imam Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about
the difference between the Qur'an and Furqan, he said: "The Qur'an
refers to these celestial Books wholly, and Furqan refers to the clear
verses."[^1]

This noble narration is not in contrast with Furqan being distinguisher
of all verses of the Qur'an and its purpose is that clear verses have
got a clearer and more obvious extension of Furqan and distinguishing of
truth from falsehood.

The blessing of 'distinguishing and knowing' is so important that the
Glorious Qur'an has been introduced as the great reward of those who are
pious, where it says: " O you who have Faith! If you be in awe of Allah,
He will assign for you a discrimination (between right and wrong) ...
"[^2]

Yes, distinguishing truth from falsehood is possible only through
piety, for sins, love and hatred cover truth with a thick veil and they
blind man's perception and insight.

Anyway, the Glorious Qur'an is the best Furqan. It is a means for
distinguishing truth from falsehood in all life system of man. It is a
means for knowing truth and falsehood during personal and social life
and it is a criterion for thoughts, beliefs, laws, judgments, customs,
rules and ethics.

This matter is also important that the verse says: "... Who sent down
the Furqan (The Distinction of right and wrong) upon His servant ..."
Yes, it is the sincere servitude and

[^1] Burhan, Vol. 3, p. 155

[^2] Sura Al-'Anfal, No. 8, verse 29

submission that makes a man deserving and worthy for receiving Furqan
and accepting the criteria of knowing truth and falsehood.

Finally, the last matter mentioned in this verse is that the ultimate
aim of Furqan is to warn people of the world, a warning that leads man
to feel responsibility for duties and obligations that are put on his
shoulder. The Qur'anic phrase /lil 'alamin/, meaning: '(the peoples) of
the worlds', shows that Islam religion is universal and is not limited
to a certain region, race and tribe.

But some have used it for the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) as being the seal of
the prophets, for the word /'alamin/ not only is not limited to place,
but also it is not chronologically limited to a special time and it
includes all the future generations, too.


