Commentary : Verse 3
====================

3. وَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِهِ ءَالِهَةً لاَ يَخْلُقُونَ شَيْئاً وَهُمْ
يُخْلَقُونَ وَلاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لاَنفُسِهِمْ ضَرّاً وَلاَ نَفْعاً وَلاَ
يَمْلِكُونَ مَوْتاً وَلاَحَيَاةً وَلاَ نُشُور

3. " Yet they have taken gods, besides Him, gods that do not create
anything while they are themselves created and they do not own for
themselves any hurt or profit, nor can they control death nor life nor
resurrection."

**Commentary:**

The reason of man's servitude is Allah's power in solving problems and
knotty affairs, while idols cannot do such thing. ('They do not own')

This holy verse continues the previous discussion about struggling with
polytheism, idol worshipping, and baseless claims of idol worshippers
about their idols and then-accusations of the holy Qur'an and the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) mentioned in former verses.

First, polytheists are in fact called to trial and, to pick
then-conscience with a clear, simple, decisive logic, it says:

"Yet they have taken gods, besides Him, gods that do not create
anything while they are themselves created ..."

The real deity is the Creator of the universe, but they did not have
such a claim about idols and they knew them as creatures of Allah.

But what was their motivation for worshipping idols? Idols that possess
not hurt nor profit for themselves, and possess not death nor life, nor
power to raise the dead (let alone others). The verse in this regard
says:

"... and they do not own for themselves any hurt or profit, nor can
they control death nor life nor resurrection."

The principles that are important for man are as follows: profit, loss,
death, life, and resurrection.

Does one who is the owner of these affairs deserve worshipping? But
idols cannot do such things for themselves, let alone they want to
protect and support their worshippers?

What a shameful logic is that man follows a creature and worships it,
while it cannot even control itself let alone others. Neither does this
idol solve a problem in this world nor can it do anything in the other
world.

This sentence shows that this group of polytheists, who have been
addressed in this verse, had accepted resurrection in a way (although
not physical one but spiritual resurrection).

Or the Qur'an was certain about their lack of belief in the
resurrection and talked to them in a certain and decisive way. This is
usual that sometimes man faces one person who denies truth, but he
expresses his own ideas and beliefs resolutely without paying attention
to that person's thoughts.

Especially when there is an implied reason for resurrection in the
verse, because when a creator creates a creature and is the owner of
creature's loss and benefit, he must have an aim for his creation. And
this aim concerning man is impossible without accepting the issue of
resurrection, for if everything ended with the death of man, life would
be nonsense and it would be a reason indicating that that creator was
not wise.

Meanwhile if we see that the issue of loss has come before the issue of
benefit, it is because man first fears loss and the sentence 'protection
from loss is prior to the achievement of benefit' has turned into an
intellectual rule.

And if 'loss', 'benefit', 'death', 'life', 'resurrection' have been
mentioned indeterminately, it is for the fact that these idols are not
controlling benefit, loss, death, life, and resurrection even in one
case, let alone all people.

And if the Qur'anic phrase /layamlikuna/ (they possess not) and
/layaxluquna/ (they create naught) are mentioned in the masculine,
plural, wise form (while stone and wooden idols have got no wisdom and
sense), it is for the matter that these phrases are not only about
wooden and stone idols, but also there was a group that worshipped
Christ or angels and because sage and non-sage are all included in the
meaning of the verse, all of them are mentioned as wise.

Or according to the opinion of the opposite party, it is said for
showing their weakness and inability. It implies that they believed that
these idols had intellect and sense, but these idols cannot protect
themselves from loss and can not achieve any benefit!


**Commentary : Verse 4**

4. وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَذَا إِلآَّ إِفْكٌ افْتَرَاهُ
وَأَعَانَهُ عَلَيْهِ قَوْمٌ ءَاخَرُونَ فَقَدْ جآءُوا ظُلْماً وَزُور

4. " And those who disbelieve say: 'This (Qur'an) is nothing but a lie
which he (our Apostle) has forged, and other people have helped him at
it; so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a falsehood."

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /ifk/ means lie, and the word /zur/ means a false
word[^1]. In all of the Holy Qur'an only here the words /zulm/ (iniquity)
and /zur/ have come together, because pagans prevented others from being
guided by means of false accusation of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and
belying the heavenly Book. So this noble verse is about pagans' analysis
or, in better words, their pretext-seeking against the call of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) when it says:

" And those who disbelieve say: 'This (Qur'an) is nothing but a lie
which he (our Apostle) has forged, and other people have helped him at
it;..."

In fact, in order not to shoulder the Truth - as those who in the
course of history decided to be against divine leaders - they first
accused him to calumny and falsehood, and especially, in order to scorn
the Holy Qur'an, they used the word /haoa/ (this).

Then, in order to prove that he could not say such words by himself,
because saying such meaningful words needs at least a lot of knowledge
and they did not want to accept it, and in

[^1] Lisan-ul-'Arab

order to say that this was a calculated program, they said that he was
not alone and others have helped him at it and that there was a
conspiracy and they must stand against him.

Some of commentators have said that the purpose of/qaum un 'axarun/
(other people) is a group of Jews. And some others have said that the
objective is three persons of the People of The Book, that is 'Adas',
'Yasar', and 'Hibr' (or 'Jibr').

Anyway, since such matters did not exist among the polytheists of Mecca
and some part of it, such as: the story of the former prophets, was
among Jews and the People of The Book, they had to drag the People of
the Book into this accusation so that the people became less astonished
and bewildered by hearing these verses.

But, in their answer here, the Holy Qur'an says only one sentence:

"...so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a falsehood."[^1]

It is /zulm/ (a wrong action) because they, as well as some of the
People of the Book, accused a trustworthy, veracious and pure man such
as the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) of giving a false impression of Allah and they
did wrong action towards themselves and people. It is false and invalid,
because their words were completely baseless and the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
had repeatedly called them to present some verses and Suras like those
of the Holy Qur'an and,confronting this challenge of the Qur'an, they
were somehow unable to achieve it.

This shows that these verses are not the product of man's mind, because
if it were so, they could also present such verses with the help of the
Jews and the People of the Book. Therefore, their inability to do it is
the reason of their lie and

[^1] Thr word /ja'u/ means to come, but here it means to bring.

their lie is the reason of their iniquity. So the short sentence
saying: "... so indeed they have done injustice and (uttered) a
falsehood." is a clear and expressive answer to their groundless
claims.

The Arabic word /zur/ is in fact derived from a word that means the
upper part of the chest. Then it was applied to whatever that inclines
from the middle and, because lie deviates from truth and inclines toward
falsehood, it is called /zur/.


