Commentary : Verse 9
====================

9. انظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الاَمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلاَ
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ سَبيلا

9. " Behold, how they strike similitudes for you, but they have gone
astray, so they shall not be able to find a way (to the truth)."

The Great Bounties of Allah awaiting the Apostle (Muhammad) - The
grievous and the wicked will meet - Reward for the faithful - The
Apostles of Allah were men.


**Section 2 : The Bounties awaiting the Apostle Commentary : Verse
10**

10. تَبَارَكَ الَّذِي إِن شَآءَ جَعَلَ لَكَ خَيْراً مّـِن ذَلِكَ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَنْهَارُ وَيَجْعَل لَّكَ قُصُور

10. " Blessed is He Who, if that were His will, could give you better
(things) than all that, gardens beneath which rivers flow, and He will
give you palaces."

**Commentary:**

One will get misled,if logic, miracle, and accomplishments of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) are not paid attention to and wealth, posts, and
seeking pretext get to be the aim. ('... but they have gone astray,
...')

Therefore in a short sentence, the Qur'an in this noble verse says:

" Behold, how they strike similitudes for you, but they have gone
astray, so they shall not be able to find a way (to the truth)."

This sentence clearly illustrates this fact that against the call of
Allah and the Qur'an, whose content is an expressive proof of its
relationship with Allali, they fell back on some illusive words and they
wanted to cover the face of the truth by these groundless words.

This is just like a person who resorts to some seeking pretext, being
clearly baseless, in order to stand against our logical arguments and we
do not answer what he has said separately, but we simply say you may see
with what illusive words does he want to stand against the logical
reason?

And verily all of their words in all of their parts were so, because:

First: Why must a prophet be one of angels? But intellect and knowledge
say that a human must lead human beings, so that he knows and perceives
all their pains, needs, problems, and life issues, so, he will be a
paragon in all aspects and people can be inspired in all programs. If an
angel were sent down, certainly this aim would not be fulfilled and
people would say: "If he speaks about piety and paying no attention to
the world, it is because he is an angel and needs nothing. If he speaks
about modesty and calls to chastity, it is because he knows nothing of
sexual desire." And there are also many other matters.

Second: Is it necessary to send an angel to be the company of man for
the sake of confirming him? Are not miracles, specially a great miracle
such as the holy Qur'an, enough for understanding this reality?

Third: Eating food like other men and going to markets cause him to
associate with people more and to know their life more deeply.It helps
him to carry out his mission better. There is not only loss or harm in
this, but it is a kind of help for him.

Forth: Eminence and personality of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) does not
depend on treasure, wealth, and huge gardens full of fruits. This is the
pagan's deviating conception of personality and even nearness to Allah
as being depended on wealth and money, while prophets have come to say
that the value of man depends on his knowledge, faith and piety.

Fifth: According to what criterion did they call him insane and
bewitched? According to history, his great revolution and his foundation
of Islamic civilization were extraordinary, how can he be accused and
given such ridiculous labels? Unless we say that breaking idols and not
blindly following the ancestors is a reason of insanity!

According to what was said, it gets clear that the word /'amoal/
(similitudes), here, especially with regard of the context, means
groundless and meaningless words. Using this word is perhaps because of
the matter that they uttered their words in the form of truth,
similitude and like a logical reason, while it was not really so.

Another matter that we must pay attention to is that the foes of the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) used to accuse him of being sorcerer and sometimes
being bewitched, though some of the commentators say that 'being
bewitched' perhaps means 'being sorcerer' (because in Arabic sometime
past participle is used as subject), but apparently these two words are
different.

If they called him sorcerer, it was because his words extraordinarily
influenced hearts and they did not want to accept this fact and,
therefore, they resorted to the accusation of being sorcerer.

Being bewitched means to be mentally and intellectually influenced by
sorcerers and to have distorted senses. This accusation originated from
this fact that he broke the tradition and swam against the stream
ideologically and was against personal interests, superstitious habits
and customs. But all these accusations are answered by the above
words.

A question now arises that why it is said: "... but they have gone
astray, so they shall not be able to find a way (to the truth)."

Its answer is that man can find the path of the truth if he wills and
wants the truth. But the one, who has already made decision by wrong and
deviating prejudgments that originate from ignorance and stubbornness,
not only does not find the truth but also stands against it.

The next verse, similar to the previous one, addresses the
Prophet(p.b.u.h.) and says, with the intention of scorning their words
and saying that they are unanswerable. It says:

" Blessed is He Who, if that were His will, could give you better
(things) than all that, gardens beneath which rivers flow, and He will
give you palaces."

Except Allah, who is it that has given gardens and palaces to them?
Basically, except Allah, who is it that has created all of these
beauties and blessings? Cannot such a powerful and mighty Allah provide
better than these for you? But He does not want people to think that the
personality of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) depends on wealth, money, garden,
and palace. He wants the life of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) to be like the
life of common people, the oppressed and the poor, so that he will be a
sanctuary for all of them.

But, why it is said that gardens and palaces are better than what they
wanted, for treasure by itself does not resolve all the problems and
difficulties, but it must be changed to gardens and palaces by a lot of
troubles. Moreover, they said that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) must have a
garden to sustain him, but the holy Qur'an says: "... He Who, if that
were His will, could give you better (things) than all that, gardens
beneath which rivers flow, and He will give you palaces.", (but the aim
of the Prophet's mission is something else).

In a sermon called Qisi'ah, No. 192, by Imam Ali (a.s.), we find this
matter expressed very explicitly: " When Musa, the son of 'Imran, went
to Pharaoh along with his brother Harun (Aaron) wearing (coarse) shirts
of wool and holding sticks in their hands, they guaranteed him retention
of his country and continuity of his honour if he submitted; but he
said:'Do you not wonder at these two men who guaranteed me the
continuity of my honour and the retention of my country although you see
their poverty and lowliness.

Otherwise, why do they not have gold bangels on their wrists?" He said
so feeling proud of his gold and collected possessions, and belittled
wool and wearing woolen garment.

When Allah, the Glorified,deputed His prophets, if He had wished to
open for them the doors of treasures and mines of gold and (surround
them with) planted gardens and to collect around them birds of the skies
and beasts of the earth, He would have done so. If he had done so then
there would have been no trial, nor recompense and no tidings (about the
affairs of the next world).

Those who accepted (His message) could not be given the recompense
falling due after trial and the believers could not deserve the reward
for good acts, and all these words would not have retained their
meanings. But Allah, the Glorified, makes His Prophets firm in their
determinations and gives them weakness of appearance as seen from the
eyes, along with contentment that fills the hearts and eyes resulting
from care-freeness, and with the want that pains the ordinary eyes and
ears.

If the prophets had possessed such authority that could not be
assaulted, or honour that could not be damaged or domain towards which
the necks of people would turn and the saddles of mounts could be set,
it would have been very easy for people to seek lessons and quite
difficult to feel vanity. They would have then accepted belief out of
fear felt by them or inclination attracting them,and the intention of
them all would have been the same, although their actions would have
been different.

Therefore, Allah, the Glorified decided that people should follow His
prophets, acknowledge His books, remain humble before His face, obey His
command and accept His obedience with sincerity in which there should
not be an iota of anything else; and as the trial and tribulation would
be stiffer the reward and recompense too should be larger.[^1]

Some say that the purpose of palace and garden is that of the other
world, but this commentary is not in line with the appearance of the
verse.

However, the Arabic word/tabaraka/ is derived either from /baraka/ with
the sense of 'fix' and 'ever lasting', or from /barakat/ which means
'abundant goodness'

[^1] Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 192


**Commentary : Verse 11**

11. بَلْ كَذَّبُوا بِالسَّاعَةِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِمَن كَذَّبَ
بِالسَّاعَةِ سَعِير

11. " But they deny the Hour (of Resurrection), and We have prepared a
Blazing Fire for him who denies the Hour."

**Commentary:**

The Arabic word /sa'ir/ (blaze) means a burning and ablaze fire. The
source of pagans' pretexts is often disbelief in the Hereafter.

To continue the Qur'anic discussion of pagans' deviation from
monotheism and prophethood which was in the previous verses, this noble
verse talks about another part of their deviations from the view of the
issue of the resurrection. In fact, with the statement of this part, it
gets clear that they were utterly shaky and deviated in all principles
of religion, both monotheism, and prophethood, and resurrection. Two of
them have been mentioned in the former verses and now we turn to the
third one. The verse says:

"But they deny the Hour (of Resurrection),..."

By mentioning the Arabic word /bal/,the verse implies that what they
say about monotheism and prophethood is just some pretexts that
originate from denial of resurrection, because if one believes in such a
great court and the divine reward and punishment, one neither boldly
ridicules the truths nor rejects a prophet's call for illusive reasons,
nor bows down before idols that he has made by himself.

But, here, the holy Qur'an has not given them any argumentative
answers, for they were not men of reason and argument, but the Qur'an
warns and threatens them severely and harshly and illustrates their
gloomy and painful future for them. Sometimes this logic is more
effective for such people. It continues saying:

"... and We have prepared a Blazing Fire for him who denies the
Hour."


