Chapter 10 : Adl - Justice of God
=================================

The second basic belief in Islam is Adl which means Divine Justice.

To believe in adl means to believe that all actions of Allah are in
accordance with per fect justice and reason. Allah is just - beyond all
injustices. Allah does not like oppression, cruelty and any kind of
injustice among His servants.

One sect of Sunni Muslims (Ash'arites) completely denied Allah's
justice. They believe that Allah has full power to act as He likes. So
by His power and authority He can throw a good- doer into hell fire and
an evil-doer into paradise and no one can protest against His order.

But another group of Sunni Muslim and Shia Muslims believe that it is
true that Allah is the Supreme power and Supreme authority and no one
can challenge His action or decision, but He is perfect, and therefore
all His actions and decisions are always based on justice.

**What is the meaning of Justice**

It is important to know the meaning of justice because sometimes it is
confused with equality. For example, a person who does not know the
correct meaning of justice may ask many wrong questions, such as, If
Allah is Just and all His actions are based on justice then: G Why there
are some rich and some poor people in the world ?

G Why men are physically strong and women weak and frail ?

G Why there are black and white people ?

G Why some people have long life and some die at a very young age ?

All these facts and many other realities in the world can confuse a
person if he believes in Divine justice but does not know the right
meaning of justice.

It is important to know that the meaning of justice is not equality as
these two words have entirely different meanings.

Hazrat Ali has given an accurate definition of justice. He said justice
means, to put a thing in its right place. In contrast, injustice means
putting a thing not in its due place. For example, if we sit on the
table and put our books on the chair then it is injustice as they are
not in their right places.

Similarly, if we pay equal wages to a highly qualified professor and an
ordinary teacher or we give equal marks both to a hardworking and lazy
student, then it is not justice.

Justice is that everyone should get what he deserves for. Justice is
this that a professor should get more salary than an ordinary teacher as
he has done more work to acquire knowledge and has better abilities to
do work. Justice is that each student should be graded according to the
quality of his work. i.e., equal treatment, or equal distribution is not
justice, rather it is injustice.

Thus equality is not a condition for justice, rather rights and
appropriate dealings is justice. By keeping this meaning of justice in
mind, we can easily understand as to why there are rich and poor, long
and short, black and white people in the world?

Why men are strong and women are weak?

There are good reasons and logical explanations. For example, the
delicate body of woman is a beauty and the reverse is a defect for
her.

Thus Divine justice is that everyone should get his/her rights in
propor tion to his / her needs and abilities.

It is also important to note that the many cases of injustices we see
all over the world is because of favoritism and human unjustness. Allah
Subhanahu taala is Just and He will punish such people on the day of
judgment for their unfairness in dealings.

The Holy Quran clearly states that Allah's decisions and dealings are
always based on perfect justice. He is the Lord of the universe and He
can do everything He likes as there can never be a slightest opposition
or resistance against His will, but it is one of His attribute that He
is Just (Adil).

Thus He can throw a good man in the hell-fire by His power, but He will
never do so because of His perfect personality.

He will pardon many people befitting for the hell-fire because He is
compassionate, merciful, and kind, i.e., His mercy outshines His
justice. The Prophet has taught us du'a to ask Allah Subhanahu taala,
not to deal us with justice but with mercy and leniency.

The Holy Quran clearly states that :

"Allah is never unjust in the least degree" (4:40)

"we shall set up scales of justice on the day of judgment so that not a
single soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least." (21:47)

"Allah Commands justice, kindness and charity to one's kindred, and
forbids indecency and oppression." (16:90)

This made it very clear that why Shia consider Adl as the basic belief
of Islam and why they differ with Sunnis on this issue.

Divine Justice in the Natural systems.

The definition of justice given by Hazrat Ali (as) can precisely be
seen in the Divine laws of nature working in the universe.

Scientists have amazingly confirmed that they find everything in its
right place. There is nothing in the universe disorderly and
haphazard.

Scientists say that there is a precise balance between the sun, ear th
and other planets. If this balance is disturbed, the whole solar system
will collapse. This balance which is a beautiful demonstration of Divine
justice is found in every atom of the universe. As atom is the unit of
matter, it means that justice prevails everywhere in the universe.

Professor Haldane, a famous biologist, has written an ar ticle On being
the right size. In this interesting article, he proves that every living
creature ( man, animals, insects etc.) has the right size, i.e. their
bodies fit to their living conditions and circumstances. Thus the whole
universe and its uncountable things are the witnesses of Allah's adl
(Divine justice).

The Holy Quran confirms the scientific view of the universe. "He has
raised the heavens and has set up a standard for everything." (55:7)


