Chapter 11 : Causes of Human Sufferings and Natural Disasters
=============================================================

Everyday when we read the newspaper or watch TV, we come to know about
many different kinds of human miseries and mishaps. We also see people
around us miserably suffering with chronic diseases, hunger, and
poverty. We also hear about many catastrophic natural disasters such as
ear thquake, floods, hurricanes, tornado, cyclone, storms and droughts
killing millions of people and leaving millions of widows, orphans, and
handicaps.

A question arises that when God is All-mighty i.e. capable of
controlling anything and everything and God is also all-knowing i.e., He
knows everything that happens anywhere in the universe, then why such
dreadful events occur.

This is a very important question. Many atheists use this question as a
valid reason to deny the existence of God. This question also disturbs
many ignorant Muslims. It is therefore essential for all Muslim students
to have a satisfactory answer to this question.

This question does not have one simple answer as there are many
different causes of human suffering and afflictions.

Some of the major causes of calamities and sufferings are as follows:

G Reaction of our action and Divine punishment.
G Warning and reminder to turn back to God.
G To energize and stimulate human spirit and to intensify his
efforts.
G Examination.
G Divine system.
Reaction of our action.

The major cause of our all sufferings and miseries is our deeds. i.e.,
in most of the cases we suffer because of our wrong doings. Quran has
disclosed this law of God. "Then it shall be said to the wrongdoers:
Taste the everlasting torment; Shall you be rewarded except according to
your deeds" (10:52)

i.e., You receive the payment of what you earn. This law of God has
also been discovered by Isaac Newton in Nature which we teach in
Physics. i.e., every action has an equal reaction. If we sincerely study
and analyze our sufferings and miseries we will really know that in most
of the cases our sufferings are the outcome of our own actions or
attitude. Let us see this categorically.

**Hunger and poverty**

The most common kind of suffering and infliction are hunger, poverty
and diseases. Let's analyze the causes of these infliction one by one.

Poverty is the lack of enough income and resources to live comfor
tably. It is one of the world's main social problems. In both developing
and developed countries, millions of people are suffering because of
pover ty. Poverty is the most common social disease.

Many of the poor people in the world cannot buy the food, shelter,
clothing, and medical care that they need. This creates frustration,
hopelessness and lack of interest in life. In the late 1980's, it was
estimated that I billion people, about a fifth of the world's
population, were so poor that their health and lives were endangered.

But what is the cause of poverty and who should be held responsible for
all that suffering ? Man or God ?

Poverty has variety of causes. Some of them are being mentioned here.

a- Lack of education, skills and aptitude to do work. Many people don't
want to do work. They suffer due to their laziness or less interest in
work. Some people think that Allah Subhanahu taala is our sustainer and
He has taken the responsibility of our basic needs. It is true, but
still a lot of effor ts are needed to take our share from the Divine
warehouse. So in many cases poverty is due to the under utilization of
human potential and natural resources.

b- Inflation also significantly contributes to pover ty. Inflation
means increasing the price of goods which affects a certain group of the
society. We experience this problem now and then. This is a man-made
cause in which human selfish nature works to get as much as possible
without considering anything.

c- Some countries are poor because of lack of exper tise and equipment
needed to produce adequate food supplies for most of their people. It is
also due to the lack of involvement in science and technology.

d- Many women become poor after they are divorced or separated from
their husbands. It is also a personal reason.

e - In some cases poverty also results from natural disasters such as
floods, droughts or poor harvests. This can also be the indirect cause
of our wrongdoing which we shall discuss later.

Thus in most of the cases we find that the hunger and pover ty are
mainly either due to the improper distribution of amenities or under
utilization of natural abilities and resources Divine Punishments It is
important to know more about the Divine punishments. Quran has described
the Divine punishments in detail. However, it is not easy for an
ordinary person to identify the Divine punishment and more importantly
its actual cause.

**Diseases and epidemics**

Disease is also a major cause of sufferings. It is said that diseases
have killed or disabled more people then all the wars ever fought. Each
year, tens of millions of people die from different kinds of diseases.
In the United States alone, diseases kill nearly 2 million people each
year and leave many people permanently disabled.

Apparently it seems that God is solely responsible for all kinds of
diseases as He has created the viruses, bacteria which cause many
different kinds of diseases. But this is not tr ue. Medical experts say
that almost all diseases are caused by ignoring the standard laws of
nature. i.e., our life-style, habits, living conditions and physical
environment nur ture diseases. Let's take malaria, the most common
disease of the third world countries.

Malaria is caused by protozoan called plasmodia and is transmitted by
the bite of the female anopheles mosquito. It is true that Allah
Subhanahu taala has created the mosquito and plasmodia which infect us
with malaria. But Allah has also instructed mosquitoes to live in dir ty
water and filthy environment. thus, by creating a dir ty environment, we
invite mosquitoes, houseflies, rats, and other germs carriers in our
home to deliver diseases.

Similarly AIDS, the most dangerous and incurable disease, which has
killed millions of peoples, is a disease sponsored by criminals. The
cause of AIDS is HIV virus, undoubtedly created by Allah, but who
transfer it into the human body ? Allah or the patient himself /herself.
At least in this particular disease doctors have honestly acknowledged
that the only source of this disease is the patient himself / herself as
he or she is the one who has acquired it. That is why they have named it
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.

Even those innocent people who get this disease from blood transfusion
or blades are due to the human negligence.

Thus in most of the cases, the sufferings due to the chronic disease
that makes the life miserable, are the result of our own deeds. Black
Death.

As mentioned above, not always but in most of the cases, the cause of
the disease is one's bad deed or negligence of Divine orders. Sometimes
the whole nation is punished by epidemics. Scientists say they don't yet
know, how all of sudden a particular epidemic disease grows and spreads
widely killing millions of people and then goes away itself without any
human efforts. For example, outbreaks of plague have been repor ted in
different periods of history that have killed hundreds of millions of
people.

In 542 AD an epidemic of plague struck Constantinople (now Istanbul,
Turkey) and killed half of the population.

In 1347, one of the most disastrous plague burst out in Europe which
killed 40,000,000 people - about a fourth of the European population at
that time. This pandemic plague is called Black Death in history.

In 1800's a third epidemic appeared suddenly in China and spread like a
fire. It killed more than 20 million people.

Scientists have tried to guess some of the probable causes of these
epidemics but are puzzled by their mystified origin. For instance, they
can not answer such questions, how a particular cause develops that
spreads plague, and why it has developed at some par ticular time and
not at any other time, and how it stops itself without any apparent
reason.

To cite an instance, consider the apparent known cause of the second
epidemic - Black Death, which killed 40 million people in Europe. It is
said that the source of this epidemic were Black Rats which carry a
particular species of flies called Xenopsylla Cheopsis. But the origin
from where all these rats who arrived to spread the epidemic is still a
riddle. More surprisingly, why the same rats did not spread the disease
where they were living before.

Further to their surprise, it was found that the Brown Rats, which are
rare in Europe, came from China and killed the Black Rats which were
spreading the disease.

Those who do not believe in God and in His planning, such epidemics
will remain a myster y. But those who read Quran can understand, why the
Black Rats brought the disease in Europe and who sent the Brown rats to
stop the epidemic.

**Natural Disasters**

The natural disasters such as ear thquakes, storms, floods, and
droughts, which bring different kinds of miseries are also sometimes due
to our bad deeds. Quran has described in details that how these many
kinds of natural disasters have wiped out many nations in the past when
they disobeyed Allah and crossed the Divine limits.

Quran mentions different kinds of natural disasters which were caused
by the wrath of Allah Taala.

"Each one of them We seized for his crime. Of them, against some We
sent a violent tornado: some were caught by a (mid-night) blast, some We
caused the earth to swallow up ( powerful earthquake or major volcano
eruption), and some We drowned (in water).

It was not Allah Who injured (or destroyed) them: they injured
(destroyed) themselves."(29:40) In surah HUD, it is mentioned with all
details that how the nations of the following prophets were punished one
after the other because of their sins and rebellious nature.

1 - Prophet Nuh (as) - FLOOD

His whole nation except his companions was perished by a great flood.
Huge flow of water welled out from the earth and from the sky and all
were drowned except few believers. (11:21-49)

2 - Prophet Hud (as) - A DREADFUL EXPLOSION His whole nation, named Aad
was destroyed by a horrible natural disaster except those who obeyed
him. (11:49-59)

3 - Prophet Saleh (as) - A MIGHTY BL AST His whole nation, named
Thamud, except his true followers, was smashed by a dreadful explosion
that rang along with a powerful storm. (11:61-67)

4 - Prophet Lut (as) - A MOST POWERFUL EARTHQUAKE His whole nation,
except his true followers were destroyed by turning the whole town
upside down, followed by a rain of baked clay layer on layer.
(11:77-82)

5 - Prophet Shu'ayb (as) - A POWERFUL BL AST His whole nation, named
Madyan, except his few followers, was killed by a powerful Explosion
(Earthquake). (11:84-94), (29:36)

6 - Prophet Moosa (as) -THROWN INTO THE SEA Pharaoh, his Chiefs and the
whole army were drowned into the River Nile.

After giving all details of crimes and punishments, Quran very clearly
tells the cause of such dreadful natural disasters in the following
verse.

"These are some of the stories of communities which we have told
you --- It was not WE that wronged them: They wronged their own souls".
(11:100) Thus, these verses of the Holy Quran have explained that one of
the major cause of natural disasters is Divine punishment. However, we
can not say for sure that each and every natural disaster is a Divine
punishment. But the natural disaster do occur as in the past with hor
rible results. Hundreds of natural disasters of high intensity have been
recorded in the histor y. Here, we present just few of these many
natural disasters that terribly hit various nations in last one thousand
year.

The Holy Quran has identified the root cause of many of such kinds of
natural disasters, as mentioned above, in the following verse; "Verily,
Allah does not deal unjustly with man in any way: it is man that does
unjust to his own soul." (10:44)

**Divine warnings to turn back to our Lord**

If we study carefully the painful incidents of our life that occurred
in some specific circumstances and judge them in context of our
behavior, we can realize that most of these painful events were the
milestone of our progress. Many times it has happened that a sudden
shock or blow in our life becomes the turning point. These mild
punishments are just to discipline us in order to save us from severe
punishments.

Those who are mindful they take the advantage of such occurrence and
change their behaviors, but those who are not watchful they just cry and
complain and finally meet even more severe consequences of their
heedless attitude.

We find many people who have very smooth and comfortable life forget
their Lord and a sudden undesirable event wakes them up from their deep
sleep. A plain and easy living is just like driving on smooth highways
in a pleasant night. If the driver is not warned in time by a slash, he
will certainly face a dreadful accident. This is why in modern highways
engineers fix artificial light barriers at regular short distances just
to prevent sleeping during the long driving. Thus ups and downs and
hardships in life also serve the same purpose and keep us attentive to
escape deadly events.

The Holy Quran rejects such heedless people who do not take lessons
from their sufferings.

"We afflicted them with calamities and misfortunes so that they might
humble themselves, but their hearts were hardened ..... (6:43)

Thus hardships and painful events can have many different causes and it
is not fair to consider them punishment without proper identification.
Moreover in most of the cases there are many blessings of Allah in our
sufferings as they energize and stimulate our spirit and intensify our
efforts.

Even the natural disasters such as ear thquakes, droughts, floods, wars
bring many significant changes in our physical world and society.

A poisonous snake seems to be a very dangerous enemy of mankind, but
its poison which can kill a careless person, is used as a medicine to
save the lives of thousands of people.


