Chapter 15 : Explicit Signs of the Qiyamat
==========================================

Exact timings of the Qiyamat, as mentioned earlier, is an absolute
Divine secret. No one knows it except Allah Taala. Even the archangel
Israfeel, who has been assigned the duty from the first day to blow the
Soor on its appointed time, does not know its exact time and is
vigilantly waiting the command of Allah.

But Allah Subhanahu taala has told His last Prophet (sws) some of the
major signs which will appear before the commencement of the Qiyamat.
This is a great favor to him and his Ummah.

The Holy Prophet (sws) has explained these signs in many different
ways. But it was impossible to illustrate the exact signs to the people
of his time who were totally unaware of the things which would happen in
future.

For example, the people during the time of the Holy Prophet (sws) had
no idea about the television, computers and many other sophisticated
products of modern technology.

Thus, the Holy Prophet (sws) had used simple symbolic expressions
familiar to the people of his time to ascertain the identity of the
future events.

It is, therefore, imperative to analyze the metaphorical expressions of
the hadith, ser ving as illustration, in order to identify the
figurative objects hidden in the words to elucidate the related events
of the future. This kind of explanations based on deep research can give
the true picture of the scene.

Hudhaifah bin Usaid al-Ghafari, quoting the Prophet (sws), narrated the
following 10 specific signs of the Doomsday. Some of them are as
follows:

(1) The Smoke (2) Dajjal (3) Dabbatul-Ardh (4) Rising of the sun from
the West (5) Re- appearance of Imam Mehdi (as) and Hazrat Isa (as) (6)
YaJooj and Majooj.

**The Smoke - Climax of the climatic deterioration**

According to many traditions, some kind of smoke will spread throughout
the world near the Doomsday. This will penetrate the ears (and eyes) of
the people.

Possible explanation : It may be the result of big volcanic explosions
releasing many kinds of volcanic gases followed by strong wind storms,
and excessive meteorite showers. The combined effect of all these
catastrophic things can fill the whole atmosphere of the ear th with
smoke.

**Dajjal - Climax of the spiritual deterioration**

According to many hadith, Dajjal will rise near the Doomsday. He will
be a powerful ruler and a staunch enemy of the Muslims. He will
demonstrate incredible things to attract the people. He will have the
means to travel from the East to the West in a day or a part thereof. He
will have with him Jannat and Jahannum. He will grant Jannat to his
followers and will throw his opponents in his Jahannum.

It is also mentioned in ahadiths that Dajjal will be one-eyed person
who will falsely claim that he is the Messiah, awaited by the Jews ( or
by Christians ). He will attract a large number of the people living in
different par ts of the world and with this increase of power,
popularity and prestige, he will finally claim that he is god. The
Dajjal will be killed by Imam Mehdi (as). It has been reported in
Sahih-e- Muslim, that the Holy Prophet (sws) said:

"There is not, between the creation of Adam up to the appearance of
Qiyamat, any matter more difficult than that of Dajjal."

Now it is difficult to hypothesize accurately the nature and picture of
Dajjal from the words of the hadith. Many people can imagine Dajjal
literally as a one-eyed person. But Dajjal could also be a powerful
technologically advanced nation.

A nation who calls himself a Massiha (peace-maker), and a Superpower (
god ). One-eyed person can be interpreted as a developed nation
exploring the universe with one eye, i.e., material aspects only.

Today, the United States is being considered by many people as Jannat.
There are many Muslims, living in Muslim countries, who desperately wish
to migrate to the United States by all means. Green Card for them is
like an entry permit of Jannat.

Viewing the technological advancement and spiritual decline of this
country in the light of the hadith, one can say that America is the
Dajjal. There can be many other countries in the world which can be
referred as the Jannat of Dajjaal. The Holy Prophet has warned the
Muslims repeatedly about the Fitna of Dajjal. The literal meaning of
Dajjal is "The Deceiver " Allah knows better.

**Yajuj (Gog) and Majuj (Magog). Nuclear World War**

According to the Muslim scholars, Yajuj and Majuj are the two big
tribes from the children of Japheth. In Old Testament, Majuj has been
referred to the chief of Mashech and Tubal. These places have been
identified by the researchers as located now in present Moscow.

Some scholars have also identified the word Mangol as the Chinese word
Mangog or Manchog. If this is true than the region associated to Yajuj
and Majuj would cover the entire area between Russia and China from the
Moscow river to Mongolia.

In the Tafseer Majma-ul-Bayan, the author says that "after dominating
the earth, Yajuj and Majuj will aspire to conquer the space. They will
shoot the arrows towards the heavens and it will return to them with
something like blood-stain on it. So they will say: we conquered the
inhabitants of the earth and the heaven."

Allama S. Saeed Akhtar Rizvi has interpreted the arrows as rocket and
space-ships. If his analysis is correct then we can conclude from this
that the whole story of Yajuj and Majuj indicates a "World War " between
the future nuclear powers such as Russia, China and the United States ,
using the rockets from the various space stations to launch nuclear
arsenals.

The Smoke, another major sign of the Qiyamat, may be the result of this
nuclear war. Dabba-tul-Ardh The meaning of Dabbat-ul-Ardh is a "walker
of earth". There is a lengthy hadiths explaining the nature of
Dabbatulardh.


