Chapter 16 : Re-appearance of Imam Mehdi (as)
=============================================

There is no confusion or difference of opinion among the Muslim
scholars about the ar rival of Imam Mehdi (as) before the Doomsday. In a
hadith, unanimously accepted by all Muslims as an authentic one, the
Holy Prophet (sws) stressed that Imam Mehdi (as) will cer tainly come
before the commencement of the Doomsday.

The Holy Prophet (sws) said;

"If there were to remain in life of the world but one day, Allah (swt)
would prolong that day until He sends in it a man from my family and my
household. His name will be the same as my name. He will fill the earth
with equity and justice as it was filled with oppression and tyranny."
Shia and Sunni ahadith about Imam Mehdi(as).

There are more than 3000 ahadith of the Holy Prophet (sws) and Holy
Imams about Imam Mahdi (as) recorded by Shia scholars. Also, there are
more than 70 books written by renowned Sunni scholars about Imam Mahdi
(as). For example, Hafiz Muhammad ibn Yusuf ash-Shaafi, a renowned Sunni
scholar, has written a book, "Al- Bayan fi Akhbar Sahibi'z Zaman," in
two volumes, in which he has recorded the traditions regarding the
coming of the Holy Imam.

The other books written by Sunni scholars in which they have recorded
hundreds of traditions about the Imam Mehdi (s) are:

Al Masnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal (d.241AH)
Sahih Bukhari (d. 256 AH)
Sahih Muslim (d.261 AH)
Sunan of Abu Dawood (d.275 AH)
Sahih Tirmidhi (d.279 AH)

The above most famous books are considered by all Sunni scholars as the
most authentic books. As mentioned in the brackets, the authors of these
books died either before the bir th of Imam Mahdi (as) or shortly after
his birth.

Difference of opinion between Shia and Sunni about the appearance of
Imam Mehdi(as)

Both Shia and Sunni are united in their basic belief that Imam
Mahdi(as) will cer tainly rule the whole world before the occurrence of
the Doomsday.

But, there is a strong controversy among Muslims on the issue of
occultation (Ghaibat). Sunni scholars believe that Imam Mehdi (as) will
be born anytime before the day of Qiyamat and will rule the world.
Whereas, all Shia scholars have a strong belief based on Quran and
hadith that Imam Mehdi (as) was born in 255 AH, and is still living in
concealment as the Imam of his time, and will reappear by the order of
Allah (swt) at His appointed time.

He has a title Imam ul-Asr, meaning the Imam of the period.

Briefly, Imam Mehdi(as) is the son of the 11th Imam, Hazrat Hasan al -
Askari and Bibi Nargis. He is our 12th and the last Imam. He was born on
15th Shaban 255 AH / 869 AD in Samarra, Iraq. He lived under his father
's care until 260AH / 874 AD.

As a normal trend of Imamat, just after the martyrdom of his father,
Imam Hasan al - Askari (as), he became the Imam in 260 AH. He then by
the Allah's Command went into occultation (ghaybah) immediately.

The occultation (period of ghaibat) of Imam Mehdi (as) is divided into
two par ts.

1 - The minor occultation ( ghaibatu'l-sughra ), which occurred from
260 AH / 872 AD to 329 AH /939 AD, lasting 70 years.

2 - The major occultation ( ghaibatu' l- kubra ), which occurred from
329 AH / 939 AD and is still in process.

No one, except Allah (swt), knows the length of the major occultation.
Even the Imam himself does not know about the time when his occultation
will be over. No one, except Allah (swt), knows the exact place of
Imam's residence. However, there are some reliable narration and
reasonably trustworthy clues to form a hypothetical opinion about his
station.

**Philosophy of the occultation**

It is important to do extensive research on the hadiths to know
correctly about the purpose of occultation, and the way Imam Mehdi (as)
would re- appear.

It is not as simple as we think that our Imam is just living somewhere
in hiding, does hajj ever y year, helps people or Ulema and will
reappear on any Friday to establish an unparalleled Islamic government
after killing all the Kafirs by his sword.

There are some important questions concerning the occultation of the
Imam which need rational explanation.

1 - What is the Divine scheme and purpose of keeping the Imam alive but
totally invisible to the public?

2 - What is the daily routine of the Holy Imam ? Is he just helping the
Ulema occasionally, passively observing the daily performance of the
Shias, attending and helping the people in their desperate need and
that's all ?

What would be the productive turnout of his hundreds of years stay in
occultation ? 3 - How will the Holy Imam, on his arrival just as one
single person, destroy the giant nuclear powers of the time by a
conventional weapon - the sword ?

eg. China alone has about 2 million troops on active duty, 600,000
people in reserve and about 1 million in its armed militia uses as a
military draft. The combined armed forces of these nations that are
trained to fight both in air and on land have more than 10 million
troops on active duty.

We know that Muslim countries are not united to raise a strong army for
the Imam nor they are technologically equipped to assist him in any
other useful way.

How the conventional sword would match with intercontinental ballistic
missiles, atomic bombs, artillery shells, mines, torpedoes and many
other kinds of strategic nuclear weapons normally used in world wars ?

We know that the United States alone has a war machine that could
launch its forces within minutes of a warning and strike anywhere in the
world.

4 - According to Sunnis belief, Imam Mehdi will be born before the
Doomsday and will destroy the evil Empires of his time. Does it mean
that the Imam will conquer the giant super powers by some supernatural
means ? But it has never happened in the whole his-tory of prophethood.
Even the Head of all prophets, the Holy Prophet (sws) did everything
from the scratch to the establishment of Islamic government in normal
and natural way.

These are indeed some valid and useful questions which need satisfactor
y answers to strengthen the unshaken belief in the re-appearance of the
Holy Imam (as).

According to my research, Imam is not just idly sitting and waiting for
Allah's command to come out from the hidden place. I believe, Imam must
have a full scheme of work and a broad Divine agenda to follow up during
the long period of occultation. But what is that Divine agenda and his
scheduled occupation all through the long duration of his concealment?

The rational explanation of this question will convince the
unprejudiced Muslim minds, the grave repercussion of the misconceptions
they have about the coming of Imam Al-Mehdi (as). The Sunni believe that
Imam's bir th will take place in future. This misconception jeopardizes
the basic Divine objective of sending the Imam before the end of the
world. There is a precise purpose of occultation.

However, our explanation may or may not be absolutely correct as there
are many things beyond the range of our perception.

A powerful Empire behind the iron curtain.

We know that all the prophets were sent by Allah (swt) to guide the
mankind in natural way. They all were human beings. They all lived in a
natural way like other ordinary human beings. Our 12th Imam is also
living in occultation in conformity with the normal sunnah of the
prophets and his eleven predecessors.

The Holy Prophet (sws) and all 11 Imams (as) had married women and had
many children from them. Despite the very short life span of the Imams,
and mass killing of saadat, a great number of sayyed exist today.

The 12th Imam must also have married many women. The Holy Prophet (sws)
was granted by Allah a special provision of marrying more than 4 wives
at a time because of some good reasons. We don't know if our living Imam
is also having such provision of mar rying many wives at a time to raise
a large population of momineen.

In any case, viewing his extremely long life span, we can genuinely
imagine a large population of people in his generation. He must be
living with millions, if not billion, of people from his own long chain
of generation progressed in more than 1000 years. This population must
be steadily increasing day by day in the dominion of the Holy Imam.

This is not merely a hypothetical guess work. There are some remarkable
clues in suppor t of the speculation that there exists a powerful
invisible country somewhere in the world. There are reliable traditions
repor ted by great Shia scholars about the huge number of inhabitants
living in a group of islands known as the JAZIRATUL KHADHRA (The Green
Island).

These islands are totally cut off from the rest of the world by a large
sea known as Bahrul Abyadh (White Sea ).

There is a long story narrated by Muhammad bin Ali Alawi Hussaini,
repor ted in an authoritative book Al - Najmus Thaqib. In this story, a
reliable person tells in full detail, how he happened to visit these
islands totally governed by the Imam Zaman (as). He told that there are
large cities in these islands, highly developed and advanced. The names
of these cities mentioned in the book are as follows:

(1) Mubaraka. (2) Raequa. (3) Sophia. (4) Zaloom. (5) Panatis. There
are also some other authentic repor ts confirming the existence of a
huge empire of Al- Mehdi(as).

There are also some other reports by Non-Muslim news agencies
disclosing the mysteries of these islands. These reports got a blaze of
publicity throughout the world. International magazines, newspapers,
radio and television gave substantial coverage to these repor ts. The
encyclopedias and World Books have also endorsed these repor ts in full
detail. We are giving here a report from the World Book Encyclopedia.

"There is a group of islands, known as Bermuda Triangle, in the
southeastern coast of Florida where many ships and airplanes have
disappeared. However, commercial and military crafts cross this area
safely every day.

Many people believe the disappearances in the Bermuda Triangle have
taken place under mysterious circumstances. Only a few captains or
pilots radioed distress messages. The first recorded disappearance of a
United States ship in the Ber muda Triangle occurred in March 1918, when
the U.S.S. Cyclops vanished.

On Dec. 5, 1945, a squadron of five US bombers disappeared, and a
sea-plane vanished while searching for the aircraft." There are many
other reports confirming many other such incidents of this nature
occurred in this area.

These islands cover about 1,140,000 square kilometers area which is
bigger than France, Germany, Greece, japan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland
and many other countries of the world. These reports show that a
powerful system is working in this par t of the world which can capture,
destroy or jam the most advanced ships and aircraft of the world. Also,
there is a lot of talk going on for years about the mysterious
unidentified flying objects (UFO).

**What is the reality of these objects ?**

Scientists define these objects as something unidentified that has no
obvious explanations. It means that these objects are the product of
such highly developed technology that the world's top scientists can not
understand them and, therefore, they are not able to identify them.
Indeed, in such circumstances, any kind of scientific explanation is out
of question. Let us see first what these unidentified objects are?

Here is the full report from the World Book Encyclopedia. "People have
reported aircraft, missiles, satellites, birds, insects, and weather
balloon. Investigators can explain all but a small percentage of UFO
repor ts. The remainder may be due to an unknown phenomenon or merely to
limitation in human perception, memor y, and research.

In 1952, the United States Air Force, in a program called Project Blue
Book, investigated about 12000 UFO reports to determine whether UFO's
were a potential threat to national security. In addition, from 1966 to
1968, the Air Force sponsored an independent study of UFO's by
scientists at the university of Colorado. The Colorado scientists
advised the Air Force that further study of UFO's was not likely to
produce useful information concerning a security threat. As a result,
the Air Force ended Project Blue Book in 1969.

Many people throughout the world believe that UFO's are spacecraft from
other planets. Accounts of encounters with alien visitors have appeared
in numerous books, newspapers, motion pictures, and TV programs. Some
people have even repor ted that they have been abducted by aliens".

Reviewing and analytically judging all these international reports
viz., the Bermuda Triangle, Unidentified Flying Objects (UFO), and
authentic narrative accounts of many religious people recorded in
reliable books such as the one by Muhammad bin Ali Alawi in his book
'Al - Najmus Thaqib' about the Jaziratul Khadhra, ( the Green Island ),
we can rationally arrive at some useful conclusions.

1- That these groups of islands, Green Islands or Bermuda Islands, may
be occupied and governed by the Holy Imam Al- Mehdi (as) and his people,
where he has established a powerful Islamic government.

2- The Imam's country is totally invisible and is protected and
monitored by computerized electromagnetic devices that produce intense
light beams.

There are some highly sensitive clockwork equipments, which can
accurately ascer tain the identity of all the passing ships and
airplanes. As repor ted above, they allow many ships and airplane to go
while stop some in accordance with the programmed instructions to divert
them to the desired destination for reason not known to us. Some pilots
who were allowed to escape say that they believe the country has highly
developed technology which can easily destroy or interfere all kinds of
ships, airplane, radar and electronic navigational systems.

3 - The Imam's country, behind the iron curtain, is immensely developed
in science and technology.

They have highly advanced aircrafts, missiles, artillery shells,
satellites, and many other kinds of nuclear devices. According to the
UFO reports, they have powerful long range-bomber aircrafts which are
designed to launch an attack from great distances on specific targets in
any par t of the world.

The peculiar birds and insects (UFO's objects) witnessed by many people
may be these long-range bomber aircrafts. Quran has mentioned these
kinds of ballistic missiles sent by Allah to destroy the big army of the
elephant which came from Yemen under the command of Abrahah Al-Ashram to
frighten the Muslims and to destroy the Kabah at Makkah. .

"Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the companions of the
elephants. Did he not make their plot go astray ?

And He sent against them Flights of Birds. Then He made them like an
empty field of stalks of which the corn has been eaten up by cattle."
(105:1-5)

These few samples of Imam's world, i.e., the UFO's, have demonstrated
the fact that the so- called Super Power of this world and their allies
are far behind in scientific and technological advancement. The
scientists of this world can not even understand the level and standard
of Imam's technology. This is why they call these technological products
unidentified objects, meaning something beyond comprehension.

As mentioned above, several teams of specialists from different
countries have made all possible efforts to know the origin of these
flying objects. We know that different kinds of satellites such as
weather, communication, navigation, space and earth observation
satellites are constantly monitoring the world from space in all sides
and at all times.

The US military satellite - often called as "Spy Satellite"- can detect
the launch of missiles, the course of airplane in air and the movement
of any kind of flying object. But despite this tight security of the
planet, no one knows from where these different kinds of flying objects
are coming. Out of frustration, some scientists said that they may be
from any other planet. But the unmanned space crafts have already
confirmed that there is no possibility of any kind of life in any of the
planet.

Thus, we believe, the 12000 flying objects (UFO's) seen in different
par t of the world may be the military maneuvering from the Imam's war
depar tment. This gives an image of the imam's war machinery, which is
certainly much superior than the combined military power of the whole
world. In fact, it is not even the 1% of Imam's military strength.

When Imam will reappear, his new kind of weapons will repeat the
performance of his great grand father 's sword - THE ZULFIQAR. The whole
world will surrender to him.

This is a rational explanation of what Imam has been doing during the
occultation, which is a period of more than 1000 years, and how the Imam
will defeat the strong nuclear powers of our time in natural way.

UFO's reports, which can not be denied, are a mystery for the
non-believers and non-Muslim scientists because they have no ground to
imagine a powerful country on this earth. But for us, it strongly
connects us with our belief that Imam is alive and is fully busy in
preparation of his reappearance to overthrow all the powerful Un-Islamic
governments and their allies.

4- The whole population of the Imam's country is solely true Muslim.
They are all the true followers of Ahlal -Bayate. The country and its
all sectors are fully governed by the Holy Imam and his appointed
Deputies.

There may be hundreds of highly advanced universities with vast
laboratories and workshops, big industries and nuclear plants, space
platform and manned orbiting habitat etc., all fully equipped and
embellished with highly sophisticated and computerized tools. In these
places, great scientists of all disciplines must be working under the
supervision of Imam Al-Mehdi (as).

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (as) got a little oppor tunity and limited time to
do some work. But even then he had produced 4000 students, among them
were great scientists such as Jabir bin Hayyan, Father of Chemistry.

Imam Muhammed Al- Mehdi (as) has been given a full oppor tunity and
enough time to develop an ideal world in all respect. So he must produce
thousands of great scientists, fuqha and scholars in every discipline of
knowledge.

The modern scientific and technological revolution, which has stunned
the world, is just 200 years old. It was not supervised by good and
matured leaders. It can never compete with the 1000 years old scientific
revolution, fully guided and supervised by the Holy Imam.

Thus, there is a strong possibility that from the beginning of the
occultation, the Holy Imam Al-Mehdi has been working to develop a great
powerful Islamic government, ideal in all respects, perfect in every
sphere, in some part of the world. No one can surely know that place as
everything belonging to the Holy Imam(as) is hidden.

It is mentioned in the Holy Quran that a time will come when the
righteous people will take over the power and government of the world,
where they will govern the whole earth in accordance with the perfect
laws of Islam.

"We have written in the Scripture after the message had been given: The
righteous among My servants shall inherit the earth. Verily in this is a
message to those who serve Us." (21:105 ) The development of such an
ideal government during the long period of occultation is an exciting
and remarkable achievement of the Holy Imam (as). Ever since man has
inhabited the earth, no such country has existed to lead a perfect
social and intellectual life filled with happiness in its true sense.

When the Holy Imam Al-Mehdi will reappear, his absolutely perfect and
ideal world which he would have established during the period of
occultation, will convey the Divine message to all mankind - this is the
kind of peaceful and ideal world Allah's messengers were planning to
make for you.

This was the Divine purpose of keeping the Imam in concealment. This is
what Allah Subhanahu taala wants to show the inhabitants of the ear th
before the Doomsday. The Divine message is apparent in the wordings of
the hadith, that ...... if there were to remain in life of the world but
one day, Allah would prolong that day until He sends in it a man from my
family and my household.

This is a rational explanation of Shia belief that Imam Al-Mehdi's bir
th has taken place and he is alive and will re-appear to restore
unprecedented peace and tranquillity in the world in a natural way. The
Sunni belief that his bir th will occur in future to bring peace and
order in the corrupted world fails to explain the means and mode of his
revolution.

Nevertheless, though these conclusions are in good agreement with our
belief in the existence of our living Imam in occultation, and also in
conformity with the true understanding of the Holy Quran and ahadith,
but nothing can be said with cer tainty and the whole idea about the
Imam's powerful Kingdom is a guess network.

Does identifying the residence of Imam invalidate the purpose of
occultation?

The Ghaibah of Imam has a Divine scheme that no one should know the
whereabouts of the Imam. Some one can argue that if we know precisely
where Imam is living then the purpose of occultation is not served.

But our guess-work of pinpointing a specific place of residence for
Imam does not invalidate the philosophy of occultation. If our
assumption that Imam is stationed on these islands is true and if the
whole world realize his presence there, even then they will not be able
to see him, to approach him, or to reach him by any means. This is the
purpose of Ghaibat of Imam which is fully preserved.

Al -Imam al- Hujjaah AI- Mehdi (as) said :

"Rest assured that no one has a special relationship with Allah.
Whoever denies me is not my follower. The appearance of the Relief
(al-faraj ) depends solely upon Allah ; therefore , those who propose a
certain time for it are liars.

As to the benefits of my existence in occultation, it is like the
benefit of the sun behind the clouds where the eyes do not see. Indeed
my existence is an amnesty for the people of the earth. Pray much to
Allah to hasten the Relief, for therein also lies the release from your
sufferings."

This statement of the Holy Imam has made it very clear that everything
regarding the Imam's occultation i.e., where he is staying, what he is
doing and when he would reappear is an absolute secret and if anyone
claims that he knows about it accurately and with cer tainty then he is
a liar.

So, I want to clarify once again that whatever I have said is merely a
guess work which may or may not be true. But the rationality of my guess
work can clear the self-caused mystification, confusion and astonishment
which is always disturbing the minds of our youths and of the people who
have seen the UFO's objects and disappearance of several airplanes and
ships. There can be no other possible explanation of the unidentified
objects which is a proven reality.


