Chapter 19 : Second Phase of Our Existence
==========================================

Life in this world.

The second phase of our existence is the most crucial and decisive
period of our life. The span of this life is relatively very short i.e.,
60 to 70 years in average, but it shapes a definite nature of our
endless life. On Quranic scale, the length of our stay in this world is
less than a day.

**How the present shapes the nature of eternal life?**

This is the most important question which all of us should strive to
know. Quran has repeatedly mentioned that the nature of our endless life
depends upon how we live in this world. For this, we all will be
examined for two things.

1 - Thought and perception. i.e., Emaan
2 - Actions and deeds. i.e., Amaal

All human beings will be judged Jahannum accordingly.

for these two things and will go either to Jannat or The first basic
qualification required by a person to enter jannat is perfect religion.
Quran has explicitly warned the entire mankind that no religion other
than Islam will be accepted on the Day of Judgment.

"The only true religion before Allah is Islam." (3:19)

Thus all non-Muslims, who don't fulfill this pre-requisite condition
are not qualified for Jannat. The second important requirement is Amaal,
i.e. actions.

Islam has given a full scheme of work, called Shariah (Islamic laws ),
which has identified all good and bad actions, obligatory duties and
forbidden acts. Thus all those Muslims who don't follow the rules of
Shariah will not be qualified to enter Jannat.

However, Allah is so kind and lenient that He forgives all our sins if
we sincerely ask Him for forgiveness. And His generosity is such that He
will multiply the reward of our good deeds ten times i.e. far above the
merit, and the punishment will be no more than what commensurate with
our sin.

Quran confirms this in the following verse.

"He that does a good deed shall be repaid tenfold: but he that commits
a sin shall be punished only for it." (6:160)

**What is successful life**

As the second phase of our life i.e., life in this physical world, is
the most impor tant and decisive period of our entire life, it is
essential to know how to make this life most successful and
productive.

There is a vast Islamic literature, which includes more than 6000
Divine verses, more than 15000 ahadith of the Prophet, more than 300
sermons & duas of Imams and a huge stock of books by Ulama, all this
just to tell with all minor and major details about, What is a
successful life and how to get the ultimate success.

**How can we accomplish the purpose of our life**

It is very important to understand fully and correctly what should be
the primary and ultimate aim of our life which should never be
compromised with anything in any circumstances.

Quran has told us in a very decisive manner that the Divine purpose of
creation is to worship Him. Every second of our life should be spent in
His worship. This means that worship doesn't mean traditional or ritual
worship in which we do cer tain acts prescribed in the shariah. Worship
means to follow His commandments in every action.

Some key points of successful life.

1 - The first and foremost thing in the agenda of life is the true
intention of total submission to Allah Subhanahu taala. i.e., we should
have this feeling in the hear t of our heart. We should please Allah
Subhanahu taala by all possible means. We should do anything and
everything to seek His pleasure and His nearness.

2 - We should know this fact very well that every pleasure and success
in this world is of temporary nature. The real success is the success of
Akherah. Thus, we should not do anything at the expense of Akherah.
Quran has repeatedly warned the residents of planet earth that their
stay on earth is pretty short. Every intelligent person at least knows
this fact.

3 - Acquire useful knowledge to strengthen Emaan. Quran has stressed on
the exploration of the universe and study of nature.

"Indeed: In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
alternation of night and day, there are signs for men of understanding,
those that remember Allah when standing, sitting and lying down, and
reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth (saying): Lord, you
have not created these in vain. Glory be to You: save us from the
torment of the fire." (3:190)

Thus, it is important to ponder in the vast creation of Allah Subhanahu
taala in order to glorify His majesty.

Today, the Western scientists have collected a large amount of
information about the universe and its innumerable entities through
their researches and explorations. As one can not grasp the enormous
amount of acquired knowledge, it has been divided into bits and pieces,
classified as physics, chemistry, biology, astronomy etc. All these
disciplines of sciences, being taught in secular institutions, can be
made very useful if they are taught with Islamic perspectives.

4- One must know the laws of Islam in order to fulfill the obligatory
duties and to abstain from the forbidden acts.

The sunnah of the Holy Prophet (sws), as interpreted by his Ahlal
Baiyt, covers each and every aspect of an ideal life. Thus, it is
essential to follow his sunnah and the teachings of the Imams in every
sphere of life.

We should acquire taqwa in life. Taqwa means, to observe the obligatory
duties in full and to abstain from the evils and forbidden things.


