Chapter 20 : Third Phase of Our Existence
=========================================

**Life After Death**

Our third phase of life or the third stage of our existence is the life
af ter death. World of Souls (Alam-e-Arwah) - Womb of Mother - Physical
World - World of Soul (Barzakh)

**What is life and death ?**

Many scientists do not believe in the existence of the Master of the
universe. They think that all living beings in the world are the
accidental products of Darwin's evolution. The inevitable outcome of
this baseless faith is that everything is for nothing. Such mindless
people can never comprehend the philosophy of life and death.

That is the reason that Western scientists who have discovered a large
number of facts about life and death know very little about life. They
admit that they can not give one simple definition of life that can
appropriately cover all its aspects.

We find this confession in all standard books of biology that
scientists can not define life because they can not locate the dividing
line between the living and non-living things.

For example, a virus is a lifeless particle by itself, but it becomes
active and multiplies rapidly when invades in a living cell. i.e., the
virus has the characteristics of both living and non-living species.

Thus, scientists openly confess that they can not give a precise
definition of life and can only give some common characteristics of
living creatures.

So when scientists cannot even define life, how can they create life.
Test-tube baby, surro- gate motherhood or cloning are nothing but the
manipulation of natural bir th mechanism. Similarly, scientists cannot
comprehend the philosophy of death.

They say, death is the end of all life processes in an organism. But
they can not say anything about what makes the life process to cease.

Today, surgeon can transplant almost every organ of the human body if
it starts malfunctioning. This means that they should be able to avoid
death as it is always caused by the malfunctioning of any organ. But we
all know that despite the tremendous progress in surgery and medicine,
the life span is more or less the same as it was 100 years ago.

So, scientist can neither create life nor can they stop occurrence of
death. This fact reveals the actual nature of life and death.

"Blessed be He in Whose hands is all sovereignty: He has power over all
things. He created life and death that He might put you to the test and
find out which of you acquitted himself best. He is the Mighty, the
Forgiving one." ( 68:1)

In such a short sentence, Quran has given a complete and perfect
definition of life and death. It gives a full account of the origin and
the prospect of life and death. Briefly we can highlight the impor tant
features of life and death from this shor t verse of the Holy Quran.

1 - Life is not the accidental product of some spontaneous bio-chemical
reactions. Rather, it is the great creation of All-Mighty Allah
Subhanahu taala.

2 - Death is not the disorder of physio-chemical functions of organic
systems of the body. Rather, it is also another kind of creation of
All-Mighty Allah Subhanahu Taala.

3 - Both, life and death have a well defined purpose in the existence
of a living being.

4 - Death is not the end of life but the beginning of another kind of
life.

This complete and perfect definition of life and death opens our mind
to think seriously about the life after death.

**What happens after death?**

From medical point of view, a person whose breathing and hear tbeat has
completely stopped is considered dead.

Many changes occur immediately after death. For example, the
temperature of the body drops to that of its surroundings, the muscles
of the body become stiff, the circulation of the blood stops and
produces reddish-purple discoloration in the lowest par t of the body,
and finally the bacteria and other tiny organisms grow on the corpse and
cause it to decay.

So, there is no dispute or doubt that death is the end of worldly life.
But we believe that a human being is made-up of two components. i.e.,
organic body and nonphysical soul.

Thus, death is the termination of organic functions.

We can say death is caused by the separation of soul and body or we can
also say, the sparation of soul and body causes death.

So death is the end of organic life but not the absolute end of whole
life. This means that there is some kind of life after death and death
is simply a major change in the present kind of life.

This is true. The entire edifice of Islam is based on this fact that
death is not the end of life but it is a sharp turning point from where
another kind of life begins.

A large number ahadith and Quranic verses are there which clearly
explain the philosophy of life and death. If we understand them
correctly then we will realize that life in this world has a direct
effect on the life after death. We are told to do good preparation in
this life for the next life.

The Holy Prophet (sws) and Imams have explained the repercussion of
this life on the life after death in the following words:

"You have not been created to perish, but to remain for ever; only you
will be transferred from one home to another; and the souls in the
bodies are (like) prisoners." (Holy Prophet)

"Death is one of the three things happening (to the dying person),
either it is a good tiding of eternal bliss, or bad tidings of eternal
punishment, or there is obscure uncer tainty so that he does not know in
which category he will be grouped." (Hazrat Imam Ali)

"(Death is) the greatest happiness which comes to the believers, when
they migrate from the house of misery to the eternal bliss; (it is) the
greatest disaster which befalls the unbelievers, when they go from their
paradise(i.e., this world) to the fire which will never be extinguished
and will never burn itself out." (Hazrat Imam Hassan)

"Death is nothing but a bridge which takes you from difficulties and
troubles to the vast paradise and everlasting bliss. So among you who
would dislike to transfer from the prison of the world to the paradise"
(Hazrat Imam Hussain)

"It (Death) is for the believer like removing a dirty cloth and like
removing heavy shackles and chains, and to take the finest and best
cloths, or finest horses and most lovely abode" ( Hazrat Imam Zainul
Abideen)

"Death is like sleep that comes to you every night, but this is a sleep
which is very long and there is no awakening but on the Day of
Resurrection." ( Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqar) "Death for a believer is
like fragrant breeze, by smelling which he becomes revived and every
trouble and sorrow is removed from him. And for unbelievers, it is like
snake-bite and sting of the scorpions and even worse." (Hazrat Imam
Jafer-e- Sadiq)

**Why we fear death**

Those who do not believe in life after death and assume death as the
painful end of everything, always live with an intense fear of it.

This is the reason that most people fear death and try to avoid
thinking about it. Medical reports reveal that in the Western hospitals,
close relatives, intimate friends, and even doctors and nurses leave the
dying patients to die alone and avoid seeing the occur rence of death
because of the fear of death.

In Muslim society, there is no such thing. Relatives and friends live
very closely with the dying person and recite duas and Quran until the
last breathing of the patient. Thus, the major cause of fear of death is
ignorance or the feelings of uncer tainty.

In one hadith it is mentioned that Imam Hadi (as) went to visit a dying
person who was drowning in the ocean of fear. Imam beautifully explained
him the nature of death in the following way;

"O servant of Allah, you fear death because you do not understand it
correctly. Tell me: if your body were soiled with dirt so that it was
paining you and afflicted you with sores, and you knew that a washing in
the bathhouse would rid you of all that dir t and pain, would you wish
to avail yourself of the bathhouse to clean yourself of the dir t? or
would you be reluctant to avail this facility and will prefer to remain
in your polluted state"

The sick man replied: O descendant of the Prophet: I would definitely
prefer to wash myself to become clean.

Then Imam responded:

"Know, then the death is exactly like the bathhouse. It offers you the
last chance to rid yourself of your sins and to purify yourself of
evils. If death embrace you now, there can be no doubt that you will be
freed of all sorrow and pains and will attain an everlasting happiness
and joy."

This clear picture of death in the explanation of the Imam relieved the
dying person from the unknown fear of death and allowed him to die with
peace and grace.

So mostly people fear death because they are not sure what is going to
happen with them or they know very well that time of severe punishment
has come.

Hazrat Ali (as), The Commander of Faithful, has disclosed the truth
that Godfearing people do not have any fear of death as he repeatedly
said the following words in his lifetime: "I swear by Allah that the son
of Abu Talib is more at ease with death than a suckling infant with the
breast of his mother. "

**The taste of death**

The internal feelings that a dying person has when death approaches him
is very difficult to know. Normally all sorts of communications are
blocked between the dying person and the rest of the world. But the Holy
Quran has clearly told us at two different places that there is a par
ticular taste of death.

"Every soul shall have a taste of death." (3:185)
"Every soul shall have a taste of death." (21:35)

Thus, the Holy Quran tells us that every person will have some kind of
strong feeling at the time of his death.

We know that there are three different kinds of taste, namely, sour,
sweet, and bitter. As Quran has not described any par ticular kind of
taste for death, the intense feelings of death may be either sweet, sour
or bitter.

This is true. Both, Quran and ahadits tell us that good people will
find a sweet taste in their death, and bad people will meet a frightful
death.

**Death - A sweet taste**

No sophisticated machine can disclose the internal feelings of a dying
person. Usually, a person becomes unconscious before the occurrence of
death. During this period the acute pain of the killing disease or wound
disappears and it is replaced by an intense fear or perfect peace.

This is the time when the dying person loses all contacts with the
physical world and communication with the angel of death begins. The
internal feelings during this communication can not be made known by any
instrument. However, a careful and knowledgeable person can read the
internal conditions from his facial expressions.

The Holy Quran transmits out the text of inter-communication. "The
angels will say to those whom they cause to die in purity, peace be on
you: come into paradise for what you did."(16:32)

This verse of Quran tells us that the pious people will be warmly
welcomed by the angel of death with a salutation of peace.

According to the ahadith of our Imams noted by Allama Mur taza
Mutahheri as an authentic one, for the righteous people after their
death there are several paradises, not one single paradise. In the next
world they vary according to degree of their intimate proximity to
Allah. In addition to these paradises, there are some other paradises in
the Barzakh. Hence the paradise mentioned in the above quoted verse
would give a wrong impression that it relates to the Day of Judgment.

In one hadith, much more details of conversation between the angel of
death and the dying person which occurred just before the commencement
of death, has been given. One companion of Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as)
asked him about the internal feelings of the true believer just near his
death.

The Imam answered:

When the angel of death comes to take the soul of a believer, he is at
first distraught. But then the angel consoles him and says :

O friend of Allah, do not distress yourself. I swear by the Lord who
sent Muhammad as His messenger that we will treat you more kindly and
gently than your father. The angel of death will further say;

Open your eyes and look at us. Then the Messenger of Allah and Imaams
will appear before him, and the angel will introduce them to the dying
believer by saying: This is the Prophet (sws) and the leaders of
religion who will be your friends and companions.

He will then open his eyes par tly, and hear Allah calling him as
follows:

O soul that found tranquillity in the protection of Muhammad and his
pure family, now return to your Lord. You have accepted as truth the
authority of the Imams, and because of this you are now happy. Be
certain that you have also earned thereby the pleasure of your Lord.
Come now and be the companion of My chosen elite, and take up the abode
that has been prepared for you in everlasting paradise.

Imam further said; nothing could be more desirable for the believer at
that moment than for his soul to take flight and receive all that it has
been promised.

This is a clear indication that there will be no pain or any kind of
discomfor t in death for righteous people. This is a sweet death.

In the battle of Karbala, Imam Hussain (as) asked his 10 year old
nephew, Hazrat Qasim bin Hassan, just before he was going to sacrifice
his life; My dear son! you are going to die, how do you feel about
death? The young Qasim instantly replied with confidence; My uncle I
find death sweeter than honey.

Death - A bitter taste.

But the wicked people will face a dreadful death. Quran has depicted
the scene of horrifying death.

"If you could see the angels when they carry off the souls of the
unbelievers : They shall strike them on their faces and their backs,
saying : Taste the torment of fire. This is your punishment for what
your hands committed. Allah is not unjust to His servants." (8:50) This
verse of the Quran also gives a clear picture of what really happens
when wrongdoers die. This is a deadly bitter taste of death.

All those people whose conduct was not fair but they were not
rebellious will feel a sour taste in their deaths. The Holy Quran has
also described the miserable dying conditions of such Muslims who were
not practicing the Islamic codes of life in this world.

**Burial**

According to the Islamic Shariah, the dead body of the deceased should
be buried with full Islamic honor as early as possible after death. When
the dead body is taken for the burial, his guardian angels go with his
body in company of his soul. During the bath (Ghusl-e-Mayyet ), dressing
of Kafan and other burial formalities, the soul feels all those going
with his dead body and listen to the screaming of the relatives and the
friends.

When they take the body to the grave, the soul sees the burying of his
dead body in a narrow place - The Grave. After burial, the guardian
angels allow the soul to see off his departing relatives and friends. As
soon as the relatives leave the grave of the dead person, the guardian
angels take the soul into the grave for questions - answers.

It is narrated in a hadith, recorded by Shia and Sunni authentic books,
that the Holy Prophet (sws) has advised the Muslims to stand by the
grave of the dead person after the burial, and should pray to Allah
Taala for the forgiveness. The Prophet said, it is the most difficult
time for the dead person as he is put to the questions concerning his
beliefs and actions. The Talqeen in Shias is recited at this time.

The Barzakh ( Purgatory ) - Resting place of souls.

Barzakh is an Arabic word which means a barrier, i.e., a thing that
separates two things. Quran has used this word to inform us that there
is another world between this physical world and the eternal world where
we will live after our death until the day of resurrection. Quran says;
"And behind them is the Barzakh till the day of judgment." (23:100)

Thus, barzakh is the place where every departed soul will live until
the resurrection day. No one knows how long the souls will live there as
the time of resurrection is known to Allah only. Even the Prophets have
expressed their unawareness about it.

**What happens in the grave ?**

The first stop in the barzakh is grave. This is the place where the
soul of the dead person meets with two angels who ask him certain
fundamental questions. The names of these two angels are Munkir and
Nakeer. According to the reports from Imams, in the Barzakh man is
interrogated about his faith and belief only. Other questions are left
to the Day of Resurrection (Allama Mutahheri).

The soul of the dead person will re-enter the body and he will be asked
by the angels to get ready for the questioning.

Munkir and Nakir will ask the following questions:

I - WHO IS YOUR RABB (creator) ?
2 - WHO IS YOUR PROPHET ?
3 - WHAT IS YOUR RELIGION ?
4 - WHAT IS YOUR BOOK ?
5 - WHO IS YOUR IMAM ?

These questions apparently seem to be very easy and straight forward.
We think that, even a small boy can answer them easily.

But in fact, only a true and practising Muslim will be able to answer
these questions correctly and the rest of the people will become stunned
and perplexed.

In the grave, the unconscious mind (Rooh or spirit) will speak. If the
dead person had recognised Allah in his lifetime by vir tue of his
knowledge and deep understanding, then he will be able to answer the
first question correctly. But if he was a materialistic person, his
unconscious mind will answer accordingly. He might respond to the angels
telling them - dollar, pounds, shilling, or another things as his god.
It is because, he was worshipping them in place of God in his
lifetime.

It is narrated that, those who used to worship idols and images will
star t worshipping the angels and will say that they are their gods.

Similarly the second question, i.e., who is your Prophet ? and who is
your Imam ? the answer will depend on the lifestyle and perception.
Those who have sincerely and wholehear tedly followed the teachings of
the Holy Prophet (sws) and the Holy Imams (as) in their lifetime will
instantly give the correct answer. But, those Muslims who proclaim that
they love the Holy Prophet and Imams but were following the lifestyle
and footsteps of some other people, the unconscious mind will name the
same persons instead of Prophet or Imams.

These questions and answers are just to show the dead person, what
should be his status in the barzakh and thereafter.

The Squeezing of the body in the Grave.

The squeezing of the body takes place in the grave on the first night.
For some, this squeezing will be as two intimate friends embrace each
other when they meet after a long time. But, for others this will be so
severe that the ribs of right and left side will penetrate into each
other.

**How does a soul live in Barzakh?**

Immediately after death, we will find ourselves in an entirely new
world. How would be this world and what will be the nature of life
there?

From Quran and hadith, our ulema explains that immediately after death,
man enters a new stage of life in which he feels everything. i.e., after
the death, the body becomes motionless and useless, but the soul does
not die and the sense of feelings remains. The soul of the dead person
feels both pain and pleasure. But the pain and pleasure in barzakh
depends on the conduct of the previous life.

The place and the living conditions in the barzakh will be different
for different people. The Holy Prophet (sws) said: Grave is the first
encounter with the events leading to the Resurrection. If one finds it
easy, his future will also be secured, but if this is not good for him,
then the remaining events of the resurrection might be even worse for
him.

Allama Mutahhaeri has mentioned 15 verses of the Holy Quran which tell
about the nature of life in barzakh.

We can send gifts and presents to our dear relatives and friends who
live in barzakh. The meritorious deeds performed by the relatives of the
dead person with intention that their reward should go to his dead
relative reaches him and makes the dead person happy. If alms and
charities are given with an intention that their reward should go to
one's depar ted father, mother, brother, husband, wife , friend,
teacher, or anyone else, these charities in form of gifts are delivered
to the concerned deceased person. This makes him cheerful and happy.

Similarly if anyone performs salat, fasting, tawaaf of Kaaba, hajj, or
any other mustahab act on behalf of a dead person, its reward goes to
him and make the dead person blissful. It has been advised that those
who have displeased their parents during their lifetime, should take the
advantage of this privilege. They should do something to please them
after their death if they did not please them when they were alive.

**Wadi-e-Salaam**

This is the resting place of the good souls. The good practising Muslim
is transfer red after the Questions - Answers session to a place known
as Wadi-e-Salaam. Here, he would meet many of his relatives and friends
who died before him and were housed here because of their good deeds.

They see the delights of the paradise throughout this period in reward
of their exceptionally good deeds.

The Valley of Barhut.

This is the place where the souls of the non-believers, polytheists,
infields and rejected people are transferred immediately after the
death. The new dead man will find many of his dead relatives, friends
and followers camped there in miserable conditions.

All of them, i.e., their souls, will live there until the day of
resurrection.

Although the final accountability and the punishment of the dead person
will be on the Day of Judgment, but the souls of the rebellious people
like Firaun, Namrood, Yazid and other enemies of the Prophets and Imams
will be exposed to the punishment soon af ter their death.


