Chapter 3 : Benefits of the True Religion
=========================================

The benefits of the true religion are numerous. The person who has no
religion or has chosen a wrong religion is the biggest loser. Nothing
can compensate this loss.

We find many disbelievers around us who have wealth, power, and
property. Many people think that they are the most fortunate people in
the world. But there were many people like them in the past who are now
dead. Every person knows without any doubt that they have left all their
wealth, power and honour which they were enjoying during their lifetime.
So death is the end of every material and worldly thing.

The Holy Quran has revealed this truth in the following verses. "How
many gardens, how many fountains they left behind them; and cornfields,
and noble palaces, and good things in which they took delight. Thus (it
was ), and we made other people inherit all that. Neither heaven nor
earth shed tears for them, nor were they reprieved". (44:25-29)

"O believers : Shall I command you to a bargain that will save you from
a miserable infliction ? Have faith in Allah and His apostle and that
you strive to your utmost in the cause of Allah with your wealth and
your persons, that will be the best for you, if you but knew it. He will
forgive you your sins and admit you to gardens watered by running
streams. He will lodge you in pleasant mansions in gardens of eternity;
that is indeed the supreme achievement." (61:10-12)

The holy Quran has repeatedly warned us that every thing which we
possess in this world will be left behind. The intelligent people are
those who purchase the prosperity that can remain with them even after
their death. A man of understanding, even if he is not Muslim, can
perceive it.

Jean-jacques Rousseau (1712-1778), a great French philosopher and most
impor tant writer of the Age of Reason, has given some words of wisdom,
when he wrote to his son about the reality of this worldly life:

"I know that I am destined to die; then, should I create attachment for
myself in this world ? In a world where all things are changing and
passing, I myself will soon become non- existent. Of what use to me are
attachments? Emile, my son, if I lose you, what will be lef t for me? I
must nonetheless prepare myself for such an intolerable eventuality,
because no one can assure me that I will die before you. So if you wish
to live happily and rationally, attach your heart only to beauties that
are imperishable; try to limit your desires and hold duty in higher
esteem than all else. Seek only those things that do not violate the law
of morality, and accustom yourself to losing things without distress.
Accept nothing, unless your conscience permits you. If you do all of
this, you will surely be happy, and not become over attached to anything
on ear th".

Rousseau was not a Muslim but was inspired by Islamic philosophy. A man
of this thinking can command his people to bring revolution. Rousseau's
philosophy motivated the people of his time that led to the French
Revolution.

Now let us point out some of the discernible benefits of the true
religion. Religion imparts a consciousness of the self-esteem. From
Islamic point of view, all human beings are born as Muslims, it is their
parents who make them Hindus, Christians, Jews or pagans. There are more
than 2 millions kinds of living creatures and out of them men are the
most supreme beings.

The first and foremost duty of man is to know its rank and status in
the world of creation. It is then, he can maintain his position and can
go fur ther in his evolutionary growth and development. Quran and hadith
are the only reliable source of knowing the origin of mankind. It is
important to note that Quran has given a special emphasis to reveal the
real position of man for his self-recognition.
Announcement of Divine Deputyship. Allah Subhanu taala has appointed
man as His vicegerent on the ear th.

Quran says:

"It is He who has appointed you vicegerent on the earth and exalted
some of you in rank above others, so that He may test you by means of
what he has given you." (6:165) The coronation ceremony of man. Allah
arranged a special coronation ceremony in which the entire existing
creatures of that time were asked to attend it. The participants who
were mostly the angels, were then ordered by Allah Subhanu taala, to bow
down before Adam- the symbolic representative of mankind.

Quran says;

"Behold; your Lord said to the angels: I am about to create Man, from
sounding clay from mud molded in. When I fashion him and breathe into
him of My spirit, kneel down and prostrate yourself before him; All the
angels prostrated themselves, except Satan, who refused to be one of
those who prostrated themselves" (15:28-29-34)

All the angels and the archangel respectfully followed the command of
Allah Subhanu Taala and prostrated, except Satan ( a Jinn ), who was
then disgracefully ousted from the paradise on his noncompliance of the
Divine Command.

Quran further explains the status of man and the facilities and favors
with which he has been bestowed by The Lord of The Worlds "Indeed We
have honored the children of Adam. We have put the land and the sea
under their control, provided them good livelihood and have definitely
given them superiority above many of our creatures." (17:70) "Have you
not seen that Allah has put at your service whatever there is in the
heavens and the earth." (31:20)

"It is He who has made the earth subservient to you. so walk about in
its regions and eat what Allah has produced." (67:15) Quran tells us
that man has the highest rank among all the creatures of Allah.

Man has been given the power to rule the world. Everything in the
universe is for him. What Quran had said 1400 years ago is proved now.
We see that man is taking the maximum advantage of Allah's creations. He
is ruling the world. Animals, plants, mountains, and even the moon and
planets are under his full use. This is a great honor.

But the scientists of today classify man among the animals. Biologists
say that human beings belong to the class of animals called mammals
which includes dogs, cats, donkeys, monkeys and all other animals. Of
course, when the man considers himself a descendant of monkey, then one
should not be surprised if he behaves like the beasts.

This sense of inferiority complex has developed because they do not
have a religion that can inspire them to know their real status. The
consequences of under mining the status of man is that after rising to
the height of moon, man is still low as he was in his primitive age.
Thus, the first and foremost task for every human being is to know his
status and position in the creation of Allah Subhanahu taala. After
recognizing himself, he will be able to understand the purpose of his
creation and the cause of his supremacy and great Divine favors. Without
the recognition of man's reality and his real status, all human
endeavors and efforts, be they scientific or spiritual, will be futile
and bottomless.

The Holy Imam Hazrat Ali(as) has told this truth in many different
ways. "Whoever recognizes himself has recognized his Lord." "I am
surprised at one who seeks what he has lost while he has lost himself
and does not search for it."

"The ultimate point of knowledge is for man to reach self-recognition."
Thus, religion is the only reliable source of self awareness, which is
prior to all other issues that concern man. Religion offers peace and
tranquillity.

Many scientists do not believe in God and say that no one has created
human beings or anything that we know in the universe. The net result of
this misleading assumption would be that universe and everything in it
is purposeless. In fact, this is what the modern scientists do believe
and eventually tend to preach: No God, which precisely means - no
religion - no purpose - no objective - no destination.

They deny everything all in all. A person who believes in true
religion, which accurately tells about the life-after-death, will have a
correct perception of his life. Eventually it would illuminate the mind
to discover the real purpose of life. Thus, the inevitable outcome of
this belief would be ;

exhaust all his energy for that preparation.
sacrifice anything and everything on demand as he has knowledge of full
reward.
never make mistakes in identifying the real nature of things.
never feel defeated if he loses any worldly thing.
Such a sensible person will live peacefully and will allow others to
live with peace.
Today, the most technologically advanced world has everything but not
peace. We all know very well that we can not enjoy anything if we don't
have peace of mind.

Those who do not believe in life after death, are killing each other to
get hold of everything.

This is happening in this world at all levels. Thus, the benefit of
true religion is that it offers peace and tranquillity in this world as
well as hereafter. Religion offers a sense of security.

Apparently it seems that the people in the West, who do not believe in
religion, are the most satisfied people. But according to one repor t
published in the Times International magazine, 28,000 people in the
United States, 25,000 people in Switzerland and the same number of
people in Japan commit suicide every year. The US suicide rate is
increasing steadily since the late 1950's. The majority of the people
who commit suicide are old people, young adults and teen-agers. 75% of
them are males.

In 1980, the best selling book in Japan was "How to commit suicide". In
this book, the author has designed different postures of committing
suicide. The large sale of this book precisely shows that a large number
of people in Japan are inclined to commit suicide. The possibilities are
that they might commit suicide in future.


**Why people commit suicide?**

A question arises, why people living in well-off and rich countries are
committing suicide? These countries have relatively less economical,
social, and political problems comparing with Third World countries such
as India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.

The report says that the most common cause of suicide is a sense of
insecurity. But we know that in these developed countries, most of the
people are well-to-do, and also the governments have a variety of
security schemes and agencies to look after the general welfare of the
people.

Then, why do these people develop feelings of insecurity that
eventually lead them to commit suicide?

A Psychologist gave a beautiful explanation. He says that we all human
beings are naturally accustomed of a special kind of security. Lack of
faith in God and aimlessness of life trigger the sense of insecurity
which generates depression and eventually leads to kill oneself to get
rid of that unknown fear. This is the reason that thousands of people
are committing suicides and murder due to their inner frustration and
sense of insecurity.

Thus, a true religion is the only solution of depression and
insecurity. Quran confirms that the real peace of mind can only be
achieved by the intellectual remembrance of Allah.

Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the
remembrance of Allah: for without doubt, in the remembrance of Allah, do
hearts find satisfaction. (13:28) A child feels complete sense of
security when he finds himself near to his mother. It is because of
child's strong belief that his mother will save him from all disasters.
The innocent child does not know this fact that his mother loves him but
can not save him in all circumstances. It is only God Who loves us ( as
He is the one who creates love for the child in the mother's heart), and
also He is All-Mighty.

"And when My servants ask you concerning me, then surely I am near; I
answer the prayer of the supplicant when he calls on Me." (2:186) gives
a purpose in life.

Man-made things
Man makes everything with a purpose
Natural things
Man finds everything in nature with a purpose
Man & Universe

**Can it be without any purpose ?
IMPOSSIBLE**

As we know that a large number of scientists do not believe in God and
consider man an accidental product of nature. Eventually for them, man
has no purpose in life except what he sets for himself. But their
assumption goes totally against their own findings. Let us see how these
so-called learned people contradict themselves.

The medical scientists have studied each and every part of the human
body. They now know the whole organization of the body, from its
smallest parts to the largest ones. On the basis of these studies they
say that the human body is made up of trillions of cells. These cells
are of many kinds such as blood cells, muscle cells, and nerve cells.
Each kind of cell has special features and some par ticular job.

Then there are special highly sophisticated organs such as hear t,
kidney, lungs, liver etc. All these organs have special functions and
well defined purpose of their being. A question should be asked to these
medical researchers who themselves have disclosed these facts. That if
every cell and every organ in the human body has special work to do,
then what is the special work of the whole human body.

Is it wise to assume that, all cells of the body and the organs, have a
purpose and a job, but the human beings who are made up of these cells
and organs have no well defined purpose. Thus, a man of average
intelligence will agree that when every organ of the body has been given
a special assignment, then humans must also have a special purpose of
life.

The Holy Quran educates us precisely the Divine purpose of creation and
aims and objectives of every human being. Those who serve the purpose
and do their duties are said to have a meaningful life.

I have only created Jinns and Men that they should worship Me. I demand
no sustenance from them, nor I ask that they should feed Me. (51:56)

Thus, Allah Subhanahu taala has given us a perfect body in which each
and every cell and organ tirelessly serves us. In our body, millions of
sophisticated machines are working for us to fulfill our demands and
keep us active and alive. Millions of pages will be required to describe
the functions and activities of these machines that serve us round the
clock. A student of medicine spends five to seven years just to acquire
knowledge of the functions of these organs. Briefly, we describe here
the functions of just some of the vital organs.

The lungs provides the body with oxygen and simultaneously rids the
body of carbon dioxide. The heart which is a powerful pump, beats
100,000 times each day as it pump 4.5 litres blood per minute throughout
the body. The digestive system breaks down the food we eat into simple
substances that the cells can use.

The urinary system removes unwanted things from the blood and flushes
them from the body.

The nervous system regulates and coordinates the activities of all the
system of the body and enables the body to adjust to changes that occur
within itself and in sur roundings. The endocrine system controls body
functions by producing hormones which work as chemical messengers.

The lymphatic system consists of a network of tubes carrying a clear,
watery fluid called lymph. It baths and nourishes the cells of the body
tissues. The immune system protects the body at all times from the
disease- producing bacteria, viruses and other kinds of harmful
substances. The specialized cells resist and destroy all kinds of
invaders that can become a threat to our health.

Now a sensitive mind should think that how obediently an instrumental
team of workers in our body is serving us all the time like obedient
slaves. We should ask ourselves, are we not obliged to serve the Lord,
Allah Subhanahu Taala, who has created them and made them our free
servant.

The scientists, who have observed this remarkable organization in the
body with their naked eyes and still deny the existence of God are fit
for nothing but the hell-fire, where they should live for ever to see
the result of their acute ignorance and indescribable ungratefulness.
Those who do not believe in the Divine Creator will remain unfit to
accomplish the purpose of their creation. This means that such people
are totally valueless whether they are world's top scientists or
presidents or richest men. Every thing they possess is worthless for
them because they will lose it one day for ever.

The Holy Quran has described the wor thlessness of such works. "As for
the unbelievers (non-Muslim or Muslim just by name), their works (all
remarkable scientific achievements) are like a mirage in a desert. The
thirsty traveler thinks it water, but when he comes near he finds that
it is nothing. He finds Allah there, who pays him back in full. swift is
Allah's reckoning." (24:39)

Thus all world's top scientists, Head of States, Prime Ministers, and
wealthy people who seem to be very great and astounding personalities
are like a mirage in a desert if they don't believe in God and His
commandments.

The religion should not be just a trademark of a person. If a person
follows a particular religion, he must see the benefits of that religion
in his life. Today, scientists are studying each and every part of the
human body just to know their purpose and specific function. They know
that every organ has a special role to play in the body. Is it not the
height of the craziness that the same scientists who strongly believe
that every organ in the body has a particular purpose, do not recognize
any definite purpose of the whole human personality.

Thus, denying the existence of God means denying everything. Man has
been created in the nature of sensing the existence of his Creator. This
sensing is by itself a religion. Islam is a religion which interpreates
this natural sensing in human language.


