Chapter 5 : What Does the Word Islam Mean?
==========================================

Islam is an Arabic word. Arabic language has substantially large
vocabular y in which one word has many different meanings. The word
Islam has also different meanings such as;

We can interrelate these different meanings to give one simple and
precise interpretation of Islam.

**Islam means**

Total submission to the will of Allah Subhanahu taala with full
commitment in absolute obedience to His laws. This purity of soul and
mind will bring perfect peace in this world and in the life hereafter.

This means that mankind can not achieve perfect peace in this world
without total submission to Allah Subhanahu taala.

Today we find that there is no peace in the world. United Nations, and
other such big organizations are making efforts to acquire peace but
they have failed in their endeavors. The reason is very simple i.e.,
peace can never be achieved without total submission to Allah Taala
subhanahu.

Thus Islam guarantees permanent peace, happiness and tranquillity which
mankind is looking for. So Islam is the only answer of our very basic
problem. If all the human beings sincerely and wholeheartedly embrace
Islam, then the world will become a paradise.

**Who are Muslims?**

The meaning of Muslim is one who thoughtfully and willfully submits
himself to the will of Allah. Those who intellectually and firmly
believe in Islam and sincerely practice its teachings are referred as
Muslims.

There are many Muslims in the world who are Muslims just because they
are bor n in a Muslim family, bear a Muslim name, and follow some
Islamic traditions in marriage and burial ceremonies. But they live as
others live and do whatever suits them to seek worldly pleasure.

They show some superficial emotional feelings for the Prophet (sws) and
Imams but do not follow their teachings. Islam considers such people as
Muslim in this world for the convenience of the true Muslims but will
not recognize them Muslim after their death. For being a Muslim, Quran
strongly demands complete obedience and fulfillment of basic commitment
of total submission as endorsed in shahadah.

"It is not fitting for a believer, man or woman, when a matter has been
decided by Allah and His messenger, to have any option about their
decision. If anyone disobeys Allah and His messenger, he is indeed on a
clearly wrong path." (33:36) A born Muslim has no advantage over a born
non- Muslim.

Quran has made it very clear that no other religion except Islam will
be accepted by Allah Taala on the Day of Judgment.

And whoever seeks a religion other than Islam, it will never be
accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers.
(3:85) Does it mean that all non-Muslims are basically unfit and not
eligible for Jannat by vir tue of their birth? And that all Muslims have
a reserved seat in Jannat just because they were born in a Muslim
family.

If this is true, then all non-Muslims would plead on the Day of
Judgment: "O, God, You are Just and Impartial: what is our fault if we
are a non-Muslim. We were born in a non-Muslim family by Your will and
not by our choice. We learned and practiced the religion of our father
because it was taught by our parents. This is why we were Hindu, or
Christian or Jews and died as non-Muslims".

This appeal will take a solid ground if we assume a fittingly parallel
case where the neighbor of any non-Muslim is a Muslim just because he
was born in a Muslim family. If that Muslim is considered eligible to
enter Jannat just because he was brought up in an Islamic environment
and died as a Muslim. Then a question would arise:

For what reason that non-Muslim is being punished and his Muslim
neighbor is being rewarded when they both have simply followed the
religion of their respective fathers. Generally a child embraces the
religion of his forefathers. i.e., a Hindu is Hindu because his father
was Hindu, a Christian is Christian because his parents were Christians,
and also a Muslim is Muslim because his father and mother were
Muslims.

So why a non-Muslim should be punished and a Muslim should get reward
when initially they all have no contribution in choosing the right or
wrong religion.This is a question which has confused many people.
Apparently it seems to be a valid question, but this argument is based
on a misconception.

We have a very wrong conception that all those who are born in a Muslim
family are Muslims and those who are born in a non-Muslim family are
basically unable to be a Muslim. This is not true. The fact is that,
whether a person is a born Muslim or non-Muslim by birth, he has an
inborn capability to identify the truth. Quran has made it clear that
every person has been taught the basic truths before his birth so that
he should not give any such excuse that he was born in a Non-Muslim
family or he was completely unaware of the whole situation.

The verses 172 and 173 of the Surah Aaraf cer tify that every person is
born with some kind of innate knowledge with which he can verify the
truth and falsehood.

"And ( Remember) when your Lord brought forth the children of Adam,
from their loins- their descendants and made them testify of themselves,
(saying): Am I not your Lord ?

They said: Yes, verily, We do testify : lest (so that) you should say
on the Day of Judgment: " Verily, we have been unaware of this." (7:172)
"or you can say: " our fathers before us have taken false gods, and we
are their descendants after them. Will You destroy us on account of that
which they followed" (7: 173) Muslim scholars quoting the Holy Prophet
(as) and Imams(as) have described the scene of this covenant in
different books. The full account of this story is as follows.

The event which Quran is referring in the above two verses, has
occurred sometimes in the distant past i.e., before the bir th of man.
Allah Subhanahu Taala gathered all human beings, who are from the
lineage of Adam, in the form of minute particles and asked them to
testify their faith in Him. All human beings in that state confirmed
that they know the truth by saying : "We bear witness that You are our
Lord".

This testimony was then induced in every soul. Any soul which takes
birth whether in a Muslim or a non- Muslim family comes with this inborn
knowledge which is enough for him to achieve the truth and reject the
falsehood.So, all human beings, whether born in a Muslim or nom-Muslim
family, are equally equipped to achieve the truth and are therefore
equally responsible for what they believe irrespective of their personal
background.

On Islamic standard, a person is not qualified to be called as Muslim
just because he is bor n in a Muslim family. It is only for the sake of
convenience in social dealings that Islam recognizes every born Muslim
as Muslims. But the basic criteria of being a Muslim is the same for
everyone whether he is a born Muslim or born non-Muslim.

The basic criterion for any person to be called as a Muslim is that he
has intellectually recognized the basic concepts of Islam and he
consciously observes the Islamic laws .

This means that a Muslim is one whose faith is based on his research
and deep understanding of Islam. He has not inherited his faith from his
father but he has realized the truth and has accepted it because of its
merits.

With this definition in mind, we find no difference between a person
who is born in a Muslim or a non-Muslim family. Everyone whether born in
a Muslim or a non-Muslim family is required the same amount of efforts
to achieve the truth.

On the Day of Judgment, each person will be judged fairly on the basis
of his sincere effor ts and thoughts. Thus many Muslims who were Muslims
just by vir tue of their birth and not by their research and
understanding will find themselves among the non-Muslims.

The basic criterion of Islam is Shahadah. A person becomes Muslim when
he pronounce the shadah, which says :

"I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and I bear witness that
Muhammad is His servant and messenger".

The word witness implies that he has thoughtfully accepted Islam and
not just by blind following. The pre-requisite condition of a proper
witness is a thorough knowledge. The problem lies that many Muslims just
pronounce shahadah without understanding its meanings and requirements.
If we simply analyze the word witness used in Shadah then the error in
understanding can easily be identified.

The question of who is suitable to serve as a witness is not difficult
to answer. All of us know very well that a witness is always based on
evidence.

For instance, a person appears in cour t as witness in a murder case.
The Judge will ask him to give evidence in support of his statement. If
he fails to do so then the Judge will ask him the grounds on which he
suspects that Mr. XYZ to have committed the murder. Now he replies that
he doesn't know any thing about the murder except what his father has
told him.

The Judge will further ask him; Did his father see the accused person
involved in murder. He replies; No, I think my father has learned this
from his father.

**What will be the judgment of the court?**

Obviously the court will reject his statement. In fact, he is liable to
punishment for contempt of court. A witness who testifies untruthfully
is guilty of the crime of perjury and can be severely punished.

Thus, all those Muslims who claim to be a Muslim without any solid
evidence in suppor t of their faith i.e., without any research and deep
knowledge by which they can testify their beliefs, are not true
Muslims.

On the Day of Judgment, if non-Muslims will be charged with not having
accepted the truth then Muslims will also be cer tainly questioned about
how they have accepted the truth. This is why acquisition of knowledge
in Islam is compulsory (wajib) for every male and female Muslim. But
most of us take it for granted The Divine word Islam holds full contents
of its teachings. It demands from its followers - peace, purity,
submission and obedience. Thus, Muslims are those who make a strong
commitment for total submission to the Will of Allah Subhanahu taala by
obeying His laws.

Every material thing in the universe is made up of atoms. It is an
empirical belief of all scientists that all atoms, that means everything
in universe, strictly obey laws of nature. Ignorant scientists do not
believe in the existence of Allah and call His laws as laws of nature.
Thus, the whole universe is regarded in the state of Islam.

"Have they not observed things that Allah has created, How their (very)
shadows turn round, from the right and the left, prostrating themselves
to Allah, and that in the humblest manner?" (16:48)

"And to Allah prostrate all that is in the heavens and all that is in
the earth, of the moving (living) creatures and the angels, and they are
not proud [i.e they worship their lord with humility]" (16:49)

In His whole creation, Allah taala has given only two kinds of His
creatures, namely men and jinaat, freedom of choice in respect of
submission to His will. Allah has equipped men with intelligence to take
the right decision. Those who choose to submit to His will and obey His
laws are known as Muslims.

How the people of different backgrounds can be expected to embrace
Islam ?

Quran has the answer to this question.

So set thou thy face steadily and truly to the Faith: (establish)
Allah's handiwork according to the pattern on which He has made mankind:
no change (let there be) in the work (wrought) by Allah: that is the
standard Religion: but most among mankind understand not. (30:30)

So Quran tells us that all mankind have the recognition of Allah
imprinted on their souls, a part of their very nature with which they
are created. Every child is born with a natural belief in Allah and an
inborn inclination to worship Him alone in a way Islam has educated its
followers. This is known as nature or Fitrah.

The Holy Prophet (sws) said:

"Each child is born in a state of Fitrah, then his parents make him a
Jew, Christian or Zoroastrian" So it is not difficult for man to turn
back towards his real nature, if he makes reasonable efforts. The
concern to put reasonable efforts is the major criteria of ultimate fate
of all mankind.


