Chapter 6 : Tawhid - Oneness of God
===================================

There are FIVE basic beliefs of Islam. In Islamic terminology, we call
them Usul - e - Din. i.e., fundamentals of Islam. Anyone who has
slightest doubts in these basic beliefs, or accepts them without
understanding, is not a true Muslim. These basic principles of Islam are
as follows;

It is important to know the meanings and have good understanding of
these basic principles of Islam.

**What is Tawhid ?**

Tawhid is the most basic principle of Islam.

Islam is the only religion which teaches a pure, perfect and
unadulterated concept of monotheism, and entertains no compromise with
nationalism, racism, polytheism, trinitariasm, saint-worship, idol
worship or considering anyone in anyway equal to God or par t of God.
The concept of Tawhid has two inseparable components.

1 - Belief in the existence of God.
2 - Belief in the absolute oneness of God.

Those who do not believe in the existence of God are called atheists.
In Islamic terminology, we call them Kafir and Mulhid.

And those who do not believe in the absolute oneness of God are called
polytheists. In Islamic terminology, we call such people as Mushrik.
Both Mulhid and Mushrik are the most condemned people, and their
ultimate end is eter nal hell-fire.

Thus, the most essential requirement of being a Muslim is that one must
believe in the existence of God and also in His absolute oneness.

The most basic teaching of Islam is that the universe and everything in
it, such as sun, stars, planets, moon, mountains, oceans, trees,
animals, men, and billions of other material and invisible things around
the universe, have been created by Allah Taala alone without any help
from anyone. Mathematically speaking, anything other than Him and
everything other than Him is His creation.

The Holy Quran has beautifully explained the meaning of Tawhid in Surah
Al-Ikhlas which is also known as Surah Tawhid;

Say: Allah is one, the eternal God. He begot none, nor was He begotten.
None is equal to Him or like Him. (112) This surah precisely tells us
that there is none comparable or equivalent to Him. In surah ash- Shura,
Quran tells the same fact in simple manner, "Nothing is similar to Him".
(42:11)

Existence of God.

A special branch of Islamic theology, known as Ilm-ul-Kalam, deals with
this subject in full detail. But is there any need to discuss the
existence of God ? Do we discuss such plain observation such as that we
have five fingers? Do we argue such apparent things like why there is
light during the day and darkness during the night?

No, we don't really discuss such simple matters. Then the issue of
Existence of God is also an obvious truth which doesn't need any debate
or lengthy discussion. Quran also considers it a self-evident case.

"Their messengers said; Is there a doubt about Allah, the creator of
the heavens and the earth. It is He Who invites you, in order that He
may forgive you and your sins and give you respite for a term appointed"
(14:10)

Quran further shakes the frozen minds:

"Is it not enough that your God is the proof of all things"?

This is a beautiful Quranic proof of the existence of God. Thus, the
attentive and intelligent people consider God to be the proof of all
existing things, not the existing things to be proof for God.
So, there should be no doubt in the existence of God and there should
be no need of any kind of serious argumentation. What we really need is
to strengthen the faith in God. For this reason Quran invites the
believers to ponder in the creation of Allah.

However, we are living in an age of doubt, where people are denying the
naked truths. For this reason, we shall discuss the existence of God
from various angles and at a reasonable length. Does science prove
existence of God ?

History of science tells us that man has an inborn desire to acquire
knowledge. This desire is born out of his natural urge to know about his
Creator. Many scholars believe that man's struggle to gain knowledge
began with an effor t to understand God.

All scientists believe that the basic aim of scientific researches is
to know the tr uth. So every sincere effort in scientific research will
prove the existence of God because it is a universal truth. Quran
invites all researchers in their respective fields of specialization to
ponder in the creations of Allah in order to testify His existence and
His Oneness.

"And your God is one : there is no god but He; He is the beneficent,
the merciful. Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth
and the alternation of the night and the day, and the ships that run in
the sea with that which profit men, and the water that Allah sends down
from the clouds, then gives life with it to the earth after its death
and spreads in it all kinds of animals, and the changing of the winds
and the clouds made subservient between the heavens and the earth, there
are signs for a people who understand". (2:163-164)

Almost every discipline of science is covered in this shor t verse of
the Holy Quran. It is true. Today, the existence of God is a common
observation of all scientists working in different fields of science.

**How to prove the existence of God at school level ?**

Existence of God is so obvious and visible that it can be convincingly
proved at all levels. When your chemistry teacher tells you about the
structure of atom, he teaches you that some tiny particles known as
electrons, are revolving around the nucleus.

You should ask him a simple question; Sir: Who has initiated the
movement of electrons ?

Because your physics teacher has taught you that, Isaac Newton in first
law of motion says, that nothing can move unless someone makes it to
move. So if electrons are moving in their respective orbits, then who
has made them to move ? Did any scientist tell you about any kind of
force which has brought these electrons into motion?

No, without any dispute everyone says "NO".

Then, how the electrons started moving around the nucleus in their
respective orbits? The answer of this question is nothing but what we
teach you in Tawhid. "He is Allah. There is no god but Him". (20:8)

Both physics and chemistry teach you that you can not explain the
structure of atom and first law of motion completely without believing
in Tawhid. Thus every book of science and each discovery of the
scientists teaches us, how great is our Lord Who has created every thing
which exists in the universe.

The human body is a marvelous creation of Allah Subhanahu taala. Every
part of the body is divinely computerized to do a specific job. For
instance, heart is a tireless, powerful muscle which works round the
clock. It pumps 4.7 liters of blood throughout the body ever y minute.
i.e., 7,600 liters of blood in one day. Millions of pages are not enough
to describe the amazing features of the body and its accessories.

Thus, physics, chemistry and biology explicitly tell about the reality
of God. Hence, science adequately proves the existence and oneness of
God. Brain Exercise :

If we see sunlight, we affirmativly confirm the presence of sun without
seeing it. If we find a car parked in a forest, we assuredly conclude
that someone has brought it here with a definite intention. If we don't
see the owner, we will look for him. If we can't find him around, still
we will believe that someone has brought it here.

If we observe the chairs and desks orderly arranged in a room, and a
blackboard with chalk and duster, we confidently assume that it is a
classroom for students. We did not see the person who has arranged it,
and we do not know the person who has arranged it. But we believe with
certainty that a concerned person has done it for a definite purpose.

Now with the same eyes, if we see the moon, stars, oceans, trees,
animals, and millions of other things, and we find that all of them are
serving a definite purpose in the universe, then should we not believe
that someone, who can be none but an omnipotent God, has created them
with a definite purpose.


Thus, denying God means, denying the existance of univers. In Quranic
terminology such a person is referred as Kafir.


