Chapter 7 : Atheism - Kufr
==========================

**What is Atheism**

The antithesis ( direct opposite) of Tauhid is atheism and polytheism.
Atheism is a belief that God does not exist.

There are many people in the world who believe without any solid
knowledge that sun, stars, planets, earth, humans, animals, plants and
billions and trillions of other marvelous things, have come into
existence by accident i.e. by themselves and without any creator. All
such people are called Kafirs (atheists).

Anyone whether a top scientist, a great scholar or a highly learned
person who does not believe in the existence of God is not a wise man.
Quran calls such educated people who refuse to accept the clear signs of
God as the donkey laden with books (62:5).

The Holy Quran also confirms that such people, even if they have made
great contributions in science and technology, are the great losers.

"The works of those who reject their Lord may be compared to ashes
which the wind whips around on a stormy day. They can not do a thing
with anything they have earned. That is the extreme failure." (14:18)
Quran further evaluates the worth of their works.

"Those who disbelieve will find their deeds (scientific achievements)
will disappear like a mirage in a desert, the thirsty traveler thinks it
as water, but when he comes near, he finds that it is nothing. Yet he
finds Allah there, who pays him back in full. Allah is prompt in
accounting" (24:39)

"Or like darkness on a deep sea: one wave cover up another wave, above
which are clouds, layers of darkness, one above the other: when he holds
his hands, he can hardly see it. If Allah refuses light to anyone, there
is no way he can find light. (24:40) "But those who are disbelievers,
Allah will render their deeds astray". (47:8) Atheists, or Kafirs
(unbelievers) are of two kinds.

Those who know the fact or can easily ascer tain it from their acquired
knowledge, but deliberately refuse to accept. They understand the truth
but determinedly reject it because of their personal reasons.

In other words, they know the truth but they hide it to an extent as if
they don't know. A large number of people such as Firaun (Pharoh),
Namrud, Abu Jahal, Abu sufian, Abu Lahab, and many world top scientists
and educated people are atheists of this kind. To all these people,
truth was revealed to them, but they rejected it out of their arrogance
and hatred. Such people are real Kafirs and are the permanent residents
of Jahannum.

The second kind of atheists (Kafirs) are those who are ignorant people.
The cause of their ignorance is either their too much involvement in the
worldly things or their extremely inattentive nature. Such heedless
people view everything with blind eyes and never conclude the truth. A
large number of learned non-Muslims and many illiterate Muslims fall in
this category of Kafirs.

Atheism conflicts with many of the world's major religions, including
Christianity, Judaism, and Hinduism etc. Confucianism, and Buddhism are
atheistic religions.

Agnosticism.

Agnosticism is an offshoot of atheism. It is a religion of utterly
confused people. The followers of this belief say that existence of God
and other religious realities can not be proved. According to them,
there is no way to prove the existence of God.

The word agnosticism has been derived from the Greek language
agnostics, which means not knowing. i.e., they don't believe in God
because they don't have means to know Him. This is absolute nonsense.
All such people are Kafir as they pretend and deny the naked truth.

The word, agnosticism, was coined by the British naturalist Thomas
Henry Huxley in 1869. Huxley was a staunch supporter of Charles Darwin,
and people used to call him the bulldog win. The holy Quran condemns
such people and has categorically stated that they will straight go to
the hell-fire.

**Does science disprove the existence of God ?**

Many top scientists of the world do not believe in God. Does it mean
that science denies the existence of God ? Not at all.

No scientist has ever proved, and can never prove, that there is no
God. In fact, for the last 200 years, all scientists of the world have
been trying to disprove the existence of God by their combined efforts,
but they have been utterly unsuccessful in their attempts. For example,
They have devised different theories to prove the self-existence of the
universe.

They have formulated the theory of evolution to prove the
self-existence of all living species.

Firstly, none of these theories can be proved on valid scientific
standards. But even if we accept these theories as the true facts of
science, the existence of God can not be denied. The most popular theory
about the origin of the universe are:

**1 The Big bang theory**

In big bang theory, scientists have proposed that the universe came
into existence by an explosion - called the big bang. This explosion
occurred by itself 10 to 20 billion years ago. The main part of the
fire-ball was matter, chiefly hydrogen. This matter, consisting of
hydrogen and other light elements broke apart in huge clumps and became
galaxies. That is how the universe of atheists was formed.

Now let us suppose that this is a correct theory. But does it
invalidate the existence of God ? No; Because a valid question arises
that, how matter consisting of hydrogen, helium and other light elements
came into existence ?

So by this theory, the existence of God cannot be denied. The argument
is that, one who created the hydrogen, will be considered as the creator
of the universe even if the universe began as the result of an
accidental big-bang explosion.

**2 The Steady State theory**

This is another forged theory to deny the existence of God. According
to this theory, the universe has always existed in its present state.

Again if we accept this theory as correct one, a question will arise
that, where this matter came from. This theory doesn't say anything
about the origin of the matter. Thus, in these two popular theories of
the West, we find very different explanations, and none is supported by
astronomical observations or sound reasoning.

To deny or invalidate the existence of God, the atheist should create a
universe without any raw material. They don't want to do so because if
they do so, they will become god themselves as only God creates things
out of nothing.

**3 Organic Evolution**

Similarly this Theory has also been tactfully designed to deny the
existence of God. According to this theory, popularly known as the
Darwin theory of evolution, all living species evolved from a single
cell of life which lived about 3 billion years ago. i.e., All kinds of
living organism that inhabit the ear th today are the descendants of a
single cell.

Again, even if we supposedly accept this theory of evolution , the
existence of God remains a valid and logical belief. Because, how a
single cell came into being. i.e., whether we accept or reject this
theory of evolution, the existence of God will remain a valid belief.

However, if one accepts the theory of evolution, the controversy will
arise only over one issue; that millions of kinds of living creatures
around the world have been created by God as they are seen today or God
has created first a single cell and multiplied it into millions of
different kinds of living creatures.

Apparently, it seems that all different kinds of living species were
created by Allah Taala as we find them today.

Nevertheless, some useful variations and essential modifications might
have been occur red in them in a period of time to meet the immediate
natural demand of their body and to fulfill the essential requirements
of the prevailing time.

This is the great mercy of Allah Subhanahu taala and an obvious sign
that He is the sustainer and the caretaker of all the creatures He has
created. Allah knows the best, what a par ticular living species needs
and in what finest body structure, it can comfortably survive. This is
the Islamic explanation of the Darwin's phrase, survival of the fittest,
and the struggle for the existence.

So, atheist scientists have exhaustively tried to create a theory just
to cast-off the concept of existence of God, but every theory proved
that the denial of God is utterly unworkable. In fact, to explain the
big bang theory, steady state theory and the theory of evolution,
scientifically and rationally, scientists will have to accept the
existence of God. That is why Kepler, a great scientists of 1700s said,
"If there is no God, we must invent God to justify the scientific truths
and make them rationally understandable".

Thus, the edifice of all scientific truths and established facts will
crumble if one stubbornly denies the existence of God.

The entire building of science is based on the strong foundation of
Tawhid i.e., intellectually recognizing the existence of Omnipotent
being, who is none but Allah Subhanahu taala.

The rejection of Divine creator, or criminal silence on this basic
issue of science is totally an irrational attitude. It distorts the
amazing beauty and rationality of natural phenomena. The first and the
most basic teaching of Islam and the true science is that, the universe
and everything in it is the creation of a Supreme immor tal being called
ALLAH.

Allah is the creator of all things, and of all things He is a guardian.
His are the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those that deny His
revelations shall assuredly be lost. (39:64) Thus, the pre-requisite
condition of scientific research is that,

1- Scientists must acknowledge the existence of God.
2 - Scientists should make efforts to understand the purpose of His
creation.
3 - Scientists should provide the rational explanation of the natural
phenomena.
4 - Scientists should invite people to worship God


