Preface
=======

This book has two main subjects. One is Dialogue among Civilizations;
the other is Civil Society. By Dialogue among Civilizations, President
Khatami highlights the significance of culture in international
relations as a new paradigm. Such an approach delineates how
civilizations can engage in fruitful Dialogue with one another, rather
than negating or being absorbed by each other.  
    
 The other main topic is Civil Society. It has two aspects. One is the
practical aspect, that is, how Iranian society can materialize the
ideals of civil society in its political and social affairs by expanding
citizenship rights and public participation. The other aspect is the
theoretical one, examining how Islam is compatible with notions of
freedom, rationality, development and human rights.  
    
 President Khatami underlines the importance of the relationship between
these two subjects, especially with regard to Iranian society. His
emphasis on Dialogue among Civilizations reflects on how Iran can
interact effectively with the wider world. Iran is a country with an
ancient civilization, which has benefited from Islamic civilization, and
has subsequently engaged with Western civilization. It has therefore had
a long history of interaction and dialogue. Drawing on this historical
backdrop, President Khatami's reforms aim at building civil society in
Iran, and at promoting dialogue among civilizations.  
    
 Articles and speeches in this volume include those written both before
and after Muhammad Khatami's election in 1997 as President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. Dr Gholamali Khoshroo has played a significant
role in the selection of the contents of the book.  
  


