Freedom and Development
=======================

Nassereddin Shah inaugurated the Dar-Alfonun, Iran’s first technical
school of higher education, on the fifth of Rabi al Awwal, 1268 AH
(October 27, 1851). This event marked the birth of the idea of
'development' as we know it in Iran today. Our intense preoccupation
with defining development, and how we might achieve it a full century
and a half after the founding of the school, shows that we have not
achieved development. We must try to find out why.  
    
 Here I do not wish to address the complex idea of cultural development.
I hope that the vision and effort of our eminent thinkers will take the
ambiguity out of the meaning of development. Instead I. wish to put
forth a general discussion of the cultural prerequisites of development,
not the meaning of development itself. In my view, development is a form
of desirable transformation in society. In its contemporary meaning,
development is merely one form of transformation. Three points are
essential to consider.  
    
 First, no transformation will be humane and productive unless people
knowingly and willingly participate in the process of that
transformation. Second, the active and willing presence of humans in the
process of development requires that serious and established thinking be
present in large parts of society. Third, sustainable and productive
thinking in society has to be based, first and foremost, on freedom.  
    
 Thus we cannot expect any positive transformations anywhere unless the
yearning for freedom is fulfilled. That is, the freedom to think and the
security to express new thinking. The way I see it, development is a
Western construct, and all those who seek development must become
modern. This means that development as currently defined is a branch of
the tree of modern civilization. If that civilization arrives, so will
development.

Indeed, those who claim that adopting Western thinking and values is a
necessary precondition of development are not misguided. Alongside
Western thinking and wisdom, the Western temperament and ethic must also
be adopted.  
    
 But I also believe that development, as conceived today, is only one
form of transformation and evolution in human society, not the only and
exclusive version of it. Certainly this transformation and evolution has
brought many benefits to humanity, but I believe that it has caused much
harm as well. In looking at Western civilization and its idea of
development, many realities have been overlooked and ignored with
devastating consequences.

We who discuss development today cannot go back four hundred years to
the time when the West started the journey in order to get to where it
is today. Instead, the vast experience of Westerners is before us, and
if we are thoughtful; we must choose our future path on the basis of
this experience. This means that we must see the strengths and
shortcomings of the Western experience to arrive at a better and more
desirable choice.

Negating the exclusivity of progress in its current form, which has been
called development, is not to deny the realities of modern civilization,
and one can say with certainty that in any society that wants to
advance, nothing instrumental will happen unless its people incorporate
Western civilization's achievements, instead of trying to circumvent
them.

This requires that we become familiar with Western civilization, to be
in touch with its spirit, which is modernity. Those who are not familiar
with this spirit will never be able to effect positive change in their
lives. Thus the main criterion of transformation is incorporating
Western civilization into one's own thinking, and the goal of this
familiarity with the West understands the main tenets of modernity,
which is hidden behind many appearances.

Sadly, nations such as we are still devoid of such understanding. As
Abdulhadi Haeri has put it, we have yet to become familiar with the two
countenances of Western civilization. Our encounter with the West has
been mostly superficial. We have vacillated between the equally harmful
extremes of either being taken in or entranced by the West, or loathing
and rejecting it.  
    
 In my view the discussion of development requires a fundamental look at
what Western civilization is and how we are related to it. If this
debate begins in earnest, the debate on development will advance more
rapidly and with greater certainty.  
 Why is it that a century and half after the creation of Dar-Alfonun,
the mother of modern scientific schooling in Iran, we are still mired in
the same question of what development is and why we have not achieved
it?  
    
 The attempt to answer this important question must begin by relating
another historical anecdote. On Friday, the seventeenth of Rabi al
Awwal, 1268 AH (November 9, 1851), a mere twelve days after Dar-Alfonun
was inaugurated, Nassereddin Shah had Amirkabir- the very man by whose
vision and wisdom that school was conceived-put to death in the Feen
bathhouse in the city of Kashan. In my view, the secret of our malaise
lies therein.  
    
 Centuries of our history have been governed not by the effort and
thoughtfulness of the people of this land, but by autocratic and
whimsical rulers, and because of the existence of authoritarianism and
its central role in our society, our people have not had the opportunity
to be active in their own society.

Freedom of thought, which is the highest emblem of being and the key
condition of our presence on the stage of destiny, as well as the main
impetus for growth and dynamism in life, has not been respected. In
other words, the secret of our greatest historical problems, to borrow
from Farabi, has been the dominance of deceit and craftiness on our
destiny, a deceit that was already deeply rooted before the advent of
Islam.

Rampant corruption in pre­Islamic, Sasanid Iran had brought the country
to the brink of explosion. With the coming of Islam, the foundations of,
deceit began to shake, but a mere forty years after the coming of Islam,
in the period known as the Rashed Caliphate, authoritarianism of a more
dangerous form came to govern the destiny of the Islamic community, for
this time authoritarianism and tyranny adopted the guise of Islamic
legitimacy.  
    
 As Islamic civilization came to replace Sasanid Persian civilization or
other civilizations, it was expected that the political manifestations
of those civilizations would also be replaced. Especially at the
beginning of Islamic civilization, there was much hope in the new
political environment. The legitimacy of concepts such as collective
decision making, reconciliation, and the supremacy of the public
interest was upheld by the behavior of the prophet himself and to some
extent by the Caliphs who succeeded him, especially by Imam ‘Ali.

A new horizon dawned over people. Had it been allowed to continue, it
could have spurred serious thinking, and the Islamic community would
have undoubtedly had a different destiny. But sadly, the dark shadow of
tyranny began to dominate Muslims. Even more sadly, effort was put into
passing this tyranny off as the pillar of the new way of life. The
autocratic form of policy grew into a legacy, a relic that led to the
decline and degradation of the civilization.  
    
 In such an atmosphere, reflection about subjects' political destiny was
stifled, and the only thinker who managed to dedicate deep thought to
philosophy, politics, and civic discourse was Farabi, the founder of
Islamic philosophy, with whom the idea begins and terminates at the same
time. After him, thought left the sphere of secular affairs, and because
of the dominance of despotism and its consequences, deep investigation
became focused strictly on esoteric and metaphysical phenomena, and we
see that despite the advancement of knowledge about the supernatural,
philosophical thinking on politics, society, and different social
spheres became almost entirely dormant.  
    
 Alongside metaphysical philosophy, another form of thinking, namely
Sufism and mysticism, gained currency, especially among the elite. And
although Sufism can be viewed in some instances as a response and
complaint to unpleasant and hapless circumstances, it ,was a wrong and
ill-fated response. Instead of challenging the bitterness of ,extant
political reality and looking for a way of changing that reality through
offering alternative realities and visions, Sufism, at least its extreme
versions, resisted' the dominant political order by negating the
relevance of politics and political' thought altogether.

As Farabi has said, many from this camp put forth the proposition that
real understanding and salvation could only come from negating all that
pertains to this world, including civil society. This means that by
rejecting and staying away from politics, they left society in the
bloodstained hands of autocrats. Instead of resisting injustice, they
closed their eyes, even though they did not cooperate with oppressors.

At the same time, a sort of insularity and parochialism began to
dominate Muslims, and this marginalized even Islamic philosophy, as
esoteric and metaphysical as it was. What gained prominence as political
thought was a theoretical-practical system, apparently the creation of
the famed Shafi'ite theologian of the Abbasid period and the chief
magistrate of Baghdad, Abolhassan al-Mawardy, who wrote the important
book, *Al-Ahkam al-Soltaniyyah-Commandments of Kingship.*

The Hanbalid interpretation of al-Mawardy was later put forward in a
book with the same title by Abu 'Ali al-Farra. These two books
implicitly legitimized the extent of Abbasid authoritarianism and also
proposed a system of laws based on Islamic thought for the governance of
Muslim society, a society whose main pillar of organization was Islamic
jurisprudence.

Yet religious law itself is dependent on thought, and does not in and of
itself give form and function to thoughts. Where there is rational
thinking in society, religious law will be vibrant, instrumental; and
adaptive. Through rational thinking a jurisconsult can develop a system
of law which is adaptive, appropriate, and. effective. Instead, the
religious law that was supposed to be based on rational thought became
the basis of its form and function.  
    
 Concurrently, a different form of political thought gained currency,
which was in essence the revival of a previously examined pre-Islamic
paradigm. Important thinkers such as Abolhassan 'Ameri and Moskuya
helped bring back the pre­Islamic tradition of authoritarianism from
ancient Persia. The work of Nezam al-Mulk and al-Ghazali (if the latter
part of *Nasihat al-Moluk* could authentically be attributed to him)
further solidified this thinking, turning it into one of the main
obstacles of serious thought for Muslims.  
    
 This was a very unfortunate development, but even sadder was the fact
that Muslims took their hapless fate as manifest destiny, as the
ineluctable work of God and nature, and after this, people could not
think beyond authoritarianism in the sphere of politics. People either
submitted to this fate, or even if they thought of combating the extant
authoritarianism, they could not find a mode of resistance other than
force and the sword.

Confrontations in the world of ideas, instead of focusing on the roots
of the authoritarianism, became enmeshed in factional squabbles. If a
group found that the rulers protected their factional interests, they
cooperated with them, and if their own interests were threatened, they
fought with the rulers. The last example of this was the symbiosis of
senior Shiite clergy with the Safavid autocratic Shiite despots, as the
former justified the latter's rule: Far less common in the history of
our political thought is questioning the very nature of authoritarianism
and searching for ways to overcome it.  
    
 From this general historical discussion I will now try to shed light on
the problem of our own underdevelopment and why a century and half after
the founding of the Dar-Alfonun, we are still on the first step. Again,
transformation and progress require thought, and thought only flourishes
in an atmosphere of freedom. But our history has not allowed human
character to grow and to be appreciated, and thus the basic human
yearning for thinking and freedom has been unattended at best and
negated at worst.  
    
 In the past two hundred years we have encountered an additional
problem, namely authoritarianism and dictatorship of a more dangerous
and destructive character that took over our society. In this period,
the hideous phenomenon of colonialism became widespread in the world,
afflicting us with a colonialism dependent dictatorship. Dictatorship no
longer appeared as one powerful tribe or nation dominating us, but came
in the form of an internal authoritarianism, which was dependent on
protecting the interests of a global colonist. Foreign colonist powers
wanted to rob all our material and spiritual resources, propping up
dictatorships as tame and complacent tools for the realization of their
goals.  
    
 Unfortunately, because of what *has* happened to us, our temperament
has not been trained to be receptive to freedom such that in the past
half-century, every time the ground has been ripe for us to experience
freedom, we have squandered the opportunity.

In the aftermath of August 25, 1941, when an atmosphere of relative
freedom came about in Iran, social movements became confused and
incapacitated, and opportunists tried to use this freedom to monopolize
power. Foreign hands conspired to disallow the natural order of freedom
from taking hold in society. This state of chaos, propelled by the
treachery of some camps and the conspiracy of foreigners, created a
situation that eventually led to the black *coup d'état* of 1953.
Finally, the Islamic revolution came to our rescue, showing us the
beautiful face of freedom once more.  
    
 Today, whatever supporters and critics think of this revolution, they
should concede by virtue of fairness that Iran's Islamic revolution
possesses two distinct characteristics. First, while in countries such
as ours, anti-colonial struggles have often taken a militaristic form,
in our case the authoritarianism that was supported by imperialism was
not overthrown by the force of guns, but by the presence of the masses
and the power of discourse and enlightenment.

And second, the revolution began its life with freedom, not suppression,
so much so that in the first years after its victory, the revolution was
even on the verge of descending into anarchy. But as despotism had
become second nature to us through our dark past, we were unable to
benefit from this freedom properly.

Undoubtedly, the foreign hand that over the past two centuries had
overtly and covertly meddled in our internal affairs, did not sit idly
by, and through conspiracy and its invisible agents, prevented us from
becoming acquainted with freedom in a natural way, to learn its
advantages, and to grapple with its challenges.  
    
 In our universities there were groups who took up armed struggle to
overthrow the government. A destructive atmosphere took hold, making all
parties suspicious of all others. It is natural that the revolution's
leaders could not sit idly by lest the bitter experience of 1953 repeat
itself. Thus, in running the country, extreme measures had to be taken
to prevent a deep descent into anarchy.

At the same time, the extenuating circumstances after the revolution
gave some the excuse to suppress freedom as the perceived source of
dislocation in society, instead of understanding the historical
obstacles to freedom.

They covered their closed-minded ways under the guise of religion, when
in fact their religion was nothing but a series of mental and emotional
habits, habits that .would be questioned in an atmosphere of freedom
where ideas encountered one another freely. Thus there were many who,
instead of scrutinizing the roots and causes that led freedom to descend
into anarchy and destruction, began to oppose freedom. Willingly or not,
they saw religious and national interest as being opposed to freedom.

Destroying the atmosphere of peace in the name of freedom, and
destroying freedom in the name of religion and national interest,
represent two sides of the same coin, both symptomatic of the historical
ailment that we suffer from due to centuries of despotic rule which has
shaped our temperament and made it irreconcilable with freedom. In
scrutinizing the source of our problems, we cannot blame solely the
government.

Before that, we ourselves must learn how we can come to deserve freedom
and rights. Today in universities, in our schools, and at home, we are
incapable of exercising tolerance toward one another. Let us not doubt
that unless we undergo an inner transformation, we cannot expect
external forces to solve our problems for us. We have to understand that
the experience of freedom does not come easily and that this issue has
two fundamental tenets.

First, the effects of despotism have become second nature to us. We are
all individually dictator-like in our own ways, and this unfortunate
condition is evident in all strata and spheres of our society. And
second, we want to experience freedom in a world that is dominated by
grandiose powers who think only of their, own interests, interests that
they view as being in conflict with the freedom of other countries, as
they focus their immense political, military, informational, and
economic power on protecting their interests. If the experience of
freedom has encountered difficulties in countries such as ours, we
should not disregard the conspiracy of outsiders.  
    
 Here we face a paradox. On the one hand, growth and progress are not
possible without freedom, and on the other hand, freedom will not
materialize and last unless society is mature and progressive. What is
to be done?  
    
 I believe that if we are fair and profound in our thinking, we will
reach the conclusion that freedom has priority over growth. Of course,
the road to freedom and liberty is replete with danger and difficulty.
Again, what I mean by freedom is the freedom to think and the security
to express new thinking, and instituting a protective system for the
security of the free-spirited and of thinkers.

More important, I think, it is practically impossible to suppress
thought, but if we live in an atmosphere of freedom, thought appears in
a balanced and moderate way, and rationality becomes dominant, as the
power to choose and the means of choice and progress become available to
the people. But if freedom is absent, thoughts that will inevitably
appear in the minds of thinkers will be driven underground, and may
appear in violent and explosive form through the deeds of those who do
not believe in thoughtful, peaceful discourse. It is necessary to
explore the relationship between freedom and national security and the
positive effect of the former on the latter, and the destructive effect
of the lack of freedom on social stability.  
    
 The desired outcome is that the elite and thinkers reach a consensus
that in today's world we must not search for a single Procrustean model
of freedom for all nations. While the essence of freedom is the same, on
the basis of their different social conditions and historical
experiences, different nations may experience it in different ways, and
choose different ways and priorities regarding the demands of freedom.  
    
 Second, let us try to create the proper atmosphere so that we can
extend tolerance to one another more easily and share each other's view
of freedom, share our minimal expectations and priorities, and base this
on the rule of law, ensuring the survival and protection of freedom. It
is in such an atmosphere that our progress will be accelerated,
guaranteeing a brighter future for our people.


