Dialogue among Civilizations and the World of Islam
===================================================

**In the Name of Allah**

   
 The year 2001, which has been confirmed and approved by the world as
the 'Year of Dialogue among Civilizations', has certain important and
noteworthy messages. Perhaps there are few topics that are accepted and
embraced by the world as this has been. What follows, therefore, is a
brief summary of the debate over this topic:  
    
 1. The eager approval of this suggestion indicates humanity's pressing
need for dialogue and understanding.  
    
 2. This idea, its delineation and approval, are presented at a time
when we have put behind us a century of war, turmoil, usurpation,
discrimination and terror. Fortunately, in these entanglements and wars,
not only has the world of Islam not played any role, but rather in many
instances it has itself been a victim of wars and aggressions. The two
world wars have been the bloodiest of the present grievous state. These
two wars occurred in the West, at the hands of Westerners. The
infringements on the rights of human beings throughout the world have
occurred outside the world of Islam.

The rights of the peoples of the continents of Asia, Africa and South
America, especially the oppressed people of Palestine, have been
trampled upon. This inequality has been imposed even upon non-Muslim
countries, which were not among industrial nations. With this
description, at the end of a century full of blood, war and turmoil, the
onset of the third Christian millennium, under the umbrella of 'Dialogue
and Understanding', augurs a brighter and more promising future for the
mankind.  
    
 3. Most important of all, this idea, which has been embraced by the
world, was outlined by Muslims. This is testimony to the self-confidence
and self-belief of the Islamic world and Muslim nations, especially in
the second half of the twentieth century.

The proponent of 'Dialogue among Civilizations' is himself an heir to a
strong civilization and culture. He understands relations between human
beings to be comprised not of might and imposition, but of rationality
and dialogue. One who values wisdom and has founded his own life on the
basis of rationality, which is the origin of wisdom, speaks ‘Dialogue
among Civilizations’. We believe in rationality and dialogue. Religion
and history have taught us this lesson. It was Muslims who familiarized
Westerners with their history of philosophy and civics.

The transfer of Greek science, philosophy and wisdom first occurred as a
result of Europeans' familiarity with Muslims. Europeans learned
tolerance from us. It is now ironic that they suggest the moral value of
tolerance to us. The great Western civilization is strongly indebted to
Islamic civilization. The world of Islam is endowed with a great
civilization. Most assuredly, however, there exists a great distance
between our civilization and our present state.  
    
 4. 'Dialogue among Civilizations' means equality between peoples and
nations. In other words, one conducts a dialogue only when one respects
the other party and considers the other party as equal to oneself. The
colonial relationship which has ruled over certain parts of the world in
the past two or three centuries has been the result of the phenomenon of
dividing peoples and nations into first- and second-class citizens: that
is, nations which have an inherent right to be masters, and nations
which are inferior and have no choice but to be followers.

War arises from the phenomenon of one party giving itself a greater
right and, because he has power, he is entitled to serve his own
interests at any cost, even at the cost, of war. Such a war is the fruit
of discrimination and injustice. However, as soon as one proposes
'Dialogue among Civilizations', and it is accepted, it means that
equality between nations has been accepted, and this is a great
achievement for humanity.  
    
 5. Presently, by relying on many common elements, we Muslims must make
a sincere effort to reduce differences, because a notable portion of our
existing differences arises from differences in religious jurisprudence,
culture, and the meaning of words, which can be eliminated. People who
have not wanted the unity of the world of Islam have imposed other
difficulties or, if the plan did not originate with them, they have at
least taken advantage of already existing differences by aggravating
them.

Thus, it is possible to eliminate differences, except for those, which
are natural, for people are by nature different; *we* do not all think
alike, and we do not have identical interpretations. Therefore, in light
of agreements and numerous common elements, we can minimize differences
and render them a means to perfection and progress. Similar thoughts
never confront each other. To have two ways of thinking set against each
other is not only problem-free, but they ought to confront each other,
for this causes the evolution and perfection of the thought.

What is important is that the dichotomy of thoughts not turns into
disagreements, contradiction, aggression and war. In order to achieve
this, we must first return to the roots of unity, and, secondly, we must
understand that if we wish to hold a dialogue, we must be inclined to
wisdom and rationality.  
    
 6. One of the plagues, which can be found in religious societies, and
unfortunately the world of Islam has at times been plagued by it, is the
misconception that, with the existence of religion, man does not require
reason. That is, to believe that one can have either reason or religion,
oblivious to the fact that one *can* understand even religion through
reason.

Does any mental tool exist other than reason? The difference between
having faith and not having faith is not that a man without faith uses
his reason, while a religious person is not in need of reason-they
equally require the power of reason and must use it. The difference lies
in the fact that a man of faith possesses two books while a man without
faith, one book. The source of the religious man's knowledge is greater,
and thus his achievements are richer.

But a man who does not believe in God and inspiration possesses only the
Book of Nature, to which he refers with the aid of his reason. A
religious maxi also has this book and, as a natural human being, through
the aid of his reason, he studies nature, acquires knowledge,
comprehends science and philosophy, while, in addition, he benefits from
yet another Book, the Book of Divine Law and Inspiration. People *who*
set religion against reason understand their flawed interpretations to
be 'religion'.

It *is* true that inspiration lies beyond time and space, however, we
exist in time and space. Our understanding, therefore, belongs to the
realm of time and space. Thus, our understanding of the Book of Creation
and Divine Laws is also limited to time and space. In this way,
knowledge evolves. At one time, men of knowledge have one understanding,
while at another time their understanding evolves, or perhaps the former
understanding is even negated and replaced by our present understanding.

Although man is endowed with a divine spirit and it benefits from
dimensions that are beyond nature, beyond time and space, a large
portion of his love, feelings and thoughts are nevertheless subject to
time and space. Thus a great portion of our understanding of the Book of
God is limited to time and space. Those who consider their understanding
of God, the Book of God, and religion to be identical with 'religion',
with the passage of time they are still not prepared to change their
view. As a result, they sacrifice reason to their own understanding,
which is limited to time and space. If we Muslims wish to have a better
future and build a prosperous life for ourselves and a model for
humanity that is proportional to the Greatness of God and the message of
the Prophet, we must rely on God's great blessing-reason.  
    
 7. Our identity is rooted in the past; however, this does not mean that
we should return to the past. The revelation of God descended on us in
the past, but it does not belong to only one time. We must refer to the
past, because the roots of our identity lie in the past, but we must not
remain in the past, for this would be a retreat. A reverting to the past
is to find a springboard from which we may forge ahead to the future.  
    
 8. In order to move ahead to the future we must understand the world
and benefit from all positive achievements of human thought and
civilization, wherever they may be. It is only under such circumstances
that we can renew the greatness and grandeur of the past and,
proportional to our present and future, shape a life which is blessed
with God-like attributes and inspiration, a life in which at the same
time human reason and human rights are held in respect.  
    
 9. One of the other blights is a situation where religion and freedom
oppose one another. In the Middle Ages, religion was held against reason
and freedom-and both suffered. Today, in liberal systems, freedom
exists, but a freedom devoid of spirituality, and apart from the
spiritual dimension of human life. As a consequence, their contemporary
life faces many difficulties, which are admitted by Westerners
themselves.  
    
 Religion without freedom is tantamount to a life of enslavement, a life
in which man is devoid of honor. Religion must not be set against reason
and freedom. Rather, religion is a cradle and support for the growth of
reason, freedom and liberality. God's religion has taught us this
lesson. By relying on these standards and many other factors, we must
become prepared for a 'Dialogue among Civilizations' and convey to the
world the latent grandeur of the foundations of our religion and
civilization.  
    
 10. With an open embrace, we must benefit from the positive aspects of
other civilizations and cultures. This is in the sense of adopting, and
adopting is a human art. This is adopting where man has understood his
past and his identity, has founded his life on wisdom and reason, and
puts to good use what others have already achieved. This is quite
different from mere unseemly imitation.


