Miscellaneous Issues
====================

Ghusl (Ritual Bath)
-------------------

All ghusls are done in the same way and pattern. They only differ in the
Niyyah (intention). After making intention follow these 3 steps:

First wash the head and neck  
 Wash the right side from shoulder to the tip of the toe.  
 Wash the left side from the shoulder to the tip of the toe.

The above ruling is as per Imam Khomeini. According to his rulings one
must follow the succession specified above for the ghusl to be valid,
meaning the head and neck first and then the right side and then the
left side.

**Note 1:** *As per Ayatullah Seestani* *a woman must wash head and neck
first and then it is better to wash the right side first and then the
left. If someone after washing her head and neck washes her left side
and then the right side, the ghusl* *is still valid as per Ayatullah
Seestani.*

**Note 2:** *Imagine and divide yourself in 2 halves. If the water while
washing the right side reaches the left side, and vice versa, it is not
a problem, and the ghusl* *is okay. Make sure to let the water reach all
the parts of the body, even under the feet.*

**Note 3:** *Imam Khomeini* *says that wudhu* *is wajib* *after taking
all the ghusls except Ghusl Janabat, if someone wants to carry out any
acts of worship that require wudhu.*  
***But*** *Ayatullah Seestani* *says wudhu* *is not necessary after any
wajib ghusl nor for mustahab ghusls that are mentioned in rule number
651 of his Risala.*

Dress Code, Hijab (Islamic Covering)
------------------------------------

Observing hijab is obligatory. The body must be covered (in the presence
of a Non-Mahram), except the two parts mentioned below. Proper hijab is
when the body is covered in loose clothing so the shape of a woman is
not apparent.

The amount of face that is washed during wudhu, without makeup.  
 Hands from wrist to fingertips.

**Note:** *During Salat, if there are no Non-Mahram* *around, feet need
not be covered, and socks need not be worn.*

Mahram and Non-Mahram
---------------------

Mahram: Someone with whom marriage is prohibited. Women need not observe
Hijab in his presence. Example: Father, Brother etc.

Non-Mahram: Someone with whom marriage is allowed. One should observe
Hijab (Islamic covering), in his presence. Example: Paternal and
maternal cousins.

Mahrams for a woman:

Father  
 Brother  
 Paternal uncle (father’s brother)  
 Maternal uncle (mother’s brother)  
 Maternal and paternal grandfathers, and their fathers  
 Mother’s maternal and paternal uncles  
 Father’s maternal and paternal uncles  
 Half brothers  
 Husband  
 Father-in-law  
 Husband’s paternal grandfather, and their fathers  
 Husband’s maternal grandfather, and their fathers  
 Husband’s sons  
 Husband’s grandsons.  
 Son and sons of her children  
 Nephew – son of her sister  
 Nephew – son of her brother  
 Son-in-law

The remaining men are Non-Mahrams, however there may be exceptions to
this rule by way of marriage and with certain conditions explained in
detail in the books of Fiqh. A good example: This woman’s husband dies,
after the days of ‘iddat’ the brother of her husband may marry this
woman and thus will become her Mahram.

A sister’s husband is Non-Mahram. As long as one’s sister is married to
him and is living, he cannot marry his wife’s sister. This is why one
needs to observe Hijab in his presence.

Similarly the husband’s brothers are also non-mahrams to the wife.


