Menopause
=========

Most women stop menstruating between the ages of 45 to 55, which is
called Menopause.

**Sayyids** (women from the progeny of our Holy Prophet (SAWA))may see
haidh up until the age of 60 as per the Lunar Calendar.

**BUT Non Sayyids** (a woman whose father is not a Sayyid, even if her
mother is Sayyid) may see their periods up until the age of 50 as per
the Lunar Calendar  
 (Which is approximately 48 ½ years Solar Calendar).

As per Imam Khomeini if a Sayyid woman sees blood after the age of 60
Lunar years, even though the blood seen is in her days of habit (haidh),
she should consider this blood to be istihadha. She should follow all
the rulings that apply to her. (Please check the Istihadha Section to
see what type of istihadha she is experiencing).

Similarly as per Imam Khomeini if a Non Sayyid sees blood after the age
of 50 Lunar Years, even though the blood seen is in her days of habit
(haidh), she should consider this blood to be istihadha. She should
follow all the rulings that apply to her. (Please check the Istihadha
Section to see what type of istihadha she is experiencing).

**Note:** *As per Ayatullah Seestani* *a woman may see haidh* *up until
the age of 60 Lunar years (Which is approximately 58 years and 3 months
solar calendar). However, Its ihtiyat-e-mustahab* *for a Non Sayyid*
*woman between the ages of 50 to 60 Lunar years who sees blood every
month to do ‘Jum\`’ (Check Scenario’s (5 thru 6) of Ayatullah Seestani
ruling)*

Scenarios (1 thru 4) as per Imam Khomeini
-----------------------------------------

**Scenario** **1:** A Non Sayyid woman who is 42 Lunar years has been
seeing blood continuously for a month. She thinks that she should have
menopause by now. What is the ruling as per Imam Khomeini?

**Answer:** First of all she is a Non Sayyid, she is not yet reached to
the age of 50 Lunar years, and therefore she still has time for reaching
menopause. Since she is seeing blood and is not 50 yet, she will not be
considered as having reached menopause. As a result the days of her
habit would be haidh and all the other days would be istihadha.

**Scenario** **2:** A Non Sayyid woman who is 51 Lunar Years has been
seeing blood around the time of her days of habit (haidh). What is the
ruling as per Imam Khomeini?

**Answer:** After the age of 50 (Lunar) as per Islamic Jurisprudence a
Non Sayyid woman is in Menopause. If she sees any blood even though it
might have the signs of haidh etc she should consider it as istihadha.
She should follow all the rulings that apply to her. (Please check the
Istihadha section to see what type of istihadha she is experiencing).

**Scenario** **3**: A Sayyid woman who is 55 Lunar years. She has been
seeing blood continuously for a month. She thinks that she should have
menopause by now. What is the ruling as per Imam Khomeini?

**Answer:** First of all she is a Sayyid, she has not yet reached to the
age of 60 Lunar years, and she still has time for reaching menopause.
Since she is seeing blood and is not 60 yet, she will not considered as
having reached menopause. As a result the days of her habit will be
haidh and all the other days will be istihadha.

**Scenario** **4:** ASayyid woman who is 61 Lunar Years has been seeing
blood around the time of her days of habit (haidh). What is the ruling
as per Imam Khomeini?

**Answer:** After the age of 60 (Lunar) as per Islamic Jurisprudence a
Sayyid woman is in Menopause. If she sees any blood even though it might
have the signs of haidh etc she should consider it as istihadha. She
should follow all the rulings that apply to her. (Please check the
Istihadha section to see what type of istihadha she is experiencing).

Scenarios (5 thru 6) as per Ayatullah Seestani
----------------------------------------------

**Scenario** **5:** A Non Sayyid woman who is 52 Lunar years. She has
been seeing blood continuously for a month. She thinks that she should
have menopause by now. What is the ruling as per Ayatullah Seestani?

**Answer:** This woman should treat it the days of her habit as haidh
and the rest istihadha because this woman is not 60 lunar years yet.
However Ayatullah Seestani says that this woman can do Jum\` in the days
of haidh, if she wishes.

**Scenario** **6:** A Non Sayyid woman who is 61 Lunar Years has been
seeing blood around the time of her days of habit (haidh). What is the
ruling as per Ayatullah Seestani?

**Answer:** After the age of 60 (Lunar) as per Islamic Jurisprudence a
Non Sayyid or Sayyid woman is in Menopause. If she sees any blood even
though it might have the signs of haidh etc she should consider it as
istihadha. She should follow all the rulings that apply to her. (Please
check the Istihadha Section to see what type of istihadha she is
experiencing).


