Rules of Istihadha
==================

Having determined the type of istihadha, there are now different rules
for the different types of blood. We have already talked about how to
determine the type of istihadha blood above.

Rules for Qaleelah (Little flow)
--------------------------------

Wash the surface of the vagina  
 Change the cotton  
 For each prayer perform one new wudhu (ablution)  
 All other kinds of worship where wudhu is necessary require a new wudhu
as per Ihtiyat-e-Wajib, (Imam Khomeini). What this means is if a woman
has made wudhu for salat and if she decides to touch the script of the
Qur’an she needs to do wudhu after salat again.

**But,** As per Ayatullah Seestani it is wajib (not just ihtiyate wajib)
to do wudhu again for the other acts of worship that require wudhu.  
**Note:** *To prevent the blood from gushing out, let the cotton* *stay
in vagina. If the blood comes out in the midst of the prayers* *it will
be deemed void.*

**Further explanation:** If a woman sees a little discharge of blood and
as per the signs and verification she is sure its istihadha then, for
performing each prayer she should wash the surface of her vagina, change
the cotton and perform Wudhu.

**Helping Note:** *Let the cotton* *stay in vagina. Between 2 prayers*
*examine it; if no blood is seen, renewing the Wudhu* *is not
necessary.*

Rules for Mutawassitah (Medium flow)
------------------------------------

Do the 3 steps of Qaleelah  
 For the first prayer (recited after the woman sees blood) perform
ghusl  
 From the next day, perform ghusl for the morning prayers everyday. This
is as per Imam Khomeini.

Also, according to Ayatullah Seestani, if a woman performs ghusl for the
afternoon prayers, she should perform ghusl the next day in the morning.
In this scenario a ghusl in the morning is required too. That is, if she
performs first ghusl in the afternoon then she needs to perform the next
ghusl in the morning, next day**.**

**Note:** *All other kinds of worship where wudhu* *is necessary should
be done with a new wudhu as per Ihtiyat-e-Wajib, (Imam Khomeini). What
this means is if a woman has made wudhu for salat* *and if she decides
to touch the script of the Qur’an* *she needs to do wudhu again after
salat.*

*As per Ayatullah Seestani* *its wajib* *to do wudhu* *again for the
other acts of worship that require wudhu.*

**Another important point:** Ayatullah Seestani says that a woman should
perform the ghusl first and then do wudhu as per
Ihtiyat-e-Wajib.Whereas,Imam Khomeini says it does not matter if one
performs ghusl first or wudhu.

**Further explanation:** If a woman sees medium discharge of blood and
as per the signs and verification she is sure it is istihadha then, for
performing each prayer she should wash the surface of her vagina, change
the cotton and perform Wudhu and in addition perform ghusl if it is the
first salat of the day.

From the next day in addition to doing the 3 steps of Qaleelah, she
should perform ghusl for the morning prayers only, BUT for the other
prayers she should wash the surface of the vagina, change the cotton and
do wudhu for each prayer.

Rules for Katheera (Excessive flow)
-----------------------------------

For each prayer perform one ghusl  
 Do the 3 steps of Qaleelah  
 If praying Asr right after Dhuhr or Isha right after Maghrib, only 3
ghusls are enough for the day.

**Further explanation:** If a woman sees excessive discharge of blood
and as per the signs and verification if she is sure it is istihadha
then, for performing each prayer she should perform ghusl and then wash
the surface of the vagina and then change the cotton and do wudhu.

**But** if a woman is going to pray Asr prayers right after Dhuhr
prayers and Isha prayers right after Maghrib Prayers only one ghusl for
each set of prayers will suffice. However, between Dhuhr and Asr,
Maghrib and Isha she must wash, change the cotton and do wudhu.

**Important Note:** *As per Ayatullah Seestani* *wudhu* *is not needed
after the ghusl* *but if a woman wishes she should do it before ghusl
for Katheera.* ***Whereas,*** *Imam Khomeini* *says it does not matter
if wudhu is made before ghusl or after, but wudhu is required.*

Change of Intensity of Blood Flow
---------------------------------

When one sees the intensity of the blood flow increase, then there are
different rules that apply:

### Change of Flow from Less to More

Qaleelah to Mutawassitah (Little to Medium flow)  
 Qaleelah to Katheera (Little to Excessive flow)  
 Mutawassitah to Katheera (Medium to Excessive flow)

Rules to be followed if the blood flow changes from less to more as
stated above:

**If before prayer:** If the intensity of the blood flow changes from
less to more, before a woman prays:

If the flow changes from little to medium then the rules for medium
apply.  
 If the flow changes from little/medium to excessive then the rules for
excessive apply.

**Note:** *For explanation of rules for little* *flow, medium* *flow and
excessive, refer to the rules of Istihadha.*

**During prayers:** If a woman feels while praying that the intensity of
the blood flow changed from less to more:

If by discontinuing the prayers there is no fear that they will become
Qadha, then a woman should discontinue praying and take care of the duty
as per the rules, then perform prayers.

**Further explanation:** If a woman starts praying and realizes that the
blood flow has increased then she should see if there is enough time
left so that her prayers do not get Qadha. If there is enough time left
then she should discontinue her prayers.

After discontinuing her prayers she should check to see if the flow has
increased to medium or excessive istihadha, and then follow the rules
accordingly.

If there is not enough time left, then she should not discontinue the
prayers. She should complete the prayers, then check to see if the
intensity of the flow increased to medium flow or excessive flow. Follow
the rules accordingly, **and then repeat the prayer again with the
intention** **of Qadha.**

### Change of Flow from More to Less

Katheera to Qaleelah (Excessive to Little)  
 Katheera to Mutawassitah (Excessive to Medium)  
 Mutawassitah to Qaleelah (Medium to Little)

Rules to be followed if the blood flow changes from more to less as
stated above:

For the first prayer a woman should follow the rules as per the state
she was in. Prayers after that are going to be according to the state
she is in.

**Further explanation:** If a woman is in the state of Katheera
(Excessive flow) and before praying Dhuhr she realizes that she is in
the state of Qaleelah (Little) now, she should follow the rules for
Katheera for praying Dhuhr and then for Asr she should follow the rules
for Qaleela.

If a woman after Dhuhr realizes that state she is not in a state of
Katheera anymore but she is in a state of Qaleela now, she should still
follow the rules for Katheera for praying Asr and then for Maghrib and
the prayers after that she should follow the rules of Qaleela.

Fasting during Istihadha
------------------------

**During Qaleela:** A woman should follow the rules she follows before
prayers. With the only exception that a cotton should be inserted inside
the vagina to prevent the blood from gushing out. *(As per Imam
Khomeini* *this is Ihtiyat-e-Wajib* *for all the states of istihadha)*

**During Mutawassitah:** A woman should follow the rules she follows
before prayers. With the only exception that a cotton should be inserted
inside the vagina to prevent the blood from gushing out.

**During Katheera:** A woman should perform ghusl, the evening before
for prayers of Maghrib.

**And…**

Perform ghusl for each prayer if there is not going to be a gap between
the prayers. For example if she performs ghusl for Maghrib and then
prays Isha right after Maghrib, then another ghusl is not needed.

**And…**

Insert cotton inside the vagina, to prevent the blood from gushing out.

**Note:** *Ayatullah Seestani says that it is not a problem if the blood
gushes out during the fast, and the fast is valid, but she has to
prevent the blood from gushing out of her vagina* *during her prayers.*

Sex during Istihadha
--------------------

**During the state of Qaleelah:** Rules of Qaleelah (Under ‘Rules of
Istihadha’) apply.  
**During the state of Mutawassitah:** Must have ghusl before sex.  
**During the state of Katheera:** Must have ghusl before sex. But if sex
is performed soon after prayers, ghusl is not necessary.

**Note:** *Ayatullah Seestani* *says that ghusl* *is not needed before
sex* *in any of the three conditions of istihadha. (Performing ghusl is
Ihtiyat-e-Mustahab)*

Miscellaneous Points regarding Istihadha
----------------------------------------

According to Ayatullah Seestani if a woman is not sure if she is in a
state Mutawassitah or Qaleelah she should consider it as Qaleelah.
Another scenario would be if a woman is not sure if she is in a state of
Katheera or Mutawassitah. In this case she should consider it to be
Mutawassitah. In other words when in doubt she must always go with the
lesser one.

If a woman delays her prayers thinking that her Istihadha will stop
before the salat becomes Qadha, then it is okay to do so as long as she
does not delay her prayers so long that they become Qadha.

Salatul Ayat is the prayers that are obligatory at the time of natural
calamities for example, an earthquake, a lunar eclipse, or a solar
eclipse etc. Salatul Ayat is obligatory on a woman who is experiencing
Istihadha. All the rules required for a woman in istihadha during the
other obligatory prayers are also required for this salat. (Please note:
Same rules apply for all the obligatory prayers.)


