Nifas (Blood of Childbirth)
===========================

**What is Nifas?** Nifas is the blood seen after childbirth, or after a
miscarriage.

**Childbirth:** The blood seen as soon as the baby begins to come out of
the womb is the blood of nifas. In other words blood seen during
childbirth and after childbirth is nifas.

**Note:** *The blood that a pregnant* *woman sometimes sees before
delivery is istihadha* *or haidh* *depending on the signs but it is*
***not nifas.***

**Miscarriage:** When a woman sees large clots of blood coming out of
the womb, and when one is sure that it is a miscarriage. The blood seen
in this case is the blood of nifas.

Nifas can be a maximum of 10 days from the date of delivery or
miscarriage. Here is how to calculate the time span of nifas:

If the blood is seen for 10 days only, then all of it is nifas.

If the blood flow exceeds 10 days, then these guidelines must be
followed:

If a woman has a habit of duration during ‘Haidh’, that means this woman
sees blood for a fixed period each month, and this woman delivers a baby
and sees blood for more than 10 days, then she must consider the same
amount of days as nifas and the rest of the days as istihadha. (Check
Scenario 1 below, to get a clear understanding).

If a woman does not have a habit of time or duration during haidh, that
means she is Mudhtaribah, or Nasiyah or Mubtadiya, then she should
consider the first 10 days as nifas and the rest as istihadha.(Check out
Scenario 2 below to get a clear understanding).

If a woman has a habit of time and duration during haidh, that means
this woman sees blood of haidh on a specific date each month and for a
fixed duration, and then she delivers a baby and sees blood for more
than 10 days, then she should consider the same amount of days of her
duration of her period as nifas and the rest as istihadha. (Check out
scenario 3 below to get a clear understanding).

If a woman has a habit of time during haidh, that means this woman sees
blood of haidh on a specific date each month, and then she delivers a
baby and sees blood for more than 10 days, then she should consider the
first 10 days as nifas and the rest as istihadha. (Check out scenario 4
below to get a clear understanding).

**Scenario** **1:** This woman sees blood for a fixed duration during
haidh. She delivered a baby and has been seeing blood for 13 days, is
this blood all nifas? Let us suppose her duration of haidh is 8 days,
then 8 days will be nifas and the remaining 5 days will be istihadha.
(Please check Question 1 below for another scenario).

**Scenario** **2:** This woman has no fixed duration and no fixed time
when she sees blood during haidh. She delivered a baby and has been
seeing blood for 13 days, is this blood all nifas? Since this woman has
no habit of duration, then she should consider the first 10 days as
nifas and the remaining 3 days as istihadha. (Please check Question 2
below for another scenario).

**Scenario** **3:** This woman has a habit of time and duration during
haidh that means she sees blood of haidh on a specific date each month
and for a fixed duration. She delivers a baby and sees blood for 14
days., is this blood all nifas? Let us suppose that her duration of
haidh is 7 days, then 7 days will be nifas and the remaining 7 days will
be istihadha. (Please check Question 3 below for another scenario)

**Scenario** **4:** This woman has a habit of time during haidh, which
means this woman sees blood of haidh on a specific date each month. She
delivers a baby and sees blood for more than 13 days. Then she should
consider the first 10 days as nifas and the remaining 3 days as
istihadha. (Please check Question 4 below for another scenario).

**Question 1:** Keeping scenario 1 in mind, if a woman who has a habit
of duration during haidh, delivers a baby and sees blood for 30 days,
what is the ruling?

Answer: The first 8 days are nifas *(her habit of duration of haidh* *in
this scenario)*.  
 The next 10 days are going to be counted as istihadha.  
 The next 8 days are haidh (If it still has the signs of haidh. If it
does not have the signs of haidh, then she must consult her family to
see if they had the same pattern after delivery).  
 The final 4 days are istihadha

**Question 2:** Keeping scenario 2 in mind, where a woman does not have
a habit of time and duration when haidh is concerned, if she delivers a
baby and sees blood for 30 days, what is the ruling?

Answer: First 10 days are nifas *(since she has no habit of time and
duration)*.  
 The next 10 days are istihadha.  
 The final 10 days are haidh (if the blood continues to have the signs
of haidh. Otherwise if for example, 8 days had signs, then 8 count
towards haidh and 2 to istihadha. If for example, the blood had no
signs, then she must contact her family for the number of days of
duration of haidh).

**Question 3:** Keeping scenario 3 in mind, when a woman has a habit of
time and duration where haidh is concerned – If she delivers a baby on
the 1st of the month and sees blood for 30 days, and her habit is that
she sees blood on the 10th to 17th every month, what is the ruling?

Answer: The first 7 days are nifas (1st to the 7th, because this woman
has a habit of duration too).  
 The next 10 days are istihadha (8th to 17th even though it is the time
of her menses, she should still consider it as istihadha).  
 The last 13 days are istihadha (18th to 30th, because this woman has a
habit of time too and her time is 10th of the month)

**Note:** *According to the rulings of Ayatullah Seestani* *in order for
a woman in such a case to get haidh* *again, she must wait until the
10th* *of the next month.*

**Question 4:** Keeping scenario 4 in mind that is a woman who has a
habit of time only where haidh is concerned - If she delivers a baby and
sees blood for 30 days, what is the ruling?

Answer: The first 10 days are nifas (Since she has a habit of time
only).  
 The next 10 days are istihadha.  
 Following days are haidh if the blood seen now is on the days this
woman has a habit of seeing each month. Even if the blood lacks the
signs of haidh it should still be considered haidh if it falls on the
specific time. ***(Check scenario*** ***5 for a clear understanding)***.
If it does not fall on the specific time then it is not haidh, it is
istihadha even though it has the signs of haidh***. (Check scenario 6
for getting a clear understanding)***

**Scenario** **5:** This woman has a habit of time only, where haidh is
concerned. She used to see blood of haidh on the 1st of every month. She
delivers a baby on the 10th of this month and sees blood for 40 days.
What is the ruling? **This scenario has two rulings.**

Ruling 1: The first 10 days will be nifas, then the next 10 days is
going to be istihadha. Now if this woman sees blood and it falls on the
specific date and it **has signs** of haidh and she sees these signs for
8 days. Then the first 10 days are nifas (from the 10th to the 20th of
this month). Next 10 days are istihadha (from the 20th to the 30th of
this month). Next 8 days are haidh (from the 1st to the 8th). Last 12
days are istihadha (from the 9th to the20th)

Ruling 2: The first 10 days will be nifas, then the next 10 days will be
istihadha. Now if this woman sees blood and it falls on the specific
date and it has **no signs** of haidh, because the date is her specific
date when she experiences haidh, it will be considered haidh. But since
she does not have a habit of fixed duration (there are no signs of
haidh), and if the blood seen exceeds 10 days, then she needs to check
with her family to get the number of days. Suppose they say the usual
number of days is 6. Then,

First 10 days are nifas (from the 10th to the 20th of this month)  
 Next10 days are istihadha (from the 20th to the 30th of this month)  
 Next 6 days are haidh (from the 1st to the 6th)  
 Last 14 days are istihadha (from the 7th to the20th)

**Scenario** **6:** This woman has a habit of time only, where haidh is
concerned. She used to see blood of haidh on the 1st of every month. If
she delivers a baby on the 2nd of this month and sees blood for 32 days.
What is the ruling?

First 10 days are nifas (from the 2nd to the 12th of this month)  
 Next 10 days are istihadha (from the13th to the 23rd of this month)  
 Next 6 days are istihadha (from the 24th to the 30th)  
 Last 6 days are haidh (from the 1st to the 7th depending on if one is
certain that it is haidh)

In scenario 6 above istihadha went on for 16 days, because this woman
has a habit of time and her time of haidh was not till the 1st of the
month.

**Important Note: All the things that are Haraam** **(prohibited) for a
woman who is in Haidh** **(menstruating) are Haraam for a woman in
Nifas.**


