Publisher's Preface
===================

  

**In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful**

This valuable book, Sulh al-Hasan, is, among the works of the great
Shaykh Radi Al-Yasin. It is also among the important writings on the
subject. So we may say that it is matchless. Worth mentioning, writing
about such a subject, Sulh al-Hasan (peace be on him) is among the
difficult matters. That is because the time of Imam al-Hasan, Peace be
on him, is among the vaguest periods in the history of Islam. In other
words it is difficult to get the facts about the events as they had
happened. Meanwhile they are in need of much studying and researching.
Thank Allah. The great researcher Shaykh Radi Al-Yasin was granted
success in making important researches and studies about this topic.
Thus he has left behind this immortal work. It is an act of pride that
we were granted permission to translate, to print and to distribute it.
That is because Muslims are in urgent need of it. In the meantime Muslim
libraries are empty of it. After a period of effort and fatigue, we were
able to publish the book before you to help the seeker of knowledge and
truth to make use of it.

Noteworthy, Sayyid 'Ali Khamana'i, leader of the Islamic Revolution in
Iran, had translated the book, Sulh al-Hasan, from Arabic into Persian
before the revolution. The book was translated and printed in an
excellent manner. So Persian speakers have made use of it.

We ask Allah, the Most High, to grant us success to render more
services. Meanwhile we ask the gentle reader to show his/her suggestions
about the book. Indeed success is from Allah.
