Chapter 11: Attitude Towards Confusion
======================================

  

Al-Hasan devoted himself to thinking., He remained calm in the confusion
of the misfortunes that threatened his attitude. He was indifferent to
those calamities though some of them were tragedy; some of them were
humiliation; some of them were death unlike the death of the great ones.

Confusion was not important for al-Hasan. However, it filled his heart
with an intense sorrow. It moved his feelings and pricked him as the
burning thorns did. Thus it urged him to find a solution without
humiliation, tragedy, and usurped death which his holy memories refused.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, faced a situation full of exhausted
importunity, false rumors, and rushing in the terrible trend of chaos.

In spite of these convulsions, al-Hasan, was like the mountain which
violent gales cannot shake. He was a pious Imam. So the ignorance of the
ignorant did not enrage him, nor did the wrath of those who were
indignant with him angered him. He was indifferent to those hardships.
In the meantime he studied the plans and ideas to decide his plan and
idea.

Now, we are unable to discuss in detail all the ideas al-Hasan faced at
that time. Generally speaking, those ideas were: "what Allah likes, what
has been mentioned on the authority of the Apostle of Allah, and what is
obligatory to protect the doctrine."

As for what the people said, it did not concern al-Hasan very much.

We must always remember that al-Hasan was a spiritual Imam. Thus he did
not cling to life as the people did. He regarded life as a  

  

sacrifice in the way of Allah, means for public interest, and a field
for achieving righteousness and spreading kindness. So the words of the
people were worthless towards this divine morale. The Imam had spiritual
qualities. He led the people to good through them. Thus he always
thought about Allah, the practice of the Prophet (may Allah bless him
and his family), the correct doctrine, and good deeds.

For this reason confusion, as we have said, had no effect on al Hasan.
For the way of Allah is everlasting, and the Sunna of the Apostle of
Allah is clear. However, he faced bitter confusion.

It is annoying that man is driven from his conditions, from where he has
no power, to the situation which no nature accepts, on which the crises
agree. Then man goes on resisting such continuous conditions of his own
accord. That is the irregular condition which is not known but during
confusion, that does not become constant with its desires but during
restlessness. During such a condition the self is between intrepidity
and recoiling, and between despair and hope. The self, in spite of such
a situation, is in need of a maximum degree of thinking and
contemplation, and of memorization and verification. The conscience, in
spite of this situation, has an accurate attitude over which the origins
of people differ.

What a great that self was! How great that conscience was! It was the
calm self that resorted to its lord during every terror that befell it.
It was the satisfied and pleased self that regarded anyone other than
Him as insufficient. It was the self that did not seek guidance of
anyone but that of Him. Al-Hasan had a good pure conscience. He did not
become weak in spite of the heavy obligation. Rather he was solder than
the disaster. Many people were with al-Hasan during the misfortunes that
befell him. They did not say that he was sad or broken hearted. They saw
neither sadness nor defeat on his face. Rather, all his aspects were
steadfastness, determination, and tranquility. Even during his secret
prayers to Allah, he was an example for patience, resorting to Allah,
and relying on no one but Him.

Among the supplications of al-Hasan, peace be on him, is: "O Allah! O
You Who have might and sovereignty! O You Who have  

  

supreme position! How do I fear (of people) and You are my hope? How do
I fear (of them) and my reliance is on You? Pour on me some of Your
patience. Grant me victory over Your enemies through Your authority.
Support me with Your triumph. I resort to You and seek refuge with You.
So make for me relief and solution (to save) me from my affair. O You
Who were sufficient to protect the people of the haram (the Kaaba) from
the Companions of the Elephant! O You Who sent to them birds in flocks
to cast them against stones of backed clay! Punish my enemy severely!"

A glimpse of hope flashed in the desperate sides of al-Hasan's intellect
and in the frowning corners of his contemplation. The glimpse of hope
was an answer to his prayers to Allah, the Great and Almighty. So it
spread as fragrance did. Then bright aspects appeared through it. They
were like good news.

It (i.e., the glimpse of hope) was a strange surprise. It was able to
put an end to all of al-Hasan's troubles at those moments. So he was in
a flood of memories. The memories did not belong to his conditions, nor
did they belong to the misfortunes of his moment. Those memories pleased
al-Hasan. Thus his soul was full of enjoyment and amusement.

The pain sometimes extremely hurts the self. Intense thinking and
silence sometimes exhaust it. So the self revolts to move from
narrowness to vastness, from despair to hope, and from confusion to the
indication full of hopes.

Al-Hasan thought about the disturbances of his time. He thought about
the future of his religion that was liable to the dangers of this enemy
who paid no attention to the holy things. He thought "that if he had put
his hand in the hand of his enemy, the enemy would have not allowed him
to follow the religion of his grandfather, the Apostle of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family." [[1]](#r1)

As for this new surprise, it reminded al-Hasan of one third of a
century. Suddenly, he remembered the houses of the Prophethood, for  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n1) Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 10, p. 107.

  

they competed with each other to attract him. He remembered the nexts of
the descents of revelation, for they vied with each other to embrace him
warmly. He remembered the Ansar (helpers) who celebrated him.

Those memories were visions. They possessed his feelings. They were
sweet dreams that nursed his injuries.

This is his (al-Hasan's) grandfather. This is the authority of his
Prophethood among his community. These are the holy verses. They are
like the stars. They were revealed from time to time. They were like the
postmen who traveled between the sky and the earth. They were revealed
at his house. This is his (al-Hasan's) father, the helper of the Prophet
and the greatest fighter (mujahid), who made the Arab brave men yield to
the Words of Allah, and who conquered the Fort of Khaybar. This is his
mother, who was pure and chaste. With her the Prophet challenged the
Christians of Najran to a contest of prayers. So she was meritorious to
be the mistress of the women of the world.

Al-Hasan remembered all these memories. If these were not external
realities, then they were psychological ones. For his divine spirit made
them appear before his eyes. He inherited this spirit from his parents
('Ali and Fatima), namely his self was not separated from them. In the
meantime his body was with them on the day when Allah formed His
delegation to challenge the Christians of Najran to a contest of prayer.
So the delegation was composed of al-Hasan, his grandfather, his father,
his mother, and his brother. Al-Hasan was with his parents on the day
when the Apostle of Allah ordered the cloak to be brought to cover those
chosen five persons, who were al Hasan, al-Husayn, their parents and
their grandfather. He was with them on the day when the verse of
purification was revealed. Noteworthy, the Prophet (may Allah bless him
and his family) explained that this verse concerned the five blessed
persons, peace be on them.

These are great qualities of which no Muslim has.

Then al-Hasan looked at that sad horizon. He remembered those
interesting memories. Thus they reminded him of his blessed childhood,
and his early holy youth. Through these memories, he  

  

considered his white days full of light in Medina. That was on the day
when he toddled at his excellent next in it (Medina), and his notable
pampered situation among his friends. That was on the day when he played
happily in it. He played there between the great hands of his father and
on the chest of his grandfather or on his holy back or on the stick of
his scared pulpit. That was on the day when he embraced revelation from
its first moments and learned the Words of Allah through the tongue of
the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. Thus he
graduated from the Prophet's school of knowledge. In this way he
completed his education to assume his obligatory Imamate over the
Muslims. Moreover, al-Hasan listened to his grandfather when the latter
declared his succession to the Imamate on many occasions.

Those memories reminded al-Hasan of great times. Thus he was full of
happiness, strength, and activity.

It was the fascinating memory that controlled al-Hasan's soul. So it
deprived him of his enjoyable smile. However, we do not think that he
smiled during his condition. Al-Hasan remembered his grandfather. For he
took him from the shoulder of his mother. He took him by the hand, made
him stand on his blessed feet, and began talking gently to him with his
holy song: "huzzaqa! huzzaqa! tarqqa 'ayna baqqa!(i.e., little! little!
ascend the eye of a bug.)" So al-Hasan ascended gradually with his small
feet till he put them on the chest of his grandfather. He opened his
mouth when his grandfather said to him: "Open your mouth." Then the
Prophet kissed him on the mouth and said: "O Allah! I love him, so love
him and love him who loves him." [[1]](#r2)

Then this memory was the key of the memories that amused al Hasan. For
it made him forget the annoying things of his last moment. The best
period in the life of every human being is his innocent childhood. For
it reminds him of the laps where he sits and the society where he lives.
Besides the memories of this period remain immortal  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n2) See al-Zamakhshari. Ibn al-Bay'. Al-Tabarani. Yanabi'
al-Mawadda. Al-IsAba, vol. 2, p. 12.

  

in his mind, in his heart, and in his spirit. Namely, he never forgets
such a period.

One day al-Hasan remembered his grandfather, the Apostle of Allah, may
Allah bless him and his family, when he put him on his right shoulder
and put his brother al-Husayn on his left shoulder. So Abu Bakr received
Allah's Apostle and said to al-Hasan and al Husayn: "The best riding
next you have ridden, two boys." "They are the best two riders. Indeed,
these two boys are my two plants of sweet basil (to sweeten) the world,"
[[2]](#r3) said the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his
family.

Al-Hasan remembered the day when his grandfather sat down and made him
ride on his back and made his brother al-Husayn ride with him, and said
to them: "The best camel is your camel, and you are the best two just
ones." [[2]](#r4)

He (al-Hasan) remembered the day when he came and his grandfather was
bowing down, so he (al-Hasan) rode on his neck while he (his
grandfather) was praying. [[3]](#r5) He remembered the day when he
(al-Hasan) came and his grandfather was kneeling down, so he (his
grandfather) opened his legs to let him pass to the other side.
[[4]](#r6) He remembered the day when it was said to his grandfather:
"You treat this (i.e., al-Hasan) in a manner with which you do not treat
anyone  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n3) See the book of Sulaym b. Qays. Al-Bayhaqi, al-Mahasin wa
al-Masawi', p. 49. The latter has reported the words of al-Himyari, who
poetized the Prophetic tradition as follows: Al-Hasan and al-Husayn came
to the Apostle, They had gone out in the morning to play. So he (the
Apostle) embraced and welcomed them, They were with him at that next.
They passed riding on his two shoulders (i.e., al-Hasan and al-Husayn).
So (his shoulders) were the best riding next, and they were the best
riders. [[2]](#n4) Ibn Batta, al-Ibana. [[3]](#n5) Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat
al-Awliya'. [[4]](#n6) Ahmad Shahab al-Din al-'Asqalani al-Isaba fi
Tamyiz al-Sahaba, vol. 2, p. 11.

  

else." So he (the Prophet) said: "Indeed, this (i.e., al-Hasan) is my
plant of sweet basil. Indeed, this (grand) son of mine is a lord.
Through him Allah will make peace between two groups of the Muslims."
[[1]](#r7)

He (al-Hasan) remembered his riding on the neck of his grandfather, may
Allah bless him and his family, while the latter was delivering a speech
at his mosque so that the shine of his (al-Hasan's) anklets was seen
from the farthest (next) of the mosque. They (al Hasan's) anklets were
shining on the chest of his grandfather. Then he (al-Hasan) went on
sitting on his grandfather's neck till the Prophet ended his speech.
[[2]](#r8)

He (al-Hasan) remembered the day when his grandfather got down from his
pulpit frightened when he (al-Hasan) stumbled at the door of the mosque.
So he (his grandfather) carried him and took him with him to his pulpit.
Then he (the Prophet) said: "The child is nothing but a tribulation."
[[3]](#r9)

He (al-Hasan) remembered his grandfather when he said more than one time
to him: "You are similar to me in form and manners." [[4]](#r10)

He remembered the day when he woke, suddenly. His grandfather and his
mother were talking. So he came forward his grandfather and said:
"Grandfather, water me." So his grandfather took him and went to his
she-camel with a lot of milk. He milked the she- camel. Then he brought
a foaming bowel of milk. He passed it to al-Hasan. Meanwhile, al-Husayn
woke and said:" (Grand) father water me." He (his grandfather) said to
him:"(Grand) son, your brother is older than you, and he had asked me to
water him before you." [[5]](#r11)

He remembered the day when he was a child between the two  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n7) Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat al-Awliya'. [[2]](#n8) Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 6, p. 58. [[3]](#n9) Al-Manaqib. Al-Tirmidhi. Al-Sam'ani.
Ahmad, al-Fada'il. [[4]](#n10) Al-Ghazali, Ihya' 'Ulum al-Din. Al-Makki,
al-Ihya' and Qut al Qulub. [[5]](#n11) Sulaym b. Qays al-Saqifa, p. 98.

  

hands of his mother Fatima, peace be on her. Then her father the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, came to her. He saw him
(al-Hasan) playing. So he (her father) said to her: "Indeed, Allah, the
Exalted, will make peace between two great groups of the Muslims through
this son of yours." [[1]](#r12)

He remembered some signs of his succession to authority. That was on the
day when he came to Abu Bakr when the latter was on the pulpit of his
grandfather, the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family.
He said to him: "Get down from the pulpit of my (grand) father."
[[2]](#r13)

Moreover, he remembered his grandfather when he took him with him to his
pulpit. Thus he (his grandfather) was looking at the people. In the mean
time he was looking at him. Then he said: "Indeed, this (grand) son of
mine is a lord. Through him Allah will make peace between two groups of
the Muslims." [[3]](#r14)

These sentimental memories had an effect on al-Hasan. Besides they were
historical and enjoyable. For they abated his sufferings during those
painful moments. Meanwhile they abated that the violent disaster.
Moreover, each memory led to many memories, and each vision moved other
visions.

Al-Hasan was sure of the words of his grandfather, may Allah bless him
and his family, as he was sure of the clear revelation (i.e., the
Qur'an). His grandfather said the following words on several occasions:
"Indeed, this (grand) son of mine is a lord. Through him Allah will make
peace between two groups of the Muslims."

Al-Hasan remembered these words of his grandfather. Thus he asked
himself "Is this the day on which the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, wanted me to make peace with the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n12) Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, al-'Iqd al-Farid, vol. 1, p. 194.
Al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1, p. 40. Al-Bukhari. Al-Sam'ani. Al-Harkushi.
Al-Janabadhi. Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat al-Awliya'. Yanabi' al-Mawadda. Muruj
al-Dhahab. [[2]](#n13) Ibn Hajar al-'Asqalani, al-Sawa'iq al-Muhriqa, p.
105. Also Al-Darqutni has mentioned it. [[3]](#n14) Al-Bukhari. Muslim.
Al-Isaba, vol. 2, p. 12.

  

Syrians? The Syrians are aggressors, so does this tradition concern
them? Is this the discord for which the Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family, wanted me to settle? Do I not have enough
fighters to suppress it by force?

All these questions sounded in al-Hasan's mind. They stirred him up. So
he was about to create a historical change. Apart from this, al Hasan
had to find appropriate solutions for these questions to get ready to
face his critical situation.

Al-Hasan was successful in finding solutions for these questions. That
is because he followed the same ways his grandfather followed during his
most critical hours.

Indeed the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said
the foregoing tradition.

Besides, it is this discord which the Prophet meant in his holy
traditions. For there was no discord greater than it. In other words it
divided the Muslims and diverted them from their enemies who lay in wait
for them. [[1]](#r15) Moreover, it prevented them from achieving their
religious obligations such as development, organization, and jihad (holy
war).

As for the Islamic judgment of the aggressors, the attitude of the
Commander of the faithful (Imam 'Ali), peace be on him, towards them
indicates that. He prevented the Muslims from capturing their women and
their children. Furthermore, his practices towards them are good enough
examples in the religion.

The Shi'a in Kufa were very eager to wage jihad (holy war), against
Mu'awiya. However, why did al-Hasan ask himself about the ability to
suppress the discord by force? To answer this question. We must study
al-Hasan's fighters and their morale in the armies. For they are the
only means that help to win battles. Thus they are more important than
the large number of an army without high military  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n15)This is a hint to the attempts of the Byzantine on the Syrian
borders in the year40A.H.

  

spirit.

Now, we are able to answer the above-mentioned question as follows:

At Maskan, the morale of al-Hasan's army was low. Hence this army was in
need of a miracle to raise its morale. That is because of the disaster
that hit it when its commander and eight thousand fighters deserted it.

In al-Mada'in, al-Hasan had some fighters who were like ghosts. He was
able to know their intentions through their hostile confusing
fabrications. Moreover, they created a good deal of exciting discords.
They were afraid of the critical situations. They had no hope of victory
at the battle. As for the number of the army of al-Hasan, peace be on
him, it was twenty thousand fighters or little more when al-Hasan
advanced against Mu'awiya. However, Mu'awiya's army that camped on the
Iraqi borders was sixty thousand fighters.

So al-Hasan, at that time, had third of the number of the army of
Mu'awiya.

There were many desertions from the Camp of Maskan. For example, the
cousin (i.e., al-Hasan's cousin, 'Ubayd Allah) deserted that camp. Thus
he embodied the Arabic proverb: "A cousin maybe not a cousin." Eight
thousand fighters deserted that camp, too. So it decreased in an awful
manner.

Accordingly, the number of al-Hasan's army was one fifth of the army of
Mu'awiya in both camps.

If we, here, depend on the modern military rule that owes morale to the
numerical abundance, that is one to three, then we will come to a very
sorrowful result that is fifteen to one in proportion.

If we think about the army of al-Hasan, that remained fighting against
Mu'awiya at Maskan (according to this rule), we will find that it was
fighting against an enemy who was exactly forty-five times more than it.

Therefore, I wonder: Was al-Hasan's army strong enough to  

  

suppress the discord the Syrians created?

War regulations throughout history do not permit one person to fight
against fifteen or forty- five persons. If such a war occurred some day,
then it would be irregular. Rather, it is among death- defying attacks
that lead to suicide with will and intention.

So al-Hasan was not supposed to take such a measure. For he was the
(grand) son of the Apostle of Allah. He was the creature whom Allah kept
for reform not for war, for peace not for enmity. He was the plant Allah
grew for Muslims not for himself, for the religion not for authority.
Moreover, he wanted a reward from Allah in the hereafter, not from the
people in this world.

In this way the peaceful message of Allah prevented the two parties from
waging war against each other. This event is very famous in history.
Still some historians tried to hint to a battle. They claimed that the
battle took next between the army of Qays, who was the commander of the
vanguard of the army of al-Hasan, and the Syrians at Maskan. In his
book, 'al-Darrajat al-Rafi'a', Sayyid 'Ali Khan (died 1120 A.H.) has
mentioned some stages of this claimed battle.

I have not found a reference book older than this book of the great
Sayyid to affirm this story, nor have I found what supports this idea
when I studied the situation at Maskan at that time, nor have I found
what urges me to accept this report when I have studied the plan al
Hasan drew to prevent bloodshed during all his lifetime, nor have I
understood that when I have read this tradition of the Apostle of Allah,
may Allah bless him and his family: "Indeed, Allah will make peace
between two great groups of the Muslims through al-Hasan." Rather, this
tradition indicates that he was the messenger of peace in Islam.

So was it possible for al-Hasan's army to wage war against Mu'awiya or
to attack him?

From al-Hasan's testamentary bequest, we have known that he ordered
al-Husayn not to pour even blood into a cupping- glass in carrying out
his command. That happened as he wanted.

Moreover, many eyewitnesses underlined that al-Hasan was the  

  

successor to authority, and that he did not shed even blood into a
cupping- glass during his succession to authority. Some of them said
that. They affirmed their words through swearing (by Allah) twice.
[[1]](#r16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n16) Ahmad Shahab al-Din al-'Asqalani, al-Isaba fi Tamyiz
al-Sahaba, vol. 2, p. 12. Ibn Kathir, Ta'rikh, vol. 8, pp. 8-14.
