Chapter 14: Secret of the Attitude
==================================

  

Up till now, we have brought nothing to quench our thirst or to serve as
a proof for understanding the reason why al-Hasan, peace be on him,
turned away from martyrdom and accepted making peace practically. The
most important point in the matter of al-Hasan arose from the day when
he made peace with Mu'awiya. For people have criticized him since then.
The subject which we have mentioned within this study is the worthiest
of all subjects in taking care, discussing, and probing. That is because
it is of great importance and because it is the secret of the attitude
which no one has unveiled for more than thirteen centuries.

To be more accurate in understanding the reasons for the purpose which
we want to conclude through this study, we will first of all start with
mentioning the declarations of the most famous historians on the
subject, and then we will consider carefully the condition when al Hasan
made peace (with Mu'awiya) and the conclusions of this study.

1. In his book 'Ta'rikh', al-Ya'qubi said: "Mu'awiya sent (some men) to
the army of al-Hasan to rumor that Qays b. Sa'd had made peace with
Mu'awiya and joined him. Also he (i.e., Mu'awiya) sent (some men) to the
army of Qays, after the desertion of 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas and those
who were with him, to rumor that al-Hasan had made peace with Mu'awiya
and answered him. Then Mu'awiya sent to al-Hasan al-Mughira b. Shu'ba,
'Abd Allah b. Kurayz, and 'Abd al Rahman b. Umm al-Hakam. They came to
al-Hasan, who stopped at his great tent, in al-Mada'in. Then they left
him speaking loudly to make the people hear: 'Indeed Allah has prevented
bloodshed through the (grand) son of the Apostle of Allah. For al-Hasan
has calmed the discord  
 and accepted making peace (with Mu'awiya).' So they (the  

  

people) attacked al-Hasan, and plundered his great tent. So al-Hasan
mounted his own horse and went to Mazlam Sabat. Al-Jarrah b. Sinan
al-Asadi had ambushed him, stabbed him in the thigh, seized his beard
and twisted it, and took him by the neck. Al-Hasan was carried (on a
stretcher) to al-Mada'in. He bled very much, and his illness became
intense. So the people deserted him. Then Mu'awiya came to Iraq and
controlled the authority. Al-Hasan had no strength, and his companions
had deserted him and had not stood alongside him. He knew of that, so
made peace with Mu'awiya."

2. Al-Tabari said: "The people pledged allegiance to al-Hasan b. 'Ali,
peace be on him. Then he went out with the people till he stopped at
al-Mada'in. He sent Qays b. Sa'd to lead his vanguard (so and- so) that
was composed of twelve thousand fighters. (In the meantime) Mu'awiya and
the Syrians moved till they stopped at Maskan. While al-Hasan had been
at al-Mada'in, a caller called in the army: 'Qays b. Sa'd has  

  

been killed, so desert (al-Hasan).' So they deserted him, and plundered
his tent to the extent that they plundered even his prayer mat from
under him. Then al-Hasan went out till he stopped at the white
compartment at Maskan. The uncle of al Mukhtar b. Abu 'Ubayd was
governor over al-Mada'in. His name was Sa'd b. Mas'ud. So al-Mukhtar,
who was a young man, said to him: 'Have you anything of riches and
honor?' He (i.e., Sa'd b. Mas'ud) said: 'What is that?' He (i.e.,
al-Mukhtar) said: 'Bind al Hasan's legs together and ask Mu'awiya for
safety through this act.' So Sa'd said to him: 'May Allah's curse be on
you! Do you want me to attack the son of the daughter of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and to bind his legs
together? How a bad man you are!' So when al-Hasan knew that the people
deserted him, he-sent (a man) to Mu'awiya and asked him to make peace
with him. Thus Mu'awiya sent to him 'Abd Allah b. 'Amir, and 'Abd
al-Rahman b. Samra b. Habib b. 'Abd Shams. So they came to al-Hasan at
al Mada'in, then they gave him what he wanted and made peace with him."

3. In his book 'al-Kamil', Ibn al-Athir said: "When al-Hasan stopped at
al-Mada'in, a caller called in the army: 'Qays b. Sa'd has been killed,
so desert.' Then they attacked al-Hasan's tent and plundered his
provisions."

Also Ibn al-Athir has mentioned the previous text of al-Tabari, then he
said: "It was said that al-Hasan handed over the authority. That is
because Mu'awiya exchanged letters with him to hand over the authority.
Then al-Hasan addressed the people. He praised Allah, lauded Him, and
said: 'By Allah, neither doubt nor regret prevents us from the Syrians.
Rather we fought against them with safety and patience. However, safety
was mixed with enmity, and patience with impatience. Your religion was
before your life in this world during your advancing against (them at
the Battle of) Siffin. However, today your life in this world has become
before your religion. Indeed you have become between two killed
(persons)- one was killed at (the Battle) of Siffin and you weep over
him, and the other was killed at (the Battle) of al-Nahrwan and you
avenge his blood. As for the rest, they are betrayers, and as for the
weeper is a rebel. Indeed Mu'awiya has summoned us to a matter in which
there is neither dignity nor justice. So if you want death, we will
answer in kind and judge him for Allah with our swords. If you want
life, we will accept him and take contentment for you.' So the people
called al-Hasan from all directions: 'The rest! The rest! Make peace!'"

4. In his book 'Sharh Nahj al-Balagha', b. Abu al-Hadid said: "On the
authority of al-Mada'in, who said: 'Then al-Hasan sent 'Abd Allah b.
'Abbas and Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbdda to head a vanguard of twelve thousand
(fighters) to advance against Sham (Syria). Then he went out to head for
al-Mada'in. However, he was stabbed at Sabat and his provisions were
plundered. Then he entered al-Madain. Mu'awiya heard of that news, so he
propagated it. The companions whom al-Hasan sent with 'Abd Allah began
joining Mu'awiya's camp. They were from the prominent figures and the
members of the houses. So 'Abd Allah b. al-'Abbas wrote to al-Hasan
concerning that. For this reason al-Hasan addressed the people and
scolded them and said: 'You had disobeyed my father, so he accepted the
arbitration while he was reluctant (to do that). Then he summoned you to
fight against the Syrians after  
 the arbitration, but you refused that till he passed away.  
 Then you pledged allegiance to me to make peace with  

  

him who makes peace with me and to fight him who fights against me. I
have heard that the people of honor went to Mu'awiya and pledged
allegiance to him. It is enough for me when you do not desert me and my
religion. Al-Hasan sent to Mu'awiya 'Abd Allah (b. al-Harith b. Noufal
b. al-Harith b. 'Abd al-Muttalib. His mother was Hind bint (the
daughter) of Abu Sufyan b. Harb) to ask him to make peace. Al-Hasan
stipulated that Mu'awiya should act according to the Book of Allah and
the Sunna (practices) of His Apostle, and that he should not pledge
allegiance to anyone after him.

5. In his book 'al-Irshad', al-Mufid said: "A group of the tribal
leaders wrote secretly to Mu'awiya offering to accept his authority
(i.e., to listen and obey). They urged him to come to them and they
guaranteed to hand over al-Hasan when they got to his camp, or to kill
him treacherously.

"Al-Hasan learned of that when a letter came to him from Qays b. Sa'd.
He had sent Qays with 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas (to go on ahead) when he
had set out from Kufa to meet Mu'awiya and to drive him out of Iraq, and
make himself a commander of a unified people (lama 'a). He had said to
'Ubayd Allah: 'If you are struck down, then the commander will be Qays
b. Sa'd.'

"Qays b. Sa'd's letter arrived informing al-Hasan that they had stopped
Mu'awiya at a village called al-Jinubiya opposite Maskan. Then Mu'awiya
had sent to 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas, urging him to come to him and
offering him a million dirhams, half of which he would give him
immediately, and the other half on his entry into Kufa. 'Ubayd Allah had
slipped away in the night with his close associates to (join) Mu'awiya's
camp. In the morning the people found their leader missing. Qays b. Sa'd
said the prayer with them and took charge of their affairs.

"Al-Hasan's awareness of the people's desertion of him increased, (as
did his awareness) of the corrupt intention of the Muhakkima (the
Kharijites) against him, which they made obvious by cursing him,
accusing him of disbelief, and declaring that it was lawful to shed his
blood and plunder his proper. There remained no one to protect him from
his unfortunate predicament except the close associates from his  

  

father's Shi'a and his own Shi'a, and they were a group that could not
resist the Syrian soldiers.

"Mu'awiya wrote to al-Hasan about a truce and peace treaty. He also sent
him letters of his followers in which they had guaranteed to kill him
treacherously or to hand him over. He offered him as many conditions as
he wanted, to answer his (call) for peace and he gave his (sworn)
covenant by whose fulfillment everybody's interests would be served.
Al-Hasan did not trust him. He was aware of his deception and his
attempts at assassination. However, he could find no escape from
assenting to his demands to abandon the war and bring about a truce
because of the weakness of his followers' understanding of his right,
their corrupt attitude towards him and their opposition to him. (In
addition, he was aware) of the view of many of them in declaring it
lawful to shed his blood and to hand him over to his rival. (He also
knew) of his cousin's desertion (of him) and his joining his enemy, as
well as the inclination of the people towards the immediate present and
their reluctance (to show concern) for the future."

I (the author) say: In most historical encyclopedias, you do not find a
study written in detail on the matter of al-Hasan, peace be on him. In
this respect, all writers do not resemble each other and sometimes they
oppose each other in presenting the historical facts. Besides their
studies are incomplete and their expressions are brief.

As you have seen (in the above- mentioned texts) that one of the
historian thinks that al-Hasan asked Mu'awiya for making peace, while
the other thinks that it was Mu'awiya who asked al-Hasan for making
peace. Some historians think that al-Hasan asked Mu'awiya for making
peace because of the discords that happened at both the camps, namely at
Maskan and al-Mada'in. Then they differ over the kind of the discord.
Some of them think that al-Hasan agreed on making peace with  

  

Mu'awiya because the people deserted him when he was stabbed and became
ill. Some of them think that al-Hasan made peace with Mu'awiya because
the people were tired of fighting alongside him. That was al-Hasan's
oration when the people said: "the rest! the rest!," and when they said
openly: "Make peace (with Mu'awiya)!" Some of them think that al-Hasan
made peace with Mu'awiya because the commander (i.e., 'Ubayd Allah b.
'Abbas) deserted him and his companions betrayed him and some of his
companions declared that it was lawful to shed his blood and the rest of
his companions were not enough to wage war against Mu'awiya.

Moreover, the historians still differ over the commander's name. Some of
them have called him 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas; some of them called him Qays
b. Sa'd b. 'Ubbada; some of them called him 'Ubayd Allah b. al-'Abbas,
and so on.

How painful this historical matter is! Indeed it is harmful, especially
when the historians study it at random.

The other historians have studied this matter as they studied the
marginal matters in history, paying no attention to that short period of
time that was full of great events, namely the period of time when al
Hasan's general Islamic succession to authority occurred, the separation
between the spiritual authority and the temporal authority happened, the
caliphate turned into kingdom, and the tribal enmities in Islam started.

The historians who wrote briefly or in detail about the matter of al
Hasan discussed only the critical conditions that forced him to make
peace with Mu'awiya. In other words they adopted different attitudes
towards such a sensitive matter: some of them yielded to government,
kept silent, and showed no idea; some of them regarded al-Hasan's matter
as right, justified it, increased proofs for it, and numbered the
excuses; others criticized him in an ignorant way, were unaware of the
secret of the attitude so that they began disclosing their own
psychological traits such as impudent fanaticism, bad discrimination,
and the like.

If the friends and the enemies consider carefully the critical
historical situations from which al-Hasan, peace be on him, suffered,
they will refrain from censuring him for turning away from martyrdom
that was, without doubt, the best and most appropriate end for the
immortal Imam.

At this they will be able to know the reason why the Imam preferred
making peace with Mu'awiya to martyrdom. In the  

  

meantime they will be in no need of any effort to count the disasters or
to study the critical situations. However, these people insist that it
was inappropriate for al-Hasan to make peace with Mu'awiya, for the
condition was appropriate for al-Hasan to die a martyr as his brother al
Husayn did. In other words the hardships from which al-Hasan suffered
were similar to those from which al-Husayn suffered. However, al-Husayn
passed them through martyrdom. So such a kind of martyrdom is a proof
for his immortality in the history of the people who revolt against
oppression.

Therefore, why did al-Hasan not follow the way of al-Husayn?

Was he cowardly? I (the author) ask Allah's forgiveness, for al Husayn's
heart was not braver than al-Hasan's, nor was his sword sharper than
his, nor was he more liable to persecutions than him. Al Hasan and
al-Husayn were two brothers in all their great qualities: in good
manners, religion, sacrificing for the religion, bravery in
battlefields; moreover they were the two sons of the bravest of all
Arabs. So I (i.e., the author) wonder: where is the next of cowardice in
al Hasan?

Was al-Hasan desirous of the life in this world? Far be it from the
spiritual Imam who has perfumed history. It was impossible for him to
prefer the life in this world to what Allah has bestowed on him such as
dignity and great position in the gardens. He had great spirits, for
jihad and sacrifices grew on him. Thus he was ready to abdicate the
throne and to renounce all worldly pleasures.

Was he satisfied with Mu'awiya to be the leader of Islam when he made
peace with him and yielded to him? Certainly not! Al-Hasan was not
satisfied with Mu'awiya. Many historians have reported his words
concerning Mu'awiya. He regarded him as an aggressor. He had no doubt
about his aggression. He described him as an unbeliever. Thus he said to
the Muslims that it was incumbent on them to fight against him.

These are some of al-Hasan's words to Mu'awiya: "Leave aggression and
prevent the blood of the Muslim from shedding. By  

  

Allah, you have shed a lot of their Blood. Fear Allah, for you will meet
him. [[1]](#r1)

One of his companions blamed him for making peace with Mu'awiya, so he
said: "By Allah, if I had supporters, I would fight against Mu'awiya day
and night." [[2]](#r2)

In his historical speech at al-Mada'in, al-Hasan said: "By Allah,
neither doubt nor regret prevent us from (fighting against) the
Syrians."

As we have previously mentioned, al-Hasan said to Abu Said: "The reason
that made me make peace with Mu'awiya was the same reason that made the
Apostle of Allah made peace with the banu (sons of) Damra, the banu of
Ashja', and the Meccans when he left al Hudaybiya. Those were
unbelievers according to the Holy Qur'an, while Mu'awiya and his
companions are unbelievers according to the interpretation."

Therefore al-Hasan made peace with Mu'awiya, but he was not satisfied
with him. He did not fight against him, but he was not afraid of him.
Moreover, he turned away from martyrdom, but he was not desirous of the
life in this world. Rather he made peace with Mu'awiya because there was
no choice other than making peace during his time. In this way al-Hasan
is distinguished from al Husayn. That is because al-Husayn had two
choices during his time: either making peace or martyrdom. So the best
of all the people (i.e., al-Husayn) hurried to choose the better of the
two ways. As for al Hasan, he was prevented from obtaining martyrdom so
that he had only one possible way which he had to follow.

I (i.e., the author) say that and I am sure of what I say.

Maybe it seems strange when I say: al-Hasan was prevented from obtaining
martyrdom. That is because someone may ask: "Wasn't al Hasan the
believer who abdicated his right to authority? Didn't he leave for Allah
what was in the world for the world? Didn't he sell his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n1) Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 12.
[[2]](#n2) Al-Tubrisi, al-Ihtijaj, p. 151.

  

life for Allah's reward? So why did he avoid facing the swords and the
spears to be a martyr? Isn't this the Immortal martyr? Moreover, why was
such a mujahid (holy fighter) prevented from martyrdom while he had a
long history in jihad (holy war)? So why didn't he hurry to martyrdom?
Why haven't we heard that he tried to obtain martyrdom through fighting
against the enemy on the day when he had no escape from that? If he had
done that, wouldn't all his loyal Shi'a have defied death for him? Were
they not waiting for his final word to wage war against his enemies?"

Yes, this was the beginning of the problem that distinguished al Hasan
from the other members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.
From here this historical problem has become a matter of doubt. Much
nonsense has been said about it. Such kind of nonsense has complicated
the matter very much and made the people unable to understand it.

Then it is natural for those who depend on nonsense in their life to
misunderstand the series of the events. Thus they improvise rules.
Through these rules they study the policy of al-Hasan to show weak
points in it and to criticize it paying no intention to the historical
facts.

Now, which idea is correct-the idea of al-Hasan or that of the critics?

Al-Hasan was a great leader. No one can doubt his leadership. Besides no
one can criticize him easily.

Now, we will solve the problem. However, it is better for us to mention
three facts before we solve it. These facts are as follows:

The first fact is about the meaning of martyrdom.

The second fact is about al-Hasan's critical situation at al Mada' in.

The third fact is about Mu'awiya's plan towards the aims of al Hasan,
peace be on him.

  

### 1. Martyrdom for Allah

In its meaning that makes life, martyrdom means sacrificing the life to
enliven a good deed or to cause an evil deed to die.

The sacrifice that is not for Allah is not an act of martyrdom, nor is
the sacrifice that not for enjoining good deeds and forbidding evil
deeds.

If an unbeliever killed a Muslim in the field of jihad, the Muslim would
be a martyr.

If an oppressive person killed a Muslim in the field of defense, the
Muslim would be a martyr.

However, if a Muslim killed a Muslim during a personal dispute or killed
him to support a certain religious doctrine, there would be neither
martyrdom nor dignity. That is because the dignity on which mankind have
agreed throughout history is the wage of the martyr, for he sacrifices
his life for the public interest. So neither personal sacrifices nor
anti-interest sacrifices are acts of martyrdom.

The leader is sometimes killed by his followers or by those who have
right to authority. Thus his blood is in vain, namely he is not a martyr
in the full sense of the word. That is because the majority in every
society is the source of the powers of every person who assumes their
affairs in their name. This was the rule on which the team powers in
Islam were based. According to this rule, the early Muslim said to 'Umar
b. al-Khattab: "If you deviate (from the truth), we will straighten you
with our swords."

Again, if the leader is killed, then his blood is in vain, and he is not
a martyr in the full sense of the word, for the friendly followers who
gather together to shed this blood are worthier of authority than him.
In other words they revolt against him to take their legal right to
authority. Their strong proof for that is their cooperation. In this
respect al-Qaffal al-Shafi'i said: "Indeed the community that appoints
(a person) as a ruler is responsible for punishing him."

For example, 'Uthman, who was the third Caliph and historical figure who
shook the earth with his fearful authority, was killed by the  

  

armed revolutionaries from the owners of the right to authority. So
neither history nor his friends in history are able to regard him as a
martyr in the full sense of the word.

Waqqas was the servant of Abu Dharr al-Ghifari. He was a poor black
slave. He had no important role in life. However, he has forced history
to hallow him, for he was killed in the way of Allah, so he has become a
martyr in the full sense of the word.

Therefore the conditions of martyrdom and the necessities of its dignity
do not concern only the great figure. Meanwhile not only the great
figure is regarded as a martyr when he is killed in the way of Allah.

Now, let us leave this preface to move to the second subject, then we
will take our need from it when necessary.

### 2. A Diminished Picture on the Irregular Situation at al-Mada'in

From the foregoing study, repetition is necessary for the research, we
have known that the best soldiers of al-Hasan joined the vanguard that
went to Maskan before him. However, his soldiers at al-Mada'in were the
weakest of all soldiers in morale and the nearest of them to desertion,
restlessness, and division.

We have also known that al-Hasan had been surprised by three initiatives
before he received any help from his other camps. These three
initiatives, that were as warners against the disaster, are as follows:

A. The news of the wide-range treason at Maskan.

B. The provocative rumor that urged the people to desert (the camp)
through telling them that Qays b. Sa'd, who was the second commander of
the army of Maskan, had been killed.

C. The discord created by the Syrian delegation that came to show the
Imam the letters of the traitorous Kufans, and then the delegation went
out saying that al-Hasan had accepted making peace with  

  

Mu'awiya.

As we have mentioned in chapter 8, in this army were the men of
discords, the men of the wish for booty, the Kharijites, and the like.
They had no means more useful than these discords which they stirred up
among al-Hasan's army through the above-mentioned three sorrowful
initiatives.

Moreover, al-Hasan summoned the people, addressed them, asked them for
good intention and patience, reminded them of their laudable days (i.e.,
battles) at Siffin, and blamed them for those discords. Among the most
wonderful things which al-Hasan achieved through his speech was that he
was able to bring the people gradually to confess openly that they
recoiled from waging war against Mu'awiya. That occurred when al-Hasan
wanted to ask them for advice concerning what Mu'awiya had written to
him, so, at the end of his speech, he said: "Indeed Mu'awiya has
summoned us to a matter in which there is neither dignity nor justice.
If you wanted death, we would refuse it and judge him with our swords
before Allah. If you wanted life, we would accept it from him and take
contentment for you." So the people called him from all directions: "The
rest! The rest! Carry out peace making!" [[1]](#r3)

I (i.e., the author): In the history of the matter of al-Hasan, peace be
on him, there are two reports. They have been mentioned to the extent
that they have become among the axioms of this history. They are: the
narration of the people who requested the rest and carrying out peace
making, and the narration of the people who rose in al-Mada'in
protesting against making peace and insisting on waging war against
Mu'awiya. So I wish I knew which of the two ideas was the aim of these
people?

Aren't these two ideas the signs of the division which we have already
mentioned?. Rather they indicate the chaos that hindered the battle
field, and they indicate that those who called the Imam from all  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n3) Ibn Khaldun. Ibn al-Athir. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar. We
have already mentioned the first part of this oration with in the
declarations of the historians in this chapter.

  

directions to make peace with Mu'awiya were themselves who asked the
Imam to wage war against him.

So chaos, summons to jihad, and making friends with the Imam do not come
together.

These were among the aspects of the camp of al-Mada'in, and among the
qualities of the mixed groups of people who had controlled it.

Some soldiers revolted against al-Hasan. They accused him of unbelief.
This indicates that they belonged to the Kharijites. For the Kharijites
accused the Muslims or the Imams of unbelief when they became angry with
them. Besides they used such an accusation as a pretext to cover the
great crime which one of them committed when he stabbed al-Hasan in the
thigh.

Some soldiers plundered al-Hasan's tent to the extent that they
plundered his cloak and his prayer mat. This indicates that they
belonged to "the men of the wish for booty.

The discords in al-Hasan's army indicate that there were discord makers.
They were in this army when it was in Kufa and when it moved to the two
camps to wage holy jihad against Mu'awiya.

In this manner the discord quickly spread through the army in al
Mada'in. So even the well- organized loyal companions to al-Hasan were
unable to control it. Thus the majority prevented the minority from
carrying out its duties. This army lacked tranquility which was
important to achieve steadfastness. Meanwhile it had no aims but foolish
ones. So this army was not able to fight against Mu'awiya. However, it
wanted to fight against its Imam, al-Hasan. It did not take war booty
from their enemy, but it wanted to take booty from its friends through
plundering their possessions. It was not able to join Mu'awiya's camp,
as its friends in the second camp did, it wrote to him to come to it.

This is what history has kept for this group of the people. As for what
historians have forgotten or tried to forget or they have been prevented
from mentioning it, no one knows it but Allah, the Great and Almighty.

  

I (i.e., the author) wonder: If Mu'awiya with all his cleverness and
generosity faced the situation and the army of al-Hasan, would he pass
his critical situation in a manner better than that al-Hasan used to
protect his doctrines, his plans, and his future?

To increase looking for the reasons that prevented al-Hasan from
obtaining holy martyrdom, we will inform the gentle reader of the third
stage of this round with sad steps.

### 3. Mu'awiya's Plan towards the Aims of al-Hasan, peace be on him

When 'Uthman died, the title 'the governor' (al-wali) with which
Mu'awiya was called died, too. We do not know which title he had used to
call himself after that, nor do we know the kind of his responsibility
according to the Islamic Law. However, we have known that the two legal
caliphs (i.e., 'Ali and his son al-Hasan), peace be on them, did not
appoint him as a governor, so he was not a governor. Also we have known
that the Islamic Law does not permit two caliphs at one time, so he was
not a caliph.

Therefore what was Mu'awiya after 'Uthman?

We do not know.

Yes, he drew the weapon at the faces of these two caliphs (i.e., 'Ali
and his son al-Hasan) from the day when he was removed from the
authority of Sham (Syria). We have seen that the Islamic Law gives a
title to him who behaved as Mu'awiya did. We think that Mu'awiya was
satisfied with the title, that is al-baghi (i.e., the oppressive one).

I (i.e., the author) wonder: Did Mu'awiya choose a title for himself
other than the leader of al-bughat (i.e., the oppressive ones)?

I think that Mu'awiya, because of his future ambition, was not annoyed
when he took the reins of authority while his title was unknown, nor was
worried when he was called al-baghi according to the Islamic Law. That
is because he was insisting on taking the greatest  
 titles by force regardless of the Islamic Law. So after that,  

  

Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas called him king. Muslim b. 'Aqaba [[1]](#r4),
al-Mughira b. Shu'ba [[2]](#r5), and 'Amr b. al 'As [[3]](#r6) called
him Amir al-mu'minin (the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n4) He was the leader at the Battle of al-Hurra, which took next
at the City of the Apostle of Allah (i.e., Medina), may Allah bless him
and his family. He violated the sanctity of the City for three days. He
demolished the Holy Kaaba with his mangonels. Mu'awiya advised his son
Yazid, after he had paved the affairs for him, to appoint Muslim b.
'Aqaba as a governor over Medina. He said to him: "You will face a day
(a battle) headed by the Medinans. If they did that, then punish them
with Muslim b. 'Aqaba, for he is the man whose advice I have known." See
al-Tabari, al-Bayhaqi, and Ibn al-Athir. [[2]](#n5) In his book
al-Mahasan wa al-Masawi', al-Bayhaqi told us: "AlMughira was the first
to be bribed. He (i.e., al-Mughira) was the mediator in the matter of
adding Ziyad (to Abu Sufyan) regardless of the Islamic laws. He was the
first to nominate Yazid b. Mu'awiya to the Caliphate. It was he who said
in this respect: 'I have put Mu'awiya's leg in the leather stirrup which
is far away from the intention of the community of Muhammad, and I have
made a rip for them (i.e., the Community of Muhammad), which can never
be mended.'" It was he whom Hasan b. Thabit ( a poet) meant when he
said: If ignobility was ascribed, it would be a one- eyed Slave with an
ugly face from Thaqif. I have left the religion and belief because of
ignorance In the early morning when I met the associate of al-Nasif. I
resorted to youth, and I remembered from inside the bowels Play and the
fine waist. [[3]](#n6) He was very famous. His boy Wardan, concerning
him, said: "Here and the hereafter quarreled with each other to control
his heart." So he preferred the life in this world to the next life. He
followed Mu'awiya provided that the latter should appoint him a governor
over Egypt. So may the hand of the seller be unsuccessful and the trust
of the buyer be disgraceful! Ibn 'Abd Rabbih has reported the following
on the authority of al-Hasan al-Basri, who said: "By Allah, Mu'awiya
knew that he would not control government completely unless 'Amr pledged
allegiance to him. So he said to him:' 'Amru, follow me.' 'Amr said:
'Why? For the hereafter? By Allah, there will, be no hereafter with you.
Or for the life in this world? By Allah, I will not follow you unless I
be your partner in it.' 'Then you are my partner in it,' said Mu'awiya.
'So give me Egypt and her districts,' said 'Amru. So Mu'awiya gave him
Egypt and her districts, and wrote at the end of the letter: 'Amr should
listen and obey.' 'And write that listening and obedience  

  

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

should change nothing of his condition,' said 'Amru. 'No, we will
consider this carefully,' said Mu'awiya. 'Till you write that,' said
'Amru." The old companion (i.e., 'Amru) who died at the age of 98 was
pleased to end his long age with such an evil trickery in the religion
and began saying without attention: "Were it not for Egypt and her
districts, I would escape from it, for I know that 'Ali b. 'Abu Talib
was right but I opposed him." As for the early life of 'Amr b. al-'As,
it harmed Islam and the Prophet of Islam, may Allah bless him and his
family, very much. That is because he was one of the two persons who
tried to kill the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, on the
Night of the Bed in Mecca. (i.e., the night when the latter asked 'Ali
to sleep in his bed to emigrate from Mecca to Medina). It was 'Amra who
was the childless (al-abtar) person whom Allah, the Exalted, meant by
His Words: "Indeed your enemy is the childless." He was among those who
provoked the people to kill 'Uthman. He did not go to Palestine till he
opened the ulcer as he said concerning himself on the day when he heard
of the killing of 'Uthman. At last he joined Mu'awiya's camp according
to the above- mentioned shameful bargaining. He got rid of the sure
killing at (the battle of) Siffin through the ugliest means which
history has known. Copies of the Qur'an were raised in answer to his
idea through which he was able to divide the unity of the Muslims. When
'Amr was about to die, he said to his son: "I had entered affairs. I do
not know what my proof for them will be with Allah." Then he looked at
his plentiful property and said: "I wish it was dung. I wish I died
thirty years before this time. I reformed Mu'awiya's life in this world
and I corrupted my religion. I preferred my life in this world to my
next life. My reason became blind till my death came to me." The
property he left behind him was three hundred thousand gold dinars and a
million silver dirhams in addition to his country estates. Al-Tabarani
and Ibn 'Asakir have reported the following tradition of the Apostle of
Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, concerning 'Amr and Mu'awiya:
"They do not meet each other but for perfidy." In their two books called
'al-Musnad', Ahmad and Abu Ya'la have mentioned the following tradition
on the authority of Abu Barza, who said: "We were with the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, so he (i.e., the Prophet) heard someone
singing and said: 'Look! Who is this?' I (i.e., Abu Barza) ascended.
Suddenly, it was Mu'awiya and Amru b. al-'As. They were singing. So I
came back and told the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who
said: 'O Allah, sink them into the seduction thoroughly. O Allah, leave
them in the fire for ever.'"

  

Commander of the faithful). He was the happiest one in this world, "who
obtained all things which the people did not obtain in this world," as
he said concerning himself.

When 'Amrru b. al-'As, Muslim b. 'Aqaba, and al-Mughira b. Shu'ba had
appointed him as a caliph and Commander of the faithful, Mu'awiya was
indifferent to the Islamic Law whether it permitted him to use such
titles or not. That is because the Islamic Law does not permit anyone to
take the religious titles by force, nor does it allow anyone to use the
title 'caliph' but when the person is similar to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. Besides the Islamic Law deprives the person of
using this title when there is between him and the Prophet like that
which is between two religions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In his book 'Tathir al-Jinan', b. Hajr has narrated the following
traditions: "Indeed 'Amr went up on the pulpit and cursed 'Ali. Then al
Mughira b. Shu'ba did as he ('Amra) did. So it was said to al-Hasan: 'Go
up on the pulpit to answer them.' However, he refused to do that unless
they promised to believe him when he said the truth and to accuse him of
lying when he said falsehood. They accepted that, so he went up on the
pulpit, praised Allah, lauded Him, and said:' 'Amra and Mughira, I want
you to swear by Allah, do you know that the Apostle of Allah had cursed
the driver and the leader; one of them was so- and- so (i.e.,
Mu'awiya)?' 'Yes,' they said. Then he (the Prophet) said: 'Mu'awiya and
Mughira, I ask you to swear by Allah, don't you know that the Prophet
had cursed 'Amra?' 'Yes,'they said. Then he said: "Amra and Mu'awiya, I
ask you to swear by Allah, don't you know that the Prophet had cursed
the people of this (i.e., al-Mughira)?' Then al-Hasan said: 'Indeed I
thank Allah who has made you from those who renounced this (i.e.,
'Ali)."' It was 'Amra b. al-'As whom the great companion 'Ammar b.
Yasir, may Allah be pleased with him, meant when he said to the
mujahidin (holy fighters) at (the Battle of Siffin) : "Do you not want
to look at him who showed enmity towards Allah and His Apostle and
fought against them, wronged the Muslims, and supported the polytheist,
and when he saw that Allah, the Great and Almighty, had strengthened his
religion and supported His Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
he became Muslim, as we think, unwillingly?. Then Allah made his
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, to die. By Allah, 'Amra
removed a good deed after Allah's Apostle when he showed enmity towards
the Muslims and bargained the criminal. So resist him and fight against
him, for he will extinguish the light of Allah and help the enemies of
Allah, the Great and Almighty." See: alTabari, Ibn Abu al-Hadid,
al-Mas'adi, and the like.

  

We do not know exactly to what extent these titles cost Mu'awiya in his
religion when he ascribed them to himself and to his son Yazid by force,
and when he did not introduce his son to the Muslims.

Also we do not know to what extent Mu'awiya took care of himself towards
Allah concerning what he had to take care of.

However, in the light of his many disputes, we have known that he did
not guard against himself. Also we have known that the ambitious
selfishness had controlled his heart so that he forgot his attitude
standing windward, and based on the spider web on the day when all
titles deserted him.

Also we have known that unruly tribalism prevented Mu'awiya, the tyrant,
from thinking so that it made him think that had a justification for
refusing the clear conditions of Islam concerning the caliph. That is
because 'Amr b. al-'As pledged allegiance to him, and alMughira b.
Shu'ba nominated his son Yazid to be the successor after him to lead the
believers. Wasn't this pledge of allegiance to Mu'awiya and this
nomination to his son Yazid resulting from the cheap bargaining for the
authorities of Egypt and Kufa as it is historically known?

No wonder! It was natural for Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan to be as he had
been before. That is because he was an original Umayyad or an Umayyad
associate, but he spared no effort to be original Umayyad. [[1]](#r7)

The Umayyads and the Hashimites had their own history that made them
ascended till they met and descended with them whenever the time
descended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n7) Al-Zamakhshari, Rabi' al-Abrar. Ibn al-Sa'ib, al-Mathalib.
Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, al-Aghani. Ibn al-Samman, Mathalib bani
Umayya. Ja'far b. Muhammad al-Hamadani, Bahjat al-Mustafid. Then the
gentle reader will be free to ascribe Mu'awiya to any of his four
fathers whose names have been mentioned there. In his book 'Nahj al
Balagha', the lord of Arabs (i.e., Imam 'Ali) referred to that: "The
original one is unlike the associate."

  

It was natural for the persons who were used to the tribal backgrounds
before and after Islam, who accepted Islam unwillingly on the Day of the
Conquest (of Mecca), and who did not understand Islam as it is, to keep
on their inherited spites and the old heritage with deep injuries.

After the Conquest (of Mecca) and during the time of the Prophet,
Mu'awiya was a bare-footed freed prisoner of war, as he described
himself. Then the Umayyads became eager to renew their position in
society. That is because an Umayyad member was nominated take to part in
the consultative Committee (which 'Umar b. al-Khattab appointed to elect
a new caliph). This step helped 'Uthman's cousin (i.e., Mu'awiya) to be
the fearful powerful governor of Sham (Syria). So he began to gather
helpers and supporters and to please the followers, the soldiers, and
the advisers. Then he built palaces, used curtains for them, and ordered
the soldiers to stop at their doors. In the meantime his wealth was
enough to tempt the men of greediness, the men who sold their
conscience, and the men who licked the bowl.

As Mu'awiya was a deserted subject and was unable to avenge himself and
his tribe on the people who overcame him and his tribe, it was natural
for him, when he took the reins of authority, to punish those people
severely and to avenge himself and his tribe on their children, their
brothers, their companions, their doctrines and their aims. So it was
expected that Mu'awiya would make armed raids on 'Ali and al-Hasan,
peace be on them, at the first opportunity, and to wage cold war against
them. Noteworthy this cold war of-his was the longest of all wars, and
most harmful of them towards Islam.

From the numerous diplomatic acts which Mu'awiya did during his long
time, we can conclude that he had decided to make a wide- range campaign
to destroy the Alid doctrines or to destroy the true Islam which 'Ali
and his pure sons represented.

It seems that Mu'awiya wanted to achieve four aims through this campaign
of his. They are as follows:

1. To paralyze the Shi'ites, to destroy gradually all those who adopted
Shiism, and to divide their unity.

  

2. To create discords in the areas that followed the members of the
House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, so that he (Mu'awiya) would be
able to severely punish those innocent people under the pretext of
causing riot.

3. To isolate the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them,
from the Muslim world, to force the people to forget them, to prevent
them by all means (possible) from having any influence, and then to
destroy them through assassinations.

4. To strengthen war of nerves.

In this respect, Mu'awiya had oppressive deeds. Thus Allah, the Great
and Almighty, will expose him for a long time as he has exposed him
throughout history. The research will force us to give some examples of
them when we talk about the stipulations of the Peace Treaty, which
Mu'awiya broke.

The most prominent way Mu'awiya used to show his enmity towards 'Ali and
his sons was that he forced the people in his kingdom to curse them.
This means that he forced the people to forget their right to the
authority, to renounce them, and to leave any tradition concerning their
outstanding qualities. Through this act, Mu'awiya was the first to curse
the Companions of the Prophet. So he was able to make the people obey
him through this abominable heresy.

Worth mentioning that the people were quickly affected by the powerful
propagation, especially when they were accompanied by money and high
ranks.

We do not know why the people were satisfied with Mu'awiya when he
cursed 'Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, peace be on them. In the meantime
we do not know why they harbored malice against the members of the House
(Ahl al-Bayt) peace be on them, when Mu'awiya provoked them.

Perhaps Mu'awiya was able to convince the people of that it was 'Ali and
his sons who waged war against the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, when he summoned the people to believe in Islam, and that it was
they who made unlawful what Allah had made lawful and made lawful what
Allah had made unlawful, and that it was they  

  

who added the illegal child to the lineage, and that it was they who
broke the covenants, violated the oath, killed great Muslim figures,
buried the innocent alive, and performed Friday prayer on Wednesday.
[[1]](#r8)

Perhaps Mu'awiya fed the people but he did not satisfy them, and maybe
he terrified them without giving them food. So he assumed "power through
them when they obeyed him and made cursing 'Ali a sunny (practice) on
which the young one grew up and the old one died. [[2]](#r9) It seems
probable that it was Mu'awiya who called this heresy Sunna (practice).
Then those who were deceived by his policy called it Sunna. In this way
the people after Mu'awiya went on adopting his heresy, namely cursing
'Ali, till 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz came to power and abolished it. "The
orator of the mosque of Harran delivered a sermon, then he ended the
sermon. However, he said nothing about cursing Abu Turab (i.e., Imam
'Ali) as usual. So the people shouted from all sides: 'Woe unto you! Woe
unto you! The sunna, the sunna! You have left the sunna!" [[3]](#r10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n8) Al-Mas'udi, Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, 72. Also other
references have reported that. [[2]](#n9) Al-Mas'udi, Muruj al-Dhahab,
vol. 2, p. 72. Here we must remember that 'Ali, peace be on him, heard a
group of people abusing the Syrians at the Battle of Siffin, he
prevented them from that and said to them: "I dislike you to start
abusing them but if you describe their deeds and recount their
conditions that would be a better mode of speaking and more convincing
way of arguing. Instead of abusing them you should say: 'O Allah, save
our blood and their blood, produce reconciliation between us and them,
and lead them out of their misguidance so that he who is ignorant of
truth may know it and he who is inclining to rebellion and revolt may
turn away from it.'" Nahj al-Balagha, pp. 420 and 421. One day
Mu'awiya's messenger came to al-Hasan, peace be on him, and said to him:
"I ask Allah to protect you and destroy these people." So al Hasan said
to him: "Be kind! Do not betray him who trusts you. It is enough for you
to love me for the love of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, of my father and mother. It is an act of treason that a certain
group of people trust you and you show enmity towards them and invoke
Allah against them." See al-Malahim wa al-Fitan, p. 143 (Najaf).
[[3]](#n10) Hashim al-Daftardar, al-Islam bayna al-Sunna wa al-Shi'a, p.
20.

  

Then the sunna of Mu'awiya became historical rule. It made the word
sunna imply another idiomatic meaning which the generations handed down,
and with which the early political meaning was forgotten.

When you consider carefully Mu'awiya's psychological features, you will
be in no need of mentioning many examples of his evil deeds.

After this, what would have happened if Mu'awiya had been victorious at
his fighting against al-Hasan and the latter had died a martyr at that
fighting?

Do the back grounds of Mu'awiya indicate that he would be moderate in
his victory over al-Hasan's Shi'a and the rest of the firm believers or
would he destroy them all after he had killed the greatest figure in the
great Prophetic family?

Surely, Mu'awiya would never refrain from doing that. Moreover, he would
not abstain from destroying the doctrine that shook his entity from the
day when 'Ali became a caliph, rather from the day when the Hashimites
brought light to the life in this world, rather from the day when the
Hashimites vied in nobility with the Umayyads so that the latter escaped
to Sham (Syria).

Mu'awiya would be able to take other well- woven measures to destroy the
Shi'a after the killing of al-Husayn and to trick those who were
deceived by his leadership from the generation that helped him to usurp
government.

Mu'awiya took measures to curse the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt)
and to accuse 'Ali of killing 'Uthman so that he was ready to take the
third measure to destroy Shiism materially and spiritually.

Inside the high palaces of Mu'awiya in Sham (Syria) were consciences for
sale and hireling pens. So it was natural for such kinds of people to
fabricate traditions and ascribe them to the Apostle of Allah, may Allah
bless him and his family. Also it was natural for them to violate the
Alid doctrines, to distort them, and to disdain them to the extent that
they uprooted their existence from the people. Then they would be able,
when the atmosphere was empty of the family of Muhammad (may Allah bless
him and his family), to create another  

  

apostasy from Islam through their fabricated traditions so that they
would destroy the true Islam and legislate another Islam that was
appropriate for Mu'awiya's ambitions and far away from the inspiration
of the sky.

This was what al-Hasan, peace be on him, meant when he said: "You do not
know what I have done. By Allah, what I have done is better for my Shi'a
than what the sun rises over."

There is nothing of what the sun rises over better than protecting the
faith and immortalizing the doctrine.

Also this was what Imam Muhammad al-Baqir b. 'Ali b. al Husayn b. 'Ali
b. Abu Talib, peace be on him, meant when he was asked about the Peace
Treaty of al-Hasan, peace be on him, so he said: "Indeed he (i.e.,
al-Hasan) was more knowledgeable of what he had done. Were it not for
what he had done, there would be a great affair."

### Conclusions

We think that the steps for these three stages have helped the gentle
reader understand our purpose in this study before we will explain it
clearly. Also these gradual steps have helped him discover much of the
vagueness that prepared the atmosphere for this inherited criticism.

We have already mentioned that the door to martyrdom was closed at the
face of al-Hasan, peace be on him. In other words martyrdom refrained
from al-Hasan, not he who refrained from it. To indicate this, we say:
If al-Hasan had tried to shed his pure blood during his critical
situation to resist the aggression of sixty thousand Syrian fighters and
to choose martyrdom and its glorious position, he would have not
achieved what he had wanted. Besides he would have been killed and his
blood would have been in vain. Moreover, his friends in history would
have not regarded him as a martyr in the full sense of the world.

That is because the vanguards of al-Mada'in created a sorrowful
situation through their foolish chaos. The traitorous Kufans  
 maintained an attitude when they deserted al-Hasan through their  

  

letters, which al-Hasan himself read, to Mu'awiya to kill the former or
to hand him over. This forces us to think that a group of the great
figures at the camp decided to take part in the greatest crime against
Imam al-Hasan, peace be on him. Thus it waited for the opportunity to
commit that great abominable crime.

The order at the camp of al-Mada'in was over because of fear, the
discords, the news of the camp of Maskan, and the artificial chaos. Thus
that group of the great figures seized the opportunity to impose a fatal
blow upon al-Hasan. This was the aim of the Kharijites during their
fighting against him, and was the purpose of the Umayyad party when it
made an agreement with Mu'awiya. We must not forget that Mu'awiya
himself had referred to that through his early letters to al-Hasan,
peace be on him, to make him feel the threat of this hostile plan from
the beginning. Don't these words of Mu'awiya indicate that: "Beware that
your death will be done by the rabble from the people."

The attitude was very critical and the situation was very intense during
the last moments at the camp of al-Mada'in. So every movement issued
from Imam al-Hasan, peace be on him, whether in the way of waging war or
in the way of making peace or in the way of joining the front at Maskan
or in the way of coming back to Kufa, turned into dangerous
disagreement, then into a wide ranging mutiny, and then into a reckless
armed revolt. This was all what Mu'awiya had wanted, and for which he
devoted his gold and his treasuries.

So nothing would have extinguished the fire of the discord if its
firebrand had burnt but the pure blood of al-Hasan.

Unruly revolutions have their own severe rules and results. So the
objectives of such revolutions are obtained through sacrificing many
people regardless of their great position among the people.

Doesn't the stab of al-Hasan at Mazlam Sabat in al-Mada'in indicate what
we say? Didn't those who stabbed him volunteer to kill him with will and
intention? It is worth mentioning that al-Hasan went out of his tent on
that day when he was stabbed to arrive at the tent of his governor over
the camp of al-Mada'in. He went there to avoid the  

  

noise of the people and to be able to take measures to treat the
situation when necessary.

In this connection the historians say: "Groups of his close associates
and of his Shi'a surrounded him (i.e., al-Hasan) and prevented those who
sought him from (reaching to) him." In another text is the following :
"So they encompassed him and pushed the people away from him." I (i.e.,
the author) say: Why did they push the people away from him? Why did
they prevent those who sought him from (reaching to) him? Doesn't this
indicate that al-Hasan's life was in danger, and those who went out with
him as fighters (mujahidin) to defend him became enemies after a while
and began rushing towards him?

Doesn't al-Hasan's going to the tent of Sa'd b. Mas'ud indicate that he
wanted to be far away from the deceived people who were getting ready to
declare a revolution that would achieve nothing but atrocities? Al-Hasan
saw with his own eye his fighters coming successively into his own tent
to plunder what was in it even his prayer mat. He heard them abusing him
and accusing him of unbelief. He understood their bad treatment towards
him and towards his great position. For this reason he knew that they
were unable to see him, and that his existence among them would move
their evil mutiny so that he moved away from them. This movement of his
was means to treat the attitude.

It is unquestionable that there was no one in all the world more eager
than al-Hasan himself to win victory for his affair. There was no one
more than he in act, care, vitality, and sacrifice.

Also it is unquestionable that the idea that does not escape us did not
escape al-Hasan, and that the measure that does not escape us did not
escape him. Moreover, all his stages have indicated that he was the
intelligent man who overcame all his problems then he chose the best
solutions for them during his war and his peace, during the stages of
his jihad and the treaties of his peace, in the capital of his
government (i.e., Kufa), and the capital of his Imamate (i.e.,
al-Medina).

I (i.e., the author) wonder: Was it possible for the death during the
last moments at the camp of al-Mada'in to make life or was it the  

  

death that would make death for ever? This is why the great selves do
not die but to enliven a sunna (practice) or to save a community.

Again I wonder, so was it possible for al-Hasan to die a martyr?

When the person who loves al-Hasan imagined those evil disasters which
were imposed on him successively during his critical moments, he will be
full of sorrow and sadness.

Mind may accept the events that result from a personal enmity or a
tribal dispute or a theoretical disagreement such as the enmity of
Mu'awiya towards al-Hasan, the quarrel of the Umayyads towards the
Hashimites or the disagreement of the Kharijites towards 'Ali and his
sons, peace be on them. As for the events that result from ignoble
wishes, they are from the most painful things from which man suffers
because of the irregularity of the people.

Do you think that it was possible for a Shi'ite person who believed in
the Imamate of al-Hasan as he believed in the Prophethood of the Prophet
and lived in the favor of al-Hasan as he lived in his father's favor to
desert his Imam and benefactor during the most critical moments when he
was in an urgent need of his loyal Shi'a?

Yes, it was the mean plot that resulted from the attitude towards al
Hasan when he was in the white tent in al-Mada'in.

Now, consider carefully the corrupt manners of those persons whom
al-Hasan prepared to wage war against his enemy.

The person sometimes belongs to a high-born family, but he becomes weak
when the people desert him. Such a person, in spite of the weakness
deep- rooted in him, feels bravery when he takes part in a certain event
and when the eager people around him encourage and help him. In other
words the teamwork will move him to think and act. Besides he will
oppose his natural feelings and repent painfully when the event abates
and the conditions change.

In this manner the critical situation in al-Mada'in discouraged the weak
Shi'ite person, so he forgot his Shiism, his tribal qualities, and even
his simple Arab morale that had no relationship with the religion.

So if al-Hasan was not the Imam of such persons, he was their  

  

benefactor. If he was not their benefactor, he was at least a generous
wronged man.

The historians have mentioned an example to show the attitudes of some
of al-Hasan's Shi'a towards him, then what do you think about the
Kharijites, the Umayyads, the doubters, the Hamra', and the like?

They adopted many attitudes towards al-Hasan, but the historians have
forgotten or tried to forget them.

### Another Meaning

Al-Hasan referred to this meaning when he answered his Shi'a who blamed
him for making peace with Mu'awiya. He (al-Hasan) said: "Through my
making peace with Mu'awiya, I wanted to push death away from you."
[[1]](#r11)

Many words similar to this in meaning have been reported on the
authority of al-Hasan, peace be on him.

We must understand this fact in detail to be satisfied with the
foregoing brief words of the Imam. We say: the actual dispute between
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya was not for the throne, rather it was between
their two doctrines that competed with each other for existence and
immortality. Thus winning victory during this dispute means that one of
the two doctrines would immortalize one of the disputing parties. Such
was the war of doctrines. It did not achieve its victory through the
weapon, rather through the steadfastness of the faith and the
immortality of the doctrine. The doctrine may obtain immortality but
under the banner that is apparently overcome.

At that time, because al-Hasan and Mu'awiya were in disagreement on the
doctrines, the Muslims divided into two parties. Each party protected
its own doctrine and was ready to die for it with all its power and
might.

The provoking roles which Mu'awiya played under the pretext of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n11) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Ma'arif, p. 303.

  

'Uthman's blood moved the Shi'a of 'Ali and of his sons, peace be on
them, in the Syrian Camp. So it was necessary for them to join their
camp in Kufa and its districts without fear and pursuit.

After that, all the Shi'a of the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt)
peace be on them, gathered in Kufa, Basrah, al-Madaiin, Hijaz, and the
Yemen.

Besides the great Muslim figures and the rest of the muhajrin
(emigrants) and the Ansar (helpers) arrived in the capital of the Imam
from all Muslim countries. So during the Hashimite Caliphate, Kufa was
the shelter of the Muslims and the center that preserved the heritage of
the Islamic message with faithfulness, patience, and belief.

It was natural for this chosen group to respond to al-Hasan's summons to
wage the final battle between the two doctrines, for they were the
remaining choice in Kufa after the death of his father, peace be on him.
In other words they were from his Shi'a (followers), the Shi'a of his
father, and the Companions of his grandfather, may Allah bless him and
his family. So they joined the army that was getting ready at
al-Nukhayla to wage war against Mu'awiya.

In all the world, there were no abilities to preserve the Islamic
heritage in the right manner like the abilities which the flank of this
army had when these noble groups joined it. Among them were the members
of the pure families from the Hashimites.

Apart from these noble groups, the units of al-Nukhayla included the
mixed bands which we have already mentioned in detail. Also we have
mentioned their ambitions and the results of their acts.

To continue waging war against Mu'awiya was necessary due to the
accidental condition, as we have mentioned before.

Very few days passed. Then all parts of the army at the two camps in
al-Madain and Maskan became organized. At each of these two camps were
groups from the top class in behavior, morale, and loyalty, in addition
to these groups were other groups from the mixed classes.

The desertion of 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas and his associates to Mu'awiya
was a necessary operation for purifying the army of  
 al-Hasan. That is because such an operation purified the Camp of  

  

Maskan, that fought against the enemy face to face, from the mixed
groups that represented the corrupt organ in the army. Unfortunately,
this operation of desertion was accompanied by similar desertions.

As for the Camp of al-Mada'in, it included al-Hasan and his loyal
companions. However, this group was surrounded by the defeated like
persons who were unable to join Mu'awiya's camp, nor were they able to
carry out their obligations. So in the near future, they were the means
of the historical disaster when they prevented al-Hasan from achieving
his objectives during this war. That is because they prevented him from
obtaining martyrdom, and spoiled all his affairs, as we have previously
mentioned.

Now, let us suppose that there was one thing at the hand of al-Hasan to
go on waging war against Mu'awiya or to refrain from making peace with
him.

That thing was that al-Hasan had to issue his commands, while he was
besieged at the Camp of al-Mada'in, to his followers at the Camp of
Maskan to start the war under the leadership of the new commander,
namely Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbada al-Ansari, the great man who preferred
war to peace even if Imam al-Hasan inclined to make peace (with
Mu'awiya). [[1]](#r12) Though the revolt of the disobedient persons at
the Camp of al-Madain prevented al-Hasan from preparing this army to
fight against Mu'awiya, it did not prevent him from issuing his commands
secretly or openly to his loyal followers at the Camp of Maskan to start
fighting.

It is possible that many helpless persons from the loyal mujahidin (holy
fighters) at the Camp of al-Mada'in were able to join the Camp of Maskan
to help the fighting forces there. That would have happened if they had
found that al-Hasan had been ready to accept this idea or at least to
encourage it.

Also it was possible that Imam al-Hasan was able, after short patience
through which he waited for the abating of the disturbances that
surrounded him at the Camp of al-Madain, to hasten to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n12) Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 162.

  

Camp of Maskan to win the final victory or to obtain glorious martyrdom
in the full sense of the word in the way of Allah and history.

So why did al-Hasan incline to make peace with Mu'awiya while he was
able to take such measures?

We (i.e., the author) say: Maybe al-Hasan was able to issue these
commands at the Camp of al-Mada'in during the last moments, and maybe he
was unable to do that.

According to these two suppositions, it is not necessary to put into
effect every alternative that refers to a certain success. That is
because a certain measure during a certain condition may cause critical
situations in the conditions that follow. Then this is the rule which
should be taken into consideration when the person wants to adopt a
certain choice during every critical situation.

Also, here, has the person who suggested this measure thought about the
period of time when four thousand fighters, the army of al-Hasan at the
Camp of Maskan, were supposed to fight against sixty or sixty eight
thousand fighters, who were the army of Mu'awiya? I (i.e., the author)
ask Allah's forgiveness! Rather it was a group of the army that was
supposed to fight against a group of the army that was forty-five times
more than the former. (See the analysis of the numerical ratio between
the two parties, namely the army of Sham (Syria) and the army of Maskan,
in chapter 11.)

Has the person who has suggested this alternative thought about al
Hasan's attitude when the short moments of this war were over, and when
the eager ones from his supporters sacrificed their lives for him?

Indeed, without a doubt, the attitude would force al-Hasan, if he
remained alive, to yield to Mu'awiya without any condition.

Without a doubt, it would be the new opportunity for which Mu'awiya was
waiting to take the final steps between Kufa and Sham (Syria), namely
the steps that were nothing more than the military occupation
accompanied by Mu'awiya's limitless destruction and wrath against the
members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them,  
 and their followers (Shi'a). It was possible for such an  

  

occupation to endanger the hopes of the country, its excellent rites,
and its doctrines which were built on the skulls of tens of thousands
from the best martyrs who strove in the way of Allah.

I (i.e., the author) think that the person who realizes these certain
results will decide that this alternative that contradicts itself is
unsuccessful. The most prominent mistake in this choice is that it makes
al-Hasan, who wanted to fight against enemy who tried to impose his
conditions on his enemy, a defeated fighter who would surely surrender
to his enemy without any condition.

This would have happened if the war had ended before it broke out and if
al-Hasan remained alive and did not take part in it.

However, if this short war had broken out and al-Hasan had been able to
join the Camp of Maskan to take part in it and to die a martyr, while
this step did not match the course of the events there as you have just
known, then this martyrdom would have not been successful means in the
way of Allah and history, for it would have destroyed the doctrine for
ever.

Besides history, which would be entrusted to mention this war and its
sorrowful results after the martyrdom of al-Hasan, would tell
generations about the affairs of al-Hasan and his battles in the manner
that shows them that he was nothing but a mere rebel. This is what we
wanted to refer to when we talked about the 'Plan of Mu'awiya towards
the Aims of al-Hasan' in this chapter.

To mention more details about this brief idea, we say: As we have said
earlier the choice from those who knew the Qur'an by heart, the rest of
the pious Companions, and the prominent people from the sincere Shi'a
gathered together under the leadership of al-Hasan when he decided to
advance against Mu'awiya. We firmly believe that no one of this top
class was slow willingly when al-Hasan summoned them to wage holy war
(jihad) against Mu'awiya.

So the attitude during that critical moment between al-Hasan and
Mu'awiya was similar to that between al-Hasan's grandfather, Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and Mu'awiya's father on
the day when all belief advanced against all polytheism.

  

In all the world, there was no group like this group that gathered
together under the leadership of al-Hasan. That is because this group
was entrusted to preserve the laws of Islam and the ideal doctrines.

So if al-Hasan had carried out the idea of war and involved this group
with violent fighting, he would have neglected the Qur'an which no one
in the world had memorized by heart but it.

If he had neglected the Qur'an, the relation between 'Ali, his sons, who
were Imams, and generations there would have been cut off till the Day
of Judgment.

Then the matter of al-Hasan would have been like that of those Alid
Sharifs who rose many times during the Islamic government who summoned
the people to righteousness through their close relationship to the
Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. Then they were
overcome so that nothing of their summons has remained in history and
lineage books except their names.

Suppose that the Umayyads had thoroughly destroyed the family of
Muhammad. In other words they had killed al-Hasan, all members of his
family, and the prominent people from the loyal servants of Allah.
Moreover, Islam of Muhammad had turned into Umayyad Islam. In this case,
which of Muhammad's memories, may Allah bless him and his family, would
have remained in history? Which of the Islamic ideals, which these great
figures protected, would have remained? Besides, wouldn't al-Hasan's
prominent people been cut into pieces by the Syrian swords during this
war?

From what we have said before, we have known that Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan
was full of tribal spites and selfishness. At the end of this supposed
massacre, we are sure that 'Ali and his sons would not be mentioned but
with evil words. Then would the people mention Muhammad (may Allah bless
him and his family), his teachings, and his authentic doctrines in a
good manner?

The victorious enemy at this battle would be Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan.
Thus he would be unable to hear the people mention the brother of Hashim
(i.e., the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family) five times a day
as the Islamic Sunna (practice) decided at the  

  

adhan (call to prayer). So he said to al-Mughira b. Shu'ba: "May your
mother lose you, every practice remains after this (adhan) will bury us
thoroughly. [[1]](#r13)

His victorious men were: his illegal brother (i.e., Ziyad b. Abih), the
old companion (i.e., 'Amru b. al-'As), the dishonest cunning one (i.e.,
al-Mughira b. Shu'ba), and the one who attacked Mecca  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n13) Al-Mas'udi, Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 343. Ibn Abu
al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 357. Matraf b. al-Mughira b.
Shu'ba said: "My father al-Mughira and I went to visit Mu'awiya. My
father came to him, talked with him, then he returned to me. So he
mentioned Mu'awiya and his intellect, and admired what he had seen of
him. One night he came and refrained from having his supper. He looked
sad so that I waited him for an hour. I thought that (he was sad)
because of a thing had befallen us or our work. So I said to him:' Why
do you look sad this night?' 'My son, I came from the worst of all
people,' he replied. 'Who is it?,' I said. He said: 'When I was alone
with him (Mu'awiya), I said to him: Commander of the faithful, you have
achieved your wish, then you have to show justice and spread good. You
have become an old man, so you have to think of your brothers from
Hashim's children and take care of them. By Allah, they have nothing
that makes you afraid of them'. He said to me: 'How far! How far! The
brother of Taym (i.e., Abu Bakr) ruled, showed justice, and did what he
had done. However, when he perished his reputation perished, except his
name. Then the brother of 'Adi (i.e., 'Umar) ruled and did his best for
ten years. By Allah, when he perished, his fame perished, except his
name. Then our brother 'Uthman ruled, while no one was like him in
lineage. He did what he had done, but he was killed. By Allah, when he
perished, his reputation perished, and what had been done towards him
has been mentioned. However, the brother of Hashim (i.e., the Prophet)
is mentioned five times a day: I testify that Muhammad is the Apostle of
Allah. May your mother lose you, every practice remains after this will
bury us thoroughly.'"

  

and Medina (i.e., Muslim b. 'Aqaba), and the like of these persons who
destroyed the spirits of Muslims.

We firmly believe that these persons destroyed the Islamic heritage, the
Islamic sanctuaries, and the interests of Muslims. That is because Ziyad
committed massacres in Kufa, 'Amra made discords at Siffin and Doumat
al-Jandal, al-Mughira b. Shu'ba (the first to be bribed in Islam) spared
no effort to appoint Yazid caliph after his father Mu'awiya added Ziyad
to him, and Muslim b. 'Aqaba attacked Mecca and Medina.

These persons did what they had done. Their deeds were seen by the
family of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, the remaining
choice from his students, and from his followers who enjoined the people
to do good and prevented them from doing evil, and who were ready to
fight against such kinds of people.

So what do you think that these persons would have done if the world had
been empty of the family of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his
family, and the righteous servants of Allah?

The obvious final result is that if al-Hasan, peace be on him, had
sacrificed his life and the lives of his Shi'a, as we have already
supposed that he was able to join his camp at Maskan, then he would have
subjected his life to death to the extent that even his name would have
not been mentioned but in lineage books. He would have subjected his
holy doctrine to destruction to the extent that even a word of it would
have not been heard in the earth. His glorious history and the
outstanding history of his family would have been a mere distorted
fable. Thus Mu'awiya would have dictated the fable to others as he had
wanted. Besides Marwan and his family would have explained it as they
had wanted.

That would have been the end of the history of Islamic spiritualism and
the beginning of Umayyad history with certain known features, which
there is no need to explain.

This holy tradition affirms that: "If there was no one of the banu
(children) of Umayyad but a toothless old woman, she would make the
religion of Allah crooked."

I (i.e., the author) wonder: Was it possible for al-Hasan to do more
than what he had done?

If we consider carefully al-Hasan's plan, we will conclude that he had
used the best way (the way of making peace with Mu'awiya) to decrease
the violence of the expected results.

When al-Hasan was sure of these results, he used this way (i.e., the way
of making peace with Mu'awiya). For he wanted to continue the lines of
his communication with generations, rather the lines of his  

  

father and his grandfather, blessing and peace be on them, through
preserving his Shi'a. Through this way he was able to save his doctrine
from sure destruction, and his history from distortion, forgery,
corruption, and contempt.

Also through this way, he was able to gain a bright victory in spite of
the desertion that surrounded him during his lifetime. Thus he was able
to enliven his doctrine, his faith, and his next life.

In this way, al-Hasan abandoned the life in this world to preserve the
religion.

Such was the nature of the Imamate headed by this blessed group from
Allah's servants.
