Chapter 20: Fulfilling the Stipulations
=======================================

  

From the previous chapters, we have known the objectives that urged the
two sides (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) to make peace with each other
and the conditions which both sides regarded as guarantees for their
objectives.

After that, we have known that the two sides inclined practically to
make peace with each other so that they held a meeting in Kufa. At that
historical meeting, they were about to conclude an agreement, while they
were unable to conclude such an agreement through their written
documents and official letters when they intended to make peace with
each other. However, it was Mu'awiya who made all those efforts go in
vain though he was facing the most critical situation in his policy and
his character as a king who wanted to rule the people who had not loved
him since they hated him, as al-Ahnaf b. Qays said. So Mu'awiya met
al-Hasan, but it was as b. Abu Sufyan met the son of the conqueror of
Mecca, not as two fighters who laid their arms and exchanged the
documents of peace. This was the firm manner of Mu'awiya though he
sometimes affected much patience. Al-Hasan took advantage of this manner
of Mu'awiya during the organized campaign which he launched against him
in his second field as we have mentioned at the end of the previous
chapter.

We have known all that in the near previous chapters so that we must
understand whether both sides fulfilled their stipulations or broke
them. Now, in this stage, we are facing the most sensitive point which
has been studied very much in history.

We do not want to study this subject in detail, for such details will
move memories. Some of these memories are painful; some of them are
obvious scandals; and some of them disagree with the glories in  

  

history. In this book I have taken upon myself that I must depend on a
clear analytical study about the matter of al-Hasan and Mu'awiya. So I
must not ignore the elements of the subject. For they had the most
wonderful effect on the results which al-Hasan b. 'Ali wanted to achieve
through his Peace Treaty with Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan. As these details
are very important for my subject, it is necessary for me to follow this
subject step by step till I conclude clear results from the axiomatic
premises, for these results will indicate the glory of the oppressed one
(who was victorious) and the disgrace of the oppressive one (who was
defeated). In this connection we say:

### 1. Fulfilling the first Stipulation

This was the only stipulation with which al-Hasan bound himself to
fulfill for Mu'awiya.

This was the only condition which found fulfillment, while the other
conditions were never fulfilled.

It was impossible for al-Hasan, after he had signed the Peace Treaty, to
attempt to break this condition of his, not to talk about that, nor to
accept any talk concerning that.

After Mu'awiya had declared that he would not fulfill his conditions,
the leaders of the Shi'a went to al-Hasan, when he had returned to
Medina, and told him that they and their followers were ready to wage
holy war (jihad) under his leadership against Mu'awiya. In the meantime
the Kufans promised that they would dismiss the Umayyad governor from
Kufa, and that they would provide al Hasan with men and weapons to
attack Sham (Syria) again. However, all these suggestions of the zealous
supporters did not shake al-Hasan.

For example, Sulayman b. Sirt, who was the lord and chief of the Iraqis
(as b. Qutayba said concerning him), said to al-Hasan: "He (i.e.,
Mu'awiya) said openly to the people what you have heard: 'I have made
conditions for the people, made promises to them, and made them desire
(for that). Indeed all that is under these two feet of mine.' By Allah,
with that, he meant nothing but that he has violated what is between you
and him, so turn the war into a trick, and permit me to go  

  

to Kufa to dismiss its governor, and to declare his dismissal in it.
Indeed Allah does not guide the cunning of traitors.

"Then b. Sirt kept silent, so all those who attended al-Hasan's meeting
spoke as he did. All of them said: 'Send Sulayman b. Sirt and send us
with him. Then follow us when you know that we have dismissed his
(Mu'awiya's) governor and declared his dismissal." [[1]](#r1)

Also Hujr b. 'Adi al-Kindi whose strong position was in Iraq went to
al-Hasan, as you will know very soon.

Al-Musayyab b. Nujayya went to him, too. Worth mentioning, al Musayyab
was the only hero at Mudar, the red (al-Hamra'). If ten of its noble men
were counted, he would be among them, as Zafr b. al Harith al-Kilabi
said concerning him.

Others like these great figures went to him. All of them found nothing
with al-Hasan except a good answer and asking to wait till Mu'awiya's
death. That is because al-Hasan was unable to break the promise which he
made with Mu'awiya. Moreover, he made use of the Kufans attitude towards
him so that he was in no need of any other experience.

Al-Hasan's final answer to his companions was: "Every man of you should
sit in his house as long as Mu'awiya is living. If Mu'awiya perished and
you and I were alive, we would ask Allah for a decision to guide us, to
help us in our matter, and not to leave us alone. Indeed Allah is with
those who fear (Him) and who do good deeds." [[2]](#r2)

### 2. Fulfilling the second Stipulation

The neutral and the partial historians have unanimously agreed on that
the condition which Mu'awiya gave to al-Hasan within the conditions of
the Peace Treaty was that the former should not hand over the authority
to anyone after him. This means that he had to hand  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n1) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p.
151. [[2]](#n2) Ibid, p. 152.

  

it over to its legal owner, namely al-Hasan b. 'Ali. If al-Hasan died,
the authority had to be handed over to his brother al-Husayn according
to the condition that said that handing over the authority to Mu'awiya
was limited to his lifetime, and that he had no right to hand it over to
anyone after him.

Also the historians have unanimously agreed on that Mu'awiya violated
this condition openly and appointed his son Yazid as a successor after
him.

Now, we do not intend to discuss with Mu'awiya about the stipulation
which he made, and then violated. However, he added this error to his
errors which the Peace Treaty indicated whether he knew that or not. We
have discussed the attitude of Mu'awiya towards his promises several
times, so there is no need to discuss the most dangerous error which
Mu'awiya made when he appointed his son Yazid as a successor after him.
In this connection we say: Through this ugly act, Mu'awiya committed the
gravest sin in his religion, and the most horrible crime towards the
public interest. Because of this impudent improvised act of Mu'awiya,
the leadership of Islam deviated from its righteous way, the subjects
lost their practical example, selfishness prevailed that society, the
individuals and the groups mistreated each other, and the relationship
between the leaders and their followers ended. Accordingly, the people's
inclinations became various and their aims became different. Besides the
Umayyad authority was leading them to corruption so that they got ready
to declare their bloody revolts and their internal uprising that were
necessary to correct the errors and to warn the others against the
dangers. Apart from this, the person must know what has been said about
Yazid, and about his personal and moral abilities with which history is
abound from his day to this day of ours, and which had obvious results
during his authority. We do not want to write in detail about Yazid.
However, we want to draw the attention of the gentle reader to the great
error which Mu'awiya made, and through which he took the reins of the
Islamic authority and violated all Islamic rules freely. Mu'awiya used
strange ways to appoint his son as a successor over the Muslims.  
 The friends and the enemies of Mu'awiya have narrated all  
 these ways that are enough for us to be sure of his  

  

behavior as a Muslim and caliph. These ways were the worst of all ways
in history, and the farthest of them from the essence of Islam and its
meaning and objectives. The results of these ways indicate the character
of Mu'awiya and of the people who lived during his lifetime. If they
were not among the sources of our wide research through which we want to
explain the reason why al-Hasan made peace with Mu'awiya, we would not
mention them. Rather we would cover them though they have been exposed
for thirteen centuries.

Now, we will mention some texts of the historians without any
explanation or comment, for these texts themselves are in no need of
explanation and comment.

### In this Manner Mu'awiya pledged Allegiance to Yazid

Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani said: "Mu'awiya wanted the pledge of allegiance
to his son Yazid. Nothing was heavier with him than the matter of
al-Hasan and Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas. So he gave them poison (to drink). Then
they died of it." [[1]](#r3)

Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari said : "In a short time after the death of al
Hasan, Mu'awiya pledged allegiance to Yazid in Sham (Syria), and wrote
to the cities concerning the pledge of allegiance to him." [[2]](#r4)

Ibn al-Athir said: "He (i.e., Mu'awiya) started that (i.e., the pledge
of allegiance to his son). Al-Mughira b. Shu'ba was the first (to
suggest) that. That is because Mu'awiya wanted to remove him from Kufa
and to appoint Said b. al-'As instead of him. So he (i.e., al Mughira)
heard of that and said: 'I think that I had better go to Mu'awiya and
tender my resignation to show the people that I hate the authority.' So
he went to him and said to his companion when he reached him: 'Now, if I
do not make you win an authority or an emirate, I will never do that.'
Then he went till he came to Yazid and said to him: 'Indeed  
 the notables from the companions of the Apostle  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n3) Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 29.
[[2]](#n4) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, p.
160.

  

of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and the chiefs and the old
men of Quraysh died. [[1]](#r5) No one but their children has remained
(alive). You are the best of them! You are the best of them in opinion,
and the most knowledgeable of them in Sunna and policy! I do not know
what prevents the Commander of the faithful (i.e., Mu'awiya) from
pledging allegiance to you.' He (i.e., Yazid) said: 'Do you think that
(this suggestion) will happen?' 'Yes', replied al-Mughira. So Yazid went
to his father and told him about what al-Mughira had said. So Mu'awiya
summoned al-Mughira and said to him: 'What has Yazid said?' So
al-Mughira said: 'Commander of the faithful, you have seen the bloodshed
and the differences after 'Uthman. Yazid should be a successor. Pledge
allegiance to him. If a certain accident happens to you, Yazid will be a
shelter for the people and your successor. So do not shed blood. Do not
create discord.' Mu'awiya said: 'Who will help me with that?' Al-Mughira
said: 'I will help you against the people of Kufa, and Ziyad will help
you against the people of Basrah. After these two cities, no one shall
oppose you.' Mu'awiya said: "Return to your work, talk with him whom you
have confidence in about that. You will see and we will see."

"Then al-Mughira saw off Mu'awiya and returned to his companions. His
companions asked him: "What?" al-Mughira replied: 'I have put Mu'awiya's
leg in a stitch that is far from the objective of the community of
Muhammad, and I have made a tear for them, which will never be mended.
[[2]](#r6)

"Mu'awiya acted in collusion with the heads of the delegations who
advised him (to appoint his son a successor) to deliver speeches  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n5) In his book (al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi', vol. 1, p. 108)
al-Bayhaqi has mention the opinion of al-Mughira b. Shu'ba. However, he
has narrated that al-Mughira offered his opinion to Mu'awiya first, and
that when the latter was sure of the former, he returned him to his work
and said to him: "Go to your work and strengthen the matter for the son
of your friend." [[2]](#n6) Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol.
3, p. 198- 201. In this text is what makes you feel the spirit of
al-Mughira b. Shu'ba and the extent of this companion who made a tear
for the community of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family.

  

and mention the qualities of Yazid. When the delegations, among them was
al Ahnaf b. Qays, met Mu'awiya, the latter summoned al Dahhak b. Qays
al-Fihri and said to him: 'When I sit on the pulpit and end some of my
sermon and speech, then you ask permission to stand up. When they permit
you, then you praise Allah, the Most High, and mention Yazid, praise
him, then ask me to appoint him as a successor.' Then Mu'awiya summoned
'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Uthman al-Thaqafi, 'Ubayd Allah b. Mis'ida al-Fazari,
Thour b. Ma'an al Salami, and 'Abd Allah b. 'Isam al-Ash'ari. He ordered
them to stand up when al Dahhak ended (his speech) and to confirm his
words. These persons stood up and delivered speeches to praise Yazid.
Then al-Ahnaf b. Qays, who was not among the actors whom Mu'awiya
prepared this scenario, and said: 'May Allah reform the Emir, indeed,
the people lived in the abominable past time and they have lived in the
kind present time. You have tried the times and experienced the affairs.
So know him to whom you entrust the authority after you. Then you
disobey him who orders you. He who advises you and does not look at you
should not tempt you, though the Syrians and the Iraqis do not accept
this and do not pledge allegiance to Yazid as long as al-Hasan is
living.'"

Al-Ahnaf added: "Mu'awiya, you know that you have not conquered Iraq by
force, nor had you influence on it. However, you have given al-Hasan b.
'Ali some promises which you know. [[1]](#r7) Indeed if you fulfill
(your) promises, then you are appropriate for fulfillment. If you break
(your conditions), then you will wrong (al-Hasan). By Allah, behind
al-Hasan there are quick horses, strong arms, and sharp swords. If you
approach him through a span of treason, you will find a span of the
outstretched arms of victory behind him. You know that the Iraqis have
not loved you since they hated you, nor have they hated 'Ali and  
 al-Hasan since they loved them. Nothing other than  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n7) Many writers have misunderstood this period of time. For
example, (in his book al-Dawla al-Amawiya, p. 70) Hasan Murad said:
"From here we see that it was unexpected change when Mu'awiya pledged
allegiance to his son Yazid." From the words of al-Ahnaf and from our
foregoing studies you have known that it was unexpected change.

  

that has come down from the sky to them. The swords which they drew
against you when they were with 'Ali at (the Battle of) Siffin are on
their shoulders, and the hearts with which they hate you are among their
rips." [[1]](#r8)

I (i.e., the author) say: This speech of al-Ahnaf indicates clearly that
Mu'awiya tried to take the pledge of allegiance to his son Yazid during
al-Hasan's lifetime, while other authors have declared that the pledge
of allegiance to Yazid occurred after the death of al-Hasan. Abu
al-Faraj al-Isfahani has denoted that when he said: "Indeed Mu'awiya
poisoned al-Hasan and Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas to pave the way to the pledge
of allegiance to his son Yazid." We have already mentioned that.
Therefore Mu'awiya had two attempts to carry out this plan: one of them
was during al-Hasan's lifetime in spite of the promises, the oath, and
the covenants. This attempt failed, for al Hasan was still alive. The
other attempt was after the death of al Hasan, peace be on him. This
attempt was achieved through the unjust ways, which most historians have
mentioned.

"Mu'awiya removed Marwan from Medina when the latter was unable to take
the pledge of allegiance to Yazid from the Medinans. Then Mu'awiya
appointed Said b. al-'As as a governor over Medina. So Sa'd showed
rudeness, treated them with resolution and violence, and attacked all
those who were slow in pledging allegiance to Yazid. Nevertheless the
people were slow in paying homage (to Yazid), except very few (of them),
especially the banu of Hashim. Indeed no one of them answered him."

"As for Marwan, he went to Sham (Syria) angrily. He met Mu'awiya through
a long speech in which he said: 'Ibn Abu Sufyan, reform the authority,
and refrain from appointing the boys as rulers. Know that you have peers
in your people. They help each other to show enmity towards you."'

However, Marwan kept silent, for Mu'awiya gave him one thousand dinars a
month.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n8) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp.
156- 8. Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al Athir, vol. 6, pp. 100- 102.

  

"Mu'awiya wrote to 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas, 'Abd Allah b. al Zubayr, 'Abd
Allah b. Ja'far, and al-Husayn b. 'Ali. He summoned them to pledge
allegiance to Yazid."

Mu'awiya's letter to al-Hasan, peace be on him, is as follows: "Now
then, affairs from you have come to my knowledge. I had not thought that
they (the affairs) would issue from you, for you dislike them. Indeed
the worthiest of all people in faithfulness is he who is like you in
your importance, your honor, and your position in which Allah has
installed you. Therefore do not dispute (with me) for your abandonment,
and fear Allah. Do not lead this community to a discord. Think of
yourself, your religion, and the community of Muhammad. Do not let those
who are not sure (of Allah) disdain you."

In answer to Mu'awiya's letter, al-Husayn wrote the following: "Now
then, your letter has come to me, in which you have mentioned that
affairs (issued) from me have come to your knowledge, and that you had
thought that they would not (issue) from me, for I dislike them, and
that no one except Allah, the Most High, guides (people) to good deeds.
As for what you have mentioned that (affairs issued) from me have come
to your knowledge, they have been informed by the cajolers who inform
against (the people) and sow dissension among the community. The
seducers and the apostates have told lies. I have wanted neither war nor
disagreement. I fear Allah in leaving that because of you and your
unjust party, the party of oppression and the helper of the cursed
Satan. Aren't you who killed Hujr and his companions who were humble
worshippers, and who regarded heresies as ugly (acts), enjoined (the
people) to do good and prevented (them) from doing evil? You killed them
because of oppression and enmity after you had given them strong
covenants and certain promises showing impudence towards Allah and
disdaining His covenant. Aren't you who killed 'Amr b. al-Hamaq whose
face of worship wore out? You killed him after you had given him pledges
which if the white footed antelopes understood, they would come down
from the tops of the mountains. Aren't you he who claims that Ziyad is
the son of Abu Sufyan, (while) the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, has decided that the baby is to the bed (i.e., the baby
is attributed to his father) and the prostitute is stoned?

  

Then you have empowered Ziyad over the Muslims to kill them, to cut off
their hands and their legs on opposite sides, and to hang them on the
trunks of the date-palms. Mu'awiya, glory be to Allah, it is as if that
you do not belong to this community, nor does it belong to you. Aren't
you who killed al-Hadrami about whom Ziyad wrote to you that he followed
the religion of 'Ali? The religion of 'Ali is the religion of his
paternal cousin, may Allah bless him and his family, who has installed
you in the position in which you are. Were it not for that, your best
honor and the honor of your grandfathers would suffer from the two
journeys: the winter and the summer journey. However, Allah has relieved
you of them through us as a favor for you.

"You have said: 'Do not lead this community to a discord.' Indeed I do
not know that there is a discord greater than your authority over it."

"You have said: 'Think of your self, your religion, and the community of
Muhammad.' Indeed, by Allah, I do not know that there is a thing better
than waging holy war against you. Indeed if I did (that), it would be
(an act) to please my Lord. If I did not do (that), I would ask Allah to
forgive me my sin, and I ask Him (to grant me) success to what He loves
and accepts."

"You have said: 'When you plot against me, I will plot against you.'
Therefore, Mu'awiya, plot against me through what has appeared to you.
By my life, in the past (the people) plotted against the righteous ones.
Indeed I hope that you will harm (no one) but yourself, and destroy (no
act) except yours. Therefore plot against me through what has seemed to
you!"

"Mu'awiya, fear Allah! Know that Allah has a book that counts every
small and big (act)! Know that Allah has not forgotten (the persons
whom) you killed due to doubt, (whom) you punished because of
accusation, and the boy (i.e., Yazid) whom you have appointed as emir,
who drinks wine and plays with the dogs! I do not see but that you have
degraded your self, destroyed your religion, and ruined the subjects,
greetings!" [[1]](#r9)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n9) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp.
63- 5.

  

After that, Mu'awiya went to Medina. Many Syrian people were with him.
Ibn al-Athir estimated them at one thousand horsemen. He (i.e., Ibn
al-Athir) said: "Then Mu'awiya went to 'A'isha, who had heard that the
former mentioned al-Husayn and his companions, and said: 'If they do not
pledge allegiance (to Yazid), I will kill them.' So she (i.e., 'A'isha)
said: Treat them with kindness. They will achieve what you like, Allah
willing.'" [[1]](#r10)

Having mentioned Mu'awiya's going to Medina, b. Qutayba al Dinawari
said: "Then Mu'awiya sat down in the morning of the second day. He
ordered his clerks to sit where they were able to here his orders. Also
he ordered his chamberlain not to permit anyone of the people even if he
was a close relative. Then he sent for al-Husayn b. 'Ali and 'Abd Allah
b. 'Abbas. Ibn 'Abbas preceded (al-Husayn in coming). So Mu'awiya seated
him on his left hand and made him busy with talking till al-Hasan came
and entered. So Mu'awiya seated him on his right hand and asked him
about the banu (sons) of al-Hasan and their old ones. So al-Husayn told
him about them."

Then Mu'awiya delivered a sermon in which he praised Allah and His
Apostle, and he mentioned the two Shaykhs (i.e., 'Umar and Abu Bakr) and
'Uthman. Then he mentioned the matter of Yazid. He mentioned his
knowledge in the Qur'an and the Sunna (the Prophet's practices), and his
clemency. (Then he mentioned) that Yazid was the best of them in policy
and debate though they were older than him and better (than him) in
relationship (to the Prophet). [[2]](#r11) Then he mentioned that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, appointed 'Amr b. al-'As as
commander over Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and the elder Companions at the Campaign
of Dhat al-Salasil. Then he asked them about what he had mentioned.

"So b. 'Abbas got ready to speak. However, al-Husayn said to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n10) I (i.e., the author) say: From these words we must
understand that the mother of the believers (i.e., 'A'isha) achieved
what Mu'awiya wanted when she pledged allegiance to Yazid. [[2]](#n11)
We have already mentioned that Mu'awiya claimed that he was more
appropriate for the succession to authority than al Hasan, for he was
older than him.

  

him: 'Slowly! He means me, [[1]](#r12) and my share in the accusation is
more.'"

Al-Husayn rose. He thanked Allah, the Most High, and asked Him to bless
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and said:

"Mu'awiya, though the sayer elaborates on the outstanding merits of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, he cannot mention them all.
I have understood what you have coated the successors after the Apostle
of Allah, such as the brief quality and turning away from mentioning the
pledge of allegiance. [[2]](#r13) Mu'awiya, how far! How far! The
morning has exposed the darkness of night, and the sun has dazzled the
lights of the lamps. You have preferred (some people to others) till you
went too far. You have appropriated (the authority) to the extent that
you have become unjust. You have prevented (the people from taking their
rights) to the extent that you have become miserly. You have wronged
(the people) to the extent that you have exceeded (the proper limits).
You have not given the people their shares of their rights so that the
Satan has taken his perfect share. [[3]](#r14)

"I have understood what you have mentioned concerning Yazid, (namely
concerning) his perfect (qualities) and his policy for the community of
Muhammad. You want to deceive the people in Yazid. It is as if that you
are describing a hidden one or qualifying an absent one or telling (us)
about certain knowledge which you have contained, while Yazid himself
has indicated his real idea. Then take to Yazid what he has taken for
himself (such as) following the quarreling dogs, the pigeons that
precede their mates of the same age, the songsters with stringed
instruments, and the various amusement centers. (In these things) you
will find him a helper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n12) That is because he was the successor to authority after
al-Hasan: first, his grandfather the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, nominated him. Second, the Peace Treaty nominated
him, too. [[2]](#n13) Al-Husayn refers to Mu'awiya's turning away from
mentioning the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, when he
mention those who succeeded the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family. [[3]](#n14) He means that this intentional inequity is
the wish of Satan in setting people against each other.

  

"Put aside what you attempt. That you will meet Allah with sin of these
creatures does not suffice you more than what you will meet Him with. By
Allah, you are still strike falsehood with oppression, and rage with
injustice to the extent that you have filled the (water) skins. There is
(nothing) between you and death except a wink. So you will see your act
kept on the Day of Resurrection, then it will be to late to escape.

"You have reminded the people of the leadership of the man (i.e., 'Umru
b. al-'As) during the time of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family. When 'Amr had assumed that at that time, the people
disdained his leadership, hated his priority (over them), and counted
his acts against him. So the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him end
his family, said: 'Group of Emigrants (muhajirin), without a doubt, he
(i.e., 'Umru b. al-'As) shall not be a commander over you from today.'
Therefore how do you advance the certain abrogated practice of the
Prophet as a plea? Or how do you match through a later companion (while)
there are, around you, (people) who are honest in their companionship
and reliable in their religion and kinship? You (want) to abandon them
(and depend on) a wasteful, fascinated one. You want to coat the people
with a suspicion with which the living one is happy, and with which you
will be unhappy in your next life. Indeed this is the obvious loss. I
ask Allah's forgiveness for both me and you."

"So Mu'awiya looked at b. 'Abbas and said: 'Ibn 'Abbas, what is this?
Indeed what you have is stronger and more disastrous.' Then b. 'Abbas
said: 'By Allah, he (al-Husayn) is among the progeny of the Prophet,
among the people whom the Prophet covered with his cloak (ashab
al-kisa), and among the purified House. So ask him about what you want,
for you are satisfied with the people till Allah judges with His order
and He is the best of all judges."' [[1]](#r15)

Then Mu'awiya went to Mecca as Ibn al-Athir and other historians tell
us. He (i.e., Ibn al-Athir) said: "Al-Husayn b. 'Ali, 'Abd Allah b.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n15) Ibn Qutayba al-Dinawari, al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 1, pp.
168172.

  

al-Zubayr, 'Abd al-Rahman b. Abu Bakr, and b. 'Umar preceded Mu'awiya to
Mecca. As it was his last days in Mecca, he summoned these (persons) and
said to them: 'I wished to come to you. He who warns is excused. When I
addressed you, some of you rose and accused me of lying openly. I bore
that and forgave (you). I am going to make a speech. I swear by Allah,
if any one of you opposes me with a word during this speech of mine, the
sword shall hit his head before he says his second word. Therefore, the
man should keep (no self) except his own self.'"

Then Mu'awiya summoned the commander of his guards and said to him:
"Behind each of these (persons), make two men with two swords stand. If
any one of them opposes me with a true or false word, then they (i.e.,
the swordsmen) should hit him with their own swords."

Then Mu'awiya went out and they went out with him till he went up on the
pulpit. He praised Allah and lauded Him, and then he said: "Those
persons are the lords of the Muslims and the good ones from them. Every
matter shall be decided according to their own advice. Moreover, they
have agreed to pledge allegiance to Yazid. Therefore pledge allegiance
(to him) in the Name of Allah. Accordingly, the people pledged
allegiance (to Yazid)."

After many hardships, this abominable pledge of allegiance was born. It
was born while the swords were drawn over the heads of the men. In other
words, it was the rest of plots, maneuvers, and terrorism!

If this was the succession to authority in Islam, then peace be on
Islam.

In his book 'al-Sahih', al-Bukhari has narrated the following tradition
on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family:
"Every ruler who has power over subjects from the Muslims and dies
(while) he has deceived them, Allah shall deprive him of Paradise."

  

### 3. Fulfilling the third Stipulation

Ibn al-Athir said: "Indeed when Mu'awiya performed the special prayers
(qunut), he cursed 'Ali, b. 'Abbas, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and (Malik)
al-Ashtar." [[1]](#r16) In his book 'al-Radd 'ala al-Imamiya', Abu
'Uthman al-Jahiz has narrated: "Indeed Mu'awiya said at the end of his
sermon: 'O Allah, indeed, Abu Turab (i.e., 'Ali) disbelieved in your
religion, and prevented (the people) from Your way. Therefore curse him
very much, and torture him painfully.' Concerning that, he wrote to the
cities. So these words were mentioned from on pulpits." [[2]](#r17)

It was said to Marwan: "Why do you curse him ('Ali) on the pulpits? He
said: 'The authority will not continue for us but through that.'"

History and the biographies are full of Mu'awiya's efforts concerning
cursing 'Ali. According to this, Mu'awiya was the first to curse openly
the Companions of the Prophet, and the first to open the door widely to
those who came after him. We think that there was no person before
Mu'awiya had cursed the Companions of the Prophet except 'A'isha when
she said: "Kill Na'thal (i.e., 'Uthman), for he has disbelieved (in
Allah)." Also we think that no one of the Muslim scholars has called
A'isha an unbeliever and Mu'awiya an apostate from the religion, for
they deemed it lawful to curse the Companions of the Prophet or for they
cursed them to the extent that they intended to accuse them of unbelief.
Without a doubt the rule of the similar things is one, that does not
change due to the time. For this reason we find no justification to
judge those who defame Mu'awiya or any other Companion of the Prophet
but through the justification with which the Muslim scholars have judged
Mu'awiya and A'isha when they defamed 'Ali and 'Uthman.

As for the claimed tradition that says: "If you follow anyone of them
(the Muslims), you are guided," it has been limited to a certain  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n16) Muhammad b. 'Aqil, al-Nasa'ih al-Kafiya, pp. 19- 20.
[[2]](#n17) Ibid.

  

group of the Companions, so it generality cannot be used as a proof.
Other wise those who cursed the Companions of the Prophet would be more
appropriate than the others in putting it into effect. Mu'awiya would
prevent his tongue from cursing the brilliant figures from the family of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, while it was incumbent on
him (Mu'awiya) to follow them to be guided. The people would prevent
their tongue from cursing Mu'awiya and those oppressive ones who were
like him. Religious fanaticism would die, and peace would occur through
reforming the Muslims.

However, it was the evil seed that the man (i.e., Mu'awiya) planted
intentionally. Then he and his kinship watered it. So it has become the
tree of the boxthom in the history of Islam. With it the Umayyads made
the simple people heedless and confused the minds of the ignorant. The
Umayyads made cursing 'Ali a sunna (practice) in history. So the Muslims
followed it, cerebrated it, and protested against those who left it.

Mu'awiya had no hoped excuse in what he had rendered to himself from
these remaining acts, nor had he glory for which he was envied or
flattered in what he had delayed for his history. Moreover, if
cleverness is the failure of the man in what he had advanced and
delayed, then Mu'awiya was the cleverest of all the clever!

Among the most wonderful aspects of the cleverness of Mu'awiya was his
attitude towards peace, which he made with al-Hasan, peace be on him.
That is because this Peace Treaty brought upon him spiritual and
historical disasters during his lifetime and after his death.

In the opinion of the people, the meaning of peacemaking (I mean the
peace on which Mu'awiya insisted) was that he had to break his
spearhead, to muzzle his mouth, and to leave al-Hasan alone, according
to the items which the two sides decided when they signed the Peace
Treaty. So the third item of their agreement was clear in refraining
from cursing. Accordingly, Mu'awiya had to refrain from that if he had
wanted real peace or if he had wanted to fulfill the stipulations that
were obligatory due to the protection, the covenant, and the oath.

However, Mu'awiya insisted on making peace with al-Hasan to  

  

disband his soldiers and to be safe from the disaster of his war against
al-Hasan, the grandson of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and
his family, as we have already mentioned. He did not want to conform to
the decisions of the Peace Treaty, nor did he pay attention to the
agreements. He signed the Peace Treaty, but it was mere ink on paper. He
took an oath and made covenants, but they were in vain. He went to Kufa,
went up on the pulpit, mentioned 'Ali and al-Hasan and defamed them.
Al-Husayn rose to refute him, so al-Hasan took him by the hand and made
him sit. Then al-Hasan got up, and said wise words to summon Mu'awiya to
the straight path, as we have said in chapter 18.

Mu'awiya was dissatisfied when the people hailed the speech which
al-Hasan made before him. At that time Mu'awiya was pleased with his
imaginary victory. So he thought that it was better for him to resort to
cursing and defaming the people. Noteworthy, the Islamic ideal manners
oppose such kind of behavior, prevent the people from adopting it, and
order them to have mercy on each other, to love each other, and to
associate as brothers in the religion. For example, some of the Islamic
ideal manners are: "The believer does not abuse, does not say obscene
words, does not defame, and does not curse."

"In his book 'al-Ahdath, Abu al-Hasan 'Ali b. Muhammad b. Abu Yousif
al-Mada'ini said: After the Year of al-Jama'a (a unified group of
people), Mu'awiya wrote a letter. In the letter he said: I am innocent
of him who narrates something concerning the outstanding qualities of
Abu Turab (i.e., 'Ali, peace be on him and his family). So in every
district and on every pulpit, the orators cursed 'Ali, renounced him,
and defamed him and his household. At that time, the tribulation of Kufa
was more difficult than that of the other (cities), for it had many
Shi'a of 'Ali, peace be on him.'" [[1]](#r18)

After the Peace Treaty, Mu'awiya decided to appoint al-Mu'ghira b.
Shu'ba as a governor over Kufa. So he summoned him and said to him: "Now
then, before this day, the stick had not been beat for the clement one.
The clement one does not re**next** you without teaching. I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n18) Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 15.

  

had wanted to recommend to you many things. I will leave them to depend
on your idea. However, I will not leave recommending you one quality. Do
not leave cursing and dispraising 'Ali." [[1]](#r19)

Then Ziyad became the governor over Kufa after al Mughira:"Ziyad
gathered the people at the gate of his palace and provoked them to curse
'Ali. Whoever refused (to do that), he (i.e., Ziyad) exposed him to the
sword." [[2]](#r20)

As for Basrah, Mu'awiya appointed Bisr b. Artat over it. So he made
speeches on its pulpit and cursed 'Ali, saying: "I will make every man
swear by Allah to believe me when I am truthful and to accuse me of
lying when I am a liar." In his book 'Ta'rikh', al-Tabari said: "So Abu
Bakra said to Ziyad: 'By Allah, we do not know you but a liar.' He
(i.e., al-Tabari) said: Zyydd ordered him to be brought, so he strangled
him, then they (i.e., the people) saved Abu Bakra from him." [[3]](#r21)

As for Medina, Mu'awiya appointed Marwan b. al-Hakam as a governor over
it. So the latter cursed 'Ali on the pulpit every Friday. Ibn Hajar
al-Maliki said: "Al-Hasan knew of that. So he did not enter the mosque
except during the establishment of the regular prayers (iqama). Marwan
refused to accept that. For this reason, he sent (some men) to
al-Hasan's house to curse his father and him strongly."

After the Peace Treaty, Mu'awiya went to Mecca to perform the hajj. He
circumambulated the Kaaba. Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas was with him. When he
ended that, he went to the House of the Council (dar alnadwa). Mu'awiya
seated Sa'd beside him on his bed and began to curse and defame 'Ali. So
Sa'd moved aside, and then he said: 'You have seated me by you on your
bed and began cursing 'Ali! By Allah, if I had a  
 quality of 'Ali's qualities, it would be better for me than  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n19) Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 187.
Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p. 141. [[2]](#n20) Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b.
al-Athir, vol. 6, p. 99. [[3]](#n21) Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p. 96.
Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 105.

  

what the sun rises over! By Allah, if I was the son- in- law of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and had sons as 'Ali had,
it would be better for me than what the sun rises over! By Allah, if the
Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, had said to me
what he said at the campaign against Khaybar: "Indeed, tomorrow, I will
give the standard to a man whom Allah and His Apostle love, and who
loves Allah and His Apostle. He does not escape. Allah will make a
conquest through him," it would have been better for me than what the
sun rises over! By Allah, if the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him
and his family, had said to me what he said at the Campaign of Tabuk:
"You are in the same position with respect to me as Aaron (Harun) was to
Moses (Musa) except that there is no prophet after me," it would have
been better for me than what the sun rises over. By Allah, I will not
enter a house belongs to you as long as you are living." [[1]](#r22)

Al-Mas'udi has narrated Mu'awiya's answer to Sa'd b. Abu Waqqas.
However, we think that it is not appropriate for us to mention his
answer, for it is ugly. Still it is a new proof for Mu'awiya's lowliness
in morals, decencies, and compliments.

### 4. Fulfilling the forth Stipulation

In his book 'Ta'rikh, vol. 6, p. 95.' al-Tabari said: "The people of
Basrah prevented him (i.e., al-Hasan) from receiving the land tax of Dar
Abjard, and they said:'It is our booty (fayy').'"

In his book 'al-Kamil fi al-Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 162.', Ibn al-Athir
said: "Their prevention (i.e., the prevention of the people of Basrah)
was according to Mu'awiya's order, too."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n22) Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol. 6, pp. 81- 2.

  

### 5. Fulfilling the fifth Stipulation

As you have known, this condition was concerning the covenant of
security for people in general, and the Shi'a of 'Ali in particular, and
concerning that Mu'awiya had to avoid doing any disaster secretly and
openly towards al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and their household.

The historians have many texts concerning the. matter of this condition:
some of these texts concern the evil disasters which the Umayyad rulers
committed against the Shi'a during the time of Mu'awiya; some of them
concern the disasters which Mu'awiya himself committed against the
excellent figures from the Companions of the Commander of the faithful;
some of them concern Mu'awiya's treason towards al-Hasan and al-Husayn
in particular. For this reason, we will present these texts according to
this order, too.
