Chapter 4: Kufa During the Days of the Pledge of Allegiance
===========================================================

  

Sa'sa'a b. Sawhan al-'Abdi [[1]](#r1) described Kufa as: "the dome of
Islam and top of speech." However, there were rude persons in Kufa. They
prevented the people from obeying those who were in charge of authority
(i.e., the Prophet's family). Also they prevented the people from
meeting them. These were the manners of the possessors.

The Muslims inhabited Kufa in the year 17 A.H., namely directly after
the conquest of Iraq. [[2]](#r2)

The early houses of Kufa were built of reed. However, they burned down.
So they were built of adobes. The streets of Kufa were twenty cubits
wide. Its lanes were seven cubits wide. The nexts of the buildings were
among its streets. They were forty cubits wide. Also alqatay' (plots of
land) were among its streets. They were sixty cubits wide.

The Mosque was the first thing to be built in Kufa. It was built in the
Middle of the area which was chosen to build the city. A strong man
threw arrows at all directions. Then the houses were built beyond the
arrows. So the area before the arrows was allotted to build the Mosque
and its yard. In front of the Mosque, they (the Muslims) built  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n1) See chapter: The Leaders of the Shi'a, in this book.
Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vo1.6, p.118. [[2]](#n2) Al-Baladhuri,
Futuh al-Buldan. Al-Buraqi, Ta'rikh al-Kufa. Al-Hamawi, al-Mu'jam.
However, al-Hamawi opposed him when he said: "Basrah was inhabited six
months before Kufa in the year 14 A.H."

  

a porch on which they built pillars made of marble, which the followers
of Kasra (a Persian king) brought from the ruins of al-Hira. They (the
Muslims) dug a trench around the yard of the Mosque to prevent the
people from building houses near it.

Suddenly, the buildings of Kufa increased. For the Commander of the
faithful (Amir al-mu'minin) emigrated to it. Then he regarded it as a
headquarters after the Battle of the Camel on the twelfth of the month
of Rajab, in the year 36 A.H.

Among the motives of this initiative (the Emigration of Imam 'Ali to
Kufa) was that the resources of Hijaz (Saudi Arabi) became so weak that
this country depended on other resources from other countries. The most
harmful thing for a certain country is that it depends on the resources
of other countries. However, Kufa and Iraq did not suffer from the
paucity of resources. In other words their resources were more than
their needs. There were also military factors. For example military
rebels used Iraq as a base for their hostile acts.

Prominent Muslim figures came successively to Kufa, from various Muslim
countries. For it was the capital of the Caliphate. The Arab tribes from
the Yemen and Hijaz, and the Persian communities from al-Mada'in and
Iran inhabited Kufa. Trade markets became active in it. Scientific
studies became bright in it. Gardens and villages were built around it.
Glorious history, arts, sciences lasted in it for a long time.

Shi'ism (tashayu) for Imam 'Ali and his sons, peace be on them,
prevailed Kufa under the Hashimite ruling. This phenomenon has been in
it since that time. Because of the mixed groups who inhabited the new
city, other hostile desires appeared there beside Shi'ism. After a short
time, such hostile motives became the reason for creating historical
events in Kufa.

The pledge of allegiance to al-Hasan, peace be on him, occurred when
Kufa pledged allegiance to him. Then all the people there agreed on his
nomination though they rarely agreed on a certain idea.

Throughout his life in this city, al-Hasan, peace be on him, showed  

  

the noble qualities which the family of Muhammad, may Allah bless him
and his family, inherited. Those noble qualities were: goodness, good
manners, noble feelings, gentle traits, wide patience, excellent mind,
knowledge, religious devotion, worship, and the like. So the hearts of
the people inclined towards him.

The Pulpit of the succession, though sad for the late Imam ('Ali),
smiled at the Prophetic qualities inherited by its new Successor. For he
was the best person in piety, refraining from the life in this world,
and collecting all good traits. For this reason, he (al-Hasan) was a
unique figure. Thus all different persons agreed on him willingly.
Moreover, all the elements of leadership necessary for the leader of a
nation or the Imam of people gathered in al-Hasan.

The festivals of the pledge of allegiance to al-Hasan, peace be on him,
in Kufa ended in the hoped manner. They resulted in strength, activity,
and mobilization. However, fate has rules that do not occur according to
the measures of minds, nor do they occur according to the desires of
selves. So the political atmosphere in the city of (Kufa), that
celebrated the appointment of the Successor for the first time in its
history, was still stagnant, clouded, and mingled with much suspicious
disturbance. That was what Kufa suffered from because of the effects of
the violent battles that happened in the neighboring nexts, namely in
Basrah, Nahrwan, and Siffin. In Kufa, at that time, there were many
supporters for the martyrs and victims of these battles from both
parties. Those supporters were very eager to avenge the blood of their
martyrs. So they spared no effort to carry out their purposes. Some of
these purposes were good, while some of them were evil. The evil
purposes were the reason for creating disagreement in the Muslim
community.

Though al-Hasan was in the beginning of his succession, all the hearts
inclined towards him. For he was the son of the daughter of the Apostle
of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. To love him was among the
conditions of belief. To obey him was among the conditions of the pledge
of allegiance to him.

  

Ibn Kathir said: "They (the Kufans) loved him (i.e., al-Hasan) more than
they loved his father. [[1]](#r3)

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, was still safe from all parties. That is
because he did not react to destroy the purposes of some people or to
injure the sensitive cord of the stubborn ideas of some people. That is
because the ways through which Islam lived at that time were sometimes
subjected, in such Muslims, to personal aims and were sometimes to
fanatic opinions.

Many of those people were selfish and ambitious. Their selfishness and
ambitions exceeded the limits of Islam. Thus they thought that they
would achieve their ambitions through pledging allegiance to al Hasan.
Al-Hasan's good manners made them pledge allegiance to him. For his
manners reminded them of the manners of his grandfather, may Allah bless
him and his family. Also they memorized a tradition from the Companions
of the Apostle of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. The
tradition said that al-Hasan was the most similar person to Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, in form and nobility.

In fact, they (the Kufans) understood al-Hasan's great manners as they
were.

Many of those who were opposed to al-Hasan's ideas and thoughts competed
with each other for the above- mentioned ambitions. So they pledged
allegiance to him of their own accord as the loyal believers did. Then
they, after a short time, were the quickest of all the people in
escaping from his camps. That is because they thought that they would
obtain their ambitions through the leniency of al-Hasan, peace be on
him. However, they found it difficult for them to get their ambitions
when al-Hasan assumed the succession. For he was very strict in
enforcing the Islamic law even with his close relatives such as his
brother and cousin.

For this reason, it was natural for the leaders in Kufa to oppose al
Hasan, peace be on him, as they had opposed the late Imam (i.e.,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n3) Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 8, p.41.

  

Imam 'Ali) who said to them: "You have filled my heart with puss and
loaded my bosom with rage. You made me drink mouthfuls of grief one
after the other." In this manner, that corrupt group of people clung to
their angry partisanship. Meanwhile they found a strong supporter abroad
(i.e., Mu'awiya in Syria). Also in this manner, various kinds of
problems began to appear because of that abominable partisanship.

Groups of the opportunists took advantage of that critical stage. They
were able to communicate with the people of Kufa to provoke them to
mutiny against the obligatory Successor, to violate morals, and to break
the pledge of Allegiance to him, peace be on him. These kind of people,
who were 'like men,' resorted to riot, boycott, and disobedience when
the Islamic Succession was moved to the new city (Kufa) in Iraq. For the
Islamic Succession there was clear in carrying out the Islamic laws and
was severe in enforcing justice. They were restless because they were
hopeless of the world of that succession. For such a kind of succession
was religious, not worldly. Also they knew that the succession would not
allow them to achieve their worldly ambitions.

So they (the rebels in Kufa) took advantage of the disagreement between
the new Successor in Kufa and Mu'awiya in Sham (Syria). They found that
disagreement appropriate for them to renew their activities to get
possible urgent interests through deceiving the two parties (i.e.,
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya). Thus they were before two choices: either they
get their ambitions through the new succession or they co-operate with
each other to corrupt and destroy it. In the meantime, Mu'awiya promised
to achieve their ambitions. Accordingly, money and promises were the
strongest weapons the rulers in Sham used to destroy the new succession
in Kufa throughout that time.

In this manner, the changeable desires, the different ideas, the bad
manners, and the impudent quarrels were able to weaken the attitude of
al-Hasan, peace be on him, in Kufa.

Thus the people during the pledge of allegiance to al-Hasan, peace be on
him, were many parties. We may classify them as follows:

  

### The Umayyad Party

The greatest persons who belonged to this party were: 'Amr b. Hurayth,
'Ammara b. al-Walid b. 'Aqaba, Hajar b. 'Amru, 'Umar b. Sa'd b. Abu
Waqqas, Abu Burda b. Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, Isma'il and Ishaq the two sons
of Talha b. 'Ubayd Allah, and the like. Strong elements with followers
and influence belonged to this party. They played a dangerous role in
destroying the succession of al-Hasan, peace be on him, through their
riot, plots, and disobedience.

"So they wrote secretly to Mu'awiya to listen and obey him. They urged
him to come quickly to them. They guaranteed to hand over al Hasan when
they got to his camp, or to kill him treacherously."[[1]](#r4)

In his book 'Ta'rikh, al-Mas'udi told us [[2]](#r5) : "Many of them (the
Kufans) wrote secretly to him (Mu'awiya). They became hasty in promises
for him and asked him for powers."

"Mu'awiya plotted against 'Amr b. Hurayth, al-Ash'ath b. Qays, Hajjar b.
Abjar, and Shibth b. Rib'i through his spies. In the meantime he said to
one of his spies: "If you kill al-Hasan, I will give you one hundred
thousand dirhams, an army of the armies of Sham (Syria), and a daughter
of my daughters." Al-Hasan, peace be on him, heard of that. So he wore
his breastplate. He guarded against them and did not  
 head them in prayer. So one of them (the above mentioned  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n4) Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p.170. Al-Tubrisi, A'lam al-Ward.
[[2]](#n5) Al-Mas'udi, Hamish b. al-Athir, vol.6, p.42. I (the author)
say: I think that many people from Sham might have written to al-Hasan,
peace be on him, at that time as the Kufans wrote to Mu'awiya. We have
known that the two parties (the Kufans and the Syrians) were ready to
break their promises whenever worldly desires tempted them. You have to
see 'al-Mahasin wa al Masawi', vol. 2, p.200, by al-Bayhaqi, to know
that the followers of Mu'awiya wrote to imam 'Ali, peace be on him. Also
try to see Ta'rikh, vol. 3, p. 12, by al-Ya'qubi, to know that all
followers of 'Abd al-Malik b. Marwan wrote to Mas'ab b. al-Zubayr and
asked him for safety and gifts. So we must understand that the Syrians
wrote to al-Hasan, but their letters have remained secret for us, for
al-Hasan did not reveal the secret as Mu'awiya did, or the historians
have intentionally ignored this matter as they have ignored many
matters.

  

persons) threw an arrow at him. However, the arrow did not hit him
because of his breastplate. [[1]](#r6)

One of these texts is enough to explain Mu'awiya's intentions. In this
manner, they (the Kufans) did evil deeds intentionally. They did the
deeds of the traitor who waited for an opportunity. Their mean attempts
were clear even under the clouds of deception and hypocrisy. In other
words their attempts seemed exposed and blatant at the hour of the
summons to the obligation.

Also in this manner, they (the Kufans) were throughout that time the
leaders of riot, helpers of plots, and fingers of the enemy in the city
(of Kufa).

The Kharijites co-operated with them (the Kufans) to overthrow the
Hashimite Caliphate during its two holy times. That is because the
Kharijites and the Kufans shared the same plan. The evidence for this is
what has been in the last text concerning the participation of alAsh'ath
b. Qays and Shibth b. Rib'i, who were among the leaders of the
Kharijites in Kufa.

### The Kharijites

They were the enemies of Imam 'Ali, peace be on him, from the day when
the event of the arbitration (al-tahkim) took next. Also they were the
enemies of Mu'awiya.

The leaders of the Kharijites in Kufa were: 'Abd Allah b. Wahab
al-Rasibi, Shibth b. Rib'i, al-Ash'ath b. Qays, and Shimr b. Dhi
al-Jawshan.

The Kharijites insisted on waging war against Mu'awiya more than the
other people in Kufa did. It was they who pledged allegiance to al
Hasan, peace be on him, on the condition that he should fight against
those who went astray (i.e., the Syrians). However, al-Hasan refused
their pledge of allegiance according to this condition. He wanted them
to pledge allegiance to him to conform to "listening and obeying."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n6) 'Ilal al-Sharai', p.82.

  

Moreover, he asked them to fight against him whom he fought against and
to make peace with him whom he made peace with. So the Kharijites went
to his brother al-Husayn, peace be on him. They said to him: "Stretch
out your hand to pledge allegiance to you as we had pledged allegiance
to your father to fight those who went astray (i.e., the Syrians)." So
al-Husayn, peace be on him, said to them: "I seek protection with Allah,
I cannot accept your pledge of allegiance as long as al-Hasan is
living." So they (the Kharijites) went to al-Hasan again and pledged
their allegiance to him as he had stipulated before. [[1]](#r7)

I (the author) think that there was no aspect of enmity when the
Kharijites wanted to pledge allegiance to al-Hasan, peace be on him.
Besides there was no aspect of enmity when they insisted on fighting
those who went astray from the Syrians. In the meantime, some followers
of al-Hasan, peace be on him, supported the Kharijites to declare war.
However, when you read the stages of the matter of al Hasan, you will
understand that the Kharijites were the reason for creating critical
conditions from which al-Hasan suffered. You have read in the foregoing
text that two leaders of the Kharijites took part in the ugliest Umayyad
plot in Kufa

The Kharijites used effective, fearful methods when they provoked the
people against the Umayyads. Their methods undermined the belief of many
people with doubts. That was the reason for the spreading of the
Kharijites after their decisive defeat at the Battle of al-Nahrwan.

Concerning the methods of the Kharijites, Ziyad b. Abih said: "Indeed,
the words of these (Kharijites) goes quicker to the hearts than the fire
goes to the reeds." In this connection, al-Mughira b. Shu'ba said: "When
they (the Kharijites) stayed at a next for two days, they corrupted
those whom they associated. [[2]](#r8)

The Kharijites told lies and thought that they told the truth. They did
evil deeds and thought that they did good deeds. They relied on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n7) Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, p. 150. [[2]](#n8) Al-Tabari, Ta'rikh,
vol. 6, p. 109.

  

Allah, but there was no religious relation between Him and them.

We will mention the Kharijites again when we discuss the members of the
Army in the following chapters.

### The Doubters

We have read something about the doubters in what al-Mufid, may Allah
have mercy on him, has mentioned concerning the members of the Army of
al-Hasan, peace be on him. We think that they have been called the
doubters because they were affected by the ideas of the Kharijites while
they did not belong to them. They were hesitating. Namely they did not
belong to a certain party.

I (the author) have known that al-Murtada has mentioned the doubters at
a great length and regarded them as unbelievers in his book 'al-Anal',
vol. 3, p. 93. It is as if that he understood that the doubters had
doubts about the origin of the religion.

The doubters were a group of the people of Kufa. They were from the
defeated rabble there. They had no intention to do good, nor had they an
ability to do evil. However, their existence in itself was evil. It was
a help for corruption, and a tool in the hands of the wrongdoers.

### Al-Hamra'

They belonged to the armed men in Kufa. Their number was twenty-thousand
men, as al-Tabari said in his book 'Ta'rikh'. When Kufa had been divided
into one-sevenths, they lived in the one seventh which was allotted to
their allies who belonged to the Banu (sons of) 'Abd al-Qays. They (the
Hamra') did not belong to the Banu of 'Abd al-Qays, nor did they belong
to the Arabs. Rather they were a mixed band from the friends and the
slaves. Maybe, most of them were from the sons of the Persian women who
were taken prisoners at the Battles of 'Ayn al-Tamr and Jalawla' in the
years 12- 17 A.H. So they carried weapons in the crisis of al-Hasan in
the year 41 A.H., and in the crisis of al-Husayn in the year 61 A.H.

  

The Hamra' were the police- men of Ziyad who killed the Shi'a in the
year 51 A.H. They were from those who carried out their duties well when
the evil tempted them. Mere likely, they were the soldiers of the
victorious tyrants.

The Hamra' became powerful because they helped Ziyad suppress the events
and the disturbances took next in Kufa during the first century A.H.
Moreover, they became more powerful in Kufa when they ascribed it to
themselves. So Kufa was called the Kufa of the Hamra' (Kufat al-Hamra ).

Basrah, like Kufa, had mixed groups of people (Hamra'). Ziyad, who was
the governor of Basrah then, was afraid of their power there, so he
tried to destroy them. However, al-Ahnaf b. Qays prevented him from
doing that.

Some modern writers have attributed the Hamrd' to the Shi'a, while they
were far away from them. For they spared no effort to destroy the Shi'a
and their Imams. We do not deny that there might be some of them who
adopted the beliefs of the Shi'a. However, the Shi'a are not judged by
the few persons. The followers of al-Hasan, peace be on him, lived in
Kufa beside these hostile people. The followers of al Hasan were greater
in number than the Hamra' in the capital of Imam 'Ali, peace be on him.
Among al-Hasan's followers was a number of the Emigrants (muhajrin) and
the Supporters (ansar). They followed 'Ali to Kufa. They had a high
social rank. The people respected them because they were the Companions
of the Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.

The great figures of the Shi'a in Kufa proved their loyalty to the
members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. They pledged
allegiance to al-Hasan, peace be on him. Thus he (al-Hasan) summoned
them to jihad (holy war) after his succession during the critical
situations. If those Shi'a had been safe from the plots of the other
citizens, they would have defended Kufa against the dangers of the
Syrians. No one can deny the ability and the activity of that blessed
group of people. By the activity we mean the abilities that helped that
Shi'ite group to bear and understand the hardships. Also they help them
find solutions to these hardships.

  

Among that blessed Shi'ite group were: Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbada
al-Ansari, Hujr b. 'Abu al-Kindi, 'Amr b. al-Hamq al-Khiza'i, Said b.
Qays al-Hamadani, Habib b. Muzahir al-Asadi, 'Adi b. Hatam al-Ta'i,
al-Musayyab b. Nujayya, Ziyad b. Sa'sa'a, and the like.

As for the reckless, opposing foreigners, and the mercenaries, they did
their best to overcome those abilities and to change that power.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, was aware of that atmosphere full of various
inclinations, disturbances, and opinions. It was necessary for him, at
the beginning of his succession, to tell the people frankly about his
plan and his attitude which he had concluded from his real conditions
both in Kufa and abroad.

It was Mu'awiya who was the enemy abroad. Thus he disturbed Kufa through
his various plots. Also he had taken the reins of authority. Moreover,
his own country Sham (Syria) was stable. It was not permitted for
al-Hasan, peace be on him, to overlook Mu'awiya. That is because the
latter was not an easy enemy. Meanwhile al Hasan would have not been
safe from his plots if he had overlooked him. Indeed al-Hasan had been
the most ready person to destroy Mu'awiya if he had found available
means to achieve that during his conditions.

As for Kufa, it had a dangerous opposition. The opposition was near to
al-Hasan, peace be on him, in next. However, it was far away from him in
spirit, meaning, and aims. So this kind of opposition engaged the Imam
and held his attention.

It was sorrowful for al-Hasan, peace be on him, to see such of people in
his capital (i.e., Kufa). For their desires and ambitions had controlled
them, and their opinions divided them. Besides, they did not know the
meaning of loyalty, the safeguard of the religion, and the rights of the
neighbor. They abandoned their morals, so they became an exploited tool
for opposition, treason, and corruption. They followed every crower and
rambled in every valley. So they were not appropriate for a political
field, nor were they appropriate for a war field. It is enough for you
to know that they were the reason for creating disturbances, riots, and
fear.

  

In this way, since the ancient times, the Iraqis have the ability to
understand opinions and violent revolts on various occasions.

Through his tested attitude, al-Hasan, peace be on him, showed his
talents that were always the good news of a bright victory. However, he
suffered from awful adversities came down on his attitude as the decree
came down from the sky.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, had predicted many events before they
occurred. However, the precautionary procedures prevented him from
mentioning those events openly. So he made hints for them. For this
reason he said the following vague words which he quoted from the
Qur'an: "I see what you do not see."

I (the author) wonder: At that time al-Hasan, peace be on him, saw those
active festivals which the Muslim community held to express their
loyalty to their new Successor. However, why did the new Successor see
what they did not see?

It was the insight that was among the qualities of al-Hasan, peace be on
him. He used such an insight in war and peace, and in all his steps
towards his enemies and his friends.

Unfortunately, the historical encyclopedias have not paid attention to
many examples. That is because they are necessary for us to indicate the
historical policy of al-Hasan, peace be on him, especially during the
first period of his short time. Namely the period that preceded the
declaration of holy war (jihad) in Kufa. So we have collected some
extracts from here and there to show his skillful policy that is beyond
doubt. So he led that shaky community wisely.

The following are some examples about al-Hasan's wise leadership:

1. Al-Hasan, peace be on him, made a certain form for those who wanted
to pledge allegiance to him, and he refrained from accepting the
conditions which the others made to pledge allegiance to him. He was
ready to accept that pledge of allegiance from the people provided that
they should listen and obey him, fight those whom he fought against, and
make peace with those whom he made peace with. Thus the people admired
his ability to run war and peace at the same time.

  

In this way he was able to please the two parties in Kufa, namely those
who wanted war and those who wanted peace. That is because the general
situation in Kufa forced him to take such wise precautions for a certain
time.

2. Al-Hasan, peace be on him, raised the salaries of the fighters to
100%. That was the first step he took when he became a successor. Then
the successors after him followed his example. [[1]](#r9)

This step al-Hasan, peace be on him, adopted to promote the salaries
refreshed the morale of his army and made a large number of people ready
to render their services for jihad (holy war).

Also this step means that al-Hasan, peace be on him, was ready to
declare war. However, it does not show us clearly that he was resolute
to wage war as long as it was a step of refreshment at that new time.
Besides this step was among his wise acts that led the Muslims to unity,
not to discord. In the meantime it was wise readiness for the future
that would force him to wage an expected war.

3. Al-Hasan, peace be on him, ordered the two men to be killed, for they
spied for his enemies. Also he threatened those who might spy on him in
Kufa and Basrah. Al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him, said: "When
Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan learned of the death of the Commander of the
faithful (Amir al-mu 'minin), peace be on him, and the people's pledge
of allegiance to his son, al-Hasan, peace be on him, he sent a man from
Himyar secretly to Kufa and a man from Banu al-Qayn to Basrah. They were
to write reports to him to undermine affairs for al-Hasan, peace be on
him. Al-Hasan, peace be on him, learned of that. He ordered the Himyari
to be brought out from (the tribe of) Lakhm in Kufa. He had him brought
out and executed. (Al-Hasan) wrote to Basrah,. ordering the Qayni to be
brought from the Banu Sulaym. He was brought out and executed."
[[2]](#r10)

Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani has mentioned a report similar to what  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n9) Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol.4, p. 12.
[[2]](#n10) Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 168. al-Anwar. Kashf al-Ghumma.

  

al-Mufid has mentioned: "You sent men to use deception and to carry out
assassinations and you sent out spies as if you want to meet (in
battle). That is something that will soon happen, so wait for it, if
Allah wills. I have learned that you have become haughty in a way that
no wise man would become haughty. In that you are just as al-Awwal
described:

Say to him who desires the contrary of the one who has died:

Prepare for another like him, as if (from the same) root.

I and the one among us who has died are like the one who

goes in the evening so that (the other) may come in the morning.

Many people urged al-Hasan, peace be on him, to wage war against
Mu'awiya from the day when he took the reins of authority in Kufa.
However, he considered their viewpoints carefully.

In Chapter 5, which you will read soon, we will analyze the political
attitude at that time. You will know that this deliberation was the only
measure at that time of al-Hasan, peace be on him.

5. Al-Hasan, peace be on him, made Mu'awiya forget his shaky, baseless
attitude through exchanging letters. Through Mu'awiya's answers full of
insults to al-Hasan, peace be on him, the people were able to know the
former's character which was unknown for them. Besides the letters paved
the way for al-Hasan to show the reasons for his war against Mu'awiya.
Suddenly, Mu'awiya became the defeated party according to the logical
viewpoint of the wise though he was victorious, after that, according to
the logical viewpoint of those who depend on force.

One of these skillful measures which al-Hasan, peace be on him, used to
carry out his political plan during his short time, between the death of
his father (peace be on him) and his determination to wage war, is
enough to explain al-Hasan's wise policy.
