Chapter 6: Jihad and Leadership
===============================

  

The caller of Kufa called: "The prayer is a general one (which all
should have attained) (al-salat jami 'a). "The people gathered.
Al-Hasan, peace be on him, went out. He went up on the pulpit. He
praised Allah, lauded Him, and said: "Now then, indeed, Allah has
enjoined jihad (fighting) on you, and has called it dislike. Then He
said to the mujahidin (holy fighters): 'Be patient. Indeed, Allah is
with the patient.' People, you do not obtain what you like but through
enduring what you dislike. I have heard that Mu'awiya has advanced
against us. Therefore, may Allah have mercy on you, go out to your camp
at al-Nukhayla [[1]](#r1) so that we may look and you look, we may see
and you see.

The historians of the event said: "The people kept silent. They did not
speak to him, nor did they answer him with a letter."

'Adi b. Hatam was the chief of (the tribe of) Tay. He was a notable
leader for his glorious deeds. He was a companion of both the Prophet
and 'Ali, the trustee of authority (wasi), may Allah bless them. When he
saw that (attitude), he was full of anger. His voice boomed and shook
the gathering people. So they turned to him to understand his words and
to take care of his affair. Many people knew the history of b. Hatam
al-Ta'i. They knew his righteousness, and his resistance for the truth.
The leader (i.e., 'Adi b. Hatam) used effective words and intense
scolding. He condemned the silence of the people, and denounced their
abominable weakness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n1) Little date palm, a next near Kufa, towards Sham (Syria). I
(the author) say: Today, there is, towards Karbala', a building called
Khan al-Nukhayla. There are twelve miles between it and Kufa.

  

Then 'Adi said: "I am 'Adi b. Hatam. How ugly this attitude is! Why do
you not answer your Imam, the son of the daughter of your Prophet? Where
are the orators of the city? Where are their tongues that are like the
penetrating swords during peace? Why do they trick like the fox during
seriousness? Do you not fear Allah's disgust? Do you not feel shame for
the defect and the disgrace of it (the attitude)?"

Then 'Adi b. Hatam turned his face to al-Hasan and said: "May Allah
achieve right guidance through you, guard you against misfortunes, and
grant you success to do laudable acts. We have heard your words. We have
obeyed your order. We have listened to you. We have obeyed you in what
you have said and seen. Now, I am heading for our camp."

Then he said: "So whoever wants to come, let him come." Then he went out
of the mosque. His riding animal was at the door (of the mosque). So he
mounted it and headed for al-Nukhayla. He ordered his servant to follow
him to supply him with his necessities. For this reason he was the first
to go to the camp, [[1]](#r2) to set a good example to the other
obedient mujahids (fighters). In (the tribe of Tay), there were a
thousand fighters who obeyed 'Adi in everything. [[2]](#r3)

After 'Adi b. Hatam, other orators became active. They addressed
al-Hasan in the same manner 'Adi used. So al-Hasan, peace be on him,
said to them: "May Allah have mercy on you. I still know your sincere
intentions, your faithfulness, and your love. So may Allah reward you
with good."

Al-Hasan, appointed his cousin, al-Mughira b. Noufal b. al-Harith b.
'Abd al-Muttalib, as his successor over Kufa and ordered him to urge the
people to join him at al-Nukhayla.

Al-Hasan went out with those who were with him. His going out was the
first day of the declaration of jihad. In the meantime it was the
strongest proof al-Hasan used to urge the people to take part in jihad.

The battalions of al-Nukhayla included the best companions from  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n2) Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14.
[[2]](#n3) Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, p. 171.

  

the followers (Shi'a) of al-Hasan and from the companions of his father,
and the like.

Al-Mughira b. Noufal became active in urging the people to take part in
jihad. The people held active festivals during the pledge of allegiance
to the new Successor. It was expected for the new Succession to urge the
people in Kufa to answer the summons of the Imam (i.e., al-Hasan) with
enthusiasm. However, nothing of that occurred. Noteworthy, there were
ready companies. They had forty thousand fighters. The Commander of the
faithful (i.e., Imam 'Ali) formed them to resist the attacks of the
Syrians before his death. However, these ready companies divided and
most of them mutinied against al-Hasan. Also most of the armed men in
Kufa followed them in disobeying al-Hasan's orders.

Some hesitating Kufan chiefs became very active during the critical
moment when the attitude became serious.

The historians have mentioned the following words on the authority of
al-Harith al-Hamadani, who said: "Those who wanted to go out rode with
him (i.e., al-Hasan). Many people refused to go with him. They did not
fulfill what they had said and promised. They deceived him as they had
deceived the Commander of the faithful before him. Al-Hasan camped at
al-Nukhayla for ten days. No one joined him except four thousand
fighters. So he came back to Kufa to urge people. There he delivered a
sermon in which he said: "You have deceived me as you had deceived those
who were before me." [[1]](#r4)

I (the author) say: We do not know exactly the number of those who
joined al-Hasan. However, we know that he "left Kufa with a great army"
as b. Abu al-Hadid said in his book 'Sharh Nahj al-Balagha.'

In the chapter entitled, 'the Number of the Army', we will discuss the
ideas of the historians to choose the accurate number of the soldiers of
al-Hasan, peace be on him.

Al-Hasan left al-Nukhayla and reached Dir 'Abd al-Rahman. He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n4) Al-Rawandi, al-Kharaij wa al-Jaraih, p. 228, (Iran).

  

stayed there for three days. At that next other mujahidin (fighters)
joined him, but we do not know their number.

Dir of 'Abd al-Rahman was situated between the two camps of Imam
al-Hasan in al-Mada'in [[1]](#r5) and Maskan.[[2]](#r6)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n5) It was the Sassanid capital. It lasted for one thousand
years. It was the inheritor of Babil (Babylon) in greatness. Today, none
of its ruins has remained but Taq Kasra, and the Shrine of the great
Companion (Salman al Farisi), may Allah have mercy on him. There were
seven facing cities, namely they faced each other on the banks of
Tigris. The Muslims conquered it in the year 15 A.H. At that time it was
the capital of all the Persian East. So in the Western side were
Saluqiya, Darzjan, Bahrsir, and Jindisabur (Kauka) in the district of
Mazlam Sabat which was related to Nahr al-Malik (the River of the king).
And in the Eastern side were Asfanbar, Romya, and Tishfon which had Taq
Kasra. More than one hundred years had passed before the extinction of
al Mada'in because of the foundation of Baghdad in the year 150 A.H.
During that period of time, al-Mada'in supplied Kufa with industries,
resources, and crops. That was through sending Persian friends to it,
who became Muslims. Al-Mada'in followed the example of the family of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, from the day when Salman
became a governor over it. Also in the seventh century A.H., al Mada'in
was a village which no one inhabited but the eager Shi'a. Al-Mas'udi
mentioned al-Mada'in when he mentioned Iraq. He said: "And the cities of
Iraq were al Mada'in and the surrounding cities. The people of
al-Mada'in had the most moderate colors, the purest perfumes, the best
tempers, and the most obedient natures. In them were inclusive virtues,
and peerless sound deeds." [[2]](#n6) The name of al-Tasuj from which
Awana was. It was situated on the bank of the river Dujayl. There were
many gardens of date- palms and trees in it. Abu al-Faraj al-Sawadi
(from the poets of the sixth century A.H.) meant it when he said: And
they regarded it as virgin grew in Awana Hidden from her fiancees with
the vessels. There were ten leagues between Maskan and Baghdad. At
Maskan, a battle took next between 'Abd al-Malik b. Marwan and Mas'ab b.
al-Zubayr in the year 72 A.H. Mas'ab and Ibrahim b. Malik al Ashtar were
killed at that battle. They were buried where they were killed. Their
graves are still visible. There is a humble dome  
 over the two graves. The Arabs of Sumayka call this dome the  
 Grave of Shaykh Ibrahim (Qabr Shaykh lbrahim). There are about  

  

As for al-Mada'in, it was at the bridgehead towards Persia and the
neighboring area. Because of its geographical situation, al-Mada'in was
the only area that protected the three lines that connected Kufa,
Basrah, and Persia with each other. Because of its military importance,
it drove back the events which the conditions of war caused. Persia was
the next from which the revolts against the State started. Over Persia
was Ziyad b. 'Ubayd who was appointed by the Imam, and who went on his
previous nature that changed every thing in him.

As for Maskan, it was the sensitive point in the history of the jihad of
al-Hasan, peace be on him. That is because it was the field which
al-Hasan was supposed to meet the enemy face to face. At that time it
was on the far northern borders of Hashimite Iraq, or the areas
dominated by the Kufan authority from this direction. At Maskan, there
were agricultural lands, inhabited lands, and many famous villages such
as Awana, 'Ukbara, and al-'Alth that was the last village on the
northern borders of Maskan [[1]](#r7). Facing al-'Alth was a village
called al-Jinubiya towards which Mu'awiya and his army advanced when
they left the bridge of Manbij where the two armies met.

It is known today that the situation of Maskan is at these wide plains
that are situated between the village of Sumayka and the village of
Balad, with the exception of Samarra.'

Maskan had nature rich in resources, near rivers, and wide plains.
Because of these natural features, Maskan was the best next for war. It
was, for the first time in its history, the battlefield towards which
al-Hasan and Mu'awiya advanced. Then many battles between Iraq and Sham
(Syria) occurred there.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, thought that it was better for him to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

sixty kilometers between this dome and Baghdad, and ten kilometers
between it and Tigris. So Maskan was the area that surrounded this
grave, including the river Dujayl. Also Awana was there. [[1]](#n7) In
al-Ahkam al-Sultaniya, al-Mawardi has mentioned the following on the
authority of al-Hamawi, who said: "Al-'Alth is the first part of Iraq
from this direction." I (the author) say: Al-'Alth is situated between
'Ukbara and Samarra'. 'Ukbara is among the villages of Dujayl, near
Awanan.

  

use al-Mada'in, because of its military importance, as a headquarters
for his high command to receive military supplies from the three
neighboring cities and to be at the back of his field where he met
Mu'awiya and the Syrians, namely at Maskan. There were no more than
fifteen leagues between the two Hashimite camps, namely alMada'in and
Maskan.

That was the excellent plan of which there was no alternative for that
situation of war. In this way, namely through drawing his war plans,
al-Hasan has shown us that he was the inspired leader who had command of
war tactics as the people of his time called. Moreover, al-Hasan used
gradual steps to resist his enemy. Namely, he tested the time, chose the
situations, and led the armies. All these steps have indicated that he
had outstanding military talents that were equal to the talents he had
in policy, loyalty, and sacrifice.

Al-Hasan, peace be on him, looked left and right. Then he considered
carefully the prominent figures who were with him. They were from the
leaders of his followers (Shi'a) and of his family. He wanted to choose
a leader from them for his advance guards whom he determined to send to
Maskan. Among the gentle ones of the tribe and the loyal Ansar
(supporters), he found no one more eager and sincerer for the attitude
of his cousin 'Ubayd Allah [[1]](#r8) b. 'Abbas b. 'Abd al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n8) Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 170. Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al
Balagha, vol. 4, p. 14. Al-Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, p. 191. Another
historian has mentioned that it was his brother 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas.
That is incorrect, for 'Abd Allah was not in Kufa during the days of the
Succession of al-Hasan. Rather, he was in Mecca, and wrote to al-Hasan a
letter in which he hinted at war. You find details about him in 'Sharh
Nahj al-Balagha', vol. 4, pp. 8-9. If 'Abd Allah was in Kufa at that
time, his name would not be hidden during those events. In his book
'al-Ta'rikh', vol. 6, p. 81, al-Tabari said: "In the opinion of all
historians, 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas went out of Basrah and reached Mecca.
Some historians have denied that and claimed that the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, appointed him a governor over Basrah. He
governed it till he (the Commander of the faithful) was killed. (He was
still a governor over Basrah) after the killing of 'Ali till al-Hasan
made peace (with Mu'awiya). Then he left (Basrah) at that time for
Mecca." I (i.e., the author)  
 say: 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas was not in Basrah. If he  
 had been there, the army would not have delayed. For al-Hasan  

  

Muttalib, Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbada al-Ansari, and Said b. Qays
al-Hamadani, the head of the Yemenis in Kufa. So al-Hasan confined
successively the leadership to these three leaders.

'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas was among those who were eager for war, and was
indifferent to life. Religious zeal moved him, and the tribal enthusiasm
stirred him up. So he was melted in his fanaticism for the Hashimite
throne as the melted steel. He was among the leaders of the Hashimites.
As they say :"The bereaved woman of a child is unlike the hired one." As
for his outstanding backgrounds, he was the Emir of the hajj in the year
36 A.H. (according to the narration in the book al-Isaba') or in the
year 39 A.H. (according to the report of al-Tabari) or he was the Emir
of the hajj in both years. He was the ruler of Bahrain and the Yemen
[[1]](#r9) and their subsequent parts during the lifetime of the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

was in a pressing need of it in al-Mada'in. Ibn al-Athir (vol. 3, p.
166) has underlined that 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas left 'Ali during his
lifetime. We think that it is the similarity between the two brothers in
father and name has made such an error in attributing the leadership to
'Abd Allah. Another historian made a mistake so that he has attributed
the leadership of the vanguard to Qays b. Sa'd who was the leader of the
fighters who were in front of the vanguard as Ibn al-Athir has
mentioned. That maybe the reason for this imagination. Then think.
[[1]](#n9) Some historians tried to doubt the historical backgrounds of
'Ubayd Allah through the event that forced him to go out of the Yemen.
It is an act of truthfulness to admit that the garrison of the Yemen was
too weak to resist the attack of Bisr b. Artat at that time. Moreover,
some of the Yemenis deserted the Hashimite authority. They wrote letters
to Mu'awiya. They dismissed their Emir Said b. Nimran from the army. And
they disobeyed their ruler 'Ubayd Allah. All these factors and others
indicate that 'Ubayd Allah was innocent of the doubts. If 'Ubayd Allah
had tried to resist Bisr, the latter would have been able to defeat him
with the help of the 'Uthmanis in the Yemen. 'Ubayd Allah did not do
more than what his peers did in Mecca and Medina when they escaped from
Bisr. The governor of Mu'awiya over the three capitals attacked the
people where in. So he killed about thirty thousand innocent people. We
have known that 'Ubayd Allah intended to go to Kufa when he left the
Yemen. And if he had been suspicious, he would have not headed for Kufa.
Besides we have known that Said b. Nimran apologized to the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on  
 him, when he said to the latter: "I summoned the people (i.e., the
people  
 of the Yemen) to fighting. A group of them answered  

  

Commander of the faithful (i.e., Imam 'Ali). The pilgrims in Mecca bore
witness that he was generous. Then he was the first to pledge allegiance
to al-Hasan when the people pledged allegiance to him.

According to these excellent backgrounds, Imam al-Hasan, peace be on
him, had great confidence in 'Ubayd Allah. [[1]](#r10) Then al-Hasan
summoned him and gave him commandments which have not fully been
reported to us. Rather some books have briefly mentioned them.

In these commandments, al-Hasan, peace be on him, said :"Cousin, I am
going to send with you twelve thousand from the horsemen of the Arabs
and the readers of the Qur'an in the city. The man from them is more
than a battalion. So lead them and treat them kindly.

That is because they are the rest of the reliable companions of the
Commander of the faithful. Lead them to the Euphrates. Then go on (your
advancing) till you make them meet Mu'awiya face to face. If  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

me. So I fought weakly. Then the people left me, and I went away. I (the
author) say: Will the experience of b. Nimran not correct the apology of
'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas? That is because the backgrounds of this man had
no defect. Therefore, no wonder when al-Hasan was satisfied with him
because of his reliable backgrounds. [[1]](#n10) Ibn Abu al-Hadid, vol.
4, p. 14. Al-Mufid, al-Irshad, pp. 168-169. Al Ya'qubi, Ta'rikh, vol. 2,
p. 191. Only al-Ya'qubi did not mention the third leader from the
leaders of the vanguard, then he said: "Al-Hasan ordered 'Ubayd Allah to
obey the order and idea of Qays b. Sa'd. So 'Ubayd Allah advanced
towards the Island (i.e., Mesopotamia). When Mu'awiya heard of the
killing of 'Ali, peace be on him, he headed for Mousil eighteen days
after the killing of 'Ali. I (the author) say: Mousil was among the
villages of Maskan. Our master Muhammad b. Imam 'Ali al-Midi was buried
near Mousil as al-Hamawi has mentioned in his book 'al-Mujam'. It is
other than the present city of Mousil (in Iraq). There is no difference
between what al-Ya'qubi and what the others reported about limiting the
situation where the army of Mu'awiya stopped during his war against
al-Hasan. That is because Mousil, al Haywada, al-Jinubiya were all among
the villages of Maskan at that time. Maybe, the army occupied all these
villages, so their names have been mentioned in various reports. Also
some reports have been confined to some names as you see. As for us, we
have only chosen al-Jinubiya depending on the letter Qays b. Sa'd wrote
to al-Hasan as we will mention in the following chapters.

  

you find him (i.e., Mu'awiya), then withhold him till I come to you, for
I am about to follow you. Let your news come to me every day. Ask the
advice of these two (persons) (i.e., Qays b. Sa'd, and Said b. Qays). If
you meet Mu'awiya, then do not start fighting against him till he starts
fighting against you. If he does, then fight him. If you were struck
(i.e., killed or wounded), then Qays b. Sa'd would be (the leader) over
the people. If he were struck, then Said b. Qays would be (the leader)
over the people.

As you see that Imam al-Hasan peace be on him, did not mean 'Ubayd Allah
through his commandments. Rather he meant his Companions. So he
(al-Hasan) praised them, lauded their bravery, and added them to his
father, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. With all this
praise and laud, al-Hasan wanted to raise the morale, to stir up their
enthusiasm, and to move their feelings. Then al-Hasan ordered 'Ubayd
Allah to treat them kindly. Al-Hasan gave these commandments to 'Ubayd
Allah to create exchangeable confidence between the commander and the
army. This confidence, in the war that suffered from the paucity of the
modern military regulations, was the worthiest of importance of all the
elements hoped for the black (bad) days. They (the commandments) are in
four joined sentences. They underline each other. Then they have only
one meaning. I (the author) wonder: Is it possible for us to make use of
this intentional repetition of these sentences? They, through their
emphasizing, tried to uproot a certain manner in 'Ubayd Allah (the new
commander). That is because there were great figures with him in his
army. They had glorious backgrounds and reputation. Thus they were not
unable to bear his proud manner, nor were they able to bear his
rudeness. For he would enjoin and prevent them. In other words they were
unable to bear these qualities in that Hashimite young man who was not
the best of them in merit, jihad, piety, and age. [[1]](#r11)

After that are these words of al-Hasan: "Ask the advice of these two
persons." These words are another evidence for that al-Hasan  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n11) 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas was 39 years old on the day when he
led this army.

  

intended to reform the rude behavior of 'Ubayd Allah. The Imam knew that
his cousin had such a kind of behavior that would hinder his victory at
the battle.

I (the author) say: That rude manner, if the doubt is true, would not
prevent 'Ubayd Allah from being worthy of the leadership. In other words
many other conditions forced him to use that rude manners, for there is
a close relation between rudeness and military life in the past and
present times.

In this connection, we may raise a question: Why did al-Hasan, peace be
on him, appoint 'Ubayd Allah over the vanguard of his army? Didn't his
army have great figures such as Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbad al-Ansari? Wasn't
the latter known for his military merit, his loyalty to the family of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and his honesty?

We may answer these questions as follows:

1. When al-Hasan appointed 'Ubayd Allah over the vanguard, he ordered
him to ask the advice of both Qays b. Sa'd and Said b. Qays. That is
what his clear commandments indicate. Through this measure, al-Hasan was
able to avoid preferring 'Ubayd Allah to the others. For he would be
criticized for this preference. In the meantime this preference would
affect that attitude. In this way the leadership became a consultation
among the three persons who were the most appropriate ones of al-Hasan's
men. Among these prominent figures, who were known for their leadership
at the battle fields, loyalty, jihad, and back grounds, were Abu Ayyub
al-Ansari, Hujr b. 'Adi al-Kindi, 'Adi b. Hatam al-Ta'i, and the like.
We have already mentioned them.

Generally speaking, al-Hasan gave priority to 'Ubayd Allah, who was
al-Hasan's and the Prophet's cousin, may Allah bless him and his family,
over the two other leaders. He appointed him as a leader only in name.
He ordered him to ask the advice of Qays and his companion, as we have
mentioned above. These steps put an end to any disagreement on the
leadership or any competition for it.

2. Among the excellent precautionary measures for the general situations
at that time was that no one would be a leader with al-  

  

Hasan but a Hashimite one.

To explain that, we may say that the intense weakness that accompanied
the matter of al-Hasan in Kufa was still very ominous in his
consideration. So al-Hasan had to take possible measures to avoid in his
present and future times, the censure of the people, their accusing him
of an error, and their criticism. It is easy for people to accuse
someone of an error or to criticize him when they find weakness,
failure, and deprivation in him. If the matter of al-Hasan in Maskan had
failed, the people would have blamed him for that failure. They would
say that if the leader had been from the family of al-Hasan, he would
have been the most appropriate person for enduring the great
adversities, and the matter would have not come to this result.

So al-Hasan was right when he got ready for the disasters of that time
through appointing a Hashimite leader. This measure was very important.

3. 'Ubayd Allah was more angry with Mu'awiya than any other man. He was
angrier with him than Qays and the son of Qays. That is because 'Ubayd
Allah's two sons were killed when Bisr b. Artat attacked the Yemen.
(This event is among the famous events in history.)

Thus it was very appropriate for al-Hasan to choose such a leader who
was full of anger, and was eager to fight against the killer of his two
sons.

The majority of the army of the vanguard headed by 'Ubayd Allah was from
the army which the Commander of the faithful prepared in Kufa to fight
against the Syrians. Its worth mentioning that, Qays b. Sa'd b. 'Abbada
was the commander of this army during the lifetime of the Commander of
the faithful (i.e., Imam 'Ali), peace be on him. [[1]](#r12)

These backgrounds were of great importance in strengthening the links
between the commander and his soldiers. It was easy for the commander
who had great influence on his soldiers to incline,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#n12) Ibn Kathir, Ta'rikh, vol. 8, p. 14.

  

whenever he wanted, to free conduct. This kind of freedom would indicate
that there was no positive relation between the commander and the
Supreme Authority. So al-Hasan had to be careful of such a position, for
it was the most import thing during that attitude.

Although we respect our master Qays very much, we do not deny his
personal abilities that would make him incline to such a kind of free
conduct.

We do not forget that Qays, on the day when he headed this army, stood
among his soldiers and ordered them to choose either following the
Imam's Peace Treaty or going on fighting against Mu'awiya without an
Imam.

Accordingly, Imam al-Hasan carried out the best two ideas. In other
words, he appointed a person as a commander for his army. In the
meantime he made 'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abbas a military adviser to make use
of his abilities and cleverness.

I (the author) say: Appointing Qays as a successor after 'Ubayd Allah
did not harm this policy (i.e., al-Hasan's policy). That is because Qays
would, after the killing of his predecessor in the battlefields of
Maskan according to the items of the convention, follow the plan, which
his predecessor had followed. For the conditions of the battle between
the two parties (i.e., al-Hasan and Mu'awiya) did not permit him to
change the plan. Moreover, he (Qays) would be under the direct
leadership of the Imam (who was) the high leader. From what we have
already mentioned, we have known that the Imam promised the vanguard of
his army that he was about to follow them.

After this (explanation), there was no danger in appointing Qays as a
successor after 'Ubayd Allah as long as the former was ordered to follow
a certain plan, and was under the direct supervision of the Imam.
