Chapter 9:  The Struggle for Legitimacy
=======================================

   
 What has so far been said completes the first and fundamental phase in
the history of the development of Shi'i Islam. In this phase a rather
specific direction, a well-defined trend of thought, an ideal of polity,
and an underlying principle of religious adherence were established
which can easily be distinguished as the Shi'i interpretation of Islam.
Perhaps even at this early stage one can discern the basic difference
between the Shi'a and the rest of the community, for while the former
preferred to accept the leadership of only those who derived their
authority directly from the person of the Prophet and in this way
enjoyed divine sanction, the latter vested the authority for the
leadership in the community as a whole, which was thus entitled to
choose the leader.  
    
 With the death of Husayn, however, Shi'ism entered the second phase of
its history. While the basic principle remained the same, disagreements
arose over the specific criteria for deciding who the divinely inspired
leader was, and this led to the internal division of Shi'i Islam. A
study of the history of religions would show that a common phenomenon of
world religions and their factions has been that they always split over
certain details when they enter the second phase of their development.
Islam too, and within it both the major groups of Shi'is and Sunnis,
could not escape this fate.  
    
 We have seen in the previous chapter that shortly before the Tawwabun
marched against the Syrians, Mukhtar arrived in Kufa and tried to gain
the support of Sulayman b. Surad and his followers for his own plan to
rise against the Umayyads. The Tawwabun, however, refused to join him.
The personality and character of Mukhtar have been subjected to a great
controversy in early Shi'i history. Some sources present him as an
ambitious adventurer seeking political authority for himself in the name
of the Ahl al-Bayt. Others give him the benefit of the doubt and accept
that his actions were in reality motivated by his love for the family of
the Prophet, though his approach and tactics were different from those
of the Tawwabun.  
    
 An exhaustive scrutiny of the sources may well prove that he was a
devoted follower of the House of 'Ali and a sincere supporter of their
cause, but whatever the case may be, the fact remains that he has
generally been treated rather unsympathetically by the sources of
different schools for different reasons. The Twelver Shi'i sources
present him in an unfavourable light since it was he who for the first
time began propaganda for the Imamate of Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya, thus
deviating from the line of Fatima. The non-Shi'i sources, on the other
hand, seem to have been influenced by the anti-Mukhtar propaganda
launched by both the sympathizers of Ibn az-Zubayr and those of the
Umayyads. No serious study has so far been done on Mukhtar, and the
sketchy accounts given by some of the modern scholars[^1] are generally
influenced, without a critical assessment, by the sources usually
hostile to him. Recently, however, Hodgson has hinted that the
blackening of Mukhtar's reputation and the attempt to discredit him
began from the time of his death.[^2]  
    
 The fact, however, remains that Mukhtar, in all probability due to the
quiescent policy of Zayn al-'Abidin,-to be discussed below, was
responsible for shifting the Imamate from the descendants of the Prophet
through Fatima to another son of 'Ali! Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya, thus
creating the first deviation from the legitimist body of the Shi'a. The
word legitimist may not be a good expression, but it is perhaps the
nearest English approximation to the idea of a central body of the
Shi'a, where the Imamate remained strictly restricted in the line of
'Ali and Fatima, coming from Hasan to Husayn and then through explicit
nomination from father to son, usually to the eldest surviving son,
until it ended with the twelfth Imam. Our intention in the following
chapters is, therefore, to restrict our attention to the survey of this
legitimist or central body of the Shi'a, which was reduced to an almost
insignificant number after the death of Husayn by the newly emerging
revolutionary or Messianic branches of the Shi'a. The use of the term
legitimist and central body may seem at this stage arbitrary and a
premature description of a later development; nevertheless, the fact
remains that it was this legitimist faction which ultimately re-emerged
as the largest and thus the central body of the Shi'a, and was
eventually to be known as the Imamiya or Ithna-'ashariya (Twelver)
Shi'a. The movement of Mukhtar and the idea of the Mahdi attached to the
person of Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya, with its extremist and esoteric
doctrines, or other ramifications of the Shi'a, are therefore beyond the
scope of this study.  
    
 It may, however, be pointed out here for future reference that from
this time of the confusion in the leadership which followed the death of
Husayn, this study has to address itself to two different questions:
first, how legitimist Shi'ism maintained its separate identity without
being absorbed into the emerging Sunni synthesis; and second, how it
maintained its own character distinct from the revolutionary and
extremist branches within Shi'ism itself. To resist the latter form of
absorption was indeed more difficult, since extremist and revolutionary
ideas are often more appealing than moderate ones.  
    
 As long as Husayn was alive the Shi'is remained united, considering him
the only head and Imam of the House of the Prophet. But his sudden death
and the quiescent attitude of his only surviving son 'Ali, more commonly
known as Zayn al-'Abidin, left the Shi'a in confusion and created a
vacuum in the active leadership of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt.
Thus the period following Husayn's death marks the first conflict over
the leadership of the followers of 'Ali, resulting in the division of
the Shi'a into various groups.  
    
 'Ali Zayn al-'Abidin was the only one of the sons of Husayn whose life
was spared during the massacre at Karbala, since he did not take part in
the fighting due to illness. He was at that time twenty-three years
old.[^3] After his return from Karbala, Zayn al-'Abidin lived in Medina
for most of his life, avoiding any political involvement as much as he
could. The tragedy of Karbala left a deep mark on him and it was only
too natural that he bore a deep grudge against the Umayyads, holding
them responsible for the massacre of his father and all other family
members. In spite of this feeling, however, he refrained from expressing
any hostile attitude towards them. As a result, the Umayyads also tried
to maintain good relations with him; in particular, Marwan b. al-Hakam
and his son 'Abd al-Malik even showed a certain respect and affection
for him.[^4]  
    
 When the Medinese rose against Yazid b. Mu'awiya in the year 62/681,
Zayn al-'Abidin, in order to emphasize his neutrality in the political
struggle in the community, left Medina and went to stay on his estate
outside the city.[^5] When Marwan, the governor of Medina, was compelled
by the Medinese to leave the city, he took his wife to Zayn al-'Abidin
and asked him to protect her. Zayn al-'Abidin demonstrated his
magnanimity by accepting this responsibility; he sent her to Ta'if
escorted by his son 'Abd Allah.[^6] When Yazid's army, led by Muslim b.
'Uqba however, defeated the Medinese in the battle of Harra, and sacked
and looted the city, Zayn al-'Abidin and his family were left
unmolested. Moreover, while all the Medinese were obliged to take a
humiliating oath of allegiance, declaring themselves slaves of the
Caliph Yazid, Zayn al-'Abidin was exempted.[^7] If this information, so
widely reported by the sources, on the one hand illustrates the neutral
policy of Zayn al-'Abidin, on the other hand it also indicated that the
Umayyads, after killing Husayn, began to realize the respect and regard
which the progeny of the Prophet commanded among the majority of the
Muslims.  
    
 In the conflict between the Umayyads and 'Abd Allah b. az-Zubayr, Zayn
al-'Abidin remained neutral. Ibn az-Zubayr did him no harm, but held him
in Mecca under his supervision. Still another important factor in Zayn
al-'Abidin's policy was his reserved attitude towards Mukhtar, who tried
his best to gain his explicit support. Besides many approaches to Zayn
al-'Abidin, which Mukhtar made while he was in the Hijaz, he even wrote
a letter to Zayn al-'Abidin from Kufa, offering his allegiance.[^8] In
avenging the blood of Husayn, Mukhtar beheaded most of those responsible
for the tragedy.

The head of 'Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad, the chief architect of the massacre
at Karbala, was sent by Mukhtar to Zayn al-'Abidin, not to Ibn
al-Hanafiya, and was delivered in a most dramatic manner.[^9] The son of
Husayn is reported to have been seen so happy at that occasion that
people said that they had never noticed him so elated since that tragedy
at Karbala. Nevertheless, he continued his reserved and with-drawn
attitude towards Mukhtar. The sources even report Zayn al-'Abidin as
publicly denouncing Mukhtar in violent terms which seem to warrant
serious examination.[^10] If these reports are correct, however, the
reason for Zayn al-'Abidin's resentful attitude towards Mukhtar seems to
have been the latter's proclamation of Ibn al-Hanafiya's imamate, which
Zayn al-'Abidin considered as the usurpation of his own rights.  
    
 Shi'i sources record a number of traditions stating that Husayn
expressly appointed Zayn al-'Abidin as his successor. The most commonly
reported tradition in this connection is. that Husayn, before leaving
for Iraq, entrusted Umm Salima, the widow of the Prophet, with his will
and letters, enjoining her to hand them over td the eldest of his male
offspring in case he himself did not return. Zayn al-'Abidin was the
only son who came back and so he was given his father's will and became
his nominee.[^11] Another tradition states that Husayn nominated Zayn
al-'Abidin as his successor and the next Imam of the House of the
Prophet just before he went out to meet the Umayyad forces for the last
encounter at Karbala.[^12]  
    
 There is no criterion for an historian either to accept or to reject
this sort of tradition. Perhaps the only guiding principle which may be
used is the general tendency of the epoch and the common practice of the
people of that period. Judging from this angle, we may recall our
earlier comment in Chapter 7 that Husayn, by virtue of his family and
his own position therein as the grandson of the Prophet, thought that it
was his right to be the Imam of the community. It would therefore be
natural to think that he bequeathed his heritage to his son to maintain
his family's tradition of leadership coming down from the Prophet.
Nevertheless, the fact remains unchallenged that after Husayn's death
the majority of the Shi'is followed Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya and not Zayn
al-'Abidin, though the Tawwabun, as we have seen, thought of the latter
as their prospective Imam. Even the remnants of the Tawwabun who
survived the battle of 'Ayn al-Warda were attracted by Mukhtar to the
side of Ibn al-Hanafrya.[^13] The reason was obvious. The Shi'is in
Kufa, especially the mawali among them, wanted an active movement which
could relieve them from the oppressive rule of the Syrians. They found
an outlet only under the banner of Mukhtar, and saw a ray of hope in the
Messianic role propagated by him for Ibn al- Hanafiya.  
    
 On his part, Ibn al-Hanafiya did not repudiate Mukhtar's propaganda for
his Imamate and Messianic role; he nevertheless maintained a carefully
non-committal attitude and never openly raised his claims to the
heritage of Husayn.[^14] It is indeed difficult to say whether Ibn
al-Hanafiya's policy of not publicly laying claims to the leadership of
the Shi'is was because of the serious risk such a claim would have
entailed or because he was aware of the fact that he. was not the
descendant of the Prophet. We have repeatedly pointed out throughout
this work, from the event of Saqifa till the movement of the Tawwabun,
that the main emphasis of the Shi'is regarding the leadership of the
community has been focused upon the direct relationship to the Prophet.

With reference to Hasan and Husayn, we always find far more emphasis on
the idea of succession to the Prophet by blood than to 'Ali by blood. If
all these overwhelming reports have any historic merit, then it seems
very strange indeed that immediately after Husayn's death the emphasis
has so suddenly changed from the lineage of the Prophet to that of 'Ali.
It is, therefore, most probable that, besides political danger, Ibn
al-Hanafiya, not being the descendant of the Prophet, was hesitant to
claim the Imamate for himself. This also explains why Mukhtar was first
so anxious to gain the support of Zayn al-'Abidin; and when he lost all
hopes of winning the son of Husayn, only then did he turn to Ibn al-
Hanafiya.

As for the other part of the problem, that is, how the Shi'is of Kufa so
readily changed their attitude and accepted as their Imam a son of 'Ali
who was not the descendant of the Prophet, whereas Zayn al-'Abidin was,
some explanation must be sought. Perhaps the only answer to the riddle
may be found in the fact that most of the original and main body of the
Shi'a, with a clear doctrinal stand regarding the idea of the
leadership, had been much reduced in number, first in the Karbala
massacre with Husayn, and then in the battle of 'Ayn al-Warda under the
command of Sulayman b. Surad al-Khuza'i.

They were not only the hard core and well grounded in their Shi'i!
ideals, but also provided intellectual and religious leadership and
guidance to the masses of the Shi'a of Ku fa. After Karbala and 'Ayn al-
Warda, what remained in Kufa in the name of the Shi'a were mostly the
wavering commoners of the Arabs and the mawali who in that desperate
situation could not make the delicate doctrinal distinction between
merely a son of 'Ali and a son of 'Ali from Fatima. To them, 'Ali was,
after all, the cousin of the Prophet and also a member of the priestly
clan of Hashim. That the sanctity of the Banu Hashim was confined to
Muhammad after the Prophethood had been bestowed on him, to the
exclusion of other members of the family of Hashim, as understood by the
original body of the Shi'a, was lost among these commoners.

They were thus easily carried away by the talented eloquence of Mukhtar
and his successful propaganda for Ibn al-Hanafiya as the deliverer
(Mahdi) from the tyranny and injustice inflicted upon them by the
Umayyads. It was, therefore, not so much the rights and personality of
Ibn al-Hanafiya which made the masses of the Shi'is of Kufa accept him
as Mahdi-Imam as it was their desperate yearning for a deliverer from
Umayyad domination and oppressive rule. A careful examination of
Mukhtar's propaganda for Ibn al-Hanafiya would show that the overriding
emphasis in introducing him was on his role as Mahdi and not so much on
his being the Imam. This may prove to have been the main factor which
attracted people to him.  
    
 Once, however, the idea was implanted it found its way and swept away
most of the unstable Shi'i masses. Once it became a popular movement
with certain hopes pinned to it, even some of the remnants of the
original Shi'a were also carried away.

It is indeed difficult to resist what we may call a popular appeal and,
especially in the situation prevalent in Iraq at that time, even some of
the firm believers in the leadership of the descendant of the Prophet
could not remain unaffected. Thus the Mahdism of Ibn al-Hanafiya soon
became the order of the day among the Shi'is of Kufa. And, in course of
time, the idea was popularly spread and accepted by the people and
developed its own doctrines and dogma, legends and beliefs. It produced
its own poets, such as Kuthayyir and Sayyid al- Himyari and others. The
majority of the Shi'a thus in that particular period became the
followers of the Mahdi-Imam (and not of the Imam only) attached to the
person of Ibn al-Hanafiya, and eclipsed, though only for a short period
of time, the Imams from the line of Husayn.  
    
 Being the son of Husayn and the eldest surviving descendant of the
Prophet, Zayn al-'Abidin could not tolerate this situation for long.
Though he maintained his quiescent policy of not getting involved in any
politico-religious movement, he nevertheless resisted the acceptance of
Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya as the Imam, and the latter's own silence, which
to Zayn al-'Abidin seemed to imply Ibn al-Hanafiya's tacit approval of
Mukhtar's propaganda.

The traditions recorded in this connection by Shi'i traditionists[^15]
 may or may not be authentic in their details, but it does seem that he
did make known to the people his own claims to the heritage of the House
of the Prophet against those made on behalf of his uncle. This is
deduced from the fact that some of those of the prominent Shi'is who had
become followers of Ibn al-Hanafiya, such as Abu Khalid al-Kabuli[^16]
Qasim b. 'Awf,[^17] and a few others, abandoned Ibn al-Hanafiya and went
over to Zayn al-'Abidin's side. The nucleus of his following, though,
was not formed before 73/692, the year which marks the death of Ibn
az-Zubayr and a complete collapse of the political aspirations of the
peoples of the Hijaz and Iraq. The majority of the Shi'is, however,
continued to recognize the Imamate of Ibn al-Hanafiya and later on his
son Abu-Hashim 'Abd Allah.  
    
 Towards the end of his life Zayn al-'Abidin seems to have succeeded in
gathering round himself a small group of his adherents, some of them
quite prominent figures of the erstwhile followers of the Ahl al-Bayt.
Among them, apart from Yahya b. Umm at-Tiwal[^18] and Muhammad b. Jubayr
b. Mut'im[^19] was also Jabir b. 'Abd Allah al-Ansari,[^20] a respected
Companion of the Prophet and a devoted supporter of 'Ali b. Abi Talib.
On account of his prestige as one of the most devoted Companions of the
Prophet who took part in the pledge of Al-'Aqaba and in the Bay'at
ar-Ridwan, Jabir's recognition of Zayn al-'Abidin was of great
significance for the latter. Another important figure was the Kufan
Sa'id b. al-Jubayr,[^21] a mawla of Banu Asad and a warm-hearted and
brave man who even refused to hide his partisanship and support for the
House of the Prophet.

A well-known traditionist, Sa'd was Zayn al-'Abidin's main spokesman and
gained for the son of Husayn many sympathizers among the ranks of his
fellow traditionists, especially from the old companions of 'Ali b. Abi
Talib. The group of Zayn al- 'Abidin's active supporters also included
two young but energetic Kufans: Abu Hamza Thabit b. Dinar,[^22] an Arab
from the tribe of Azd, and Furat b. Ahnaf al-'Abdi.[^23] Their
attachment to the family of Husayn remained strong, and both were later
close companions of Zayn al-'Abidin 5 son and successor Muhammad
al-Baqir. That these people became the followers of Husaynid Imams and
were in the close circles of Zayn al-'Abidin and then of Muhammad
al-Baqir is further indicated by the fact that a great number of Shi'i
traditions from the above-mentioned Imams are frequently transmitted on
their authority.[^24] Obviously the Twelver Shi'i traditionists would
not have accepted them in their isnads had they not been the followers
of these Imams. Thus there seems to be no serious reason to doubt the
reports that these people formed a nucleus of the followers of Zayn
al-'Abidin.  
    
 Perhaps the most important role in enhancing Zayn al- 'Abidin's
prestige was played by Farazdaq, a renowned poet of the time. He
composed numerous verses to propagate the cause of Zayn al-'Abidin, the
most famous of which was his qasida (ode) in praise of the Imam, which
celebrates the occasion when the Caliph Hisham b. 'Abd al-Malik was
overshadowed by the respect the people demonstrated for the
great-grandson of the Prophet. It was at the time of the Hajj when both
of them were trying to reach the Black Stone in the crowded Ka'ba. The
people gave way to Zayn al-'Abidin while the Caliph was struggling to
reach the relic. This deeply offended Hisham, and in a sarcastic manner
he inquired who was the person to whom the people gave preference.
Farazdaq, present at the scene, upon hearing this remark, spontaneously
composed the qasida and recited it, addressing Hisham. A few lines from
this famous qasida, which is also considered as one of the masterpieces
of Farazdaq and of Arabic literature, are worth quoting:  
    
 It is one whose footsteps are well known to every spot and it is he who
is known to the Bayt [Ka'ba], in Mecca, the most frequented sanctuary.  
    
 It is he who is the son of the best of all men of God [reference to the
Prophet], and it is he who is the most pious and devout, pure and
unstained, chaste and righteous and a symbol [of Islam].  
    
 This is 'Ali [b. al-Husayn], whose father is the Prophet, and it was
through the light of his [the Prophet's] guidance that the darkened road
changed into the straight path.  
    
 This is the son of Fatima, if you are ignorant of him; and with his
great-grandfather the Prophethood came to an end and Muhammad became the
seal of the Prophets.  
    
 Whosoever recognizes his God knows also the primacy and superiority of
this man ['Ali b. al-Husayn], because religion reached the nations
through his house.[^25]  
    
 The authenticity of this famous qasida of Farazdaq, and also the
occasion at which it was composed and recited, has never been questioned
by anyone. It must therefore be taken as a most reliable and useful
contemporary document describing Zayn al-'Abidin, with particular
emphasis on his noble birth as a descendant of the Prophet as distinct
from Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya. One may note with interest that the poet,
in praising Zayn al-'Abidin, describes him with emphasis on his being
the grandson of Fatima and the great-grandson of Muhammad, while he does
not refer to his being the grandson of 'Ali b. Abi Talib.  
    
 Farazdaq, however, had to pay for his praise of the Imam, and was
imprisoned by the order of Hisham. When Zayn al 'Abidin heard about the
misfortune of the poet, he sent him a gift of 12,000 dirhams, but
Farazdaq refused to accept it, saying that he had composed the poem
purely from his religious zeal. Farazdaq remained in prison and then
began to satirize Hisham. Fearing the poet's biting tongue, the prince
released him.[^26]  
    
 All these reports of Zayn al-'Abidin's adherents suggest that the
Husaynid line had never ceased to be a focus of devotion and special
regard, though in this period by a small minority of the Shi'is, and
that Zayn al-'Abidin gathered around himself a committed following who
looked upon him as the legitimist Imam of the House of the Prophet. Yet
it cannot be denied that in the period between the death of Husayn in
61/680 and thedeath of Ibn az-Zubayr in 73/692, Zayn al-'Abidin was left
without any active following. Indeed, the Tawwabun did consider, it
seems, that Zayn al-'Abidin was their Imam, but they never declared it
publicly; and the small number of them who survived the battle of 'Ayn
al-Warda went over to Mukhtar and thus accepted Ibn al-  Hanafiya as
their Imam. This is confirmed even by Muhammad al-Baqir in one of his
traditions quoted by Kashshi, which must be accepted as genuine.
Muhammad al-Baqir said: “After the death of Husayn all the people
apostatised except three-Abu Khalid al-Kabuli, Yahya b. Umm at-Tiwal,
and Jubayr b. Mut'im-and only later did others join them and their
numbers increased.”[^27]

Moreover, that Zayn al-'Abidin was not of much significance as an Imam
or leader of any visible group until the year 73/692 is further evident
from the fact that among the 'Alids, including Ibn al-Hanafiya, whom Ibn
az-Zubayr held in the prison of 'Arim, the name of Zayn al-'Abidin is
nowhere mentioned.This means that he was of no potential danger to Ibn
az-Zubayr and that until that time he remained quiet and did not make
his claims to the Imamate publicly. Silence does not, however imply the
complete absence of an idea, the expression of which often depends on
the prevailing circumstances and opportunities.  
    
 Apart from the small number of followers, mentioned above, who looked
upon Zayn al-'Abidin with special regard as their Imam and the only
religious authority of the time, he was also held in great respect and
high esteem by the learned circles in Medina in general. This was the
period when there was a growing sympathy and regard for the descendants
of the Prophet among the people, though it was indeed altogether
different from that of the Shi'is. This was also the period of growing
interest in Medina in Prophetic traditions, especially those dealing
with legal matters. This was the “epoch of the seven lawyers of Medina”
whom we have mentioned in the second chapter of this book. In this
setting of Medina we find that Zayn al-'Abidin was considered an eminent
traditionist in the Medinese circle of scholars. The greatest Medinese
lawyer of this time, Sa'id b. al-Musayyab, regarded the Imam with the
highest esteem.[^28]

The Shi'i sources assert that Sa'd was a follower of the Imam, which
cannot be true. In fact, though Sa'd respected Zayn al-'Abidin and was
also a close friend of his, he did not have common views in legal
matters with him. However, at that time the schools of legal thought
were still in their embryonic state, and therefore there might not have
been many serious differences of opinion between Zayn al-'Abidin and
Sa'id. Yet it is possible that the former, as well as his uncle,
Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya, adhered only to the traditions related on the
authority of 'Ali b. Abi Talib. Another great jurist and traditionist of
the period, Az-Zuhri, was also a great friend and admirer of the Imam.

The honorific name Zayn a1-'Abidin (the ornament of the pious), due to
his excessive prayers, was given to him by Az-Zuhri;[^29] from the
overwhelming reports recorded by both the Shi'I and the Sunni
authorities,[^30] it seems, however, that Zayn al- 'Abidin was widely
respected by the community in general for his extraordinary qualities,
such as the long duration of his prayers, his piety, and his generosity.
His piety must have been of a high degree, for he was not inclined to
making a show of his virtues. When travelling with people who did not
know him, he remained incognito so as not to take advantage of the fact
that the Prophet was his ancestor.[^31]  
    
 Zayn al-Abidin died in the year 94/712-713, and was buried in the
cemetery of Al-Baqir. He lived thirty-four years after the death of
Husayn, a period long enough to establish himself as the trustee of the
heritage of his father, and to leave an imprint of his personality on
his followers and associates. According to the unanimous Shi'i
traditions, before his death Zayn al-'Abidin nominated Muhammad
al-Baqir, his eldest son, as his wasi and successor to his
heritage.[^32]

One may doubt the existence of any explicit will of Husayn for the
nomination of Zayn al-'Abidin as his successor, but we should accept the
tradition that Zayn al-'Abidin, before his death, must have explicitly
nominated his son Al-Baqir, at least in the circle of his adherents. The
obvious factor in support of the credibility of this tradition is that
during Zayn al-'Abidin's time the majority of the Shi'is abandoned the
Husaynid line and went over to Ibn al-Hanafiya, and then accepted the
Imamate of the latter's son, Abu Hashim; Zayn al-'Abidin thought this a
usurpation of his rights and, not without much difficulty, succeeded in
winning over a group of followers on the principle of legitimate
succession through Fatima in the line of Husayn. It is then only natural
that he would have entrusted his eldest son to continue the task on the
same ground he had established.  
    
 Zayn al-'Abidin, by raising claims to the heritage of Husayn and by
collecting around himself a number of followers, had only laid the
foundation of the legitimist group of the Shi'a; it was the task of
Muhammad al-Baqir to evolve the principles of legitimacy in the concept
of succession. Some scholars[^33] have cast doubts on whether Muhammad
al-Baqir really achieved any degree of success in his lifetime, or even
whether he claimed the Imamate for himself. There is indeed a
possibility that many traditions attributed to Al-Baqir in this
connection might have been produced by some of his followers who
survived him. Yet, there being no decisive criterion for either
admission or rejection of these traditions, we must, as far as
circumstantial evidence allows, accept them in the form in which they
are found in the earliest Shi'I collection of Hadith, Al-Usul al-Kafi
Moreover, the testimony of the following Imams of the same line, and
their own rejection of many a tradition forged by some of the fanatical
followers of the House, makes stronger the case in favour of the
surviving traditions.  
    
 Though Muhammad al-Baqir inherited his father's following, he had to
face many more serious problems than did his father. Zayn al-'Abidin had
only to counteract the propaganda of Mukhtar for the Imamate of Ibn
al-Hanafiya, which he could easily do on the grounds that he was the
descendant of the Prophet as well as of 'Ali. After the death of Zayn
al- 'Abidin many descendants of Fatima too, either motivated by
ambitions or discontented with the idea of the Imam being merely a
spiritual guide, as adopted by Zayn al-'Abidin, raised their own claims
to the heritage of the Prophet.

Thus the immediate problem facing Al-Baqir was not from outside, but
from within the family circle. The movements of his two most potential
rivals, 'Abd Allah al-Mahdi, who worked for his son Muhammad an-Nafs
az-Zakiya, and Al-Baqir's half brother Zayd b. 'Ali Zayn al-'Abidin,
will be discussed in detail in the following chapter. Here it would
suffice to point out in passing that Zayd b. Zayn al-'Abidin's energies
appealed to many Shi'is and were a serious challenge to the Imamate of
Al-Baqir. In these rivalries, however, Al-Baqir and his followers were
markedly overshadowed by Zayd and led the former to put increasing
emphasis on legitimism within the Shi'i movement.

Thus, against the claims of his half-brother, Al-Baqir resorted to the
principle of nomination by an explicit “text” (Nass)–a fundamental
legitimist principle which will be discussed in detail in Chapter II. He
claimed that Zayn al-'Abidin had appointed him to the succession in the
presence of his brothers and had entruste him with a casket containing
secret religious scrolls and the weapons of the Prophet.[^34]

A number of traditions are recorded by the Shi'i traditionists[^35] in
which Al-Baqir explains the nature and function of an Imam, who
possesses certain special qualities which come down to him through the
nass of the preceding Imam. In this way Al-Baqir introduced certain
ideas which were to be fully elaborated by his son Ja'far as-Sadiq. The
traditions of Al- Baqir, however, make it abundantly clear that he tried
to establish his position as an Imam, declaring himself the
representative of God on earth and the divinely inspired interpreter of
His Word.  
    
 Now the most vital question with which we are concerned here is how far
Al-Baqir succeeded in establishing the principle of legitimacy in the
concept of the Imamate, and thereby whether he could really achieve any
success of religious consequence in his lifetime. A close scrutiny of
the biographical literature from both Sunni and Shi'i sources will help
us to find an answer to this question. In this attempt, it is immensely
useful to note that the names of the followers of Al-Baqir, which have
been recorded with full biographical details by the Imamate writers,
were never disputed by the Sunny compilers of biographical dictionaries
(Kutub ar-Rijal).

Instead, whenever Sunni writers mention the names of the adherents of
the legitimist Imams, they immediately remark that he was a rafidi, or a
ghali; or a Shi'i. Besides biographical dictionaries, the
heresiographical works such as Al-Baghdadi's Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq, Ibn
Hazm's Al-Fasl and Ash-Shahrastani's Al-Milal wa'l-Nihal also describe
these names with often derogatory remarks. Finally, it should be noted
that the Imamate writers themselves specifically remark that
such-and-such a person changed his affiliation at such-and-such a time
to Zayd or An-Nafs az-Zakiya, whatever the case may have been.
Furthermore, the writers of the Zaydiya and Isma'iliya sects, which
produced a considerable religious literature of their own, do not claim
adherents of Al-Baqir as among their numbers. There was, indeed, a
considerable shift from one 'Alid claimant to another by some, such as
Bayan b. Sim'an and Al-Mughira b. Sa'id al-'Ijli, but they are vocally
repudiated by the Imamate writers.

All these facts, however, support the view that the list of Al-Baqir's
followers, which we are going to enumerate here as the legitimist
faction, is not a mere fiction. No matter how much “the biographies of
these men have been touched up by Shi'ite [Imamate] writers in the
attempt to show that all along they [the Husaynid Imams] claimed to be
Imams and acted as such,”[^36] these reports must have been based on
certain facts. Indeed, Zayn al-'Abidin, Al- Baqir, and Ja'far were
unimportant politically and as a matter of policy they avoided
involvement in any political adventures, but this does not mean that
they did not claim a strictly religious “function” as Imams for
themselves. In fact the very policy of quiescence caused them to be
overshadowed by other activist members of the family; at the same time,
through this very policy, they in the long run survived as the Imams and
emerged as the recognized leaders of the future majority group of the
Shi'a.  
    
 It is no doubt true, however, that immediately after the death of Zayn
al-'Abidin a struggle for the leadership began between Al-Baqir and his
half-brother Zayd, and that a great number from among the Shi'is
preferred the latter because of his activist policy and his bold
attitude. Yet, in the course of time Al-Bsqir succeeded in winning back
some of those who had gone over to Zayd, as well as in attracting some
new followers. The most important of them were Zuhra b. 'Ayan, his
brother Humran, and Hamza b. Muhammad b. 'Abd Allah at-Tayyar. Zuhra in
particular was a very important acquisition, for he became the most
eminent theologian and traditionist of his time, with a wide circle of
disciples in Kufa.[^37]

His brother Humran was formerly a close associate of Zayn al-'Abidin and
later made himself known as an extremely devoted supporter of Al-Baqir,
who promised him Paradise and declared that “Humran would be from our
Shi'a in this world and the next.”[^38] Hamza b. at-Tayyar, although for
a time opposed to Al-Baqir, after hesitating between various claimants,
finally chose to follow him.[^39] Apart from Zurara, other important
adherents of Al-Baqir, who became the main authorities on Twelver fiqh
when their Shi'i legal school was formulated later on, were Ma'ruf b.
Kharrabfldh,[^40] Abu Basir al-Asadi,[^41] Burayd b. Mu'awiya,[^42]  
    
 Muhammad b. Muslim b. Riyah at-Ta'ifi,[^43] and Al-Fudayl b.
Yasar.[^44] The prominent figure among them was Muhammad b. Muslim b.
Riyah, a Kufan mawla of the Thaqif, a miller by trade, known also as
Al-A'war (the one-eyed). Described as the “most trustworthy of all men”,
he was well known as a great jurist in Kufan circles and a contemporary
fellow-lawyer of Ibn Abi Layla, Aba Hanifa, and Sharik al-Qadi. He seems
to have been a counterpart of Zurara, for while the latter was a
traditionist as well as a speculative theologian, and the originator of
the Sh1'i school of kalam, Muhammad b. Muslim combined knowledge of the
science of Tradition with the work of a practical lawyer, and was
renowned for quick and drastic solutions. He was also a well known
ascetic.  
    
 Among these followers of Al-Baqir, Aba Basir Layth al- Bakhtari
al-Muradi also attained fame and reputation as a great Shi'i faqih and
traditionist. Aba Basir, a mawla of Banu Asad, became the favourite
companion of Al-Baqir and later of Ja'far al-Sadiq. Ja'far is reported
to have said that Aba Basir, Burayd, Zurara, and Muhammad b. Muslim were
the “tent pegs of the world”, and that without them the Prophetic
traditions would have been lost.[^45] They were the fastest runners and
the closest associates of the Imams. Another striking figure was Aba
Hamza ath-Thumali, who occupieda high place among Al-Baqir's associates,
and to him may be traced many traditions of an extremist tendency,
especially those relating to miracles.[^46]  
    
 Al-Kumayt b. Zayd al-Asadi,[^47] a renowned poet of his time, was
another great and very important supporter of Al-Baqir. He served the
cause of the Imam more than any other follower through his poetic
genius. His devotion, which found expression in his talented poetry,
took the name and fame of Al-Baqir far and wide. But his collection of
poetry, devoted to the praise of the Ahl al-Bayt, the “al-Hashimiyat”,
caused him some serious trouble. The anti-'Alid viceroy of Iraq, Yusuf
b. 'Umar, brought this work to the attention of the Caliph 'Abd
al-Malik.[^48] Kumayt, however, managed to extricate himself from
danger, and in order to please the Caliph he even wrote some poems in
praise of the Umayyads.[^49] Nevertheless, the poet remained a great
favourite of the legitimist line of the Husaynid Imams, and Ja'far
as-Sadiq said of him: “Kumayl has not ceased to be aided by the Holy
Spirit.”[^50]  
    
 Though the city of Basra was generally anti-Shi'i, Al-Baqir succeeded
in gaining several followers there too, such as Muhammad b. Marwan
al-Basri[^51] and Malik b.A'yan.[^52] In Mecca also, Al-Baqir earned
quite a few staunch followers.  
    
 However, the popularity of the movement of Zayd b. Zayn Al-Abidin
overshadowed Al-Baqir's efforts to establish the legitimist Imamate, yet
Al-Baqir restricted himself to attacking only the friends and followers
of Zayd. Nevertheless, when an opportunity presented itself, he did not
hesitate to contest Zayd's rights quite sharply. Thus when Sa'id b.
al-Mansur, one of the leaders of the Zaydiya circle, asked him:  
 “What is your opinion about nabidh, for I have seen Zayd drinking it?”
Al-Baqir replied: “I do not believe that Zayd would drink it, but even
if he did, he is neither a Prophet nor a Trustee of a Prophet, only an
ordinary person from the Family of Muhammad, and he is sometimes right
and sometimes may commit an error.”[^53] This was both an open denial of
Zayd's rights to the Imamate, and an indirect assertion of his own
position as the Prophetic Wasi Muhammad al-Baqir was the son of Fatima,
the daughter of Al-Hasan,[^54] and so, being the descendant of the
Prophet and of 'Ali on both sides, he had a great advantage over Zayd,
whose mother was a slave-woman from Sind,[^55] but the former never
showed any inclination to organize an active movement and maintained the
pacific policy of his father.

On the other hand, Zayd, a close associate of Wasil b. 'Ata', the
Mu'tazilite, was strongly impressed by the latter's ideas and laid
emphasis on the principle of “ordering good and prohibiting evil”, if
necessary, by force. Accordingly, he believed that if an Imam wanted to
be recognized, he had to claim his right, sword in hand.[^56] Al-Baqir
and Zayd quarrelled over this point, for when the latter asserted that
an Imam must rise against the oppressors, the former remarked: “So you
deny that your own father was an Imam, for he never contested the
issue.”[^57]  
    
 When Abu Bakr b. Muhammad al-Hadrami and his brother 'Alqama, two Kufan
Shi'is, asked Zayd whether 'Ali was an Imam before he resorted to the
sword, he refused to answer the question, which made them break their
allegiance with Zayd and go over to Al-Baqir.[^58]  
    
 A crucial question was that of the rights of Abu-Bakr and 'Umar. Zayd,
agreeing with the Mu'tazilites, held that the first two caliphs had been
legally elected Imams, though 'Ali was the preferable candidate, and
this greatly impressed the traditionist circles. At the same time he
rejected the Mu'tazilite doctrine of the “intermediate state”, but did
not object to the opinion of Wasil, that in the conflict between ”'Ali
and his adversaries” one of the opposing sides was certainly wrong
though Wasil was not sure which,[^59] whereas Zayd regarded the virtues
of 'Ali as of such a high order that the idea of his not being in the
right was inadmissible.  
    
 However, Zayd's special emphasis on accepting the caliphates of Abu
Bakr and 'Umar and his popularity on this ground among moderate circles
show, on the one hand, that the question of the caliphates of the first
two caliphs had already been under serious discussion in some Shi'i
circles at that time, and on the other hand, that Zayd's success by
adopting this stand created an embarrassing and complicated situation
for Al-Baqir. Zayn al-'Abidin himself never spoke against the first two
caliphs, but during Al-Baqir's lifetime some of the extremists who sided
themselves with him started asking this question among the legitimist
section of the Shi'a. Al-Baqir was thus asked time and again what he
thought of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, but he did not publicly discredit them
and rather confirmed that they were caliphs.[^60]

Yet certain Shi'is of Kufa asserted that he disavowed the first two
caliphs and only concealed his real opinion by resorting to the
principle of dissimulation.[^61] This propaganda on the part of some of
the Kufan followers of Al-Baqir no doubt earned him the sympathy of many
extremist and semi-extremist circles, but on the other hand it
discouraged those who wanted an active and more practical movement to
bring the Ahl al-Bayt to power, and were already disappointed with
Al-Baqir's quiescent policy. These moderates therefore preferred to
range themselves on the side of Zayd,[^62] who in order to secure
certain advantages became more emphatic in his acceptance of the first
two caliphs, at the same time rejecting the principle of Taqiya.
Al-Baqir was infuriated by the attitude of these Ku fan Shi'is and said,
“Even if the Butrites formed one battle-line from east to west, God
would not grant glory to the world through them.”[^63]  
    
 Among these Kufan Shi'is was Al-Hakam b. 'Utayba al-Kindi, one of the
most eminent lawyers of his city.[^64] He put 'Ali b. Abi Talib above
Abu Bakr, but nevertheless remained mild in his Shi'i partisanship,
which made him highly popular among the followers of Zayd. As the judge
of Kufa, he exercised a strong influence among his fellow-citizens, thus
greatly helping the cause of Zayd.[^65] Naturally Al-Baqir, who
considered that he possessed better rights to the Imamate than his
younger half-brother, and also objected to the generally compromising
attitude of Zayd and his partisans, spoke of them in a bitter way,
giving expression to his displeasure thus: “Hakam b. 'Utayba and other
associates of Zayd led astray many people. They say, 'We believe in God
and the Last Day,' but they are not believers.”[^66] The successor of
Al-Baqir, Ja'far as-Sadiq, upheld the same view and accused Hakam of
blaspheming against Al-Baqir,[^67] and even called the Zaydites
an-Nussab (dissenters) who hated 'Ali.[^68]  
    
 The question of the first two caliphs at this stage draws our attention
to another problem: that of religious practices. Al-Baqir adhered to the
traditions derived from 'Ali and his supporters. There were, however,
certain disagreements even among the Ahl al-Bayt, for Zayd was inclined
to accept the practice of the Ashab al-Hadith of Kufa, mainly based on
the rulings of 'Umar. Thus it was Al-Baqir who established the
beginnings of the madhhab (legal school) of the Ahl al-Bayt Kashshi
records for us a very important tradition which says:  
    
 “Before the Imamate of Muhammad al-Baqir the Shi'is did not know what
was lawful and what was unlawful, except what they learned from the
[other] people; until Abu Ja'far [Al-Baqir] became the Imam, and he
taught them and explained to them the knowledge [of law], and they began
to teach other people from whom they were previously learning.”[^69]  
    
 This tradition clearly indicates that until the time of Al-Baqir there
were hardly any differences in legal practices among the Shi'is and
Ashab al-Hadith of Medina, Kufa, and elsewhere. Even later the
differences in the sphere of legal matters (furu') were in reality
few,[^70] such as while Al-Baqir absolutely forbade all intoxicants,
including nabidh  (fermented drinks)[^71] the Kufan jurists allowed
nabidh. Another problem was that of mut'a (temporary marriage), over
which the Shi'i and Kufan jurists differed, the former allowing it on
the authority of 'Ali, the latter forbidding it, referring to the
decision of 'Umar.[^72] The argument was that if 'Umar could revoke a
permission granted by the Prophet, then 'Ali could revoke a ruling of
'Umar.  
    
 However, the above-mentioned accounts seem to make it highly probable
that Muhammad al-Baqir did claim the Imamate as the inheritance of his
father, and that the small nucleus established by Zayn al-'Abidin began
to develop under him into a legitimist faction within the Shi'i
movement. If we reject this then we will have to reject many established
historical facts, foremost among them being the rivalry and even the
quarrel, overwhelmingly reported by the sources, between him and Zayd.
Nevertheless, the dates of the deaths of the chief associates of
Al-Baqir indicate that these developments in his favour took place
towards the end of his life, for most of the renowned traditionists and
jurists of his circle survived him by at least a decade.  
    
 At the time of Al-Baqir's death, the legitimist faction, though still
limited in number, was to be found in all the main centres of the Hijaz
and Iraq. It possessed the elements necessary for its future growth into
a strong and popular discipline. It possessed a theoretical foundation,
still only partly formulated and uncertain, and although it was not
completely separated from the current ideas permeating the Madhhab Ashab
al-Hadith, it was nevertheless sufficiently individualized to be
regarded as a doctrine in its own right. It had in Zurara and his
disciples its own school of speculative theology and an embryo for a
school of jurisprudence. Finally, in Kumayt it was able to produce its
own literature and gain widespread public exposure.  
    
 Much has been recorded about Muhammad al-Baqir's person and
extraordinary qualities, many of which he inherited from his father. He
was extremely generous. devoted to acts of piety, and peaceful by
nature, never thinking to organize a revolt to assert his rights.[^73]
 Instead he strove to impress people by his extensive knowledge in
matters of religion, and in fact he came to be considered as one of the
most erudite men of his time. Because of this -learning, according to
Ya'qubi, he was nicknamed Al-Baqir, “the one who splits knowledge open”:
that is, he scrutinized it and examined the depths of it.[^74] But
according to Ibn Khallikan, he received the appellation Al-Baqir, “the
ample”, because he collected an ample fund (tabaqqar)
ofknowledge.[^75]  
    
 Many jurists, attracted by the fame of his learning, used to visit him
to discuss legal problems. Among them were Muhammad b. Minkadir, Abu
Hanifa an-Nu'man, Qatida b. Di'ama, 'Abd Allah b. Mu'ammar al-Laythi,
and the Kharijite Nafi' b. Azraq.[^76]  
    
 It is not certain when Al-Baqir died. The earliest date is given as
113/731-732,[^77] the latest as 126/743-744.[^78] The most acceptable
however, seems to be 117/735, as given by Ya'qubi.[^79] There can be no
doubt that he was no longer alive when Zayd revolted in Kufa, but he
could not have been dead for many years then, as Ja'far as-Sadiq's
position was still not well established.  
    
 Shahrastani tells us that some of Al-Baqir's followers refused to
believe that he had died and expected his raja (return).[^80] These
people must have been former Kaysanites who abandoned Abu Hashim and
attached themselves to Al- Baqir's following. If, however, this report
has any truth in it, it is a further proof that Al-Baqir in his lifetime
was recognized by a group of people as their Imam. Nawbakhti classifies
his followers as Al-Baqiriya,[^81] which was replaced after his death by
Al-Ja'fariya, derived from his son and successor.[^82] These titles
given by heresiographers, however, should not be taken literally, as
they are used to mention the followers of certain persons, and not a
sect.  
    
 Muhammad al-Baqir, by the time he died, had lived as an Imam for about
nineteen years. He left his heritage to his son and successor Ja'far
as-Sadiq, to whom we now turn our attention.  
    
  

[^1]: Welihausen, Ahzab, pp. 198-234; K. A. Fariq, The Story of an Arab
Diplomat (New Dehli, 1967)

[^2]: Hodgson, “How Did the Early Shi'a Become Sectarian?”, JAOS ('955),
p.3

[^3]: Ibn Sa'd,V,p.2I2

[^4]: Ibn Sa'd, V, pp.212, 220; Tabari, II, p.209

[^5]: Tabari, II, p.220

[^6]: ibid.

[^7]: Mas'udi, Muruj, III, p.70; Mubarrad, Kamil, I, p.260; Dinawari, p.
266

[^8]: Baladhuri; V, p.272; Masudi, Muruj, III, 74

[^9]: Ya'qubi, II, p.259

[^10]: Baladhuri, V, p.272; Ibn Sa'd, V, p.213

[^11]: Muhammad b. Ya'qub al-Kulayni; Usul al-Kafi (Karachi, 1965), I,
p.353; Majlisi, Bihar, XI, p.7; 'Amili, A'yan, IV, p.332. Also see
Mas'udi; Muruj, III, p.225

[^12]: Kulayni, loc. cit.

[^13]: Ibn Khaldun, 'Ibar (Cairo, 1867), III, p.172

[^14]: Baladhuri, V, p.218

[^15]: Kulayni, Kafi, pp.352 f.

[^16]: Kashshi, Ikhtiyar Ma'rifat ar-Rijal (Tehran, n.d.), p.121

[^17]: ibid., p.124

[^18]: ibid., p.123

[^19]: ibid., p.115

[^20]: ibid., p.4; Ibn 'Imad, Shadharat adh-Dhahab (Cairo, 1350 A.H.),
I, p.84

[^21]: Kashshi, Rijal, p. 119

[^22]: ibid., pp.201-3

[^23]: ibid., p. 124

[^24]: e.g., Kulayni, Kafi; passim

[^25]: Farazdaq, Diwan, I, p.847 f.; Aghani; XXI, pp.400 ff.; Ibn
Khallikan, Wafayat, VI, pp. 95f.; Bayhaqi, Kitab al-Mahasin wa'l-
Masawi; ed. Schwally (Giessen, 1902), pp.131 f.; Abu Nu'aym, Hilyat
al-Awliya (Cairo, 1938), III, p.139; Kashshi, Rijal, p. 130 if.; Subki,
Abo Nasr, Tabaqat ash-Shafi'iya, ed. Ahmad b. 'Abd al-Karim (Cairo,
n.d.), I, pp.153 if.; Ibn Kathir, Bidaya, IX, pp. 108 f.

[^26]: See the detailed account in the references cited in note 25
above.

[^27]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.123

[^28]: Ibn Sa'd, V, p. 216; Kashshi, Rijal 155 ff.

[^29]: Ibn Sa'd, V, p. 216

[^30]: For Sunni sources, see Ibn Sa'd, V, pp.216-22; Ibn Khallikan,
III, pp. 266 if.; Mubarrad, Kamil, I, p. 260; II, p. 138; III, pp.120
f.; Ibn Kathir, Bidaya, IX, pp.103-15. For Shi'i sources, see Ya'qubi,
II, p.247; Mas'udi, Muruj, III, p. 160; Kulayni, Kafi, I, Kitab al-
Hujja and passim; Mufid, Irshad, II, pp.138-45; 'Amili, 'A'yan, IV, pp.
308-461

[^31]: Mubarrad, Kamil, II, p. 138

[^32]: Kulayni, Kafi, I, pp.354 f.; Majlisl, Bihar, XI, pp. 100 ff.;
Qadi Nu'man, Sharh, fol. 32a

[^33]: Montgomery Watt, “Shi'ism under the Umayyads”, pp. 168 f.;
Hodgson, op. cit., p. I

[^34]: See references cited in note 32 above

[^35]: See specifically Kulayni, Kafi; “Kitab al-Hujj a”

[^36]: Montgomery Watt, op. cit., p. 166

[^37]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp.133 ff.

[^38]: ibid., pp. 161, 176 ff

[^39]: ibid., pp.276, 347 ff.

[^40]: ibid., pp.211, 238. See also Ha'iri Muntaha al-Maqal (Tehran,
1302 AH), pp.304-5

[^41]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp. 169, 238

[^42]: ibid., p.238

[^43]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp. i6i, 238; Ha'iri, Muntaha, p.243

[^44]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp.213 f.; Ha'iri, Muntaha, p.243; Najashi,
Rijal, p.210

[^45]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.170; Ha'iri; Muntaha, pp. 24-50

[^46]: Kashshl, Rijal, pp.201 ff; Ha'iri; Muntaha, p.73

[^47]: See Aghani; XVI, pp.330 ff; Jahiz, Bayan, I, p.46

[^48]: Aghani; XVI, p.333

[^49]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp. 206 f.; Aghani; loc. cit.

[^50]: Kashshi; Rijal, p. 206 f.

[^51]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.214; Ha'iri, Muntaha, p.293

[^52]: Kashshi, loc. cit.; Ha'iri, loc. cit.

[^53]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.232

[^54]: Ibn Sa'd, V, pp.211, 320, 325 f.

[^55]: Abu'l-Faraj, Maqatil, p.127; Ibn Sa'd, V, pp.211, 325 f.

[^56]: Shahrastani, Milal, I, pp. 154 f.

[^57]: ibid.

[^58]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp.416 f.

[^59]: Shahrastani, Milal, I, p.49

[^60]: Ibn Kathir, Bidaya, IX, p.311; Dhahabi, Ta'rikh, IV, p.300; Ibn
al-Jawzi, Sifat as-Safwa, II, p. 61; Abu Nu'aym, Hilya, III, p. 185

[^61]: Traditions referring to the poet Kumayt quote Al-Baqir as very
violently disavowing Abu Bakr and 'Umar; see Kashshl, Rijal, pp.205 f.
On the other hand Kumayt did not express himself openly against the
first two caliphs; see his verse in Hashimyat, p. 155

[^62]: Nawbakhti, Firaq, pp.52 ff.; Kashshl, Rijal, p.229

[^63]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.232. The Butrlya were those who drew no
distinction between the claimants from the house of 'Ali and supported
any 'Alid claimant who revolted, sword in hand.

[^64]: Dhahabi; Ta'rikh, IV, p. 242; Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib, II, pp. 434 ff

[^65]: Ibn 'Imad, Shadharat, I, p.151

[^66]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.209

[^67]: Kashshi, Rijal, p.209; Ha'iri, Muntaha p.263

[^68]: Kashshi, Rijal, pp.209, 229

[^69]: Kashshi, Rijal, p. 289

[^70]: Schacht, Origins, pp. 262 ff

[^71]: Kulayni, Furu' al-Kafi, II, p.193. Also see Dhahabl, Tadhkirat
al-Huffaz, I, p. 160; Qadi Nu'man, Sharh Al-Akhbar, fol. 36a

[^72]: Schacht, Origins, pp. 266 ff; Malik b. Anas, Muwatta, III, p.23;
Murtada b. Dai', Tadhkirat al-'Awamm, pp. 270-271

[^73]: Ibn Sa'd, V, p.321; Kulayni, Kafi, pp.299 ff; Qadi Nu'man, Sharh
al-Akhbar, fol. 32a ff.; 'Amill, A'yan, IV, pp. 262 ff; Ibn Khallikan,
IV, p. 176; Majlisl, Bihar, XI, pp. 100 ff

[^74]: Ya'qubi, II, p.320; Bayhacl, Kitab al-Mahasin wa'l Masawi, III,
pp. 298 ff; Qadi Nu'man, Sharh al-Akhbar, fol. 33a

[^75]: Ibn Khallikan, IV, p.176

[^76]: Qadi Nu'man, loc. cit.; 'Amili, A'yan, pp.490 ff; Majlisi, Bihar,
XI, pp.100 f.; Kulayni, Kafi, pp.299 ff; Bhahlanji, Nur al-Ibsar, pp.
160 ff

[^77]: See Ibn Sa'd, V, p.324; Ibn Khallikan, IV, pp.174; Abu'l-Mahasin,
Nujum, I, pp.273 f. The last source here says he died in AH 114.

[^78]: Mas'udi, Muruj, III, p.219

[^79]: Ya'qubi, II, p.320.Also see Dhahabi, Ta'rikh, IV, p.300

[^80]: Shahrastani, Milal, I, p. 166

[^81]: Firaq, p.25

[^82]: Al-Ja'fariya should not be confused with the name Madhhab
al-Ja'fari, given very often to the present Twelver Shi'a.


