O Allāh, Reform Every Uneven Affair of the Muslims
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّهُمَّ أَصْلِحْ كُلَّ فَاسِدٍ مِنْ أُمُورِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allāh, Reform Every Uneven Affair of the Muslims

The Meaning
-----------

اَصْلِحْ (*Aslih*):

This imperative verb is normally translated as ‘Reform!’ and ‘Rectify!’
It originates from the word *al-salāh*, which means ‘equilibrium’ and
‘balance.’ And ‘*salāh*’ is the opposite of the word ‘*fasād*’, which
according to Rāghib al-Isfahānī means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُرُوجُ الشَّيءِ عَنِ الإِعْتِدَالِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The deviation of an entity from its equilibrium.”[^1]

Consequently, the word *aslih* literally means ‘Restore [such and such a
thing or affair] to [its] equilibrium!’

And the word فَاسِد “*fāsid*” means ‘something out of its equilibrium.’

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُمُوْرُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Umūru’l Muslimīn* means “Affairs of Muslims.”

Thus we are asking Almighty Allāh to restore all those affairs of the
Muslims, which have lost their equilibrium and become distorted. Such
affairs may pertain to individual or social life, and may concern all
the members of the Muslim ummah or a certain group in particular.

As explained earlier [in the previous discussions of the supplication],
whenever one prays for something, he or she must also seek its
respective solution. The same law applies here too. Seeking reform in
any matter should be preceded by knowledge and effort to facilitate the
reform. As we pray for equilibrium in the affairs of the Muslims, we
should try to:

(1) Identify those Muslim affairs which are in the state of
disequilibrium,

(2) Acquire knowledge about the correct and most efficient ways to
rectify the state of affairs, and

(3) Prepare ourselves to effect equilibrium to these respective affairs.

Self-reform is the Beginning
----------------------------

Before embarking on any kind of reform, the aspirant of reform should
have the competency to effect it. Mere ‘aspiration’ to see reform does
not qualify one to effect the same. And the most fundamental condition
of qualifying to reform others is ‘self-reform.’ In other words, one
must ensure that he or she enjoys the state of equilibrium in order to
be able to effect it elsewhere. Otherwise, it would mean that
disequilibrium can effect equilibrium, the absurdity of which is quite
clear. Metaphysicians express this reality as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاقِدُ الشَّيءِ لاَ يُعْطِيه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One who does not possess a thing cannot confer the same.”[^2]

The chaos created by so-called reformers of the past is due to this very
reason. They set out to confer equilibrium to the nation, but instead
increased its state of disequilibrium. The reason behind this was that
they themselves did not enjoy inner stability. They had sullied their
souls with selfish desires and their reform movement was nothing but
another manifestation of their selfish interests. They forgot that the
transience of their life would not be the end of the story. Rather,
their ‘so-called reform’ would be left as a destructive heritage for
future generations to inherit. An apt manifestation of such a reform
movement is ‘the Renaissance’, which instead of bringing life to the
nations, created a foundation for the destruction of the future
generations. The spiritual crisis in the Western world partly reflects
this contention.

The Holy Qur’ān says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ تُفْسِدُوا فِي الأَرْضِ قَالُوا إِنَّمَا
نَحْنُ مُصْلِحُونَ. أَلاَ إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْمُفْسِدُونَ وَلٌكِنْ لاَ
يَشْعُرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when it said to them, do not create disequilibrium (mischief) in
the earth, they say verily we are reformers. Mind, they themselves are
mischief mongers, but they are not aware.”***[^3]

This is a very dangerous state, for the hypocrites believe that they
really are reformers [after engaging in repetitive ills and losing their
power of identifying the elements of equilibrium and disequilibrium].
This reflects their compound ignorance. They imagine that they are
reformers and have conviction about the matter whereas in reality, they
are mischief mongers.

The following are verses from the Holy Qur’ān and traditions that
underline the essential requisite of self-reform before one ever tries
to embark upon reforming others:

1. Almighty Allāh says in chapter 10, verse 35:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَفَـمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلـى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لاَ
يَهِدِّي إِلاَّ أَنْ يُهْدَى 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or
he who himself does not go aright unless he is guided?”***

Readers should not limit ‘guidance’ just to conceptual knowledge that
one acquires after having been taught what is right and wrong. Rather
‘guidance’ is a change of the previous state of deviation. When one
follows the religion properly and rectifies his previous state, then
only can he be known to be guided.

2. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَجِبْتُ لِمَنْ يَتَصَدَّى لإِصْلاَحِ النَّاسِ وَنَفْسُهُ أَشَدُّ
شَيْ‏ءٍ فَسَاداً فَلاَ يُصْلِحُهَا وَيَتَعَاطَى إِصْلاَحَ غَيْرِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I am surprised at one who takes charge of reforming the people while
his soul is in greater need of reform, and he does not reform it but
undertakes to reform others.”[^4]

3. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ سَمَتْ هِمَّتُكَ لإِصْلاَحِ النَّاسِ فَابْدَأْ بِنَفْسِكَ،
فَإِنَّ تَعَاطِيكَ صَلاَحَ غَيْرِكَ وَأَنْتَ فَاسِدٌ أَكْبَرُ
الْعَيْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If your aspiration rises to reform the people, then start with your
self, because your mission to reform other than yourself while you are
corrupt is the greatest of deficiencies.”[^5]

4. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَمْ يُصْلِحْ نَفْسَهُ لَمْ يُصْلِحْ غَيْرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever does not reform himself would not reform others.”[^6]

The Reality of Self-Reform
--------------------------

Having understood the fundamental requisite of self-reform, let us now
try to understand its reality. What is ‘*islāh al-nafs*’ (self-reform)
in its real sense? As understood earlier, the word ‘islāh’ stands for
‘effecting equilibrium [in an entity].’ Therefore ‘Islāh al-nafs’ would
mean ‘effecting equilibrium in the soul.’ And when does a soul enjoy its
equilibrium?

To respond to this query we must understand the basic faculties of our
souls. The soul of the human being possesses the following three main
faculties:

1- The Reality of the Intellect (*al-quwwat al-’aqliyyah*)  
 2- The Faculty of Desire (*al-quwwat al-shahwiyyah*)  
 3- The Faculty of Anger (*al-quwwat al-ghadabiyyah*)

If the faculty of intellect does not deviate towards the directions of
excess (*ifrāt*) or negligence (*tafrīt*) and the faculties of desire
and anger are subservient to the faculty of the intellect, the soul
would enjoy its equilibrium. And this, according to some ethicians is
the state of *‘adālah* (equilibrium). The esteemed mystic Mullā Hādi
Sabzawārī in his excellent commentary of Du‘ā Jawshan al-Kabīr, called
*Sharh al-Asmā’* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلإِنْسَانِ ثَلاَث قِوى: قوّةٌ دَرَّاكَةٌ، وقُوّةٌ شَهْوِيَّةٌ،
وقُوّةٌ غَضَبيّةٌ، فَانْحِرَافُ الْقُوّةِ الدَرَّاكَةِ مِنْهُ إِلـى
جَانِبَي الإِفْرَاطِ وَالتَّفْرِيطِ يُسَمَّى (جُرْبُزَة) وَ
(بَلاَهَةَ) وَاعْتِدَالُهَا (حِكْمَةٌ)، وَانْحِرَافُ الْقُوَّةِ
الشَّهْوِيَّةِ إِلـى طَرَفَيِ الإِفْرَاطِ وَالتَّفْرِيطِ يُسَمّى
(شَرَهًا) وَ (خُمُوْدًا) وَاعْتِدَالُهَا (عِفّةٌ)، وَانْحِرَافُ
الْقُوّةِ الْغَضَبيَّةِ إِلـى حَدَّي الإِفْرَاطِ وَالتَّفْرِيطِ
يُسَمّى (تَهَوُّرًا) وَ (جُبْناً) وَاعْتِدَالُهَا شُجَاعَةٌ. وَهٌذَا
الإِعْتِدَالُ هُوَ الْمُسَمَّى (بالْعَدَالَةِ) وَهُوَ الصِّرَاطُ
الْمُسْتَقِيْمُ الَّذِي هُوَ أَحَدُّ مِنَ السَّيْفِ وَ أَدَقُّ مِنَ
الشَّعْرِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely the human being has three faculties [of the soul]:

• The faculty of comprehension (sometimes known as faculty of
intellection)

• The faculty of appetite

• The faculty of anger (also translated as the irascible faculty)

The deviation of the faculty of comprehension towards the two directions
of excess and negligence are called *jurbuzah* (deception) and *balāhah*
(silliness) respectively, and its state of equilibrium is known as
*al-hikmah* (wisdom);

The deviation of the faculty of appetite towards the two directions of
excess and negligence is called *sharah* (gluttony) and *khumūd*
(stillness) respectively, while its state of equilibrium is known as
*al-‘iffah* (temperance/chastity);

The the deviation of the faculty of anger towards the directions of
excess and negligence is known as *tahawwur* (recklessness) and *jubnah*
(cowardice) respectively, whereas its state of equilibrium is called
*al-shujā‘a* (courage/bravery).

And this state of *al-i‘tidāl* (equilibrium of the aforementioned three
faculties) is called *al-‘adālah* (justice) and it is the straight path
(*sirāt* *al-mustaqīm*) which is sharper than the sword and thinner than
hair… ‘“[^7]

In order to have a better picture of what Mullā is trying to say, let us
look at what Mullā Fayd Kashānī has to say in his al-Mahajjat al-Baydā’:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أمّا قوّةُ العِلْمِ فَحُسْنُهَا وَ صَلاَحُهَا فِيْ أَنْ تَصِيْرَ
بِحَيْثُ يَسْهُلُ لَهَا دَرْكُ الْفَرْقِ بَيْنَ الصِّدْقِ وَالْكِذْبِ
فِي الأَقْوَالِ وَبَيْنَ الْحَقِّ وَالْبَاطِلِ فِي الإِعْتِقَادَاتِ
وَبَيْنَ الْجَمِيْلِ وَالْقَبِيْحِ فِي الأَفْعَالِ فَإِذَا تَحَصَّلَتْ
هٌذِهِ الْقُوَّة حَصَلَ مِنْهَا ثَمَرَةُ الْحِكْمَةِ وَالْحِكْمَةُ
رَأْسُ الأَخْلاَقِ الْحَسَنَةِ وَهِيَ الَّتِي قَالَ اللٌّهُ تَعَالـى
فِيْهَا  وَمَنْ يُؤْتَ الْحِكْمَةُ فَقَدْ أُوْتِيَ خَيْرًا كَثِيْرًا
 وَإمّا قوّةُ الْغَضَبِ فَحُسْنُهَا فِيْ أَنْ يَقْتَصِرَ
اِنْقِبَاضُهَا وَاِنْبِسَاطُهَا عَلى حَدِّ مَا تَقْتَضِيْهِ
الْحِكْمَةُ، وَكَذٌلِكَ الشَّهْوَةُ حُسْنُهَا وَصَلاَحُهَا فِي أَنْ
تَكُوْنَ تَحْتَ إِشَارَةِ الْحِكْمَةِ أَعْنِي إِشَارَةُ الْعَقْلِ وَ
الدِّيْنِ، وَأَمّاَ قُوّةُ الْعَدْلِ فَهِيَ فِي ضَبْطِ قُوَّةِ
الْغَضَبِ وَالشَّهْوَةِ تَحْتَ إِشَارَةِ الْعَقْلِ وَالشَّرْعِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The rational faculty is sound and good when it is easily able to
discriminate, that is, to distinguish honesty from lies in speech, truth
from falsehood in questions of belief, and beauty from ugliness in
actions. When this faculty is sound it bears fruit in the form of
wisdom, which is the chief of the good traits of character, and
regarding which God has said, And whosoever is granted wisdom has truly
been granted abundant good. Regarding the faculty of anger, this is
sound when its movements lie within the bounds required by wisdom.
Likewise, the faculty of desire is sound and good when it is under the
command of the religion and the intellect. As for the faculty to effect
a just equilibrium, it is this which sets desire and anger under the
command of the intellect and the religion…”[^8]

Ethicians also quote a tradition that refers to the aforementioned
reality:

Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْفَضَائِلُ أَرْبَعَةُ أَجْنَاسٍ: أَحَدُهَا الْحِكْمَةُ وَقِوَامُهَا
فِي الْفِكْرَةِ، وَالثَّانِي الْعِفَّةُ وَقِوَامُهَا فِي الشَّهْوَةِ،
وَالثَّالِثُ الْقُوَّةُ وَقِوَامُهَا فِي الْغَضَبِ، وَالرَّابعُ
الْعَدْلُ وَقِوَامُهُ فِي اِعْتِدَالِ قِوَى النَّفْسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Virtues are four kinds: The first is wisdom (*al-hikmah*) which is
sustained by intellection (*al-fikrah*), the second is the temperance
(*al-‘iffah*) which is sustained by desires (*al-shahwah*), the third is
power (*al-quwwah*) which is sustained by anger (*al-ghadab*), and the
fourth is justice (*‘adālah*) which is sustained by the equilibrium of
the faculties of the soul.”[^9]

The equilibrium of the soul can be achieved by following the Holy Qur’ān
and the Sunnah, which cover Islamic Ideology, Islamic ethics, Islamic
law, etc. We must remember however, that equilibrium has different
levels. And in order to find one’s way to the higher levels one needs a
qualified guide for proper direction, since there is always the danger
of stumbling and falling. However, as mentioned earlier, it is possible
for a very few to traverse the journey without the direct guidance of a
specific master.

The Grand Āyatullāh Jawādī Āmulī says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابدال در اصطلاح سالكانى هستند كه تحت تدبير شخص معين نيستند. و از آنها
بعنوان ((مفرِد) يا ((مفرَد)) ياد مي شود چه اين كه اينها راه را به
تنهائي طي مي كنند. گرچه سخت است ولي رفتني است و گرچه پيشرفت انسان تحت
نظر مدير و مدبر بيشتر است، لكن بتنهائي هم مي توان طي طريق نمود
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Abdāl technically stands for those wayfarers on the path of God who are
not trained by a specific master. They are also called “*mufrid*” or
“*mufrad*” This is because they traverse the path by themselves. Despite
this being difficult it can be traversed, and although the human being
progresses farther under the tutelage of a master and supervisor, one
can still traverse the path by himself.”[^10]

He also narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقتي از عارفي پرسيدند: ((ابدال)) چند نفرند؟ فرمود: ((اَرْبَعُوْنَ
نَفْسًا)) ابدال چهل تن هستند، و سوال كردند كه: چرا نگفتيد:
((اَرْبَعُوْنَ رَجُلاً))، چهل مردند، و گفتيد چهل نفس هستند؟ در جواب
گفت: اولاً: همه اين بزرگان مرد نيستند، بلكه در بين آنان زنان هستند. و
ثانياً: كسي كه به مقام ابدال نائل مي آيد انسان است و انسان بودن اختصاص
به زن يا مرد ندارد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When a saint was asked how many are the ‘abdāl’? He responded by
saying, ‘*Arba‘ūna nafsan*’ (40 souls). He was asked: Why did you say
‘forty souls’ instead of ‘forty men’? He responded: ‘Firstly: not all of
these great personalities are men; rather, we also have women among
them’; and secondly: whosoever attains the station of the *abdāl* is ‘a
human being [in the true sense of the word]’, and being human is not
restricted to men.”[^11]

Seeking the support and intercession of the Holy Prophet (s) and his
infallible progeny who enjoy proximity to God and who always stand
unparalleled, can enable one to soar very high. In fact some great
saints have said things worthy of reflection:

1. The late saint Āyatullāh Sayyid Hāshim al-Mūsawī reports Āyatullāh
al-’Uzmā Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī al-Tabātabā’ī, the spiritual mentor of
‘Allāmah al-Tabātabā’ī to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لِي أُسْتَاذِيْ الْمَرْحُوْم اَلقَاضِيْ قُدِّسَ سِرّهُ: أَنَّهُ
مُحَالٌ أَنْ يَصِلَ إِنْسَانٌ إِلـى مَقَامِ التَّوْحِيْدِ بدُوْنِ
طَرِيْقِ سَيِّدِ الشُّهَداءِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My teacher, Marhūm Qādī (may his spirit be sanctified) said to me that
it is impossible for a human being to attain the station of *tawhīd*
[proximity to God] without the path of Sayyid al-Shuhadā.”[^12]

2. Āyatullāh Muhammad Husayn Tehrānī in his ‘*spirit Immaterial*’
narrates that Sayyid ‘Alī Qādī Tabātabā’ī said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصول به مقام توحيد و سير صحيح الي الله و عرفان ذات احديت عزّ اسمُه
بدون ولايت امامان شيعه و خلفاي به حق از علي بن ابي طالب (ع) و فرزندانش
از بتول عذراء محال است
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is impossible to attain the station of Divine unity and traverse
correctly towards God and attain the knowledge of the His Unique Essence
(Invincible is His Name), without the guardianship of the Shī‘ah Imāms
(upon whom be peace) and the true Caliphs starting from ‘Alī bin Abī
Tālib and his progeny through the *Batūl-e-‘Adhrā’* (Hadrat Fātima
(as)).”[^13]

3. ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī, the author of *al-Mīzān*, is reported to have
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آن حضرت (امام الحسين (ع)) را براي رفع حجاب و موانع طريق نسبت به سالكين
راه خدا عنايتي عظيم است
  </p>
</blockquote>

“That Hadrat [i.e. Imām Husayn (as)] has great attention towards the
wayfarers of the path of God in removing the veil and impediments on the
path of God.”[^14]

4. Āyatullāh Qādī Tabātabā’ī, the spiritual mentor of ‘Allāmah
Tabātabā’ī is reported to have said:

> اگر من به جائي رسيده باشم از دو چيز است:(1) قرآن كريم, (2) زيارت سيد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشهداء
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If I have attained any station, it is by two things: (1) The Noble
Qur’ān, and (2) *Ziyārah* of *Sayyid al-Shuhadā’* [Doyen of the
Martyrs].”[^15]

5. Sayyid ‘Ādil al-’Alawī, quotes his late mentor, the pious Shi’ite
Marja’, Āyatullāh al-’Uzmā Shahāb al-Dīn al-Najafī al-Mar’ashī as having
advised him as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذاَ اَرَدْتَ التَّوْفِيْقَ فِيْ حَيَاتِكَ الْعِلْمِيَّةِ فَعَلَيْكَ
بثَلاَثَةِ أَعْمَالٍ: الأَوَّلُ: كُنْ دَوْماً عَلىَ طَهَارَةٍ
وَوُضُوْءٍ فَإِنَّهُ يُنِيْرُ الْقَلْبِ وَيُزِيْلُ الْهَمّ. الثَّانِي:
شَيِّعْ الْجَنَائِزَ اَيّ جَنَازَةٍ رَأَيْتَهَا وَلَوْ بأَقْدَامٍ.
الثَّالِثُ: شَارِكْ فِيْ قَضِيَّةِ الْحُسَيْن عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمِ
بأَيِّ نَحْوٍ مِنَ الْمُشَارَكَةِ. ثُمّ قَالَ: كُنْتُ مِنْ مُدَرَّسِي
الْحَوْزَةِ الْمَعْرُوْفِيْنَ، وَكُنْتُ آنَذاَكَ أُوَزِّعُ الشَّايَ
عَلى النَّاسِ فِي الْمَجَالِسِ وَالْمِآتِمِ الْحُسَيْنِيَّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you would like divine succor (*tawfīq*) in your intellectual and
practical life, you should practice the following three acts:

(1) Always be in the state of purity and *wudū’*, for that illumines the
heart and removes anguish.

(2) Escort the dead body, whoever it may be [among the Muslims], even
for a few steps.

(3) Participate in the matter of Husayn (as) [i.e. any ceremony that
concerns his exalted personality]

Then he said to me: I was one of the well-known professors of the
Islamic Seminary; and during that period I would distribute tea to the
people who attended ceremonies for mourning Imām Husayn (as).”[^16]

Scholars of ethics and gnosis have produced thought provoking works
about the path to self-reform. However, the limited scope of this
commentary does not allow the author to delve into all the details of
this path. Nevertheless, God willing, we shall try to cover some of the
significant rudimentary stations of wayfaring very soon.  
 In short, one must reflect on the following tradition: both the Shī‘ah
as well as Sunnī narrators of tradition quote that the Holy Prophet (s)
is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي تَارِكٌ فِيْكُمُ الثَّقَلَيْنِ مَا إِنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ بِهِمَا
لَنْ تَضِلُّوْا بَعْدِي: كِتَابَ اللٌّهِ وَعِتْرَتِي أَهْلَ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…I leave behind you the two weighty things; if you hold fast unto them
you will never go astray after me: The Book of Allāh and my
Progeny…”[^17]

This, in short, is the path to self-reform. But it is not as easy as it
seems. Try to reflect on “holding fast” and its true extensions and you
will come to understand what self-reform entails.

Waking Up: The First Stage of Self-Reform
-----------------------------------------

Scholars of *‘irfān* (gnosis) introduce ‘*yaqzah*’ (wakefulness) as the
first step on the path toward self-reform. So long as the human being is
attached to the material world, and oblivious of the purpose of his
creation, he is fast asleep. He needs to be woken up in order to begin
the journey to Almighty Allāh. Allāh (swt) addressing His Noble
Messenger in chapter Saba, verse 46 says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَاحِدَةٍ أَنْ تَقُومُوا لِلٌّهِ مَثْنَى
وَفُرَادَى 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say [O Prophet of Allāh] I exhort you only to one word: rise for
Allāh, in pairs and alone…”***

Khwājah ‘Abdullāh Ansārī, in his monumental work of practical gnosis,
*Manāzil as-Sā’irīn* (the Dwellings of the Wayfarers), which is a text
studied by many of the wayfarers on the path of God, after quoting the
above verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القَوْمَةُ لِلٌّهِ هِيَ الْيَقَظَةُ مِنْ سِنَةِ الْغَفْلَةِ،
وَالنُّهُوْضُ عَنْ وَرَطَةِ الْفَتْرَةِ. وَهِيَ أَوَّلُ مَا
يَسْتَنِيرُ قَلْبُ الْعَبْدُ بالْحَيَاةِ لِرُؤْيَةِ نُوْرِ
التَّنْبِيْهِ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“To rise for Allāh [as indicated in the verse] means to wake up from the
sleep of heedlessness (*ghaflah*) and rise up from the entanglement of
lassitude; and that is the first illumination of the heart of the
servant with [true] life due to perceiving the light of awakening
(*tanbīh*).”[^18]

When the human being wakes up from the slumber of his heedlessness, his
imaginative life subsides and his true life begins. His entire past,
which was filled with ‘mundane aspirations’ collapses, and he starts
experiencing a life, which would benefit him eternally. So important is
this step, the experts of practical gnosis (*al-‘irfān al-‘amalī*)
believe that yaqzah is: “the first step of wayfaring towards Allāh, and
in fact, the foundation of the journey to God.”[^19]

The late Āyatullāh Khumaynī, who was also known as an authority in
gnosis (*‘irfān*), at one time advised the seminarians in Najaf as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تا كى مى‏خواهيد در خواب غفلت به سر بريد، و در فساد و تباهى غوطه‏ور
باشيد؟ از خدا بترسيد از عواقب امور بپرهيزيد از خواب غفلت بيدار شويد.
شما هنوز بيدار نشده‏ايد هنوز قدم اول را برنداشته‏ايد. قدم اول در سلوك
«يقظه» است. ولى شما در خواب به سر مى‏بريد چشمها باز و دلها در خواب فرو
رفته است.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“How long do you wish to remain in the sleep of negligence, steeped in
corruption? Fear God! Beware of the consequence of your deeds! Wake up
from the sleep of negligence! You have not yet awakened. You have not
yet taken the first step. The first step of wayfaring is *yaqzah*
(awakening), but you are still asleep. Your eyes may be open, but your
hearts are asleep…”[^20]

And in his well-known ethical manual Chehel Hadith (Forty Traditions) he
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منزل اوّل انسانيت «يقظه» است. و آن بيدار شدن از خواب غفلت و هشيار شدن
از سكر طبيعت است، و فهميدن اينكه انسان مسافر است، و هر مسافر زاد و
راحله مى‏خواهد. زاد و راحله انسان خصال خود انسان است‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…The first stage of humanness (*insāniyyat*) is yaqzah. It signifies
the awakening from the slumber of negligence and the intoxication of
physical nature, and the realization hat man is a traveler, and like any
other traveler, he needs some provisions for this journey. His morality
and character are his provisions for this journey…”[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بدان كه اول منزل از منازل انسانيت منزل يقظه و بيدارى است، چنانچه مشايخ
اهل سلوك در منازل سالكان بيان فرموده‏اند . و از براى اين منزل، چنانچه
شيخ عظيم الشأن شاه آبادى، دام ظله، بيان فرمودند، ده بيت است كه اكنون
در مقام تعداد آن نيستيم‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…Remember that the first step towards humanness is that of awareness
and awakening (*yaqzah*), as mentioned by the leading mystics
(*mashāyikh*) concerning the stages of wayfaring. There are ten stages
in this step, as elaborated by the great Shaykh Shāhābadī, which we are
not in a position to enumerate here...”[^22]

Now, how and when is *yaqzah* achieved? How does the human being wake up
from his long slumber? And what is the source of this spark of
wakefulness?

The Holy Qur’ān and the teachings of the Sunnah inform us that the
source of this noble spark is Almighty Allāh. It is He who wakes the
slumbering human being and enables him to start this significant journey
of eternal salvation:

1. Almighty Allāh says in chapter 4, verse 79:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 مَا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنَ اللٌّهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever good befalls you is from Allāh.”***

2. And in chapter chapter 16, verse 53 He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَ مَا بِكُمْ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ فَمِنَ اللٌّهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever blessing you have is from Allāh…”***

3. In the morning supplication of “al-Sabāh”, Imām ‘Alī (as) cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٌهِي إِنْ لَمْ تَبْتَدِئْنِي الرَّحْمَة مِنْكَ بِحُسْنِ
التَّوْفِيْقِ، فَمَنِ السَّالِكُ بِي إِلَيْكَ فِيْ وَاضِحِ
الطَّرِيْقِ؟‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God, if Mercy from You does not begin with fair success for me, then
who can take me to You upon the evident path?”[^23]

4. Imām Zayn al-’Ābidīn (as) in his supplication of praise says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...ثُمَّ سَلَكَ بِهِمْ طَِريقَ إِرَادَتِهِ وَبَعَثَهُمْ فِي‏ سَبِيلِ
مَحَبَّتِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Then He made them walk on the path of His desire, and sent them out on
the way of His love.”

5. Sulaymān bin Khālid narrates that Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) [once]
said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا سُلَيْمَانُ إِنَّ لَكَ قَلْباً وَمَسَامِعَ وَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ إِذاَ
أَرَادَ أَنْ يَهْدِيَ عَبْدًا فَتَحَ مَسَامِعَ قَلْبِهِ وَإِذاَ
أَرَادَ بهِ غَيْرَ ذلِكَ خَتَمَ مَسَامِعَ قَلْبهِ فَلاَ يَصْلُحُ
أَبَدًا وَهُوَ قَوْلُ اللٌّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: أَمْ عَلى‏ قُلُوبٍ
أَقْفالُها 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Sulaymān, surely you have a heart and the sense of hearing, and
certainly when Allāh wants to guide a servant, He opens the ears of his
heart; but when He wants other than that for him, He closes the ears of
his heart, as a result of which he can never attain the state of his
equilibrium; and to this does the following speech of God allude:
‘***Or are there locks upon their hearts?***’” [47:24][^24]

In fact, the entire Qur’ān has been sent down in order to awaken the
human being. Almighty Allāh teaches His servants to reflect and ponder
over the verses of the Qur’ān so that they can attain the state of
wakefulness. Look at the following verses:

1. In Sūrat Sād (38), verse 29, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ مُبَارَكٌ لِيَدَّبَّرُوا آيَاتِهِ
وَلِيَتَذَكَّرَ أُوْلُوا الأَلْبَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[It is] a blessed Book that We have sent down to you, so that they
may contemplate its verses, and that those who possess intellect may
take admonition.”***

2. And in chapter 14, verse 1, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 الر. كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ
الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلـى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ إِلـى صِرَاطِ
الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alif, Lām, Rā; This is a Book We sent down unto you so that you
bring mankind out of darkness into light by their Lord’s permission, to
the path of the All-mighty, the All-laudable.”***

3. And in chapter 47, verse 24, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَفَلاَ يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ أَمْ عَلَى قُلُوبٍ أَقْفَالُهَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do they not then ponder over the Qur’ān or are there locks upon
their hearts?”***

The reason, we are told, why many are still asleep, is their
unpreparedness for receiving the Divine spark. Due to their continual
sinning, they have erected barriers in their hearts, and thus are not
receptive and cannot wake up from their slumber of heedlessness. So long
as they have not ‘locked their hearts ‘ as explained in the previous
tradition and [not] lost their discerning spirit and ‘innate nature’
[like those hypocrites and disbelievers referred to in verses 7 & 18 of
Sūrat al-Baqarah] they still have the opportunity to change, and they
should not despair. Rather, while trying to prepare themselves to attain
this fundamental state by pondering over the verses of the Holy Qur’ān,
they should be steadfast in refraining from sin and should obey the laws
of Almighty Allāh and perpetually pray for the state of wakefulness.

Imām Husayn (as) in his well-known supplication of *‘Arafah* cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٌهِي أُطْلُبْنِي برَحْمَتِكَ حَتّى أَصِلَ إِلَيْكَ، وَاجْذُبْنِيْ
بِمَنِّكَ حَتَّى أُقْبلَ إِلَيْكَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God, Seek me by Your Mercy until I reach You and attract me by Your
Favor until I draw towards You.”[^25]

Additionally, the aspirants of wakefulness should refrain from those
*makrūhāt* [abominable deeds] that blur the heart and the intellect from
comprehension and should engage themselves in activities that quicken
the process of the soul’s enlightenment. The following traditions are
worthy of reflection:

1. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِسْتَدِيْمُوا الذِّكْرَ، فَإِنَّهُ يُنِيرُ الْقَلْبَ، وَهُوَ أَفْضَلُ
الْعِبَادَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Be constant in the remembrance of God (*dhikr*), for that enlightens
the heart, and it is the best worship.”[^26]

Readers should note that ‘dhikr’ must always accompany attention,
otherwise it would not have its desired effect. Remembrance of Allāh can
be attained by strengthening one’s belief in His Omnipresence. When the
supplicant is always mindful that there is someone Infinitely Supreme
who witnesses each and every act and thought of his, he would refrain
from sin.

2. Imām al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلْقُلُوبِ صَدَأً كَصَدَأِ النُّحَاسِ، فَاجْلُوهَا
بِالإِسْتِغْفَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely there is corrosion for the hearts like the corrosion of copper;
therefore burnish them by seeking God’s forgiveness.”[^27]

3. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُكْثِرُوا الْكَلاَمَ بغَيْرِ ذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ، فَإِنَّ كَثْرَةَ
الْكَلاَمِ بِغَيْرِ ذِكْرِ اللٌّهِ تُقْسِي الْقُلُوبَ، وَإِنَّ
أَبْعَدَ النَّاسِ مِنَ اللٌّهِ الْقَاسِي الْقَلْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not talk much about that which concerns other than the remembrance
of Allāh, for that hardens the heart; and surely the most remote from
Allāh among the people is the one who possesses a hard heart.”[^28]

4. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْبُكَاءُ مِنْ خَشْيَةِ اللٌّهِ يُنِيرُ الْقَلْبَ وَيَعْصِمُ مِنْ
مُعَاوَدَةِ الذَّنْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Weeping out of the fear of Allāh, enlightens the heart and prevents
[one] from repeating sin.”[^29]

[We should understand that ‘*khashyah*’ which is translated as fear
should not be taken to merely mean ‘the conventional fear’ that we know
of. ‘*Khashyah*’, according to Rāghib al-Isfahānī, is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَوْفٌ يَشُوْبُهُ تَعْظِيْمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘fear mixed with veneration.’[^30]

And this can only be achieved after knowing God. At the onset our duty
is to know God and His Beautiful Attributes even in the conceptual and
intellectual level. For every heart, which accepts the truth, this can
be a catalyst for achieving the higher levels of ma’rifah, and
consequently, the higher levels of khashyah as well. Therefore, it is
incumbent to introduce and inculcate in oneself the basic knowledge of
the roots of religion, especially *tawhīd*, so that one can naturally
experience the fear of Allāh with veneration for His Exalted Essence.

5. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُمِيْتُوا الْقُلُوْبَ بكَثْرَةِ الطَّعَامِ وَالشَّرَاب، فَإِنَّ
الْقُلُوْبَ تَمُوْتُ كَالزُّرُوْعِ إِذَا كَثُرَ عَلَيْهِ الْمَاءُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not deaden your hearts by a lot of food and drink for surely the
hearts die like plantations if a lot of water is put on them.”[^31]

6. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...طَلَبْتُ نُورَ الْقَلْبِ فَوَجَدْتُهُ فِي التَّفَكُّرِ
وَالْبُكَاءِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…I sought for the light of the heart and found it in reflection and
weeping [for those things that one should weep for such as regret of
sin, etc.]…”[^32]

7. Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as) is reported to have advised Jābir
al-Ju’fī as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِسْتَجْلِبْ شِدَّةَ التَّيَقُّظِ بِصِدْقِ الْخَوْفِ.‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Attract extreme wakefulness by true fear.”

And true fear of God can only be achieved when one has knowledge of
Allāh and His Sublime Attributes. And the beginning of’knowledge’ is
conceptual knowledge: knowledge by the intellect. Then comes presential
knowledge (*al-‘ilm al-hudurī*), when the spirit reaches its height.

8. The Holy Prophet (s) in a lengthy tradition says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ عَلِيًّا بَعَثَ اللٌّهُ مَلَكَ الْمَوْتِ إِلَيْهِ
بِرِفْقٍ، وَدَفَعَ اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَنْهُ هَوْلَ مُنْكِرٍ
وَنَكِيْرٍ، وَنَوَّرَ قَلْبَهُ، وَبَيَّضَ وَجْهَهُ‏...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And whosoever loves ‘Alī, Allāh (swt) would send the Angel of death to
him in a friendly manner and remove from him the fear of Munkir and
Nakīr and enlighten his heart and whiten his face…”[^33]  
 As pointed out much earlier, it is important to understand what kind of
‘hubb’ of ‘Alī is spoken about in this radiant tradition. Obviously it
is not an evanescent emotional pull. For a better understanding of this,
look at the following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ أَبِي عُبَيْدَة عَنْ أَبِي جَعْفَر (ع) قَالَ: مَنْ أَحَبَّنَا
فَهُوَ مِنَّا أَهْلِ الْبَيْتِ. قُلْتُ: جُعِلْتُ فِدَاكَ! مِنْكُمْ؟
قَالَ: مِنَّا وَاللٌّهِ، أَمَا سَمِعْتَ قَوْلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ (ع): 
فَمَنْ تَبِعَنِي فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Abū ‘Ubaydah is reported to have said that Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as)
said: “Whosoever loves us then he is from us the Ahlu’l Bayt (as).” Abū
‘Ubaydah said: “May I be made your ransom; “from you [the Ahl al- Bayt
(as)]?” Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as) responds: “[yes] from us, I swear by
Allāh; have you not heard the statement of Prophet Ibrāhīm (as):
***Then whosoever follows me, then verily he is from me.***” [Sūrat
Ibrāhim, v. 36]

This tradition is narrative of a love that is concordant with following
the Ahlu’l Bayt (as). Were we to ponder a little more, we would come to
understand true love is the unity of the lover with the beloved. The
veracity of one’s claim of the love of Ahlu’l Bayt (as) becomes apparent
when one reflects their attributes in one’s own personality. Readers are
requested to ponder over this point carefully.

Fudayl Wakes Up!
----------------

History informs us of people who, at a sensitive moment of their lives,
woke up from their deep slumber, and underwent a transformation that
became the foundation of their eternal salvation. One such person was
Fudayl bin ‘Ayyād.

In the beginning Fudayl was well-known as a caravan robber. He would
stop different caravans in the middle of their journeys and would steal
from them whatever he desired. However, it is said that he would not
transgress the limits by hurting anyone or leaving them with no
provisions to reach their destination… Once he got in love with a
certain woman, and headed for her house. While climbing the wall of her
house, he happened to hear the following verse of Qur’ān from someone
who was reciting the Qur’ān in the neighborhood:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلَمْ يَأْنِ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ تَخْشَعَ قُلُوبُهُمْ لِذِكْرِ
اللٌّهِ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Has the time not yet come for the believers that their hearts turn
humble for the remembrance of Allāh…?”[^34]

On listening to this verse, he underwent a transformation and cried:

*Yā Rabbī qad āna*  
 O Lord, the time indeed has come!

Thereafter he left the place and returned back and adopted a path of
detachment from the world and self-reform. It is also said that he had a
son called ‘Alī who was higher than him in rank in terms of detachment,
worship and self-reform; however, he did not live for long. One day
while he was standing near the spring of Zamzam in Masjid al-Harām he
heard the following verses of Qur’ān from someone nearby:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَتَرَى الْمُجْرِمِينَ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الأَصْفَادِ.
سَرَابِيلُهُمْ مِنْ قَطِرَانٍ وَتَغْشَى وُجُوهَهُمْ النَّارُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains.
Their shirts made of pitch and the fire covering their faces.”[^35]

On hearing this verse, he fell down and died.[^36]

Such changes do not happen for all. One must prepare himself or herself
in order to be overtaken by the Divine Grip. Despite Fudayl’s evil
attitude, he must have had qualities that enabled him to be receptive
and wake up from his slumber. We should not imagine that wakefulness is
reserved for a certain class, and others are deprived of the same. The
following universal law sums it up:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ...لَـهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَ عَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…For it (i.e. the soul) is what it has earned, and against it is
what it has earned….”***[^37]

Therefore one should struggle to refine his heart and prepare it for the
first spark to ignite.

The Ahlu’l Bayt (as) - Intermediaries of Allāh’s Grace
------------------------------------------------------

Seeking the support of the Holy Prophet (s) and his sinless progeny
(upon whom be peace) can also be very helpful in igniting the spark of
wakefulness. Rather, as we pointed out earlier,’it is impossible for one
to attain the heights of perfection without their support.’ This is
because the Ahlu’l Bayt (as) are the intermediaries of Allāh’s Grace.
Every thing that anyone possesses originates from Almighty Allāh, but
passes through them. This should in no way make us think that they
bestow grace independently, for every unit of the world of contingent
existence entirely subsists by Allāh, including the noble beings of the
Prophets (as) and Imāms (as).

Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا صَنَايِعُ رَبِّنَا، وَالنَّاسُ بَعْدُ صَنَايعُ لَنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We are the handicrafts of our Lord and the people then are our
handicrafts.”[^38]

Imām al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ السَّبَبُ بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَ اللٌّهِ تَعَالى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We are the intermediary between you and Allāh.”[^39]

Look at the following verses of the famous Ziyārah of Jāmi‘ah for a
better understanding of the significant role played by the Holy Prophet
(s) and his infallible progeny (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَرَادَ اللٌّهَ بَدَأَ بِكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever seeks Allāh begins through you.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ قَصَدَهُ تَوَجَّهَ بِكُمْ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whosoever intends Him pays attention to Him by means of you.[^40]

Therefore the light of wakefulness originates from Allāh but passes
through the station of *wilāyah* (which the Holy Prophet (s) and his
infallible progeny occupy by Allāh’s permission).

Past history has manifested this fact in different places. An example of
such light of wakefulness can be seen in the personality of Zuhayr bin
Qayn, who is counted as one of the highly esteemed supporters of *Sayyid
al-Shuhadā’* (as) in the plains of Karbalā’. At the onset he was among
those who disliked confronting the Imām (as). Later however he is said
to have woken up by the Imām’s (as) special attention.

The Spark Ignited by Imām al-Husayn (as) in Zuhayr!
---------------------------------------------------

The companions of Zuhayr narrate:

During the very days when Imām Husayn (as) left Makkah for Kūfah, we
were also leaving Makkah with Zuhayr. Due to the path being the same
between the stopovers on our way, we would reach the gathering of the
Imām (as) but try to remain aloof from them and disliked to move with
the Imām (as) and his group. And Zuhayr was the same. Whenever the
caravan of the Imām (as) moved, we would remain behind so that we should
not be together; then we would continue our way; and wherever the Imām
(as) stopped, we would move and continue. This trend continued until we
reached a stopover when the Imām (as) together with his companions
camped on one side, and we too had no option but to camp on the other
side. While we were seated eating our meals, a messenger from the Imām’s
camp came to us, and after expressing his salutations addressing Zuhayr,
said: ‘Imām (as) is calling you.’ Witnessing this we were so overtaken
that we dropped the morsels of food from our hands and were left in
amazement. The wife of Zuhayr, who also was with him, said to him:
Subhānallāh! The son of the Messenger of Allāh is calling you and you
are thinking whether to go or not?!! Rise and go and see what he has to
say. Zuhayr stood up and in the state of astonishment went to the
presence of the Imām (as) and entered the personal tent of the Imām
(as). It did not take long before we saw Zuhayr coming out of the Imām’s
tent, while his face was radiant and he was in the state of complete
happiness and joy. When he reached us, he said: Remove my tent and place
it near the tent of the Imām (as). And he said to his wife’I have
resolved to be in the company of the Imām (as) and sacrifice my soul for
him. Then he left her in the company of one of his relatives so that he
may take her to her family.[^41]

Ethicians believe that the sudden transformation in Zuhayr needed the
special attention of Imām Husayn (as), who was also an intermediary of
grace.

Dear readers this light of wakefulness can take a person so high that he
can rank among those who had the privilege of being a noble companion of
Imām Husayn(as). If we carefully read the Ziyārah of the martyrs of
Karbalā’ we come to realize how exalted was Zuhayr and his likes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَوْلِيآءَ اللٌّهِ وَ أَحِبّاءَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O friends of Allāh and His lovers…”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَنْصَارَ دِيْنِ اللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O helpers of the religion of Allāh.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَنْصَارَ رَسُولِ اللٌّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O helpers of the Messenger of Allāh.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَنْصَارَ أَمِيْرِ الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O helpers of the Commander of the faithful.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَنْصَارَ فَاطِمَةَ سَيِّدَةِ نِسَاءِ
الْعَالَمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O helpers of Fātimah, the Mistress of the Women of the
Universe.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَا أَنْصَارَ أَبِي مُحَمَّدٍ الْحَسَنِ بْنِ
عَلِيٍّ الزَّكِيِّ النَّاصِحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Peace be on you O helpers of Abī Muhammad al-Hasan bin ‘Alī…”[^42]

And is it possible for one to be a helper of someone whom he has not met
or seen? Why do we say that these companions were the helpers of the
Holy Prophet (s), Imām ‘Alī (as), Hadrat Fātima (as) and Imām al-Hasan
(as) while they accompanied and supported Imām Husayn (as)? This is
because they are the helpers of religion (*ansāra dīnillāh*). Therefore
they help all those who have sacrificed their lives for the sake of
*dīn*. Hence they live before their time. They live with Ādam (as), they
live with Nūh (as), they live with Ibrāhīm (as); they live with Mūsā
(as), they live with ‘Īsā (as), they live with all the Prophets of Allāh
(swt). This is because they sacrificed their lives to revive the
teachings of religion and woke the slumbering folk. Such people live in
the past, present, and future. They are beyond time and place. Small
wonder it is that we are taught to address them saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَالَيْتَنِي كُنْتُ مَعَكُمْ فَأَفُوْزَ مَعَكُمْ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I wish I would have been in your company so that I may have succeeded
with you.”[^43]

After one has woken up from his deep slumber and attained the light of
*yaqzah*, there are particular effects that he would experience. Such
effects are outlined and expounded in books of practical gnosis.
Observing brevity here we would not like to cover their details.
Instead, let us briefly look at the second fundamental stage of
self-reform:

The second stage of self-reform is *al-tawbah* (return to Allāh).

The Reality of Tawbah
---------------------

*Tawbah* (which literally means “to return”) is a state of the return of
God’s servant to his Lord. Wakefulness makes one realize the extent of
injustice one had done to himself all his life. This reality does not
give him any rest, and he struggles to clear himself of sin. It is not
as simple as it seems, but the wakeful wayfarer, is always resolute in
cleansing himself of the dirt by which he blemished his heart all his
life.

Ethicians believe that before the servant returns to his Lord, Almighty
Allāh returns to His servant with His Mercy. It is small wonder that one
of the beautiful names of Almighty Allāh is *al-Tawwāb* [The One Who
often turns in Mercy]. This reality is manifested in the following verse
of the Qur’ān:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَعَلَى الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ خُلِّفُوا حَتَّى إِذَا ضَاقَتْ
عَلَيْهِمْ الأَرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ أَنْفُسُهُمْ
وَظَنُّوا أَنْ لاَ مَلْجَأَ مِنَ اللٌّّهِ إِلاَّ إِلَيْهِ ثُمَّ تَابَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَتُوبُوا إِنَّ اللٌّهَ هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And to the three who were left behind, until, when the earth became
strait for them, for all its breadth, and their souls became strait for
them, and they thought that there was no shelter from God except in Him,
then He turned towards them [Mercifully] [tāba ‘alayhim], that they may
turn [liyatūbū]; surely Only Allāh is Oft-returning [with mercy]
[al-Tawwāb] and is All-Compassionate.”***[^44]

This verse refers to three Muslims who refused to participate in the
battle of Tabūk due to their laziness. Then after the battle, when the
Holy Prophet (s) and the Muslims returned to Madīnah, the three went to
the Prophet (s) and expressed their apology, but the Prophet (s) did not
speak to them, and the Muslims likewise, following the Prophet (s), did
not speak to them, and left them alone. The children too stayed away
from them and their own wives were not responsive to them. In this way,
they were left so much alone, that the town of Madīnah was a
constriction for them, and they left for the mountains and open grounds.
The situation had become such that both time and place was a source of
constriction for them. And finally they knew that besides Allāh, there
was no point of hope. This is when Almighty Allāh turned to them in
Mercy, as a result of which they started repenting and doing tawbah.
Then Almighty Allāh again returned to them in His Mercy by forgiving
them.

The aforementioned verse therefore informs us that the first tawba
(return in mercy)[^45] is from Allāh. This then enables the servant to
turn to Him and repent. Then he needs another *tawba* (return) from
Almighty Allāh so that his sins are forgiven. Therefore the tawbah of
the servant is sandwiched by two returns of Almighty Allāh. The verse
also indicates that Allāh’s return to his servants was continuous, until
they repented and returned to their Lord. The letter “*waw*” at the
beginning of the verse “*wa ‘alā al-thalāthah*” is a conjunction, which
indicates a continuation of the previous verse which talks about the
return of Allāh in Mercy to His Prophet (s), the Emigrants and the
Ansār. Thus, apart from Allāh returning in Mercy to the Holy Prophet
(s), the emigrants, and the helpers, He also returned in Mercy to the
three men (*wa ‘alā al-thalāthah* “…and the three men”) who did not
participate in the battle of Tabūk. Then Allāh (swt) once again turns to
the three men in Mercy: “thumma tābā” (thereafter He turned in Mercy).
Therefore there is a clear mention of two consecutive *tawbas* (returns)
before the phrase “*liyatūbū*” (so that they may repent and turn to
Allāh): one through the conjunction and the other by the phrase “*thumma
tāba*”. This subtle aspect needs a little attention to understand.

If tawbah is taken in its universal sense, it is the second and the last
station before Meeting Almighty Allāh. This is because the process of
traversing the different stages of practical gnosis is in fact covering
the degrees of returning to God. Every return from Almighty Allāh makes
the wayfarer return, until he attains the proximity of Almighty Allāh.
The following verse is worthy of contemplation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَتُوبُوا إِلـى اللٌّهِ جَمِيعًا أَيُّهَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُفْلِحُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…And turn to Allāh all of you, O believers, so that you may attain
salvation.”[^46]

Ponder over the phrase, ‘*tūbū ilallāh* [return to Allāh].’ Firstly, all
believers are enjoined to return to Allāh. This means that tawbah (in
all its various levels) is the path to Almighty Allāh. Secondly, since
Almighty Allāh is the end of the journey, the journey is necessarily
endless, for one can never reach the Absolute and Infinite Perfection
which is Allāh. In other words, however far one travels on this journey,
he still only possesses finite perefection. Consequently, the imperative
verb *tūbū* [return] also includes the great saints who already enjoy
the last stage of wayfaring - but still need wayfaring, for the journey
never ends. Experts say that after a certain limit of perfection has
been attained the journey is no more vertical, but horizontal. In the
words of the people of gnosis - after *sayr ilā Allāh* (journey to
Allāh) ends, sayr fī Allāh begins and never ends. Because the journey is
towards Infinite Perfection. In simple terms the journey from the finite
to the Infinite is infinite. *Fa tūbū ilallāh*!!! Therefore return to
Allāh, O believers.

Although *tawbah* in its initial stages signifies returning from denial
and sin to approval and obedience and from heedlessness and
forgetfulness to remembrance and seeking God, later there would be
nothing like sin or heedlessness. Rather the return would be from’other
than God ‘to’ God ‘and from’ shirk in its very minute level ‘to’tawhid
in its highest levels’, and from the ‘self’ to the ‘Only beloved.’ Ustād
Muhammad Shujā’ī in his monumental ethical masterpiece alludes to this
reality.[^47]

Conditions of Tawbah
--------------------

Have we ever thought about the conditions of true *tawbah*? Many of us
may conjecture that perhaps the factors of ‘regret’ and expression of
‘sorrow’ to God can suffice for tawbah. The reality of the matter,
however, is quite different. *Tawbah* is not just a transient emotional
experience but ‘a transformation of one’s state.’ It is the process of
clearing one’s heart and soaring to the higher planes of existence. It
begins as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ (ع) لِقَائِلٍ قَالَ بِحَضْرَتِهِ (أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ):
ثَكِلَتْكَ أُمُّكَ أَتَدْرِي مَا الإَسْتِغْفَارُ؟ أَلإِسْتِغْفَارُ
دَرَجَةُ الْعِلِّيِّينَ، وَهُوَ اسْمٌ وَاقِعٌ عَلَى سِتَّةِ مَعَانٍ:
أَوَّلُهَا النَّدَمُ عَلَى مَا مَضَى. وَالثَّانِي الْعَزْمُ عَلَى
تَرْكِ الْعَوْدِ إِلَيْهِ أَبَداً. وَالثَّالِثُ أَنْ تُؤَدِّيَ إِلَى
الْمَخْلُوقِينَ حُقُوقَهُمْ حَتَّى تَلْقَى اللٌّهَ أَمْلَسَ لَيْسَ
عَلَيْكَ تَبعَةٌ. وَالرَّابِعُ أَنْ تَعْمِدَ إِلَى كُلِّ فَرِيضَةٍ
عَلَيْكَ ضَيَّعْتَهَا فَتُؤَدِّيَ حَقَّهَا. وَالْخَامِسُ أَنْ تَعْمِدَ
إِلَى اللَّحْمِ الَّذِي نَبَتَ عَلَى السُّحْتِ فَتُذِيبَهُ
بِالأحْزَانِ حَتَّى تُلْصِقَ الْجِلْدَ بالْعَظْمِ وَيَنْشَأَ
بَيْنَهُمَا لَحْمٌ جَدِيدٌ. وَالسَّادِسُ أَنْ تُذِيقَ الْجسْمَ أَلَمَ
الطَّاعَةِ كَمَا أَذَقْتَهُ حَلاوَةَ الْمَعْصِيَةِ. فَعِنْدَ ذَلِكَ
تَقُولُ: (أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Once in the presence of Imām ‘Alī (as) a person said: *Astaghfirullāh*
(I seek forgiveness from Allāh). Hearing this, the Imām (as) said to
him: *Thakalatka ummuka; atadrī ma’l istighfār* (May your mother weep
after you; do you know what is ‘seeking forgiveness’?) Then he continued
as follows: Istighfār is a station of the exalted ones (*‘illiyyīn*);
and it is a name, which stands for six things:

1. First is to regret for what one has done [of sin]

2. Second, to resolve never to return to what one has done [of sin]

3. To return to the creatures their rights so that you meet Allāh while
you have nothing on your shoulders.

4. To intend to perform every compulsory act that you had wasted and
paying its due right

5. To melt the flesh that has been grown out of unlawful means with
sorrows [and hardships] until the skin touches the bone and new flesh
grows [out of lawful sustenance] between them.

6. To make the body taste the pain of obedience the way you made it
taste the sweetness of sin

That is when you say: *Astaghfirullāh* (I seek Allāh’s
forgiveness.)”[^48]

Therefore, in order for one to successfully achieve this level of
tawbah, which would purify the heart and make it ready for the higher
stations of spiritual wayfaring, one must struggle to meet the
abovementioned conditions.

Entirely His Grace
------------------

It should be noted however that when one is in the state of tawbah, no
kind of self esteem should ever deceive him. He should never think that
it is his tawbah that would transport him to the house of the Only
Beloved. Rather it is entirely Allāh’s Grace and Mercy that enables him
to undertake this great journey. Indeed tawbah is necessary, and in fact
a succor (*tawfīq*) of Almighty Allāh Himself, but that should never
deceive the repentant. He should always hopeful of its acceptance and
understand the fact that it is not his struggle that would reap any
benefit, but Allāh’s Grace and Mercy. This is a monotheistic vision of
the reality. Imām al-Sajjād (as) teaches us the same in supplication no.
16 of his radiant work al-Sahīfat al-Sajjādiyyah as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ بَكَيْتُ إِلَيْكَ حَتّى‏ تَسْقُطَ أَشْفارَ عَيْنَيَّ،
وَانْتَحَبْتُ حَتّى‏ يَنْقَطِعُ صَوْتِي،‏ وَقُمْتُ لَكَ حَتَّى
تَتَنَشَّرَ قَدَمايَ، وَرَكَعْتُ لَكَ حَتّى‏ يَنْخَلِعَ صُلْبي،‏
وَسَجَدْتُ لَكَ حَتّى‏ تَتَفَقَّأَ حَدَقَتايَ، وَأَكَلْتُ تُرَابَ
الأََرْضِ طُولَ عُمْري،‏ وَشَرِبْتُ مَآءَ الرَّمَادِ آخِرَ دَهْرِي،‏
وَذَكَرْتُكَ فِي‏ خِلالِ ذٌلِكَ حَتّى‏ يَكِلَّ لِسَانِي،‏ ثُمَّ لَمْ
ارْفَعْ طَرْفي‏ إِلـى‏ آفاقِ السَّماءِ اسْتِحْياءً مِنْكَ، مَا
اسْتَوْجَبْتُ بِذٌلِكَ مَحْوَ سَيِّئَةٍ واحِدَةٍ مِنْ سَيِّئاتِي‏.
وَإِنْ كُنْتَ تَغْفِرُ لِي‏ حِينَ اسْتَوْجِبُ مَغْفِرَتكَ، وَتَعْفُو
عَنِّي حِيْنَ اسْتَحِقُّ عَفْوَكَ، فَإِنَّ ذٌلِكَ غَيْرُ وَاجِبٍ لِيْ
بِاسْتِحْقاقٍ، وَلا اَنَا اهْلٌ لَهُ بِاسْتيجابٍ، إِذْ كانَ جَزائِي
مِنْكَ فِي‏ اَوَّلِ مَا عَصَيْتُكَ النَّارَ، فَإِنْ تُعَذِّبْنِيْ
فَاَنْتَ غَيْرُ ظَالِمٍ لِي‏‏...
  </p>
</blockquote>

My God,  
 were I to weep to You until my eyelids drop off,  
 wail until my voice wears out,  
 stand before You until my feet swell up,  
 bow to You until my backbone is thrown out of joint,  
 prostrate to You until my eyeballs fall out,  
 eat the dirt of the earth for my whole life,  
 drink the water of ashes till the end of my days,  
 mention You through all of that until my tongue fails,  
 and not lift my glance to the sky’s horizons in shame before You,  
 yet would I not merit through all of that  
 the erasing of a single one of my evil deeds!  
 Though You forgive me when I merit Your forgiveness  
 and pardonest me when I deserve Your pardon,  
 yet I have no title to that through what I deserve,  
 nor am I worthy of it through merit,  
 since my repayment from You  
 from the first that I disobeyed You  
 is the Fire!  
 So if You punishe me,  
 You do me no wrong.[^49]

Due to the brevity of this commentary we would suffice with these
fundamental stations of the path towards Almighty Allāh over here. Those
interested in understanding the intricacies of each and every station of
wayfaring may refer to texts such as the *Manāzil al-Sā’irīn* of Khwājah
‘Abdullāh Ansārī and other relevant texts of practical gnosis.

Having known the basics of self-reform, which is the beginning of every
kind of reform, let us now look at how one can effect reform in others.
It is incumbent, however, for us to first understand the characteristics
of a true reformer.

Characteristics of a True Reformer
----------------------------------

The Holy Qur’ān, chapter 7, verse no. 170, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَالَّذِينَ يُمَـسِّكُونَ بِالْكِتَابِ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلاَةَ إِنَّا
لاَ نُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُصْلِحِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who [1] hold fast by the book and [2] keep up prayer;
verily We waste not the recompense of the reformers.”***

The above verse informs us that a reformer must:

1) Hold steadfast onto the book

The great Shī‘ah exegete, Shaykh Tabrasī in his *Majma‘ al-Bayān* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْسَكَ وَمسَّكَ وَتَمَسَّكَ واسْتَمْسَكَ بِالشَّيْءِ بِمَعْنيً
وَاحِدٍ: أَيْ اِعْتَصَمَ بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The verbs *amsaka* and *tamassaka* and *istamsaka bi al-shay’* all have
the same meaning, which is ‘to adhere to something.’”[^50]

And in his *al-Mufradāt*, an authoritative dictionary of Qur’ānic words,
Rāghib al-Isfahānī says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِمْسَاكُ الشَّيْءِ: التَّعَلُّقُ بهِ وَحِفْظُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“‘*Imsāk al-shay’* (to adhere to something) means to cling to it and
protect it.’”[^51]

Therefore, to adhere to the Book in this verse would mean: To hold fast
to it and protect it.

Obviously, such adherence and protection should not be imagined to mean
safeguarding the physical Qur’ān from being torn, mishandled or
misplaced [all of which are also important]. Holding fast to the Qur’ān
and protecting it means to follow its teachings and revive them in the
different dimensions of human life. The Holy Qur’ān is a book of
instructions for both individual as well as social reform. It teaches us
how to refine our spirits and beautify it with the Attributes of
Almighty Allāh; it outlines the skills and conditions necessary to
revive a society; one, therefore, who holds fast to it and protects its
teachings would obviously qualify to be a reformer. And protection of
its teachings substantially concerns the practical plane. It is not a
matter of being learned and able to expound the sublime teachings of the
Qur’ān. It is a matter of action and qualification.

2) Establish Prayer:

‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī in his monumental *al-Mīzān* says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَخْصِيْصُ إِقَامَةِ الصَّلاَةِ بِالذِّكْرِ مِنْ بَيْنِ سَائِرِ
أَجْزَاءِ الدِّيْنِ لِشَرَفِهَا وَكَوْنِهَا رُكْنًا مِنْ الدِّيْنِ
يُحْفَظُ بِهَا ذِكْرُ اللٌّهِ وَالْخُضُوْعُ إِلـى مَقَامِهِ الَّذِي
هُوَ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الرُّوْحِ الْحَيَّةِ فِيْ هَيْكَلِ الشَّرَائِع
الدِّيْنِيَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the particular mention of establishing prayer from among the parts
of relgion is due to its sacred position and that it is the pillar of
religion, which protects and ensures the remembrance of Allāh, and
humility to His exalted station, the latter being the living spirit in
the body of religious creeds.”[^52]

One who establishes prayer is different from one who only prays. The
expression that the Holy Qur’ān employs in this verse as well as other
verses is not ‘*yusallūna*’ (those who pray) but ‘*aqāmussalāta*’ (those
who establish prayer), which calls for responsibility. One who
establishes prayer, observes all the perfect etiquette of prayer and
ensures that others pray as well. Such a person is not satisfied in
observing prayer alone; his selfless spirit would like to see others
benefiting from this means of ascension to God. In order to be able to
reform an individual or community, one should have the ability to
establish prayer. The fundamental significance of prayer can well be
appreciated by looking at the following traditions:

1. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ كُلَّ شَيْ‏ءٍ مِنْ عَمَلِكَ تَبَعٌ لِصَلاتِكَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And know that every thing that you do is according to your
prayer.”[^53]

2. Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ قُبِلَتْ قُبلَ مَا سِوَاهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If it [i.e. *Salāt*] is accepted the other actions would be
accepted.”[^54]

3. Imām al-Ridā (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَأَوَّلُ مَا يُحَاسَبُ الْعَبْدُ عَلَيْهِ الصَّلاَةُ، فَإِنْ
صَحَّتْ لَهُ الصَّلاَةُ صَحَّتْ لَهُ مَا سِوَاهَا، وَإِنْ رُدَّتْ
رُدَّتْ مَا سِوَاَها...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…The first thing that a servant would be accounted for is prayers; if
his prayers are in order, then all else would be correct, and if it is
rejected then all else would be rejected…”[^55]

Understanding this link between the spirit of prayer and the spirit of
action calls for one to revive his prayer so that his acts would carry
meaning and value. The reason why many people end in committing
*al-shirk al-khafī* (hidden polytheism) is their ignorance of what they
recite in prayer. One who infuses the spirit of utter monotheism in his
prayer, his acts would bear the color of monotheism.

Social Reform
-------------

Reforming a society and conferring to it its equilibrium is to revive
the teachings of Islam and the Qur’ān in the society. The phrase
‘***Surely we do not waste the recompense of the reformers***’ of the
aforementioned verse (7:170) clearly alludes to the fact that “reviving
the teachings of the Qur’ān” (*yumassikūna bi‘l kitābi*) is the reality
of effecting equilibrium (*islāh*).’ In order for a society to enjoy its
state of equilibrium, it must be governed by laws that ensure its
stability and purpose. And the only person who can formulate such laws
is Almighty Allāh who knows every subtle aspect of the human being and
his salvation. The Holy Qur’ān says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلاَ يَعْلَمُ مَنْ خَلَقَ وَهُوَ اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِيرُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Would He who has created not know? And He is the All-Attentive, the
All-Aware.”[^56]

And when one is successful in reforming society, the individuals that
form the society would easily be able to attain perfection.

In his *al-Mīzān*, the late ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...لَكِنّ سَعَادَةَ الشّخْصِ مَبْنِيَّةٌ عَلى صَلاَحِ الظَّرْفِ
الاِجْتِمَاعِي الَّذِي يَعِيْشُ هُوَ فِيْهِ، وَمَا أَصْعَبُ أَنْ
يَفْلَحَ فَرْدٌ فِيْ مُجْتَمَعٍ فَاسِدٍ أَحَاطَ بهِ الشّقَاءُ مِنْ
كُلِّ جَانِبٍ. وَلِذٌلِكَ إِهْتَمَّ فِي إِصْلاَحِ الْمُجْتَمَعِ
اِهْتِمَامًا لاَ يُعَادِلُهُ فِيْهِ غَيْرُهُ وَبَذَلَ الْجُهْدَ
الْبَالِغَ فِيْ جَعْلِ الدَّسَاتِيْرَ وَالتَّعَالِيْمَ الدِّيْنِيَّةِ
حَتّى العِبَادَات مِنَ الصَّلاَةِ وَالْحَجِّ وَالصَّوْمِ
اِجْتِمَاعِيَّةً مَا أَمْكَنَ فِيْهَا ذَلِكَ، كُلُّ ذَلِكَ
لِيَسْتَصْلِحَ الإِنْسَانُ فِي نَفْسِهِ وَمِنْ جِهَةِ ظَرْفِ
حَيَاتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…But the prosperity of a person depends on the equilibrium of the
social conditions where he lives, and how difficult it is for a person
to achieve salvation in a corrupt society, which is embraced with
wretchedness from all sides!

And that is why it (the Qur’ān) gave unparalleled importance to
effecting equilibrium in the society and strived to enact religious
commandments and laws to be of a social nature, including devotions,
such as the canonical prayer, hajj and fasting. All this was done so
that the human being may attain equilibrium of himself and the vessel of
his life…”[^57]

One of the very important conditions of social reform is the support of
the people that form the social unit. Although one may have the
qualities of a true reformer, if he is not supported by the people, the
state of social equilibrium cannot be attained. There is a subtle
allusion to this truth in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so that the people rise with justice.”***[^58]

Almighty Allāh informs us here that the ‘nās’ have a determining role to
play. He does not tell us that the Prophets (as), would effect justice
and equilibrium to the society, but says ‘so that the people (*nās*)
rise in justice.’ This alludes to collective participation. And this
truth is evident for every sound intellect. If the components of the
society were to be adamant in their rejection, the reformer would not be
able to effect equilibrium. A majority of the masses need to undergo
transformation, so that the society returns to the state of its
equilibrium. The Holy Qur’ān narrates the destructive end of many of the
past nations, who simply refused to change themselves. Due to their
obstinacy, they had to face a despicable doom. Look at the following
verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا الْقُرُونَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَمَّا ظَلَمُوا
وَجَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَمَا كَانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا
كَذٌلِكَ نَجْزِي الْقَوْمَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed We destroyed generations before you when they did wrong:
their Messengers came to them with Clear Signs, and they were not those
who would believe. Thus do We requite those who sin!”***[^59]

It should be noted here that those referred to in the above verse were
so degenerate that they could not be changed. They are defined as “*wa
mā kānu liyu ’minu*” (they were not those to believe). This state
obviously was a result of their own misdeeds.

Political Stability: A Fundamental Unit of Social Reform
--------------------------------------------------------

Reforming a society has always been a challenging task, but perhaps it
has become even more challenging in the contemporary era. The
prerequisite of social reform is political reform. So long as there is
no valid political power, the other dimensions of the society would
always be in the state of disequilibrium. Islam, which is a complete
religion, and therefore caters for every need of the human being in
different dimensions of his life, has not left mankind without a
direction for political power and authority. The Holy Qur’ān and the
traditions as well as Islamic history vividly illustrate the unity of
religion and politics. Islam would like to ensure that the laws of Allāh
prevail and that the government makes its decisions entirely on the
principles laid by the Qur’ān and the Sunnah. This is when every kind of
imbalance in the society can be obliterated. Under a firm Islamic
government, all the economic problems that stem from different kinds of
mischief would be terminated. Under a strict government, promiscuity and
other evils would lessen. The atmosphere of such a society would then
enable the people to wake up from their slumber and attain Allāh’s
proximity.

One of the most rational and sublime concepts of political thought in
Islam is the concept of *wilāyat al-faqīh* (the governance of the
Islamic jurisprudent). Its rational definition is that in the absence of
the 12th holy Imām (as), the jurisprudent identified as pious and
knowledgeable in Islamic laws can govern a collectivity and lead it
towards its material as well as spiritual prosperity. Such a person who
enjoys sublime traits, is far from selfish interests, and is also
well-aware of Islamic Law as well as the circumstances of his time, can
ably control the government and lead the nation toward prosperity. To
consider such a clear fact as dependant on what different clerics
believe, and refrain from thinking about or involving oneself in the
future of a collectivity of human beings who need to attain eternal
salvation, is unreasonable.

The Timeless Reformer of Karbala
--------------------------------

Sometimes a historical incident can conquer its spatial limitations and
serve as an example for all times, places and people. Immortality is one
issue and transcending time and space is another. Immortality deals with
the future, but the conquerer of spatial limitations embrace and cover
the past as well. The event of Karbalā’, which is known to evoke the
emotions of the coldest reader, was not only a tragedy as it is so
labeled usually, but a reform movement (*harakah islāhiyyah*) that could
serve as a lesson both before and after it transpired. As it has been a
source of inspiration for the followers of the Imām (as) after Imām
Husayn (as), it has also been a source of inspiration for the preceding
prophets of God too. Narrations indicate how the previous Prophets would
curse the perpetrators of the heinous massacre [and thus take a stance].
If we understand Imām Husayn’s motive, we would fully realize the
movement’s sublimity. In one of his addresses to Muhammad bin
Hanafiyyah, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّـمَا خَرَجْتُ لِطَلَبِ الإِصْلاَحِ فِي أُمَّةِ جَدِّي (ص)،
أُرِيدُ أَنْ آمُرَ بالْمَعْرُوْفِ وَأَنْهَى عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ،
وَأَسِيرَ بِسِيرَةِ جَدِّي وَأَبِي عَلِيِّ بْنِ أَبِي طَالِبِ (ع).
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I have only risen to seek reform and equilibrium in the nation of my
grandfather, the Messenger of Allāh; I would like to invite to good and
dissuade evil; and adopt the path of my grandfather and my father, Alī
bin Abī Tālib.”[^60]

It looks like as if Imām Husayn (as) informs us of his motive, the
method of achieving it, and those who also employed the method:

Motive: Seeking reform and equilibrium in the nation (*ummah*)

Method: *Amr bil Ma’rūf* and *Nahy ‘ani ‘l Munkar*; Adopting the path of
his grandfather and father.

Therefore, he aspired to restore equilibrium to the society. He desired
that the society enjoy both material as well as spiritual prosperity.
The physical amenities bestowed to man are means for his upliftment, and
hence should also be given importance. Nevertheless, the main motive
should not be neglected and remain forgotten.

The timeless reformer with his utter steadfastness calls out to all
epochs: ‘Do not allow the destruction of human values in any social
organization! Do not sit quiet while oppressors control the affairs of
the people! Struggle to eradicate all kinds of disequilibrium in the
Muslim society! The prayer under discussion is a verbal expression.
Husayn’s was a practical expression. He, like his noble grandfather,
practically manifested his concern of eradicating all kinds of social as
well as individual vices. His eagerness in restoring Islamic values was
to see the eternal prosperity of humanity.’

Awaiting for the Noble Government
---------------------------------

In the famous *Du‘ā al-Iftitāh*, we pray:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّا نَرْغَبُ إِلَيْكَ فِي دَوْلَةٍ كَرِيـمَةٍ تُعِزُّ
بِهَا الإِسْلاَمَ وَأَهْلَهُ، وَتُذِلُّ بِهَا النِّفَاقَ وَأَهْلَهُ،
وَتَجْعَلُنَا فِيهَا مِنَ الدُّعَاةِ إِلَى طَاعَتِكَ، وَالْقَادَةِ
إِلَى سَبِيلِكَ، وَتَرْزُقُنَا بِهَا كَرَامَةَ الدُّنْيَا
وَالآخِرَةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh, indeed we ask you for a noble government in which you would
elevate Islam and its followers, and degrade hypocrisy and its
adherents, and make us among those who invite to your obedience, and
leaders on your path, and to grant us by it, nobility in this world and
the Hereafter…”

Our *hadīth* literature clearly mentions many signs preceding the
reappearance of our 12th Holy Imām (as). Many of us observe that a
number of these signs already exist. Some of us have the tendency to say
that ‘the world is so corrupt today; it is high time that 12th Imām
should reappear.’ Such rhetoric may be found in different circles. But
objectively speaking, it reveals the narrow-mindedness of those who
speak about it. This does not mean that the signs prevalent would not
precede his reappearance. However, one should try to observe whether the
factors that would prepare the ground for the Imām’s reappearance exist
or not. The 12th Holy Imām (as) does not need corruption to reappear. He
rather needs the support of the masses who overtly yearn for his
reappearance so that equilibrium is created in the society. So long as
the masses yearn for his reappearance without being ready for it, it
would be futile for him to appear. We must remember that the 12th Imām’s
mission is to create a global Islamic government. For such a government
to take form, he needs our support [*liyaqūma al-nāsu bi al-qist* (so
that the people stand in justice)]. And support, we must understand, can
be to forgo so many of our worldly interests. It may seem to be a simple
issue, but the reality of the matter is quite different.

The concept of awaiting for the 12th Imām should be understood in its
correct meaning. The secret to its understanding is to ask ourselves
about the purpose behind our intizār. Why are we waiting for his
reappearance? To create social stability and prosperity? To eradicate
corruption and oppression? If that is so, does our prayer conform with
our practical lives? Do our actions reveal that we are practically
working to create order and eradicate oppression in any circle that is
in our limited sphere and power? Have we started with our family and
neighborhood and observed whether we truly aspire for that great person
who would effect reform globally? We should always try to measure
ourselves against the purpose of intizār, and ask: ‘Do our actions tally
with the spirit of effecting reform?’

Characteristics of the Helpers of our 12th Imām (as) in the Reformation Process
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a tradition narrated in *Bihār al-Anwār* we are informed that the
12th Imām (as) would have 313 sincere companions who would assist him in
his reform process. Every one of us who has developed knowledge and love
of the Imām (as) and knows his sublime aim as well, would aspire to be
one of the 313 companions mentioned in the hadīth. But in order for us
to qualify for this sacred mission we should identify the
characteristics that such reformers would possess. Many who have the
strength to revive themselves and adopt a life full of spiritual
blessings do have the opportunity to qualify. Mothers too, who can rear
their children with excellent morals can shape their future and create
the ground for their offspring to qualify for this lofty station. Youth
also, who aspire to get married and select such spouses of noble descent
and excellent morals that would enable a generation of purity to ensue,
can also facilitate personalities who would qualify to be the Imām’s
loyal supporters. And what exactly are the characteristics of the
helpers of the 12th holy Imām (as)? The following are traditions that
outline the characteristics of the supporters of the 12th Holy Imām
(as):

1. Possessing an Indepth Knowledge about God:

Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said about the soldiers of the 12th
Holy Imām (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...رِجَالٌ عَرَفُوا اللٌّهَ حَقَّ مَعْرِفَتِهِ، وَهُمْ أَنْصَارُ
الْمَهْدِي (ع) آخَر الزَّماَن...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“...Men who know Allāh as He should be Known, and they are the helpers
of al-Mahdī at the end of time.”[^61]

Here obviously, the absolute knowledge of God is not meant, for that is
beyond the reach of any dependent being, including the Prophet (s) who
is reported to have said: *mā‘arafnāka haqqā ma ‘rifatika*... we have
not known You the way You absolutely deserve. Obviously, no finite being
can ever comprehend the Infinite Being.

2. Possessing the Attributes of a Qualified Islamic Leader:

Imām al-Sādiq (as) is reported[^62] to have said in a lengthy tradition
that those who would come out with Imām al-Mahdi (as) would be as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلٌكِنَّ هٌذِهِ (الْعِدّة) الَّتِي يُخْرِجُ اللٌّهُ فِيْهَا
اَلْقَائِم (ع)، وَهُمْ النُّجَبَاءُ، وَالْقُضَاةُ وَالْحُكَّامُ،
وَالْفُقَهَاءُ فِي الدِّيْنِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“They are:  
 • Of noble Descent [*nujabā’*]

• Qualified to rule [*al-hukkām*]

• Qualified to judge [*al-qudāt*]

• Highly learned in religion [*al-fuqahā’ fi al-Din*]”

These characteristics therefore create responsibilities for us: if we
are of noble descent and marry the *nujabā’* (of noble descent), our
children too would be of noble descent, if we rear our children and
teach them how to be responsible from a young age and enable traits such
as bravery, knowledge, etc., to develop, we can create the ground for
them to be future leaders, if we inculcate the spirit of seeking
religious knowledge in our children, their interest, zeal, etc., would
attract them towards gaining indepth knowledge of religion and thus
create in them the essential characteristics of the 12th Imām’s noble
supporters.

Our Duties
----------

Having understood the steps of reform, each one of us would be able to
decide where he or she stands, and what is his or her immediate
responsibility. Wherever it is possible for us to effect reform, however
limited, we should do so. Otherwise, our supplication would be mere
rhetoric or out of ignorance.

[^1]: Mufradātu Alfāzi’l Qur’ān, new ed., pg. 636

[^2]: This is also a proverb in the Arabic language.

[^3]: Holy Qur’ān, 2:11-12

[^4]: Ghuraru’l Hikam wa Duraru’l Kalim, tr. 4853, pg. 240

[^5]: Ibid., tr. 4765, pg. 237

[^6]: Ibid., tr. 4772, pg. 237

[^7]: Sharhu’l Asmā ‘ al-Husnā, pg. 213

[^8]: Mawlā Muhsin Fayd Kāshānī, al-Mahajjat al-Baydā ‘, v. 5

[^9]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 75, pg. 81

[^10]: Zan dar Āineye Jalāl o Jamāl, pg. 233

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: ‘Ārifun Fī al-Rihāb al-Qudsiyya, pg. 47

[^13]: Rūhe Mujarrad, pg. 329

[^14]: Daryāye ‘Irfān, pg. 97

[^15]: Ibid., pg. 98

[^16]: Qabasāt min Hayāti Sayyidina al-Ustādh, pg. 118

[^17]: al-Ihtijāj, v. 2, pg. 380

[^18]: Manāzil al-Sā’irīn, ch. 1 , pg. 36

[^19]: Maqālāt- Tarīqe ‘Amaliyyeye Tazkiyeh (1), pg. 24

[^20]: Jihād-e Akbar, pg. 51

[^21]: Chehel Hadīth, tr. Four, On Kibr pp. 97-98

[^22]: Ibid., tr. Ten - On Desire and Hope

[^23]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, Du‘ā al-Sabāh, Arabic ed., pg. 93-94

[^24]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 5, pg. 203

[^25]: Mafatīh al-Jinān, Du‘ā ‘Arafah

[^26]: Ghuraru’l Hikam wa Duraru’l Kalim, tr. 3654

[^27]: Muntakhab Mīzān al-Hikmah, pg. 432, tr. 5357

[^28]: Ibid., pg. 431, tr. 5333

[^29]: Ghuraru’l Hikam wa Duraru’l Kalim, tr. 3730

[^30]: al-Mufradāt, new ed., pg. 283

[^31]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 63, pg. 331

[^32]: Mustadrak al-Wasā’il, v. 12, pg. 173

[^33]: Bihār al-Anwār, pg. 277

[^34]: The Holy Qur’ān, 57:16

[^35]: The Holy Qur’ān, 14:49 & 50

[^36]: Maqālāt- Tarīqe ‘Amaliyyeye Tazkiyeh (1), pp. 29-30

[^37]: The Holy Qur’ān, 2:286

[^38]: Nahj al-Balāghah, letter 28. Al-Khu’ī in his Minhāj al-Barā’ah, a
comprehensive commentary on the Nahj al-Balaghah says: Imām  by his
statement wannāsu sanāyi ‘un lanā (and the people are our handicrafts)
meant that they are the intermediaries of Almighty Allāh’s grace (Mīrzā
Habībullāh al-Hāshimī al-Khū’ī, Minhāj al-Barā’ah, vol.9, pg. 98)

[^39]: Āyatullāh Hasan Zādeh Āmulī quotes Bishārat al-Mustafā, pg. 90 in
his gloss over the Minhāj al-Barā’ah of al-Khū’ī

[^40]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, Arabic ed., pp. 620-626

[^41]: Maqālāt- Tarīqe ‘Amaliyyeye Tazkiye (1), pg. 37

[^42]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, Arabic ed., pg. 503

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Holy Qur’ān, 9:118

[^45]: The readers should note that tawbah is a relative matter, for
with regard to Almighty Allāh it means “to Return in Forgiveness and
Mercy” whereas with regard to His servants it means “to return in
repentance”.

[^46]: Holy Qur’ān, 24:31

[^47]: Maqālāt Tarīqe ‘Amaliyyeye Tazkiye (1), pp. 86-87

[^48]: Nahju’l Balāgha, pg. 549

[^49]: al-Sahīfah al-Sajjādiyyah (The Psalms of Islām, English
Translation by William Chittick), Supplication no. 16, pp. 59-60.

[^50]: Tafsīr Majma‘ al-Bayān, v. 4, pg. 762

[^51]: Al-Mufradāt, pg. 768

[^52]: Tafsīr al-Mīzān, v. 8, pg. 299

[^53]: Wasā’il al-Shī‘a, v. 4, pg. 161

[^54]: Tahdhīb al-Ahkām, v. 2, pg. 239

[^55]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 80, pg. 20

[^56]: Holy Qur’ān, 67:14

[^57]: al-Mīzān fī Tafsīri’l Qur’ān, v. 12, pg. 330

[^58]: Holy Qur’ān, 57:25

[^59]: Holy Qur’ān, 10:13

[^60]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 44, pg. 368

[^61]: Muntakhab al-Athar, volume 3, pg. 177

[^62]: Ibid.


