O Allāh, Fill Our Poverty With Your Needlessness
================================================

أََللٌّهُمَّ سُدَّ فَقْرَنَا بِغِنَاكَ

OAllāh, fill (*sudda*) our poverty (*faqranā*) with Your affluence
(*bighināka*). This verse does not pertain to the need of the commonly
needy individuals, but a need that is shared by every human being, or
rather every contingent being[^1], which due to the nature of its
essence, possesses nothing of its own. Therefore, even the apparently
self-sufficient among the created beings are termed poor and needy in
this verse. Similarly, *ghināka* (lit. Your Needlessness) is not the
common self-sufficiency shared by some of the human beings, but that
which is restricted only to Almighty Allāh. In reality, if one
understands the relation between the Creator and the creation,
self-sufficiency makes no sense with regard to the creation at all. The
Holy Qur’ān alluding to this says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ أَنْتُمْ الْفُقَرَاءُ إِلـى اللٌّهِ وَاللٌّهُ
هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O mankind! You are the ones who stand in need of Allāh, and Allāh -
He is the All-Sufficient, the All-Laudable.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ وَإِنَّ اللٌّهَ لَهُوَ
الْغَنِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Him only belongs what is in the heavens and what is in the earth;
and indeed Allāh is the All-sufficient, the All-laudable.”***[^3]

And in his well-known supplication of *‘Arafah*, Imām Husayn (as) humbly
cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٌهِي: أَنَا الْفَقِيرُ فِي غِنَايَ، فَكَيْفَ لا أَكُونُ فَقِيراً
فِي فَقْرِي؟‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God, I am the poor in my self-sufficiency; therefore how can I not be
needy in my state of need?”

And Imām ‘Alī (as) in his famous whisperings (*munājāt*) cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَوْلايَ يَا مَوْلايَ: أَنْتَ الْغَنِيُّ وَأَنَا الْفَقِيرُ، وَهَلْ
يَرْحَمُ الْفَقِيرَ إِلا الْغَنِيُ؟‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My Master, My Master, You are the All-Sufficient and I am the needy;
and who other than the All-Sufficient can have mercy on the needy?”

And in the recommended prayer after ‘Asr, we introduce ourselves as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لا يَمْلِكُ لِنَفْسِهِ نَفْعاً وَلا ضَرّاً وَلا مَوْتاً وَلا حَيَاةً
وَلا نُشُوراً…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…one who does not own any benefit, nor harm, nor death, nor life, nor
resurrection…”[^4]

Can we turn into the necessary being?
-------------------------------------

*Faqranā* (lit. our poverty) refers to the utterly dependent state of
the human being, which in the language of metaphysicians is termed as
‘contingency’ (*imkān*), and in the vision of mystics ‘manifestation’
(*zuhūr*). All that exists other than Allāh does not have existence of
its own. To come into being and subsist in any state whatsoever requires
the Divine Will. The following verse of the Qur’ān expounds the
continual process of causation with relation to the creation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قُلِ اللٌّهُ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَ هُوَ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘God is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the
All-paramount.’”***

It should be noted that Khāliqu in the above verse denotes perpetual
creation. This concept is also beautifully expounded by Mullā Sadrā in
his philosophical texts, where he intellectually establishes, through
his well-known theory of transubstantial motion (*harakah jawhariyyah*),
the fact that every contingent being receives existence every moment.
Reflect over the following verses of the Holy Qur’ān:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَفَعَيِينَا بِالْخَلْقِ الأَوَّلِ بَلْ هُمْ فِي لَبْسٍ مِنْ خَلْقٍ
جَدِيدٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Were We exhausted by the first creation? Rather they are in doubt
about a new creation.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَتَرَى الْجِبَالَ تَحْسَبُهَا جَامِدَةً وَهِيَ تَمُرُّ مَرَّ
السَّحَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you see the mountains, which you suppose to be stationary, while
they drift like passing clouds...”***[^6]

The mystics also vision this reality when they behold this universe.
‘Ayn al-Qudāt al-Hamadāni says: “Small children, observing a lamp
burning continuously, would naturally think that what we see is one
single flame. But the grownups know very well that it is a series of
different flames appearing and disappearing moment by moment. And from
the viewpoint of mystics this must necessarily be the case with
everything in the world except God.”[^7]

Having understood the aforesaid, we ask: Is it possible for the human
being to lose his or her contingent identity and become Essential and
Necessary in existence? In other words, is it possible for us to change
from the utterly poor to the absolutely affluent? Intellectually
speaking, such a phenomenon can never transpire for it is evidently
impossible. This is because, ‘a Necessary Being’ (*wājib* *al-wujūd*) is
only necessary and essential when it did not and does not depend on any
kind of cause whatsoever. If one says that a certain being was
contingent (*mumkin*) and thereafter turned into a Necessary Being
(*wājib*), this would depict nothing but absurdity. This is because an
entity changing from contingency (*imkān*) to necessity (*wujūb*) means
change of the essence (*dhāt*) of the entity. This change either was
causeless or needed a cause. If we say that it did not require a cause
and changed by accident, we have said what is intellectually absurd. If
we say it needed a cause, then that would also be incorrect because for
something to be necessary no cause is needed whatsoever. A Necessary
Being is Causeless. It is never brought about. Hence a contingent being
can never turn into a Necessary Being.

Therefore, what exactly do we mean when we utter the above verse of this
supplication? What do we actually seek from Almighty Allāh?

One of the Sublime Names of Almighty Allāh is al-Samad. There are
several meanings for this name, but they in reality are corollaries
(*lawāzim*) of its exact lexical meaning[^8] which is: ‘One who is
besought and every entity returns to Him for any need.’ One of the
corollary meanings of al-Samad is ‘the All-compact (al-musmat).’ Imām
al-Husayn (as) is reported to have said:

آَلصّمَدُ: الَّذِي لاَ جَوْفَ لَهُ...

“As-Samad is One Who has no hollowness.”

Due to His Infinite Existence, there is no gap of deficiency in any of
His perfections. If He is All-Knowing, then there is no perforation in
His Infinite knowledge, if He is All-Powerful, there is no kind of power
that he lacks… In short, He has no kind of deficiency in the level of
His Essence, Attributes or Actions. Mullā Hādī Sabzawārī in his Sharh
al-Asmā’ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فانّه لمّا كان بسيط الحقيقة واجداً للكمالات والخيرات لا يسلب عنه خير،
كان كالمصمّت الّذي لا جوف له - تعالى عن الشبيه و النظير علوّاً
كبيراً - فهو بخلاف الممكن الّذي هو الأجوف النّاقص الجائع الفاقد لكلّ
كمال، في مرتبة ذاته بذاته...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Because His reality is Simple[^9] and Non-composite [*Basīt al-Haqīqa*]
and He possesses all the perfections and virtues, and does not lack any
goodness (*khayr*), He is like a compact entity (*al-musammat*) that
does not have any hollowness- highly exalted is He from comparison and
similarity- and so He (Allāh) is contrary to a contingent being
(*al-mumkin*) who is hollow (*al-ajwaf*), imperfect, hungry, and lacks
any perfection in the level of his essence…”[^10]  
 Therefore, every dependent entity is hollow in its reality. Only Allāh
is al-Samad. Several parables are given to show this relation. One such
relation is that of the ocean and its waves. The waves have nothing of
their own yet they seem to be different to the Ocean. Perhaps the best
comparison is that of the reflection and the mirror. The creation is
like the reflection of Divine Names in the Mirror.

Having considered the aforesaid, what do we mean when we ask Almighty
Allāh to fill up our existential poverty with His existential affluence?

Seeking the Proximity of Allāh
------------------------------

One of the interpretations of this sacred verse is to seek the state of
human perfection through utter submission to Allāh, such that the human
being gains sufficiency (*ghinā*) through the Absolutely Sufficient
(*al-Ghanī*). The following sacred tradition (*hadith al-qudsī*) refers
to this exalted station:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ: أَنَا غَنِيٌّ لاَ أَفْتَقِرُ، أَطِعْنِي فِيمَا
أَمَرْتُكَ أَجْعَلُكَ غَنِيّاً لاَ تَفْتَقِرْ. يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ: أَنَا
حَيٌّ لاَ أَمُوتُ، أَطِعْنِي فِيمَا أَمَرْتُكَ أَجْعَلُكَ حَيّاً لاَ
تَمُوتُ. يَا ابْنَ آدَمَ: أَنَا أَقُولُ لِلشَّيْ‏ءِ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ،
أَطِعْنِي فِيمَا أَمَرْتُكَ أَجْعَلُكَ تَقُولُ لِلشَّيْءِ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O offspring of Adam, I am the All-sufficient, and will never become
needy; obey Me, and I will make you All-sufficient such that you will
never become needy; O offspring of Ādam, I am All-living and will never
die, obey Me, and I will make you All-living and you will never die; O
offspring of Adam, I say [to a thing] be! And it is; Obey Me in what I
have commanded you, and I will make you such that when you say be! [to a
thing], it would come into being.”[^11]

In order to attain this fundamental level of proximity (*qurb*), which
is the highest point of the first spiritual journey (السير الى الله) one
must rise through the way-stations of human perfection, which are
expounded by the experts of gnosis in their manuals of direction. The
fundamental stages, however, as we discussed earlier, are yaqzah and
tawbah. It should also be understood that for one to maintain himself or
herself on the straight path and never divert from it, he or she needs a
master of gnosis (*‘irfān*) who has already traversed the levels of
perfection and has the ability to take others as well.

Seeking The Infinite
--------------------

Another possible interpretation of this verse of the blessed
supplication is to seek greater perfection of the Divine attributes one
already possesses. The authoritative mystics in their works present
different levels[^12] in the journey of human perfection. One of the
basic classifications they propound is that the human being has two
fundamental journeys:

Ibn Maytham al-Bahrānī, in his *Sharhu Mi’at Kalimah* quoting the
mystical scholars says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّفَرُ سَفَرَانِ، سَفَرٌ اِلى اللٌّهِ، وَسَفَرٌ فِي اللٌّهِ.
وَالأَوَّلُ إِشَارَةٌ إِلـى إِنْتِقَالاَتِ النَّفْسِ فِي مَراَتِبِ
السُّلُوْكِ، وَالثَّانِي اِشَارَةٌ إِلـى اِنْتِقَالِهَا فِي دَرَجَاتِ
الْوُصُوْلِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There are two journeys: journey to Allāh, and journey in Allāh; the
first alludes to the transformations of the soul in the different levels
of wayfaring, and the second refers to its transformations in the stages
of attainment (*wusūl*)…”[^13]

1. *Al-sayr ilā Allāh* السير إلى الله (Journey towards Allāh) which
culminates with the state of tawhīd when one does not see anything save
Allāh.

2. *Al-sayr fī Allāh* السير في الله (Journey in Allāh) which never
culminates, for it has no end. When we say “in God”, one should not
conjecture that God is a vessel (*‘arf*) in which the human being
travels. Far is He from any kind of limitation and imperfection
whatsoever. *Al-sayr fī* *Allāh* means journeying in the Attributes of
God, or the continual process of coloring oneself with the Divine
Attributes. And because Allāh is *al-Samad* and Infinite, all His
perfect attributes are infinite too. And since the journey from the
finite to the Infinite is infinite, the human being, however exalted he
may be, is still in need of more and more perfection. The following
famous dictum of Imām ‘Alī (as) according to some scholars[^14] refers
to this very journey:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آهِ مِنْ قِلَّةِ الزَّادِ، وَطُولِ الطَّرِيقِ، وَ ُبعْدِ السَّفَرِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O, how little is the provision, and how long the path and distant the
journey…!”[^15]

Hence, there will never be an occasion when the human being would be
needless of this prayer.

Readers however should note that for the one who has not attained the
proximity of Allāh, ‘seeking more’ carries no meaning. He should strive
to cover the first journey so that he may be able to swim across the
oceans of the different names of Almighty Allāh. Scholars of ethics
however advise that in such cases when the supplicant realizes how
remote he is from uttering such lofty words, he should pray with utter
humility and shame, and while feeling repentant of his state of
separation, pin his hopes entirely on the One who can jerk him to start
his journey and later have the ability to swim across the vast oceans of
His Attributes.

[^1]: Contingent beings are those that do not exist essentially nor are
they impossible to exist. Therefore in order for them to exist, they
always need a cause. All the created beings are such.

[^2]: Holy Qur’ān, 35:15

[^3]: Ibid., 22:64

[^4]: Miftāh al-Falāh, v. 1, pg. 198

[^5]: Holy Qur’ān, 50:15

[^6]: Ibid., 27:88

[^7]: Zubdat al-Haqā’iq, pg. 62

[^8]: al-Mīzān, v. 20, pg. 391

[^9]: Here ‘simplicity’ denotes the non-compositeness of God. (Author)

[^10]: Sharh al-Asmā’ , pg. 365

[^11]: ‘Uddat al-Dā’ī, pg. 310

[^12]: It should be noted that the well-known classification, which is
not contradictory to what we have mentioned above, is the al-Asfar
al-Arb‘ah (the four journeys) which Sadru’l Muta ‘allihīn and his school
of thought has adopted. We have not mentioned this due to the limited
scope of this work.

[^13]: Sharh Mi’at Kalimah, v. 1, pg. 40

[^14]: Āyatullāh Jawādī Āmolī alludes to this point in his lessons on
Ibn ‘Arabī’s Fusūs al-Hikam. See also ‘Buhuth Fī ‘Ilm al-Nafs’
[Transcripts of the notes of Sayyid Kamāl al-Haydarī on the section
about the human soul from Mullā Hādī Sabzawārī’s philosophical poetry
al-Manzūmah, page 298]

[^15]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 34, pg. 284


