O Allāh, Change Our Unpleasant State Into Your Beautiful State
==============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ غَيِّرْ سُوْء حَالنَا بَحُسْنِ حَالِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allāh, Change Our Unpleasant State Into Your Beautiful State

In order to properly understand the above verse, it is imperative to
know the meaning of the word “*husn*” in the phrase ‘*bi husni Hālik.*’
According to Rāghib al-Isfahāni, the word husn means:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحُسْنُ: عِبَارَةٌ عَنْ كُلِّ مُبْهِجٍ مَرْغُوْبٍ فِيهِ، وَذَلِكَ
ثَلاَثَة أَضْرُبٍ: مُسْتَحْسَنٌ مِن جِهَةِ الْعَقْلِ، مُسْتَحْسَنٌ
مِنْ جهَةِ الْهَوَى، مُسْتَحْسَنٌ مِنْ جهَةِ الْحِسّ وَالْحَسَنَةُ
يُعبّر عَنْهَا عَنْ كُلَِ ما يَسُرُّ مِنْ نِعْمَةٍ تَنَالُ الإِنْسَان
فِيْ نَفْسِهِ وَبَدَنِهِ وَاَحْوَالِهِ وَالسَّيِّئَةُ تضادّهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Husn* is every pleasant and desirable thing. And it is of three
kinds:  
 • Pleasant according to the intellect;

• Pleasant according to worldly inclination;

• Pleasant according to sense perception.

And the word *al-hasanah* is employed to mean every pleasant blessing
that the human being attains in his spirit, body or states. And
al-sayyi’ah is opposite to that…”[^1]

بحُسْن حَالِكَ The personal pronoun “*kāf*” here implies that we are
after the utter Beauty of Almighty Allāh, who is the Most Pleasant and
Beloved[^2]. We can therefore not limit the extensions of *husn* to what
al-Isfahānī enumerates in his lexicon of Qur’ānic words. The universal
sense of the word itself allows every pleasant entity to come under its
conceptual umbrella. In addition, the *Husnu‘l Hāl* (the pleasant state)
possessed by Almighty Allāh is beyond intellectual and sensory
perception.

It should be noted that the main components of *husn* are ‘*mubhij*‘
(pleasant, delightful, etc.) and *marghūb fīh* (desirable). This is one
key to understanding the various extensions of beautiful entities.

The particle “*bi*” in the phrase ‘*bi husni hālik*’ here can have two
probable meanings:

(1) It can mean into[^3] (the same as the particle إلى *ilā*). Therefore
the prayer would read: “O Allāh change our unpleasant state into Your
Beautiful State”. This also reminds us of another supplication which is
recommended to be recited on the first day of the solar year – Nawrūz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...حَوِّل حَالَنَا إلى اَحْسَنِ الْحَالِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

…change our state into the most beautiful state…[^4]  
 (2) It can denote sababiyyah (mediation)[^5], and thus the prayer would
read: “O Allāh change my evil state by Your Beautiful State”.

بحُسْن حَالِكَ Hāl حَال denotes ‘a changing state.’ Due to his imperfect
nature, the human being undergoes a movement of perfection and thus
“hāl” can be correctly attributed to him or her. But is it correct to
employ it for Almighty Allāh? Does His Exalted Essence undergo change?
Intellectually speaking, God, Who is Absolutely Perfect, can never
undergo change. Change manifests deficiency and imperfection, while
Almighty Allāh is Absolutely Perfect. Thus, it would be incorrect to
talk about change with regard to His Sublime Essence. In a morning
supplication narrated in the prayer manual Balad al-Amīn[^6], we glorify
Almighty Allāh saying:

ياَ مَنْ لاَ يتغيّر مِنْ حَالٍ إِلـى حَالٍ!‏

“O One Who does not change from one state to another!”

And in one of his sermons, while glorifying Almighty Allāh, Amīru‘l
Mu’minīn’Alī (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...الَّذِيْ لا يَحُوْلُ وَلاَ يزولُ وَلاَ يَجُوْزُ عَلَيْهِ الاًفُولُ
...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One Who neither changes nor ceases to exist, nor is He transitory.”[^7]

In expounding the meaning of “*lā yahūlu*” ‘Allāmah Majlisī[^8] in his
remarks says: *lā yahūlu ay lā yataghayyaru* [*lā yahūlu* means ‘He does
not change.’]

Then what does ‘*bi husni Hālika*’ mean in this noble supplication? To
answer this, we need to understand that the extensions of concepts
employed to describe different attributes of contingent entities
(*mumkināt*), are not completely the same as those of the Absolute
Perfect Being. When we say that a certain person, for example, is kind
and merciful, we mean that he or she has a sense of pity which follows
acts of support to others. But we can never conceive the state of pity
which is an experience of change in the heart with regard to the Exalted
Being. Similar is the case with ‘*hāl*’ which when employed for Almighty
Allāh is not ‘a changing state’ but rather His Exalted Reality of
Absolute Perfection that always was and will ever be. Small wonder it is
that Imām Abu’l Hasan al-Ridā (as) in one of his debates with a
theologian hired by Ma ‘mūn is reported to have employed the word
“*Hāl*” for Almighty Allāh, which of course does not depict “a changing
state”. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...لأنَّه لاَ يَكُوْنُ أَنْ يُحْدِثَ نَفْسَهُ ولاَ يَتَغَيَّرُ عَنْ
حَالِهِ، تَعالى اللٌّه عَنْ ذٌلِكَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…This is because it is impossible that he created Himself, nor does He
change from His State, Exalted is Allāh from that…”[^9]

Therefore when we say “*bi* *Husni Hālika*” we do not mean “a changing
state”, Exalted is Allāh from any deficiency whatsoever.

Physical Extensions of Husnu’l Hāl
----------------------------------

Our trend so far has been to consider both the apparent as well as the
subtle meanings of this noble supplication. In this verse, however, it
is clear that the human being opts for the Infinite Beauty and thus the
state of physical beauty is not taken into consideration. Nevertheless,
it is important to know what Islam has to say with regard to physical
beauty. Does Islam consider physical beauty (whose pleasant (*mubhij*)
state the sense perception admits) as insignificant and trivial? Ample
proofs indicate that although physical beauty is pleasant and important
it should not be reckoned as a distinction in the absolute sense.
Whereas the Holy Qur’ān promises damsels with beautiful features[^10]
for the believing men as well as handsome young men[^11] for heavenly
women, and therefore does not consider physical beauty as insignificant,
it warns the believing men and women that even if an unbeliever is so
beautiful or so handsome, you are not allowed to marry with him or her.
Consider the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَلاَ تَنكِحُوا الْمُشْرِكَاتِ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنَّ وَلَأَمَةٌ
مُؤْمِنَةٌ خَيْرٌ مِنْ مُشْرِكَةٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ وَلاَ
تُنكِحُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَتَّى يُؤْمِنُوا وَلَعَبْدٌ مُؤْمِنٌ خَيْرٌ
مِنْ مُشْرِكٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكُمْ أُوْلَئِكَ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ
وَاللٌّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ وَالْمَغْفِرَةِ بِإِذْنِهِ
وَيُبَيِّنُ آيَاتِهِ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not marry idolatresses until they embrace faith. A faithful slave
girl is better than an idolatress, though she should impress you. And do
not marry [your daughters] to idolaters until they embrace faith. A
faithful slave is better than an idolater, though he should impress you.
Those invite [others] to the Fire, but God invites to paradise and
pardon, by His will, and He clarifies His signs for the people so that
they may take admonition.”***[^12]

It should not be misconceived that Islam discourages one to marry with
the physically beautiful. There are traditions which clearly encourage
one to be a companion of one who enjoys beautiful features. Imām Abu’l
Hasan (*al-Ridā*) (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثَلاثةٌ يَجْلُونَ الْبَصَرَ: النَّظَرُ إِلَى الْخُضْرَةِ، وَالنَّظَرُ
إِلَى الْمَاءِ الْجَارِي، وَالنَّظَرُ إِلَى الْوَجْهِ الْحَسَنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Three things enlighten the eye: (1) Looking at greenery, (2) looking at
running water, and (3) looking at a beautiful face (*al-wajh
al-hasan*).”[^13]

That which Islam considers wrong is to establish the basis of one’s
marriage on material interests. Physical beauty without morality would
create nothing but chaos in one’s family life. In addition, purity of
descent is also highly significant as spiritual heredity plays a
fundamental role in one’s future generation. Imām al-Sādiq (as) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَامَ النَّبيّ (ص) خَطِيْبًا فَقَالَ: أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ! إيَّاكُمْ
وَخَضْرَاءُ الدِّمَن. قِيْلَ: يَا رَسُولَ اللٌّهِ (ص): وَمَا خَضْرَاءُ
الدِّمَن؟ قَالَ: اَلْمَرْأةُ الْحَسنَاء فِي مَنْبَتِ السُّوْءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Holy Prophet (s) once addressing the people said: O people, beware
of the verdure of the dung. He was asked:’O Messenger of Allāh, ‘And
what does the verdure of the dung mean?’ The Holy Prophet (s) said: ‘A
beautiful woman (al-hasnā)’ from unpleasant roots.’”

Effulgence of the Face!
-----------------------

There is however another group of traditions that talk of spiritual
light and the effulgence of the face. They also instruct the aspirants
of marriage that the fundamental criteria of spousal selection is ‘the
brilliance of the heart which is manifest on the face’. Imām al-Sādiq
(as) is reported to have said that the Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ (ص): أَفْضَلُ نِسَاءِ أُمَّتِي أَصْبَحُهُنَّ
وَجْهاً وَأَقَلُّهُنَّ مَهْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The best of the women of my Nation are the most radiant in complexion
and seek the least of dowry.”[^14]

Note that the word أَصْبَحُهُنَّ “*asbahahunna*” is employed in the
above tradition and not اَجْمَلَهُنَّ “*ajmalahunna*”, which means that
the yardstick of excellence and perfection is radiance and luminance of
the complexion and not physical beauty.

In short, while Islam encourages physical beauty and reckons it as
something good and naturally pleasant, it warns us from bartering our
spiritual beauty for physical beauty. There is a prophetic tradition
that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أللٌّهُ جَمِيْلٌ يُحِبُّ الْجَمَالَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh is Beautiful and He Loves beauty.”

Beauty appreciated by the intellect likewise is naturally lovable and
pleasant. In fact one of the proofs of God’s existence is by
appreciating the orderliness of the world of creation through the
intellect. The intellect appreciates that we live in the most beautiful
system. In religious terminology this world is known as al-nizām
al-ahsan (The most beautiful system). The holy Qur’ān terms the entire
creation of Allāh as beautiful. Observe the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“One Who Made Beautiful every thing that He Created.”***[^15]  
 The beauty of every creature can be well appreciated by intellectually
considering the orderliness of its system, and its relation with the
rest of the world of creation.

Husnu’l Hāl - A Unique State of Utter Ecstasy
---------------------------------------------

The contemporary mystic-scholar, Āllāmah Hasan Zadeh Āmolī, may the
Almighty Allāh protect his noble presence, in his treatise- Nūrun’Alā
Nūr[^16], says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سعى كن تا به آب برسى با اينكه از آب بريده نيستى. و چون به آب رسيده‏اى
آن وقت است كه حسن حال دارى و ابتهاج تو به وصف نمى‏آيد. در دعاى مأثور
آمده است كه: (اللّهُمّ غَيِّرْ سُوءَ حَالِنَا بحُسْنِ حَالِكَ) . پس
خداى تعالى حسن حال دارد، آرى اين حسن حال همانست كه شيخ در فصل هجدهم
نمط بهجت و سرور «اشارات» فرمود: «أجل مبتهج بشي‏ء هو الاول بذاته».
فافهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Try to reach the water, although you are not cut off from water. And
when you reach the water, you would have *husnu ‘l hāl* and your joy
would be inexpressible. In one of the narrated supplications we read: O
Allāh change our unpleasant state into your Beautiful State. Thus
Almighty God Has the State of *Husnu’l Hāl*. Yes, this State of Joy
(*Husnu’l Hāl*) is that very state that Shaykh (Ibn Sinā) speaks about
in chapter eighteen of the section on Joy and Happiness of his
monumental work *al-Ishārāt*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَجَلُّ مُبْتَهجٍ بِشَيْ‏ءٍ هُوَ الأَوَّلُ بِذَاتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Being that has the greatest joy in a thing is the First (i.e. God)
as having joy in His Essence.”[^17]

With regard to Almighty Allāh’s sincere servants, the state of Ridā is
known to be the state of joy and ecstasy. Shaykh al-Rā’īs also mentions
this in section nine of his monumental *al-Ishārāt*, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَارِفُ هَشٌّ بَشٌّ بَسَّامٌ، يُبَجِّلُ الصَّغِيْرَ مِنْ تَوَاضُعِهِ
مِثْلَ مَا يُبَجِّلُ الْكَبِيْرَ، وَ يَنْبَسِطُ مِنَ النَّبِيْه.
وَكَيْفَ لاَ يَهُشُّ، وَهُوَ فَرْحَان بِا لْحَقِّ وَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ-
فَإِنَّهُ يَرَى فِيْهِ الْحَقَّ؟! وَكَيْفَ لاَ يُسَوِّي وَالْجَمْعُ
عِنْدَهُ سَوَاسِيَة أَهْلُ الرَّحْمَةِ قَدْ شَغَلُوْا بِا لْبَاطِل؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Gnostic (*‘ārif*) is bright faced, friendly and smiling. Due to his
modesty he honors the young as he honors the old. He is as pleased with
the unclearheaded as he is with the alert. How could he not be
bright-faced when he enjoys the Truth (i.e. God) and everything other
than the Truth, for he sees the Truth even in everything other than the
Truth. Furthermore, how could he not treat all as equal when, to him all
are equal! They are objects of mercy preoccupied with falsehoods.”[^18]

Avicenna’s statement “… for he sees the Truth even in everything other
than the Truth” reminds us of the Holy Prophet (s), and the Holy Imāms
of the Ahlu’l Bayt (as). Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَأَيْتُ شَيْئًا إِلاَّ وَرَأَيْتُ اللَّهَ قَبْلَهُ وَبَعْدَهُ
وَمَعَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I did not see anything save that I saw Allāh before it, after it, and
with it.”

A similar dictum is reported also from Imām al-Sādiq (as). Some analysts
say that the following tradition also alludes to the sublime state of
ecstasy and joy of the Leader of martyrs, Imām al-Husayn (as), as he
neared his supreme sacrifice, which guaranteed the salvation of Islam
forever: Shaykh Sadūq in his Ma’āni al-Akhbār reports Imām al-Sajjād
(as) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لماّ اشتَدَّ الأمر بِالحسين بن علي عليهما الصلاة والسلام نظر إليه من
كان معه فإذا هو بخلافهم، لانّهم كلما اشتد الأمر تغيرت ألوانهم، وارتعدت
فرائصهم، ووجلت قلوبهم، وكان الحسين عليه السّلام وبعض من معه من خواصه
تشرق ألوانهم، وتهدأ جوارحهم، وتسكن نفوسهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When the situation became tense for Imām al-Husayn (as) those who were
with him looked at him and saw that his state was contrary to theirs,
for whenever the situation grew tense they changed color and were shaken
and experienced fear, whereas the faces of al-Husayn (as) and some of
his companions shone, their bodily members were relaxed and their souls
were tranquil…”[^19]

Such is the spirit which is ready to meet his Lord while both he is
Pleased with his Beloved and the Beloved is pleased with him. The last
verses of Sūratu‘l Fajr, because of which the chapter was also known as
*Sūratu‘l Husayn* (as), also depicts the state of *Sayyid al-Shuhadā*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ. ارْجِعِي إِلَى رَبِّكِ
رَاضِيَةً مَرْضِيَّةً. فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي. وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O soul that art at rest! Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with
him), well-pleasing (Him), So enter among My servants, And enter into My
garden.”***[^20]

There is a beautiful statement that Sayyid Haddād al-Mūsawī, a great
mystic and contemporary of the late ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī, is reported to
have said. His disciple, the late Ayatullāh Muhammad Husayn al-Tehrānī
in his Rūh-e-Mujarrad quotes him as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحنة عاشوراء عاليترين مناظر عشقبازي است و زيباترين مواطن جمال و جلال
الهي و نيكوترين اسماء رحمت و غضب و براي اهل بيت جز عبور از درجات و
مراتب و وصول به اعلي ذروة حيات جاويدان و منسلخ شدن از مظاهر و تحقّق به
اصل ظاهر و فناي مطلق در ذات احديت چيزي نبوده است.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The scene of ‘Āshurā is the sublimest expression of love and reveals
the most beautiful scenes of Divine Beauty and Glory, and the finest
manifestations of the Names of Mercy and Wrath. For the Prophet’s
Household it was nothing more than a transition across all the levels
and degrees, to reach the highest peak of eternal life, coming off from
the ‘manifestations ‘ to realize the Manifesting Principle and to obtain
absolute annihilation in the Being of the One.”

Āyatullāh Tehrānī adds saying[^21]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تحقيقا روز شادي و مسرت اهل بيت است زيرا روز كاميابي و ظفر و قبولي
ورورد در حريم خدا و حرم امن و امان او است. روز عبور از جزئيت و دخول در
عالم كليت است. روز پيروزي و نجاح است. روز وصول به مطلوب غائي و هدف
اصلي است. روزي است كه گوشه اي از آن را اگر به سالكان و عاشقان و
شوريدگان راه خدا نشان دهند در تمام عمر از فرط شادي مدهوش مي گردند و
يكسره تا قيامت برپا شود به سجده شكر به رو در مي افتند.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Truly it was the day of joy and delight for the Ahlu’l Bayt as it was a
day of success and victory, of reception into the Divine Sanctity and
the sanctuary of peace and security. It was a day of rising above
particularity and entry into the realm of universality. It was the day
of triumph and deliverance, the day of the attainment of the ultimate
end and the principal goal. It is such a day that if a fraction of it
were shown to the wayfarers and ardent lovers of the path of God, they
would swoon with extreme ecstasy until the end of their lives and fall
on their faces to remain in prostration of gratitude until Judgment’s
Day….”[^22]

In reality, as Āyatullāh Tehrāni later explains in his biographical
account of his mentor, the event of Kerbalā’ is like a double sided
coin, one side of which is love, zeal, victory and the triumphant
attainment of the Imām (as), and the other side is sorrow, grief
torment, torture, and mourning. Āyatullāh Tehrānī believes that one can
only see its other side (i.e. the side of ‘ishq) after one has seen the
sorrowful side and transcended it. He says:

Āyatullāh Tehrānī says[^23]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما ساير افراد مردم كه در عالم كثرات گرفتارند و از نفس برون نيامده اند
حتما بايد گريه و عزاداري و سينه زني و نوحه خواني كنند تا بدين طريق
بتوانند راه را طي كنند و بدان مقصد عالي نائل آيند...همچنانكه در روايات
كثيرة مستفيضه ما را امر به عزاداري نموده اند تا بدين وسيله جان خود را
پاك كنيم و با آن سروران در طي اين سبيل هم آهنگ گرديم
  </p>
</blockquote>

“But those who are still captives within the realm of multiplicity and
have not emerged from the domain of the self, they should definitely
engage in lamentation and mourning, in beating their breasts and
reciting elegies so that thereby they may traverse the way and reach the
high goal…Accordingly, in a large number of traditions we have been
commanded to mourn, so that we may purify our souls by these means and
fall in step with those masters in traversing this way.”[^24]

All these radiant narratives demonstrate that the path is open for the
faithful believers too. If one adopts the path of Imām al-Husayn (as)
and his sincere followers, he can reach the husnu’l hāl that he or she
eagerly asks from Almighty Allāh from this noble supplication.

[^1]: Mufradātu Alfāzi’l Qur’ān, pg. 235

[^2]: In his Mufradāt al-Isfahānī has extensively discussed about the
etymology of the word إله ‘ilāh.’ He reports different origins for the
same. One of these, he says, is وِلاه ‘wilāh’ (passionate love). At the
onset it was pronounced as wilāh; thereafter the letter wāw (و) was
changed into the letter hamza (إ) and it became ilāh. And God was named
wilāh because every created being has passionate love for Him.
Al-Isfahānī says: قال بعض الحكماء: الله محبوب الأشياء كلها،‌ وعليه دل
قوله تعالى: وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَكِنْ لا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ. “A certain theosophist is reported to have
said, ‘Allāh is the beloved of all things.’ And upon this does the
following speech of Almighty Allāh indicate: ‘And there is nothing save
that it glorifies Allāh and praises Him, but you do not comprehend their
glorification.’” [Mufradātu Alfāzi’l Qur’ān, pg. 83]

[^3]: Dr. Rāmīl Badī ‘Ya’qūb, Mawsū’at al-Nahw wa al-Sarf wa al-I’rāb,
pg. 186

[^4]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 299

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Balad al-Amīn, v. 1, pg. 60

[^7]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 4, pg. 254

[^8]: Ibid., v. 4, pg. 257

[^9]: Ibid., v. 10, pg. 334

[^10]: Holy Qur’ān, 56:22

[^11]: Ibid., 56:17

[^12]: Ibid., 2:221

[^13]: Wasā’il al-Shī‘a, v. 5, pg. 340

[^14]: Usūl al-Kāfī, v. 5, pg. 324

[^15]: Holy Qur’ān, 32:7

[^16]: Nūrun ‘Alā Nūr, section 9, pg. 78

[^17]: al-Ishārāt wa al-Tanbīhāt, pg. 350 [trans. By Shams Inati, pg. 78
– Translation]

[^18]: al-Ishārāt wa al-Tanbīhāt, pg. 364 [trans. By Shams Inati, pg. 89
– Translation]

[^19]: Ma’āni al-Akhbār, pg. 288

[^20]: Holy Qur’ān, 89:27-30

[^21]: Rūh-e-Mujarrad, pg. 84

[^22]: Spirit Immaterial, translated by Sayyid ‘Alī Qūlī Qarā’ī,
Al-Tawhid Quareterly Journal, v. 12, no.3, pp. 42-43

[^23]: Rūh-e-Mujarrad, pg. 91

[^24]: Spirit Immaterial, translated by Sayyid ‘Alī Qūlī Qarā’ī,
Al-Tawhid Quarterly Journal, v. 12, no.3, pp. 52


