O Allāh, Facilitate the Payment of Our Debt
===========================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اقْضِ عَنَّا الدَّيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allāh, Facilitate the Payment of Our Debt

We have already discussed extensively on the subject of debt in our
commentary on the verse ‘*Allāhumma aqdi dayna kullī madīn*’ (O Allāh,
facilitate the payment of the debt of every indebted one). It is
possible that this verse speaks about the same subject, but is an
emphasis and thus reveals the fundamental importance of relieving
oneself from debt before departing this mortal world. In fact, if we
look at several other supplications, we find that the following two
requests have frequently come together: seeking relief from debt and
enriching oneself (*wa aghninā min al-faqr* - which is to follow).

Following are some examples:

1. In a supplication that the Holy Prophet (s) is narrated to have
taught his beloved daughter Fātimah  for sustenance, we find the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُ رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّ كُلِّ شَئْ ٍ، مُنْزِلُ التَّوْرَاةِ
وَالانْجِيلِ وَالزَّبُوْرِ وَالْفُرْقَان… إِقْضِ عَنّيْ الدَّيْنَ
وَأَغْنِنِي مِنَ الْفَقْرِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh is our Lord and the Lord of all things; He is the Revealer of
Torah, *Injīl*, *Zabūr* and *Furqān*…facilitate the payment of my debt
and make me needless…”[^1]

2. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said to his noble companion
Salmān:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا سَلْمَان: أَكْثِرْ أَنْ تَقُوْلَ رَبِّيْ اقْضِ عَنِّيْ الدَّيْنَ
وَاَغْنِنِيْ مِنَ الْفَقْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Salmān frequently say: ‘O Lord, pay for me my debt and make me
needless.’”[^2]

3. In the well-known supplication of *‘Alqamah* we recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وَتَقْضِيَ عَنِّي دَيْنِي وَتُجِيرَنِي مِنَ الْفَقْرِ وَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…and pay for me my debt and save me from my poverty…”[^3]

4. In a lengthy supplication recommended for the first day of the Holy
month of Ramadān we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتَ الأَوَّلُ فَلَيْسَ قَبْلَكَ شَيْ‏ءٌ، وَأَنْتَ الآخِرُ فَلَيْسَ
بَعْدَكَ شَيْ‏ءٌ، وَاَنْتَ الظَّاهِرُ فَلَيْسَ دُونَكَ شَيْ‏ءٌ،
فَصَلِّ عَلَى‏ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ وَاقْضِ عَنِّي الدَّيْنَ وَأَغْنِنِي
مِنَ الْفَقْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are the First[^4], and thus there is none before You, and You are
the Last, and therefore there is none after You; and You are the
Apparent, and therefore there is none other than You; so send Your
Blessings on Muhammad and his progeny (as) and facilitate the payment of
my debt and make me needless.”[^5]

The supplicant therefore, is humbly asking Almighty Allāh to make his
situation such that after having paid his debts, he would never need to
take another debt again. For he realizes how difficult it is to be
suspended by debt, and thus would like to be free from its chains so
that if death were to overtake him he would have nothing on his
shoulders.

Another Aspect: Paying A Common Debt
------------------------------------

Another probable meaning of this verse is that it speaks of a common
debt that every human being shares. The phrase ‘*iqdī ‘annā
al-dayn*’…اقض عنا الدين (lit. pay for us the debt) can imply that all
the human beings are in debt. This is when the article ‘*al*’ in al-Dayn
is for ‘determination’ and thus refers to a particular debt. What kind
of debt actually is this? There is well-known dictum (which some
scholars narrate as a tradition[^6]) that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُ سُبْحَانَهُ غَرِيْمٌ، لاَ يُقْضَى دَيْنُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh is a Creditor whose debt cannot be paid.”

A rephrasal of this dictum is mentioned in the first sermon of Imām ‘Alī
(as) in *Nahju’l Balāghah* as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلاَ يُؤَدِّي حَقَّهُ الْمُجْتَهِدُوْنَ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…One Whose rights the diligent cannot fulfill…”[^7]

In simpler words: He is One Whose rights cannot be fulfilled even by
those who struggle hard and are diligent. In his *Minhāj al-Barā’ah*- a
commentary on the Nahju’l Balāghah - ‘Allāmah Habībullāh al-Khu’ī
expounds the above statement of Imām ‘Alī (as) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُرَادُ بالْحَقِّ اللاّزمِ هُوَ الْقِيَامُ عَلى شُكْرِ
النَّعْمَاءِ، وَحَمْدِ الآلاَءِ، فَأَشَارَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ إلى
أَنَّهُ لاَ يُمْكِنُ الْقِيَامُ بوَظَايِفِ حَمْدِهِ، لأَنَّ الْحَمْدَ
مِنْ جُمْلَةِ نِعَمِهِ، فَيَسْتَحِقُّ عَلَيْهِ حَمْدًا وَشُكْرًا،
فَلاَ يَنْقَضِي مَا يَسْتَحِقُّهُ مِنَ الْمَحَامِدِ، لِعَدَمِ تَنَاهِي
نِعَمِهِ، فَالأَوْلىَ حِيْنَئِذٍ الاِعْتِرَافُ بالْعَجْزِ
وَالْقُصُوْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The meaning of compulsory rights [as depicted in the dictum of Imām
‘Alī (as) - ‘One whose rights…’] is to thank God for His blessings and
praise Him for His bestowals; therefore the Imām (as) alluded to the
fact that it is impossible for one to bear the responsibility of
praising Him, because ‘to praise him’ is in itself among His blessings,
which then necessitates another praise and thanks; consequently, the
praises that He deserves would never end, due to His endless blessings.
Hence it is better to confess one’s inability and shortcoming [in
praising and thanking Him]…”[^8]

Almighty Allāh says in the Qur’ān:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَ إِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ اللٌّهِ لاَ تُحْصُوهَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…If you enumerate Allāh’s blessings, you will not be able to count
them…”***[^9]

In his supplication when confessing his shortcomings in giving thanks,
Imām al-Sajjād (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنَّ أَحَداً لا يَبْلُغُ مِنْ شُكْرِكَ غَايَةً إِلا
حَصَلَ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ إِحْسَانِكَ مَا يُلْزِمُهُ شُكْراً. وَلا يَبْلُغُ
مَبْلَغاً مِنْ طَاعَتِكَ وَإِنِ اجْتَهَدَ إِلاّ كَانَ مُقَصِّرا دُونَ
اسْتِحْقَاقِكَ بِفَضْلِكَ. فَأَشْكَرُ عِبَادِكَ عَاجِزٌ عَنْ شُكْرِكَ،
وَأَعْبَدُهُمْ مُقَصِّرٌ عَنْ طَاعَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allāh,  
 no one reaches a limit in thanking You  
 without acquiring that of Your beneficence  
 which enjoins upon him thanksgiving,  
 Nor does anyone reach a degree in obeying You,  
 even if he strives,  
 without falling short of what You deserve  
 because of Your bounty.  
 The most thankful of Your servants  
 has not the capacity to thank You,  
 and the most worshipful of them  
 falls short of obeying You.[^10]

Imām ‘Alī (as) is sermon 52 of Nahja’l Balāghah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللٌّهِ لَوِ انْمَاثَتْ قُلُوبُكُمُ انْمِيَاثاً-وَسَالَتْ
عُيُونُكُمْ مِنْ رَغْبَةٍ إِلَيْهِ أَوْ رَهْبَةٍ مِنْهُ دَماً-ثُمَّ
عُمِّرْتُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا-مَا الدُّنْيَا بَاقِيَةٌ مَا جَزَتْ
أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَلَوْ لَمْ تُبْقُوا شَيْئاً مِنْ جُهْدِكُمْ-أَنْعُمَهُ
عَلَيْكُمُ الْعِظَامَ-وَهُدَاهُ إِيَّاكُمْ إلَى الإِيْمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By Allāh, if your hearts melt down thoroughly and your eyes shed tears
of blood either in hope for Him or for fear from Him and you are also
allowed to live in this world for all the time that it exists, even then
your actions cannot pay for His great bounties over you and His having
guided you towards faith.”[^11]

Thanking Allāh As He Deserves
-----------------------------

But despite all this, Almighty Allāh has shown us a method of thanking
Him. Imām al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْحَى اللٌّهُ تَعَالَى إِلَى مُوسَى (ع): يَا مُوسَى اشْكُرْنِي حَقَّ
شُكْرِي. فَقَالَ: يَا رَبِّ كَيْفَ أَشْكُرُكَ حَقَّ شُكْرِكَ وَلَيْسَ
مِنْ شُكْرٍ أَشْكُرُكَ بِهِ إِلاَّ وَأَنْتَ أَنْعَمْتَ بِهِ عَلَيَّ.
فَقَالَ: يَا مُوسَى شَكَرْتَنِي حَقَّ شُكْرِي حِينَ عَلِمْتَ أَنَّ
ذَلِكَ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh, the Exalted, Revealed unto Mūsā (as): ‘O Mūsā, thank Me the way
I deserve to be thanked. Mūsā (as) said: O Lord, how can I thank you the
way You deserve to be thanked, while there is no gratitude that I
express save that it in itself is a blessing that You have bestowed on
me; Allāh said: O Mūsā, It is now that you have thanked me the way I
deserve to be thanked, knowing that that was from me.”[^12]

Therefore understanding the fact that ‘every thanksgiving’ is in itself
a blessing of Almighty Allāh on His servant is highly important. Rather
those who have realized through Divine Revelation (Qur’ān), intellectual
reasoning (*burhān*) or inner vision (*‘irfān*) that every element of
their beings depend on the Almighty, whether in the level of their
essence, attributes or actions, are in a better position of achieving
this kind of thankfulness.The following verse of the Holy Qur’ān clearly
says the every being together with its action stands by the permission
of Almighty Allāh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَ اللٌّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَ مَا تَعْمَلُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allāh has created you and whatever you do.”***[^13]

Therefore whatever good we do, whether in form of thanks, praise,
worship, etc. all belong to Almighty Allāh and are by His permission,
succor (*tawfīq*), and assistance. Neither is our essence our property
nor our actions of virtue. Therefore ‘paying the common debt of Allāh’
can never be conceived. Consequently, asking Allāh to pay our common
debt is like asking Him to accept our deeds of worship, praise and
thanks.

Thanking the Means of Grace - a Condition of Thanking Allāh
-----------------------------------------------------------

Although every advantage that we receive is principally from and by
Allāh, there are secondary causes that Almighty Allāh Creates to allow
things to happen. For example, He helps His poor servants through His
benevolent rich ones. He feeds the human beings through the plants and
animals and requires them to work and facilitate the conditions of
preparing food so that they can consume it and maintain their health to
worship and get closer to Him. Therefore it would be incorrect to
discard the ‘intermediary’ of an advantage by saying that my
monotheistic outlook dictates that al*-shukr lillāh* (thanks belong
solely to Allāh). It is correct to say that thanks belong solely to
Allāh, but the Almighty has taught the human being to show gratitude to
one who does anything good to someone despite his limitation and utter
dependence. Observe the following narrations:

1. Imām al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ حَقِّ الشُّكْرِ لِلٌّهِ أَنْ تَشْكُرَ مَنْ أَجْرَى تِلْكَ
النِّعْمَةَ عَلَى يَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“An example of thanking Allāh the way He deserves to be thanked is when
you thank one in whose hands He enabled the blessing to take
place.”[^14]

2. Imām al-Ridā (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَمْ يَشْكُرِ الْمُنْعِمَ مِنَ الْمَخْلُوقِينَ لَمْ يَشْكُرِ
اللٌّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever does not thank the giver of the blessing from among the
creatures, would not thank Allāh, the Invincible and Majestic.”[^15]

Allāh is the both the Shākir (one who thanks) and the Mashkur (one who is thanked)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Having understood the monotheistic outlook that every action of ours
entirely comes into being and subsists by Allāh, it is clear that both
the *shākir* and the *mashkūr* is Allāh. Mullā Hādī Sabzawārī in his
Sharh al-Asmā’ under the verse ‘*…yā khayra Shākirin wa Mashkūr, yā
khayra Hāmidin wa Mahmūd…*’ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(يَا خَيْرَ ذَاكِرٍ وَمَذْكُوْرٍ، يَا خَيْرَ شَاكِرٍ وَمَشْكُوْرِ، يَا
خَيْرَ حَامِدٍ وَمَحْمُوْدٍ): قَدْ ذَكَرْنَا سَابقًا اَنّهُ إذاَ
قِيْلَ: (لَهُ الْحَمْدُ) لاَ يُقْصَدُ اَنَّ الْمَحْمُوْدِيّةَ فَقَطْ
أَيْنَمَا وَقَعَتْ طُرّاً وَكُلاًّ لَهُ تَعَالـى، بَلْ الْمَقْصُوْدُ
اَنَّ الْحَامِدِيَّةَ أَيْضًا لَهُ وَبِهِ تَعَالـى، فَالذّاَكِرِيّةُ
وَالشَّاكِرِيَّةُ وَالْحَامِدِيَّةُ وَنَظَائِرُهَا لَهُ وَبهِ تَعَالى.
وَالْعِبَارَةُ الأَوْلى فِي بَعْضِ الْمَرَاتِبِ أَنْ يُقَالَ: اِنَّهُ
بحَوْلِهِ وَقُوَّتِهِ تَعَالى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We mentioned earlier that if it is said ‘to Him belongs all praises’ it
does not only mean that every praise wherever it may occur belongs to
Allāh, but also means that ‘the agency of praise’ [wherever it may be]
too belongs to Allāh and takes place by Him; hence thankfulness
(*shākiriyyah*), remembrance (*dhākiriyyah*), praise (*hāmidiyyah*) and
the like [all] belong to him and take place by Him, the Exalted. And a
better expression about the same in a certain level is to say: that it
[i.e. praise, thankfulness, etc.] transpires by His power and strength,
the Exalted.”[^16]

Imām Husayn (as) in his famous supplication of *‘Arafah* alludes to the
subtlely that even before we try to remember Him, He remembers us. He
attracts us; He pulls us; He encourages us to thank and praise and
remember Him. If we were to free ourselves from the spatial limitations,
we can understand a subtler meaning to such precedence: Not only does He
Remember us before we remember Him, but causally it is essential for Him
to Remember us so that we Remember Him. Rather, our remembrance is
entirely by Him. Imām Husayn (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أَنْتَ الذَّاكِرُ قَبْلَ الذَّاكِرِينَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…You are the Rememberer before the rememberers…”[^17]

Allāh is Thanked according to the Limitation of the Thankful One
----------------------------------------------------------------

It should be noted that although the tradition on *shukr* that we
mentioned earlier clearly states how one can thank Almighty Allāh
appropriately, it makes a hint to the fact that thanking Him the way He
deserves is beyond the limitation of the human being. None can ever
claim that he has thanked Almighty Allāh for every blessing. Firstly,
because every ‘thanks’ necessitates another thanks, since thanking him
is a blessing in itself. And secondly, we cannot enumerate and count the
blessings of Almighty Allāh. Imām al-Sajjād (as) in his prayer *Munājāt
al-Shākirīn* mentions these two reasons as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…فَآلاؤُكَ جَمَّةٌ ضَعُفَ لِسَانِي عَنْ إِحْصَائِهَا، وَنَعْمَاؤُكَ
كَثِيرَةٌ قَصُرَ فَهْمِي عَنْ إِدْرَاكِهَا فَضْلاً عَنِ
اسْتِقْصَائِهَا، فَكَيْفَ لِي بِتَحْصِيلِ الشُّكْرِ وَشُكْرِي إِيَّاكَ
يَفْتَقِرُ إِلَى شُكْرٍ؟ فَكُلَّمَا قُلْتُ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ وَجَبَ
عَلَيَّ لِذٌلِكَ أَنْ أَقُولَ لَكَ الْحَمْدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Your boons are abundant -  
 my tongue is too weak to count them!  
 Your favours are many -  
 my understanding falls short of grasping them,  
 not to speak of exhausting them!  
 So how can I achieve thanksgiving?  
 For my thanking You requires thanksgiving.  
 Whenever I say, ‘To You belongs praise!’,  
 it becomes thereby incumbent upon me to say,  
 ‘To You belongs praise’!”[^18]

Therefore, no one should ever think that he or she has the ability to
thank Him the way He deserves. Yes, out of His overflowing Mercy, He
accepts the thankfulness and praise of one who has realized that his
thankfulness itself is from Allāh and that it deserves another thanking.
But that should not be taken as the ‘perfect’ thanks of the *‘abd*
(servant of Allāh). Rather it should be taken as ‘the imperfect and
incomplete thanks ‘accepted by the All-Merciful. Furthermore the degrees
of comprehending that every thanksgiving is a blessing and from Allāh
are various. Whereas some have accepted this truth by following the
Revelation, others have established its verity through intellectual
reasoning. Another group however, due to the purification of their
hearts, can literally behold this truth through presential knowledge
(*al-’ilm al-hudūrī*).

In another supplication Imām al-Sajjād (as) confesses that the *dhikr*
(remembrance of Allāh, whether that be in the form of thanks (*shukr*),
praise (*hamd*), etc.) of the supplicant is according to his imperfect
state and not according to what Almighty Allāh deserves. In his Munājāt
al-Dhākirīn, Imām al-Sajjād (as) whispers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللٌّهِ الرَّحْمٌنِ الرَّحِيمِ. إِلٌهِي لَوْلا الْوَاجِبُ مِنْ
قَبُولِ أَمْرِكَ لَنَزَّهْتُكَ مِنْ [عَنْ‏] ذِكْرِي إِيَّاكَ، عَلَى
أَنَّ ذِكْرِي لَكَ بِقَدْرِي لا بِقَدْرِكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My God,  
 were it not incumbent to accept Your command,  
 I would declare You far too exalted for me to remember You,  
 for I remember You in my measure,  
 not in Your measure…”[^19]

Worship - A Form of Thanking Almighty Allāh
-------------------------------------------

Those who have realized the utter dependence of the human being and the
absolute affluence of Almighty Allāh would never deem whatever they do
as perfect. Consequently, they would not worship Almighty Allāh in
transaction for Paradise. They would worship Him because He deserves to
be worshipped. Their worship would be a worship of thankfulness or love.
Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ قَوْمًا عَبَدُوا اللٌّهَ رَغْبَةً فَتِلْكَ عِبَادَةُ
التُّجَّارِ، وَاِنَّ قَوْمًا عَبَدُوا اللٌّهَ رَهْبَةً فَتِلْكَ
عِبَادَةُ الْعَبِيْدِ، وَاِنَّ قَوْمًا عَبَدُوا اللٌّهَ شُكْرًا
فَتِلْكَ عِبَادَةُ الاَحْرَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely a people worshipped Allāh in anticipation [of reward]; this is
the worship of traders; and a people worshipped Allāh out of fear [of
Hell]; this is the worship of bondsman; and another group of people
worshipped Allāh out of thankfulness, this is the worship of the
liberated and free ones (*ahrār*).”[^20]

Readers can appreciate the fundamental reason why some worship Allāh as
a transaction. It is due to their ignorance of the relation between the
human being and Allāh. They feel they can offer something independent
from themselves. They do not realize that every perfect action entirely
stands by Allāh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا بِكُم مِّن نِّعْمَةٍ فَمِنَ اللّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whatever blessing you have is from God***…[^21]

It should however not be misunderstood and thought that every evil deed
also stems from Almighty Allāh. Indeed it is through the support of
Almighty that every deed regardless of its nature is done. The human
beings however have a volition and can choose what to do. The human
conscience is a proof to this contention. When they resolve to do bad,
Almighty Allāh out of His Wisdom does not intercept their way. Rather
every movement they make is entirely by His support. Trial and
tribulation, and obedience and disobedience would carry no meaning if
every one was forced to do what Almighty Allāh wants. Therefore good and
bad is by His support but not forced by Him on man.

It should also be realized that ‘to do bad’ stems from imperfection on
the part of the human being. And imperfection is the non-existence of a
perfection, which does not require any cause. Therefore attributing the
non-existence of a perfection to Almighty Allāh is evidently absurd. For
example, the stingy behavior of a certain person reveals deficiency on
his part. The person lacks the ‘broadness of heart’ and the trait of
‘open-handedness (*jūd*).’ We cannot say that Almighty Allāh creates his
stinginess. This is because stinginess (*bukhl*) is not a trait to be
created. It is the absence of a trait. But when the person is openhanded
and benevolent, the trait of benevolence which is an existential trait
(*sifah wujūdiyyah*) needs a cause. And it is only by Almighty Allāh
that this trait can exist and subsist. Therefore we can say that
benevolence is from and by Allāh, but we cannot say that stinginess is
from and by Allāh. Yes, the actions that stem from a stingy heart, need
the support and strength of Allāh. However, since Almighty Allāh has
given every one a free will, he himself chooses the action and Allāh
(swt) enables him to carry out the same. But that should not lead us to
imagine that Allāh has forced him to do the action.

The Holy Prophet’s (s) Worship
------------------------------

Several traditions narrate that the Holy Prophet (s) would worship
Almighty Allāh so much that his feet would get swollen. He was once
asked by one of his wives: ‘Why do you distress yourself when Almighty
Allāh has forgiven all your past and future sins?’ and he replied:
‘should I not be a thankful servant of Allāh?’[^22]

Despite all this, he (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عَبَدْناَكَ حَقَّ عِبَادَتِكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We have not worshiped you the way You deserve to be worshipped…”

The angels of Allāh (swt) likewise, despite their utter purity and
perpetual worship, declare their shortcoming in worshipping Almighty
Allāh the way He deserves to be worshipped. The Holy Prophet (s) is
reported to have said to Abū Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا ذرّ! إنَّ لِلٌّهِ مَلائكَةٌ قِيَامًا مِنْ خِيْفَةِ اللٌّهِ،
مَا رَفَعُوْا رُؤُوسَهُمْ حَتَّى يُنْفَخُ فِي الصُّوْرِ النَّفْخَةُ
الآخِرَة، فَيَقُوْلُوْنَ جَمِيْعًا: سُبْحَانَكَ رَبَّنا وَبحَمْدِكَ،
مَا عَبَدْنَاكَ كَمَا يَنْبَغِي لَكَ أَنْ تُعْبَدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Abū Dharr, surely Allāh has angels who stand in fear of Him; they
would not raise their heads until the final blow of the trumpet;
thereupon all of them would say: Free from imperfection are You, Our
Lord, and we praise You; we did not worship You the way You should be
worshipped.”[^23]

And Imām al-Sajjād (as) alluding to this in one of his supplications
quotes the angels of Allāh saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَكَ ما عَبَدْناكَ حَقَّ عِبادَتِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Free from imperfection are You! We have not worshipped You the way You
deserve to be worshipped.”[^24]

Hence one should never rely on any of his deeds of virtue. Obviously
this does not mean that he should despair and think that his deeds have
no value. One should instead totally rely on the Grace of the
All-Merciful and continue in his struggle of perfection.

A Noteworthy Incident
---------------------

The night before he left for the hospital where he was to pass the last
moments of his life, the late Āyatullāh Khumaynī was in the company of
Mrs. Fātimah Tabātabā’ī, his daughter-in-law among other relatives. The
latter narrates the following conversation, which took place after
Āyatullāh Khumaynī had eaten very little of his dinner:

Āyatullāh Khumaynī: Now I have one or two advices for you: I shall not
return. However, I don’t want you to express grief and anxiety on my
demise. I am asking God to give you patience. Be careful not to weep and
lament. This is what I had to say.”

Fātimah Tabātabā’ī: I and Khānum (the wife of Āyatullāh Khumaynī) were
present; I do not recollect exactly; I think Zahrā Khānum Ishrāqī was
(also) present. I don’t know whether someone else was present or not. It
was difficult for us to listen to this issue; all of us had turned sad.

Khānum said: No, Āghā, God Willing, you will recover...

Āyatullāh Khumaynī: No, I will not return. However, let me tell you
this: to go [to the next world] is very difficult; to go [to the next
world] is very difficult.’

Fātima Tabātabā’ī said: ‘Āghā, If you say all this, then we shall
greatly lose our hopes. This is because, as far as I know, although I am
young, those who have been with you narrate that not only have you
performed all the obligatory deeds, and abstained from the forbidden
ones, you have also observed the recommended acts and even abstained
from most of the unpleasant deeds (*makrūhāt*). If it is really
difficult for you also, then what should we say? We get greatly
despondent.

Āyatullāh Khumaynī: ‘No, you must not despair from God’s Mercy[^25];
this itself is the greatest sin...[^26] However, bear this in mind that
to go [to the next world] is very difficult; I do not have any [good]
deed, so that I should want to be happy thereby.’

Fātimah Tabātabā’ī: But Āghā, these words that you utter are very
difficult for us to bear, for if it is as such, we are extremely
frightened, worried and upset.’

Āyatullāh Khumaynī: ‘It is really as such. If Hadrat Sajjād (as) wept
and said: “O Lord it is likely that my good deeds are bad”[^27], do I
possess a deed to get happy and confident thereby? I only have hope of
God’s Grace[^28] and have no [action] at my credit to be hopeful...; and
to go [to the next world] is very difficult; to go [to the next world]
is very difficult.

The doctors then came, and Imām [Khumaynī] said: ‘It is time to
leave.’[^29]

A Supplication to the Only Beloved
----------------------------------

O Allāh, all of us have debts to pay. Some pertain to the material world
and others concern the immaterial realm. You Have taught us how
important it is to ensure that our debts are paid before we enter Your
sanctuary of love. Therefore enable us to pay our debts. You very well
know that the common debt that all of us have to pay can never be paid
unless You forgive us and accept our few deeds of virtue, if any. O
Allāh, we have no hope in our actions however much we have struggled;
our hope is on Your Enveloping Mercy. Therefore deprive us not from the
same. Our hope (*rajā’*), which again is entirely by Your Grace, is our
capital asset (ra’sumāl). Enable us to maintain it so that it can
facilitate the Divine spark to glow in our spirits and always inspire us
to come closer to You.

It is indeed interesting to note the extent of hope in our infallible
Imāms (as), who enjoyed very exalted stations: Imām ‘Alī (as) whispers
in his Sha’bān whisperings (*Munājāt al-Sha’abāniyyah*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ أَدْخَلْتَنِي النَّارَ أَعْلَمْتُ أَهْلَهَا أَنِّي أُحِبُّكَ‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If you place me in the Hell Fire I will inform its inhabitants that I
love You…”[^30]

And in his well-known *Du‘ā al-Kumayl* he cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ كَيْفَ أَسْكُنُ فِي النَّارِ وَرَجَائِي عَفْوُكَ؟ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ
يَا سَيِّدِي وَمَوْلايَ أُقْسِمُ صَادِقاً، لَئِنْ تَرَكْتَنِي
نَاطِقاً، لأََضِجَّنَّ إِلَيْكَ بَيْنَ أَهْلِهَا ضَجِيجَ
الآمِلِينَ...وَلأَبْكِيَنَّ عَلَيْكَ بُكَاءَ الْفَاقِدِينَ‏…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“How can I stay in the Hell Fire when I am hopeful of Your forgiveness;
for by Your Invincibility, O my Leader and my Master- I swear
truthfully, if you do allow me to speak; I would surely cry to You among
its inhabitants, the cry of the hopeful… and I would most surely lament
for You the lamentation of those who are separate from their dear
ones…”[^31]

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 29, pg. 297

[^2]: al-Mu’jam al-Kabīr, pg. 233

[^3]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 459

[^4]: This supplication reveals the Pre-eternity & Necessity of the
Non-Composite Creator.

[^5]: al-Iqbāl al-A‘māl, v. 1, pg. 130

[^6]: This dictum is mentioned by ‘Allamah Tabātabā ‘ī in the
introduction of al-Mīzān [See Tafsīr al-Mīzān, v. 1, pg. 27]. In his
anthology of questions (Dar Mahdare Ustād) that he had asked the grand
‘Allāmah during his life time, Hujjat al-Islām Rukhshād quotes this
dictum as a hadīth and attributes the same to ‘Allāmah. The reference
however has not been cited. Nevertheless, the dictum itself bears
witness to its veracious content.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 1

[^8]: Minhāj al-Barā’ah fi Sharhi Nahj al-Balāghah, v. 1, pg. 247

[^9]: Holy Qur’ān, 14:34

[^10]: al-Sahīfat al-Sajjādiyyah ( The Psalms of Islām, English
Translation by William Chittick), Supplication no. 37, pp. 123-124

[^11]: Nahj al-Balāghah, sermon 52, pg. 72

[^12]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 13, pg. 351

[^13]: Holy Qur’ān, 37:96

[^14]: Wasā’il al-Shī‘ah, v. 16, pg. 311

[^15]: Ibid., v. 16, pg. 313

[^16]: Sharh al-Asmā’, pp. 759-760

[^17]: Du‘ā’ al-’Arafah, Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 273

[^18]: al-Sahīfah al-Sajjādiyyah (The Psalms of Islām, English
Translation by William Chittick), Supplication no. 37, pp. 243-244

[^19]: Sahīfat al-Sajjādiyyah, pg. 255

[^20]: Nahj al-Balāghah, wisdom no. 237

[^21]: Holy Qur’ān, 16:53

[^22]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 16, pg. 264

[^23]: Makārim al-Akhlāq, v. 1, pg. 464

[^24]: al-Sahīfat al-Sajjādiyyah, supg. no.3

[^25]: The Holy Qur’ān [39:54] says: Say: O My servants who have been
extravagant against yourselves, do not despair of Allāh’s Mercy; surely
Allāh forgives sins altogether. Surely, He is the All-forgiving, the
All-compassionate. The Holy Qur’ān [15:56] also says: He said, ‘And who
despairs of the Mercy of his Lord, excepting those that are astray? ‘

[^26]: Imām ‘Alī  is reported to have once told a person, whom fear had
made to despair, due to the ampleness of his sins: ‘O you! Your
despondency of Allāh’s Mercy is worse than your sins.’ [Jāmi’
al-Sa’ādāt, vol. 1, pg. 247]

[^27]: This also refers to what Imam al-Husayn  says in his famous
supplication of ‘Arafah. He says: ‘O God, one whose good deeds are bad,
how can his bad deeds not be bad?’ [Mafatīh al-Jinān, Du‘ā al-’Arafah by
Imām al-Husayn ].

[^28]: The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said: ‘Know that no one
of you will be saved by his action, including me; except if Allāh’s
Mercy and Grace were to cover me.’ (Mīzān al-Hikmah, new ed., vol. 3,
pg. 2131)

[^29]: Fasl-e Sabr - Memoirs of the days of Imām’s illness and demise by
the team of physicians and those affiliated to Āyatullāh Khumaynī, pp.
83-84.

[^30]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 158

[^31]: Ibid.,v. 1, pg. 65


