And Make us Needless
====================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَغْنِنَا مِنَ الْفَقْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the verses “*Allāhumma aghnī kulla faq*īr”[^1] and “*Allāhumma sudda
faqranā bighināk*” we spoke about poverty at length. The apparent import
of the above verse seems to be an emphasis on the previous verses.
Besides, the context of this verse bears a witness to that too.
Nevertheless, in order to summarize the main kinds of poverty, I have
chosen to discuss the verse from another angle.It should also be noted
that this particular supplication reveals the states of the Prophet (s)
in his supplication. And appreciating the remoteness of this servant
from the lofty station of the supplicant, it would not be easy to
accurately define the motive of these verses. Therefore we would suffice
ourselves in this chapter with an infinitesimal drop of the ocean.

Considering the article اَلْ “al” that accompanies al-faqr, the word
al-faqr can have different meanings. One of these is to denote a
specific kind of *faqr* (poverty).

Briefly, after having gone through the Holy Qur’ān, authentic
traditions, and words of wisdom of authorities in philosophy and Islamic
theology, we conclude:

There are two general kinds of poverty:

1. *al-faqr al-mamdūh* (the recommended poverty).

2. *al-faqr al-madhmūm* (the abominable poverty).

The Recommended Poverty
-----------------------

Any kind of poverty that is an advantage either for the path or the goal
of human perfection comes under the category of recommended poverty.
Some of Almighty Allāh’s servants have been deliberately made to suffer
the problems of poverty so that they can attain perfection after they
bear the difficult situations with patience and thankfulness. Almighty
Allāh knows the state of every servant of His, and thus provides
according to His Plan.

Realization Of Absolute Poverty
-------------------------------

The poverty that is achieved at the end of the journey to Allāh is
highly praised in our traditions. It is the state of being utterly poor
to Allāh. Some authorities, in order to be more accurate, say that we
are not poor (*faqīr*) in this sense, but rather ‘poverty itself’ (*‘ayn
al-faqr*). This is because we do not have any independent essence that
is needy. In other words, it is incorrect to say that we are independent
beings who are needy. No one has any share of independence whatsoever.
Our beings that we conjecture to be independent entirely exist and
subsist by the permission of Allāh. Therefore our beings are not poor,
but poverty itself. In terms of philosophy, there are no three entities
when it comes to causing a creation. We do not have the Conferrer of
grace (*mufīd*) and the object of grace (*mufād ‘alayh*) and the grace
itself (*fayd*). Rather, we only have the Conferrer of Grace and His
Grace- which we, due to our limited comprehension or remoteness from the
Beloved, consider as an independent entity. Therefore the ‘creation’ or
‘creatures’ are grace (*fayd*) itself.[^2]

Āyatullāh Khumaynī in his Chehel Hadīth (40 Traditions), alluding to the
reality that the dependent existents are sheer poverty, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…و هيچ موجودى را از خود استقلالى نيست و صرف تعلق و ربط و عين فقر و
تدلّى به ذات مقدس حقّ على الاطلاق است...
  </p>
</blockquote>

…No being has any independence of its own and everything is sheer
dependence, relation, poverty, and attachment to the sacred being of the
Absolute Real…[^3]

Although such poverty always exists in every being, only one who
“realizes the same” through the vision of the heart, after
self-purification, can be qualified to be known as poor in this sense.
In his commentary on the *Du‘ā’ al-Sabāh*, Mullā Hādī Sabzawārī says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْفَقِيْرُ الْحَقيْقِي مَنْ لاَ يَمْلِكُ فِعْلاً وَلاَ صِفَةً وَلاَ
وُجُوْداً وَيَشْهَدُ أَنَّ الْمُلْكَ لِلٌّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهّارِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And the really poor one is he who does not own any action, attribute,
or existence, and witnesses that the kingdom is solely Allāh’s, the
All-Paramount.”[^4]

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفَقْرُ فَخْرِيْ وَبهِ أَفْتَخِرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The poverty is my pride and I am proud of it.”[^5]

Imām al-Sajjād (as) in his supplication of seeking asylum with Allāh
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا غَنِىَّ الأَغْنِياءِ: ها نَحْنُ عِبادُكَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ، وَاِنّاَ
افْقَرُ الْفُقَراء إِلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O the Affluent of the affluent ones, here we are, your slaves, before
You… and we are the neediest of the needy toward You…”[^6]

Therefore this kind of poverty is highly recommended and thus we do not
seek emancipation from it in this verse. Rather, we eagerly ask for it
and although it is known as ‘poverty’, no affluence and self-sufficiency
can be compared to it. In other words, although near Allāh, the
All-Affluent, this state is absolute poverty, it is the state of being
‘All-affluent by Allāh’s permission.’

There is a beautiful allusion in the well-known *Du‘ā’ Jawshan al-Kabīr*
about this. We pray:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا غِناَئِي عِنْدَ افْتِقَارِي!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my Affluence in my poverty…”[^7]

The Holy Prophet (s) is also reported to have prayed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَغْنِنِي بِالاِفْتِقَِارِ إِلَيْكَ، وَلاَ تُفْقَرْنِي
بالاِسْتِغْنَاءِ عَنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh: Make me needless by becoming needy of You, and do not make me
poor by being needless of You.”[^8]

The Abominable Poverty
----------------------

This is the poverty from which we direly seek release. If poverty
obstructs us from availing ourselves of the basic necessities of life,
that can enable us attain nearness to God, it is indeed something that
we detest. If poverty makes us forget the Hereafter instead of making us
alert about the Creator, then it is something that we should seek refuge
from. Any poverty that separates us from the path or the goal is
abominable. It is from such poverty that we should seek emancipation.
Following are allusions to such kinds of poverty:

1. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said to Imām ‘Alī (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عَلِيُّ: لاَ فَقْرَ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْجَهْلِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…O ‘Alī, there is no poverty more severe than ignorance…”[^9]

2. Safwān bin Mihrān al-Jammāl is reported to have narrated from Imām
al-Sādiq (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لاَ فَقْرَ أَحَطُّ مِنَ الْحُمْقِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…There is no poverty more degenerate than silliness (*humq*)…”[^10]

One reason for this may be that ‘silliness’ deprives one from both
material as well as spiritual progress.

3. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفْقَرُ النَّاسِ الطَّمَّاعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The poorest among the people is the greediest.”[^11]

This is because such a person is never satisfied, and instead of
employing the means of livelihood for the main aim behind his creation
he engages in the world and forgets the Hereafter. It is from such an
attitude that we always seek refuge after our zuhr prayers when we say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ نَفْسٍ لا تَشْبَعُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh, I seek refuge with You from the soul that does not get
satisfied.”[^12]

4. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُبَّ غَنِيٌّ أَفْقَرُ مِنْ فَقِيرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Many a time there is a rich person who is poorer than a poor
person.”[^13]

5. Emphasizing the poverty that is really abominable, The Holy Prophet
(s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلفَقْرُ فَقْر الْقَلْبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Poverty is the poverty of the heart.”

The Holy Qur’ān also alludes to this fact when it describes the Judgment
Day as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَوْمَ لاَ يَنْفَعُ مَالٌ وَلاَ بَنُونَ. إِلاَّ مَنْ أَتَى اللٌّهَ
بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…the day when neither wealth nor children will avail, except him who
comes to God with a sound heart.”***[^14]

Hence those who are spiritually affluent are really rich, for they
cannot separate from their noble traits and pure heart, and thus would
come with real provisions in the Hereafter.

A Word On Material Poverty
--------------------------

We cannot ignore the great disadvantage of material poverty, however,
for every human being would like to live a life independent of other
than Allāh. At times, as we understood in the earlier verses of the
supplication, it is the human being himself who creates impediments for
his sustenance and thus is deprived of it. Sometimes however, Almighty
Allāh, out of His Abundant Mercy limits the sustenance of His servant
only to test and elevate him more. In such a situation, one cannot blame
the poor believer for his misdeeds. Following are some traditions that
shed light on this issue:

1. Imām Abū al-Hasan al-Kāzim (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللٌّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ: إِنِّي لَمْ أُغْنِ الْغَنِيَّ
لِكَرَامَةٍ بِهِ عَلَيَّ، وَلَمْ أُفْقِرِ الْفَقِيرَ لِهَوَانٍ بِهِ
عَلَيَّ، وَهُوَ مِمَّا ابْتَلَيْتُ بِهِ الأَغْنِيَاءَ بِالْفُقَرَاءِ،
وَلَوْلا الْفُقَرَاءُ لَمْ يَسْتَوْجِبِ الأَغْنِيَاءُ الْجَنَّةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed, Allāh (the invincible and exalted) says: Indeed I did not
enrich the affluent one due to a nobility in him, nor did I make the
poor needy due to his insignificance; [Rather] I tried the affluent ones
with the destitute; and were there no poor people, the rich ones would
not deserve Paradise.”[^15]

2. In his noble ascent to the heavens (*al-mi’rāj*), it is reported that
Almighty Allāh addressing the Prophet (s) at one point said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَإِنَّ مِنْ عِبَادِيَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مَنْ لاَ يُصْلِحُهُ إِلاَّ
الْغِنَى، وَلَوْ صَرَفْتُهُ إِلَى غَيْرِ ذٌلِكَ لَهَلَكَ، وَإِنَّ مِنْ
عِبَادِيَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مَنْ لاَ يُصْلِحُهُ إِلاّ الْفَقْرُ، وَلَوْ
صَرَفْتُهُ إِلَى غَيْرِ ذَلِكَ لَهَلَكَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed among My believing servants there are believers whom nothing
save affluence (*al-ghinā*) can reform, and were I to change their state
to other than that, they would perish; and indeed from among my
believing servants there are those whom nothing save poverty can reform,
and were I to change their state to other than that they would perish.”

Judging Ourselves
-----------------

In order to determine which boat we are sailing in and to which category
among the two kinds of poverty we belong, it is important for us to have
a yardstick for distinction. How can we determine whether we suffer from
the abominable poverty or the recommended one? There is a tradition
narrated from Imām ‘Alī (as) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلٌّهِ تَعَالـى فِيْ خَلْقِهِ مَثُوْبَاتُ فَقْرٍ وَعُقُوْبَاتُ
فَقْرٍ، فَمِنْ عَلاَمَةِ الْفَقْرِ إذاَ كَانَ مَثُوْبَةً أَنْ يَحْسُنَ
عَلَيْهِ خُلُقُهُ، وَيُطِيْعَ رَبّهُ، وَلاَ يَشْكُو حَالَهُ،
وَيَشْكُرَ اللٌّهَ تَعَالـى عَلى فَقْرِهِ. وَمِنْ عَلاَمَةِ الْفَقْرِ
إذَا كَانَ عُقُوْبَةً أَنْ يَسُوْءَ عَلَيْهِ خُلْقُهُ، وَيَعْصِي فيْهِ
رَبّهُ، وَيُكْثِرَ الشِّكَايَةَ، وَيتسْخّط القَضَاء، وَهَذَا النَّوْعُ
مِنَ الْفَقْرِ هُوَ الَّذِيْ اسْتَعَاذَ مِنْهُ النَّبيّ صَلّى اللٌّهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh, the Exalted, has rewards and punishments of poverty in his
creation. Among the signs of poverty when it is a reward is when one has
a beautiful character, obeys His Lord, does not complain about his poor
state, and thanks Allāh for his poverty; and among the signs of poverty
when it is a punishment is when one is of unpleasant character, is
disobedient of his Lord, frequently complains about his situation, and
is not happy with what Allāh has ordained for him. And this is the kind
of the poverty that the Holy Prophet (s) sought refuge from.”[^16]

The Blessed State Of Ridhā
--------------------------

Although we have many traditions indicating how the pious believers
would undergo poverty and face difficulties in life, one should not
consider ‘the state of poverty’ always as a distinction for them. The
criteria to judge what is good for whom, is Allāh’s decision and choice.
Therefore, even if one was able to bear the difficulties of poverty, he
should not consider it always recommended for him. Consider the
following tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ وَرَدَ: أَنَّ الإِمَامَ مُحَمَدَ بْنَ عَلِيٍّ أَلْبَاقِرَ (ع)
قَالَ لِجَابِرِ بْنِ عَبْدِ اللٌّهِ الأَنْصَارِي - وَقَدْ
إِكْتَنَفَتْهُ عِلَلٌ وَأَسْقَامٌ وَغَلَبَهُ ضَعْفُ الْهَرَمِ: كَيْفَ
تَجِدُ حَالَكَ؟ قَالَ: أَنَا فِي حَالٍ أَلْفَقْرُ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنَ
الْغِنـى، وَالْمَرَضُ أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنَ الصِّحَّةِ، وَالْمَوْتُ
أَحَبُّ إِلَيَّ مِنَ الْحَيَاةِ. فَقَالَ الإِمَامُ (ع) : أَمَّا نَحْنُ
أَهْلُ الْـبَيْتِ، فَمَا يَرِدُ عَلَينَا مِنَ اللٌّهِ مِنَ الفَقْرِ
وَالغِنَى وَالْمَرَضِ وَالصِّحَّةِ وَالْمَوْتِ وَالحَياةِ، فَهُوَ
أحَبُّ إِلَيْنَا. فَقَامَ جَابِرٌ وَقَبَّلَ بَيْنَ عَيْنَيْهِ،
وَقَالَ: صَدَقَ رَسُولُ اللٌّهِ (ص) حَيْثُ قَالَ لِي: يَا جَابِرُ:
سَتُدْرِكُ وَاحداً مِنْ أَوْلاَدِي اسْمُهُ اسْمِي، يَبقُرُ العُلومَ
بَقراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Once Imām al-Bāqir (as) is reported to have asked Jābir bin ‘Abdillāh
al-Ansārī while the latter was not well and the weakness of old age had
overtaken him: ‘How do you find your state?’ Jābir said: ‘Poverty is
more lovable to me than affluence, illness is more lovable to me than
well-being, and death is more lovable to me than life.’ Thereupon Imām
al-Bāqir (as) said: ‘As for us, the Ahlu’l Bayt (as), however, we love
whatever comes to us from Allāh, whether poverty, affluence, sickness,
well-being, death or life.’ Jābir thereupon stood and kissed the Imām
(as) between the two eyes and said: ‘The Messenger of Allāh said the
truth when he said to me: ‘O Jābir, you will soon meet one of my
offsprings, his name is my name, he would split the knowledge a thorough
splitting.’’”[^17]

So Many Shi’as?
---------------

There are numerous traditions that outline the criteria for identifying
a true follower of the Holy Prophet (s) and his infallible household.
Due to the limited scope of this work, all this cannot be analyzed here.
However, due to the relevance of the subject, we would like to quote one
such tradition that clearly reveals what kind of relation a true Shī‘ah
has with regard to his believing brethren. *Al-Kāfī* narrates[^18] a
tradition from Abū Ismā’īl who is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعَنْ أَبِي إِسْمَاعِيلَ قَالَ: قُلْتُ لأَبِي جَعْفَرٍ (ع): جُعِلْتُ
فِدَاكَ! إِنَّ الشِّيعَةَ عِنْدَنَا كَثِيرٌ. فَقَالَ: فَهَلْ يَعْطِفُ
الْغَنِيُّ عَلَى الْفَقِيرِ؟ وَ هَلْ يَتَجَاوَزُ الْمُحْسِنُ عَنِ
الْمُسِي‏ءِ وَيَتَوَاسَوْنَ؟ فَقُلْتُ: لاَ. فَقَالَ: لَيْسَ هَؤُلاءِ
شِيعَةً. الشِّيعَةُ مَنْ يَفْعَلُ هَذَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I said to Abū Ja’far (as): may I be made your ransom; surely there are
many Shī‘ahs among us. He said: ‘And do the rich among them have a soft
heart for the poor, and the good-doer forgive the faults of the evil
doer, and do they have concern for one another? I said: No. Thereupon he
(as) said: These are not our Shī‘ahs; our Shi’ahs are those who do all
that.”

[^1]: Manifestations of the All-Merciful, v. 1, pp. 16-26

[^2]: And getting deeper we come to realize that in reality we only have
One Being and His Actions, which form His Creation and manifest His Most
Beautiful Names

[^3]: Forty Traditions, pg. 578

[^4]: Sharh Du‘ā al-Sabāh, pg. 137

[^5]: ‘Uddat al-Dā’ī wa Najāh al-Sā’ī, v. 1, pg. 123

[^6]: al-Sahīfah al-Sajjādiyyah, Supg. 10, pg. 41

[^7]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 88

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 96, pg. 31

[^9]: al-Kāfī, v. 1, pg. 25

[^10]: Ibid., v. 1, pg. 29

[^11]: Mustadrak al-Wasā’il, v. 12, pg. 68

[^12]: Mafātīh al-Jinān, v. 1, pg. 17

[^13]: Ghurar al-Hikam wa Durar al-Kalim, pg. 370

[^14]: Holy Qur’ān, 26:88-89

[^15]: al-Kāfī, v. 2, pg. 265

[^16]: Riyād al-Sālikīn, v. 2, pg. 390

[^17]: Jāmi’ al-Sa’ādāt, v. 2, pg. 21

[^18]: al-Kāfī, v. 2, pg. 173


