Foreword
========

In the Name of Allāh, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

All Praise belongs to Allāh, Lord of the Worlds, and the good outcome
belongs to the pious; may Allāh bless His chosen elite ones, the
choicest from among those whom He favors - the manifestation of His
kindness to the world, namely Muhammad (s) and his Pure Progeny (as).

In the Qur’ān, Allāh (swt) says: ***“When My servants ask about Me, I am
indeed close to them.  I listen to the prayer of every supplicant, when
he calls on Me.”***(*al-Qur’ān* 2:186)

In this day and age of strife, perplexity and confusion, it is all the
more necessary that we ‘call’ on Allāh (swt) to protect us from the
trials and tribulations of the modern era. The supplications taught to
us by the A’immah (as) are indeed the best way to call upon Allāh (swt).
While it is true that ritualistic recitations of supplications taught to
us by the A’immah (as) have always been a significant part of our
program of worship (*‘ibādah*), on a daily basis, we hardly ever pause
to ponder upon the profound pronouncement we utter by way of the Du‘ā.

The Blessed Prophet (s) has said, “Allāh does not answer the
supplication of a heedless heart,” and what that thought in mind, the
present volume, *Manifestations of the All-Merciful*, by Shaykh Muhammad
Khalfan, is a welcome addition to the corpus of literature on the
commentaries of the commonly recited supplications as this work goes
beyond the translation and a brief explanation of the words of the Du‘ā.
This volume is a wonderful exposition of the richness of such
supplications.

I recall, vividly, some four years ago, during the blessed month of
Ramadān, receiving by way of e-mail from Shaykh Khalfan, a regular dose
of the commentary on the verses of this Du‘ā, highly recommended for the
month of Ramadān. Each day I eagerly looked forward to his inspiring
e-mail, elaborating the deep meanings contained within each word of this
Du‘ā. Subsequently, the Tabligh Section of Dar-es-Salaam Jama’at, under
the able leadership of Al-Hājj Mehboob Somji published the work in book
form.

I am so very pleased to be writing this forward for this second edition,
which has encapsulated the full commentary of all fifteen verses of the
Du‘ā.

The author, Shaykh Khalfan, is a scholar residing in Qum, who has a deep
and unique insight into matters spiritual and we are blessed to have an
opportunity to share this insight through this publication. Works of
this nature show us that the profound words of the Du‘ā, from the Holy
Prophet (s) and his Pure Progeny (as) are timeless and are as relevant
today in the 21st century as they were in the seventh century when they
were first uttered - perhaps more so today, when our preoccupation in
perfecting the material aspects of life has robbed us of the spiritual
dimension and has led us to be heedless of the very essence of our
existence. Even our mode, manner and places of worship, may have given
us the ‘means’, however not the ‘end’.

Thus, this book can be a beacon for us to regain sight of the ‘end’ - as
the author elaborates in his introduction - this is a ‘journey of
thought and concept’ that will lead us to ’comprehend the kernel of
prayer’, Inshā-Allāh.

May Allāh (swt) give us ability to supplicate with a heart that is not
heedless.

Hasnain Walji  
 Plano, Texas  
 Rajab 27th 1426 ah / August 31st 2005 ce

Understanding the Merit of the Supplication

The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ دَعَا بِهٌذَا الدُّعاءِ فِي شَهْرِ رَمَضَانَ بَعْدَ
الْمَكْتُوبَةِ غُفِرَتْ ذُنُوبُهُ إِلـى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever beseeches with this supplication in the Holy month of
Ramadān, after the prescribed prayer, his sins (*dhunūb*) shall be
forgiven till the Day of Judgment.”[^1]

Du‘ā is not a mere verbal utterance, but “a state of real want,” which
is mostly manifested by the verbal supplication. However, as long as
there is no harmony between “the inner state of want” and “the verbal
utterance,” the supplication would lack its spirit.

Realizing this, we say that “the state of yearning for the betterment of
the human species” is an ‘innate want’ of every human being who enjoys
an untainted soul. This is because every human being has been fashioned
with the Attributes of Almighty Allāh. And one such attribute is “mercy”
which is all-embracing. Therefore the human being innately wants the
betterment of every other human being. The reason why many of us do not
experience this quality is because of our separation from the
neighbourhood of our All-Loving Creator. Therefore we need to undergo
self-purification to expose this quality, which has been veiled by the
accumulation of sins and attachment to the world of matter. And when we
experience the state of “yearning for the betterment of others” and
translate the same in the form of words, our supplication shall carry
meaning, and we will benefit from its great merit.

However, those who have not attained this station of proximity should
not despair, but recite this prayer regularly with reflection. If such
illuminative supplications were intended for perfect human beings only,
then the Holy Prophet (s) would not teach it to all and sundry.
Therefore, we should always try to recite the supplication with
reflection and change. If one were to inculcate the sublime thoughts
contained in this prayer, he could really wake up from his deep slumber
and change his life.

In this Glorious Month, when the over-flowing Grace of the All-Gracious
is continuous, let us humbly ask Almighty Allāh to enable us to be among
those who utter this wonderful supplication as a manifestation of our
inner spirits.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 95, pg. 120, ch. 6


