O Allāh, Instil Happiness in the Spirits of the Inhabitants of the Grave
========================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَدْخِلْ عَلى أَهلِ القُبُورِ السُّرُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allāh, Instil Happiness in the Spirits of the Inhabitants of the Grave

**Supplication and the Law of Cause & Effect**

Du‘ā is an excellent means of achieving one’s legitimate desires.
The universal law of ‘cause and effect’ itself encourages us to seek
help from the Principal Cause - who is Almighty Allāh. Thus even in
circumstances when things can be acquired through natural means, one
should not think that one is needless of supplication.

Some, on the other hand, may think that supplication is sufficient and
there is no need of achieving our goals through the means that are at
our disposal. Clearly, this path also, is that of ignorance, for
Almighty Allāh has established the system of cause and effect and
encouraged the human being to employ it for his noble ends. The
following word of wisdom from Imām al-Sādiq (as) emphasizes this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَبَى اللٌّهُ أَنْ يُجْرِيَ الأَشْيَاءَ إِلاَّ بِأَسْبَابِهَا،
فَجَعَلَ لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ سَبَباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allāh does not permit things to take place except by their causes;
thus, He made a cause for every thing.”[^1]

Seeking the Cause of Instilling Happiness
-----------------------------------------

Having known the aforesaid, every understanding supplicant, would
seek the causes that “instil happiness in spirits of the inhabitants of
the grave” apart from praying for the same. Our holy traditions (which
indeed are extensions of “light”) have informed us how to make the
deceased happy. Following are traditions worthy of contemplation:

1. Imām al-Sādiq (as) was asked: ‘Is it possible to recite prayers for
the dead?’ He said, ‘Yes,’ and added:

إِنَّ الْمَيِّتَ لَيَفْرَحُ بِالتَّرَحُّمِ عَلَيْهِ وَالإِسْتِغْفَارِ،
كَمَا يَفْرَحُ الْحَيُّ بالْهَدِيَّة.

“Surely, a dead person rejoices when he is pitied and forgiveness is
sought for him, just as a living person rejoices upon receiving a
gift.”[^2]

2. The Holy Prophet (s) once passed by the grave of a person who was
buried a day before, and saw his family weeping. Observing this, he
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَرَكْعَتَانِ خَفِيْفَتَانِ مِمَّا تَحْتَقِرُوْنَ أَحَبُّ إِلَى
صَاحِبِ هٌذاَ الْقَبْرِ مِنْ دُنْيَاكُمْ كُلّهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed, two small units of prayer which you consider insignificant is
more lovable to the inhabitant of this grave than your world in its
entirety.”[^3]

3. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْهَدَايَا لِلأَمْوَاتِ الدُّعَاءُ وَ الإِسْتِغْفَارُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed, the gifts [from the living] for the dead are *du‘ā’*
(supplication) and *istighfār* (seeking forgiveness of the sins of the
dead).”[^4]

4. Imām ‘Alī al-Ridā (as) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ عَبْدٍ زَارَ قَبْرَ مُؤْمِنٍ فَقَرَأَ عَلَيْهِ إِنّا
أَنْزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ سَبْعَ مَرَّاتٍ إِلاََّ غَفَرَ
اللٌّهُ لَهُ وَ لِصَاحِبِ الْقَبْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever of God’s servants visits the grave of a beliver, and recites
seven times “*Innā anzalnāhu fī laylati’l qadr [...]*” Allāh would
forgive him and the inhabitant of the grave.”[^5] and [^6]

5. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ مَرَّ عَلَى الْمَقَابِرِ فَقَرَأَ قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
إِحْدَى عَشْرَةَ مَرَّةً وَوَهَبَ أَجْرَهُ لِلأَمْوَاتِ أُعْطِيَ مِنَ
الأَجْرِ بِعَدَدِ الأَمْوَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever passes by the graves and recites *Qul Huwallāhu Ahad* 11
times and gifts its reward to the deceased, he is granted a reward
proportional to the number of the dead.”[^7]

6. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported[^8] to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَدْخُلُ عَلَى الْمَيِّتِ فِي قَبْرِهِ الصَّلاةُ وَالصَّوْمُ
وَالْحَجُّ وَالصَّدَقَةُ وَالْبِرُّ وَالدُّعَاءُ وَيُكْتَبُ أَجْرُهُ
لِلَّذِي فَعَلَهُ وَ لِلْمَيِّتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Prayers, Fasting, Hajj, Sadaqa, good deeds and Du‘ā’ reach the dead in
his grave, and their reward is written for [both] the doer and the
deceased.”

7. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported[^9] to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ عَنِ مَيِّتٍ عَمَلَ [عَمَلاً] خَيْرٍ
أَضْعَفَ اللٌّهُ لَهُ أَجْرَهُ وَنَفَعَ اللٌّهُ بِهِ الْمَيِّتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever among the Muslims does a good act for a dead person, Allāh
rewards him manifold and makes the dead benefit from the same.”

Therefore, as we pray for the deceased to attain happiness in the
intermediate realm (*barzakh*), we should also make efforts to act on
the means of their happiness as taught to us and humbly pray to Almighty
Allāh to accept our deeds.

The late Āyatullāh Shihāb al-Dīn Mar’ashī in his last will[^10] gave
some thought provoking advice to his son. One of them was: “I advise him
(my son) to read the Holy Qur’ān and send its blessings to the souls of
those Shī‘ites of the Household of the Holy Prophet (as) who did not
leave any offspring.”

Therefore, in this Holy month of grace, let us not forget the
inhabitants of the grave, including those whom we are not familiar with.
In addition, let us also pray for the well-being of those presumed
*kuffār* (disbelievers), who although were apparently known to be
disbelievers, had professed the unity of Allāh and became Muslims prior
to the departure of their souls from this world.

In his *Chehl Hadith* (Forty Traditions), the late Āyatullāh al-Khumaynī
(may Allāh elevate his soul) relates something thought provoking from
his teacher in *‘Irfān* (Divine gnosis) - Āyatullāh Shāhābādī. He says:
Our Shaykh, the accomplished ‘ārif that he was (i.e. Āyatullāh
Shāhābādī) - may my soul be his ransom - used to say: “Never call down
curses (*la*‘*n*) on anybody, though he be a kāfir concerning whom you
do not know how he made the transit from this world to the next, and
unless an infallible *walī* (saint) informs you concerning his condition
after death. For it is possible that he may have attained faith before
the time of death. Hence let your curse be of a general character.[^11]

And in another place[^12] he says: Our great master, the accomplished
*‘ārif*, Shāhābādī - *rūhī fidāh* (may my soul be his ransom) - used to
say, ‘Do not look down on even a *kāfir* (non-believer) in your heart.
It is possible that the divine light of his inner nature may lead him to
faith and your rebuke may lead you towards a wretched life in the
Hereafter. Of course, to practice *al-amr bi’l-ma‘rūf wa al-nahy
‘ani’l-munkar* (enjoining right conduct and forbidding bad behavior) is
something different from the inner feeling of contempt.’ He would even
say, ‘Never curse the unbelievers about whom it is not known that they
will leave the world in the state of unbelief. If they leave the world
as rightly-guided servants of God, their spiritual rectitude may prove
to be an obstruction in the way of your own spiritual advancement.’

Therefore, as we utter this verse of supplication, let us commit
ourselves to performing deeds of virtue for the deceased Muslims, as a
practical demonstration of our true desire for the happiness of the
deceased.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, v. 2, pg. 90

[^2]: al-Mahajjatu’l al-Baydā’, v. 8. pg. 292

[^3]: Tanbīhu‘l Khawātir, pg. 453

[^4]: al-Mahajjatu‘l Baydā’, v. 8, pg. 291

[^5]: Armaghāne Asmān, pg. 541

[^6]: Man Lā Yahduruhu’l Faqīh, v. 1, pg. 181

[^7]: Mustadrak al-Wasā’il, v. 2, pg. 483

[^8]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a, v. 8, pg. 279

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Wasiyyatnāme-ye Āyatullāh al-‘Uzmā Mar’ashī

[^11]: Chehl Hadīth, 28th tradition

[^12]: Chehl Hadīth, 3rd tradition


