O Allāh, Clothe Every Unclothed One
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اكْسُ كُلَّ عُرْيَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Aim of Human Creation
-------------------------

One of the great calamities of human life is the lack of insight about
the purpose of human creation. So long as man has not come to know ‘the
goal of life’ he shall always have to face difficulties. This universal
law applies to the affluent too. Ask every wealthy person whether his
money always keeps him happy, and his answer would be in the negative.
The Holy Qur’ān as well the Ahlu’l Bayt (as) have informed us that the
aim behind human creation is to attain Allāh’s proximity and nearness.
And the path that leads one to realize this aspiration is none other
than *‘ibādah* (obedience and worship). The following verse explains it:

In chapter 51, verse 56, Almighty Allāh says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالإِنْسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and men except that they should
worship Me.”***

Here, the aim is indicated as Allāh’s Worship. But is it the ‘final aim
of creation?’ To answer this we should look at chapter 15, verse 99 of
the Qur’ān, which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَاعْـبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And worship your Lord until conviction comes to you.”***

Therefore, it is *ma‘rifatullāh* that is the end. And the closer one
gets to his Lord the better his knowledge of his Creator.

Beautiful allusions are made in the following verses too about the
ultimate goal of the human being:

1. Imām ‘Alī (as) in his famous supplication of Kumayl cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا غَايَةَ آمَالِ العَارِفِـينَ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O the Ultimate Hope of the Gnostics.”

2. And in the prayer of *‘Arafah*, Sayyid al-Shuhadā (as) cries:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٌهِي: أُطْلُبْنِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ حَتّى أَصِلَ إِلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh, Seek me by Your Mercy until I reach You.”

It is Allāh’s worship that raises the human being so high that he may
witness God- of course in his own limitations as explained by some
traditions of the Ahlu’l Bayt (as).

Having known this, we should realize that since the human being resides
in the world of matter and possesses a structure that is submissive to
the laws of matter, he is in need of different necessities that may
enable him to subsist and achieve his goal in life. Examples of such
basic necessities, which we may also term as ‘the means of life’, are
food, drink, clothing, a place of shelter, etc.

The Means and the Goal
----------------------

Many who have not realized the purpose of human life busy themselves
with the means and forget the goal. When they look at the luster of the
various kinds of material products of the so-called developed countries,
they brand that as ‘human progress’ and even try to doubt the
authenticity of Islam. Advancement in science and technology is not
something abhorred by Islam at all. Rather it is encouraged. However it
still comes under the umbrella of ‘the means of the end’ and thus one
should not mistake it as ‘the yardstick of human progress.’ One should
rather question oneself whether ‘the material product’ really serves to
be ‘means’ on the path towards Allāh or not. Both the VCR and the
Internet, for example, are helpful means of communication, but if they
hamper the human being from traversing the path of eternal happiness,
what use do they have in serving as ‘a means’ for the goal? The
proponents of advancement always present two kinds of products:

1. Those of variable nature

2. Those of invariable nature

Commodities of the first category allow the human being to reason and
work on the path towards perfection both before and after purchase. For
example, when buying a television set, one may or may not decide to
employ the same in watching only those programs that would enrich his
mind and spirit. In the case of the second category, however, ‘this
choice’ is out of question ‘after purchase.’ For example, if a person
were to purchase an indecent film due to his base inclinations. Later if
he were to decide to employ the same for a good purpose, he would not be
able to do so. He cannot change the film to enrich his mind. All he can
do is to erase the film and dub something that would enrich his spirit.
Similar is the case with material items that directly concern human
development and subsistence such as food, drink and clothing. Many kinds
of food and clothing are forbidden is Islam and can thus not be branded
as ‘the means’ for the human goal.

Therefore it is highly significant to know the difference between ‘the
goal’ and the ‘means.’ Many of us unfortunately have molded our lives to
struggle only for the abundance of the means and have forgotten the
goal. We would understand this reality when entering our graves. The
Qur’ān [102: 1-2] says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَلْهَاكُمُ التَّكَاثُرُ. حَتَّى زُرْتُمُ الْمَقَابِرَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Competing for abundance has engaged you until you come to the
graves.”***

The Purpose Behind Clothing
---------------------------

‘Clothing’ is one of the very basic necessities of human life and indeed
a blessing of Allāh (swt) to the human being. Realizing the purpose
behind clothing would open several doors of understanding and enable us
to do our duty while requesting the All-merciful Lord to clothe all the
naked.

Following are verses of Qur’ān and supplications worthy of
contemplation:

1. [Chapter al-Ā‘rāf -7:26]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَا بَنِي آدَمَ قَدْ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ لِبَاسًا يُوَارِي
سَوْآتِكُمْ وَرِيشًا وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَى ذٌلِكَ خَيْرٌ... 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O children of Adam, surely we have sent down for you clothing that
covers your shame and an attire that causes beauty; and the attire of
piety; that is better…”***

2. Imām Mūsā bin Ja’far al-Kāzim (as) is reported[^1] to have said that
whenever a person would like to put on a new dress he should wipe his
hand over it and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الَّذِي كَسَانِي مَا أُوَارِي بِهِ عَوْرَتِي
وَأَتَجَمَّلُ بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Praise belongs to Allāh who clothed me with what I cover my shame and
beautify myself among the people.”

Studying the abovementioned quotations we come to realize that two
important reasons behind clothing are:

1. To conceal one’s private parts

2. To beautify oneself

The Inner Attire
----------------

Having spoken about this great blessing, Almighty Allāh transports the
reader to a very important truth, which if neglected would cause extreme
regret. He reminds the human being that he is not just composed of the
material body to need ‘the material attire’ only. Rather ‘the inner
attire’ is of fundamental significance. In the words of Qur’ān: *dhālika
khayr* (that is the better!) ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī in his *al-Mizān* has a
beautiful explanation about this. In order to indicate the gravity of
the situation of ‘the pain’ that the human being experiences when his
shameful deeds are displayed, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِلاَّ أَنَّ ظُهُورَ السَوْءَاتِ البَاطِنِيَّةِ أَشدُّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…except that the pain experienced with the appearance of the inner
blemishes is more intense…”

Other verses of the Holy Qur’ān clearly explain the calamity of this
situation. Look at the verses below:

1. Chapter al-Tāriq: - 86:9:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَوْمَ تُبْلـى السَّرَآئِرُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The day when the secrets shall be made manifest.”***

2. Chapter Āli ‘Imrān - 3:30:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that evil was a long distance…”***

3. Chapter Āli ‘Imrān, 3:192:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 رَبَّـنَا إِنَّكَ مَنْ تُدْخِلِ النَّارَ فَقَدْ أَخْزَيْتَهُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Lord, surely whomsoever you place in the Fire, you have indeed
disgraced him…”***

Therefore when uttering this verse of the supplication we should try to
think whether we are among those who are spiritually unclothed or not.
If we are, then we should seek Divine help to establish taqwā within
ourselves so that we do not face that ignominy which is so intense to
bear.

The other fundamental use of clothing is to look presentable and
beautiful. The inclination to be beautiful is inherent in every human
being and there are ample indications in our holy traditions that
encourage one to look beautiful and presentable within the limits of the
Sharī’a. In keeping with the brevity of this commentary, we will avoid
mentioning them.

However, we must understand that in the same manner as “taqwā” and piety
is a source of protection from sin and ignominy, it also is a source of
embellishment. This is because it embellishes the inner form of the
human being with excellent character and makes him the beloved of Allāh.
How remote is the ‘beloved of the apparently beautiful’ from the beloved
of the spiritually beautiful: *razaqanallāhu jamī’an* [May Allāh enable
all of us to achieve the same]

A Word of Prayer
----------------

O Allāh, as we humbly ask you to clothe both the physically as well as
the spiritually naked ones, and seek your support to help those who have
no proper clothes in their physical lives, and enable us to clothe our
inner selves with the attire of taqwā, so that we may acquire the worth
to clothe others as well.

[^1]: Hilyatu’l Muttaqīn, ch. 9


