O Allāh, Facilitate the Payment of Every Indebted One
=====================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ اقْضِ دَيْنَ كُلِّ مَدِيْنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Comprehensive Meaning of ‘dayn’
-----------------------------------

Many might imagine that *‘dayn*’ (debt) is the same as ‘*qard*’ (loan).
In the terminology of Islamic jurisprudence, however, the word dayn has
a broader connotation then the word ‘*qard*.’ *Dayn* also covers qard in
its conceptual umbrella. Āyatullāh Makārim Shīrāzī in his *Tafsīr-e
Namūne* alludes to this subtlety and says that qard is only applied when
one is obliged to return the equivalent of the thing taken; for example,
if he takes money as a loan, he would have to return the same amount of
money; and if he takes a certain kind of food, he would be obliged to
return the same. However, ‘*dayn*’ has a broader framework, for it
includes any kind of transaction such as ‘settlement of claim’ (*sulh*),
leasing (*ijāra*), buying and selling, and the like.[^1]

Debt Sometimes Hampers One From Spiritual Progress
--------------------------------------------------

Debt at times becomes a very great impediment on the path towards God.
The reason for this is that it preoccupies one’s mind and heart, and
that is a decisive factor in impeding progress. Look at the following
traditions:

1. Imām Zaynu’l ‘Ābidīn (as) in his beautiful supplication[^2] for
relief from debt informs his followers of the difficult situation that a
debtor normally experiences. Look at the following:

O God,  
 bless Muhammad and his Household  
 and release me from a debt  
 which makes me lose face,  
 confuses my mind,  
 disrupts my thinking,  
 and prolongs my occupation with attending to it!  
 I seek refuge in You, my Lord,  
 from worry and thought about debt,  
 from the distraction and sleeplessness of debt;  
 so bless Muhammad and his Household  
 and give me refuge from it!  
 I seek sanctuary in You, my Lord, from  
 debt’s abasement in life  
 and its ill effects after death…

2. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said[^3]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكُمْ وَالدَّيْنَ! فَإِنَّهُ هَمٌّ بِاللَّيلِ، وَذُلٌّ
بِالنَّهَارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Beware of debt, for surely it causes grief during the night and
humiliation during the day.”

Another obvious case that can hamper the indebted one from spiritual
development is when he is indifferent to repaying his debt: following
are traditions worthy of contemplation:

1. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported[^4] to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّمَا رَجُلٌ أَتَىَ رَجُلاً فَاسْتَقْرَضَ مِنْهُ مَالاً وَفِي
نِيَّتِهِ أَنْ لاَّ يُؤَدِّيَهُ، فَذٌلِكَ اللّصُّ الْعَادِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever comes to a person and takes some money as a loan from him
while he has the intention of not paying him back is a common thief.”

2. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported[^5] to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ اسْتَدَانَ دَيْنًا فَلَمْ يَنْوِِ قَضاءَهُ، كَانَ بِمِنْزِلَةِ
السَّارِقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever takes a loan and has no intention to pay it back, is the same
as a thief.”

In the above traditions such people are termed as thieves. Essentially
then, the very notion of ‘spiritual progress’ is far-fetched for them.

Those who are regularly habituated in taking loans from here and there
should also realize the dangerous consequences that await them.
Traditions of the Ahlu’l Bayt (as) have alluded to some such dangers as
follows:

1. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said[^6]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَثْرَةُ الدَّيْنِ تُصَيِّرُ الصَّادِقَ كَاذِبَاً، وَالْمُنْجِزَ
مُخْلِفاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Excess of debt turns the truthful one into a liar and one who fulfills
[his promises] to become unfaithful.”

2. Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as) is reported[^7] to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ ذَنْبٍ يُكَفِّرُهُ القَتْلُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللٌّهِ إلاَّ الدَّيْنَ،
لاَ كَفَّارَةَ لَهُ إِلاَّ أَدَاؤهُ، أَوْ يَقْضِي صَاحِبُهُ، أَوْ
يَعْفُو الَّذِي لَهُ الحَقُّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Martyrdom in Allāh’s way expiates every sin, save debt, for it has no
compensation save its repayment, or payment by the inheritor
(*sāhibuhu*) or forgiveness from the creditor...”

3. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said[^8]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَفِّفُوْا الدَّيْنَ، فَإِنَّ فِي خِفَّةِ الدَّيْنِ زِيَادَةَ
العُمُرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Lessen your debts, for surely in the reduction of your debts is the
increment of life.”

When Should One Take a Loan?
----------------------------

These above traditions should not be mistaken to mean that one has no
right to take any loan whatsoever. Rather, in times of difficulty
believers are allowed to take loans within the framework of Islamic
laws. The Infallible progeny of the Holy Prophet (s) also took loans
during their lifetime. But that which is very important is to understand
properly the correct circumstance of taking a loan. A substantial number
of people take loans to live a life of leisure or extravagance. So long
as the believer has not learnt to observe an Islamic discipline, he
would always have to live a life of hardship. Imām Zaynu’l ‘Ābidīn (as)
teaches his followers in supplication 30 of the Sahīfah al-Sajjādiyyah
to adopt some sublime traits in order to avoid debt and be freed from
the same. Look at the following:

O God,  
 bless Muhammad and his Household  
 prevent me from extravagance and excess,  
 put me on the course of generous spending and moderation,  
 teach me excellent distribution,  
 hold me back through Your gentleness from squandering,  
 allow me to attain my provisions through lawful means,  
 direct my spending toward the gateways of devotion,  
 and take away from me any possession  
 which will bring forth pride in me,  
 lead to insolence,  
 or drag me in its heels to rebellion!  
 O God,  
 make me love the companionship of the poor  
 and help me be their companion with excellent patience!  
 Whenever you take away from me  
 the goods of this perishing world,  
 store them for me in Your abiding treasuries!  
 Make this world’s broken pieces  
 which You have conferred upon meand its goods  
 which You have quickly granted to me  
 a way to reach Your neighborhood,  
 a link to Your nearness,  
 and a means to Your Garden!  
 Verily You are Possessor of bounty abounding,  
 and You are the Munificent, the Generous.

So beautifully has the Imām informed his followers about the causes of
their wretched state of debt. Every point in the above supplication is a
gateway of understanding. [Readers are requested to reflect on each of
the verses above to decipher the causes].

The wealthy believers, on the other hand, are highly encouraged to give
loans to their needy brothers and sisters and assist them in times of
hardship. In fact some holy traditions clearly tell us that the reward
one gets by giving qard exceeds the reward a person gets by giving
sadaqah, although in the case of the latter no return is anticipated,
whereas in the case of the former the lender does expect return.
Following are traditions worthy of reflection:

1. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said[^9]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَكْتُوْبٌ عَلَى بَابِ الْجَنَّةِ: إِنَّ الصَّدَّقَةَ بِالْعَشَرةِ،
وَالْقَرْضُ الْوَاحِدُ بِثَمَانِيَةَ عَشرَة...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The following has been written on the door of Paradise: Surely sadaqah
equals ten times [reward], and one loan equals to eighteen times
[reward]…”

2. Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) is reported to have said[^10]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَقْرَضَ مُؤْمِنًا قَرْضاً يَنْظُرُ بِهِ مَيْسُوْرَهُ كَانَ
مَـالُهُ فِيْ زَكَاةٍ، وَكَانَ هُوَ فِي صَلاةٍ مِنَ الْمَلائِكَةِ
حَتَّى يُؤَدِّيَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whosoever gives a loan to a mu’min, expecting his ease thereby, his
wealth would increase and the angels would invoke blessings on him until
he is paid.”

Shaykh Bahā’ī and the Du‘ā’ of Relief From Debt
-----------------------------------------------

In his well-known masterpiece of commentary of 40 traditions
(*al-Arba‘ūna Hadīthan*), Shaykh Bahā’ī relates an interesting incident
that he had experienced after quoting the following tradition:

The esteemed Shaykh al-Sadūq Muhammad bin Bābaway al-Qummī has narrated
with his chain of narrators from Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir (as) who
narrated the same from his fathers (as), who narrated from Amīru’l
Mu’minīn (as) who said:

I complained to the Prophet (s) about a loan that I had on my shoulders,
and he (s) said:

O ‘Alī say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللٌّهُمَّ أَغْنِنِي بِحَلاَلِكَ عَنْ حَرَامِكَ، وَبِفَضْلِكَ عَمَّنْ
سِوَاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allāh: Make me needless of that which you have made unlawful through
that which you have made lawful, and [make me needless] of other than
you by Your Favor.”

Thereafter Shaykh Bahā’ī narrates: “During some years of my life I was
so much in debt, that the amount I had to pay exceeded 1500 mithqāls of
gold and the lenders were highly persistent is getting their money back.
So difficult had the situation become that it diverted me from many of
my occupations, and I had no solution in repaying them. So I adhered to
reciting the above supplication, and would repeat it after every Morning
Prayer, and at times would also recite the same after other prayers.
Consequently, Allāh, the Exalted, made it easy for me to pay the loans
off quickly in a very short time through unknown sources.”[^11]

Obligations
-----------

This verse of the noble supplication creates different obligations for
different people:

1. Those who have the ability to relieve others from any of the kinds of
debt should attempt to do so. A generous moneylender, having realized
the faithfulness and inability of the debtor, may forgive him (partly or
entirely) and thereby practically and faithfully translate this verse of
the supplication.

2. Those who have the capacity of relieving themselves from debt in any
of the situations in which they have been trapped, should try hard to do
so, otherwise it would be an unfaithful cry on their part. How greedy
would it be for one who has ample money to give but waits for help and
prays for external support!

3. Muslim societies who have a united system can solve this grave
problem of debt in its different manifestations very quickly by the
collection of even very small contributions from individuals.

An In-depth Consideration
-------------------------

The supplications that the Infallible Imāms (as) have taught us are very
rich in content, but they require ‘a broad vision’ to be appreciated. In
many places we have stressed, albeit indirectly, the importance of the
inner content of every verse. Here too, we think it is important to
mention the same:

One of the significant laws that prevail the world of language is that
words are coined for the spirit of their meanings. This is contrary to
what some conjecture when saying that words are coined for their
‘material extensions (*masādīq*)’ and not ‘the spirit of their
meanings.’ They mean to say for example, the word ‘balance’ only refers
to the conventional balance that we are aware of. Clearly, this is not
correct, for the examples of balance are not be limited to those
instruments of balance that measure material entities. The Holy Qur’ān
is also known as *mīzān* (balance). The personality of Imām ‘Alī (as) is
another extension of balance, for the believers are judged and weighed
according to his spirit. Most of the learned scholars believe that words
are coined for the spirit of their meanings and not necessarily their
material extensions. For further research on this subtle subject, one
may refer to the introduction of *al-Mīzān* of ‘Allāmah Tabātabā’ī and
the first chapter of the treatise of ‘*Encounter with God*’ by Āyatullāh
Malikī Tabrīzī - the well-known Shī‘ite saint.

Āyatullāh Malikī Tabrīzī says: “…Besides, according to what has been
researched, words have been coined for the spirit of their meanings and
the particulars of the meanings have nothing to do with the [‘spirit of’
the] meaning; for example the word *mīzān* (balance) has been coined for
a thing by means of which other things are measured, but the
particularity of having two sides of the scale or the rest of the
particularities of a conventional scale has nothing to do with the
meaning [for which the word was actually coined]. Thus using the word
‘balance’ to denote the different types and kinds of balances that have
been invented, would signify ‘correct usage’ and employing a word to
denote the meaning for which it was coined. Therefore, the meaning for
which the word mīzān was coined is ‘a measuring instrument’ regardless
of any specifics, neither of the ‘instrument’ nor ‘the object measured.’
Nowadays the instruments that measure the heat and temperature of the
body and air as well as those that measure the blood temperature, the
speed of vehicles, and a variety of other measuring instruments which
number perhaps in hundreds or even thousands, all are the meanings of
the word ‘*mīzān*’, and employing the word *mīzān* for them would be the
correct usage. Likewise is the case with other general words such as
path (*sirāt*), light (*nūr*), reward (*thawāb*), punishment (*‘iqāb*),
etc.”[^12]

Realizing this, we should try to look at the ‘spirit’ of the meaning of
‘*dayn*’ so that we can decipher the variety of its examples and try to
emancipate ourselves from them accordingly.

According to Mu’jam Maqā’īs al-Lugha, a comprehensive dictionary of
Arabic words, the root word of *dayn* (d-y-n) means ‘submission’
(*inqiyād*) and ‘surrender.’ All the derivatives of the word
(*dāl*-*ye*-*nūn*) reveal a kind of ‘submission’ and ‘slavery.’ Debt in
one way enslaves the debtor and binds him or her until he or she
relieves himself or herself from the same. The following sayings of Imām
‘Alī (as) are worthy of reflection:

1. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said[^13]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدَّيْنُ رِقٌّ، والْقَضاءُ عِتْقٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Debt is slavery and payment is freedom.”

2. Imām ‘Alī (as) is reported to have said[^14]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدَّيْنُ أَحَدُ الرِّقَّيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Debt is one of the two kinds of slavery.”

3. The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said[^15]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَزَالُ نَفْسُ الْمُؤْمِنِ مُعَلَّقَةً مَا كَانَ عَلَيْهِ دَيْنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The spirit of a believer remains suspended as long as he has a debt on
him.”

When we take a loan, we are in fact enslaved until we free ourselves by
repaying it. Likewise is the case with regard to all the extensions of
debt.

Those acts which Almighty Allāh expects from every human being are
likewise examples of ‘*dayn*’; therefore, the human being should try to
perform them so that they have nothing on their shoulders. In the
following radiant tradition, *Salāt* is considered to be an extension of
*dayn*:

Imām Ja’far al-Sādiq (as) narrates[^16] Hadrat Luqmān as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا جَاءَ وَقْتُ الصَّلاَةِ فَلاَ تُؤَخِّرْهَا لِشَيءٍ: صَلِّهَا
وَاسْتَرِحْ، فَإِنَّهَا دَيْنٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When the time of prayer comes, do not delay the prayer for something
else; pray and take rest, for verily it is a debt (*dayn*).”

[^1]: Āstāne Qudse Radawī, Sharho Tafsīre Lughāte Qur’ān, Bar Asāse
Tafsīre Namūne, pg. 70

[^2]: Sahīfat al-Sajjādiyya, Supg. no. 30

[^3]: Mīzān al-Hikma, v. 2, pg. 958

[^4]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a, v. 18, pg. 329

[^5]: Ibid, v. 18, pg. 328

[^6]: Ghuraru’l Hikam Wa Duraru’l Kalim, pg. 368

[^7]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a, v. 18, pg. 324

[^8]: Mizān al-Hikma, v. 2, pg. 958

[^9]: Mir’ātu’l Kamāl, pg. 146

[^10]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a, v. 18, pg. 330

[^11]: al-Arba‘ūna Hadīthan, pg. 243

[^12]: Risāleye Liqā’ullāh

[^13]: Ghuraru’l Hikam wa Duraru’l Kalim, pg. 368

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a, v. 18, pg. 317

[^16]: Wasāi’l al-Shī‘a ilā Tahsīli Masā’il al-Sharī‘a


