Publisher's Note
================

On the basis of ideology of Islam, covering ("hijab") for women is
considered one of the basic and important principles. Islam's view
regarding women is quite different from what the West thinks about
women. Islam considers women as half of the body of the society and
holds that women, like men, should live with humon standards and
values.

Western society looks at woman merely through the windows of sexual
passion and regards woman as a little being who just satisfies sexual
desires. Before everything else the question of sexual passion is set
forth even in marriage.

Therefore, such a way of thinking results in nothing other than the
woman becoming a propaganda and commercial commodity in all aspects of
Western life, ranging from those in the mass media to streets and shops.
This is the ultimate degree of woman's slavery and fall in Western
societies which has no consequence other than corruption and misery.
While Islam with the permssibility and opening vast and extensive fields
for social activities for women, has restricted sexual activities and
liberties. With exact and all-round laws it has established a reasonable
and just balance in the context of woman's individuality and social
life.

The first practical issue in this connection is hijab. The women are
duty-bound to observe this degree in order to prevent corruption and
deviation.

In this book, this subject has been surveyed in a number of lectures
which give the reader, particularly the women, a knowledge of the
Islamic view regarding hijab.

We wish for the dominance of human value for women in human societies,
particularly Islamic societies.

International Relation Department, Islamic Propagation Organization


