From the Veiw Point of Traditions
=================================

From the point of view of the traditions, and the external aspects of
the verse, it is more or less certain that it is not necessary for women
to cover the face and hands and it is not forbidden for men to look at a
woman's face or hands if his look is not one of lust or fear of
deviation.

The traditions are numerous and we have only referred to a few and a
few more will be mentioned. One is a tradition from Imam Riza, peace be
upon him, who is asked "Is it permissible for a man to look at the hair
of his wife's sisters?" "No. It is not permissible unless she be a
menopausic woman. A wife's sister is just like any other woman that you
are not related to according to the Divine Law and you can only look at
her and her hair if she is menopausic".

Thus whenever the Imams are asked if it is permissible to look at a
woman's hair, etc, they are never asked if it is permissible to look at
a woman's face when the look is not one of lust or fear of deviation.

There is another tradition from Imam Riza, peace be upon him, about a
young boy. "Must a seven-year old boy be encouraged to recite the ritual
prayer?" He said it is not obligatory but to encourage is a good thing.
It is not necessary that a woman hide her hair from him until he reaches
puberty.1 We see that again it is covering the hair which is referred to
and not covering the face.

**CONCERNING 'WHAT THEIR RIGHT HANDS OWN'**

Again concerning "What their right hands own," if a female slave is
mahram to a man, is a male slave mahram to his female

1. "Wasa'il", vol.3, p.29.

owner or not? I am using the term 'mahram' here erroneously with a
purpose because this is an interpretation that others have. There is a
difference when we say 'mahram' meaning, for instance, they are not
permitted to marry. It is permitted for him to look at her hair but he
is not mahram in the usual sense such as the father-in-law and his son's
wife. Some have interpreted it this way. When a question is asked about
this, the answer given is that there is no problem if a male slave look
at his female owner's hair". Again, hair is mentioned, not the face.

There is a discussion concerning a khwajah (eunuch) and whether or not
he is a male slave of a woman. The ruling was that he was like a woman
and there was no problem if he looked at a woman's hair. A person asked
Imam Riza if it was necessary to cover before a khwajah and the Imam
said it was not. "They used to enter my father's house and women did not
cover their hair before them."1 As to "the women of the Book", of
course, they do not need to be dhimmah ('People of the Book' who live in
Muslim lands and are accorded hospitality and protection by Islam on
condition of acknowledging Islamic political domination and paying the
jizyah tax) because they all have the ruling of a kafir. (A person who
covers over the truth of religion, a disbeliever, an infidel). There is
no problem with looking at the hair of a Jewish woman or a Christian or
a Zoroastrian woman or a woman who is none of these. The Holy Prophet
said, "It is not forbidden to look at the hands and hair of dhimmah
women."2

Wherever you look you see that the issue which is an exception is
referred to or questioned and the face and hands are not questioned.
Whereas if it had been forbidden to look at the face and hands of a
woman, they would have been referred to in the exceptions.

1. "Wasa'il", vol.3, p.29.
2. "Wasa'il", vol.3, p.26.

As to dhimmah women, some of the 'ulama believe that we must look and
see what the situation was at the time of the Holy Prophet; what extent
of the body was not covered? Clearly the dhimmah women did not cover
their hair or their hands to a certain point. These was no problem,
then, in looking at them.

I have mentioned that in every exception, it is permitted to look
without lust except under one condition. That is to look at a woman in
lust when one wants to see a woman to decide whether or not to marry
her, as a serious suitor of marriage.1 Of course, it is clear that a man
cannot spend years looking at women in this way to determine whether or
not he wants to marry her. There are other conditions as well. How much
education should she have? Where does she come from, etc. After all of
the other conditions are met and the only one remaining is to see if one
wants to marry her, it is this situation that the exception refers to.
If the purpose is only lust, it is clearly not with the intention of
marrying.

These, then, were some of the traditions but there are many more from
both Sunni and Shi'ite sources.

Now as to the dhimmah women, the traditions say it is Muslim woman but
not with lust or with a look with holds the fear of deviating within it.
It is permissible to look at her in what she customarily wears outside
of her home. Ayatollah Burujerdi says that one must suffice to look only
at that which was common in those days. Perhaps customs have changed
today and even more areas of their body are uncovered.

There is another point to mention following this. There is an edict,
based on a tradition which some 'ulama find diffucult to accept. It is
concerned with a tradition where the Imam said that 1. There is clearly
a difference between laws made by people or a low making body and
Allah's Laws. If a person wants to follow the laws of a country, one can
play a bit with them. "The Law such and such and I did not do that" But
when it comes to Allah's Law there is a difference and one's intention
is known.

there is no problem to look at the hair of a bedouin woman, a woman
from suburb of Kufah or Ilj (non-Arab bedouin women). Why\>? Because it
is their custom to dress in their particular style and they refer to
cover their heads. So it is not forbidden to look at them, but, of
course, not with lust.

Some of the ulama have issued edicts just as the tradition states but
the late Ayatullah Mohammad Kazim does not issue one because he says
what is perhaps meant is that in places where these kinds of women are
it is not obligatory for men to curtail their comings and goings. There
is no problem if their eyes fall on these women's hair. There is no
problem if the women are told to cover themselves but they do not
listen. Therefore he felt it was an exceptional situation, not one that
needed religious edict. Another faqih (religious jurisprudent) says the
same thing holds for urban women. If they are told they should cover
themselves and they do not, there is no problem if men look at their
hair.

**HEARING THE VOICE OF A NON-MAHRAM WOMAN**

Another issue is that of hearing the voice of a non mahram woman. Is
this forbidden or not? This is clear from the edicts that it is not
forbidden as long as it is not for lust or in fear of deviating. There
is no problem between a blind person who is hearing another. However,
there is, caution, where it does not concern one, he should avoid it.
But it is forbidden for a woman to make her voice very pleasant and
attractive so as to cause confusion in a man whereby a man who has a
sickness in his heart hears her voice, and gets attracted to it through
lust.1

1. Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Kazim Tabatabai Yazdi, "Urwatul Wusqa"
Section on Marriage, Chapter One Issue 39.

This is among the things which are very clear. it is permissible to
hear the voice of a non-mahram woman as long as her voice is normal and
not one to cause lust or arouse the fear of deviating.

The verse of the Holy Quran is clear. It does not say women shouldnot
speak. No. It says they should not change the tone of their voice. Woman
continuously went to the Holy Prophet and to the Imams and asked the
questions they had. This is clear.

**SHAKING HANDS**

Another issue is shaking hands. Of course, all of these issues arise
only when there is no lust or fear of deviation present; otherwise they
are clearly not permitted. Again, the traditions and religious edicts
confirm one another in this matter. The Imam was asked if it is
permitted to shake hands with a non-related woman. He said; "No, unless
the hands be covered or the woman be mahram." One must not shake the
hands with a woman who is not mahram unless her hand is covered and even
then, pressure should not be applied?1

**THESE ARE ISSUES OF RELIGIOUS EDICTS**

Here there are two more points which should be mentioned. The first is
that the issues mentioned up to this point were all referred to within
the contents of the verses and the traditions. Perhaps no further
question would occur to a person up to this point, but these are some of
the issues which have occurred to me. Since this is a matter of an
edict, everyone must note that I have mentioned my own point of view and
referred to these proofs because of their necessity but the issue is one
which must be followed according to the Divine Law. The second point is
that

1. Ibid.

edicts exist which are comparable to the ones mentioned that include
the religious edicts of the great 'ulama' but these are the edicts of
the minority, not the majority.

For instance, Shaikh Tusi gave such an edict as well as Shaikh Hadayiq
and Shaikh Ansari. All three are among the most learned shi'ite
scholars. The others mentioned these reasons, like Ayatullah Hakim in
Mustamsak but when it comes to issuing a religious edict, they hold
back. The actions of Muslims, to this point, have been opposed to these
views so the faqih moves beyond the issue.

**MUSLIM CUSTOMS**

This itself is an issue that the customes and habits of Muslims oppose
something which is clear from the verses of Quran and the traditions.
The customs of the Muslims are not something which can be easily put
aside. There is a need for an analysis as to what it is.

If we asume that Muslims have acquired a custom from the beginning of
Islam whereby it is discovered to be from the customs of the Holy
Prophet and the Imams, which is a lesson they learned from them and if
this, then this is a custom which goes back to the time of the Holy
Prophet which is a thing he practised, it is clear that it is something
which should be preserved. However, a custom of the people is not
proofin itself except when it is discovered to be among the customs of
the Holy Prophet. Then it becomes proof and must be observed.

For instance, take the beard. Some people say that the real proof for
it is that men from the time of the Holy Prophet and later all had
beards. Thus, we rely upon this. Now note what they answer. If someone
had said that it is forbidden to grow a beard we would have said that
people in the past, according to custom, had a beard and this existed
from the time of the Holy Prophet. Thus, it was not forbidden to have a
beard. If it had been forbidden, it could not have become the custom.
But the question then arise whether growing a beard is obligatory or
recommendatory. We assume the possibility that it is a part of custom
which is at least, recommendatory or unspecified. Custom only dictates
when there is a lack of respect involved. Therefore it is either
obligatory or recommendatory.

A thought has occurred to me here which is a historical social point
and most often the reason why the religious authorities become fixed
here is because they do not attend to the social issue. The hijab did
not exist among the pre-Islamic Arabs. Islam brought the covering of the
head, neck and chest, etc. and the forbidding of looking with lust. But
a part of that which Islam brought existed in non-Arab areas. It was a
very strong influence in Iran, in particular, among the Jews and people
were influenced by their way of thinking.

Islam did not make it obligatory to uncover the face. It said it is
obligatory to cover the hair, not to display the face. Clearly, those
nations which came to accept Islam were following their own customs
because Islamic precepts did not say it was obligatory to display the
face, except in the haram. Nor did they say it was forbidden to cover
the face, it gave a choice. It left it up to the various nations to
practise their own customs of hijab if they so desired.

History shows that non-Arabs felt it was obligatory to cover the face.
Thus this custom of covering the face, as we find it now, is not a
custom of the Holy Prophet and the Imams.

Another point which is very sensitive and should also be considered,
relates to caution. Every religious jurisprudent speaks this way out of
caution. They all know that these two things exist, one in a woman and
one in a man. That which exists within a woman is the desire to show
herself off, it is a part of her nature. That which exists within man is
an inclination towards looking, not just looking but flirting and
receiving pleasure from it. Both of these exist. Will Durant says that
there is nothing in the world more firm and more persevering than a
man's desire to look at a woman. It exists no matter how much it is
restrained and it is referred to in the traditions. It is because of
this that a religious jurisprudent does not find the courage, in spite
of the fact that all of these reasons and proof exist, to issue a
religious edict. They say caution should not be put aside. The caution
relates to human nature itself.

This brings up another issue. Some people follow a philosophy and that
philosophy is that in those areas which are ruled by customs; whatever
one does not say to the people is better. It is better not to say it
than to say it.

I may have mentioned that I once received a letter in praise of the
book I wrote called "Stories of Good People". The ritual prayer leader
in Khuzistan read the book. He said that he looked up all of the
stories. Although not one idea was changed and they had been presented
in a very readable, pleasant style, he had two criticisms. The first
criticism related to a story about Hazrat Fatimah and Hazrat 'Ali, peace
be upon them. Their work had been devided so that Hazrat 'Ali die the
work outside of the house and Hazrat Fatimah, the word within the house;
a division which the Holy Prophet had made at the very beginning of
their marriage. When Hazrat 'Ali was home, he helped Hazrat Fatimah
within the house and when he was not home, Hazrat Fatimah did the work
outside the house as well. One day she was covered from head to toe in
shoot from having started the fire and because there was no flowing
water in Madinah, it had to be carried from the wells, often at some
distance a way, the pressure applied by the straps of her water bag
remained on her body because of all the water she had carried to her
house. This man said that even though this story was true and was part
of the traditions, I should not have mentioned it because it could be
misused.

I do not deny the general principle that if telling the truth will
cause the people to deviate, it should not be said because the reason
for telling the truth, in the first place, is to guide the people, not
to turn away from it. Of course, the Holy Quran tells us, "Those who
conceal the clear (Signs) we have sent down and the Guidance after we
have made it clear for the people in the Book ... on them shall be God's
curse and the curse of those entitled to curse ..."1 The tone of this
verse is very strong. There are very few verses in the Holy Quran where
such a strong and angry tone is found. At the same time, I believe the
purpose to be that people should not conceal the truth because of their
own interests but to conceal the truth because the truth itself under
very limited, temporary and definite conditions so that it is not
misused and does not pertain to this verse. In other words, it is
forbidden to lie but it is not always obligatory to speak the truth.
That is, there are occasions when one must remain silent.

I am of the belief that this kind of prudence, when it is based upon
the real issue of the truth has no problem but, not when it is based on
individual, personal or group interests. Now the point is whether or not
it is prudent thinking not to issue a religious edict about buying or
selling a radio or that it is not obligatory for a woman to cover her
face and hands. It is correct kind of thinking? Is it intelligible? Does
it produce the correct result or not? Will some women who cover their
face and hands then uncover their face and hands and finally their whole
form by saying this truth? Or is the opposite true?

That is, many men and women think that the bases of the religious
viewpoint is that the face of a woman should not show for when the face
shows, there will be no stopping the rest. On the other hand, the
covering of the face is impractical and, from the point of view of
logic, it is indefensible. No reasoning or deduction can be given for it
being so. Therefore, they will then completely uncover themselves.

Some sociologists believe that the cause for the extremity in

1. 2:159

woman's dress and their lack of modesty is because of the erroneous
belief that society had about the hijab. Yet the error was that the
truth was not spoken! If it had been expressed just as the Islamic
precepts express it, things would never have reached this point. It is
here that one should refer to the proverb, "being, more Catholic than
the Pope", or jumping "from the frying pan into the fire".

The Holy Quran says in Surah Hujarat, "O believers, advance not before
God and His Messenger".1 What is meant by 'advance' is a point beyond
which God and His Prophet said there by, 'advancing before God and His
Messenger'.

Amir al-Mu'minin, 'Ali, peace be upon him, said, "God has given limits.
Do not aggress beyond them. (He has specified the forbidden, do not
disobey). He has specified the obligatory and the precepts; do not shun
them and so to the things for which He remained silent about (neither
forbidden nor oblige it was not because He forgot them but rather He
wanted you to be free in regard to them. Therefore, do not restrict
yourself there and make something your duty in the name of God's
religion and God."

The Holy Prophet said in a tradition recorded in Jama' al-Saghir, "Just
as God dislikes that which He prohibited, people should obey and He
likes them to do what is allowed; whatever is without any problem should
be considered to be such and they should not forbid anything which God
has not forbidden ..."

This tradition has also been recorded as the following, "God loves
people who allow whatever He has allowed and prohibit whatever He has
prohibited."

Perhaps I am mistaken. As I have mentioned, in areas covered by
religious edicts, each person must follow the edicts of their own
mujtahid.

1. 49:1.

But, in regard to that which is mentioned as prudent thinking and
saying it is not advisable to mention something even though it is the
truth, I disagree with this prudent thinking. I believe it is advisable
to express the truth and that which is advisable is to counteract the
concept that women today express, "The hijab is impractical." We must
prove to them that the Islamic hijab is logical and practical.

Secondly, we must make efforts to establish cultural, social, and
health activities, particular to women, and resist the mixed activities
which are limitated from Europe. It is only in this way that women will
rediscover their real personality and the possibility that they will no
longer be a tool, a toy and means to men's lust in the name of freedom
and equality


