The Verses On the Jilbab
========================

But there is another verse in this Surah which relates to our
discussion. "O Prophet! say to your wives and daughters and the
believing women that they draw their outer garments (jilbab) close to
them; so it is more proper that they may be known and not hurt. God is
All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate. Now, if the hypocrites do not give
over and those in whose hearts there is a sickness and they make
commotion in the city, We shall assuredly set you against them and then
they will be your neighbours there only for a little while."1 All of the
commentators agree that there were certain events occuring to which this
verse is related to in Madinah. There was a group of hypocrites and
corrupts who bothered people and in particular, slave women and others.
Then when they were asked why they were doing this, they said: "We
thought they were slave women."

Slave women are among the exceptions. They do not need to cover
themselves from non-mahram men and if they had outer garments, they did
not wear it in a way to cover their hair. Very often Muslim women would
walk down the street at night and this corrupt group of hypocrites would
bother them. When they were caught, they would always use the excuse
that they thought the women were slave women.

The verse was revealed for them to cover themselves and in this way be
recognized so the corrupts and hypocrites would not bother them or at
least would no longer have that excuse. Some have commented on this
verse in a different way. They say that it means that the women be
recognized that they are not this way (to be bought and sold) because
they say if a woman maintains her honour and respect and has a serious
attitude about

1. Quran, 39 : 59-60.

herself, even corrupts will show her respect. If they know that she is
not among the other women and if she conduct herself with dignity, they
will no bother her.

Thus this verse refers to particular events which had occurred (and
they are told to make their clothes a sign so that they be recognized
apart from slave women). Then the verse threatens those who bother
others, that if they do not resist, "We will set you against them".

Now let us see what limits were set so that they are recognized as
being separate from the slave women. The verse says: "draw your outer
garments close to them": How close? They said they must cover their
heads, and some even said their chins so that this be their sign of
difference with slave women.

It is not very clear exactly what the jilbab looked like. In the Munjid
it says it is a loose flowing dress. If it were a dress, this verse
would not then be telling them to cover their hair. Raghib Isfahani in
the Mufridat, which is a very reliable book on words, and it has defined
the words of the Holy Quran very well, says that it means both dress and
scarf. There is a tradition from Imam Riza, about women who are beyond a
certain age, from which it becomes clear that it was something which
covered the head. He said they may put aside the jilbab there is no
problem if one looks at the hair of an old woman. Here it is not clear
if the jilbab covered the hair and head.

In another tradition it would appear that the jilbab differed from the
khamur but the difference is not clear. Perhaps it was larger. Imam
Sadiq was asked what these woman can take off and he said their jilbab
and khamur, i.e., 'their outer garment and scarf'.

There are two points which can be made use of in this verse. The first
is that this verse adds nothing more to the verse from Suran Nur. Why?
Because the verse refers to particular events which were occurring at
that time, not a total ruling for all times and secondly, the verse just
says to draw the jilbab closer to themselves.

**EPILOGUE

THE PARTICIPATION OF WOMEN IN MEETING AND GATHERINGS**

From what has been referred to in these lessons, it can be seen that,
in the first place, Islam is concerned with and is attentive to the
importance, extraordinary value and necessity for the legitimacy of
sexual relations between men and women, whether it be concerned in their
touching each other, hearing each other or living together. It is such
that Islamic precepts would never allow the slightest detriment in
whatever from it may take to be applied to it. But the world today
overlooks this extraordinary human value and consciously chooses to
ignore this point of view.

The world today, in the name of freedom of women, and, more directly,
the freedom of sexual relations, has only served to corrupt the morale
of the youth. Instead of this freedom helping to develop the amazing
potentialities which exist within every human being, it wastes human
energies and talents, in a way which did not exist in the past. Women
have left their homes, but for what? For the cinema, the beach, the
streets, and evening entertaiment! In the name of freedom, women today
have destroyed their homes without having effectively cultivated schools
or universities or places of work.

As a result of this unrestrainedness and ignoring of any restrictions,
the educational efficiency of young people, in general, has decreased.
Young people run away from school and education, and sexual crimes have
increased at enormous rates. The cinema market is doing a brisk business
and the pockets of capitalists who deal in cosmetics are overflowing.

The second point is that in spite of the dangers which result from the
breaking of the barriers of sexual modesty, the Divinely bestowed
religious precepts of purity have not been heeded by them, as they guide
ummah towards moderation, far from any extremity. To the point that
women are not drawn towards corruption, the Islamic precepts do not
prevent her active participation in society. In some cases, it is even
obligatory that she should participate, like in the hajj rituals which
is equally obigatory upon men and women. No husband has the right to
prevent it.

As we know, it is not obligatory for women to participate in jihad
unless a city or an area of Muslims has been attacked and the jihad had
a totally defensive state, the jihad becomes obligatory on women as
well. Otherwise, it is not obligatory. Even so, the Holy Prophet gave
some women permission to participate in the battles to help the soldiers
and the wounded. There are many stories of this in the history of
Islam.1 It is not obligatory upon women to participate in the
congregational ritual prayers but if they go it becomes obligatory upon
them to participate and not to leave.2 It is not obligatory for women to
participate in the Eid ritual prayers but they are not forbidden from
participating. It is disapproved for women of great respect or beauty to
participate

1. "Sahih Muslim", vol.5, p.196-97, "Sunane Abu Dawud", vol.2, p.17,
Jama' Tirmizi, p.247.
2. "Wasa'il", vol.1, p.456.

in such prayers.1

The Holy Prophet cast lots among his wives and would take them with him
on his journeys and some of his companions also took their wives.2

The Holy Prophet would accept the allegiance o women but he did not
shake hands with them. He would order a bowl of water to be brought. He
would put his hand in the water and order the women offerring her
allegiance to do the same thing. She was considered as haveing pledged
her allegiance.3 Ayesha said that, throughout his lifetime the Holy
Prophet who never touched the hands of a woman who was not mahram.

He did not forbid women from participatin in burial ceremonies although
he also did not feel it was necessary. He preferred that they do not
participate although, under special circumstances, they did so and
possibly participated in the recitation of the ritual prayers. It has
been narrated in our tradition that when Zaynab, the oldest daughter of
the Holy Prophet died, Hazrat Zahra, peace be upon her, and other Muslim
women came and recited the ritual prayer for her.4

According to Shi'ite traditions, it is disapproved for young girls to
participate in mourning ceremonies, Sunni scholars have recorded from
Umm 'Atiyyah who said that the Holy Prophet encouraged women not to
participate in mourning processions but he did not forbid it.5

Asma' the daughter of Yazid Ansari, was selected by the

1. "Wasa'il", vol.1, p.474.
2. "Sahih Bukhari", vol.7, p.437.
3. All historians and commentators have recorded this. Historians
recorded it in recalling the events of the victory of Makkah and
commentator have referred to it when commenting upon the verse "O
Prophet! when believing women come to you to take the oath of allegiance
... (60:12)". Also "Kafi", vol.5, p.526.
4. "Wasa'il", vol.1, p.159.
5. "Sahih", Muslim, vol.3, p.47, Bukhari, vol.2 p.94, Sunan, vol.2,
p.180.

women of Madinah as their representative to go the Holy Prophet tell
him of the complaints of the women of Madinah and receive his asnwer.
When Asma' entered, the Holy Prophet was seated among a group of the
companions. She said: "May my mother and father be sacrificed for you. I
am represetative of the women of Madinah to you. We, women, say that God
Almighty sent you as a Prophet to both men and women. You are not just
the Prophet of men. We women also found faith in you and God Almighty.
We women sit in our homes meeting the sexual needs of men. We nourish
your children in our wombs but we see that all of the sacred duties,
great and valuable deeds which are rewarded by God, are given to men
alone and we are deprived. Men are allowed to gather together, they
visit the sick, they participate in the jihad in Allah's Way. Whereas
when a man goes on the hajj or the jihad, it is us women who stay behind
and protect his property. We weave cloth for his clothes, we train his
children. How is it that we are partners of you men in difficult tasks
but when it comes to sacred duties and deeds for which God gives
spiritual reward we are not partners and we are deprived of all of
them?"

The Holy Prophet looked at the companions and asked: "Have you ever
heard a woman speak so well, so logically and so clearly about religious
affairs?"

One of the companions said, 'I do not think that these words are from
this woman herself.'

The Holy Prophet, paying no attention to what the man said, turned to
Asma' and said, 'Woman! Try to understand what you are saying and
explain to the women who sent you. Do you think that every men receives
spiritual rewards and virtues for doing these things and women are
deprived of them? No. This is not so. If a woman takes good care of her
family and husband and does not allow the pure environment of her home
to become polluted by the dust of darkness, she will receive spiritual
rewards, virtues and successes equivalent to all of the work that men
do."

Asma' was a woman of faith. Her requests and those of the women who
thought like her came from the depths of their faith, not out of lust or
greed which we most often see today. She and the women who sent her were
concerned that perhaps the duties which they performed had no value and
that all of the sacred duties were particular to men. She and the women
she represented wanted quality, but in what? In implementing the divine
commands and carrying out their religious duties. That which never
entered their minds was a confrontation to gain individual egoistical
desires in the name of a 'right'. Thus when she heard the response of
the Holy Prophet, her face lighted up with pleasure and she returned in
great happiness to her friends.1

As to the participation of women in these things, the traditions
contradict one another. Some completely forbid it, but the author of
wasa'il, who was himself a reliable transmitter, nothing the total
collection of Islamic traditions, transmitter, said, "It can be
concluded from the totality of Islamic traditions that it is permisible
for women to leave their homes to participate in mourning ceremonies or
to see to the right of the people2 or to attend a funeral procession and
to participate in these gatherings just as Fatimah, peace be upon her,
and the wives of the infallible Imams, peace be upon them, participated
in these kinds of ceremonies. Thus, the totality of the traditions rule
that we ignore that which forbids it.3

1. Asal al-Ghabah, vol.5, p.338-399.
2. See "Bihar al-Anwar", vol.11, p.118 where a tradition is recorded
from "Kafi" from Musa ibn Ja'far, peace be upon him, who said, "My
father, Imam Ja'far, peace be upon him, would sent my mother and his
mother to attend to the needs of the poor of Madinah."
3. "Wasa'il", vol.1, p.72.

The Holy Prophet allowed his wives to leave their homes to meet their
needs they had and do what they had to do. It is recorded that the Holy
Prophet ordered the door to the mosque for women be separate from the
men's door so that men and women would not be obliged to go and come
through the same door. He forbid men from using that door.1

It is also recorded that the Holy Prophet commanded that after te night
prayer, women be allowed to leave the mosque first so that they would
not have to mix together.2 In order that no contacts prevail, he said
that women should walk down the side of the street and men, down the
middle.3

It is because of this that religious jurisprudents issue edicts that it
is disapproved for men and women to mix together, Ayatullah Sayyid
Muhammad Kazim Tabatabaie Yazdi wrote, "It is truth if a person were to
look at Islam with an open mind, he or she would confirm that the way of
Islam is the way of moderation. At the same time that Islamic precepts
have provided the greatest extent of precautions to protect the purity
and sanctity of sexual relations, in no way do they prevent the human
talents of women from blossoming. As a matter of fact, these precepts
provide for both, the spirit to remain healthy and for family relations
to be more intimate and serious as well as better preparing men and
women for a healthy social environment, far from

any extremes.4

1. "Sunan", vol.1, p.106.
2. "Kafi", vol.5, p.519.
3. "Sunan", vol.2, p.658.
4. "Urwatul Wusqa" chapter', issue 49.


