The Real Visage of the Hijab
============================

The fact is that the 'covering' or its new expression, 'hijab' is not
concerned with whether or not it is good for a woman to appear in
society covered or uncovered. The point is whether or not a woman and a
man's need of her should be a limitless, free association or not. Should
a man have the right to satisfy his needs with every woman and in every
place short of committing adultery?

Islam which looks at the spirit of the problem, answers,

1. Quran 33 : 53.
2. Quran 24 : 30-31.

"No". Men are only allowed to satisfy their sexual desires with their
legal wives within a marital situation based upon the laws of marriage
which establish a series of heavy commitments. It is forbidden for men
to have any physical relations with women they are not related to by
marriage.

It is true that the question externally appears to be "What should a
woman do?" Must she leave her home covered or uncovered? That is, the
person about whom the question is raised is a woman and the question is
often expressed in very heart- rendering tones, "Is it better for a
woman to be free or condemned and imprisoned in the hijab?" But
something else lies at the root of the question. That, is, should men be
free to take sexual benefit from women in any way they choose short of
committing adultery or not? That is, the one who benefits here is a man
and not a woman or at least a man benefits more than a woman does. As
Will Durant has said, "The mini- skirt is a blessing for everyone in the
world except the seamstresses."

So the depth of the question is whether or not the seeking of sexual
pleasure should be limited to the family environment and legal wives or
is the freedom of seeking sexual fulfilment something that should be
satisfied in society at large? Islam defends the first theory. According
to Islamic precepts, limiting sexual desires to the family environment
and legal wives helps to maintain the mental health of the society. It
strengthens the relationships between the members of the family and
fosters the development of a perfect harmony between a husband and wife.
As far as society is concerned, it keeps and preserves energies to be
then used for social activities and it causes a woman to attain a higher
position in the eyes of man.

The philosophy of the Islamic 'covering' depends on several things.
Some of them are phsychological and some relate to the home and family.
Others have sociological roots and some of them relate to raising the
dignity of a woman and preventing her debasement.

The hijab in Islam is rooted in a more general and basic issue. That
is, Islamic precepts aim at limiting all kinds of sexual enjoyment to
the family and the marital environment within the bounds of marriage so
that society is only a place for work and activity. It is opposite of
the western system of the present era which mixes work with sexual
enjoyment. Islam separates these two environments completely.


