Psychological Tranqulity
========================

Without limits being established for relations between men and women or
with unlimited free associations, sexual excitement and stimulation
increase and demands become unquenchable and insatiable. The sexual
instinct is a powerful, deep-rooted instinct which resembles the
fathomless ocean. Although one thinks that by obeying it, one will have
tamed it, its rebellions nature continues to show forth. It is like a
fire; the more fuel is added to it, the greater would be its flame, in
order to comprehend this, two points should be noted.

Firstly, just as history recalls those who coveted wealth, who were
continuously seeking to add to what they already had and however much
more they gained, they were still greedy for more, it also mentions
those who were covetous for sexual pleasures. In no way were they
satisfied by possessing beautiful women dominating over them. This was
the situation of all of those who had harmes and, in truth, all those
who had the power to possess women.

Christensen writes about the Sassanian rulers, "The women we see carved
into stone at Taq-i-Bustan are only a few of the 3000 women Khosrow
Parviz possessed in his harem. This king was never satisfied sexually.
Whenever girls, widows or women with children were introduced to him
(for their beauty), he would order that they be sent to his harem.
Whenever he desired to replenish his harem, he would write letters to
his governors wherein he would describe the perfect and beautiful women
he wanted. They then would send him any women who fitted his
description".

Stories like this are endless in history. In most recent times, this
greed does not take the form of harmes but exists in another form with
the difference that today it is not necessary for a person to have the
wealth and possibilities that Khosrow Parviz or Harun al-Rashid had.
Today, with the blessing of contemporary culture, it is possible for a
man who only has one-thousandth of the possibilities of Parviz or Harun
to take advantage of women.

Secondly, have you ever considered what the desire to serenade or write
love poems stems from inhumanity? A large part of world literature is
filled with love poems. In this type of literature, a man praises his
beloved, asks for his needs to be satisfied by the beloved, raises the
position of the beloved as he lowers his own status and suffers greatly
from separation.

What is this? Why does humanity not behave in the same way towards
other needs? Have you ever seen a person who worships money or a person
who is ambitious for higher material positions, writing love poems on
money or on ambition? Has anyone ever written a love poem asking for
bread? Why is it that people enjoy listening to or reading the love
poems of another? Why is it that so many people receive such pleasure
from Hafiz's love poems? Is it not because each person senses that it
conforms to some very deep instinct which possesses their whole being?
How mistaken are those who say that the one and only reason which forms
the basis for human activity is an economic one!

Human beings have developed special literary rhytmic forms to express
that love just as they have done with spritualities whereas no special
literary rhytmic forms have been developed for things which are
essentially material like bread and water. We do not want to insinuate
that all loves are sexual nor do we mean to imply that all of Hafiz's or
Sa'adi's poems stem from their sexual instinct. This is something which
needs to be discussed separately at another time.

But what is clear is that many of the love poems are ones written by
men in devotion to women. It is suffiecient for us to recognize that a
man's attention towards a woman is not based on bread and water so that
is can be satiated when the stomach is full. Rather, it either takes the
form of greed and the worship of variety and multiplicity or the form of
love and love poems. We will later discuss under what conditions the
state of greed and sexual covetousness is strengthened and under what
conditions love and love poems assume a spiritual quality.

At any rate, Islam has placed special emphasis upon the amazing power
of this fiery instinct. There are traditions which speak of the danger
of 'a look', the danger of a man and woman being along together and,
finally, the danger of the instinct which unites a man and a woman.

Islam has established ways of controlling, balancing and taming this
instinct. Duties have been given to both men and women in this area. On
duty which is the responsibility of both men and women relates to
looking at each other. "Say to the believing men to cast down their look
and guard their private parts ..."1 and "Say to the believing women to
cast down their look and guard their private parts ..."2 In summary, the
command is that a man and a woman should not fix their eyes upon each
other; they should not flirt with each other; they should not look at
each other with lust or with the intention of seeking sexual pleasure
(unless it is within the sacred bounds of marriage).

Islam has established a particular command for a woman which is that
she covers her body from a man she is not mahram and that she should not
flaunt herself or put her body on display

1. 24 : 30
2. 24 : 30-31

in society. She is not to stimulate the attention of men by any
means.

The human soul readily accepts stimulation. It is great error to think
that the sexual desires of humanity are limited in extent and that after
a certain point, are naturally satisfied. Just as the human being, man
or woman, is never satisfied. Just as the human being, man or woman, is
never satiated with wealth or position and is continuously seeking more;
in the area of sexual desires, it is the same. No man is ever naturally
satisfied by beauty and no woman is ever naturally satisfied by a man's
attention and the conquest of his heart. Clearly the desires of the
heart are never satiated.

On the other hand, unlimited demands are never fulfilled and a sense of
deprivation is continuously felt. Not achieving one's desire results in
psychological illnesses and complexes. Why is it that in the West
psychological illnesses have increased? The reason is freedom of sexual
ethics and continuous sexual stimulation through the newspapers,
magazines, cinemas, theatres and official and unofficial parties and
even the streets and alleys.

The reason why the Islamic command to cover is exclusive to women is
because the desire to show off and display one's self is a particular
trait of women. She is the hunter in the domination of the hearts of men
and man is the prey. A woman's desire to display herself comes from this
essence of the hunter. It is the female instinct which, because of its
particular nature, wishes to capture hearts and imprison the male. Thus
the deviation begins with the female instinct which, because of its
particular nature, wishes to capture hearts and imprison the male. Thus
the deviation begins with the female instinct and therefore the command
to cover was issued.


