The Psychological Reason
========================

Some people believe that the hijab and staying at home are based on
psychological reasons and that women have had an inferiority complex
towards men from the very beginning. This feeling is based on two
reasons: one is that some women think they lack something organic in the
bleeding during their monthly menstruation and following childbirth.

The monthly period was considered to be a kind of deficiency in ancient
times. That is why women were isolated during their monthly period and
everybody avoided associating with them.

Perhaps that was the main reason for asking the Holy Prophet a question
on this subject. God revealed a special verse in answer to this
question. The Quran does not say that menstruation is something
deplorable and that a woman is to be isolated during this time and that
no one shouls associate with her. It says that it is a kind of harm
leaving the body and during this time, they should not have sexual
intercourse. It does not say that they should not associate with each
other. "They ask you about menstruation. Say, "It is a kind of harm. Do
not have sexual intercourse with woman at this time"1. According to the
Quran, it is a kind of harm like many others and it is far from being
deplorable.

Abu Dawud related a tradition of the Holy Prophet: "Ibn Malik said that
the Jewish people used to send their wives out of their home when they
were menstruating. They did not eat with them and did not drink water
from their glass. They did not remain in the same room with them either.
For this reason, the Prophet was asked about this and the above verse
descended. The Prophet forebade the isolation of women at this time and
said, "Nothing is forbidden except sexual intercourse."1 According to
Islam, the menstruating woman is mohdis, that is, a person who does not
perform the partial or total ritual ablution. Such a person is deprived
from performing the ritual prayer and fasting. Every hadas is a kind of
ritual impurity ablution. By this we mean that the state of menstruation
is like the state of having had a wet dream or sexual intercourse, etc.
But this ritual state is not special for women and it is removed by
partial or total ritual ablution.

Many ideas have been expressed about the fact that women have a sort of
deficiency in their feelings and because of this, both men and women
thought that women were abased. Whether they are correct or incorrect,
there is no relation between this and the philosophy of Islam about
women and the hijab or 'covering'. Islamic precepts neither refer to
menstruation nor the hijab as reasons to consider women lowly or
abased.

These, then, are the five causes which others have more or less related
and all five which are mentioned then be able to say that the hijab is
no longer necessary or that from the very beginning it was unjust.

Can the hijab have another cause or not? May we offer the fact that the
hijab in Islam has other reasons which do not compare to any of these
five mentioned: the well-being of a person's 'self', family and
society.

1. "Sunan-e-Abi-Dawoud", Al-haid, p.32.

It is well known that the spirit of the human being, just like a
person's body, can either be healthy or sick. What is the cause for its
sickness? They have given many reason. One of the reasons mentioned is
frustration, the failure to attain one's desires, deprivation or
disillusionment.

Some people have suggested that these sexual frustrations arise from
social limitations. With the removal of these limitations, all
individuals will then succeed in the area of sexual affairs and sexual
frustrations will disappear. This assumption was put forward but the
drawbacks to it become quite apparent. It became clear that although it
is true that sexual frustration causes psychological illnesses, it
cannot be eliminated by the removal of the limits because if we remove
social limits, we will only serve to further stimulate sexual urges.
Thereby increasing demands which only lead to further disillusionment
within the human being.

For instance, say that a human being had a limited number of demands,
such as the demands in relation to food. Every society has a certain
amount of demand for food. If a country has a population of 20 million,
the amount of food required is clear. If their supply is greater than
that, they cannot consume it. It should not be less but if it is more,
they have to throw it away. When demands are limited, they can be
satisfied. Demands can even be decreased in relation to the supply but
it has been proved that the demand of cretain things in human beings are
unlimited. However much they are satisfied, the desire persists. Things
which have a quality which are not solely physical are like this. For
instance, in the area of material things, if we want to say how much
food a society needs, we can estimate this but if we were to ask how
much money a society needed, the demand would be unlimited.

We may ask, "How much wheat would it take to satisfy the people of
Iran?" This is possible to estimate. But it is more difficult to
estimate if we ask, 'How much money would satisfy the people of the
country. If you give as much as possible to an individual, he would
never say, "That's enough". Knowledge is also like this.

Many of the demands of human beings are rooted in unending human
desires. When you relate to them, a person still says, "I want more".
Wealth is also like this. It cannot be satiated. A tradition of the Holy
Prophet relates to this. "There are two kinds of hunger which are never
fulfilled, the hunger for knowledge and the hunger for wealth."1 Can one
fulfil the ambition of a person? Can a society fulfil the ambition of a
person? No. No matter what position a person is given, that person wants
an even higher position. Even if you gave him the highest position, he
still would not be satisfied. The reason for the development of ethics
was because of this very things. That is, to regulate unending human
desires which have created chaos and conflicts.

Sexual enjoyment is limited from the pysical point of view. A man can
be satisfied from one woman, or, at the most, two. But from the point of
view of attachment that a man and a woman develop even Russel, mentions
the fact that the physical sex differs from the attachment which can
result from it. When it takes on this quality, can it be fulfilled?
Given a man who has fallen into this way, a man, for instance, who has a
harem of a thousand beautiful women. If someone were to say to him,
"There is a beautiful woman in such and such a place", would he then
say, "No. I am satisfied with my harem and my relations with the women
here". There is no question of ever being satiated.

It was because of this that they readily saw that the desire for sex is
like wealth. It is insatiable. They came and gave another suggestion.
The human being must be made to deviate from this way. A person must be
placed upon an unending road, a road

1. "Sunan-e-Al-daremi", Moqaddamah, p.32.

that leads nowhere. Freud suggested it. He first struggled against any
kind of social limits and limitations. He then saw that giving people
limitless sexual freedom

created more difficulties and problems for them. It created far greater
psychological disturbances. He said, "This spirit must be directed to
other things so that it becomes preoccupied with art, literature, etc.
because this way is impossible!" This spirit has to be allowed to
develop without anything standing in its way.

Experience and statistics have shown that in the West where sexual
freedom is very great and in some areas, there are no limitations,
psychological illness are greater than is a society which has
limitations. The greater the stimulation, the more the desires increase.
They increase several times just like fire. Can a person satiate a fire
with fuel? This clearly cannot be done. They say that no matter how you
try to prevent a human being from something, the great for it increase.
This is true but the point of note is that the human being develops
greed for something which is both forbidden and stimulated but if it is
not offered or it is offerred less, the human being finds less desire
for it. When it is stimulated it is impossible for everyone to satisfy
it.

When it is stimulated it is impossible for everyone to satisfy their
desires for it no matter how much freedom they are given. Thus, if there
is a kind of limitation and sexual desires are to be satisfied within
the marital environment, if society is to be the place of work and
activity, if a woman does not have the right to stimulate sexual urges
nor a man has the right to seek sexual fulfilment outside the marital
environment, if it takes this form, the spirit and morale of people will
clearly develop in a more healthy and wholesome way.

As to the family, efforts must be made so that, to the extent possible,
marital relations become more and more intimate and whatever will weaken
this relationship must be resisted. The limiting of sexual fulfilment to
marriage, whatever kind of fulfilment it may be, causes the married
couple to develop a more profound union because a man who know only his
wife to be able to give him satisfaction and a woman who knows only her
husband to be the source of her pleasure and happiness clearly will
develop deeper and stronger ties.

For instance, some people ask why is it that the sexual relation of a
man without a wife and a woman without a husband are forbidden outside
of marriage? Why can they not have sexual relations? We accept the fact
that there is a difference but note this point which appears to be very
clear to me. In the recent past and in the present among societies which
live according to Islamic law, a girl who reaches puberty is not free to
take sexual enjoyment from every youth even though the instinctive
desire exists. When a boy reaches puberty, a desire and inclination for
the opposite sex develops but there are no means to satiate it.

From the beginning he is told, for instance, that he can marry when he
reaches the age of 20 and the girl knows that she will marry in a few
years. Marriage for them is a very sweet and pleasurable thing. Marriage
is a fulfilment of desires after a time of deprivation. That is, sexual
urges my not be satisfied outside of marriage. This boy who is facing a
girl for the first time seeks her as the person who will satisfy his
desires, bring him pleasure and happiness and the girl who faces the boy
for the first time knowing he will bring her happiness and well-being,
develop such emotions that are incomparable to anything else. Marriage
and the family centre is like this. When the satisfaction of sexual
urges is forbidden outside this realm, it becomes the centre of
happiness.

Thus this issue of forbidding the fulfilment of sexual activities
outside of the family centre serves to strengthen family solidarity
whereas allowing such possibilities outside the family centre separates
the family. As we will come to point out, the Islamic hijab is nothing
more than this; the limiting or restricting the sexual needs to
marriage.

Now we will look at society. It has been said that the hijab paralyzes
half of the society. I accept that if the hijab were that which they say
existed among the Indians or that which existed in ancient Iran, this
may be true. But the Islamic hijab does not say that a woman should be
imprisoned nor does it say that a woman has no right to leave her home
or to do a particular job which is of social or economic nature. Islamic
precepts say, as we will read in the verses of the Holy Quran and in the
traditions, that a woman who leaves her home does not have the right to
leave in such a way that she stimulates other men or attracts and no man
has the right to cast a lustful look towards a woman who leaves her
home. This is a particular duty of men.

If a woman did not speak in stimulating tones in a social situation, if
this did not happen, would boys and girls not study better? If boys did
not have the right to flirt, would society not function better? If a
woman is wearing the hijab and goes to buy something and the seller
knows that this is not the place for games, which way is better? Clearly
if there is the Islamic hijab, the human task force will most certainly
perform with more efficiency and in this manner marketing activities
will improve. That which has been created clearly prevents work from
progressing as it should. Students to not study; marketing activities
have been made to deviate from their main purpose which is selling,
quality goods. Instead they empty the pockets of people by showing a
beautiful woman who is selling something. Men go to buy, not caring what
the product is, to enable them to talk to her. Will this cause society
to deviate?

Thus, from the point of view of work and social activity, the
improvement of society dictates that it should not be the place for the
stimulation or fulfilment of sexual urges and the Islamic hijab serves
just this purpose.

**LESSON THREE

THE ISLAMIC HIJAB - PART I

THE HIJAB BRINGS DIGNITY TO A WOMAN**

There is one issue which remains to be discussed. It is one of the
criticism they have made against the hijab which says that the hijab
deprives the honour and respect of a woman. You know that human dignity
has become one of the important goals of humanity since the words about
human rights have developed. Human dignity is respected and it must be
followed; all human beings share in this whether man or woman, black or
white, or whatever nation or creed. Every individual has this right of
human dignity. They say that the Islamic hijab opposes a woman's
dignity. We accept the right of human dignity. The discussion is whether
or not hijab, i.e., the hijab which Islamic precepts mention, is
disrespectful to women, an insult to her dignity. This idea came into
being from the idea that the hijab imprisons a woman, making her a
slave. Enslavement opposes human dignity. They say because the hijab was
introduced by men to enable them to exploit women, men wanted to
captivated woman and imprison her in a corner of her home, thus, it is
to have overlooked or insulted her human dignity. Respect, honour and
nobility of a woman call for not having a hijab.

As we have said and we will further describe later, that is, we will
deduce from the verses of the Holy Quran that we have nothing which
would serve to imprison a woman and the necessities of the Islamic hijab
are not to imprison a woman. If a man has duties in his relation to a
woman or a woman has duties in relation to a man, the duty is in order
to strengthen and solidify the family unit. That is, it has a clear
purpose. In addition, from the social point of view, it has necessities.
That is, the well-being of society demands that a man and a woman commit
themselves to a special kind of association with each other or the
ethical sanctities and ethical balance and the tranquility of the spirit
of society, demand that a man and a woman choose a special way of
relating to each other. This is neither called imprisonment nor
enslavement nor does it oppose human dignity.

As we observe if a man leaves his house naked, he is blamed and
reproached and perhaps the police will arrest him. That is, even if a
man leaves his house with pajamas on, or with just underpants, everyone
will stop him because it opposes social dignity. Law or custom rules
that when a man leaves his house, he should be covered and fully
dressed. Does this oppose human dignity to tell him to cover himself and
leave the house?

On the other hand, if a woman leaves her house coverd within the limits
that we will later mention, it causes greater respect for her. That is,
it prevents the interference of men who lack morality and ethics. If a
woman leaves her house covered, not only does it not detract from her
human dignity, but it adds to it. Take a woman who leaves her home with
only her face and two hands showing and from her behaviour and the
clothes she wears there is nothing which would cause others to be
stimulated or attracted towards her. That is, she does not invite men to
herself. She does not wear clothes taht speak out ro walk in a way to
draw attention to herself or does not speak in such a way to attract
attention.

Something the clothes of an individual speak. His or her shoes speak.
The way she or he talks says something else. Take a man, for instance,
who speaks in such a way so as to say, "Fear me", or dresses in such a
way opposite to that which is customary. That is, with a traditional
cloak, a bread and a turban, etc., communicates to the poeple, "Respect
me." It is possible that a woman wears clothes in such a manner that a
human being, a respected human being, would associate among people and
it is possible that she wears clothes and walks in a way which
stimulates, "Come and follow me". Does the dignity of a woman, the
dignity of a man, or the dignity of society not cause a woman to leave
her home serious, diligent and simply dressed in the manner not drawing
the attention of everyone she passes by.

She should be such that she does not distract a man and turn his
attention from what he is doing. Does this oppose a woman's dignity? Or
does it oppose the dignity of society? If a person says something, which
existed in non-Islamic societies, that the hijab was to imprison women,
that a woman must be placed in a locked house and she should have no
right of association outside the home, this does not relate to Islam. If
Islamic precepts were to say that it is not permitted for a woman to
leave her house; if we were to ask whether it is possible for a woman to
buy something from a store where the seller be a man and they said no,
it was forbidden; if a person asked, "Is a woman permitted to
participate in meetings, religious gatherings?' we were to say no, it is
not permitted; if it is possible for women to meet each other?; if
someone were to say all of these were forbidden, that a woman must sit
in a corner of the house and never leave her home, this would be
something, but Islam does not state this.

We say this is based on two things. One is based upon that which is
good for the family. That is, a woman must not do anything that would
disturb her family situation. For a woman to leave her house to go to
her sister's house if her sister is a corrupt and licencious person or
even to visit her mother where in the effects of the visit bring chaos
to the house for a week, they say no to such circumstances. The family
must not be disturbed. The second basis is that leaving the house,
according to the Holy Quran, must not be in order to flaunt oneself, to
disturb peace and tranquility of others, to prevent the work of others.
If it is not these things, there is no problem.

**THE COMMAND TO ANNOUNCE YOUR ENTRANCE TO SOMEONE'S HOUSE**

Now we will discuss the Quranic verses and after we clarify what
traditional commentators have explained about the verses, then with the
help of traditions which have been narrated on this topic and the edicts
of the religious jurisprudents on this issue, it will become clearer.
The verses relating on the hijab are found in Surah Nur and Surah Ahzab.
We will mention all of them. We will begin our discussion with the
verses from Surah Nur. Of course the verses which relate directly to the
hijab are verses of 30 and 31 of Surah Nur but there are three verses
before this which are more or less introductory to the hijab and relate
to this issue.

"O believers, do not enter houses other than your houses until you
first ask leave and salute the people thereof; that is better for you;
haply you will remember."1 This verse describes the duty of a man who is
not mahram, to the house of another person, that is, the house of a
person whose wife is not mahram to him. Of course, there are rules
regarding those who are mahram and we will mention them later. Also
there are some places where it is not particular to those who are
mahram. It relates to how a person who wants to enter the house of
another

1. Quran, 24 : 26.

should do.

To begin with, let me say that during the Age of Ignorance before the
Holy Quran was revealed, the present situation of houses did not exist
with locks, etc. Doors are closed basically because of the fear of
thieves. If someone wanted to enter, he would ring the doorbell or use
the knocker. In the Age of Ignorance this situation did not exist. It
was more like the situation in villages. People like myself who lived in
the village know that there were basically no doors shut. The doorst to
the courtyard are always open. In many places it is not even the
practice to lock the doors at night. In Fariman a village near Tehran
where I live I do not remember the door to the yard being closed even
once and there was very little theft.

History shows that, in particular in Makkah, they often did not even
put doors for a house. In Islam a law was passed that a person never
owns the houses of Makkah. Of course, there is a difference of opinion
among the religious jurisprudents. The Imams and the Shafe'ites agree
that in Makkah, the land cannot belong to anyone person. That is, it
belongs to all Muslims and the land of Makkah cannot be bought and sold.
The houses belong to all the people. It has the ruling of a mosque. In
Surah Hajj it says that the people who live there and the people who
come from outside that area are all the same. These rents which people
get today in Makkah neither agrees with the Shi'ite jurisprudence nor
with much of the jurisprudence of Sunnis. It must have an international
ruling. They have no right to establish limits there and not allow a
person to enter. It belongs to him but he has no right to prevents
others from entering. The person has no right to close off an empty
room. Of course, if a person is using it, he has priority.

The first peson who gave the order for doors to be placed on the houses
was Mu'awiyah. This had been forbidden to be done to the houses of
Makkah. This was the general situation.

It was not the custom among Arabs in the Age of Ignorance to announce
that they wanted permission to enter. They felt it was an insult to seek
permission to enter. The Holy Quran says in another verse, if you go and
seek permission and it is not granted, return. This may be considered to
be an insult by some but this emphasis in the Holy Quran is one of the
introductory aspects of the hijab because every woman in her own home is
in a situation that she does not want to be seen or she does not want to
see a person. A verse was revealed. "And when you ask his wives for
something, ask them from behind a curtain (hijab)"1 Thus, a person must
first seek permission to enter and then in agreement with the owner, the
person enters even if the other party knows that he wants to enter.

The Holy Prophet said, "In order to announce yor entrance, recall God's
name in a loud voice. I later realized the words 'ya Allah' that Muslim
say, for instance, to enter, is the implementation of this command.

Thus, announce and how much better it is when this announcement is made
by the recitation of God's name. The Holy Prophet continuously did this
and he was asked, "Is this a general ruling that we should use when we
enter our sister's house, our daughter's house, our mother's house?" He
said, "If your mother is getting undressed, would she want you to see
her then? They said, "NO." He said, "Then this same ruling holds for
one's mother's house.

Do not enter without announcing your entrance." When the Holy Prophet
would enter, he would stand behind the door of the room in a place where
they could bear his vioce and would call out, "Assalamo alaikum ya ahlal
bait". He said, "if you hear no answer, perhaps the person did not hear
you. Repeat it again in a loud voice. Repeat for a third time if you
receive no response. If, after the third time that you announce

1. Quran, 33 : 53.

yourself, you hear no response, either that person is not home or the
person does not want you to enter; Return". The Holy Prophet did this
and many stories have been narrated about this, such as when he wanted
to enter his daughter's house, he would call out salutations in a loud
voice. If she resonded, he would enter. If he called out three times and
received no response, he would return.

There is something here to note which is the difference between dar and
bait in Arabic. Dar is that which we call courtyard and they call a room
as bait. The Holy Quran refers to bait, that is, when you want to enter
the room of a person. Since the doors to the courtyards were open, the
courtyard clearly did not assume an area of privacy. That is, if a woman
was dressed in such a way that she did not want anyone to see her, she
would not be so dressed in the courtyard. She would go into a room. The
courtyard has the ruling of a room. The door is closed and it normally
has high walls. Women still consider the courtyard to be, to a certain
extent, a place of privacy. Now dar has the ruling of bait because bait
basically means the place of privacy where a woman does not want a
strange person to see her.

"This is purer for you." That is, the commands We give are better for
you, contain goodness, are not illogical. "Know that this is good."

"And if you do not find anyone therein, enter it not until I leave is
given to you and if you are told 'return'. That is purer for you; and
God knows the things you do." "There is no fault in you that you enter
uninhabited houses wherein enjoyment is for you. God knows what you
reveal and what you hide."1 This was very difficult for the Arabs to
understand. To seek permission when they wanted to enter a house was
itself difficult and then to be told to return and to return was next to
impossible. It was an insult.

1. Quran, 24 : 27-28.

In the verse, "there is no fault in you ...", an exception arises. Does
this ruling apply whenever one wants to enter any or only a person's
residence. The Holy Quran says this is not a general ruling and only
applies to someone's home.

A home is a place of privacy, the place of one's private life but if it
was not, there would be need to seek permission. If there is, for
instance, a caravanserai and you have business, do you have to seek
permission, etc. No. Here it is not necessary to enter by seeking
permission. What about a public bath. There is no need here. "There is
no fault in you ..." if it is not a place of residence in which you have
business. "God knows what you reveal and what you hide."

From the word, 'uninhabited', one can understand that the philosophy of
why a person cannot enter the home of another without announcing it
first is because of the wife as well as the fact that the home is the
place of one's privacy. Perhaps there are things which one does not want
someone else to see.

Thus, when a person enters the privacy of another's home, the entrance
must be announced. A person must, in some way, announce that he wants to
enter even if the person knows that the other has allowed him to enter.
He is your friend. He knows that you are going to enter. You know that
he is totally in agreement with your entering. Still, you should realize
that you are entering upon his privacy.


