A Look at Al-Risala
===================

Since a mention has been made of Al-Risala, a most valuable contribution
by the famous faqih, Muhammad Ibn Idris Shafei, it would be a good idea
to objectively explore it in greater detail.

Many old and new scholars of Sunni Fiqh insist that all the concepts in
the Faculty of Principles of Fiqh (Ilm al-Usul al-Fiqh) are the creation
of Shafei and Al-Risala is the product of his thought process. Yet many
top intellectuals of the same school of thought have a strong difference
of opinion.

Some scholars declare Abu Hanifa (died 150 AH) to be the pioneer. Others
claim that Muhammad Ibn Hasan Shaibani (died 189 AH) was the first. And
still others hold with great confidence that Abu Yousuf Yaqoob Ibn
Ibrahim (died 182 AH) was the originator.[^1]

Secondly, let us suppose that the faculty of Principles of Fiqh (Usul
al-Fiqh) was the creation of Shafei, would it not be unfair to the heads
of other schools of Fiqh and other scholars (fuqaha)? Some of such
people are Abu Hanifa Noman Bin Thabit (died 150 AH) and his famous
pupil Abu Yousuf (died 182 AH), Muhammad Ibn Hasan Shaibani (died 189
AH), Hasan Ibn Ziad Lului (died 204 AH) and Ozfar Ibn Huzail (died 158
AH). All these scholars predated Shafei.

Can all these well-known learned people be declared ignorant of the
philosophy of law or rules and regulations of commands of fiqh? Did they
not know the difference between Amr (decree to do good) and Nahi (decree
to stay away from vice); common man and the privileged; and independent
and dependent? If the answer is yes, they were unaware of such matters,
then why were they called Fuqaha? If the answer is no, these issues were
known to them, then we will have to accept that they were knowledgeable
of Ijtihad and the individual who has been declared the creator of this
faculty came much afterwards.

Now let us review Al-Risala as a book of the “Doctrines of Fiqh”. It is
a fine collection of 670 pages. Several scholars have written
explanations of this collection. In December 1935 an intellectual and
writer Ahmad Muhammad Shakir wrote a 100 page detailed critique and has
done a great service.

Shafei worked on Al-Risala twice. Once when he was in Baghdad and the
second time when he was in Egypt. The story about the Baghdad episode
goes like this. A scholar of the time, Abdur Rahman Ibn Mehdi, wrote to
Shafei and asked him to write a booklet that could help him understand
Quran, ascertain truthfulness of traditions, and find out what is
current and what is obsolete in Quran and Sunna.

Now if we stop here and think about the reason for writing of this
collection, it becomes clear that it was not written to understand the
Doctrines of Fiqh. Rather the requestor needed some explanations for
understanding Quran and Traditions and some of the terminology used
therein. This collection has primarily satisfied this demand.

A submission to those who insist that Al-Risala is a treatise on the
subject of “Doctrines of Fiqh” and is the first work on this subject,
first of all the under discussion treasure does not have a feel of a
book. That is either the author did not fully focus on the subject or he
did not have full command on the topic. However, it is not proper to
make such comments about an intellectual like Shafei.

Anyway the writing we have in front of us can be more appropriately
labeled as a very long letter. Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, while quoting
Hafiz Ibn Abdul Ber, has written the same thing. It goes like this: Ali
Ibn Madini says, “I asked Muhammad Ibn Idris Shafei to respond to Abdur
Rahman Ibn Mahdi’s letter as he was anxiously waiting for a reply”.
Shafei did the needful and here it is, Al-Risala.[^2]

In addition, another fact that cannot be ignored is that this writing
that is being portrayed as a book was not actually written by Shafei.
Rather it is a collection of his dictations. Ahmad Muhammad Shakir
writes: It appears to be more likely that Shafei was speaking and Rabii
Ibn Suleman was writing. The proof lies in sentence number 337 that
quotes the scribe, Rabii Ibn Suleman, “When he would recite an aya from
Quran, he would leave it incomplete for brevity”.[^3]

Then in several instances “Shafei said” is written. It further supports
the argument that the concentration, seriousness, creativity and
diligence required of a scholar for writing on such a subject are
missing. So it does not appear to be a unique contribution by the
learned scholar. He does not draw any boundaries around his thoughts and
does not adopt a style appropriate for conveying true understanding of
the subject. The result is that at every step it appears that either he
is solving a puzzle in the Commentary (Tafseer) or trying to get to the
bottom of a tradition to extract some idea. But in this collection of
thoughts very little justice seems to have been done to the subject of
“Doctrines of Fiqh”.

If the review is done in the context of book writing methodology, then
it appears that there are some good qualities; however, means of finding
solutions to day to day problems are missing and that is what is
required in the “Doctrines of Fiqh”.

Also the material presented does not seem to be satisfactory. It does
not appear to be a consistent and organized effort. As mentioned earlier
a reader does not receive any material relevant to ways of solving
problems and secondly there is lack of energy and freshness. To top it
off, in this hefty 670 pages long collection, one gets an impression
only four or five times that the discussion on the real subject is about
to start. For example, Babe Khairul Wahid, Babul Ijmaa, Babul Qias,
Babul Ijtihad, Babul Istehsan, Babul Ikhtilaf. But unfortunately the
expectation dies out rather quickly. As Muhammad Ahmad Shakir writes,
“This point was not highlighted in the original manuscript. I gave this
caption to this chapter. Someone else has scribbled this subject on the
border with red ink; etc, etc.”

After all this discussion one questions if it is possible to extract any
knowledge about the “Doctrines of Fiqh” from Al-Risala and secondly who
would accept that the thought was unique and came ahead of others.

[^1]: See Al-Fihrist by Ibn Nadeem; Wafiatul Ayan by Ibn Khalkan; Al
A’laam by Zarkali; and Fawaidul Usul by Dr. Mahmud Shahabi

[^2]: Al-Risala, p 11

[^3]: Al-Risala, page 12


