The Fact Is
===========

It is no secret that some scholars of Muslim world have tried to give
the credit of “Doctrines of Fiqh” to Imam Shafei.

Anyway, enough said on this subject. A few scholars with help from their
imagination have gone even farther to the age of Rasul Allah (S) and
have credited a companion, Moaz Ibn Jabal, with the discovery. However,
the brilliant author of Aunul Maabud, Muhammad Ashraf Ibn Ali, while
quoting Jozeqani has labeled this reference as a fake tradition.[^1]

In addition, Qazi Abdul Jabbar has said the same thing on page 200 of
his book, Al Mughni, vol 7. For further discussion see Al-Ahkam page
976, by Ibn Huzm Undlusi; Meezan Ul-Etidal page 439 by Zehi; Taqreeb Ut
Tahzeeb vol 1 page 142 by Ibn Hajr Asqalani. And it would be very useful
to study pages 39 to 42 of a very fine book, Al-Ijtihad Wa Usula wa
Ahkama by Sayed Muhammad Bahar Ul-Uloom.

Anyway, different people have different things to say. But the fact of
the matter is that the beneficiaries of the rivers of knowledge and
wisdom of our Aimma (as) have done a commendable job of introducing the
concept of Ijtihad.

The famous researcher, Allama Sayed Hasan Sadr, writes on Page 310 in
his most precious book, Tasees Ush-Shia Al-Uloom Ul-Islam: The pupils,
who attended the thought provoking lessons of our fifth and sixth Imams,
learnt all about the “Doctrines of Fiqh” and then wrote extensively on
this subject. The lofty treatise, Al-Alfaz wa Mubahisa, by Hasham Ibnul
Hakam (died 179 AH) is a living proof. This scholar was a beneficiary of
Imam As-Sadiq’s (as) teachings. The other personality with many
wonderful qualities was Younas Ibn Abdur Rahman (died 208 AH) who wrote
Ikhtilaf Ul-Hadeeth wa Masaila[^2].Before their time no one had written
on this subject in such a way and consequently these books became the
pioneering works and great models. Anyway, foundation had been laid down
and the work continued.

In this context Ibn Nadeem (died 380 AH) who was extremely knowledgeable
about books and personalities wrote:

A short time after the exceptional writings by Hasham Ibnul Hakam and
Younas Ibn Abdur Rahman, a great thinker of School of Ahlul Bayt and a
son of Naubakht family, Abu Sahal Ismail Ibn Ali (died 311 AH), wrote
Al-khusus wal-Umoom and Abtalul Qias and made a weighty contribution to
the “Doctrines of Fiqh”. After him when his talented nephew, Abu
Muhammad Hasan Ibn Musa Naubakhti, took over the job of preaching, he in
addition to many other books wrote Kitab Al-khusus wal-Umum and
Al-khabrul Wahid and thus made a huge addition to the treasure of books
on the subject of the “Doctrines of Fiqh”.

[^1]: Aunul Maabud, p 22

[^2]: Both the books and the authors have been mentioned in Al-Fihrist
written by Ibn Nadeem (died 380 AH). See page 224 and 276; printed in
Tehran.


