What Does Nature Say?
=====================

Taqleed is not something that has been imposed on people from outside.
Rather it is something in the human being’s nature. And remember if
something is part of a man’s system, it cannot be taught from outside.
It keeps simmering inside and then surfaces in all the people
irrespective of nationality or gender all over the world. The result is
that descendants of Adam have no choice but respond to this call of
nature. As an example;

The urge to know the truth; love for beauty; desire to excel; quest for
knowledge; wish for honor and respect; feeling for sacrifice and
selflessness; and longing for well-being and goodness.

Every one of these conditions swells up from the depths of heart; and it
is only due to these states coming to the surface that people choose
another man as an ideal and nations choose heroes.

By the same token nature truly longs for taqleed. Benefiting from
research by the experts is a natural phenomenon. If nations give up
taqleed; i.e., move away from excellence; let expertise go astray; pay
no attention to skills; can you expect that their civilization will
prosper; that their social life will bloom; that inventions will
multiply; that industry will grow; that trade will thrive?

Certainly not!

The hustle and bustle, the pomp and glory, and the abundance we are used
to, it is all because of taqleed. If taqleed loses its effect,
everything will stop, all activities will come to a halt.

We all agree that everyone wants to portray himself as an accomplished
person. The only way it can be done is to overcome one’s weaknesses by
benefiting from another individual who has achieved excellence in that
particular field.

And it is not a secret that religion is the most important part of our
culture because it is directly linked to the affairs of hereafter.
Therefore, it is imperative that in order to know and follow the rules
and regulations of sharia, we illuminate our minds with the sayings of
those great fuqaha who have devoted their lives for teaching the
religion.

Ijtihad is the effort Ulama put in and taqleed is the act of benefiting
from this effort by general public.

In this context the teacher of the Ulama, Akhund Mulla Muhammad Kazim
Khorasani (died 1329 H) has a beautiful saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم انه لا يذهب عليك ان جواز التقليد ورجوع الجاهل إلى العالم في الجملة
يكون بديهيا جبليا فطريا لا يحتاج إلى دليل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“We should not forget that taqleed is an undisputed fact and it is quite
obvious that someone who does not know certain issues will ask a
knowledgeable person. It is a natural phenomenon and is in need of no
arguments.”[^1]

To summarize, taqleed in reality is a dignified way for a person to
achieve perfection. If a man could not acquire the knowledge he needs to
solve his problems, he should benefit from others’ experiences.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يقبل الله عملا إلا بمعرفة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Allah (SWT) will not accept deeds that were performed without
comprehension.”[^2]

We follow a Mujtahid because he has the insight and the wisdom; he has
the cures for our ills.

A Little Explanation
--------------------

If anyone wants to write commentaries on ‘Ilm al-Usul (Knowledge of
Principles) and Jurisprudence, they need to follow established academic
rules and regulations. However, some individuals have not followed these
rules and have written some articles that have been unduly harsh in
their criticism on some topics

Let us take the example of taqleed. They looked up the meaning of
taqleed in a dictionary and decided that taqleed is putting a leash
around your neck. They simply ignored where the word comes from and what
do the experts have to say. They have tried to misguide general public
that taqleed is a burden that has been placed on their shoulders in the
sacred name of sharia and they just have to live with it. However, the
concept of taqleed is just the opposite.

What it really means is that the follower (muqallid) places the burden
of the accuracy of the fatwa squarely on the shoulders of the marja’
at-taqleed, while absolving himself of the responsibility for the
goodness of his deeds related to the fatwa; whereas the marja’ is held
responsible for those deeds. The rule in the philosophy of law books
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العامي يجعل قلادة اعماله على عتق من يقلده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A commoner hangs the register of his deeds around the neck of the
marja’ at-taqleed.”

In this context our greatest narrator of traditions, Muhammad Bin Yaqub
Kaleni, writes: Once Imam As-Sadiq (as) was present at a meeting at
Rabia[^3] Tur Rai’s house. A Bedouin asked Rabia a question. Rabia
immediately responded. The Bedouin immediately asked another question.
“OK, do you accept the responsibility for what you have said?” Rabia
became quiet. The Bedouin repeated his question. Rabia still stayed
quiet. At this juncture Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) explained the relevant
rule:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"هو في عنقه."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Yes the burden is on his neck”. Then the Imam elaborated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وكل مفت ضامن."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever gives the fatwa, is accountable for it.” [^4]

[^1]: Kifayatul Usul, p 472, published in Beirut

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, vol 1, p 35, published Maktaba Islamia, Tehran

[^3]: Rabia Tur Rai’s father was Abdur Rahman Farokh. According to Rijal
Sheikh Tusi he was a favorite pupil of Imam Zainul Abideen (as). He also
received blessings from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as). He was one of the
well-known fuqahas of Madina. Rijal p 177.

[^4]: Furu Kafi – vol 7, Baab Innal Mufti Zamin – p 409, published Darul
Kutub Al Islamia – Tehran


