Guidance by Intellect
=====================

Our intellect also supports the fact that taqleed is needed. The reason
is that man is not something that has been created and then set aside.
Rather he is an active existence that is always struggling and striving.
With every breath he is eager to learn where he is heading to and how he
can get there. In this struggle the primary condition for success is to
know for sure what path he needs to take to get to his destination. And
if he himself does not know it, he needs to get directions from someone
who knows how to get there.

This is precisely why, in order to facilitate traffic, all big cities
have signboards everywhere, giving directions to different places. They
tell us what direction to take, where to turn and what speed to follow.
The traffic experts have actually brought the roads alive by drawing all
kinds of signs on the roads. These symbols have taken on international
standards that guide people from all over the world alike.

Suppose the traffic rules did not exist or were not followed, do you
think in this age of high speed traffic, travel would be safe?
Absolutely not, everyone would be scared at every step.

If human intellect emphasizes use of taqleed (following someone else’s
laid down rules) in the mundane affairs of normal life, how is it
possible that in the important realm of religion everyone could be free
to follow or not follow rules of Sharia at their own whims.

After all, Islam has a system with rules and regulations that need to be
followed. Until and unless you know the relevant rules and regulations
well, you will not be able to act according to them. Either a man has
the ability to do Ijtihad himself as he can do the research and
understand issues of jurisprudence himself; or, to know the shara’i
rules, he has no other choice but to do taqleed.

Another thought worth considering. All wise people in the world say,
“one must defend against imminent danger”. That is, whenever there is a
danger, one must protect himself.

You see, we have to keep in mind that if our ignorance about sharai
issues keeps growing, then all our worldly affairs will come to a halt.
So it is imperative that we take care of this issue. Does it not make
sense that people should clearly understand the religious obligations so
they could satisfy them in the most appropriate manner and nothing is
left un-fulfilled?

Once again, there are only two ways of dealing with these dangers. The
first is research, i.e., one should climb the Ijtihad ladder himself.
The second is taqleed, i.e., follow the fatwa of a mujtahid. The first
method is not possible for everyone; the second is easy to follow. This
is precisely why taqleed has been declared mandatory (wajib).


