And this is How Quran Guides
============================

Even though there are several verses in Allah’s Book that shed light on
the issue of Taqleed. However, to keep it brief, we will refer to only
two of them. One is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you do not know, then ask*** **أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ** ***Ahluz Zikr,
[i.e. those who know – the learned ones].”*** [^1]

This verse – full of guidance – describes a basic principle. The
“ignorant” should benefit from the “knowledgeable”. If someone is
unaware of a fact, he should ask someone who is aware. Here it is quite
obvious that the verse decrees it necessary that one should ask in order
to know the issues of Sharia. So in case of ignorance it is mandatory
(wajib) to ask an authentic scholar.

At this point the intellect asks. Is the question being asked just for
the fun of it? Is it being asked to show off one’s intelligence? Or is
it being asked to test the knowledge of the scholar? It is quite obvious
that the verse does not command asking frivolous questions. Rather the
intent is that the lack of knowledge is taken care of. That the ignorant
becomes wiser. And now that the person knows, he will not have any
problem acting on it. This is the logical proof of the need for Taqleed.

It is possible that some people may say that the word Ahluz Zikr refers
to the Virtuous Ahlul Bayt. Yes, we believe the same. It is our belief
that at the first level, our Righteous Guides are the Ahluz Zikr. But
then they tell us that after them Fuqaha and Ulama of the Ummah assume
the leadership role. And if this clear fact and truth is not accepted,
then no one can stop absolute ignorance from becoming the fate of the
Ummah.

Not every member of the society is capable of scholarly discourse. And
during the occultation of Last Imam – the true learned (who has been
taught directly by the Creator) – no one has access to him, the only
logical solution is to consult those who have been taught indirectly and
know and act on Imam’s teachings.

The second command of Quran comes in the one hundred and twenty second
verse of Surah Tauba. The sacred verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنْفِرُوا كَافَّةً ۚ فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ
مِنْ كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ
وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is not essential that all believers should go. However, it is
important that a few people from all segments of the society and Ummah
should embark on the path to acquire knowledge of religion. Once they
have gained the capability, they should come back to their homelands and
teach the local residents that they stay aware from bad deeds and avoid
the path of denial.”***[^2]

This verse provides sufficient guidance. The first message in this verse
is that not all but a few need to come forward for mastering the
religious faculties. In other words what is needed is that a few people
become the scholars of religion and others should accept their scholarly
leadership and follow their instructions.

You see, there are three key words in this verse that invite every
individual of intellect to ponder. Tafaqqa, Nazar and Hazar. The first
word came out of jurisprudence and means “to know” – not just knowing
but knowing after deep thinking and getting to the bottom of an issue.
Raghib Isfahani, considered a renowned expert on explaining the Quranic
words, writes in his world-famous book “Almufarradat”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الفقه هو التوصل إلى علم غائب بعلم شاهد."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Jurisprudence (fiqh) is the discovery of the unknown, the invisible and
the hidden facts.”

Regarding Tafaqqa he writes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"تفقه إذا طلبه فتخصص به."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Once something, that was sought after, has been found, gaining
expertise in it is Tafaqqa”.

The second word is Nazar or Inzar. It means informing about the upcoming
danger. The greatest linguist, Muhammad Ibn Mukarram, writes in his
dictionary, “Lisan Ul Arab”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أنذرت القوم فنذروا اي اعلمتهم ذلك فعلموا وتحرزوا."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He informed the nation about the dangerous situation. The nation
realized the gravity and did whatever it could to save itself.”

The third word is Hazar.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(لعلهم يحذرون)
  </p>
</blockquote>

It means to be careful. Ibn Mukarram writes in this context:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رجل حذر. متيقط. متحرز. متأهب معد. يحذر أن يفاجأ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Someone who is aware; laced with defensive weapons; ready to face any
calamity; so well prepared to face any difficulties as if he is about to
run into an emergency situation.”

Now if we consider the overall impression of these words. And if we look
at the message the verse is trying to convey, it appears that those
members of the society who are active, who are doers and who have the
capability, after acquiring the knowledge of Islam should fulfill their
duty and others should benefit from them.

So the capable ones should use their intellect to seek the light, and
those who do not have such capacities should get help from others.
Nonetheless, this process of discovery, absorption, dissemination and
give and take should continue. It is again submitted that this is
exactly what Ijtihad and taqleed are all about.

[^1]: Surah Nahl, Ch. 16, Verse 43.

[^2]: Sura at-Tawbah, ch. 9 verse 122.


