Publisher's Word
================

With a view to making the rich culture of Shi'ism more profoundly known
around the globe, the DAR AL-SADEGHAIN Cultural and Publishing
Institute, in accordance with the aims of its Council of Founders,
established an International Centre for this purpose in March 1998.

In fulfilling our responsibilities to this end, we feel duty-bound to
provide the Shi'ite communities of the world with easier access to
sources of knowledge on landmarks in the history of Islam. Hence, we
have been engaged in researching, compiling and translating these
valuable writings on Shi'ism.

Our first publication is this book "With the Caravan of Light" by
Husayn Ansarian, a wellknown cleric and religious orator. The book gives
a short account of the personality of the companions of Imam Husayn (a),
the third Imam of Shi'ite Islam.
We would like to express our thanks to all the scholars and erudite
personalities for their comments and suggestions.


M. J. Al-Yazdy

**Managing Director
Notes:who is who?**

\`Ubaydullah, son of Ziad ibn-Abih: The young governor of Iraq,
appointed by Yazid ibnMuawiyah. He was a faithless, aggressive and
blood-thirsty oppressor of low birth who never abided by his promises.
His mission was to hold Imam Husayn(a) prisoner or to kill him by
whatever means he could. With an army of three thousand men, this
fiendish man initiated the tragic event of Karbala and has remained
cursed and detested by all pious people for ever.

Abdullah ibn Umeir and Amr ibn-Jinada: Both companions of Imam
Husayn(a) and martyred in Karbala. Their murderers flung their
decapitated heads towards the Imam(a).

Abu Ja' far Tabari: An eminent Shi'ite personality whose
trustworthiness, dignity, eloquence and profound knowledge was known to
all. Abul Aswad Da' ali: A loyal companion ofHadrat Ali(a) who learned
syntax and the rules for the correct pronunciation of Arabic words from
him. Abul Hatuf ibn-Harath and Sa'd ibn-Harath: They were brothers from
the Ansar tribe of Medina. For twenty years they were members of the
group that had revolted against Hadrat Ali(a) and were notorious for
being his bitter enemies. Feeling sympathetic towards Imam Husayn(a) for
being so tyrannically oppressed, they abandoned Yazid and fought for the
Imam's holy cause and were martyred.

Aqilian: They were of the family of Aqil, the brother of Amir
al-Mu'minin(a). They were martyred in the battle of Karbala.

Ahl-e Manteq: The logicians.

Ahl-i-Ussul: Scholars versed in Islamic law and canonical doctrines
namely Scripture, Sunna, the Consenus of Opinion and Deduction of legal
rulings. A philosopher is the the person who, through using scientific
laws, thought, reason and purification ofhi s soul investigates the true
nature of things in existence.

Aqaba ibn-Sam'an: He had the letters from the people ofKufa inviting
Imam Husayn(a) to come to their city. When addressing the Kufans, the
Imam(a) told Sam'an to produce these letters.

Aqilian: They were of the family of Aqil, the brother of Amir
al-Mu'minin (a). They were martyred in the battle of Karbala. Ayatullah
Haj Aqa Rahim Arbab: A learned figure in the Theological Seminary in
Isfahan. He taught theosophy, philosophy and Islamic Law and its
principles. He was endowed with fine moral qualities.

Bani Hashim: Among the most famous tribes of Qureish from which came
famous personalities including Abd al-Muttalib, Abu Talib, Ali's(a)
father and Abdullah, the Prophet's(s) father.

Barir and Sa'id: Both companions of Imam Husayn(a). The former was
martyred while fighting and the latter during the noon prayers. Fadl
ibn-Shadhan: Ail erudite Shiite from Nishabur, He was a great author,
unequalled thinker and free of temporal attachments. His tomb is visited
by men with heart, understanding and knowledge.

Habib ibn-Mazahir Asadi: A prominent companion of Imam Husayn(a) who
left Kufa for Karbala at the request ofthe Imam. He was an old man but
spiritedly put up a good fight and was martyred. Hafhaf ibn-1Vlasruq: A
companion of Imam Husayn(a) who accompanied the Imam(a) to Karbala. He
called out the times of prayer and on the day of Ashura was martyred.

Hani ibn-'Urwah: a prominent Shi'ite known for his devotion who acted
for a short while as host of Muslim ibn-Aqil, Imam Husayn's(a) messenger
to Kufa. He was apprehended by Ubeidullah ibn-Ziad and then killed
because he refused to give information about Muslim's whereabouts.

Hashim Ilahi Qumsha'i: An outstanding figure in the Theological
Seminary as well as in the University. He was pious, and a mystic, free
of temporal attachments. His book of poems with more than twelve hundred
pages is always within reach for men who are on the path of mystical
experience of the truth. He has commented on Ibn Farabi's Fusus and has
written a two-volume book on the Philosophy of Illumination.

Hurr ibn-Yazid Riahi: He was from a well known Arab tribe and a
commander in Yazid's army in Iraq. He was ordered by Ubeidullah ibn Ziad
to hold Imam Husayn(a) prisoner. On the day of Ashura, however, the
pricks of conscience made him turn away from Yazid and repent. He joined
Imam Husayn(a) in the battle and was martyred.

Husayn ibn-Ali Baghdadi: A historian in the tenth century A. H. , the
author of Jawharah alThamin.

Ibn Bashir Hadrami: A prominent figure among the companions of Imam
Husayn(a). On the night of Ashura he got the sad news that his son was
taken prisoner. Although the Imam(a) permitted him to leave the camp to
free his son, he insisted on staying with the Imam(a) and was martyred.
Luqman: A sage free of temporal attachments, pure in soul and inspired
with divine wisdom. A Surah of the Qur'an is named after him in which
reference is made to some of his wise sayings.

Mariqin: Those who revolted against Hadrat Ali(a) and fought him in
Nahrawan, a town near Baghdad. Miqdad ibn-Aswad, Abudhar Ghaffari and
Salman Farsi: Three distinguished Companions of the Prophet(s) and were
recognised by God and His Messenger(s) for their devotion, righteous
deeds and morality.

Muawiyah ibn-Wahab: A companion Of Imam Sadiq(a) and a reliable and
learned narrator.

Muslim ibn-Aqil: Imam Husayn's(a) cousin and emissary to Kufa. The
Kufans betrayed him and he was taken prisoner and killed by the order of
Ubeidullah Ziad.

Nakithin: Those who broke their pledge of allegiance to Hadrat Ali(a)
and brought about the battle of Jamal.

Qasitin: Those who pledged allegiance to Muawiyah and fought Imam
Husayn(a).

Saravi-Muhammad ibn-Ali ibn Shahr Ashub: From Sari, Tabaristan
(Mazandaran). He was an outstanding Shi'ite traditionalist and
biogragher. The author of some very important books including "Manaqib
Ali bin Abi Talib (The Virtues of the Family of Abi Talib)."

Sayyid ibn Tawus: A great Shi'ite scholar from Hellah in Iraq. He was
exemplary in virtue and religious devotion. He wrote the book "Lahuf' on
the history ofKarbala and the tragic martyrdom of Imam Husayn(a) and his
companions.

Shimr ibn-Dhul Jowshan: Ofthe Arab tribe of the Bani Kilab. He was once
a companion of Amir al-Mu'minin(a). At the time of the Arbitration, a
group ofpeople inNahrawan had revolted against Hadrat \`Ali(a) during
his caliphate. Shimr was a member of that group and then later he joined
the Umayyad party. Years later he went to Karbala as ordered by
Ubeidullah ibn Ziad and fought in the battle. He volunteered to kill
Imam Husayn(a) and subsequently beheaded the Imam(a). He was doomed to
be treated as a contemptible outcast in this world and condemned to
apainful punishment in the fire.

The Fourteen Sinless Ones: The Prophet of Islam(s), his daughter
Fatimah Zahra, his son-inlaw, Amir al-Mu'minin and their eleven
descendents(a) all of whom held the position of Imamate.

The Late Akhund Mulla Muhammad Kashi: A man of great learning. At the
time of the Qajar Dynasty he taught philosophy, theosophy, mysticism and
ethics at the Theological Seminary in Isfahan. The Late Haj Sayyid Rida
Sadr: An eminent comtemporary theologian and author whose works in the
realm of Islamic law, ethics and history are well known.

Umayyad Caliphs: Irreligious individuals of low birth, steeped in lusts
and typical throwbacks to the pagan culture of the early years of Islam.
They ruled over the oppressed Muslims for one thousand months committing
innumerable atrocities during their rule. Wahab ibn-Abdullah: A young
man from the tribe of Kilab. He had been newly-wed when he came to
Karbala with his mother and wife to join Imam Husayn(a). He and his wife
were martyred for the cause of Allah.

Wahab ibn-Manbah: A popular individual in the days of the Umayyad
Caliphate. He claimed he had knowledge of the Torah, the Gospel and
seventy-two other scriptures especially about the prophets. The Shi'ah
authorities do not believe him and refute his claims and statements
because he was a rank liar.

Zahir ibn-Qin Bajali: He was a distinguished man ofKufa and a follower
of the Caliph Uthman. On his way from Mecca to Karbala he met Imam
Husayn(a) and became attracted to his divine, sublime personality. He
fought bravely to protect the Imam's life and was killed.

Ziad ibn-Abi Sufyan or Ziad ibn-Abih: father of Ubeidullah whose faith
and religion Muawiyah bought for a mere trifle. Because his mother
Sumayyah was promiscuous, it is not known who Abu Sufyan's father was.
Muawiyah, alleging that his father Abi Sufyan had had an affair with
Ziad's mother, declared Ziad his brother.


**Notes:Battles**

Nahrawan: The battle brought about by the Khawarij-those who revolted
against Ali(a). They were completely defeated. Siffin: The battle waged
against Amir alMu'minin(a) by Muawiyah. The war ended through an
arbitration maliciously plotted by Muawiyah and Amr A' as to the
detriment of the believers.

The Battle of Jamal: The battle brought about by Ayisha, Talha and
Zubeir against Ali ibn-Abi Talib(a), the rightful Caliph immediately
after the Prophet(s). Hadrat All(a) was victorious in the battle. The
triple battles: Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan.

**Notes:Books**

\`Unsur Shuja'at: An eight-volume book that discusses the personality
ofImam Husayn(a) and his loyal companions by Mirza Khalil Kamarah' i,
the great philosopher and celebrated theologian.

A1 Rijal: A biographical work by Shaykh Tusi about the narrators of the
Sunna of the Prophet and of the People of his Household. Amali-e-Saduq:
A book by Shaykh Saduq discussing ethical traditions and narrations.

Arba'in Qazi: A research work by Shahid Qazi Tabataba' i, Imam of the
Juma prayers in Tabriz, discussing the return of the Household of the
Prophet(s) who were held prisoners for forty days after the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn(a).

Bahr al-Ma' aruf: Abook onthe subject ofmystical and moral issues, by
Mulla Abd al-Samad Hamadami. Bihar al-Anwar or the Encyclopedia of
Shi'ism: A book in 110 volumes, by Mullah Muhammad Baqir Majlisi. Dar
al-Salam: A scholarly book, by Haj Mirza Husayn Nouri, a Shi'ite
scholar.

Farsan al-Hija: A book about the companions of Imam Husayn(a) by Haj
Shaykh Dhabihulla Mahallati, a learned traditionalist. Ilal al-Sharayi:
A valuable book onthephilosophy of Islamic tenets and doctrines by
Shaykh Saduq. Kamil al-Ziarat: A very important book concerning the
religious traditions and narrations about the martyrdom of the Sinless
Imams(a), eulogies about them and about visits to their holy shrines.

Kanz al-Amal: A sixteen-volume book about the Sunna of the Prophet(s),
by Muttaqi Hindi, a Sunnite learned man. Kanz al-Fawa' id: A book about
divine teachings, prophetic traditions and narrations, by the late
scholar Karajaki. Kharaj-e-Ravandi: Avaluable work bythe Shi'ite
scholar, the late Ravandi.

Ma'am al-Akhbar: A scholarly book explaining the narrations of the
people of the Household of the Prophet(s). Manaqib: A book in four
volumes, by Ibn Shahr Ashub Saravi.

Maqtal Khwarizmi: A book about the history of the martyrs, by A1
Khwarizmi, a famous scholar. Pishva-e-Shahidan: Aresearch work
ontheevent o1'Karbala, by Ayatullah Sayyid Rida Sadr. Rijal-e-Kashi: A
biographical book about the companions of the Prophet(s) and of the
Sinless Imams(a), by the late Kashi. Sahuf: A book about the event of
Karbala, by Sayyid ibn-Tawus, a Shi'ite learned man.

Sharh-e-Nahj ul Balagha: A twenty-volume book expounding upon the wise
sayings of Hadrat Ali(a), by Ibn Abi al-Hadid, a great Sunnite scholar.
Sharh Shafia: An important work of Ibn Faras.

Sharh-e-Nahjul Balagha: A book in Persian in more than thirty volumes
by Allama Muhammad Taqi Ja'fari. Tadhkerah: A book about Islamic facts
by Ibn Jouzi, the Sunnite scholar. Tafsir Tha'labi: A book commenting on
the Qur'an by Tha'labi, a great scholar.

Thawab al-A' amal and Iqab al-A' amal (Rewards and Punishments for
one's Deeds): A book by Shaykh Saduq, a major Shi'ite traditionalist.
The Miracle of History: A book in eight volumes of \`Unsur Shuj a' at,
discussing the event ofKarbala and the martyrdom of Imam Husayn(a), by
the late Mirza Khalil Kamarah'i.

Notes:geographical Areas Basra and Ctesiphon: Cities in Iraq.

Hamun: A plain.

Isfahan: A famous city in Iran noted for Islamic and historical
monuments.

Karbala: A famous city in Iraq, where Imam Husayn(a) and his companions
are buried. It is a Qiblah for pious and true lovers of that sinless and
yet oppressed Imam.

Kufa: A city in Iraq, whose inhabitants were notorious for breaking
their allegiance to Imam Husayn(a).

Kufan: Inhabitant of Kufa.

Madressa-e-Sadr: A school in Isfahan forreligious studies attended by
many shi'ite scholars.

Shamian: Inhabitant of Sham (Syria).

The Ka'aba: The Muslim holy shrine, The Inviolable House of God in
Mecca.


**More Notes**

Hunut: Annointing dead bodies with camphor. Force and Matter: This
subject comprises a philosophical question discussed by many
philosophers in their writings. Iftar: The breaking of the fast at the
end of each day during the month of Ramadan.

Jami and Mani' : A definition meaning the whole and only truth of
something or about someone with no distortion whatsoever. Mukashifa: The
mystical spiritual ecstasy that saints experience in which they realize
spiritual and divine truths.

Qa'imiat: A prayer quoted from Hadrat Mahdi which gives a good account
of the companions and children of Imam Husayn(a). Tasua and Ashura:
Refer respectively to the 9th and 1 Oth day of the month of Muharram
during which Yazid declared a state of war against Imam Husayn(a).
Consequently the warring parties went out to battle in which the Imam
and his companions were martyred.

The Preserved Tablet (Lawh-e-Mahfuz): Men of heart believe that the
preserved tablet represents God's knowledge. It is a divine tablet on
which all that God decrees is recorded.

Zakat: The poor-rate, i. e., a legal rate on wealth that is used for
relief and support of the poor. Ziarat: Paying a visit to the holy
shrines of the Prophet(s) and of the sinless Imams(a).

Ziarat-e-Nahiah: A text containing prayers for the fallen in the battle
of Karbala, composed by the 12th Imam(a). Ziarat-e-Warith: A prayer rich
in subtleties of language, quoted from the Sinless Imams. It is said on
Friday nights as a homage paid to the memory of Hadrat Husayn(a).


**A Unique Event**

We will speak here about those who effected a unique event on the face
of the globe, a great tragic occurrence that has served as a lesson for
all-all ages and lives- an incomparable fact and an overwhelming source
of advice and admonition. Spiritual and worldly people alike would see
such an event only but once, for never again will heaven and earth
witness such a panorama.

Two tribes had clashed in battle in the desert of Karbala: one a tribe
of pure divines; and the other totally corrupt and worldly. The first
was Godcentric, seeking nothing but for the love of Truth, striving to
win His favour, to hoist the banner of reality, and to maintain the
light of virtue; they endeavoured to overthrow despots and despotism, to
uproot the tree of evil and keep green the tree of piety. The other
group was centered around false deities-the pleasures of the flesh and
the passion and worldly riches and blatantly disregarded morality.

**divines beyond Comparison**

These angelic figures, seventy two in number, under the leadership of
Husayn(a) pitched the camp of magnanimity, honour and faith and
constancy in the arena desert of Karbala. They were human in body but
angels in soul. The Prophet(s) is reported to have said:

The Believers are dearer to God than the angels nearest to Him.

(Kanz al-'Amal. vol. 1 p. 164) And in another narration he(s) said:

They deserve greater respect than the Ka 'aba. (Bihar al-Anwar vol. 68
p. 16)

And which believer could be more superior or praiseworthy than those
who in watering the tree of religion, in preserving the culture of
Divine unity, and in safeguarding the efforts of the previous prophets
and saints with an unspeakable zeal, shed their precious blood in Jihad
for the cause of Allah?

Never once did they fear their wicked enemies and, at the side of The
Chief of the Martyrs(a), fought them to pay their debt to t he Truth and
to steer the storm-stricken ship of humanityto thepeaceful shore of
salvation. They were taught the Book of Revelation by the Messenger of
Allah and by the People of his Household and with perfect sincerity
practiced all that they were taught. As far as magnanimity and deep
insight were concerned, they were second to none. They were perfect
symbols of purity of soul, brightness of heart, unflagging faith, moral
perfection, impeccable conduct and unstinting self-sacrifice.

Never did they stumble under the heavy burden ofresponsibility. They
reflected the quintessence of Truth, standard bearers ofnobility,
geniuses in creation and doyens of all virtues; and graces. Those who
wanted to harm them did them good and those who put them to the sword
kept their memory alive. They stood and fought side by side with the
Imam(a) to the bitter end, withstanding the enemy's attacks and
impervious to any offer to abandon their leader. There were a veritable
sea of endurance, constancy, honour religious zeal and purity of heart,
never succumbing to the fiendish temptations of their enemies.

One base fellow, under the command of the son of S'ad was asked as to
why had he been so ready to kill a descendant ofthe Prophet Muhammad(s).
He retorted that if others had themselves seen what he had seen, they
certainly would have done exactly as he did, adding that they had won
the day only by force of numbers.


