Worldlings To the Worst Degree
==============================

The enemy numbered thirty thousand men all of whom were notorious for
their sinful behaviour. They were led by a man who was once a waif named
Ubeidullah whose mother had revelled in the pleasures of the flesh. They
were a bunch of thugs who had gathered together to kill the offspring of
the Prophet(s). All of them were the subjects of Yazid, a libertine and
a drunkard and they had learned the lessons of brutality, plundering,
oppression, hypocrisy, ego-centrism and polytheism in the school of the
Umayyad rulers.

Zahir, that gallant warrior, called the people of Kufa in that army to
help the offspring of the Prophet(s) and withhold their support of
Ubeidullah, the son of Ziad. He said that both of them have gouged out
your eyes with red-hot irons, they have cut off your hands and legs,
your ears and noses, they have hanged many from among you and have
beheaded Qur'an reciters like Hujr ibn-'Adi and Hani ibn-Urwah. The
angry mob instead interrupted his exhortations and insulted him. They
lauded Ubeidullah and his father and threatened either to kill Imam
Husayn(a) or deliver him and his companions to Yazid as prisoners of
war.

How ignorant were the people to choose viceincarnate over
virtue-incarnate as Amir and ruler.

Zahir continued:

The children of Fatima(a) deserve more support,from you than Samiyya
(adulteress and mother of Ibn-Abi Sufyan). If you do not wish to support
Imam Husayn(a) then at least leave him alone to deal with Yazid in
whichever way he chooses, Yazid will be pleased with you even if you
fail to kill Husayn(a).

Fearing that such a strong argument might encourage the mob to act in
favour of Imam Husayn(a), Shimr, claiming that they were all tired of
Zahir's long-windedness, shot an arrow at him. Zahir condemned Shimr as
a poor beast, sure to be punished on the Last day.

When eventually Zahir fell dead on the battlefield, Imam Husayn(a)
rushed to the side of his body and cursed his killers. Zahirhad indeed
called the people of Kufa what they were symbols of inhumanity without
peer.

**The Revlatory Dream of Imam Husayn(a)**

Before dawn on the day of Ashura (the tenth day ofMuharram, the first
lunarmonth ofthe Muslim calendar) the Imam(a) had a revelatory dream. He
said he saw a pack ofrabid dogs attacking him and among them was a dog
spotted like a leper, which was the (fiercest of all. Shimr who
eventually personally killed the Imam(a) was a leper.

In a second dream he saw his grandfather, the Prophet(s) who told him
that he would soon be joining the divine folk. And so, his dream came
true on that very day of Ashura. (Maqtal of Kharazmi vol. 1, p. 25 r and
Bihar al-Anwar vol. 25 p. 3)

The first dream depicted the true nature of the enemies of the Imam(a)
and the second depicted the divine certificate of merit given to him by
the Messenger of God(s).

The battle of Karbala was the human conflict between truth and
falsehood where although the disbelievers had apparently won the day in
reality it was the believers who were victorious.

**The Viewpoint of Amir al-Mu'minin(a)**

In sermon 133 of Nahjul Balagha, Hadrat Ali(a) said:

The world marks the limits of the vision of those whose hearts are
blind who see nothing beyond it. Thesight ofthetrue seer pierces
througand realizes that the eternal abode of man is beyond this world.
Consequently he wants to leave this world while he who is blind wants to
get further involved in it. The true seer collects his provisions from
it for the hereafter while the blind person collects his provisions as
if he can remain in this transient world.

The revealed religions and wise men throughout the ages are unanimous
in their view that human beings are not created just to enjoy the
ephemeral pleasures of this earthly world, to experience ' the ups and
downs of life and then simply die; man comes into being and awaits on
the shore of the sea of immortality for a while.

Man should therefore embrace this limited opportunity to lead a life of
piety thanking his Lord for His blessings. He should strive towards
moral perfection and try to make this world like an Eden of happiness
for all. Unfortunately such cannot be expected from the wicked and
base.

Worldly people are egoists and divine personalities are God-fearing and
annihilated in Him. Divine people resonate with the melody of truth
while those whose hearts are blind sing the song of fancy. The pious
destroy the abode of the body to build the mansion of the soul.

Hakim Ilahi Qumshahai, based upon his knowledge of Islam, interpreted
the last words of this leader of lovers of God in the following stanzas
of poetry:

Thou art thesole object oflove and worship in my heart and I gaze upon
Thee with its eye.

Candle-like I burn with the desire of being near to Thee all the
sooner; With my head on the enemy's spear I'm bound for Thy seat I asked
Thee to show me Thyself when I reached the tryst with You on Mt. Sinai
Thou arttheFountofLifefrom which Thou quenchest my thirst On the edge of
the sea of existence I experienced the ascension of witnessing The
mirror ofthe heart broke but the image of the Beloved remained The true
image of Thee revealed the secret of He is Allah, the One.

These seventy two men bore the colours of the truth; they abandoned
their humble abode in this world and gained possession of a mansion in
the heavens; they laughed in the face of death and gained eternal life;
they subdued their evil desires and yearned for nothing but the Truth.

After the event of Karbala, some followed the tracks of the Caravan of
light and others went astray. Let us embellish ourselves with the
morality of Husayn(a) and shun the fetid smell of Yazid. Imam Husayn's
piety and religious devotion set an example for all generations in human
history that a godly way of life leads to salvation.

**An Outstanding Figure Among the Husayni(a) Group**

Among those who had taken to follow the tracks of the Caravan of Light,
and an outstanding figure in his time, was the late Akhund Mulla
Muhammad Kashi. Among his proteges were such distinguished personalities
as Ayatullah Martyr Mudarris, Haj Shaykh Murtada Taliqani, Haj Agha
Rahim Arbab, Ayatullah Sayyid, Jamaluddin Gulpaygani and Ayatullah
al-Uzma Haj Agha Husayn Borujerdi.

The Akhund was a pious septuagenarian who spent most, of his life
acquiring knowledge and teaching in a small chamber at the SadrMadressah
in Isfahan. His paltry earnings were hardly enough to provide bread and
water, but as far as the spiritual side of life was concerned, he was a
fountain of virtue. Not enslaved by his sexual desires he remained
unmarried and lived on a meagre daily ration of bread and cheese or
bread and vegetables with broth once a week.

Once, a young theology student waking up just before dawn to say his
night prayers, found himself so surrounded by voices of praise and
glorification of God coming as it were from all the walls and doors of
the madresseh, that he fell unconscious. In the morning he went to the
Akhund and told him the story not knowing what that chanting so full of
light was, he found that it corresponded to the very chanting of God's
Glory and praises that the Akhund recited before the dawn.

Akhund Kashi said to him:

The fact that all creation praises God is not something surprising,
what is surprising is that this heavenly praise reached your ears as if
it was coming from the walls and windows.

Worship God wholeheartedly like Imam Husayn did, because if you worship
Him upon a margin you lose both this world and the hereafter. That is
the sheer loss. (Qur'an, Surah Hajj v. 77);

Acquire divine attributes from godly men; learn bravery and honour from
the shining sun of Karbala. Follow the example of Husayn(a) fighting
against the rebellion of those estranged from Islam and learn how to get
nearer to God. Attend the school of Islam and learn the Qur'an, courage,
affection, magnanimity, beneficence and loyalty.

But to become lion-hearted, godly men, you must first learn good
manners. Imam Husayn's companions were all distinguished and pious
personalities. Those in the Caravan of Light knew well that their
journey would end up in paradise, thanks to their devotion to their
leader for the cause of Allah.

The Qur'an says:

As for.those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert.
The thirsty one supposes it to be water till he comes unto it and finds
it naught and finds in the place thereof, Allah, who pays him his due;
and Allah is swift at reckoning. Or as a darkness on a vast, abysmal
sea. There covers him a wave, above which is a wave, above which is a
cloud. Layer upon layer of darkness. When he holds out his hand he
scarce can see it. AndforwhomAllah has notappointed light, for him there
is no light.

(24/39-40).

Elsewhere the Quran says:

\*But whoso finds ease in disbelief, on them is wrath from Allah.
Theirs will bean awful doom. That is because they have chosen the life
of the world rather than the Hereafter and because Allah guides not the
disbelieving folk. Such are they whose hearts and ears and eyes Allah
has sealed. And such are the heedless. Assuredly in the Hereafter they
are the losers\* (16/106-109).

Indeed they are the losers because they are deprived of God's favour
and of the intercession ofthe Prophet(s) and the Folk ofhis
Household(a). The Quran says about them:

\*But he who turns away from remembrance of Me, his will be a narrow
life, and I shall bring him blind to the Assembly on the Day of
Resurrection. He will say: My Lord Wherefore have you gathered me
(hither) blind, when I was wont to see? He will say: So (it must be) Our
revelations came unto you and you forgot them. In like manner you are
forgotten this Day. Thus do we reward him who is prodigal and does not
believe the revelations of his Lord; and verily the doom of the
Hereafter will be sterner and more lasting\* (20/124-127).

**The Most Exalted and the Most Contemptible**

By the most exalted we can mean no other than the devoted companions of
Imam Husayn(a) and by the most contemptible only to his enemies. The
former group were annihilated in Allah and as mystic travellers were
journeying unto Allah, being unattached to all and everything but Allah.
The latter group, according to the Qur'an, chose the life of the world
rather than that of the Hereafter.

The Prophet(s) said to Fatima(a), the paragon of virtue and the mirror
of the divine attributes for all ages, that the companions of Husayn(a)
were like stars in the sky. They competed with one another in
sacrificing their lives for their leader. Their graves, would be in the
heavens. (Bahar vol. 44 p. 264)

These birds ofEdenhad all fallen onthebattlefield in less than half a
day to get all the sooner and nearer to their sole object of worship.
Thus they proved to be rightly called the greatest and the most exalted.
Imam Husayn(a) called them the best and the most trustworthy companions.
In contrast, the dirtiest record of evil; deeds ever observed have been
attributed to the servants of Yazid, the representative of the false
deity of that time, and they thus deserve to be called the most
contemptible.

So strong and unwavering was their faith in Imam Husayn(a) that his
companions defied the power of the most abominable of men, Yazid, and
the most powerful aristocracy ofthe time, the Umayyad -dynasty.

Husayn(a) and his followers were moons and Yazid and his men were dogs
that barked at the moon. The martyrs of Karbala are superior to all
other martyrs in human history.

Martyrs Without Peer

The martyrs of Karbala: Zahir, Habib, Muslim, Barir, Hurr, S'aid,
Abbas, to mention but a few, have been unsurpassed in human history. The
Quran says:

\*Naught is as His likeness\* (45/11).

They were of pious descent. The Quran says:

\*A goodly saying, as a goodly \`tree, its root setfirm, its branches
reaching into heaven giving its fruit in every season... \*
(14/24-24).

As for those wicked men who fought Imam Husayn(a), the Quran also
says: \*... having hearts wherewith they understand not, and havingeyes
wherewith they see not, and having ears wherewith they hear not. They
are as cattle-nay, but they are worse. These are the neglectful\*
(7l79).

The companions, knew that all power belonged to Allah. The Quran
says: \*... Whoso desires power (should know that) all power belongs to
Allah. Unto Him good words ascend, and the pious does he exalt... \*
(35/0).

Hadrat \`Ali(a) said that they were martyrs surpassed neither by anyone
before them nor after them. Elsewhere Imam \`Ali(a) said while
addressing the earth of Karbala:

Strange though it may seem, Oh you mysterious earth, on the Day of
Resurrection there will rise out of you a people that will enter
paradise without having been called to account. (Bihar vol. 44 p.
255).

The companions of Imam Husayn(a) had based their lives on whatever
their leader had mentioned the Prophet(s) as having said: God loves the
loftiest not the lowest aims in life. Thus the army of Imam Husayn(a)
was Godcentric and the Umayyad army was Satan-centered. The light of
Husayn(a) was the light of God that never goes out.

The Quran says:

\*Faint would they put out the light ofAllah with their mouths, but
Allah will perfect His light however much the disbelievers are averse\*
(61/8).

All things attract their complement. Angelic people attract those whose
characteristics correspond to theirs and infernal people do likewise.

The Quran says:

\*...Lo! Allah has bought from believers their lives and their wealth
because the Garden will be theirs... \* Monotheists trade their lives
for their Lord's favour and polytheists trade their lives for the things
the devil shows them, however worthless they may be. The true value of a
human being lies not in his wealth but in his virtue.

Husayn(a) and his companions resonated with the refrain of the Truth:

We gave up everything we had to win Thy favour. The Quran says:

\*Be mindful of your duty, and do right. Allah loves the good. \*
(5/93).

Elsewhere the Quran says:

\*Lo! Allah is with those who keep their duty unto Him and those who
are doers of good\* (16n2s).

If we follow the example of Imam Husayn's(a) companions we are sure to
win God's favour.


