The Greatest Reality From the Tonge of Jabir Ibn- Abdullah
==========================================================

\`Atiyyah ibn-Sa' d ibn Janadah said that he was in the company of
Jabir when he paid a visit to the holy shrine of Imam Husayn(a). Jabir
performed his ablution and put on some scent. He placed his hand on the
sacred grave of the Imam(a) and swooned. When he came to himself, he
lamented bitterly and then paid homage to the memory of the Imam's(a)
companions saying that they also shared in his battle against his
enemies.

\`Atiyyah asked how could such a thing be; Jabir, greatly surprised,
quoted the Prophet(s) as having said that one who supported others in
what good they had done would be rewarded according to what they had
done. If one is honoured with a visit to his holy shrine, one should say
in his prayers:

I swear by Almighty God, His angels and His messengers that I believe
in your leadership and in your return unto Allah. Every step I takefor
the cause ofmy religion and all my efforts in life are under the
auspices of your leadership and guidance and inspired with my deep love
and reverence for you. I surrender my heart to your pure soul and I try
to follow the example you set for human salvation.

If after saying such a prayer however, one is not honest in his vow,
that person would have told a great lie that will not be forgiven. Imam
Husayn(a) and his companions were all paragons of virtue and if one
wants to revere them duly for their divine attributes, one should try to
be their true disciple in all stages of life.

In contrast, the enemies of Imam Husayn(a) and his followers were all
vice incarnated manifestations of villainy, tyranny, bestiality,
infringement upon the rights of others, neglectfulness of
responsibility, covetousness, envy, pride and hypocrisy. When called to
account on the Last Day, they will appear to be totally deprived of
God's mercy. Imam Husayn's(a) murder was so terrible a crime that in the
punishment of the murderers, there may be no room for mercy.

**Constancy in Achieving Goals**

In following the transcendental aim of Imam Husayn(a) and his loyal
supporters, one must be prepared to face physical, financial, mental,
familial or social difficulties; hence, it requires constancy,
steadfastness, struggle, religious zeal, devotion and understanding. The
Qur'an says:

\*Whoso obeys Allah and the Messenger, they are with those unto whom
Allah has shown favour: the prophets and the saints and the martyrs and
the righteous. And the best of company are they\* (4/69)

**Our Seeking God's Help In Attaining to Good Conduct**

Imam Husayn's companions gave a vivid picture of the spirituality of
Islam in what they said and did. Indeed, they were angels that
demonstrated the truths of Islam to the world for indeed their deeds
were nothing short of angelic behaviour. They kept their duty in obeying
Islamic tenets. Their message to all muslims was to revere the Truth,
the Prophet, the Qur' an, the Imam and their leaders. That we must
establish worship and pay the poor-rate, enjoin the right and forbid the
wrong.

Those who neglect to establish worship are proud like Satan who
disobeyed God's order to prostrate before Adam, and those who do not pay
the poorrate are the miserly whose niggardliness keeps them from doing
anything good.

The Qur'an says:

\*They who hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the way
ofAllah, unto them give the tidings (OMuhammad) ofapainful doom\*
(9/34)

We supplicate to God for success in good conduct; whoso are neglectful
of good conduct in relation to others are deprived of God's favour.
People of ill-conduct are notorious for spreading the fires of
dishonourable behaviour all over the world, while on the other hand,
good conduct diffuses light everywhere and adds to the glory of the
angels.

**The Reverence Shown to Imam Husayn (a) By his Companions**

Hadrat Saj j ad(a), the Pearl among all Worshippers of God, says about
the reverence held for Imam Husayn(a) by his companions:

The Imam(a) spent one part of the night of Ashura (the night before he
was martyred) with his companions, the second part for his prayers and
the third part in getting prepared for the battle. First, he thanked
hisLordforHisgraces bestowed upon him and his family and his appointment
as the leader of all the muslims, for his being a descendant
oftheProphet(a) andforgiving him the knowledge of the Qur'an and the
tenets of Islam. He then addressed his companions saying that he knew of
no better or more devoted men than they were.

He further said that they were about to fight a bloody battle which
would result in their death. Since the enemy had a quarrel with him
alone, the Imam announced that he had freed them of their allegiance to
him. If they were not inclined to fight without it being any sin or
blameworthy action on their part. In addition they had his permission to
take any of the folk ofhis household with them if they so desired.

Abbas, in his response, said that they would never abandon him. Then
the Imam(a) gave his permission for his cousins-the children of Muslim
ibn-Aqil to leave the camp, their father had been martyred in the course
of the events leading up to Karbala and his martyrdom would have been a
sufficient enough contribution for them. But in reply they thanked their
uncle and said that they would stand by him no matter what would befall
them.

Like the men from the tribe of Bani Hashim, other companions of Imam
Husayn(a) including Muslim ibn-'Awsaja, Zuhayr and Ibn Bashir Hadrami,
all said that they would stand firm by the side oftheir exalted leader
and valiantly meet their fate. It would be a great honour they said to
lie among the fallen at the side of the beloved of the Prophet(s).

Qasim, the nephew of the Imam(a) asked his uncle whether he would be
among the fallen. The Imam(a) replied that he would be killed as well as
his own infant Abdullah. Qasim shuddered, at the thought of such a
terrible thing, that their enemies could be so cruel and fiendish that
they would not spare the lives even of a helpless infant.

**Good versus Evil**

In Karbala, two groups were arrayed in opposition to each other.

One group was the symbol of truth, honour, magnanimity, faith, virtue,
honesty, worship and devotion, in other words, representatives of the
Absolute Good, objective proofs of the Scripture and of sacred
knowledge.

Salman Farsi was one of the most notable companions of the Prophet
Muhammad(s). So high was his status that the Prophet(s) is reported to
have said that God had ordered him to love four persons: 'All
ibn-Abitalib, Miqdad ibn-Aswad, Abudar Ghaffari and Salman al-Farsi.
(Kashi, Rijal p. 24). Hadrat Ali(a) said that Salman was the gateway to
truth in the earth, those who acknowledged his sublime position were
believers and those who denied it were disbelievers. (kashi, Rijal
p.20)

Fadl ibn-Shadhan, the renowned author, said that no one was comparable
to Salman in knowledge and insight. The Prophet(s) and Imam Baqir(a)
knew him to be a member of the Household of the Prophet(s) and Hadrat
Sadiq(a) said that Salman had known the Greatest Name (The secret great
name of God). (Kashi, Rijal p. 18, 22). This man of such extraordinary
caliber, on his arrival in Iraq, was recorded to have said that the
battlefield of Karbala was the place where Imam Husayn(a) and his
companions would fall. (Kashi, Rijal p.24).

Of those who were standing in opposition to the Imam(a), a number of
them had seen the Prophet(s) and had witnessed his miracles.
Nevertheless, in their actions, they denied his mission as God's
messenger and attacked the members ofhis inviolable Household, beheading
their men and innocent male children, and making prisoners of their pure
womenfolk.

Some among them had lived during the heyday of Amir al Mu'minin, All,
the Master of the Lovers of God, the Imam of mystics and the Paragon of
honesty, and during the era of his illustrious son Hadrat Mujtaba. Their
deeds, however, showed that they denied this divine source of light
manifested to them and chose to remain in abysmal darkness.

They actually denied revelation and rather than monotheism and the
mission of the Prophet(s) and the Imams(a) they chose Yazid, the
drunkard, and Ibn- Ziad, the bastard and became themselves incarnations
of vice. Yes, those who go astray, who with all their capabilities
support irrationalism, who repress their consciences and defy the Truth
are the most wicked of people.

The Qur'an says:

\*Lo! the worst ofhearts in Allah's sightare the deaf and the dumb who
have no sense \* (8/22)

Elsewhere the Qur'an says:

\*Lo! the worst ofhearts in Allah's sight are the ungrateful who will
not believe\* (8/55)

**Our Great Responsibility Concerning the event of Karbala**

In this great battle between these two tribes-one the representative of
good and the other the representative of evil-lies a very important
lesson for us. From Husayn(a) we can learn the lesson of virtue and
morality and protect ourselves against such hideous transgressions the
like of which Yazid and his men were notorious.

Sa'adi, a celebrated poet in the literary firmament of Iran, said:

One should follow every piece of good advice even if written on a wall.
Take as null and void whatever as the contrary, because one who is
asleep can awaken not others that are asleep as well.

Luqman the famous gnostic and saint said that he learnt morality from
immoral people, by doing the opposite of what they did. We can never
claim to be as virtuous as the companions of Husayn(a), but we can claim
we are on the path of good, as were those in the Caravan of Light.

**The Constancyof Husayn's (a) Companions**

The companions of Imam Husayn characteristically manifested the highest
degree of stamina and endurance. No military commander would undermine
the morale of his men if they were less in number or ammunition than
their enemy; rather, with fiery speeches he would try to make them feel
confident of victory and incite them to fight.

On the night of the battle however, the Imam(a) told his men that the
enemy would win the day by force of numbers and that they would be all
killed. They were exhilarated by this news and did not hesitate to
declare their readiness to stand firm by his side and fight to the
bitter end. In their eyes, it was the most grievous state to befall them
if they survived their leader even for a single moment. (Bihar, vol. 44,
p. 392, 393) Imam Sadiq(a) said that those who were ignorant of the
rights of the Household of the Prophet(s) would not be rewarded even if
they lived to be a hundred years and spent all of it in devotion.

The world is like a deep and stormy sea which without being guided by
God or His Messenger(s), man would indeed succumb to the perils of the
ocean. Husayn(a) is the torch for the Straight Path and the guide of the
shipwrecked to the shore of salvation. We must abandon the path of
transgression and embark on the path of Truth as his companions one of
whom Hurr ibn-Yazid did.

Hurr, knowing full well that it would cost him his life, repented of
his sins, he stopped following Yazid and accepted the Imamates of
Husayn(a) and that of Husayn's father(a). Hurr, while he was still
commander in Yazid's army, or 'wo occasions had shown his reverence to
Imam Husayn(a). The first occasion was at the time of the noon prayers
when the Imam(a) asked Hurr if he would prefer to say his prayers with
his own men or with him and Hurr answered that he preferred to be with
the Imam(a). On the second occasion, Hurr was present with his army when
the Imam(a) addressed the soldiers facing him saying:

Lo! O you Kufans! If you are God fearing, you know that it is we, the
folk of the Household of the Prophet(s) who are the righteous leaders of
the people, not those who treat you unjustly.

The Imam(a) further mentioned the letters the people of Kufa had
written supporting him and ordered a companion, Aqa ibn-Sam'an, to bring
the letters to show the soldiers as proof. In reply, Hurr, among whose
soldiers were many Kufans, said that they were not among those who had
written the letters and that they had orders to take the Imam(a) back to
Ubeidullah in Kufa.

When the Imam(a), in order to avoid confrontation, ordered his men to
ride back to Mecca or Medina, Hurr barred their way and thus paved the
way for more of Yazid's troops to arrive and surround the Imam's(a)
small group of fighters.

On the day of Ashura however, the prick of his conscience induced a
great remorse in him. He went back to Husayn's(a) camp to seek his
forgiveness and to cast his lot with the Caravan of Light. The Imam(a)
replied that God would accept his repentance. Later on, Hurr and his son
launched a brave and relentless attack upon the enemy and were both
eventually killed in the path of God. The Qur'an says:

\*O you who believe! Shall I show you a commerce that will save you
from a painful doom? You should believe in Allah and His messenger, and
should strive for the cause ofAllah with your riches and lives. That is
better for you if you did but know\* (61/10 -11)

What is meant here by commerce, is the willingness to trade a good,
comfortable life in this world for an abode in Paradise in the
Hereafter. Husayn(a) was victorious in the battle between truth and
falsehood, between light and darkness. Because ofhi s valor and
devotion, this descendant ofMustafataught human beings the lessonofself
sacrifice. The hero on the battlefield of courage took up the sword for
his divine cause and because of this the tree of religion bore fruit and
the palace of faith remained standing on solid foundations. Its
threshold is the Ka'aba of hope for those with certainty of faith and
its court the Qiblah for those of perspicacity.

For Yazid the palace of tyranny collapsed when he decided to extinguish
the light of God. It is indeed wonderful to behold that after all these
centuries, the fundamental distinction between truth and falsehood has
remained; that the truth continues-eternal-while that falsehood
represented by the Yazidi forces has utterly vanished.

Husayn(a) was a free man, a descendant of Heidar-Hadrat Ali(a)-and
Fatima(a), daughter of the Best among Mankind. How could such a symbol
ofreligious perfection yield to the will of a tyrant usurper? If his
chest should be the target of a poisoned arrow and if he should die of
thirst, he would never stoop to an enemy. We must learn to be free like
Husayn(a) and gain victory.

Rasa, the poet, has said in a verse:

The fragrance of his dust animates me and I long to embrace his
grave.


The Qur'an says:

\*He will forgive you your sins and bring you into Gardens underneath
which rivers flow, and pleasant dwellings in Gardens of Eden. That is
the supreme triumph. And (He will give you) another blessing which you
love: help from Allah and present victory. Give good tidings (O
Muhammad) to believers \* (61/12-13)


