7- the Text On Abu Baker
========================

So far we have not arrived at any proof to prevail on us to believe
that the Prophet left the office of IMAMAT to the choice of people or to
those who were the men to settle the disputes. We have to still search
for a man whom the Prophet should have appointed to succeed him. If so;
then who he was?

Is it correct; he was Abu Baker? There is much narration available to a
seeker if he could conceive the claimed one. The most authentic ones are
those, which he himself had stated especially before his death that
there were three things to be inquired which were never asked. One of
them the issue of caliphate as to for whom it was so that to avoid the
conflict.

Then the statement of Omar Bin Khattab, while nearing the death that
more seceded the prophet. Then, the state- ment of Ayesha. She is the
defender and zealot of her father; did a great deal to confirm his
caliphate. She had denied the succession when she was asked as to who
could he have had been, had the Prophet appointed to succeed him.7 Will
discredit all.

The argument that the very concourse grouped there was the legality
that gives sanction to the dedition to Abu Baker does not hold water.
Abu Baker stepped forward to Omar and Aba Obaida at SAQIFA and said: "I
am satisfied with one of these two men for you." Well, if there was a
text strictly defining him to succeed the Prophet; then why he chose
another? Why he refrained from the text? Why he acted as though he
himself was out of question?

In the speech of Omar that day these words uttered by him make clear
the situation: "Arabs do not know this affair except Quraish -- who are
the best among Arabs in their status and lineage."

Had there been an indication in favor of Omar, the Arabs would have not
7- It is strange that Ibn Hazm lays an excuse; (This thing was not known
to Omar as great many other things of the Prophet were not known to him.
such as the Prophet wanted to putdown into writing the issue of
succession. But, we do not see anything to decide that it was so. The
narrator is Ayesha.) If this was hidden from Ayesha and Omar then it
should have been more so for the others. All these texts are narrated on
the credit of Ayesha and no one else.

NOTE: Although not in the book, I would like to add: Ayesha claimed
that the Prophet had written a letter and deposited it with her telling
her that he had written therein about the succession and that she could
disclose it at its opportune time. Omar asked her whether was there any
such thing.

She said; yes. Then she was asked to produce the letter. She said: "I
had kept it under the pillow; but it is consumed by worm." (TRANSLATOR)
known the affair but him. It is not a station of shame to invite towards
one's self. The thing that dawn is the craft in inventing texts. Whoever
invented them, they did so in the fatigue of argument about the legality
of the caliphate on the basis of meeting, which too did not meet the
consent of those whom can not be ignored because of their position.

Here the bigotry pushed them to resort to falsehood or invention -- the
obstacle in the way of truth hindering from reaching the target.
Narration's that spring from bigotry snatch away the trust from others
and rob the confidence particularly when the issue be that of a
belief.

As for his praying under a commission from the Prophet, if that be
true; but he did pray among the Muslims-it is true. Let us probe
therein:

First: There is no indication in it for him to be the caliph.

Second: Leading the prayers is not so important that the person should
be an IMAM, or else, he can not. Particularly in Sunni religion
(including all the branches) it is free from several restrictions.
Muslims, one among them, used to lead the prayers for the others.

They were used to such a cycle. It was hearsay in those days among the
people that the Prophet encouraged the practice. It is narrated that Abu
Baker led the prayers without the Prophet's permission.8 Then he sought
the good offices of Bani Omar Bin Ouf for reconciliation.

The narration that indicates the Prophet's appointment of him to lead
the prayers and that he performed this office for some days does not
appear correct because of the fact that Abu Baker was then in the
Asama's army. The Prophet had strongly warned against any delinquency;
and had stressed upon executing the mission. So, how could Abu Baker
manage to be at two places -- in Asama's army and at the same time in
Madina to lead the prayers?

The thing that is established is this: He led the prayers, once only on
Monday at noon -- the day of the Prophets death. Before Abu Baker could
finish the prayers the Prophet came out of the house despite his
sickness and the pain in his legs which he was pulling on the ground.

He came to the mosque, pushed aside Abu Baker, and prayed. That the
Prophet ordered Abu Baker to lead the prayers has come down from Ayesha
alone. There is no other source to attest this. She contacted the
Prophet in this respect and he told her angrily: "You are like the
companions of Yousuf."

She proceeds in her narration and says about the Prophet's going out
for the very same prayers.9 His going out in that condition for the
prayers was on the day of his death-Monday.

Had the Prophet sent him to lead the prayers as an indication to his
being the future caliph; then why he came out in that painful condition
and performed the prayers by sitting down because of his inability to
remain stood? Let us see its ramifications: "The Prophet prayed; Abu
Baker followed the prayers of the Prophet; and the people followed the
prayers of Abu Baker."

8- Refer to SAHEEH AL-BUKHARI 1:8
9- Refer to SAHEEH AL-BUKHARI 1:78 & 84 (in two narration); also in
SAHEEH MUSLIM in chap. ISTIKHLAF AL-IMAM from book AL-SLAAT.

Then who is the leader of the prayers, i.e. the IMAM? It is confusion;
the Prophet was there; Abu Baker was there; people followed two of them?
One of them? It could be this as far as we can understand and if that be
correct. The Prophet was in a sitting position.

So, the people were not seeing him as well as not hearing him because
he was sick and his voice weak. The people made out his bowing and his
prostration through the prayers of Abu Baker who remained a little apart
parallel with the Prophet when the Prophet pushed him aside. The
narrations are confusing and conflicting in this respect and all of them
being from one source - that of Ayesha, mother of faithful. The gist of
difference runs in these six factors:

1) (Omar for the prayers) some narration gives us to understand that
the Prophet said: "Go to Omar" after Ayesha's contacting him about her
father. Omar abstained and preferred to Abu Baker.

Some say that the Prophet first ordered Omar; then Omar told Balal to
inform the Prophet that Abu Baker was awaiting at the door. Then, the
Prophet ordered Abu Baker.

Some say that it was Omar who performed the prayers first. Upon hearing
his voice the Prophet is quoted to have said: "God and the believers
forbid that." Some say that the Prophet enjoined Abu Baker to repeat the
prayers which bad already been performed by Omar.

Some say that Omar performed the prayers and Abu Baker was then absent.
Some say that the Prophet ordered Abu Baker and Abu Baker asked Omar to
lead the prayers, but Omar abstained.

2) The Prophet ordered Omar to order Abu Baker. Some quote Ayesha, some
Bilal and some Abdullah Bin Zam'a as the source of this narration.

3) As for the person who contacted the Prophet about Abu Baker; some
say that Ayesha alone contacted the Prophet three times or more. Some
say that Ayesha contacted the Prophet and Hafasa did so once or twice.
When the Prophet got angry upon her, she told Ayesha; "No good from you
has reached me."

4) As for the time of the prayers: Some point to the evening prayers;
some to the night prayers and some to the morning prayers.

5) As for going out of the Prophet: According to some, he went out and
led the prayers; according to others, he brought his head out of the
curtain, and saw the people behind Abu Baker, then let the curtain hang
as it was before. But he did not perform the prayers.

6) As for the prayers of the Prophet after his coming out:

Some narrate that he followed the leadership of Abi Baker after
slapping at his back and keeping him from giving the place. According to
some, Abu Baker gave up the ministry of the prayers and followed the
Prophet. According to some, Abu Baker followed the Prophet and the
people followed Abu Baker.

According to some, the Prophet proceeded from where Abu Baker had
stopped.

7) As for the sitting position of the Prophet by the side of Abu Baker:
some say he sat at his right while according to some it was at his
left.

8) As for the duration of the period: Some go as far as to cover the
whole period of the Prophet's illness. Some say he performed only
seventeen prayers. According to some, he prayed for three days; some say
six days; and some indicated only one prayer.

9) As for the time of the Prophet's coming out: According to some he
came out for the same prayers for which he had ordered Abu Baker. Some
say that he came out for the noon prayers after few days when Abu Baker
had already prayed. Some indicate that it was for the morning prayers.

These differences in the very theme of the episode rob the trust to
believe its particularities. How they conflict and how they contradict
each other as though wrestling! From this labyrinth one can come out
with only one thing in hand and that is the prayers of Abu Baker heading
the people prior to the coming out of the Prophet.

We can only say by way of sympathy that it was perhaps a trick played
on Abu Baker. A sham command of the Prophet was conveyed to him, as it
appears in one of the narration, Abdullah Bin Zam'a deceived Omar Bin
Khattab who in his turn conveyed the Prophet's order to Abu Baker to
perform the prayers.

As to the reality of the episode, it can be presumed to have had been
this:

When the Prophet saw himself unable to leave the house, ordered the
people to perform their prayers themselves without waiting for him. This
caused the bloom of the opportunity and the opportunity set the promise
of a future excellence at bloom. Some one had to pick it up.

So he did. When the Prophet heard of it, he had to come out pulling his
legs on ground as the pain had failed them to pace; and performed the
prayers in that emergency by sitting. He did so to show the people how
wrong was the deliberation that had committed such a hoyden hood.

His impeachment to Ayesha at her contacting him about her father as he
said: "You are like the companions of Joseph" further supports the above
presumption. Otherwise, there was no reason for such a harsh
impeachment. If she did not deserve praise, she did not deserve the pain
either. But, it shows the magnitude of the wrong.

This opens an avenue of doubt. Perhaps it could have been her own
mischief. It could be she who concocted this, which failed in all that.
It is natural for a daughter to desire dignity for her father. Ayesha
could not be an exception. But she later seemed to have realized that
the people did not like to see her father in the place of the Prophet
performing what the Prophet used to do.

When the Prophet sent after Ali to make his will to him, Ayesha hurried
in calling her father as Hafasa too did the same. When the Prophet saw
them gathered, he dismissed them telling them: "If there be a need to me
I shall send after you."10 Such a tone expresses his disgust and anger.
Now to conclude: In 10- AL-TABARI (3:195)

spite of such a long search we did not come across any indication or
reference to the benefit of Abu Baker so as to be the caliph.


**8- Text Pertaining to Ali Bin Abi Taleb**

Is it correct what the Shias say about the text defining Ali? Of the
preceding disappointment this question is a natural outcome. I wish my
readers to be impartial about what the Shia say about this man, Ali.

There is no need of the ado in reverting to their books. Who knows?
They being zealots of Ali might say what would goad one towards him as
did the narrators in favor of Abu Baker. So, vigilance is the best to
remain at.

Whatever the Sunni authors have written about Ali; we should be at
guard. It is not that they are adversaries to him. No, never. Many of
the narrators have had been at guard with those who relate Ali's praise
or his superiority.

Wherever there be a list towards Ali the relevant author is
expropriated and the narration itself censured under the pretext of the
oddity it contains. There are those who entertain rancor towards Ali
like Abi Huraira, Mughaira Bin Shuba and Omran Bin Hattan. Their
narration could be trustworthy to those who share their rancor.

Besides, we find the swords of Bani Ommiyds drawn over the heads of the
narrators in order to check them in their writings to not attribute a
good quality to Ali against whom a long rankling antagonism was
established and to scold him over the pulpits and on the pathways was
made a tradition. On the other hand, we find them lavishing gift and
presents upon those who could say or write bad of him or take distance
from him.

Therefore, you will find me, dear reader, halting at every narration in
order to satisfy myself of its credibility. It suffices me to dwell upon
what could come out of the traditions aided by its correctness and
supported by a general acknowledgement.

Several books of Sunni sources have recorded the superiority of Ah and
the text that defines him as the caliph. But, still lam far from
trusting them. I only take into accounts what is indisputable due to its
having had obtained currency and continuity among the traditionalists as
an acknowledged fact.

True it is that Ali enjoyed a great position serving his cousin, the
Prophet. His nearness to the Prophet even incited jealousy among
Muslims. Ayesha has stated: "I didn't see a man dearer to the Prophet
than Ali nor did I see a woman dearer to him than Ali's wife."

The Prophet used to praise his son-in-law, Ali. This was his practice
at every occasion since Ali's birth, which preceded the prophet hood by
ten years till the Prophet, died in his embrace. We shall quote here a
few traditions - the most authentic and the most repeated ones, which
establish his competency to the caliphate:

1) "And admonish the nearest ones of your tribe"; when this verse
descended, the Prophet gathered forty men of his family. This was at the
initial stage of his prophet hood. The Prophet invited them to Islam and
guaranteed brotherhood, inheritance, ministry, succession and caliphate
to one who helps him (the Prophet). All abstained except Ali. The
Prophet pulled him forwards and said:

"This is my brother, my successor and my caliph among you (Or after me
as per various narrations); listen to him and obey him." Then, the
gathering got up laughing among themselves sarcastically.

They taunted Abi Taleb upon having been enjoined by the Prophet to
listen and obey the boy, meaning his son Ali.11 2) In the battle of
KHANDAQ, when Ali went to give the answer to the challenge of Omar Bin
Abdawad; the Prophet said: The whole faith has emerged to a whole
polytheism." This was in the year 5 Hijra.

3) In the battle of KHAIBER the Prophet took pride in him against
those, who had retreated with the banner, and said: "I shall give the
banner tomorrow to a man who endears God and His Prophet and is endeared
by God and His Prophet." He gains and never loses ground in a battle.
"All remained in anticipation. But the Prophet gave the banner to Ali.
This was in the year 7 Hijra.

4) He chose Ali for himself and entangled him in brotherhood with
himself. This he did prior to emigration to Madina when he imposed
brotherhood among the Muhajareen to Madina when he imposed brotherhood
among the Muhajareen and again after five months among the Ansaar (the
helpers).

He addressed him thus: "You are to me in the status in which Harun was
with Moses with the only exception that there is no prophet after me."

These words the Prophet reiterated on several occasions; one of which
was when the roadside doors of the mosque were closed down except the
door of Ali.12 During the battles of TABUK in the year of 9 Hijra the
Prophet ordered Ali to stay at Madina in his absence. He told Ali: "I
should not go unless leave you; you are my successor."13 (Ibn Abbas
Zaida is the narrator).

5) The Prophet has said to Ali: "You will not be endeared but by a
faithful (believer) and will not be hated but by a hyprorite." This
became a standard, a criterion -on which hyprorites were used to be
recognized.

6) The Prophet said: "There is one among you who will fight for the
sake of correct interpretation of Quran as I fought for the sake of safe
keeping its Revelation. "Then, he (the Prophet negated Abu Baker and
Omar to be that man and said: "But he is mender of footwear." Ali was
that time mending the footwear of the Prophet in the room of Fatima.

7) One day a bird was cooked for the Prophet. Before eating the bird
the Prophet said: "O God, let come one among the dearest ones to you to
eat the bird with me." Ali came and shared with the Prophet.

11- It is very odd that Prof. Mohammed Hussein Haikal has mentioned
this incident in his book 'Life of Muhammed' in its first print but
omitted it in subsequent prints without giving any reason or note.

12- The mosque had doors Opening into the road. People used to frequent
to the mosque from the road which ultimately caused a sort of
encroachment upon the sanctity of mosque. Therefore, the Prophet ordered
the closure of the doors except in the business hours. But the Prophet
made exception for All and kept a door always open for him. This
obtained the name DOOR OF ALI. (TRANSLATOR)

13- AL-HAKEEM in "AL-MUSTADRAK", and AL-ZEHABI in his "summary" have
dwelt on it.

8) The Prophet said: "I am the town of knowledge and Ali its door."

9) The Prophet said: "The most Just among you is Ali."

10) The Prophet said: "Ali is with Truth and the Truth with Ali; never
to be separated till both meet me at the fountain."14

11) The Prophet confirmed to Ali more than once that he would succeed
him (the Prophet) and inherit him (the Prophet). Besides, he also
specified that the succession and inheritance was that of the prophet
hood. Once he said: "There is a successor and inheritor to every
prophet; and mine is Ali."15

Ali once asked the Prophet: "What would it be that I shall inherit from
you?" The Prophet replied: "What the prophets inherited before; Book of
their Lord and the Tradition of their prophet."16

12) The Prophet said (in the year 8 Hijra): "Ali is from me and I from
Ali. No one will pay on my behalf except me and Ali.17

13) The Prophet said: "I am from Ali and Ali is from me; and he is
guardian of every believer after me."

14) The Prophet said to Ali: "You are guardian of every believer after
me."

15) All the doors of the mosque were closed down except that of Ali.
Omar said: "Three things were given to Ali. Had I been given one of them
it would have been to me the 'red of the cattle'; his wife, Fatima --
daughter of the Prophet; his residence, the mosque with the Prophet --
hails to him what it is to the Prophet; and the banner given to him on
the day of KHAIBER." Omar's son narrates that the Prophet, upon being
asked about keeping the door of Ali open, said: "I am a servant under
orders. I did what I was ordered to. I only follow whatever that is
revealed to me."

16) Prior to emigration when the Prophet brought together in
brotherhood every two among the emigrants (MUHAJAREEN) he chose Ali for
himself and said to him: "You are my brother and my inheritor' You are
to me in the same position in which Harun stood to Moses but the only
exception is that there will be no prophet after me."

Accordingly he did the same when he brought together in brotherhood the
ANSAAR (helpers) and the MUHAJAREEN. He chose Ali in the ties of
brotherhood for himself. This was after five months since the migration.
He used to call him brother on many occasions.

17) In the year 10 Hijra, after returning from the farewell pilgrimage
(HAJAL-WIDA), that is his last pilgrimage, on the way the prophet
ordered the caravan to halt for prayers; prayed in that meridional heat,
then stood among the pilgrims who were more than one hundred thousand
people and addressed them.

14- Fountain of Kothar: In the Day of Judgement the faithful ones could
reach the fountain where their thirst is quenched. (TRANSLATOR)

15- Refer to MIZAN AL-ETEDAAL about the narration, Muhammed Bin Hameed
al-Razi, is said that he was not trustworthy. On the other hand he is
viewed trustworthy by Ahmad Bin Hanbal, Abul Oassim al- Baghawi,
Al-Tabari, Ibn Moyeen and others. Besides, this narration is also stated
by Syoti in "LA'ALI" and by Al-Hakeem.

16- Refer KANZUL AMMAAL 5:41

17- To pay on Other's behalf is not obligatory except to him who
inherits. (TRANSLATOR) First, he informed them about his death; then he
reminded the two heavy things to them: Book of God and his own progeny
and that neither one parts the other nor that as long as they are
adhered nobody would ever go astray. Then he took Ali's hand and said:

"O, You the people! Am I not the preferred one among you? Am I said:
"Yes, the Prophet of God." The Prophet reiterated his question and they
their answer. Then he proceeded thus: "To he whom I was his lord, so is
Ali his lord." his lord; so is Ali his guardian. "O, God, adhere to
those who adhere to him, and be adverse to those who are adverse to him,
help those who help him, and vilify those who vilify him, and steer the
Truth with him however steers he."

Omar came to Ali and said: "Congratulations, O Son of Abi Taleb! You
became lord of every faithful one -- he and she.''18 Or in some
narration: "You became my lord and lord of every faithful he and
she."19

These traditions are extracted from the books of AL-SAHEEH. We suffice
on this little, as this book can not consume the much, which we have to
forego. Now with regards to the Quranic verses: Ibn Abbas says "In the
Book of God exists three hundred verses pertaining to Ali." Through the
Sunni authorities only one hundred verses are distinguished and
classified in this aspect. We choose only three out of the bulk:

1) "Indeed, your guardian is God, and His Messenger, and those who
believe, who establish the prayer and give alms while they bow down (in
worship)." (5:58)

The occasion of coming down of this verse is that Ali, while bowing
down in prayers, had given in charity his ring to a beggar. In this
verse God confirms his guardianship over the people as that of God and
His Prophet.

2) "This is what God desires-to avoid upon you the sin, members of the
House, and purify you a (perfect) purification." (33:33)

The occasion for this verse is that the Prophet had grouped Ali, Fatima
and their two sons, Hasan and Hussain, and blanketed himself along with
them under a covering. This verse caters the condition needed for one to
be the Imam that is the necessity of being infallible and impeccable.

3) "If any one disputed therein after the knowledge has come to you,
say: 'Come, let us gather our sons and your sons, our women and your
women, ourselves and yourselves; then pray and invoke curse of God upon
the liars." (3:61)

The dispute with the Christians of Najran is the occasion.20 In the
verse Ali is classified as the self of the Prophet.

18- MASNAD AHMAD 1281:4), TAFSEER AL-THALABl, SAWAIO AL-MOHRIQA'
SHIB'HA 11 on behalf of Abi Baker and Omar-both.

19- TAFSEER AL-RAZI, in the interpretation of the verse: "O, the
messenger, convey what came down to you."

20- To resolve the dispute such was agreed as it is stated in the
verse. But when the christians saw the Prophet with his daughter
(Fetimah), Ali, Hasan & Hussain; they yielded to compromise upon the
advice of their elders who dreaded the chastisement of God it that
little group was let to curse. (TRANSLATOR) The very saying itself that
the Prophet left the appointment of caliph undecided; it becomes
necessary that one of his companions should have been classified or
identified. And, yet, Abubaker was not the 'he'. Then, who that 'he'
was?

There never exists anyone except Ali whom either the traditions such as
those mentioned or the Verses of Quran which are in such a texture that
one supports the other and stands as an interpretation to another.

For instance, the inheritance of prophet hood and the inheritor of the
Prophet, the Prophet's successor, the Prophet's brother, the Prophet's
own self, gaurdian of the Faithful ones after the Prophet, the preferred
one among them, his position as that of Harun with Moses (excluding the
prophethood), the Prophet's caliph after the Prophet, steers the Truth
with him as he steers-the both will never separate, he, the most just
one in the nation,

he, the door of the town of the Prophet's knowledge, he, the purified
one from the sin; all these qualities are attributed only to an
infallible Imam or the Prophet's caliph chosen by God and His apostle
for the nation. How could it be coherent with reason to be the preferred
one among the believers and be their guardian after the Prophet and yet
to be goaded under the yoke like every common man and obedience should
be the demand and to obey a duty upon him??? Bilemy!!

Desire on one side to preserve the prestige of the companions (of the
Prophet) and dread on the other to pervert the text of the Prophet went
hand in hand to push the researchers to interpret each of these words
with either reservation or conservation. To them we would like to say
that to go contrary to the text of the Prophet's words is a thing
neither odd nor strange when the intentions of those companions become
known or remain no more a secret.

On the other side, these very researchers are very miser in giving
interpretations to some of the traditions such as that of GHADEER or
that of the verse "Indeed, your Protector is God..." or that of "...Lord
of every faithful after me." They have taken the word of MOWLA as
'helper' or a 'friend'.

To dwell the word (MOWLA) as a helper or a friend particularly in the
case of GHADEER is neither cogent nor coherent with the very occasion.
The linguists have interpreted the word MOWLA as one who possesses the
right of use besides the meaning of helper or a friend.

The words speak not openly when they are put into comparison. The
Prophet stood in that glowing heat and addressed a gathering of more
than one hundred thousand people only to tell that Ali is the helper of
the faithful ones or a friend to them? It is far from reason. Indeed,
there should have had been a matter of great magnitude which the Prophet
had to convey and had to make alert the attention of the people.

This he did. First he foretold them of his approaching death; then he
mentioned the two things of much weight; then he took the hand of Ali
and raised it to the length that the whiteness of the skin under his
shoulders became visible to all. In such a posture it was that he asked,
"Am I not superior than you among you?"


Then, what this bedlam? And what this conspiracy? Were those words of
the Prophet just balderdash? A matter of eternal importance was conveyed
and it was brought home to understand that Ali is the lord to those whom
the Prophet was.

Indeed, the words besides conveying their sense do obviously say this
too that Ali is his example and his like --superior among the believers
as he himself is, as the word MASTER represents; same it is as the word
MOWLA does in Arabic that is the possessor or one who holds the use of a
thing or the affair.

There is nothing to be argued here. The meaning of the word MOWLA
envelops the sense of possession. Those who are stubborn have given an
interpretation to this word, which is far from common sense.

To avoid the dispute let us dwell upon this tradition "This brother of
mine is my successor and my caliph amidst you (or behind me); so listen
to him and obey him." This tradition is an acknowledged and irrefragable
one. Its text clearly establishes the right for Ali to succeed the
Prophet.

Abu Baker has this text for his successor: "I have ordered Omar Bin
Khattab upon you."21 This text is benefit of openness and can not be fit
with that of the Prophet. An order befits the army and anything else.
The word of caliph was more frequent in the utterance either that of the
Prophet or that of the Muslims and that too in the sense, which is the
kernel of this word.

To support our findings we quote here a statement of the Prophet: "This
thing remains valid till the twelve caliphs, all of them from Quraish,
succeed one another among them." So, the sense of the word 'caliph' can
not be doubted here as it is the case with the word Quraish. Then why
should not the word 'my caliph' be taken into the same sense when it is
used in relation to Ali? Did the (the Prophet) ever use this word in
another sense?

The only difference between the text of the Prophet's word and that of
Abu Baker's is that what Abu Baker said was imposed upon the people
regardless of its interpretation and doubt while the Prophet's word
remained without practice or obedience within the folds of the book and
the bosoms of the people.

Moreover, mistake for scholars is not pleasant. We are long acquainted
with them for not confining themselves to the text of the Prophet's
statements. And such instances are innumerous. To refer to some we
suffice to mention: Their hesitation to go in the military expedition
under Asama's leadership which incensed the Prophet. They still
refrained from going till the Prophet died.

Objection of Omar at the peace treaty of HUDAIBA. Disobedience of Omar
to the orders of the Prophet when he asked for a pen and paper to write
down for the guidance of the people so that they may not go astray.

Now there are only two ways ahead of us; to entertain these traditions
regardless of their accuracy or discrepancy to the case or to say that
those companions interpreted them for some errand or the other. Indeed,
the second 21- To be honest with the Arabic text I have translated
such.

(TRANSLATOR) way is the nearest to debate under reason and logic
because we have seen those companions going contrary to the words of the
Prophet in his very lifetime while there stood no ground whatsoever for
any interpretation Those who hold a good will towards them could believe
that they (the companions) never intended to disobey the Prophet as they
were only thoughtful of the common interests because they were used to
be consulted by the Prophet in line with God's orders, "And consult them
in the matter." Therefore, it never occurred to them that they were
interfering in the public matters while the Prophet was binding them
into orders.

We are far from entertaining argument to debate the excuse of the
Companions of the Prophet. However, we do desire to point out to those
who go blind to the facts as they just gaze the Companions. Let them
know that we do not find any word more expounding than the word 'my
successor' and the word 'my guardian' uttered by the Prophet and at once
followed by his order 'to listen to him' and 'to obey to him'.

Tradition No. 11 attests: "To every apostle there is a guardian and
inheritor. To me he is Ali Bin Abi Taleb." In this tradition the
openness speaks for itself. Guardianship of prophet hood is not a thing
common. Inheritance to the prophet hood too is the same; it is not that
of property or pelf.

Ali is his cousin besides his son-in-law. He does not inherit, as does
the Prophet's daughter (his wife). Inheritor of prophet hood does not
mean a prophet himself. His station is such as that of the Prophet where
obedience becomes obligatory to all to be performed, as a duty not
presented as a favor. The Prophet exempted him from the rest. He
inherits knowledge of the Prophet while others can not.

Each of the traditions if not testifying Ali's being an Imam or a
caliph does in the least possible establishes a ground where any
likelihood of an interpretation is obviated. If still we see ourselves
under a ruling of doubt, we can well ask for a word or two that could in
some way or other point to one of his Companions.

If we do not find any, it would again be our right to investigate into
the whole business that vested the dispute to the choice of people.
There too if reason does not satisfy us, we have to return back from
this impasse empty handed.

A doubt still prevails on the researchers. A setback for them on their
way to proceed ahead and a poke repeatedly put into the wheel. This is
what they say: The traditions specify and determine the caliphate of
Ali, as the Shias say, then why Ali did not demand there upon his right.
Why Ali did not protest the Companions or the Muslims gathered at
Saqifa?

This is the doubt -- a better avenue than the denial of the text.
Indeed, the researchers have answered this query. To shorten the length
I would dwell on this much:

When the affair ended in the favor of Abu Baker and he was declared as
the caliph; Ali had to face two alternatives without a third. One: To
yield to the thing happened and forego any public campaign; this for the
sake of the very entity or survival of Islam. Two: To fight till evening
his right. Let us see what says he himself: "I started looking either to
take with my amputated hand or to bear a dark pit." When he made the
choice and he knew what it was; he says:

"Hence, I saw the patience on both the things more wise as there was no
ground to launch an open compaign for the caliphate. So, I turned from
it my face away, and shook my shirt from it." Had he demanded, he had to
endeavor too with whatever power available to him.

In what time Islam was then? We shall dwell in the coming chapter. As
for the companions, they had their men. Although at Saqifa Ansaar
declared: "We do not yield but to Ali". These words, as the winds blew,
gone with the winds too and the history either ignored or forgot. We
could only remind to our readers in our coming discussions in this
book.


