The Prophet's Plan To Avoid the Ifference
=========================================

**1) ASAMA DELEGATION:**

The Prophet became sick and the sickness told upon his life. He knew
that the nation was at the verge of a precipice. His presence had kept
them safe. The moment he dies: a movement they dash; a slip would send
them headlong down into the sea where the waves raise and fall in a
typhoon of treachery hailing from a man soon of mischief. The Arabs will
confound their own good; teeth will be grinded to bite the members of
his House and his people.

The leaping opportunities will lull those who embrace them to launch
revenges. On the other hand, the hypocrites will seek ambush in the
midst of Muslims telling them what their hearts do not hold. All this
harassing episodes came to his sight in much as the incident of rolling
goglets at the tortile passage was also quite recent to him.22 Moreover
and above all, Aswad al-Anasi and Musailama had set foot in the arena of
prophet hood;

and enmity with the real Prophet had lent lustre to a simulacrum. All
this was much enough to occupy the mind that was now mindful of the
talons of death.

The Prophet's condition got worsening and the mischief extending as the
negritude of a night. The clouds shall soon deplete their contents on
the town.23 Yet, at the threshold of death that great mind charts out
the best. He sends his army, thick, to a land remote. The command of the
army he vests to a youth of teenage by name Asama Bin Zaid.

All the magnates of MUHAJAREEN and ANSAAR (emigrants and helpers)
including Abubaker,24 Omar Bin Khattab, Abdul Rehman Ibn Ouf, Abu
Obaida, Sa'ad Bin Abi Waqqas, Aseed Bin Hazeer and Basheer-Ibn Sa'ad
were enjoined to join the army under the command of that young Asama to
fight in the land of BALKHA with the people of Obny who had defeated the
Muslim army on a previous occasion and killed Zaid, the commander,
father of Asama.

The Prophet pushed the army to move and cursed the delinquents. But
those who spurned the suzerainty of a teenager as the yoke of his
command fell heavy upon their old necks procrastinated.

Their procrastination provoked the anger of 22- This bear of reference
to story, which I brief here: The Prophet came from Madina and camped
near Mecca. His intention was to perform HAJ OMRA. When the pagans heard
this, they sent word to him to return back to Madina and come on the
next season under a treaty or covenant.

This served a prelude for the treaty of HUDAIBA, which was concluded
next year. So, the Prophet with his associates returned back to Madina
on the same night. On their hilly way at a sharp turn a group awaited at
the top of the hillock. As the camel endeavored the turn at such a
difficult passage, the men in ambush above sent down several goglets
filled with stones, which caused a horrible sound as they rolled down.
But the Prophet controlled the camel from getting wild at such an hour
of night. (TRANSLATOR)

23- SAHEEH MUSLIM (8:168 chap. NUZOOL AL-FITAN)

24- Many of the historians have stated the entry of Abu Baker in the
expedition.Among them are these historians: Ibn Sa'ad in 'Tabaqaat'
(16:4) & (136:4);Ibn Asaker in 'Tahzzeb' (391:2), (215:3); writer of
'Kanzul Ommal' (312:5); writer of 'Al-Qamees' history (174:2); Muhammad
Husaain Haikal, among the contemporaries in his 'Life of Mohammadd'
(467) and several others.

There does not exist any indication that could suggest his departure
from the Asama's army. Some have referred 'Magnates of Muhajareen" (i.e.
Ujoohak -Muhajareen) without mentioning any name. Some stubborn
historians have flatly rejected the entery of Abubakr in Asma's army
without any proof or ground.

the Prophet. Therefore he told them: "You are crossing his command as
you did the command of his father before while God was in concord with
the command and now his son is a perfect match to command."

This incident raises astonishment in the thoughts; if rumination is
solicited the result relaxes the curiosity:

First: A great army of Islam that day and in that delicate Situation
emanating from the illness of the Prophet, and more delicate the
mission -- to go to the war of the ardent enemies of Islam away from the
Islamic capital under the command of a youth whose age did not go beyond
twenty springs -- neither experience supported him nor military
knowledge aided him; nor such a duty ever called his performance before;
as to move either to return back with the pride of victory or remain in
that outlandish fields slain and killed.

Second: yet, this boy is commissioned; and the shaikhs of Muslims --
the chiefs of tribes, the Companions of the Prophet and those who were
commanders before are ordered to report their duty to this young man.25
Third: The Muslims delayed to join while the Prophet hasted.

They still delayed and upon them heaped the curses of the Prophet. They
prolonged the delay up to fourteen days. The young commander remained
camped at JURE away from Madina by three and quarter miles awaiting his
army to join him.

Neither shame withheld them nor did the fear of God. They went in their
disobedience to the Prophet. They knew they were giving anger to the
Prophet and receiving from him his curses; yet, they remained insurgents
to him. Curse from a Divine man like the Prophet of God told nothing on
their belief because now that man was nearing his death. Why at all they
revolted?

Fourth: Their rejection to undergo the command of a youth did not make
them to fear the anger of the Prophet. If they were true Muslims, had
they believed in the Prophet; they had no right to deny obedience to him
as long as the belief says that his action and his utterance is based on
God's revelation to him; and this belief takes away the choice from
them.

Fifth: The Prophet knew his end has approached and thereby approached
the darkness of the night. But, he was sending army away from the
capital and by that sweeping Madina from the presence of the chiefs of
Muhajareen and Ansaar and the men who had a say in the disputes.

All this shows that he held a point of a greater importance in his
conspectuity. To search into the viewpoint of the Prophet we can make
out the following conclusions which the Prophet should have had desired
as long as he held the secrets of God known to him by revelation.

25- I deem it necessary to add a brief explanation here: The enlisting
into army in those days was like this. The commander, whoever he is,
after being commissioned by the Prophet used to go Outside the town and
plant the banner in the ground. Then the people or the fighters used to
join him under hit banner. In other words it was the first camp where
from the army used to move. In those days there were not reserved
forces.

The forces were gathered among the people themselves who usually had
military experience and mostly well equipped in this craft. A word from
the Prophet was enough and the forces were gathered. But this expedition
stands unique for the disobedience of cardinal figures with the
Prophet's orders. (TRANSLATOR)

First: The measure is the efficiency in governing the things --, and
not the fame nor the age. This he wanted to bring home to Muslims.
Therefore, he told emphatically about the efficiency of Asama.

If we consider that Ali Bin Abi Taleb was nearing to take over the
responsibility of the affairs of the Muslims, and let us suppose there
was not text to have had specified him; yet, the case of Asama serves a
pilot or a prelude to acquaint the people with the criterion of
capability regardless of age for the leadership. That day age of Ali had
not gone beyond thirty. We do not see any other interpretation to the
riddle of Asama's expedition.

Second: He wanted to make the ground clear for Ali by dispatching all
those who had grinded their teeth for the caliphate. He seemed to be
sure of the setback in the way as it is evident by his remark: "My
household members shall be the victims after my death."

Hence, we see he enjoined to go in Asama's army every that one who had
lengthened his neck to hart a look of greed at the fast approaching
vacancy. Exemption of Ali from this army supports us in our inference.
Likewise all those who were the party (Shia) of Ali were exempted.

Besides, we reach the same conclusion if we were to interpret the
reason of those who delayed in reporting their presence to the
Commander, Asama; and their spreading the rumor of the Prophet's death.
What is evident is their own guilt -- which kept them from disclosing
their real errand. They just took refuge in an excuse that the commander
was an inexperienced youth. Beyond this we detect another guilt.

They did purport that they understood better than the Prophet whose
wisdom was catered on Divine Revelation. There is no excuse but a
fact -- established by themselves -- that they openly disobeyed the
Prophet and to him they remained stubborn.

The Prophet realized that his statements which he gave concerning the
one to succeed him were not enough to put into practice as they
refrained from joining the army under Asama's command; or, the greed
would have returned them back had they proceeded.

Third: The argument that a youth of teenage is not fit for the
responsibility of a battle, then how could it fit even a greater
responsibility of governing the affairs of all the Muslims; is only a
lame endeavor to obfuscate the fact for the people.

The gist that can be deduced from this planned expedition of Asama is
to clear the way for Ali in accordance with the circumstances
surrounding them because the Prophet did know as per the signs he had
noticed that they would concoct a plot.

So, he exerted his efforts to send them away while exempted Ali and his
associates from the obligation. They disobeyed him. He was nearing his
death. The situation for the Muslims was serious. He cursed them. And a
curse of the Prophet is a curse, today and tomorrow too, as it was
yesterday. As the time is cycling, its echo is heard.

As long as the time exists, this too exists that being a young or being
an old is not the canon; it is the obligation charted by the Prophet and
laid down on the obedience; some turned stubborn-but they only purchased
the Prophet's curse and the obligation was not obliterated. Obedience to
it runs as the time does.

Insufficient years in the age of the commander were sufficient enough
to cause the uneasiness among them; is in itself a good excuse, but it
coasts neither conviction nor cogency as much as it serves to hang a
curtain over a subterraneous trait which the Prophet had already
discovered.

If the reason was this, then why did they implement the Asama's
expedition under the same command of a teenager as soon as the issue of
caliphate was settled in the favor of Abu Baker? Omar himself addressed
this very teenager as 'AMEER' (chief) throughout his life because of his
superiority in that expedition which was a success too.

Another strange excuse that we hear is not less astonishing. It was not
a disobedience that they delayed. It was sympathy for the prophet
because of his oiling condition. Had they obeyed the prophet it would
have had been a greater and a befitting sympathy to a dying man rather
than to disappoint him and make him angry which was so painful to him
that he cursed.

A good in its exuberance and abundance would have hailed had they been
good enough to obey their Prophet. The course of history would have
changed. "If the people of the towns had but believed and feared (God),
We should indeed have opened out to them blessings from the sky and
earth; but they lied, and we punished them for what they were
attaining." (7:94)

The events that followed, the difference that flooded sweeping the
unity of Muslims, the blood that flowed in the erine and ferly wars, the
power that became feeble, and the fatal blows on the religious sanctity;
all this is because of that -- the open disobedience to the Prophet!

What a great havoc and a great calamity the Prophet tried to protect
the nation from; but to a dying man there is no command, and to whom no
command -- no obedience too.

B-- A Paper and a Pen:

The Prophet witnessed their disobedience. To go to the pulpit, his
sickness failed him. This was the first time in his life at Madina that
his orders were denied to his face. He saw his own inability to execute
his orders, which he was so insistent upon. Therefore, he should resort
to some other means to implement the need. He was not yet dead and
disobedience had made its phase. So, how could they be expected to obey
afterwards?

To write down was the best alternative; and he resorted to. That would
be a fixed text nothing to be doubted nor forgotten. They will not be
misguided, as there will be no deviation from the right path because
there exists writing. This he wanted to do. It was Thursday. His
condition got worse. In the house men were present among them Omar Bin
Khattab. "Provide me so that to write a treatise for you.

You will never go astray later on." The Prophet told the men.

What a great opportunity! An eternal security from getting astray! How
advantageous an offer it was; not only to those who were present but to
the posterity. A bounty it was. Curiosity suggests that they should have
hasted to give him a paper and a pen so as to make eternal what he
wishes to write. But, alas, it was not so!

Oman Bin Khattab impeded the compliance. He said:" the pain has
overpowered the Prophet of God." According to some narration he said:
"This man is talking nonsense. You have Quran. The Book of God is enough
to us." A debate took place among the men. Some sided the suggestion of
Omar that the man was talking nonsense….

So, now what the Prophet should do? Sickness him; and in his presence
such an opinion about him was expressed to his very face. But the belief
says this: "He never speaks of his own unless it is a Revelation." Then,
what blame this is upon the Prophet that he was talking which carried no
sense?

God forbid from such a conjecture. The division of opinion took its
root and the root took deeper and deeper to this day of ours. He did not
see any other alternative but to hint at their own error.

He said: "Go away. You should not quarrel in the presence of the
Prophet." This he said so as to register his displeasure upon their
behavior -- an evidence of their disobedience, throughout the ages.

In fact, it is a calamity -- one among the greatest, because of the
rejection to guidance. Ibn Abbas, the ink of the nation, used to say:
"It is a calamity that he (Omar) hindered him from writing the treatise
he wanted to write."

Let one ruminate what was the point in Omar's objection? Had he written
what harm it could have done to Omar? The Prophet wanted to leave a
written instruction for the nation's guidance. So, he rejects that
guidance not only to himself but for the whole nation. Another question
arises. Did Omar really believe that the Prophet of God was talking
without a meaning or a sense? To carry such a belief one should be
ignorant of the Prophet's status as well as Quran too.

If we proceed a little further and come to Abu Baker, this very same
Omar did not say that he (Abu baker) was talking nonsense when he wanted
to make the will about the caliphate although occasionally he was going
into coma while dictating the will which later Othman completed by
inserting Omar's name fearing his death before the completion of letter.
The status of Abu Baker is not that of the Prophet. But he, although in
coma, spoke the sense? What a tyranny to Mohammed?

It is quite obvious that Omar did know what the Prophet wanted to
commit to the paper. It was the appointment of Ali to succeed him
because on previous occasion, at GHADEER,

the Prophet had declared: "Two heavy things, Book of God and his
progeny" and had classified "Both will not separate from each other till
they come to him at the fountain"26, and had added "You will never go
astray if you adhere to them both." So, when the Prophet said while
asking for 26- It refers to the Fountain of kothar, which on the Day of
Judgement is under the utilization of the Prophet to quench whomsoever
he chooses. (TRANSLATOR)

pen and paper "After that you will never go astray"27, it served a good
hint for Omar to know the Prophet's mind. Omar said: "Book of God is
enough for us" which purports that among the two, one is enough -- no
need for the other. Why he chose one and rejected the other at a time
the Prophet was talking nonsense (according to his own declaration).

When Omar understood the message and was mindful what to accept and
what to reject; then the Prophet had not uttered any nonsense. It was
far from politeness to accuse the Prophet of such a thing and that too
to his face.

Indeed, it is neither easy nor simple; it is a matter of courage, and
courage against whom? Against the Prophet of God the Almighty!!! There
was only one to show it, to do it, departing from every canon upon which
relations, those of human or those of social are based and formed. And
that one was only Omar Bin Khattab. He stymied the letter from being
written.

He ceased the opportunity at an opportune time and went a great deal to
install Abu Baker as caliph of the Prophet who spoke 'nonsense.' We
shall see that this man (Omar) denies the death of the Prophet. His
stand at the SAQIFA and his struggle for Abu Baker, all that we shall
see would show his intentions.

Had not there been Omar, no ground would have been gained for Abu
Baker.28 Sword of Zubair he broke; a blow at the chest of MIQDAD he hit;
Sa'ad Bin Ebada he kicked and it was to him he said: "Kill him, he is
mischievous"; the nose of AL-HABAB BIN ALMUNDHIR he broke; whoever took
refuge in the house of Fatimah, daughter of the Prophet,

he threatened; and finally he came out of SAQIFA with a cane of palm
tree29 in his hand roaming about calling the people to yield to the
sovereignty of Abubaker. So, what else and what more he could have done?
He did all what all could have not done.

No one can deny the disinclination of Omar Bin Khattab towards Ali Bin
Abi Taleb and Omar's being watchful against Ali with regards succeeding
the Prophet. Likewise his party that was composed of Abu Baker, Abi
Obaida, Salem Moula Hazifa, Ma'az Bin Jabal and their associates. Same
to Ali who clearly indicated his disagreement with them in all stations
and situations. He did not yield to Abubaker as long as Fatima was
alive. After her death he lost his backbone and remained with no
alternative but to accept.

Throughout the period which stretched from Abu Baker and ended by the
end of Othman, he never took any part in any of the battles while he was
the pivot like one that is to a hand mill. Ali had told this to Omar
that he (Omar) supported Abubaker only because to rotate the succession
to himself. He once told Omar: "Milk it for you while keeping tied the
other half to him today in order that he could return it to you
tomorrow."30 So it happened. Abubaker nominated Omar to succeed him.

27- MUSTADRIK AL-HAKEM (3:105)
28- SHARH IBN ALHADEED (1:58)
29- KANZULOMMAL (vol.3 No.6,23,226)
30- AS'SIYSA WAL IMAMAT (chp. IMAMAT OF ABUBAKER) and SHARH AL-NAHAJ
(2:5)

The meanders of their minds finally became manifested in open
expression. How they disdained Ali could be judged from a conversation
between Omar and Ibn Abbas which we insert here as it is narrated by Ibn
Abbas:31 Omar to Ibn Abbas: "Do you know what kept your people from you
after Mohammed?"

Ibn Abbas: "If I don't know, you would inform me."

Omar: "They hated to see the prophet hood and the caliphate combined at
you. So they (Quraish) took to boast upon you by choosing the caliphate.
They succeeded and hit the target."

Ibn Abbas: "If you permit me and don't get angry I'll speak." Omar:
"Answer!" "Speak"

Ibn Abbas: "As for your saying-Quraish succeeded and hit the target,
had they chosen for themselves as God had chosen for them, it would have
had been good to them that could not be rejected nor felt jealousy upon.
As for your saying that they hated to see the prophethood and caliphate
combined with us, God has described the people who hate: "That they
hated what God sent down; and He spoiled their deeds."

Omar: "Oh, by God, words about you had been reaching me, but I hated to
make you run away because of your position which I don't want to lower
down."

Ibn Abbas: "What's that? If that was true, why should my position come
down? If it was a lie, it discloses the self."

Omar: "I am informed that you say: 'We have taken it by tyranny and
jealousy."

Ibn Abbas: "As for tyranny, it is evident even to an ignorant and to
him who has endured it. As for jealousy, Satan felt it towards Adam and
we are the children of him who was the butt of jealousy."

Omar: "Ali, your hearts, O son of Hashim, are full with neither
jealousy neither enmity goes nor the veil."

Ibn Abbas: "Wait; don't say so. Our hearts are those which God has
purified and removed error there from-either that of jealousy or that of
deceit. The Prophet's heart was from Bani Hashim."

Omar: "Go away."

We narrated the conversation in detail because it discloses to us.

1- The effusion of malice rankled on both the sides and the sparks that
ignite the flames.

2- The deliberation on their part to hinder the thing from the
household members of the Prophet based on the sentiments of rancor and
their fear that the caliphate in addition to the prophet hood if stored
in the Prophet's house it would be the factor for their ostentation and
arrogance. According to Ibn Abbas such a fear was due to their jealousy
and this was the tyranny.

31- AL-TABAR! (5:31) IBN AL-ATHEER (3:31) SHARH ALNAHAJ (2:18)

3- The 'Imamate' is God's choice, which He appropriated in the members
of His Prophet's House. It can not have bearing upon the pleasure or
displeasure of Quraish.

4- Their tyranny in depriving the Prophet' Household members of their
right, this is a fact all know.

In the answers of Iban Abbas we see these two things are stressed upon
in spite of his reservation to eschew Omar's wrath from which ultimately
he could not remain safe. The answer of Omar "Go away", at which ends
the conversation, shows the inability on the part of Omar to answer.

History can not deny nor could conceal the motive that pushed Omar to
say that the Prophet was talking nonsense and to declare that only the
Book of God would suffice the people. All this was to keep the thing
from Ali.

Indeed, there are lame excuses. Some put forward such as that the very
issue itself was not an obligatory one; and, therefore, it did not
tantamount to disobedience. Of course, such an excuse is good enough for
rejection alone because there is nothing more obligatory than the
guidance of people.

The prophet said: "After that you shall never go astray." Opinion was
not solicited. Omar gave his opinion and imposed it, which made the
Prophet angry to the extent that he ordered them to go away. Still, it
was not disobedience; then what else it was? "Pain has overcome him,"
"Nonsense"; these words could hardly be said to an ordinary man
particularly in his illness.

To behave far from politeness towards the Prophet could never have
become possible unless disobedience to him should have had been a
deliberate determination. The words of Omar are quite clear: "The Book
of God is enough to us" which mean acceptance of one and rejection of
the other. To poke nose into the orders of the Prophet so as to adjust
our own pleasure can not be classified in any word other than that of
disobedience.

Anyway, the circumstances that surround the whole episode, the
expedition of Asama and the insurgency to proceed in that expedition,
the Prophet's orders to give him a pen and paper so that "to not go
astray", and the insistence of Omar upon the Book of God alone; we can
deduce from all these that the Prophet wanted to classify or specify or
make it known who was to succeed him and that 'who' was Ali son of Abi
Taleb.

But the Prophet was not obeyed. The caliphate became the spot of
difference among the Muslims and misguidance as well. Had the Prophet
been obeyed and had he written; then there was no room for doubt or for
difference except to depart from Islam it.

Here one possibility seems quite likely to have had occurred in the
Prophet's mind and which should have had kept him from giving an
indication by spoken words and that is his fear of an open insurgency
out of their stubbornness and turning against Islam altogether. So, he
avoided a greater calamity. Therefore, we see Ali too remained silent as
his motive too was the same.

These words of Ali in his speech of 'SHQ SHAQIA' give us a clue: "I got
up to discern between the two things, to capture with a broken hand or
to remain quiet in a pit's darkness; Ii found the patience more prudent
than the two…" His stand with the caliphate shall in the fourth
chapter.


