Ali With the Caliphs
====================

It remains an irreffragable fact that Ali did not know about the
meeting of Ansaar at their veranda (SAQIFA). Abubaker, Omar among the
Muhajareen went stealthy to the meeting concluded was also a secret to
Ali.

He only knew when the gathering ended and came to the mosque and the
first one in the lead was Omar holding a cane of date waving it to
either sides calling the people to acknowledge the authority of Abubaker
and a clamor of ALLAHO AKBAR (God is greater) had filled the air. He was
occupied with the burial of the Prophet's body. He did not come out into
open that day.

At the very first sight it appears that they, those who knew the
secret, were in the station of animosity with Ali' Therefore, they did
not inform him. Abubaker was in the Prophet's house when Omar intimated
him the news. They both kept quiet and did not tell Ali. They told only
Abu Ubaida and Abu Ubaida also did not tell Ali. The news circulated
among these three.

What harm was there had Omar informed Ali too? If Omar overlooked to do
so, why Abubaker too did the same? Both ignored; why the third? He
followed Omar and Abubaker to the gathering but did not occur to him to
inform Ali. The meeting was that of Muslims and the first gathering
immediately after the death of the Prophet.

Such a meeting at such a serious juncture did require the presence of
Ali because of his status among the Muslims and his position with the
Prophet. Had he been present there he would have handled the situation
what could have been quite a different one.

The strange thing is that he was not even consulted. We do not see any
reason in that gathering of Muslims under the banner of Islam and
eschewing Ali, the confederate of the Prophet and the first among
Muslims except a conspiracy against Ali himself and a plot to serve
their own interests not that of Islam.

The outcome of the gathering at SAQIFA proves this obvious fact. The
course was correct as chosen by them. They kept no trucks with him till
every thing was finished and accomplished. By way of showing goodwill
they should have invited him or consulted him. He would have accepted or
rejected.

They settled the matter among themselves and invited the people
collectively and separately to acknowledge the succession of Abubaker to
the Prophet. They knew it was a compaign fraught with dread and risk
with those who supported Mi. Therefore, they laid hand upon the
opportunity, golden to them, the occupation of Ali and his associates
and Bani Hashim in the preparations of burying the Prophet's body.

Tabari in his history says: "Nicely it came and yielded, invigorated
the side of Abubaker and the mobs acknowledged him." There is a clear
indication that there were two parties. The other one was Ali because
Ansaar already surrendered to Abubaker at SAQIFA.

Sa'ad Bin Ebada and his son were not of much importance as they were
ignored. So, it was Ah against whom all this clamor of SAQIFA was
conspired and concluded. When Ali came to know he described the whole
affair in this brief: "They gained the tree and lost the fruit."

**2) ALI'S OPINION OF SAQIFA:**

In the first chapter we have dealt as to why Imam Ali did not demand
his right for caliphate. He did not keep his opinion to himself. He made
his opinion known to all so that the history could judge. It was a
robbery of his right and him a victim. He met the incident with
astonishment and anguish. His SHAKH SHAKHIA speech in NAHJUL BALAGHA
gives vent to his wounded feelings.

He did not yield to Abubaker's authority as long as Fatimah was alive.
This is the minimum to show his disagreement or his compaign in
rejecting the wrong. It is a great injustice to say that the Imam lagged
behind in acknowledging the authority of Abubaker.

The justice is that the mobs lagged behind in realizing his right. He
should acknowledge to one who had robbed him of his right? If at all
none knew, he knew well whose right it was; and in spite of his
knowledge he should acknowledge what? How far the injustice has gone and
how much he is expected to endure?

A day later he came out. A general dedition was accomplished and over.
He declared his opinion. In MORAWAJ AL-ZAHAB Ali's words to Abubaker are
recorded thus: "You spoiled our right to us.

You did not consult nor did you reserve to us our right." Ali was a man
fair, frank, and open. He had nothing to hide nor anything hidden he
did. Therefore, they were at caution dreading his wrath. Abubaker admits
in his answer to Ali: "Yes, but I feared the mischief." What mischief?
The very doing itself was a mischief.

History has not recorded for us Ali's reply to Abubaker. Whether the
answer of Abubaker sufficed him or made him angry or persuaded him to
argue further; we do not know. But Ali himself says in one of his
speeches: "When I surprised him by the question in the public he was
dumbfounded, knew not what to answer me."

Ali did compagin against the SAQIFA calamity and did not leave the
matter to recede into oblivion. Although the circumstance cornered him
leaving no alternative but to yield which he did unwillingly and without
his inclination. To quote his own words from his speech: "I endured
while a thorn in my eye and a bone in my throat and I see my inheritance
being robbed."

His wife, Fatimah, died. People ignored him. Hectic days had surrounded
him. He was forced under coersion to acknowledge Abuhaker's authority. A
constant tyranny kept haunting him. He had no supporter or help.
Somnolence had gripped the nation which had obtenebrated his days.

He was not left free to dwell upon his will. Tyranny had reduced him to
a victim and a victim finally yielded. He has said in NAHJUL BALAGHA
this: "By God, my right is taken away from me. Tyranny is sanctioned
against me since the Prophet died till to this day." He used to purport
by 'till to this day' the times of his caliphate.

Such was the stand of Ali. We find him quite open in his speech of
SHAKH SHAKHIA. But, the history tries to hide his frankness. In any
case, history does not deny that right is with Ah and Ali with right.
Ali's personality does not allow any blame to be attributed to him. Of
course, it has had been an endeavor of history to interpret the wrongs
of SAQIFA as otherwise and to supply various representations to it.

But history has failed in its flounder and stood the chagrin because of
the displeasure of the robbed one which keeps the file of robbery ever
open to debate and dispute. The case is closed only at the return of the
stolen goods because the owner has never registered his forgiveness.

The books of BUKHARI and MUSLIM besides other books point out to this
fact that people cared him as long as Fatima was alive. As he died
people too left Ali alone. It was upon this that he recognized Abubaker.
Fatima lived only six months after the death of her father the
Prophet.

Once more we see his opinion about the consequences of SAQIFA in his
reply to Mawiya. Mawiya accused him of rebelling against the caliphs and
execrating them. Ali writes in answer: "I take refuge in God because I
am not a rebellion.

As for execrating to them, it is not a public concern and I see no
reason for an excuse to be brought forward."50
50- Refer to SHERH AL-NAHAJ (409:3)


