Preface
=======

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

Since the time immemorial man has been seeking knowledge through his
senses. Thus by perceiving things he tried to overcome his problems. In
the process he made experiments and ultimately by trial and error he
arrived at a workable solution for his problems. Based on this concept
and practice, science developed enormously in dimensions and various
fields of its applications.

In this modern age of science hundreds and thousands of research
laboratories are engaging the attention of scientists who are making
wonderful discoveries and inventions of unbelievably accurate gadgets
and tools.

Yet the only things that science has failed so far to capture is the
social problem. Obviously, social problems are the human problems. And
human problems are such that they cannot be precipitated in a test tube.
To give credence to this fact one knows it very well that for instance,
science has not yet been able to offer answers to the discord and hatred
that exist among the people or the class distinction that is rampant in
various strata of human society.

History tells us of great civilisations that flourished in the past and
ultimately perished. We are left with only the mute remains and dumb
ruins which tell us the hoary past of the mankind. Science of course is
discovering the facts of life through excavations, and by studying the
relics and fossils embedded in the rocks. But despite all this no
tangible results have come forward with regard to the man's manifold
problems.

Imam Ali gave a bit of his mind to his son which is pertinent to the
relevant issue. He said: "My dear son! though the span of my age is not
as large as that of some other people who have passed away before me,
but I took great care to study their lives; assiduously I went through
their activities, I contemplated over their deliberations and deeds, I
studied their remains, relics and ruins; and I pondered over their lives
so deeply that I felt as if I have lived and worked with them from early
ages of history down to our times, and I know what did them good and
what brought harm to them."

True, history has recorded all facts, pleasant and detestable, but what
is to be regretted is that nobody ever cared to go into the depth of
their root causes. As to the real solution of a problem, big or small,
no effort on the part of man is traceable in history. Only unimportant
matters have been dwelt upon with uncanny details.

Since history is a recorded statement of events of the past, it owes its
existence to its compilers. The people who wrote history were not immune
from personal, racial or parochial prejudices and, therefore, its very
purpose seems to have been defeated.

On the face of the misinterpretation and fabrication of facts, an
ordinary reader of history is at a loss to understand the truth of the
matter. It is like a doctor who, if he has no correct information about
the case-history of his patient, will not be able to diagnose the actual
malady of his patient.

One bright aspect of history of course is that it carries the life
sketches of great men of the ancient past. These men in fact created
history as they brought about revolution and change in the life pattern
of mankind.

Amongst such great personalities no one led as eventful, revolutionary
and meaningful a life as Prophet Muhammad did. None of them left such a
lasting impression upon the society he sprang from as the Prophet of
Islam did. This is a fact which has been acknowledged by almost all the
historians whether of the East or of the West.

The study of the life of Prophet Muhammad, the greatest of all men, is
thought-provoking, awe-inspiring and self-enlightening. A chain of
events before and after the birth of this great man provides food for
thought for anybody who has even a slight grain of intelligence and
sense of proportion.

The birth of the Prophet as a posthumous child and the death of his
mother, Aminah, when he was only six, and his upbringing first by his
grandfather and then by his uncle are something extraordinary.

After passing an eventful life, his confinement to the Cave in Mt Hira
and the subsequent Divine Revelation, the invitation to the religion of
Allah, the resistance of the infidels and idolaters, their oppression
and persecution, his continued steadfastness in upholding the Message of
Allah during the first thirteen years of his prophethood in Makkah until
the time of his migration to Madina, are the events finish have no
parallel in history.

The last ten years of his life in Madina, his intensifying the efforts
of his mission for the spread of Islam, his participating in the
numerous battles with the infidels and the final conquest of Makkah are
still greater events which are seemingly unbelievable, but have been
recorded in history as miraculous achievements.

Hundreds of books have been written on the life and mission of the
Prophet but these cannot be taken as a complete treatise on his
attributes and achievements. Especially the writings of the orientalists
are punctuated with prejudices, errors and misinterpretations.

This book not only presents an inspiring material but it is also based
on authentic historical documents. One of its salient features is that
the author has taken extreme care in narrating historical events and at
the same time he has endeavoured as a research scholar, to approach them
with an analytical mind also.

Another interesting feature of this book is that it is absolutely free
from heresies and concocted stories invented by vested interests. In
other words, it is quite in keeping with the required standard of the
historical veracity. In short, it is addressed to the Muslims in general
without any bias and prejudice.

We hope that this book will serve its noble purpose of enlightening the
young generation who has a keen urge to acquire authentic and reliable
information about the great Prophet of Islam, and trust our young
Muslims will derive inspiration from this book in fashioning their lives
in accordance with the dictates of Allah as well as the noble attributes
of the Holy Prophet and his Chosen Descendants.


