Chapter 9: From Sheperd to Merchant
===================================

The Divine guides are charged with a very important and great
responsibility. It is a responsibility linked with embarrassment and
deprivation, torture and calamities, murder and death; etc. in short
with all sorts of hardships and sufferings. And the greater and more
sublime their target is, the severer and the graver are the hardships
attached to it.

On this account fortitude and forbearance, i.e. patience in the face of
all calumnies, accusations, injuries and persecutions, is a
pre-condition for the success of Divine leaders, because forbearance and
patience are a real condition at all stages of a campaign for the
attainment of their object.

In the history and the narratives relating to the Prophets we come
across matters which it is very hard and difficult for us (ordinary
human beings) to imagine. We read about Noah that he preached for 950
years and as a result of his campaign and prolonged efforts only eighty
one persons expressed their belief in him. In other words in every
twelve years he succeeded in bringing only one person to the right path.

The quality of forbearance and patience develops in man only gradually.
It is necessary that he should face unpleasant events so that his soul
should become fully acquainted with hardships and sufferings.

Before attaining the position of prophethood the Prophets used to spend
a part of their lives as shepherds so that they might spend some time in
the jungles in bringing up flocks and herds, and thus become patient and
forbearing for the education of human beings and might take it easy to
bear all hardships and sufferings.

This is so, because when a man is able to bear hardships with reference
to an animal which. from the point of view of intellect and wisdom,
holds no comparison with human beings, he inevitably accepts
responsibility for the guidance of the misguided people, who are
essentially prepared to have faith in Allah.

What has been said above is based upon the contents of a tradition
wherein it has been said. "Allah has not sent any Prophet who has not
been made to tend the flocks as a shepherd so that he may learn how to
guide the people.[^1]

The Holy Prophet also spent a part of his life in this manner and most
of the writers of 'Seerah' have quoted this sentence from him "All the
Prophets have been shepherds for some time before attaining to the
position of prophethood". The people asked the Prophet "Have you too
been a shepherd?" He replied "Yes. For some time I grazed the sheep of
the people of Makkah in Qarareet area".

No doubt it was necessary for the person, who must fight with Abu Jahls
and Abu Lahabs, and one who wanted to mould, out of degraded persons,
whose common sense and intelligence was at such a level that they bowed
before every stone and stick, a set of those, who should not submit to
the will of anyone except the Will of Allah, that he should have
rehearsed the lesson of forbearance and patience, in different ways, for
quite some time.

We think that there was another reason also for the Holy Prophet
choosing the pastoral occupation. It was that the sight of unreasonable
ways of life of the powerful ones amongst the Quraysh and demonstration
of viciousness by them weighed heavily on the mind of this brave and
free man; who possessed a great sense of moral dignity.

Besides this, failure of the Makkan society to worship the Almighty and
their going round the inanimate idols was something very unpleasant for
an intelligent person. For these reasons the Holy Prophet dissociated
himself from that society and spent a part of his life in the jungles
and on the slope of the mountains which were naturally located at a
distance from that polluted society, so that, for some time at least, he
might be relieved of the mental torture caused by the pitiable
conditions prevailing in that age.

By observing the beautiful sky and the positions and shape of stars and
by reflecting on the plants of the jungle an enlightened person becomes
acquainted with hundreds of signs of Divine order and strengthens his
natural belief in monotheism with cogent scientific proofs.

The great Prophets, notwithstanding the fact that from the very time of
their coming into existence their hearts were illuminated with the
glowing torch of monotheism did not consider themselves independent of
the need of studying the created beings and the Universe and through
this very method they attained to the highest degrees of conviction and
faith.

Abu Talib's Proposal
--------------------

The stringent financial conditions of his nephew prompted Abu Talib, who
was himself one of the chiefs of Makkah and noblemen of Quraysh and was
famous for his generosity, bravery and magnanimous disposition to
arrange for a vocation for him.

He therefore, said to his nephew: "Khadijah, daughter of Khuwaylad is
one of the wealthy persons among Quraysh and her trade activities extend
to Egypt and Ethiopia. She is on the look out for an honest man who
should assume responsibility for her trade, participate on her behalf in
the trade caravan of Quraysh and take her merchandise to Syria for sale.
O Muhammad! What a good thing it would be if you introduce yourself to
her".[^2]

The magnanimity and spiritual excellence of the Prophet did not permit
him that he should go to Khadijah direct, without any acquaintance, and
in the absence of any request from her, and make such a proposal.

He, therefore, replied to his uncle: "It is possible that Khadijah may
herself send someone to me'. He said so, because he knew that he was
well-known amongst the people as an 'honest' person. And the same thing
did happen. When Khadijah came to know about their conversation she at
once sent someone to the Prophet saying: "The thing which has inspired
my regard for you is your truthfulness, honesty and good morals. I am
prepared to give you double of what I give to others and shall also send
along with you two slaves, who will obey you in all circumstances''.[^3]

The Prophet related this thing to his uncle and the latter said "This
offer is a source of your livelihood which Almighty Allah has bestowed
upon you"

The caravan of Quraysh, which included the merchandise of Khadijah, got
ready to move. Khadijah placed an easy-paced camel, a quantity of costly
goods and two slaves at the disposal of her agent and ordered the slaves
to be very respectful to him at all stages, never to object to what he
did, and to obey him in all circumstances.

Eventually the caravan reached its destination and all its members made
profit. However, the profit made by the Prophet was comparatively more
than that made by others and he also purchased certain things for being
sold in the market-place of Tahamah.

After making a successful trip to Syria the caravan of Quraysh returned
to Makkah. During this journey the Prophet once again passed through the
land of Ad and Samud. The silence of death which prevailed over the
environments of that unruly nation invited his attention more and more
to the other worlds.

Moreover, the memories of the previous journey were also revived. He
recollected the days when he had traversed those very deserts along with
his uncle. The caravan of Quraysh drew near Makkah. Addressing the
Prophet the slave named Maysarah said, "It will be better if you enter
Makkah before us and inform Khadijah about the affairs of trade and the
extraordinary profit which we have made this year'.

The Prophet entered Makkah at a time when Khadijah was sitting in her
upper chamber. She ran down to receive him and took him into the
chamber. The Prophet narrated, in a sweet manner, the matters relating
to the merchandise. In the meantime Maysarah also arrived.[^4]

The slave of Khadijah (Maysarah) narrated to her exactly all that he had
seen during the journey and all of which testified to the greatness and
spirituality of Muhammad, 'the honest one'. He told her inter alia that
during the journey 'the honest one' differed with a merchant about some
matter.

That man told him that he would accept his word if he swore by 'Lat' and
'Uzza' but the honest one said to him in reply. "I consider Lat and
Uzza, whom you worship, to be the meanest and most despicable things on
the face of the earth".[^5]

Maysara also added that in Busra 'the honest one' sat under a tree to
take rest. In the meantime, a monk, who was sitting in his monastery,
chanced to see him. He came and enquired about his name and then said
"This man who is sitting under the shade of the tree is the very Prophet
about whom I have read many good tidings in the Taurat and the
Injeel".[^6]

Khadijah - The First Lady Of Islam
----------------------------------

Till that time the financial and economic conditions of the Prophet had
not improved and he still needed financial help from his uncle, Abu
Talib. His business matters were apparently not so firm as yet that he
should choose a wife and set up a family.

His last journey to Syria, and that, too, in the capacity of the agent
and representative of a wealthy and well-known lady of Quraysh
(Khadijah) stabilised his financial and economic condition to some
extent.

His courage and skill attracted the admiration of Khadijah and she
expressed her willingness to pay him, as a prize, something over and
above the settled amount. However, the Prophet accepted only that
remuneration which had been agreed upon originally. He then proceeded to
the house of Abu Talib and handed over to him all that he had earned, so
as to ensure some relief for his uncle.

Abu Taiib had been waiting impatiently for his nephew who was the
souvenir of his father (Abdul Muttalib) and his brother Abdullah. Tears
trickled down his eyes as soon as he saw him. He was, nevertheless, very
much pleased to learn about his business activities arid the profit that
he had made, and expressed his willingness to place two horses and two
camels at his disposal so that he could continue his business. As
regards the money which he had earned during the said journey and had
handed over to his uncle, he (Abu Talib) decided to utilize it for
choosing a wife for his nephew.

In these conditions the Holy Prophet decided to choose a spouse for
himself. The question, however, is as to how the lot fell upon Khadijah
who had previously rejected the proposals of the most wealthy and
influential men of Quraysh, like Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it, Abu Jahl and Abu
Sufyan.

What were the causes which brought together these two persons who were
absolutely different from each other from the point of view of their
respective lives, and which created such cordial relations, love and
spiritual cohesion between them that Khadijah put her entire wealth at
the disposal of Muhammad, and spent her wealth, which she gained from
her business which extended upto Egypt and Ethiopia in the path of
monotheism and for the exaltation of truth? And how was it that the
house which was full of chairs studded with ivory and pearls and
decorated with Indian silks and Iranian brocade curtains eventually
became an asylum for the Muslims?

The causes of these events should be ascertained from the life history
of Khadijah. However, the thing which is indisputable is that services,
indulgence and self-sacrifice of this kind cannot certainly become
permanent unless they have a firm, pure and spiritual origin.

Pages of history testify that this marriage was the outcome of the faith
of Khadijah in the piety, chastity, virtue and honesty of the Holy
Prophet, the dear one of Quraysh, and the life history of Khadijah and
narrations about her attainments make this fact abundantly clear.

As she was a chaste and virtuous woman she wished to marry a pious and
virtuous husband, and it was for this reason that the Holy Prophet said
about her "Khadijah is one of the honourable ladies of Paradise". And
the first woman who expressed faith in Muhammad was Khadijah. Imam Ali,
the Commander of the Faithful, while describing, in one of his sermons,
the pitiful condition of Islam in the early days of the prophetic
mission of the Holy Prophet says "There was then no Muslim family except
the family consisting of Muhammad, and his wife Khadijah. and I was its
third member".

Ibne Athir says that a merchant named Afif came in Masjidul Harem and
was very much surprised to observe the gathering there, and worship by a
group consisting of three persons. He saw that the Holy Prophet was
offering prayers along with Khadijah and Ali. On his return from the
Masjid he met Abbas, the uncle of the Prophet. He told him what he had
seen and inquired about the factual position. Abbas said to him, "The
leader amongst those three persons is claimant of Prophethood and the
woman is his wife Khadijah and the third person is my nephew Ali". Then
he added, "I am not aware of any person on the face of the earth who
should be a follower of this religion except these three".

It is beyond the scope of this book to explain and quote the narratives
which have come down about the excellence of Khadijah. It would,
therefore, be better that we should explain the causes which occasioned
this historical event (i.e. marriage of Muhammad and Khadija).

The Patent and Latent Causes of The Marriage
--------------------------------------------

Materialists, who study everything from the materialistic point of view,
imagine that as Khadijah was rich and a trades-woman, she was very much
in need of an honest person in connection with her commercial affairs
and she, therefore, married Muhammad; and as Muhammad was also aware of
her respectable position he consented to her request, although there was
disparity in their ages.

However, history tells us that Khadijah was prompted to marry Muhammad
the 'honest man' of Quraysh owing to a series of spiritual causes, and
this union had no material aspect. Evidence in support of our claim is
as follows:

1. When Khadijah enquired from Maysarah about the incidents related to
the journey of the Prophet he narrated to her the miracles which he had
seen from him and also what he had heard from the monk of Syria.
Khadijah felt excessive emotion within herself, which had its origin in
her interest in the spirituality of Muhammad and she said to Maysarah
involuntarily "Maysarah! That will do. You have doubled my interest in
Muhammad. I hereby set you and your wife free and also place at your
disposal two hundred dirhams. two horses and a costly dress ".

Thereafter she narrated what she had heard from Maysarah to Waraqah bin
Nawfal, who was a sage of Arabia, and he said: "One who possesses these
attributes is the Arabian Prophet".[^7]

2. One day Khadijah was seated in her house while her bonds-women and
slaves encircled her. One of the Jewish scholars was also present. By
chance the Prophet passed that way and the Jewish scholar saw him. He at
once requested Khadijah to insist upon Muhammad that he should postpone
his task and join that party for a few moments. The Prophet accepted the
request of the Jewish sage, which was based on observation of the signs
of prophethood in his person.

Khadijah then turned to the Jewish sage and said "When his uncles will
become aware of your investigation and inquisitiveness they will display
an adverse reaction, because they are afraid of the Jews about their
nephew". The Jewish sage then replied: "How can it be possible that
anyone should harm Muhammad, when the hand of destiny has reared him up
for the last prophethood and for the guidance of the people?" Khadijah
said: "On what authority do you say that he will come to hold this
position?"

He replied: "I have read the signs of the last Prophet in the Taurat.
His signs include three things that is his parents will die, his
grandfather and uncle will support him, and he will choose for his
spouse a woman, who will be the lady of Quraysh". Then he pointed to
Khadijah and said: "Blessed is she who has the honour of being his
life-mate".[^8]

3. Waraqah, uncle of Khadijah, was one of the sages of Arabia. He had
thorough knowledge of the Bible and used to say time and again: "A man
will be raised by Allah from amongst Quraysh for the guidance of the
people and he shall marry one of the richest ladies of Quraysh". And as
Khadijah was the richest woman of Quraysh he occasionally said to her:
"A day will come when you will marry the noblest man on earth!"

4. One night Khadijah dreamt that the sun revolved above Makkah and then
descended slowly and landed in her house. She related her dream to
Waraqah bin Nawfal and he interpreted it thus: "You will marry a great
man and he will become renowned throughout the world".

These are the incidents which have been quoted by some historians and by
late Allamah Majlisi[^9] and have also been recorded in many history
books. When all of them are taken into account they make crystal clear
the reasons for the inclination of Khadijah towards the Prophet. This
inclination was mostly due to her belief in the spirituality of the
Prophet and the fact that the 'honest one' was more suitable for her
business than others had no bearing on the consummation of this union.

Circumstances of Khadijah’s Suit
--------------------------------

This much is admitted that the proposal originated from the side of
Khadijah herself; so much so that Ibn Hisham quotes[^10] that Khadijah
expressed her inclination personally and said: "Cousin! On account of
the relationship which exists between us and the greatness and respect
which you enjoy amongst your people and the honesty, good manners and
truthfulness which you evidently possess, I am earnestly inclined to
marry you". The 'honest man' of Quraysh replied "I must inform my uncles
about this and this task should be accomplished with their approval".

Most of the historians believe that Nafisah, daughter of 'Alyah conveyed
the proposal of Khadijah to the Prophet in the following manner:

She said, "O Muhammad! Why don't you illuminate the night-chamber of
your life with the light of a spouse? Will you respond favourably if I
invite you to beauty, wealth, gentleness and respect?" The Prophet said
"What do you mean?" She then mentioned Khadijah.

The Prophet said, "Is Khadijah prepared for this, when there is a world
of difference between the conditions of my life and of hers?" Nafisah
said, "I hold authority on her behalf and shall make her agree. You
should fix a date for the purpose so that her agent ('Amr bin Asad) may
sit along with you and your kinsfolk and the ceremonies of marriage and
rejoicing may be accomplished.[^11]

The Holy Prophet talked about the matter with his honourable uncle (Abu
Talib). A grand party consisting of distinguished persons amongst
Quraysh was organized. In the first instance Abu Talib delivered a
sermon, commencing it with praise for Allah. As regards his nephew, he
introduced him thus "My nephew Muhammad bin Abdullah is superior to any
man of the tribe of Quraysh with whom he may be compared. Although he
lacks every sort of wealth, yet wealth is a passing shadow, and origin
and lineage is something permanent.[^12]

As Abu .Talib had made in his sermon a mention of Quraysh and the family
of Hashim, Waraqah, uncle of Khadijah said in reply "None amongst
Quraysh denies your excellence. We earnestly wish to hold the string of
your nobility. The marriage ceremony was then performed and the dowry
was fixed at four hundred dinars. Some say that the dowry was twenty
camels.

**Age of Khadijah:** It is usually said that at the time of marriage
with the Prophet, Khadijah was forty years old and was born fifteen
years before the 'Year of the Elephant'. However, some writers have
mentioned that her age at the time of marriage was lesser than this.
Previously she had married twice. The names of her husbands were 'Ais
bin Abid and Abu Halah and both of them had died.

[^1]: Safinatul Bihar, root word nabi.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XVI, page 22

[^3]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 24

[^4]: al-Khara'ij, page 186 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XVI, page 4.

[^5]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, page 140

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, page 18.

[^7]: Seerah-i ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 26.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XVI, page 19.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, vol. Vl, page 124.

[^10]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 204.

[^11]: It is well-known that Khuwaylid, the father of Khadijah was
killed in a Fujjar Battle and for this reason her uncle authorized
marriage on her behalf. Thus the view, recorded by some historians that
in the first instance Khuwaylid was not agreeable, but later he agreed,
owing to the severe inclination of Khadijah, is baseless.

[^12]: Manaqib, vol. I, page 30 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, page 6.


