Chapter 13: Who Were The First Persons to Embrace Islam?
========================================================

The advancement of Islam and its penetration into different peoples took
place gradually. In the terminology of the Holy Qur'an those persons who
preceded all others in embracing and propagating Islam are called
as-Sabiqun (the preceding ones), and in the early days of Islam this
precedence was in itself a criterion of virtue and superiority and, even
amongst these persons, one who preceded another one enjoyed a more
honourable position. Hence, we should consult the authentic sources and
decide, without any bias, as to who were the first amongst men and women
who embraced Islam.

The First Amongst Women to Embrace Islam was Khadijah
-----------------------------------------------------

It is an admitted historical fact that from amongst women Khadijah was
the first to embrace Islam and there is no contradictory report on this
point. We briefly mention here an important historical authority which
has been quoted by the historians from one of the wives of the Holy
Prophet.

A'isha says: "I was always sorry for not having seen the period of
Khadijah and wondered at the kindness and love which the Holy Prophet
expressed for her, because her dear husband always remembered her more
than anyone else and if he slaughtered a sheep he found out the friends
of Khadijah and sent them a share of the meat.

One day, when the Holy Prophet was going out of the house, he remembered
Khadijah and praised her. Eventually I could not control myself and said
very boldly: "She was nothing more than an old woman and Allah has given
you a better one".

My words had a very unfavourable effect on the Holy Prophet of Allah.
Signs of anger and wrath appeared on his forehead and he said: "It is
not at all so... I have not acquired a better one. She believed in my
Prophethood when all people were drowned in infidelity and polytheism.
She placed her wealth at my disposal in the most trying circumstances.
Allah gave me through her issues, which I did not get through anyone
else.[^1]

Another evidence about Khadijah being the first woman in the world to
embrace Islam is the very incident of the commencement of the revelation
of the Holy Qur'an, because, when the Holy Prophet came down from the
cave of Hira and related the incident to his wife she immediately
confirmed her husband's statement and consoled him.

Furthermore, she had time and again heard from the fortune-tellers and
sages of Arabia about the prophethood of her husband and it was on
account of the truthfulness and righteousness of the Hashmite young man
that she married him.

The First Amongst Men to Adopt Islam was Ali
--------------------------------------------

Almost all the Shi'ah and Sunni historians are unanimous that the first
amongst men to embrace Islam was Ali. As against this well-known
statement there can also be found some rare statements, in history.
Their narrators have chosen to state the reverse of it. For example, it
is said that the first man to embrace Islam was either Zayd bin Harith
or Abu Bakr. However, most of the arguments bear evidence against these
two statements. Some of these are as follows:

### The First Evidence

Ali had been brought up from his very childhood in the house of the Holy
Prophet and the latter endeavoured to educate him like a kind father.
Most of the biographers say unanimously: "Before the appointment of
Muhammad to the prophetic mission a severe drought appeared in Makkah.
Abu Talib, the uncle of the Holy Prophet, had a big family to support.
He was the chief of Quraysh, and his income was not at all in keeping
with his expenditure and he was not as wealthy as his brother Abbas.

The financial condition of Abu Talib prompted the Holy Prophet to
discuss the matter with his uncle Abbas and they decided to take some of
the children of Abu Talib to their own houses so as to alleviate his
burden and to help him meet his requirements. Consequently the Prophet
took Ali to his house and Abbas took Ja'far under his guardianship".[^2]

In the circumstances it can be said that, when Ali went to the Holy
Prophet's house his age was not less than eight or ten years. The reason
for this presumption is that the object of the Holy Prophet in taking
Ali under his patronage was to alleviate the burden of the chief of
Makkah (Abu Talib) and besides the fact that separation of a child from
his parents who is less than eight or ten years, is a difficult matter;
it could not also have any appreciable effect on the conditions of life
of Abu Talib.

Hence, it is necessary that we should presume the age of Ali at that
time to be such that his being taken away from Abu Talib had an
appreciable effect on the latter's conditions of life. In the
circumstances how can it be said that strangers like Zayd bin Harith and
others had become acquainted with the secrets of revelation, whereas the
cousin of the Holy Prophet, who was nearest to him of all others and was
always with him, remained ignorant of them?

The purpose of the Prophet in fostering Ali was to compensate Abu Talib
to some extent for the services rendered by him and so far as the
Prophet was concerned there was nothing more dear to him than to guide a
person directly. Keeping all these things in view how can it be said
that the Holy Prophet kept his cousin deprived of this great blessing,
notwithstanding the fact that he (Ali) was an intelligent person with a
highly enlightened mind?

It would be better if we learn about this matter from the lips of Ali
himself: In the sermon entitled Qasi'ah he explains his rank and esteem
in the eyes of the Prophet thus: "You know the esteem in which the Holy
Prophet held me on account of our near relationship and the high
position and respect (which I enjoyed in his eyes).

During my childhood he fostered me under his own care and stuck me to
his bosom. He embraced me in his bed and I used to smell his sweet
smell. I followed him just as the off-spring of a she-camel follows its
mother. Every day he hoisted (showed) a sign of his moral virtues and
ordered me to follow it. He stayed in Hira every year (before his
appointment to the prophetic mission) and I used to go and see him
there, whereas none else saw him.

At that time Islam had not reached any house except that of the Holy
Prophet and Khadijah, and I was the third amongst them. I used to see
the light of revelation and messengership and smelt the fragrance of
prophethood".[^3]

### The Second Evidence

Narrating the life history of Afif Kandi, Ibne Hajar (in 'Al-lsabah),
Ibne Abdul Bir (in Isti'ab) and many other scholars of history have
quoted him to have said: "During the Age of Ignorance I once went to
Makkah. My host was Abbas son of Abdul Muttalib and both of us arrived
in the precincts of the Holy Ka'bah. Suddenly l saw that a man came and
stood by the side of the Ka'bah. Then a boy arrived and stood on his
right side. Soon after that I saw a woman came and stood behind them. I
saw the boy and the woman performing *ruku'* and *sujud* (kneeling and
prostration) in imitation of the man. This unprecedented scene inspired
me to enquire from Abbas about it.

He said: "That man is Muhammad son of Abdullah and that boy is his
cousin and the woman standing behind them is the wife of Muhammad". Then
he added: "My nephew says that a day will come when he will control the
treasuries of 'Kisra' and 'Kaiser'. By Allah, there is no follower of
this religion on the face of the earth except these three". Then the
narrator says: "I wish that I had been the fourth of them!"

Since the above narrative is not directly concerned with Ali, even those
persons, who fail to narrate his virtues have quoted it. Amongst the
traditionalists only Bukhari has thought it proper to declare it 'weak',
but his attitude towards the progeny of the Holy Prophet's household is
quite well-known. The readers can study the said narrative in detail in
the books mentioned below.[^4]

### The Third Evidence

In the sermons and dissertations of Ali we usually come across the
following and other similar sentences:

"I am the servant of Allah and the brother of the Holy Prophet and the
greatest truthful one, and none will utter this sentence after me except
one who is a liar. I offered prayers along with the Holy Prophet for
seven years[^5] before anyone else did so."

The author of al-Ghadir (vol. III, page 222) has quoted authorities for
these narrations from the books of traditions and history and we
dispense with quoting the same briefly:

### The Fourth Evidence

The following traditions of the Holy Prophet narrated by successive
witnesses with various explanations have been quoted to this effect:

"The first person who will meet me on the Pool of 'Kauthar' and the
first person who embraced Islam is Ali son of Abu Talib".

You may also study the authorities for these traditions in the third
volume of 'al-Ghadir', page 320. The evidences for both the parts have
reached the stage of consecutiveness and when a person studies these
ahadith without any bias he becomes definite about Ali being the
foremost among the believers.

He does not, therefore, prefer at all the other two statements which are
in a minority from the point of view of narration. The number of the
supporters of the first statement (viz. Ali was the first person to
embrace Islam), who consist of distinguished companions of the Prophet
and tabe'in (companions of the companions of the Prophet) exceeds sixty.

So much so that even Tabari [^6] who has left the matter open and has
contented himself only with quoting the statement says that Ibn Sa'id
asked his father: "Was Abu Bakr the first person to embrace Islam? " His
father replied: "No. Before he embraced Islam more than fifty persons
had come round to the Prophet's way. However, his Islam was superior to
the Islam of others."

Mamunâ€™s Discussion with Ishaq
-----------------------------

Ibn Abd Rabbih quotes an interesting incident in 'Aqdul Farid' which may
be summarized as under:

Mamun arranged a debating assembly and the famous scholar Ishaq occupied
the foremost position in it. When Ali's precedence over others in the
matter of acceptance of Islam was established, Ishaq said "When Ali
embraced Islam he was only a boy but Abu Bakr was a mature man (at the
time he became a Muslim). Hence his faith enjoys superiority over that
of Ali".

Mamun suddenly intervened and said: "Did the Prophet invite Ali in his
boyhood to adopt the faith, or his faith was due to divine inspiration?
It cannot at all be said that his faith was inspired, because, not to
speak of Ali, even the faith of the Prophet was not inspired but was the
result of guidance and messages brought by Jibreel from Allah.

Hence, when the Holy Prophet invited him to accept Islam, did he do so
on his own account or had he been ordered by Allah to accomplish the
deed? We cannot imagine that the Prophet should subject himself or
anyone else to hardship and responsibility without an order from Allah.

Hence there is no alternative except that we should say that the
Prophet's call is supported by divine order. And does the Omniscient
Lord order His Prophet to invite an untalented boy (for whom 'faith' or
'no faith' are alike) to adopt Islam? Certainly such an act is not
possible from the All-Wise and All-Knowing Allah.

Hence, it should be concluded that the faith of Ali was a true and firm
faith which was not at all inferior to the faith of others and it is
Ali, son of Abu Talib to whom the verses of Qur'an *"and the foremost
are the foremost, these are they who are drawn nigh (to Allah)",* most
appropriately applies.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XVI, page 8.

[^2]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 246.

[^3]: Nahjul Balaghah, vol. II, page 182.

[^4]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II. p. 211; Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, pp.
31 - 38, and A'lamul Wara, page 25.

[^5]: In some of the narratives the period has been mentioned to be five
years and on the basis of numerous indications it may be said that a
part of this period preceded to the prophetic mission.

[^6]: 2Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 215. .


