Chapter 14: Cessatation of Revelation
=====================================

The soul of the Holy Prophet had been illuminated with the light of
revelation and he continuously meditated and reflected upon the onerous
duty which the Almighty Lord had entrusted to him by saying:

***"O you*** ***who are wrapped up in your vestment, arise and give
warning. Magnify your Lord . . ."*** **(Surah al-Muddaththir, (74:1-3)**

He was also expecting another message from his Lord, so that by hearing
the verses and the word of Allah his mind might become more illuminated
and his resolution and determination more firm. However, days and months
passed, but the Divine angel who had met him in the Cave of Hira did not
re-appear and the invisible voice which had inspired his soul was no
longer heard. We are not aware of its reason.

Possibly the purpose of pausing in the revelation was to afford rest to
the Prophet, because history tells us that the revelation is always
accompanied by unusual spiritual pressure, especially in the early days
of the appointment of a Prophet to the prophetic mission, because till
that time his soul is not accustomed to such mysterious perception.

The date of cessation of revelation is also not very clear, but after
studying the texts of history and traditions it can be concluded that
the revelation was cut off before general invitation to the public and
special invitation to the Prophet's kinsmen had taken place. It was at
the time when the Prophet had not extended his call to the public and
special contacts with the individuals had also not yet been established.

However, as quoted by the late Allamah Majlisi [^1] from Manaqib Ibn
Shahr Ashob, the time of cessation of relevation was after the extension
of invitation by the Prophet to his kinsmen to embrace Islam. Hence, it
may be said that this incident took place in the fourth year of the
appointment of the Prophet to the prophetic mission, as the invitation
to his kinsmen was extended exactly after three years of the
commencement of his prophethood.

There are some historians [^2] who have different views in this regard,
which does not conform to the established facts of the biographies of
the Holy Prophet and his dear wife. They say: "When the trail of
revelation was cut off the disturbance of mind and doubt to which the
Prophet had become subjected at the time of the commencement of his
prophetic mission was revived, his wife also became agitated and said to
him, "I think Allah has cut off His contact with you." After hearing
these words he resorted to his permanent place (Mount Hira). In the
meantime the heavenly revelation came twice and addressed him in the
following verses:

***By the light of day, and by the fall of night, your Lord has not
forsaken you, nor does He abhor you The life to come holds a richer
prize for you than this present life. You will be gratified with***
***what your Lord will give you. Did he not find you an orphan and give
you shelter? Did he not find you perplexed and guide you? Did he not
find you poor and enrich you? Therefore, do not wrong the orphan, nor
chide away the beggar. But proclaim the kindness of your Lord.***
**(Surah al-Dhuha, 93:1-11)**

The revelation of these verses gave him extraordinary happiness and he
realized that whatever was being said about him by the people was
baseless.

Our opinion on This Subject
---------------------------

We cannot accept this narrative in its entirety. The biography of
Khadijah and her conversation with her husband as well as her
recollections are still recorded in history. It was the same Khadijah
who endeavoured at the time of the commencement of revelation to remove
the agitation of her husband.

Then how could she now become the cause of his agitation, when she could
still perceive the noble character and morals of Muhammad and knew that
Allah, in whom she believed, was just and righteous. Yes! In spite of
all this, how could she develop in her mind a strange misgiving about
Allah and His Prophet?

Besides this the scholars have remarked in the books on 'Kalam'
(scholastic theology) that: "After the acquisition of a chain of
prominent habits which distinguish their holder from others the status
of prophethood is given to that person who possesses sublime habits and
praiseworthy qualities and so long as the Prophet does not possess a
number of prominent qualities and does not fulfil some special
conditions, this status is never accorded to him. At the top of these
qualities are chastity, peace of mind, faith, and trust in Allah and
because a Prophet possesses such qualities, his thoughts cannot go
astray."

The scholars have said : "The gradual development of a Prophet begins
from his very childhood and gradually his knowledge reaches a stage of
perfection. Even the slightest doubt does not cross his mind about the
things which he sees or hears. Furthermore the remarks of anyone do not
create any doubt in the mind of a person who occupies this position."

The above quoted Qur'anic verses and especially the verse *"Your Lord
has not forsaken you, nor does He abhor you,"* show only this that
someone said these words to the Holy Prophet but do not indicate as to
who said them and what effect they had on his soul.

However, some exegetes say that these words were uttered by some
polytheists and in view of this probability all these verses cannot
relate to the commencement of revelation, because none knew about the
commencement of prophethood with the descent of revelation except
Khadijah and Ali so that he might resort to criticism.

So much so that as we shall mention later the fact of the Holy Prophet's
prophethood was unknown to the polytheists for full three years and he
had not been ordered to proclaim his prophethood to the general public,
till the verse: *"Manifest that which you have been ordered to do"* was
revealed. Hence, the story of the cessation of revelation has only
historical and no Qur'anic evidence and that, too, is not in a repulsive
shape but in the manner as described in the beginning of this chapter.

The Holy Prophet Commenced Reformation From A Limited Circle
------------------------------------------------------------

The wise men and leaders of a society chalk out a very extensive
programme but start their work from a limited circle and as and when
they achieve success they immediately make efforts for its extension and
expand the sphere of their activities in proportion to their success,
and make endeavours for its gradual advancement.

A wise person[^3] enquired from the head of one of the big states of
modern times: "What is the secret of your success in public matters "He
replied: The way of thinking of westerners like us is different from
that of you orientals. We always start a work with an extensive and
well-calculated programme but commence it from a small place and make an
attempt for its expansion after acquiring success. And if in the
meantime we realize that the programme is not correct we immediately
leave it and begin another business.

On the other hand you orientals enter into a business with an extensive
programme and begin the work from a big place and put the entire
programme into action all at once. And if in the meantime you encounter
a deadlock you have no way of return left, except bearing heavy losses.

Besides this your spirit has been such that you always make hurry and
haste, and you always wish to harvest your crop on the very first day.
You desire to obtain the final result during the early days and this in
itself is the most dangerous way of social thinking which makes man to
come to a very strange deadlock.

We feel that this way of thinking is not related to either East or West.
Mature, wise and knowledgeable persons always achieve their objects in
this manner. The great Prophet of Islam also acted according to this
admitted principle and propagated his religion for full three years
without making any haste. He presented his religion to those whom he
found to be deserving and ready from the point of view of thinking and
capacity.

Although his target was to set up a great world-wide State so that he
might bring all people under the influence of one standard (the standard
of monotheism) but during these three years he did not at all resort to
general invitation. He made only special contacts with certain persons
and invited to his faith those persons, whom he found to be deserving,
fit and ready for embracing his religion. Consequently, during this
period of three years he succeeded in guiding only a few persons.

During these three years the chiefs of Quraysh were intoxicated with the
guardianship of the Ka'bah. As and when the Pharoah of Makkah (Abu
Sufyan) and his gang came to know about the nature of his call and
claim, they displayed a mocking smile on their lips and said to
themselves:

"The flame of his call too will die away soon like the call of Waraqah
and Umayyah (who had become Christians as a consequence of the study of
the Taurat and the Injeel and pretended to advocate Christianity in the
Arab assemblies) and it will not be long before he will also join the
caravan of those who have been forgotten!"

During these three years the chiefs of Quraysh did not take the
slightest liberty with the Holy Prophet and always respected him. He,
too, did not openly criticize their idols and gods during this period
and remained busy in maintaining special contacts with clear-sighted
persons.

However, Quraysh also woke up on the very first instance when the
special invitation to the Prophet's near relatives and general
invitation to the public commenced and his criticism of the idols and of
the anti-human ways and manners of Quraysh began to be talked about.
They realized on that very day that there was a vast difference between
his call and those of Waraqah and Umayyah. Secret and open opposition
and strife, therefore, started. In the first instance he broke his
silence before his relatives and thereafter pronounced his general call.

There is no doubt about the fact that deep-rooted reforms, which
influence all spheres of human life and change the course of society,
mostly stand in need of two strong forces - the force of speech and the
force of defence:

1. The force of speech so that the speaker may be able to state facts in
an attractive manner and should convey to the general public his own
personal ideas or those which he receives from the world of revelation.

2. The force of defence so that in the event of danger he may be able to
organize a defence line against the rush of the enemies. In the absence
of this ability the flame of his invitation extinguishes in the very
beginning.

The force of speech of the Holy Prophet was extraordinarily perfect and
there is no denying the fact that he was a forceful speaker who could
explain his religion with great eloquence. However, during the early
days of his call, he was devoid of the second force, because, during
these three years, he had been able to convert only about forty persons
to his faith and it is evident that such a small group could not
undertake his defence.

Hence, in order to acquire a defence line and to organize a central
nucleus, the Prophet of Islam invited his own kinsmen to his faith
before making a general call.

In this way he removed the deficiency of the second force and was able
to construct an important an important fortification against the
possible dangers. This invitation was at least useful in the sense that
even if his relatives were not inclined to his faith they stood up to
defend him on account of their fraternal and tribal sentiments, till the
time arrived when his invitation impressed some of the chiefs of the
nation and made another group inclined to him.

He also believed that the foundation of reforms rests on internal
reform. Until a man attempts to restrain his own children and relatives
from evil deeds, invitation extended by him to others can never be
effective, because in that event the opponents will indulge in criticism
and point out to him the conduct of his own relatives.

In view of these considerations Allah addressed the Prophet about
inviting his relatives with the words:

***"Admonish your nearest kinsfolk"*** **(Surah al-Shu'ara, 26:214),**

whereas with regard to the general call He said:

***"Manifest that for which you have been made responsible and remain
away from the polytheists, for we will protect you from the enemies.***
**(Surah al-Hijr 15:94)**

The Manner of Inviting The Kinsfolk
-----------------------------------

The manner of the Prophet's invitation to his kinsfolk was very
attractive, and the secrets of this manner of invitation become more
clear later when the reality became manifest. While commenting on the
verse "Admonish your nearest kinsfolk" almost all the exegetes and
historians write that the Almighty Allah ordered him to invite his
nearest kinsfolk to his faith.

After necessary circumspection the Prophet ordered Ali, son of Abu
Talib, whose age did not then exceed fifteen years, to procure food and
also to arrange for milk along with it. Then he invited forty five
elders from amongst Bani Hashim and also decided to divulge the hidden
secret on that occasion.

Unfortunately, however, when the meal was over one of his uncles (Abu
Lahab) said some privolous and baseless things and made the atmosphere
uncongenial for the presentation of the subject of prophetic mission.
The Holy Prophet, therefore, considered it expedient to defer the matter
till the following day. On the next day he again arranged a feast. After
the meal was over he turned to the elders of his family and began his
talk by praising Allah and announcing His Oneness.

Thereafter he said: "Indeed, the guide of a community never lies to his
people, I swear by Allah, besides whom there is no god, that I have been
sent by Him as His Messenger, especially towards you and generally
towards all the inhabitants of the world.

Yes! O my kinsmen! You will die as if you were going to sleep and
sometime thereafter you will be brought to life again and will receive a
recompense according to your deeds. This recompense is the eternal
Paradise of Allah (for the righteous) and His perpetual Hell (for the
evil-doers)".

Then he added: "No human being has ever brought a better thing for his
people than that which I have brought for you. I have brought for you
the blessings of this world as well as of the Hereafter. My Lord has
ordered me to invite you towards Him. Which one of you will be my
supporter so that he may become my brother, wasi (vicegerent) and
successor amongst you?"

When the speech of the Prophet reached this point, perfect silence had
prevailed over the whole gathering and every one of those present was
reflecting upon the greatness of the target and of his own fate in the
long run.

All of a sudden Ali, who was then a fifteen year old young man, broke
the silence prevailing in the assembly. He stood up and said in a
forceful tone: "O Prophet of Allah! I am prepared to support you." The
Prophet ordered him to sit down. He repeated the aforesaid words thrice
but none except the same fifteen year old young man gave him the same
reply. He then turned to his kinsmen and said "People! This young man is
my brother, vicegerent and successor amongst you. Listen to his words
and follow him".

At this stage the meeting came to an end and those present turned to Abu
Talib with smiling faces and said: "Muhammad has directed you to follow
your son and to take orders from him and has declared him to be your
elder".[^4]

What has been written above is the gist of the detailed version quoted
by most of the exegetes and historians in different words except for Ibn
Taymiyah, who holds specific views about the members of the Prophet's
family, none has doubted the authenticity of this tradition and all
consider it to be admittedly a historical fact.

Crimes and Breach of Trust
--------------------------

Distortion and misrepresentation of facts and concealment of realities
is a clear case of crime and breach of trust; and during the course of
Islamic history there has been a group of biased writers who have
treaded this path and reduced the worth of their treatises on account of
misrepresentations. The course of history and evolution of knowledge
has, however, exposed them. Here is a specimen of misrepresentation of
this type:

1 As has been observed by the readers, Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari (died
310 A.H.) has narrated the incident of invitation to the kinsfolk in
detail in his history. In his Tafsir [^5] however, while commenting on
the verse "Admonish your nearest kinsfolk" he mentions what he has
written in his history along with the text and authority, but when he
reaches the sentence: "Ali is my brother, vicegerent and successor" he
alters the sentence and says: "Ali is my brother, and this and that".
And there is no doubt about the fact that to omit the words "my
vicegerent and successor" and to substitute for them the word "etc.'' is
nothing short of breach of trust.

He has not contented himself with this alone and has not only altered
the interrogative remark of the Holy Prophet, but has also altered the
sentence which the Prophet himself uttered about Ali (This is my brother
and vicegerent and successor) and has again used the very word "etc.".

A historian should be free and unbiased in recording facts and should
write that which he has assessed and found correct, with unmatched
bravery and candour. It goes without saying that the thing which
prompted Tabari to omit these two words and to substitute two allusive
words for them is the very religious bias of his, because he did not
consider Ali to be the vicegerent and immediate successor of the
Prophet.

And as these two words clearly indicated that Ali was the wasi and the
immediate successor, Tabari considered it necessary to defend his own
religious attitude also, while commenting on the occasion of the
revelation of the verse.

2. Ibn Kathir Shami, who died in the year 732 A.H. has also treaded the
same path in his history [^6] which was treaded earlier by Tabari in his
Tafsir. We cannot excuse Ibn Kathir on any account, because Tarikh-i
Tabari itself forms the foundation of his history and he has clearly
referred to Tarikh-i Tabari in arranging this portion of his book, but,
in spite of this, he has failed to quote this matter from the said
history and has, contrary to expectations, mentioned the event according
to Tafsir-i Tabari.

3. And then we come across the crime which has been committed by Dr
Haykal, the former Education Minister of Egypt and the writer of
"Hayat-i Muhammad" who has opened the path for the new generation for
resorting to distortion of facts. It is rather strange that whereas in
the preface of his book he has used very harsh words for the
orientalists and accused them of distortion of facts and forgery, he
himself commits the same thing, rather goes a step forward, because:

Firstly: In the first edition of the said book he quoted the incident in
a mutilated manner and, out of the two essential sentences, recorded
only one (viz. the Prophet turned to the elders and said: "Who amongst
you will be my supporter in this task so that he may be my brother, wasi
and successor) but totally omitted the other sentence which the Prophet
uttered about Ali after expression of support by him, and did not at all
mention that the Holy Prophet said about him: "This young man is my
brother, vicegerent and successor."

Secondly: In the second and third editions he went one step forward and
omitted both the sentences from the two places and thus struck an
irreparable blow to his own position as well as to that of his book.

Prophethood and Imamate are Linked Together
-------------------------------------------

The proclamation of the successorship (imamate) of Ali in the early days
of the Prophethood of Muhammad goes to show that these two offices are
not separated from each other, and when the Prophet of Allah was
introduced to the people, his successor was also appointed and
introduced on the same day and this shows by itself that prophethood and
imamate are linked together and there is no distance between them.

This event clearly proves the spiritual heroism and bravery of Imam Ali,
the Commander of the Faithful. For, in an assembly in which experienced
and aged persons were drowned in reflection and astonishment, he
pronounced his support and devotion with perfect boldness and expressed
his enmity with the enemies of the Holy Prophet without treading the
path of self-seeking politicians.

Although at that time he was the youngest amongst those present so far
as age was concerned, but this association with the Holy Prophet for a
long time in the past had prepared his mind for the acceptance of the
realities which the elders of the nation were reluctant to accept.

Abu Ja'far Askafi has been very eloquent about this event. Readers may
refer in this connection to Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah. [^7]

[^1]: 1Biharul Anwar, vol. XVIll, page 197.

[^2]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. I, pp. 48-52.

[^3]: One of the Qajar Monarchs when he visited London.

[^4]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp. 62-63; Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, pp.
40-41; Musnad Ahmad, vol. I, page 111 and Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah by Ibn
Abil Hadid, vol. XIII, pp. 210-221.

[^5]: Tafsir-i Tabari, vol. XIX, page 74.

[^6]: al-Bidayah wan Nihayah, vol. III, page 40.

[^7]: Ibn Abil Hadid (Egyptian edition, vol. XIII, pp.215 onward).


