Chapter 15: General Invitation
==============================

Three years had passed since the commencement of the prophetic mission
of the Prophet. After inviting his nearest kinsfolk, the Prophet
resorted to general invitation. During these three years he had guided
some persons by special contacts to accept the Islamic faith, but this
time he invited the general public openly to the religion of worshipping
Allah, the One and the Unique One. One day he took his place on a high
rock and said aloud: 'Ya Sabahah'! [^1]

The Holy Prophet's call received attention. Some persons belonging to
different families of Quraysh ran up to him. Then he turned to those
assembled there, and said: "O people! Will you believe me if I tell you
that your enemies have taken positions on the other side of this hill (
Safa) and intend attacking your lives and property?" All of them said,
"We have never heard anything false from you throughout our lives". Then
he said: "O people of Quraysh! Save yourselves from fire. I cannot do
anything for you in the presence of Allah. I warn you of painful
torture!" Then he added: "My position is like that of a watchman, who
observes an enemy at a far-off point and immediately runs to his people
for their safety and warns them of the impending danger by saying 'Ya
Sabahah' in the particular manner".

These sentences indicate the basis of his invitation and religion.
Quraysh were more or less aware of his religion, but these sentences
created such a fear in their hearts that one of the leaders of
infidelity (Abu Lahab) broke the silence of the people and said: "Woe be
to you! Did you call us for this thing?" Then the people dispersed.

The Role of Faith and Fortitude
-------------------------------

The secret of everyone's success lies in two things: Firstly, faith in
one's aim and secondly steadfastness and effort in the path of its
attainment. Faith is the inner stimulant which perforce pushes man to
his object and invites him day and night to attain his aim, because he
firmly believes that his welfare, supremacy, prosperity and good end are
associated with it.

And, in view of the interest which man takes in himself, whenever he
develops faith and confidence the strength of his faith automatically
directs and persuades him to overcome all difficulties and keeps him
away from every doubt, notwithstanding the fact that his prosperity may
be dependent upon the attainment of a specific target.

For example, a sick man, who knows that his remedy and welfare lies in
taking a bitter medicine, takes it easily, and a diver who believes that
there are precious gems beneath the tides of the sea throws himself into
the mouth of the tides without any apprehension; and returns to surface,
after achieving his purpose.

However, if the ailing person or the diver are doubtful about the
achievement of their objects or do not at all believe in the usefulness
of their job, they either do not take any steps in that direction or,
even if they do, they are faced with hardship and anguish. Hence, it is
the very strength of belief and faith which solves all difficulties.

Nevertheless, there is no doubt about the fact that achievement of one's
target is associated with difficulties and obstacles. It is, therefore,
necessary for us to combat against those hurdles and to make necessary
efforts in that behalf, so that all the obstacles may be removed with
our full might. It has been said since olden times that wherever there
is a flower (a prized object) there is also a thorn (difficulty) with
it. The flower should, therefore, be plucked in such a way that the
thorn does not prick one's hands or feet.

The Holy Qur'an has mentioned this subject (that the secret of success
lies in faith in one's aim and steadfastness in its attainment) in a
short sentence and has said:

***"As for those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah,' and take the right
path.........."*****(Surah al-Fussilat, 41:30).**

(Viz. those who have faith in Allah and believe in a particular aim and
then display steadfastness and fortitude, will definitely achieve their
object and are helped by the angels).

Steadfastness and Fortitude of The Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

As a result of the special contacts of the Prophet before the 'general
invitation' and his indefatigable efforts thereafter, a selected and
faithful team came into existence against the forces of infidelity and
idolatry. The Muslims, who had embraced Islam secretly before the
'general invitation', developed complete acquaintance with those who
responded to the Prophet's call thereafter and the bells of danger rang
in all the assemblies of infidelity and polytheism.

No doubt it was quite easy for the strong and well-equipped Quraysh to
crush a newly-born movement, but the reason for their being afraid was
that the members of the movement did not belong to only one family but
persons belonging to various families had also embraced Islam. Hence it
was not easy for Quraysh to take a decisive action.

After mutual consultations the chiefs of Quraysh decided to remove the
very foundation of this faith and the founder of the new religion by
different means. They proposed to achieve this purpose by approaching
him sometimes with allurements and at other times by extending to him
various promises and occasionally by using threats and torture. For ten
years Quraysh behaved in this manner and eventually they decided to kill
the Holy Prophet. In order to save him, therefore, Allah ordered him to
quit Makkah.

During the aforesaid period the chief of the family of Bani Hashim was
Abu Talib. He was a man who possessed a noble nature and a magnanimous
spirit, and his house was an asylum for the needy and the orphans.
Besides being the chief of Makkah and possessing some offices with
regard to the Holy Ka'bah he enjoyed a very high position in the Arab
society and as he had been the guardian of the Prophet after the demise
of Abdul Muttalib, the other chiefs of Quraysh approached him in the
form of a group [^2] and addressed him thus: "O Abu Talib!

Your nephew abuses our gods, speaks ill of our religion, laughs at our
thoughts and beliefs and considers our forefathers misguided. Ask him to
keep aloof from us or surrender him to us and refrain from supporting
him".[^3]

The elder of Quraysh and the head of the family of Bani Hashim replied
to them in a tactful manner and in a soft tone, and consequently they
abandoned their activities. However, Islam was penetrating and expanding
day after day and the spiritual rapture of the religion of the Prophet
and the attractive and eloquent words of the Heavenly Book (the Qur'an)
were lending support to it.

The Prophet especially presented his religion before the people in the
months in which fighting was prohibited, when a large number of pilgrims
gathered in Makkah. His eloquent and sweet speeches and his attractive
beliefs impressed many persons. In the meantime the Pharoah of Makkah
also realized that the Holy Prophet had gained popularity amongst all
the tribes and had acquired many followers amongst the settled and
unsettled Arab tribes.

They, therefore, decided to approach the Prophet's only supporter (Abu
Talib) once again and to make known to him the dangers to which the
liberty of the Makkans and of their religion had become subjected owing
to the propagation and expansion of Islam. Hence, they once again
approached him jointly, and referring to their former demands spoke to
him thus:

"O Abu Talib! You are superior to us in the matter of nobility and age.
However, we met you earlier and requested you to restrain your nephew
from propagating the new religion, but you did not pay any heed to our
words. The position had now become unbearable for us. We cannot tolerate
any longer that a person should abuse our gods and should consider us to
be foolish and ignorant. It is necessary for you to restrain him from
all these activities, failing which we will fight against him as well as
against you, who are his supporter, so that the duty of each group
should become specific and one of them should be wiped out".

Abu Talib, the distinguished supporter and defender of the Prophet
realized through his sagacity and perfect wisdom that it was appropriate
to show forbearance to the people whose entire dignity of existence was
now open to danger. He, therefore, adopted a peaceful attitude and
promised that he would convey the sentiments of the chiefs to his
nephew. No doubt this reply was given primarily with the object of
quenching the fire of their wrath so that an appropriate way of solving
the difficulty could be adopted later. Hence, after the departure of the
chiefs he contacted his nephew and conveyed their message to him and
incidentally, in order to test his faith in his own object, demanded a
reply from him.

However, while replying, the Holy Prophet uttered a sentence which is
considered to be one of the outstanding and golden lines of history.
Here is the text of his reply: "Dear uncle, I swear by Allah that even
if they place the sun in my right hand and the moon in my left hand
(i.e. even if they provide me with rule over the entire world) I shall
not desist from propagating my religion and pursuing my object, and
shall continue my efforts until I overcome the difficulties and achieve
my final goal or lay down my life for its sake".

Thereafter the Prophet's eyes were filled with tears on account of his
love and enthusiasm for his object and he stood up and departed from his
uncle's presence. His penetrating and attractive speech made such a
wonderful impression on the chief of Makkah that, notwithstanding all
the dangers to which he was exposed, he called back his nephew and said
to him: "By Allah! I will not give up my support to you and you may very
well pursue your object to its end". [^4]

Quraysh Approached Abu Talib for The Third Time
-----------------------------------------------

The ever-increasing expansion of Islam disturbed Quraysh very much and
they were keen to find out a solution to this problem. They assembled
once again and were of the view that Abu Talib's support to Muhammad was
possibly due to the fact that he had adopted him as his son and if that
were so it was possible that they might take the most handsome young man
to him and ask him to adopt him as his son.

They, therefore, took with them 'Ammarah bin Walid bin Mughayrah, who
was the most handsome of the Makkan young men, and approaching Abu Talib
for the third time began complaining and threatening in these words: "O
Abu Talib! Walid's son is a young man, who is a poet and is also
handsome and intelligent. We are prepared to hand him over to you so
that you may adopt him as your son and cease supporting your nephew".

On hearing this Abu Talib was cut to the quick and shouted upon them
with a burning face and said: "You are doing a great injustice to me.
You wish that I should nurture your son and surrender my dearest child
to you so that you may kill him. I swear by Allah that it will not be
so".

Mut'am son of Adi then stood up and said: "The offer made by Quraysh is
quite fair, but you are not going to accept it". Abu Talib replied: "You
have not been just and I am sure that you want to humiliate me and to
instigate Quraysh to fight against me. However, you are free to do what
you can".

Quraysh Try to Allure The Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------

Quraysh became sure that it was not at all possible to make Abu Talib
agree to their suggestion and, although he did not declare openly to be
a follower of Islam, he had a great faith in his nephew and dearly loved
him. They, therefore, decided to refrain from entering into any
discussion with him.

They, however, thought of another plan and it was that they should
allure Muhammad by offering him status, wealth, gifts and beautiful
women so that he might abandon his call. They, therefore, went to the
house of Abu Talib in the form of a group at a time when his nephew was
also sitting with him.

The spokesman of the group opening the talk said: "O Abu Talib! Muhammad
has scattered our united ranks and has created dissension amongst us. He
has laughed our intellect down and has ridiculed us and our idols. If he
has been prompted to do so on account of his poverty and indigence we
are prepared to place enormous wealth at his disposal. If he wants
status we are ready to accept him as our ruler and will listen to him.
And in case he is invalid and needs medical treatment we will bring an
expert physician to attend upon him............."

Abu Talib turned his face to the Prophet and said: "The elders of your
tribe have come and request that you should refrain from criticizing the
idols so that they, too, may leave you alone". The Holy Prophet replied
to his uncle thus: "I don't desire anything from them. As against these
four offers they should accept one word from me so that, under its
auspices they may rule the Arabs and make non-Arabs their camp
followers".

At this stage Abu Jahl stood up and said: "We are prepared to hear you
ten times". The Prophet replied: "My only word is that you should admit
Oneness of the Lord". The unexpected words of the Holy Prophet were like
cold water thrown on a hot kettle. They were so much engulfed in
amazement coupled with disappointment and despair that they said
involuntarily all at once: "Should we forsake 360 gods and worship only
one Allah?"

Quraysh left the house while their faces and eyes were burning with
anger and they were thinking about the means for achieving their object.
In the following verses of the Holy Qur'an this very incident has been
related: [^5]

***It seems strange to the pagans that a man from their own people
should come to them as a Prophet. The unbelievers have said, "he is only
a lying magician ". They say, "Has he condemned all other gods but One?
This is certainly strange". A group of the pagans walked out of a
meeting with the Prophet and told others, "Let us walk away. Be
steadfast in the worship of your gods. This man wants to dominate you.
We have heard nothing like this in the latest religion. This is only his
own false invention.*** **(Surah Sa'd, 38:4-7)**

An Example of The Tortures and Persecutions by Quraysh
------------------------------------------------------

One of the most tragic periods of the life of the Holy Prophet began on
the day on which he broke the seal of silence and the elders of Quraysh
lost all hope of his accepting their offers in view of his well-known
words: "By Allah! Even if you place the sun in my right hand and the
moon in my left hand so that I may abandon my call, I will not rest
until Allah makes my religion prevail or I lay down my life for its
sake".

Till that time Quraysh had, during all their encounters with him,
preserved his respect, but when they saw that all their conciliation
offers had failed they were compelled to change the course of their
thinking and to forestall the expansion of Islam at all costs and to
utilize all means for this purpose. Hence the council of Quraysh decided
unanimously to practice ridicule, torture and intimidation to restrain
the Prophet from pursuing his object.

It is evident that a reformer who is anxious to guide the people of the
whole world must observe patience and fortitude in the face of
inconveniences, intimidations, dastardly attacks and corporal and mental
blows, so that by and by he should be able to overcome difficulties, and
this has been the policy of other reformers as well. We give below an
account of some of the persecutions and tortures of Quraysh so that the
extent of the Holy Prophet's patience and fortitude may become manifest.

Besides the mental and spiritual factor (faith, steadfastness and
fortitude) which helped him internally the Prophet also possessed an
external factor which ensured safety and support for him, and that was
the support of Bani Hashim with Abu Talib at their head, because when
Abu Talib came to know that Quraysh had taken a final and irrevocable
decision to persecute his nephew, he called all the members of Bani
Hashim and asked them to protect Muhammad.

Some of them undertook to support and protect him on account of their
faith and others agreed to do so in view of the bond of kinship. Out of
them only three (namely Abu Lahab and two others whose names will be
mentioned later along with other enemies of the Prophet refrained from
endorsing his decision.

However, in spite of this, these defensive measures could not protect
him from some unpleasant incidents and as and when the enemies found him
alone they did not desist from doing him all sorts of harm. Here is an
example of the tortures inflicted by Quraysh:

1. One day Abu Jahl saw the Prophet in Safa and abused and grieved him.
The Prophet did not speak to him at all and went away to his house. Abu
Jahl also went to join Quraysh who had assembled by the side of the
Ka'bah. Hamzah, who was the uncle and foster-brother of the Prophet,
also returned on that day from hunting and was carrying his bow on his
shoulder.

It was customary with him that after returning to Makkah and before
seeing his children and relatives, he went to the Ka'bah and performed
'tawaf' (circumambulation) and then went over to the different groups of
Quraysh who gathered round the Ka'bah and exchanged greetings with them.

On that day, after performing these ceremonies, he went to his house. By
chance a slave-girl of Abdullah Jad'an, who had witnessed the aforesaid
incident, came forward and said "O Abu 'Ammarah, (the patronymic of
Hamzah) I wish that you had been here a few minutes earlier and had seen
the incident which I have seen! Then you would have learnt how Abu Jahl
has abused and persecuted your nephew".

The words of the slave-girl made a strange impression on Hamzah and he
decided to avenge his nephew's insult upon Abu Jahl before doing
anything else. He, therefore, returned and saw Abu Jahl sitting amongst
a group of Quraysh.

Without speaking to anyone he raised his hunting bow and struck it on
the head of Abu Jahl and his skull was injured. Then he said to him:
"You abuse him (the Prophet) and I have embraced his religion and am
treading the same path which he treads. If you possess any strength,
come on and fight with me".

A group of persons belonging to the family of Makhzum then stood up to
support Abu Jahl. However, as he was a clever and diplomatic person, he
avoided every sort of quarrel and defence and said "I misbehaved with
Muhammad, and Hamzah is entitled to feel uneasy about it". [^6]

This admitted historical fact shows that Hamzah, who later became one of
the greatest commanders of Islam was a highly influential and brave
personality. He did all he could to protect and defend the Holy Prophet
and strengthen the group of Muslims.

As Ibn Athir says,[^7] Quraysh considered the Islam of Hamzah to be one
of the greatest factors for the advancement and strength of the Muslims
and they, therefore, resorted to other plans which will be mentioned
later.

Some Sunni historians like Ibn Kathir Shami insist that:

"The effect of the Islam of Abu Bakr and Umar was no lesser than the
effect of the Islam of Hamzah, and the Islam of these two great caliphs
became the means of the glory, strength and freedom of the
Muslims''.[^8]

Of course, there is no doubt about the fact that every person
contributed to the strength and expansion of Islam, but, in spite of
this, it can never be said that the effect of the Islam of these two
caliphs was at par with the effect of the Islam of Hamzah. The reason
for this conclusion is that Hamzah was the man who, on hearing that an
elder of Quraysh had abused the Holy Prophet, went in quest of the
culprit without informing anybody of his intention and took a very hard
revenge on him.

And none had the courage to oppose him or to fight with him. On the
other hand Ibn Hisham, the great biographer of Islam, narrates an
incident with regard to Abu Bakr which shows that when he joined the
circle of the Muslims he did not possess the requisite strength to
defend either himself or the Holy Prophet.[^9] The details of the
incident are given below:

One day the Prophet was passing by a group of Quraysh. Suddenly those
people encircled him and everyone of them began repeating, by way of
ridicule, his words about the idols and the Day of Judgement and said:
"Do you say this?" The Prophet replied to them: "Yes. I am the person
who says this".

As Quraysh saw that there was none to defend the Holy Prophet they
decided to kill him. A man, therefore, came forward and held the ends of
his dress. Abu Bakr happened to be there by the side of the Prophet.

With tears in his eyes he stood up to support the Prophet and said: "Is
it proper that you should kill a man who believes in monotheism?" Later
(for some reasons) those people desisted from maltreating the Prophet
and he went his own way, whereas Abu Bakr proceeded to his own house
with an injured head.

Although this incident may be an evidence of the Caliph's sentiments for
and interest in the Prophet it is, first of all, a firm evidence of his
weakness and fear. It shows that at that time he did not possess either
strength or an appreciable social status. And as a practical step by
Quraysh against the Prophet might have entailed evil consequences, they
left him alone and directed the severity of their action towards his
companion and broke his head.

If you place the incident of Hamzah which clearly shows his valour and
bravery side by side with this episode you can very well decide as to
whose Islam had a greater effect in the early days of Islam on the
honour, strength and fear of the unbelievers.

You will soon read about the Islam of Umar. His Islam also, like that of
his old friend, did not strengthen the defensive power of the Muslims.
But for 'As bin Wai'l it was possible that the blood of the Caliph might
have been shed on the day he embraced Islam, because he ('As bin Wai'l)
came and addressed the group, who wanted to kill Umar, in these words:
"What do you want from a man who has adopted a faith for himself? Do you
think that the family of Adi will surrender him easily?"

This sentence shows that it was the fear of his family which made others
spare him and defence by the families of those who belonged to them was
something natural and usual and there was no difference in this regard
between the low and the high.

Yes! The base of defence of the Muslims was the house of Bani Hashim and
the heavy burden of the task lay on the shoulders of Abu Talib and his
family, for, as regards other persons who joined the Muslims they did
not possess the requisite strength even to defend themselves, and the
question of their Islam becoming the source of the dignity and
exaltation of the Muslims did not, therefore, arise.

Abu Jahl Lies in Ambush for The Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------

The ever-increasing advancement of Islam had made Quraysh very much
uneasy. Every day a report regarding the inclination (to Islam) of one
member or another of their tribe reached them. On this account,
therefore, their anger was flaming out. One day the Pharaoh of Makkah,
Abu Jahl, said in the assembly of Quraysh: "O people of Quraysh! You can
see how Muhammad considers our religion to be worthless and abuses the
faith of our forefathers and their gods, and declares us to be ignorant.
By God I will lie in ambush for him tomorrow and will place a stone by
my side; and when Muhammad goes into sajdah (prostration) I will strike
that stone on his head. On the following day the Holy Prophet arrived in
Masjidul Haram to offer his prayers and stood between 'Rukn-i Yamani'
and the 'Black Stone'.

A group of Quraysh who were aware of the intention of Abu Jahl were
wondering whether or not he would succeed in his campaign. The Holy
Prophet went into sajdah and his old enemy came out of the ambush and
approached him.

However, it was not long before he was struck with awe and he returned
to Quraysh, trembling, and aghast, with a countenance distracted. All of
them ran forward and said "O Aba Hakam! what has happened?" He said with
a very weak voice which betrayed his fear and disturbance of mind "There
appeared before my eyes a scene which I had never seen before in my
life. It was for this reason that I abandoned my plan".

It goes without saying that an unseen force had arisen by the command of
Allah and had created a spectacle which protected the Prophet of Islam
from harm by the enemies in accordance with the Divine promise: *"We
shall protect you from the mischief of those who mock".*

Numerous instances of torture by Quraysh are recorded in the pages of
history. Ibn Athir has allocated a chapter to this subject and has
mentioned the names of the foremost enemies of the Prophet in Makkah and
the atrocities perpetrated by them. [^10]Whatever has been said above is
only a specimen. The Prophet found himself faced every day by a new
persecution. For example, one day 'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it saw the Prophet
performing 'Tawaf' and abused him. He twisted his turban round his neck
and dragged him out of the Masjid. Some persons freed the Prophet from
his hands on account of fear of Bani Hashim. [^11]

The torture and persecution to which the Holy Prophet was subjected by
his uncle, Abu Lahab and his wife, Umme Jamil was unprecedented. He
happened to be a next-door neighbour of theirs. They did not refrain
from throwing any sort of dirt on him, and one day they threw the
entrails of a sheep on his head. Eventually Hamzah, with a view to take
revenge, thrust the same on the head of Abu Lahab.

Persecution of Muslims by Quraysh
---------------------------------

In the early days of the prophetic mission the advancement of Islam was
the result of a number of factors, one of which, was the steadfastness
of the Prophet and his companions and supporters. Examples of the
patience and fortitude of the leader of the Muslims have already been
stated, whereas the forbearance and perseverance of the Muslims who
lived in Makkah (the centre of polytheism and idolatry) deserves
attention.

An account of their sacrifices and steadfastness will be given in the
chapters relating to events after Hijrah (migration to Madina). For the
present we mention the tragic events connected with the lives of some
old devotees of the Prophet who lived in the shelterless environments of
Makkah.

### Bilal, The Ethiopian

The parents of Bilal were amongst those persons who had been brought
from Ethiopia to Arabia as captives. He himself (who later became the
mu'azzin of the Prophet) was the slave of Umayyah bin Khalaf. Umayyah
was one of the sworn enemies of the great leader of the Muslims. As the
kinsmen of the Prophet had undertaken his own defence, Umayyah, with a
view to take revenge, used to torture openly his slave who had been
newly converted to Islam. He made him lie naked on hot sand during the
hottest days, placed a big red-hot stone on his chest and addressed him
in these words: "I will not release you until you die in this condition
or abjure the faith of Muhammad, and worship 'Lat' and 'Uzza'.

In spite of all this torture, however, Bilal replied him with only two
words which are a clear proof of his firm faith. He said, 'Ahad! Ahad!'
(viz. Allah is One and I will never revert to the religion of polytheism
and idolatry). Others wondered at the steadfastness of this black slave
who was a captive in the hands of a hard-hearted person. So much so that
Waraqah bin Nawfal, the Christian Arab scholar, wept on the condition of
Bilal and said to Umayyah: "By Allah! If you kill him in this manner I
will make his grave a sacred place to be visited by pilgrims ".[^12]

At times Ummayah acted with still greater severity. He put a rope round
the neck of Bilal and handed it over to the children so that they might
drag him in the streets.[^13]

Ummayah and his son were captured in the Battle of Badr, the first
battle of Islam. Some Muslims were not in favour of killing Umayyah, but
Bilal said: "He is the leader of infidelity and must be killed". On his
insistence the father and the son were recompensed for their crimes and
were put to death.

### Self-Sacrifice of Ammar and His Parents

Arnmar and his parents were amongst the early Muslims. They embraced
Islam when the Prophet had selected the house of Arqam bin Abil Arqam as
the rendezvous for the propagation of Islam. When the idolaters became
aware of their having adopted the Divine religion they did not neglect
torturing and persecuting them.

Ibn Athir[^14] says: "The idolaters compelled these three persons to
quit their house in the hottest season and to spend their time in the
heat and the scorching wind of the desert. This torture was repeated so
many times that Yasir succumbed to his troubles. One day his widow
Sumayyah quarrelled with Abu Jahl on this account. That hard-hearted and
cruel person thrust a spear in her heart and killed her also. The Holy
Prophet was very much moved on account of the persecution to which they
were subjected. One day he saw them being tortured. He turned his face
to them with tears in his eyes and said "O family of Yasir! Be patient,
for your place is in Paradise ".

After the death of Yasir and his wife the idolaters tormented and
tortured Ammar as well, as they had tormented Bilal. To save his life he
had no alternative left but to abjure Islam, but he repented soon and
ran to the Prophet with a palpitating heart.

He related the incident to the Prophet, who enquired of him: "Has any
instability taken place in your inner faith?" He replied: "My heart is
abounding with faith". The Prophet then said: "Do not entertain the
least fear in your mind and keep your faith hidden to save yourself from
their mischief".

The following verse was revealed with regard to the faith of Ammar:
[^15]

***(There shall be a grievous punishment for him) who disbelieves in
Allah after believing in Him, other than him who is compelled while his
heart is firm in his faith.*** **(Surah Nahl, 16:106)**

It is said that Abu Jahl decided to take to task the family of Yasir who
belonged to the class of the most unprotected persons in Makkah. He,
therefore, ordered that fire end scourage might be made ready. Yasir,
Sumayyah and Ammar were then dragged to the appointed place and
tormented with the point of the sword and with the flames of fire and
whipping. This persecution was repeated so many times that Yasir and
Sumayyah consequently breathed their last, but they did not forsake the
praise of the Prophet till their last moments.

The men of Quraysh who had witnessed this calamitous and tragic scene,
notwithstanding the fact that they had unity of interest in defeating
Islam, got the wounded and grief stricken Ammar released from the
clutches of Abu Jahl so that he might bury his parents.

### Abdullah Bin Mas'ud

The Muslims who had embraced Islam secretly were telling among
themselves that Quraysh had not heard the Holy Qur'an and it would be
quite appropriate if one of them went into Masjid ul-Haram and recited
some verses of the Holy Book with a loud voice. Abdullah, son of Mas'ud
expressed his willingness to do so. He came into the Masjid when Quraysh
had assembled by the side of the Holy Ka'bah and recited the following
verses with a loud and melodious voice:

***In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. It is the
Merciful who has taught the Qur'an.*** **..... (Surah al-Rahman,
55:1-2)**

The eloquent verses of this surah struck Quraysh with a strange awe. And
in order to forestall the effect of the heavenly call which was reaching
their ears through a defenceless person they all stood up and beat him
so much that blood began to flow from his entire body and he returned to
the companions of the Holy Prophet in a pitiable condition. They were,
however happy that the invigorating voice had eventually reached the
ears of the enemies.[^16]

Whatever has been said above was by way of example, for otherwise the
number of self-sacrificing devotees of Islam who endured the gravest
hardships during the early days of the Prophet's mission, and showed
steadfastness in the path of achievement of their aim, is much larger
However, we refrain from mentioning their names and the events of their
lives for the sake of brevity.

Ruthless Enemies of The Holy Prophet
------------------------------------

Recognition of some enemies of the Prophet is necessary in connection
with some Islamic events which took place after migration, and we give
below briefly the names and particulars of some of them:

Abu Lahab: He was the neighbour of the Prophet. He did not miss any
opportunity of contradicting and torturing him and the Muslims.

Aswad bin Abd Yaghus: He was a clown. As and when he saw the helpless
and indigent Muslims he ridiculed them and said: "These poverty-stricken
people consider themselves to be the kings of the world and think that
they will soon possess the throne and the crown of the Emperor of Iran".
However, death did not allow him to see with his own eyes as to how the
Muslims had acquired the lands, thrones and crowns of Kaiser and Kisra.

Walid bin Mughayrah: He was an old man of Quraysh who possessed enormous
wealth. We shall record his conversation with the Holy Prophet in the
following chapter.

Umayyah and Abi sons of Khalaf: One day Abi brought the decayed and worn
out bones of some dead persons to the Holy Prophet and asked: "Can your
Allah restore these bones to life?" Right came the reply from the source
of revelation:

*"Say, the Lord who created them first will bring them to life again".*
These two brothers were killed in the Battle of Badr.

Abul Hakam bin Hisham: The Muslims used to call him Abu Jahl (father of
ignorance) on account of his unwarranted enmity and fanaticism against
Islam. He, too, was killed in the Battle of Badr.

'As bin Wai'l: He was the father of Amr 'As. He was the person who had
given the nickname of *'Abtar'* (issueless) to the Holy Prophet.

'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it:[^17] He was one of the most fierce enemies of
Islam and never missed an opportunity to do harm to the Holy Prophet and
the Muslims.

There was also another group of the enemies of Islam including Abu
Sufyan and others. The historians have recorded the particulars in
detail and for the sake of brevity we refrain from reproducing them
here.

Umar Ibn Khattab Embraces Islam
-------------------------------

The acceptance of Islam by everyone of the early Muslims was the effect
of one cause or another and at times a very small incident became the
means of the conversion of an individual or a group. The stimulant for
the adoption of Islam by the second caliph is interesting.

Although from the point of view of the chronological order of the events
it would have been appropriate to record this incident after describing
the migration of Muslims to Ethiopia, but we have considered it
expedient to describe it here, as we have here mentioned some of the
companions of the Holy Prophet.

Ibn Hisham [^18] says, "Out of the family of Khattab (father of Umar)
only his daughter Fatimah and her husband Sa'id bin Zayd had embraced
Islam. As in the early days of Islam Umar's relations with the Muslims
were very inimical and he was considered to be one of the most obstinate
enemies of the Prophet, therefore, his sister and her husband always
kept their faith concealed from him. In spite of this Khubab bin Art
used to come to their house at appointed hours and taught them the Holy
Qur'an.

The confused condition of the people of Makkah had made Umar very
sentimental, for he saw that dissension and disorder prevailed amongst
them and the bright day of Quraysh had been changed into a dark evening.

Umar, therefore, decided to go and cut off the root of dissension by
killing the Holy Prophet. To achieve this purpose he was looking for the
place where the Prophet could be found. He was informed that he was in a
house situated by the side of the bazaar of Safa, and forty persons like
Hamzah, Abu Bakr, Ali etc. had undertaken to protect and defend him.

Na'im bin Abdullah who was one of the close friends of Umar says: "I saw
Umar carrying his sword. I enquired about the purpose for which he was
going. He replied thus: "I am going in search of Muhammad who has
created dissension amongst Quraysh. He laughs at their wisdom and
intellect, declares their religion to be worthless and belittles their
gods. I am going to kill him".

Na'im says: "I said to him: You are deceived. Do you think the
descendants of Abd Munaf will spare your life? If you are a peaceable
person you should first reform your own house. Your sister Fatimah and
her husband have become Muslims and follow the religion of Muhammad".

Na'im's words created a storm of wrath in the mind of Umar. Consequently
he abandoned his previous plan and went to the house of his
brother-in-law. When he reached near the house he heard the humming of
someone who was reciting the Holy Qur'an with an impressive voice. The
manner of Umar's arrival in his sister's house was such that she and her
husband also became aware that he was about to enter. They, therefore,
concealed the teacher of the Holy Qur'an in the back part of the house
so that he might remain hidden from Umar's eyes. Fatimah also concealed
a leaf on which verses of the Holy Qur'an were written.

Umar said without any salutation or greeting: "What was this humming
that I have heard?" They replied 'We have heard nothing". Umar said: "I
have been informed that you have become Muslims and follow the religion
of Muhammad". He uttered this sentence with great fury and attacked his
brother-in-law. His sister then stood up to protect her husband. Umar
attacked her also and seriously injured her head with the point of his
sword. While blood was flowing from her head, the helpless woman said
with great fervour of faith: "Yes. We have become Muslims and believe in
Allah and His Holy Prophet. Do whatever you like".

The tragic plight of the sister, who was standing by the side of her
brother with her face and eyes besmeared with blood and was speaking to
him, made Umar tremble and he was sorry for what he had done. He,
therefore, insisted that they should show him the relevant leaf so that
he might ponder over the words of Muhammad. His sister fearing lest he
should tear it up, put him on oath that he would not do so, and he also
made a promise and confirmed it on oath that he would return the leaf
after having gone through it. Then he took the sheet in his hand. A few
verses were written on it. Their translation is given below:

***Taha. It was not to distress you that We revealed the Qur'an. It is
to admonish those who fear Allah. It is a revelation from Him who has
created the earth and the lofty heavens. The Merciful who is firm in
power. His is what the heavens and earth contain. He has knowledge of
all that is secret and all that is yet more hidden.*** **(Surah Taha,
20:1-6)**

These eloquent verses and the clear and firm words impressed Umar very
much. The man, who was the most ruthless enemy of the Qur'an and Islam a
few minutes earlier, decided to change his mind. He went to the house
about which he had already learnt that the Holy Prophet could be found
there and knocked at the door.

One of the companions of the Prophet peeped through a hole and saw Umar
standing with a sword in hand and waiting for the door to be opened. He
returned at once and informed the Prophet about the matter. Hamzah, son
of Abdul Muttalib said: "Let him come in. If he has come with good
intentions we shall welcome him, but if his intentions are not good we
shall kill him".

Umar's attitude towards the Prophet reassured them and his open
countenance and expression of sorrow and shame proved his real
intentions. Eventually he embraced Islam at the hands of the Prophet in
the presence of his companions and thus joined the ranks of the
Muslims.[^19]

[^1]: Instead of ringing a bell of danger the Arabs use these words and
generally begin alarming reports with them.

[^2]: Ibn Hisham has mentioned the names and particulars of these person
in his 'Seerah'.

[^3]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. X, page 265.

[^4]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, pp. 265-266.

[^5]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp. 66,67; Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I.
pp. 295,296

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, p. 313 and Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II,
p. 72.

[^7]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 59.

[^8]: al-Bidayah wan Nihayah, vol. III, page 26.

[^9]: Seerah, page 311. Tabari has quoted the entire incident in his
history vol. II page 72, except that the head of the Caliph was injured.

[^10]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 47.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XVIII, page 204.

[^12]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 318.

[^13]: Tabaqat-i Ibn S'ad, vol. III, page 233.

[^14]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 45.

[^15]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 320.

[^16]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 314.

[^17]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, pp. 47-51; Usudul Ghabah; al-Asabah
al-lst'iab etc.

[^18]: Seerah Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 365.

[^19]: Ibn Hisham has given another version of the embracement of Islam
by Umar. (vol. I, page 368)


