Chapter 16: Judgement of Quraysh about The Holy Qur'an
======================================================

A discussion, which is purely about the essence of a miracle and the
miraculous nature of the Holy Qur'an is beyond the scope of this book.
However, historical discussions tell us that this Heavenly Book was the
greatest and sharpest weapon of the Holy Prophet-so much so that the
expert poets and the circles of prosody and oration were puzzled and
astonished at the eloquence, melody and attraction of its words,
sentences and verses, and all of them admitted that the Holy Qur'an of
Muhammad stood at the highest level of eloquence and clarity and its
mastery over the words and its way of expression was unparalleled.

The impression, penetration, rapture and attraction of the Holy Qur'an
was such that even the most severe enemies of the Holy Prophet trembled
within themselves when they heard some of its verses and at times they
became so much ecstasized that for quite some time they could not move
from their places owing to amazement. Here is an example.

Judgement of Walid
------------------

Walid was one of the judges of Arabia. Many difficulties of the Arabs
were solved through him. He possessed enormous wealth. A group of
Quraysh went to him for the solution of the problem of penetration of
Islam in all houses and explained the matter to him and sought his
opinion about the Qur'an of Muhammad.

They said to him: "Is the Qur'an of Muhammad magic or divination or is
it a sermon or a rhetoric which has been prepared by him". The sage of
Arabia requested for time so that he might express his view after
hearing the Qur'an. Then he rose from his place and came to the Prophet.
He sat with him in 'Hajar-i Isma'il' and said "Read something from your
poetry".

The Holy Prophet replied: "What I say is not poetry. Rather it is the
word of Allah which He has sent down for your guidance". Then Walid
insisted that he should recite the Qur'an. The Prophet recited the first
thirteen verses of Surah al-Fussilat and when he reached this verse:

***If they give no heed, say "I have given you warning of the scourge
which overtook Thamud and 'Ad',***

Walid trembled violently within himself. All his hair stood straight on
his body and he got up in a state of astonishment and went home. He did
not come out of his house for many days -so much so that Quraysh began
ridiculing him and said: "Walid has given up the creed of his
forefathers and has adopted the faith of Muhammad".[^1]

Tabarsi says: "When Surah al-Ghafir was revealed to the Holy Prophet he
recited it in a very attractive voice in order to communicate the Divine
verses to the people. By chance Walid was then sitting by his side and
heard these verses without being attentive:

***This Book is revealed by Allah, the Mighty One, the All-Knowing, Who
forgives sin and accepts repentance; the Bountiful One, Whose punishment
is stern. There is no god but He. All shall return to Him. None but the
unbelievers dispute the revelations of Allah. Don't be deceived by their
activities in the land...........***

These verses impressed the sage of Arabia very much. When Bani Makhzum
came round him he commended the Holy Qur'an in these words: "Today I
have heard from Muhammad a speech which does not belong to the category
of the speeches of the human beings and the genii. It is very melodious
and possesses a special beauty. Its branches are full of fruits and its
roots abound with blessings. It is an outstanding narration and no other
narration is as outstanding as this."

He uttered these sentences and went his way and Quraysh thought that he
had begun to believe in Muhammad's religion.[^2]

According to a great scholar [^3] this was the first commendation and
praise of the Qur'an by a human being and a careful study of this speech
makes the miraculous nature of the Holy Qur'an vis-a-vis Arab ignorance
absolutely clear and it becomes evident that the reason of the Holy
Qur'an being a miracle in their eyes was its unusual rapture,
attraction, sweetness and melody, because they did not find such
deliciousness and elegance in any other thing except the Qur'an.

Another Example
---------------

'Utbah bin Rabiyyah was one of the elders of Quraysh. At the time when
Hamzah embraced Islam the entire assembly of Quraysh was stricken with
sorrow and grief and their chiefs feared that the Islamic faith would
expand further. At that stage 'Atbah said: "I shall go to Muhammad and
shall make some offers to him. It is possible that he may accept one of
them and abandon the new religion". The chiefs endorsed his view.

He, therefore, got up and went to the Prophet who was then sitting in
the Masjid. He offered to him wealth, authority and medical treatment in
very gentle words. When he stopped speaking the Prophet said to him:
"Was it all that you wanted to say?" He replied: "Yes." Then the Prophet
said: "Just listen to these verses, for this is the reply to all that
you have said".

***Ha Mim. A revelation from the Compassionate, the Merciful. It is a
Book, the verses of which have been well expounded; an Arabic Qur'an for
those who have understanding. Bearing good news and warning. But most of
them ignore it and give no heed.*** **(Surah Ha Mim, 41:1-4).**

The Holy Prophet recited some verses of this Surah. When he reached the
thirty seventh verse he performed *'sajdah'.* After this he turned to
'Utbah and said: 'O Aba Walid! Have you heard the Message of Allah?"
'Utbah had been somewhat enchanted by the Word of Allah. He had placed
his hands behind his head, which rested on them.

In this very condition he kept gazing on the face of the Holy Prophet
for quite some time, as if he had been deprived of his power of speech.
Then he got up from his place and went to the place where Quraysh had
assembled. The chiefs of Quraysh had realized from his condition and
countenance that he had been impressed by the words of Muhammad and had
returned in a condition of humility coupled with distraction of mind.
They were all watching intently to see 'Utbah's face.

All of them asked him: "What has happened?" He said: "By Allah! I have
heard from Muhammad a speech which I had never heard from anyone. By
Allah! It is neither poetry, nor magic nor divination. I consider it
expedient that we should leave him alone so that he may propagate his
religion amongst the different tribes. If he is successful and acquires
a land and a kingdom it will be considered to be a matter of pride for
you and you will also benefit from it. And if he is defeated, others
will kill him and you, too, will be at ease".

Quraysh ridiculed 'Utbah for his remarks and views and said that he had
been enchanted by the speech of Muhammad. [^4]

These are two specimens of the views of two outstanding eloquent
speakers of the Age of Ignorance and other specimens are also available.

Strange Stratagem of Quraysh
----------------------------

One day, after sunset, the chiefs of Quraysh like 'Utbah, Shaybah, Abu
Sufyan, Nazar bin Harith, Abul Bakhtari, Walid bin Mughayrah, Abu Jahl,
'As bin Wai'l etc. assembled by the side of the Ka'bah and decided to
call the Prophet and discuss the matter with him directly. They,
therefore, sent someone to ask the Prophet to participate in the
meeting.

On having been informed about the matter the Prophet came hurriedly and
joined their assembly, hoping to guide them to the right path.
Conversation started from all sides and Quraysh repeated their
grievances. They complained that dissension and discord had taken place
amongst Quraysh, and expressed readiness for every sacrifice. In the end
they made requests to the Prophet which have been depicted in the
following verses:

***They say: "(O Muhammad!) We will not believe in you until you make a
spring gush from the earth before our very eyes, or cause rivers to flow
in a grove of palms and vines; until you cause the sky to fall upon us
in pieces, as you have threatened to do, or bring down Allah and the
angels in our midst; until you build a house of gold, or ascend to
heaven; nor will we believe in your ascension until you have sent down
forus a book which we can read (and*** **which** ***confirms your
prophethood)."*** **(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:90-93)**

It is evident that all that they said was mere deceit, because palm and
vine groves have nothing to do with the prophethood of a person and
causing the sky to be torn to pieces and to fall down on earth is quite
incompatible with the prophetic mission, whose object is to guide the
people.

Amongst their demands there was only one thing, which had a miraculous
aspect and that was the Prophet's ascension to heaven. And even if the
Prophet had performed this miracle they would not have believed in him,
because they had made it clear that he must also send down a book which
should confirm his prophethood!

If Quraysh had been really keen to verify the truth of the Prophet's
claim his ascension -to heaven would have been a sufficient proof of it.
However, they said that they would not be satisfied with it, because all
demands of theirs were based on particular motives. The Holy Prophet
replied to them: "Surely I am no more than a Messenger and cannot
perform a miracle without the permission of Allah".[^5]

Stimulant for The Obstinacy of the Chiefs of Quraysh
----------------------------------------------------

This portion of the history of Islam is one of the points which deserves
discussion, because one ponders as to why Quraysh quarrelled with the
Prophet to this extent, notwithstanding the fact that all of them
considered him to be truthful and honest and had not till that time
observed even the smallest shortcoming in him, and had heard fascinating
and eloquent words from him, and had often seen him perform unusual
deeds which were beyond the ambits of the laws of nature.

A few things may be considered to be the cause or causes of this
obstinacy:

### 1. Quraysh were jealous of the Holy Prophet

Some of them did not follow the Prophet, because they were jealous of
him and wished that they themselves should possess this divine office.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***They also say: 'Why was this*** **Qur'an not** ***revealed*** **to**
***some mighty man from*** ***the two towns'?*** **(Surah
al-Zukhruf,43:31)**

The exegetes while explaining the reason for the revelation of this
verse (viz. the unbelievers objected as to why the Qur'an was not
revealed to one of the chiefs of Makkah or Ta'if) write thus:

"Walid son of Mughayra once met the Prophet and told him that he (Walid)
was more suited for the office of Prophet as he enjoyed precedence over
him (the Prophet) in the matter of age, wealth and children.[^6]

Umayyah bin Abi Salt was a person who used to talk about a prophet
before the advent of Islam and was anxious to assume this high office
himself. He did not, however, follow the Holy Prophet till the end of
his life and used to instigate the people to oppose him.

Akhnas, who was one of the enemies of the Prophet, said to Abu Jahl:
"What is your opinion about Muhammad?" He replied: "We and Abd-i Munaf
quarrelled about nobility and greatness and we vied with them and
adopted all possible ways and means to become their equals. Now that we
have become their equals they say that revelation descends from heavens
on a member of their family. By Allah! We will never believe in him.[^7]

These are some specimens which clearly indicate the jealousy of the
chiefs of Quraysh. There are also other such specimens which can be
found in the pages of history.

### 2. Fear of the Day of Judgement

This was the most effective cause for the obstinacy of Quraysh, because
they were pleasure-seeking, voluptuous and easy-going people. The call
of the Holy Prophet was opposed to the old habits of these persons who
had enjoyed absolute freedom for centuries; and to give up bad habits
entails great suffering and toil.

Furthermore, hearing of the verses regarding torture, which threaten the
pleasure-seeking, unjust and ignorant persons with severe punishment,
created a strange fear in their hearts and made them very much disturbed
and uneasy. When the Holy Prophet recited the verses mentioned below in
the general gatherings of Quraysh with a pleasant voice, there appeared
a tumult, which disturbed their merry-making.

The Arabs who used to equip themselves for warding off all sorts of
occurrences, cast lots with arrows, took omens with stones to procure
safety, and considered the coming and going of birds to be the signs of
occurrences, were not at all prepared to sit still unless they had
acquired a guarantee against the torture of which Muhammad warned them.
They, therefore, quarrelled with him so that they might not hear his
good tidings and threats. Here are some of the verses which greatly
disturbed the minds of the pleasure-seeking and ignorant Arabs:

***When the Day of Judgement comes man will avoid his brother, mother,
father, wife and children. On that day everyone will be concerned with
himself*** **(Surah 'Abasa, 80:34-37)**

While sitting by the side of Ka'bah and drinking wine they suddenly
heard these words:

***No sooner will their skins be consumed than We shall give them other
skins, so that they may truly taste Our scourge.*** **(Surah al-Nisa,
4:56).**

This made them so much disturbed and agitated that they involuntarily
cast aside their cups and began trembling with fear.

There were other reasons also which made them refrain from admitting the
truthfulness of Islam. For example, one day Harith bin Nawfal, son of
Abd-i Munaf came to see the Holy Prophet and said: "We know that what
you warn us of is true and correct. However, if we express our belief in
you the polytheist Arabs will turn us out of our land". The following
verse was revealed in reply to such persons:

***They say: 'If we accept your guidance, we shall be driven from our
land.' But have We not given them a sanctuary of safety
............*****(Surah al-Qasas, 28:57)**

Some objections by the Polytheists
----------------------------------

At times they said: "Syria is the land which fosters prophets in its
lap, and it has not been observed so far that a person should have been
appointed to the prophetic mission in this desert (Makkah)". In
imitation of the Jews some polytheists said: "Why is the Qur'an revealed
piecemeal? Why has it not been sent down as a whole like the Injeel and
the Taurat?" The Holy Qur'an reproduces their objection in these words:
*"The unbelievers say: 'Why was the Qur'an not revealed to him in a
single revelation?"*

Then it gives the following reply:

***We have revealed it thus, so that We may strengthen your faith.***
**(Surah al-Furqan, 25:32)**

Undoubtedly unpleasant events and harsh occurrences have a great effect
on human spirit and the only source of satisfaction for the Holy Prophet
was the fresh words which he heard from his Lord, who ordered him to
practice forbearance and fortitude, and by this means created a fresh
spirit in his entire frame. It was for this purpose that the Holy Qur'an
was revealed piecemeal.

Furthermore, in the early days of Islam, some rules were formally
recognized, but it was not appropriate to let them continue. It was not,
therefore, possible that the Holy Qur'an should have been revealed in a
single revelation.

[^1]: A'lamul Wara', pp. 27-28 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XVII, pp.
211-222.

[^2]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. X, page 387.

[^3]: Kitabul Mu'jizatil Khalidah by Allamah Shahristani, page 66.

[^4]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, pp. 293 - 294.

[^5]: Some of the Christian missionaries have argued on the basis of
this and other verses that the Holy Prophet of Islam did not possess any
miracle other than the Qur'an. The falsity of this argument has,
however, been clearly proved and the object of such verses made manifest
in the Persian book entitled 'Risalati Jahani Pyambaran'.

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 361.

[^7]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 316.


