Chapter 1: Arabian Peninsula the Cradle of Islamic Culture
==========================================================

Arabia is a big peninsula situated in the south-west of Asia. Its area
is three million square kilometres, almost double the area of Iran, six
times that of France, ten times that of Italy and eighty times that of
Switzerland.

This peninsula is of the shape of an irregular rectangle and is bounded
by Palestine and the Syrian desert in the north, by Hira, the Tigris,
the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf in the east, by the Indian Ocean in
the south and by the Red Sea in the west. Hence, it is circumscribed on
the western and southern sides by sea and on the northern and eastern
sides by the desert and the Persian Gulf.

From olden times this territory has been divided into three regions: (1)
The northern and western region which is called the Hijaz. (2) The
central and eastern region which is called the Arabian Desert; and (3)
The southern region which is called Yemen.

Within the Peninsula one comes across plenty of vast deserts and hot
sandy tracts which are almost uninhabitable. One of these deserts is
Badyah Samawah which is nowadays called Nafud. There is also another
vast desert which extends up to the Persian Gulf and is now called
ar-Rub'ul Khali. Formerly one part of these deserts was named Ahqaf and
the other was called Dehna.

On account of the presence of these deserts about one third of the area
of the Peninsula is barren and unfit for habitation. Only at times small
quantities of water can be found in a few areas, as a result of rains in
the heart of the deserts, and some of the Arab tribes drive their camels
and cattle to those places for grazing.

The climate of the Peninsula is extremely hot and dry in the deserts and
central tracts, humid in the coastal areas and temperate in some
localities It is dire to its unwholesome climate that its population
does not exceed fifteen million

In this territory there is a mountain range which stretches from south
to north. Its maximum height is about 2470 metres

From times immemorial gold and silver mines and precious stones have
been the sources of the wealth of the Peninsula. From amongst the
animals the Arabs reared camels and horses. As regards birds, pigeons
and ostriches were more abundant than others.

In modern times the biggest source of income of Arabia is extraction of
oil and gas. The centre of oil reserves of the Peninsula is the city of
Zahran, which is called Dahran by the Europeans. This city is situated
in the Saudi Arabian district called Ahsa' in the neighbourhood of the
Persian Gulf.

In order that the esteemed reader may become more acquainted with the
conditions of Arabia we now proceed to give a somewhat detailed
description of the three regions mentioned above.

1. The Hijaz constitutes the northern and western region of Arabia and
extends from Palestine to Yemen, adjacent to the coast of the Red Sea.
It is a hilly tract which embraces many barren deserts and rugged areas.

This region enjoys more fame in history than all others. It is, however,
evident that this fame has been occasioned by a chain of spiritual and
religious matters. For example, even during the present times the
Ka'bah, the House of God which is situated in this region, is the Qiblah
of hundreds of millions of Muslims of the world.

The area surrounding the Ka'bah has been reverenced by Arabs as well as
non-Arabs for centuries preceding the birth of Islam. As a mark of
respect to it they considered warfare within the precincts of the Ka'bah
to be unlawful and even Islam has recognised the area circumscribed by
these limits to be inviolable.

Makkah, Madina and Ta'if are important cities of the Hijaz. Since ages
the Hijaz has had two sea-ports. One of these is Jeddah which serves the
people of Makkah, and the other is Yanbu' through which the people of
Madina import most of their requirements. These two ports are situated
on the coast of the Red Sea.

Makkah
------

It is one of the most famous cities of the world and the most populous
city of the Hijaz and is about 300 metres higher than sea level. As this
city is located between two mountain ranges it cannot be seen from a
distance. The present population of Makkah is about 200,000.

### A Short History of Makkah

The history of Makkah dates from the time of Prophet Ibrahim. He sent
his son Isma'il along with his mother Hajar to the territory of Makkah
to settle there. His son married in a tribe which lived at a nearby
place. Prophet Ibrahim constructed the Ka'bah under Allah's command and
thereafter settlement at Makkah commenced.

The land in the suburbs of Makkah is somewhat saline and not at all
cultivable. According to some orientalists its poor geographical
conditions have no parallel in the world.

Madina
------

Madina is a city located at a distance of 90 leagues to the north of
Makkah. It has gardens and date-palm all around it and its land is
better suited for plantation of trees as well as for cultivation of
crops.

Before Islam this city was called Yathrib, but after the Holy Prophet's
migration to this city it was renamed as Madina tur Rasul (City of the
Prophet). Later, however, the last word was dropped for the sake of
abbreviation and it began to be called only Madina. History tells us
that the first people who settled here were a group of Amaliqah. Those
who followed them were a sect of the Jews and the tribes of Aws and
Khazraj who came to be known amongst the Muslims as Ansar (helpers).

Unlike other regions of Arabia the Hijaz remained safe from the raids of
the conquerors and the traces of the civilisations of Rome and Iran, two
big empires of the world before the birth of Islam, cannot be observed
here. This was so, because its barren and uninhabitable lands did not
make it worth while for the foreigners to undertake military expeditions
to occupy it and then to return empty-handed, after facing thousands of
difficulties necessarily involved in gaining control over it.

In this connection the following story may be studied carefully. It has
been quoted by the Greek historian, Diodore (B.C.): "When the great
Greek Chief Demetrius arrived at Patra (one of the oldest cities of the
Hijaz) with the intention of occupying Arabia, the residents of the city
said to him, "O Greek Chief! Why should you fight with us? We live in a
desert in which indigence of all sorts is the source of livelihood.

We have selected this dry and barren desert so that we may not have to
obey the orders of anyone. So please accept our insignificant gifts and
presents and refrain from occupying our territory. And incidentally, if
you are inclined to persist in your intentions, we do hereby announce
that in the near future you will be confronted with thousands of
difficulties and hardships.

And be it known to you that the 'Nabtis' are not inclined to give up
their way of life. In case, therefore, you held some of our people as
captives by force and wish to carry them away this will be of no use to
you, because they will be malevolent and misbehaving slaves only and
will not be prepared to change their way of life". The Greek chief
accepted their message of peace and good-will and abandoned the idea of
attacking and occupying the Arabian territory ". [^1]

2. The central and eastern region, which is called 'The Arabian Desert'
and is inclusive of the Najd Zone, is a sparsely populated plateau.
After coming into power of the Saudi family the district of Riyaz, which
is their capital, has become one of the important centres of Arabia.

3. The length of Yemen, the south-western region of the Peninsula, is
about 750 kilometres from north to south and about 400 kilometres from
west to east and its area has be estimated to be sixty thousand miles.
However, formerly its area was even more than this and during the last
half century part of it (Aden) remained the protectorate of Britain.
Thus Najd and Aden constitute its northern and southern boundaries
respectively, the Red Sea is on its west and on the eastern side it
touches the ar-Rub'ul Khali desert.

The most well-known city of Yemen is the historical city of San'a and
its most important sea-port is Hudaydah, which is situated on the coast
of the Red Sea.

The territory of Yemen is the richest in the Peninsula and possessed a
brilliant and dignified civilisation in the past. Yemen was the seat of
government of Tababi'ah Kings who ruled for a very long period. Before
the advent of Islam Yemen was a great centre of business and commerce
and was, in fact, considered to be the 'cross-roads' of Arabia. It
possessed very rich mines like gold, silver and other precious stones
extracted therefrom. They were exported to other countries

The traces and relics of the civilisation of Yemen of those days are
still available. During a period when means for executing burdensome
tasks were not available to man the ingenious people of Yemen managed to
erect attractive and lofty buildings by dint of their hard labour.

The kings of Yemen, though undisputed rulers of the territory, did not
hesitate from enforcing the constitution drawn up and approved by the
learned men of the land, and excelled others in the promotion of
agriculture and horticulture. Minute regulations were drawn up and
enforced for cultivation of farms and irrigation of agricultural lands
and gardens. In this respect this country is considered to be one of the
distinguished and developed countries of that age.

The famous French historian Gustave Le Bon says, "In the whole of Arabia
there is no region more luxuriant and more fertile than Yemen''.

Idrisi, the celebrated historian of the twelfth Century, writes thus
about the city of San'a, "Here is situated the capital of Arabia and the
seat of the government of Yemen. The buildings and palaces of this city
are famous throughout the world. Even its ordinary buildings and houses
are built of hewn stones"

These surprising monuments, which have been discovered as a result of
recent excavations and investigations by the orientalists, prove the
existence of a wonderful civilisation in different parts of Yemen of
olden times, namely Ma'arib San'a and Bilqis.

In the city of Ma'arib (the famous city of Saba) there existed many
lofty buildings with doors and arches ornamented with gold. Similarly
gold and silver vessels as well as bedsteads made of metal were found
there in abundance".[^2]

One of the historical monuments of Ma'arib was its famous dam, whose
traces are still available. It was destroyed by a flood which has been
referred to in the Qur'an as the 'Iram flood'.

[^1]: Tamaddun-i Islam wa Arab, pp. 93 - 94

[^2]: Tamaddun-i Islam wa Arab, page 96


