Chapter 21: Death of Abu Talib
==============================

Economic blockade of the Muslims by Quraysh ended in failure on account
of the intervention by some good-natured persons. The Holy Prophet and
his supporters came out of the "Valley of Abu Talib" and proceeded to
their homes after three years of exile, boycott and hardship. Their
business and trade with the Muslims was restored and it could be hoped
that their conditions would improve.

However, the Prophet was suddenly faced with a very painful event which
left a very unwholesome effect on the morale of the helpless Muslims.
The extent of the impact of this occurrence at that critical moment
cannot be measured by any scale or balance, because the growth of an
idea and thought depends on two factors i.e. freedom of speech and
necessary strength to defend oneself against the dastardly attacks of
the enemy.

Hence, it so happened that when the Muslims were blessed with freedom of
belief they lost the second factor because the distinguished supporter
and defender of Islam breathed his last.

On that day the Prophet lost a supporter and defender who had been
responsible for his protection and safety from the time he was only
eight years of age till the day when he was passing through his 50th
year. It was he who hovered round his person in the same manner in which
a moth hovers round a candle. It was he, who provided the Prophet of
Islam with means of his livelihood till he himself became a man of means
and gave him priority over himself as well as over his offspring.

The Prophet lost a personality whom Abdul Muttalib (the grandfather of
the Prophet) while breathing his last, had made his guardian with the
following words:

"O Abd-i Munaf![^1] "I am making you responsible for the protection of
one who is the worshipper of One Allah like his father".

Abu Talib said: "Dear father! Muhammad does not stand in need of any
recommendation, because he is my own son as well as that of my brother".

Specimens Of The Kindnesses And Love Of Abu Talib
-------------------------------------------------

Specimens of mutual love and kindness of different persons have been
recorded in the pages of history. Usually, however, they are based on
material and formal considerations and move round the pivot of wealth
and beauty and the flame of love quenches within their selves in a very
short time and is extirpated. However, the sentiments which are based on
ties of kinship or faith in the spiritual excellence of the loved one do
not peter out so soon.

It so happened that the love of Abu Talib for the Prophet was based on
both these considerations, that is he believed in him and considered him
a perfect man and a unique specimen of humanity, and he was also his
nephew (real brother's son) whom he gave the position of brother and son
in his heart.

Abu Talib believed so much in his spirituality and purity that at the
time of drought he took him to musallah (the prayer carpet) with himself
and invoked Allah in the name of his proximity to Him and requested for
rains for the afflicted people, and his prayer was granted by the
Almighty. Many historians have quoted the following incident:

Once Quraysh were faced with a terrible drought and the earth and the
heavens withheld their blessings from them. They came to Abu Talib with
tears in their eyes and requested him earnestly to go to musallah and
pray to Allah for rains. Abu Talib held the hand of the Prophet, who was
then a young boy, and leaned on the wall of the Ka'bah and raising his
head towards the sky, said: "O Lord! Send rains for the sake of this
young boy (pointing towards the Prophet) and favour us with your
unlimited blessings".

The historians write unanimously: "He prayed to Allah for rains when
there was not a single patch of cloud on the sky, but a cloud then
appeared immediately from the horizon. A part of the cloud spread in the
sky above Makkah and the places round it. Thunder and lightening created
great noise. All the places were flooded with water and everyone was
happy."[^2]

### Change In The Programme Of The Journey

The Prophet was not yet twelve years of age when Abu Talib decided to go
to Syria with a trading caravan of Quraysh. When the camels had been
loaded and were about to move, and the bell for departure had been rung,
the nephew of Abu Talib suddenly held the bridle of his camel and said
with tears in his eyes: "Dear uncle! To whom are you entrusting me? I
must go with you". A tear in the eyes of Muhammad then brought a flood
of tears in the eyes of Abu Talib.

At this critical time he decided, without any prior planning, to take
his nephew with himself. Although Muhammad's place in the caravan had
not been taken into account Abu Talib decided to bear the hardships
involved in his accompanying him.

He accommodated him on his own camel and was careful about him
throughout. During that journey he observed some extraordinary things in
Muhammad and composed verses about them. They are recorded in his
poetical works.[^3]

### Defence Of His Sacred Beliefs

From the point of view of stability no strength equals that of faith.
The strength of faith in one's aim is the most powerful factor for the
advancement of man in all walks of life. It prepares him to endure all
inconveniences and hardships and makes him sacrifice his very life for
the achievement of his sacred ideal.

A soldier equipped with the strength of faith is totally successful.
When he believes that to kill or to be killed in this path is a
blessing, his victory and success is ensured. Before a soldier is armed
with modern material weapons he must be equipped with the strength of
faith, and his heart must be imbued with love for reality. His movements
at the time of war and peace should be guided by faith. His going to war
or his making peace are entirely for the defence of his faith.

The thoughts and beliefs are the offspring of one's spirit and
intellect. Just as a man loves his children, he also loves his ideas
which issue from his intellect and spirit. Rather, his love for his
faith is even greater than that for his children. Hence, he is prepared
even to embrace death for the defence of his faith, but does not go to
that extremity for the protection of his children.

Man's love for wealth and position is limited. He goes after them only
to that extent that he is not threatened with sure death. In the matter
of his faith, however, he is prepared to court death and prefers
honourable death to a life in which he is not allowed the freedom of
faith. He observes that real life is that of a 'mujahid' (one who
struggles) and repeatedly says:

### "Real life consists of faith and jihad".

Just cast a glance at the life of Abu Talib, the distinguished supporter
and defender of Islam and Prophet Muhammad. What was the stimulant for
him in this path and what was the factor which persuaded him to go up to
the edge of the precipice of annihilation, to forsake his life, wealth,
position and tribe, and to sacrifice all of these things for the sake of
Muhammad?

It is an established fact that he had no material motives and he was not
at all anxious to obtain any worldly gain from his nephew, because in
those days the Prophet himself did not possess any wealth. He did not
want to acquire any position or office, because he already possessed the
highest office in the society of those times and was the chief of Makkah
and Batha.

As a matter of fact it was possible that he might have lost even his
prominent position and status on account of his defending the Prophet,
because his defence was the cause of the chiefs of Makkah rising against
the family of Hashim and Abu Talib.

### A False Idea

It is possible that some shortsighted persons may think that the reason
for the sacrifices made by Abu Talib was his close relationship with
Muhammad and it was on this account that he was prepared to lay down his
very life for his sake.

However, this idea is so baseless that a very brief reflection makes its
stupidity evident, because the tie of blood relationship is never so
strong that a person should sacrifice his entire being for one of his
relatives and should offer his own son (Ali) as a sacrifice for his
nephew, and be ready to see the one being cut to pieces for the sake of
the other.

At times fraternal sentiments do pull a man to the precipice of
annihilation, but there is no sense in these sentiments being so acute
for a particular person only, whereas Abu Talib made all these
sacrifices for a particular person from amongst his relatives (i.e. the
Prophet) and did not do so with regard to other descendants of Abdul
Muttalib and Hashim.

### The Real Stimulant For Abu Talib

In view of what has been stated above the real stimulant for Abu Talib's
sacrifices was spiritual and not material, and he was prepared to face
every pressure of the enemy for the sake of Muhammad. It was so because
he considered him to be a perfect specimen of excellence and humanity
and had found his religion to be the best programme for acquisition of
prosperity and happiness. As he was a lover of reality he naturally
defended reality.

This fact becomes evident from the verses of Abu Talib, as giving vent
to his feelings he says that Muhammad is a Prophet like Prophets Musa
and 'Isa. Here is the translation of his verses:

"Distinguished personalities should be aware that Muhammad is a Prophet
and a guide like Prophets Musa and 'Isa and every Prophet takes
responsibility for the guidance of the people under the command of
Allah. You may read about his qualities in the Heavenly Books with
perfect correctness and this is a true statement and not a calumny on
the unseen''.[^4]

In another laudatory poem about his nephew he says thus:

"Don't you know that we consider Muhammad to be a Prophet of Allah like
Musa bin Imran and read about him in the earlier Books?''[^5]

The above-mentioned verses as well as many others which are found in the
poetical works of Abu Talib and also in the inner folds of history and
the books of traditions and exegeses clearly testify that the real
stimulant for Abu Talib's defending the Prophet was the defence of the
true religion of Islam. We mention below some of the sacrifices made by
him and you can very well decided, after necessary scrutiny, whether
they could be motivated by anything other than true belief.

### A Short Account Of The Sacrifices Made By Abu Talib

The chiefs of Quraysh held a meeting in the house of Abu Talib when the
Prophet was also present. They conversed with one another. The chiefs
got up without achieving any result, and 'Uqbah bin Abi Mu'it began
saying loudly: "Leave him alone. Advice is of no use. He should be
assassinated; he should be finished off".

Abu Talib was very much disturbed on hearing these sentences but could
not do anything, because those people had come to his house as guests.
It so happened that the Prophet went out of his house that day and did
not return till evening. His uncles went to his house but did not find
him there. Suddenly Abu Talib recollected the words of 'Uqbah which he
had uttered a few hours earlier and said to himself: "They have
certainly killed my nephew and have finished his life".

He thought that the die had been cast and it was necessary to protect
Muhammad and take vengeance on the Pharaohs of Makkah. He called the
descendants of Hashim and Abdul Muttalib and gave instructions that all
of them should conceal sharp weapons under their clothes and arrive in
Masjidul Haram collectively.

Further, that each one of them should sit by the side of one chief of
Quraysh and as soon as he himself said loudly: "O chiefs of Quraysh! I
want Muhammad from you", they should rise up at once and each of them
should kill the man sitting by his side and thus all the chiefs should
meet their fate.

When Abu Talib was about to leave, Zayd bin Harith entered the house all
of a sudden and saw them in a state of readiness. He was wonder-struck
on seeing this and said: "No harm has came to the Prophet. He is in the
house of a Muslim at present and is busy propagating Islam".

Having said this he immediately went to the Prophet and informed him of
the dangerous decision taken by Abu Talib. The Prophet then proceeded
hastily to his house. As soon as Abu Talib saw his nephew's face tears
trickled from his eyes and he said: "My nephew! Where have you been?
Were you quite happy and safe from every harm during this time?" The
Prophet assured his uncle that no harm came to him from any quarters.

Throughout that night Abu Talib kept thinking. He pondered over the
matter and said to himself: "My nephew has not become the target of the
enemy today, but Quraysh will not sit still until they kill him". He
considered it expedient to got into the mosque along with the
descendants of Hashim and Abdul Muttalib after sunrise, when Quraysh had
assembled there, and to inform them about his decision so that they
might possibly be over-awed and might not plan to kill Muhammad.

The sun rose and the time arrived for Quraysh to leave their houses and
to go and join their assemblies. They had not yet started conversing
when the figure of Abu Talib appeared at a distance and they saw that
some brave men were also accompany him. All became attentive and waited
to see what Abu Talib had to say and with what aim he had come to the
mosque along with all those men.

Abu Talib stood before their gathering and said: "Yesterday Muhammad
disappeared from us for some time. I thought that you had acted upon
what 'Uqbah had said and had killed him. Hence, I decided to come to
Masjidul Haram along with these men. I had also instructed them that
each one of them should sit by the side of each one of you and as soon
as they heard me speak aloud they should get up and attack you with
their concealed weapons. However, luckily I found Muhammad alive and
safe from any harm from you". Then he asked his men to take out their
concealed weapons and ended his speech with these words: "By Allah! If
you had killed him I would not have spared even one of you and would
have fought with you to the last ............."[^6]

If you look into the biography of Abu Talib you will find that he
supported the Prophet for full forty two years and peculiarly displayed
great bravery and sacrifice during the last ten years of his life which
were significant because of the appointment of the Prophet to the
prophetic mission and to his 'call' during that time. The only factor
which kept him so steadfast was his strong faith and his pure belief in
the sacred mission of the Prophet of Islam. And if the sacrifices of his
son, Imam Ali are also added to his own, the meaning of the verses of
Ibn Abil Hadid, as translated below, becomes quite clear:

"If Abu Talib and his son had not been there the religion would not have
been successful. He supported and protected him (the Prophet) in Makkah,
and his son dived in the whirlpools of death in Yathrib for him."

### The Will Of Abu Talib At The Time Of His Death

At the time of his death Abu Talib said to his children:

"I recommend Muhammad to you, because he is the trusted one of Quraysh
and the truthful one of Arabia and possesses all the virtues. He has
brought a religion, which has been accepted by the hearts, but the
tongues have chosen to deny it on account of fear of taunts. I can see
that the weak and the helpless of Arabia have got up to support Muhammad
and believe in him, and he has also risen to help them breaking the
ranks of Quraysh.

He has humiliated the chiefs of Quraysh and devastated their homes and
has made the helpless strong and given them status". He concluded his
remarks with these words: "O my kinsmen! Become the friends and
supporters of his faith (Islam). Whoever follows him becomes prosperous.
If death had given me some more time, I would have warded off all the
dangers that came to him".[^7]

We have no doubt about it that he was quite sincere in expressing this
wish, because his services and sacrifices, especially during the last
ten years of his life, bear testimony to his truthfulness.

Another evidence of his truthfulness is the promise he made to Muhammad
at the commencement of the latter's prophethood, because when the Holy
Prophet gathered all his uncles and kinsmen round himself and presented
Islam to them Abu Talib said to him: "Arise, O' my nephew! You enjoy a
high position. Your religion is the noblest of all religions. You are
the son of a great man. If a tongue harms you, severer tongues will come
forth to defend you and sharp swords will cut off the tongues of your
enemies. By Allah! The Arabs will be as meek before you as the
off-spring of an animal is before its mother".

### The Last Journey

It would be better if we enquire about the sincerity of faith of Abu
Talib from his honest near ones, because the owner of a house knows
better what is within it.

1. When Ali informed the Prophet about the death of Abu Talib the latter
wept bitterly. He directed Ali to arrange for his bathing, shrouding and
burial ceremonies, and prayed to Allah for the salvation of the departed
soul.[^8]

2. A mention was made about Abu Talib before Imam Zaynul Abidin, the
fourth Imam. He said: "I wonder why people doubt the faith of Abu Talib,
when a woman cannot continue her matrimonial alliance with a non-Muslim
husband after she has embraced Islam and Fatimah, daughter of Asad, was
amongst those women who embraced Islam at a very early stage and still
remained his wife till he breathed his last".

3. Imam Muhammad Baqir says: "The faith of Abu Talib was superior to the
faith of many people and Ali, the Commander of the Faithful ordered that
Haj should be performed on his behalf." [^9]

4. Imam Ja'far Sadiq says: "Abu Talib was like the People of the Cave.
They had faith in their hearts but pretended to be polytheists. For this
reason they will be rewarded twice".[^10]

### The Viewpoint Of Shi'ah Scholars

Following the people of the Prophet's household the Imamiyah Ulema are
unanimous about the fact that Abu Talib was one of the distinguished
personalities of Islam and when he breathed his last he possessed a
heart which had perfect faith in Islam and was very sincere to the
Muslims. These scholars have written many books and treatises on this
subject.

[^1]: Sometimes it is said that the real name of Abu Talib was Imran.
Some scholars are of the view that 'Abu Talib' was his real name and not
his 'kunniyah' (patronymic).

[^2]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 125.

[^3]: Diwan-i Abu Talib, page 33.

[^4]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. VII, page 37 and al-Hujjah, pp. 56 - 57.

[^5]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. VII, page 36. Ibn Hisham has quoted fifteen
verses of the poem in his Seerah vol. I, pp. 352 - 353.

[^6]: Tara'if, page 85 and al-Hujjah, page 61.

[^7]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 390.

[^8]: Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah by Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. XIV, page 76.

[^9]: Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah, vol. XIV, page 68.

[^10]: Usulul Kafi, page 244.


