Chapter 22: Me`raj â€“ The Heavenly Ascension
===========================================

Me'raj According To The Qur'an, Hadith And History
--------------------------------------------------

The darkness of night had spread in the horizon and silence reigned over
the face of nature. The time had arrived when the living creatures take
rest and sleep so that they might recuperate for their activities on the
following day.

The Prophet was also not an exception to this law of nature and he
wished to take rest after offering his prayers. However, he suddenly
heard a voice. It was the voice of the Archangel Jibreel who said to
him: "This night you have to perform a very unique journey and I have
been ordered to remain with you. You will have to traverse different
parts of the world mounted on an animal named 'Buraq'."

The Prophet commenced his grand journey from the house of Umme Hani
(sister of the Commander of the Faithful) and mounted on Buraq proceeded
to Baytul Maqdis, situated in Jerusalem, which is also called Masjidul
Aqsa. After a very short time he dismounted there and visited different
parts of the mosque as well as Bethlehem which is the birth place of
'Isa and also saw various other places associated with different
Prophets. At some of these places he also performed two rak'ats of
prayers.

Thereafter he commenced the second part of his journey and proceeded
from that place to the skies. He then observed the stars and the system
of the world and conversed with the souls of the previous Prophets and
also with the angels of the heavens. He saw the centres of blessing and
torture (Paradise and Hell) and also saw the places of the dwellers of
Hell and Paradise[^1] from close quarters, and a consequently became
fully aware of the secrets of creation, the extent of the Universe and
the signs of the Omnipotent Allah.

Then he continued his journey and reached 'Sidratul-Muntaha'[^2] and
found it fully covered with splendour, magnificence and grandeur. At
this time his journey came to an end he returned through the way he had
gone.

During his return journey also he first came to Baytul Maqdis and then
proceeded to Makkah. On the way he met a trading caravan of Quraysh who
had lost a camel and were making a search for it. He drank some water
from a container of theirs and threw the remainder on the ground and
according to another narrative placed a cover on it.

It was before daybreak when he dismounted in the house of Umme Hani from
the animal which had taken him to the heavens. She was the first person
to whom he related this matter and on the day following that night he
made it known to the assemblies of Quraysh as well. The story of his
'ascension' and grand journey which was considered by Quraysh to be
something impossible spread from mouth to mouth in all centres and made
the chiefs of Quraysh all the more perplexed.

According to their old habit Quraysh decided to refute him and said:
"Even now there are some persons in Makkah who have seen Baytul Maqdis.
If what you say is correct then give an account of its structure". The
Prophet not only described the structure of Baytul Maqdis but also
mentioned the incidents which had occurred between Makkah and Baytul
Maqdis and said: "On my way I met the caravan of such and such tribe who
had lost a camel.

They had a container full of water which was a part of their equipment.
I drank some water from it and then covered it.[^3] At another place I
met a group of persons whose camel had run away and had broken its leg".
Quraysh said: "Tell us about the caravan of Quraysh". The Prophet
replied:

"I saw them at Tan'im (a place from where the 'Haram' commences). A
brown camel was going ahead of them and they had placed a litter on it
and are now entering Makkah". Quraysh became very much excited on
account of these definite news and said: "We shall now come to know
about your truth or falsehood". However, it was not long before Abu
Sufyan, the leader of the caravan, appeared and people made known to him
in detail what the Prophet had said.

The above account is a gist of what has been stated in the books of
exegeses and traditions. [^4]

Does Me'raj Have A Qur'anic Origin?
-----------------------------------

The event of me'raj' of the Prophet in the heavens has been mentioned
clearly in two surahs of the Qur'an and has also been alluded to in
other surah(s). We give here briefly the verses which clearly make a
mention of me'raj.

In Surah al-lsra' it has been said

***Glory be to Him Who made His servant go by night from Masjidul Haram
to Masjidul Aqsa, whose surroundings We have blessed, that We might show
him some of Our signs. He alone hears all and observes all.***

This verse apparently mentions the following points:

1. In order to tell us that the Prophet travelled through these worlds
in a short time, not with human strength but through Divine strength,
the Almighty commences His statement with "Glory be to Him!" which
points to the fact that Allah is free from all defects and needs. He has
also not contented Himself with this and has introduced Himself as the
Agent of the journey by saying 'Asra' (Allah made him perform the
journey).

This favour was bestowed upon him so that the people might not think
that the journey was performed according to natural laws and with usual
means, and might, therefore deny its possibility. It has therefore, been
clarified that it was undertaken through Divine Will and special favour
of the Almighty.

2. This journey was undertaken at night.

3. Notwithstanding the fact that this journey commenced from the house
of Umme Hani, daughter of Abu Talib, the Almighty has mentioned its
starting-place to be Masjidul Haram. This is perhaps due to the fact
that the Arabs consider entire Makkah to be the House of Allah and as
such all its places are treated to be 'Masjid' and 'Haram'.

Hence, Allah's saying that: "He made him journey from Masjidul Haram" is
perfectly in order. According to some narratives, however, the journey
started from Masjidul Haram itself.

Although this verse states the starting point of the journey to be
'Masjidul Haram' and the end to be Masjidul Aqsa' there is nothing in it
which may be inconsistent with the Prophet's performing another journey
to the heavens, because this verse mentions one part of the journey and
the verses of Surah al-Najm deal with the another part of the schedule
of the journey.

4. The Prophet performed the journey with his body and soul together and
not with his soul only. The words 'to His servant bear testimony to
this, because the word 'servant' applies to 'body with soul'. In case
me'raj had been only spiritual the proper words to be used would have
been 'to His servant's soul'.

5. The object of this grand journey was to make known to the Prophet the
various aspects of the existence of the great Universe. We shall
elaborate this point later.

The other surah which clearly mentions the event of me'raj is 'Surah
al-Najm' and the verses which you will read below were revealed in this
connection. When the Prophet told Quraysh that he had seen physically
the Archangel Jibreel, when he brought the first revelation, they
disputed with him. The Holy Qur'an replies thus to their objection:

***"Why do you contend with the Prophet about his having seen Jibreel?
He beheld him once again near Sidratul Muntaha which is in the proximity
of Paradise, which is the abode of good ones. It was when Sidratul
Muntaha was covered with grandeur. His eyes did not wander, nor did they
turn aside, for he saw some of his Lord's greatest signs".***

Reports About Me'raj
--------------------

The exegetes and the traditionalists have quoted many things about
me'raj and the things observed by the Prophet but all of them are not
final and indisputable. The great Shi'ah commentator and expert exegete,
the late Allamah Tabrasi, has divided these narratives into four groups:

1. One group of the narratives is final and indisputable, for example,
the fact of me'raj and some of its particulars.

2. The reports which have been quoted in a correct manner but have not
reached the stage of finality, although they conform to the principles
and verdict of wisdom, for example, survey of Paradise and Hell, journey
in the skies and conversation with the souls of the Prophets.

3. The reports which are not apparently acceptable but are capable of
interpretation, for example, the Prophet's conversation during the night
of me'raj with the dwellers of Paradise and Hell which can be explained
away by saying that he observed their phantoms, figures and qualities.

1. Exaggerated reports coined and circulated by the liars. For example,
it is said at times that the Prophet sat that night with the Almighty or
that he heard the sound of His pen.[^5]

History Of This Event
---------------------

Though it was appropriate that this grand event should have been
properly recorded in all respects, yet, for some reasons, differences
have risen about it and one of them is about the date of its occurrence.
Two great historians of Islam (Ibn Ishaq and Ibn Hisham) say that this
event occurred in the tenth year of the Prophet's prophethood.

The renowned historian Bayhaqi believes that it took place in the
twelfth year of his prophethood. Some say that it occurred in the early
days of his prophetic mission, whereas others say that the time of its
occurrence was the middle period of the prophethood. And at times, in
order to add up all these statements, it has been said that the me'raj
of the Prophet took place more than once. However, we are of the view
that the me'raj in which daily prayers were made compulsory took place
after the death of Abu Talib which occurred in the tenth year of the
prophethood of the Prophet.

We conclude this, because it is one of the established facts of history
and tradition that during the night of me'raj the Almighty ordered that
the Prophet's followers should offer prayers five times a day and it is
also learnt from history that prayers had not been made obligatory till
the death of Abu Talib, because when he was on his death-bed the chiefs
of Quraysh approached him to settle the dispute between them and his
nephew and to prevent him from his activities and to take whatever he
wanted as a recompense for it. The Prophet who was present there
addressed the chiefs thus: "I don't want anything from you except that
you should confirm that there is no god but Allah and give up
worshipping the idols".[^6]

He uttered these words and did not at all mention *'salat'* (prayers) or
other articles of faith. This in itself shows that prayers had not been
made obligatory till then, for, otherwise, mere declaration of faith
devoid of a compulsory action like prayers would have been useless. And
as regards the fact that he did not mention his own prophethood, it was
because witnessing of monotheism implicitly means confirming of his
prophethood.

Besides this, the historians have also mentioned the embracement of
Islam by persons like Tufayl bin 'Amr Dosi which took place a little
earlier than migration (to Madina). At that time, too, the Prophet
contented himself with giving them instructions to acknowledge
monotheism and his own prophethood but did not mention 'prayers'. Such
incidents go to show that the time of the occurrence of the event in
which prayers were made compulsory was only a little earlier than
migration.

Those who think that me'raj took place earlier than the tenth year of
the prophethood of the Prophet are very much mistaken, because from the
eighth up to the tenth year he was besieged in the 'Valley' and the
pitiable condition of the Muslims did not make it expedient that they
should have been subjected to an additional responsibility like
'prayers'.

And as regards the years before the eighth, besides the fact that the
pressure of Quraysh was so hard on the Muslims that they could not bear
additional responsibilities, their number was also very small. At such a
time, therefore, when the light of faith and its principles had not been
infused in the hearts of an appreciable number of persons it appears
very unlikely that an unusual responsibility like prayers should have
been imposed on them

As regards the mention made in a number of narratives that Imam Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful performed prayers along with the Prophet for
three years before the appointment of the latter to the prophetic
mission and continued them later, it may be said that it meant special
and unlimited prayers and not limited and conditional prayers with a
fixed time.[^7] It is also possible that they might have been
'recommended' and 'nonobligatory' prayers.

Was Me'raj Of The Prophet Physical?
-----------------------------------

The quality of me'raj of the Prophet has been a subject of discussion
for long and much has been said about its being physical or spiritual,
although the Qur'an and the traditions clearly state that it was
physical.[^8]

However, some scientific notions have prevented a group of persons from
accepting this reality. Consequently they have resorted to their own
interpretations and considered the me'raj of the Prophet to be purely
spiritual and have said that only his spirit travelled through all the
worlds and then returned to his sacred body. Some have gone a step
further and say that all these events were a vision and the Prophet saw
different places and travelled through them in a dream.

The statement of the last group is so much distant from logic and
reality that it should not at all be considered as a part of the
traditions and opinions relating to me'raj. The reason for this is that
when Quraysh heard that Muhammad had claimed that he had travelled
through all these places during a night they became very uneasy and got
up seriously to give him the lie, so much so that his me'raj became the
subject of discussion in all the assemblies of Quraysh.

In case his travelling through these worlds had been only a vision there
was no point in Quraysh rising up to refute him and to create all the
tumult. This is so because if a person says that one night, while
asleep, he has dreamt this and that it cannot become an object of
dispute and strife, for a dream is after all a dream and many impossible
things can be seen in it.

For this reason, therefore, this view is not worth further scrutiny.
Unfortunately, however, some Egyptain scholars like Farid Wajdi have
adopted this idea and supported it with baseless statements. In spite of
all this, however, it is only proper to pass it over.

What Is Spiritual Me'raj?
-------------------------

Those people who have not been able to solve some minute points related
to physical me'raj have been compelled to resort to interpretation and
have considered the Prophet's me'raj to have been a spiritual one.

Spiritual me'raj means meditation about the things created by the
Almighty and observation of His Grandeur and Beauty and absorption in
thoughts about Him and glorifying His name and eventual freedom from
material ties and worldly interests and crossing through all
possibilities and entering into internal and non-material stages. And
after going through all this process a special proximity to Allah is
acquired, and it is not possible to define it.

If spiritual me'raj means meditation about the Grandeur of the Almighty
and the extent of the creation, such a me'raj is undoubtedly not
peculiar to the Prophet of Islam as many Prophets and other enlightened
and pure-hearted persons have also enjoyed this position, whereas the
Qurtan mentions his me'raj as something peculiar to him and an
extraordinary distinction for him. Furthermore, the Prophet had been in
the aforesaid condition during many nights[^9] whereas me'raj has been
proved to be related to a particular night.

The thing which has obliged these persons to hold the said view (i.e.
the me'raj was spiritual only) is the hypothesis of the well-known Greek
astronomer, Ptolemy, which has enjoyed great value in the scientists'
circles of East and West for a period of two thousand years and hundreds
of books have been written about it, and it was considered till recently
to be one of the established laws of natural sciences. It may be
summarized as under:

There are two types of bodies in the world, elemental and celestial. An
elemental body consists of the four well-known elements (water, earth,
air and fire). The first sphere which we observe is the sphere of earth
which is the centre of the world. Then come the spheres of water, air
and fire and everyone of them surrounds the other.

Here the spheres come to an end and the celestial bodies begin.
Celestial bodies means the nine skies which are connected with one
another like the layers of an onion and are not at all capable of
rending and conciliation and separation and union and no creature can
move straight through them, because this would necessitate separation of
the components of the sky from one another.

The Prophet's me'raj being physical necessitates that he should ascend
from the centre of the world in a straight line and should cross the
four spheres and also rend the skies one after the other and the rending
and conciliation of the skies is not possible and practicable according
to Greek astronomy, the said thinkers have been obliged to consider the
Prophet's me'raj to be only spiritual, as nobody can restrain a spirit
from performing a journey.

Reply To The Above Criticism
----------------------------

These statements had some worth in those days when Ptolemy's astronomy
had not yet lost its value in scientific circles and some persons
sincerely liked it and were inclined to it. In such circumstances it was
possible that we might have played with the intricacies of the Qur'an
and had explained away the clear verses of the Qur'an as well as the
traditions. These hypotheses have, however, lost their all-pervasive
value and their baselessness has become evident. Only at times a mention
of Ptolemy's astronomy is made in connection with the history of
science.

Furthermore, in view of the invention of various astronomical implements
and powerful telescopes and descending of Apollos and Lunas on the
surface of the moon, Venus and Mars and journeys of the astronauts on
the moon have left no ground for these imaginary hypotheses. Nowadays
the scientists consider the existence of four elemental spheres and nine
inter-connected skies to be a mere myth and have not have not succeeded
in seeing, with the help of scientific implements, astronomical tools
and well-equipped eyes, the worlds which Ptolemy had created with his
imagination and they consider to be valueless even view which is founded
on his wrong hypothesis.

An Unrhythmical Song
--------------------

The leader of the Shaykhiyah sect (Shaykh Ahmad Ehsai) has sung another
song in the pamphlet entitled 'Qatifiyah' and has tried to satisfy both
the groups in a new manner. He says that the Prophet went for me'raj
with a 'barzakhi'[^10] (Herculian) body. In this way, according to his
own thinking, he has satisfied those who believe in physical me'raj,
because he has admitted that the me'raj took place along with body and
has also removed the difficulty with regard to the skies, because, in
order to penetrate through the skies, it is not necessary for a
'barzakhi' body to rend them.[^11]

Nevertheless, the enlightened, truth-seeking and unbiased persons
consider this view also to be worthless and opposed to the Qur'an and
clear text of the traditions, just like the previous view (the me'raj
being spiritual), because, as has already been said, when you place the
verse of the Qur'an relating to me'raj before a linguist he will say
that the speaker means the worldly elemental body for which the word
'abd' (servant) has been used in the Qur'an and not the word
'Herculian', because the Arab society was not at all conversant with
this and other similar words and in Surah al-Isra' only the common
groups and individuals have been addressed.

Now the factor which has prompted him to adopt this forced
interpretation is that very Greek myth about the system of existence
according to which it is firm like Lawh-i Mehfooz (The Protected
Tablet). But now that all the scientists refute this view it is not at
all proper that we should continue to follow it blindly.

If the scholars of the past have said something on account of their
being optimistic about the old astronomy they can be excused and are not
much to blame, but it is not proper for us, during the present times, to
ignore the Qur'anic realities on account of a hypothesis which has been
refuted by the body of scientists.

Me'raj And Modern Scientific Laws
---------------------------------

Some of those interested in natural sciences, who are anxious to fix a
natural cause for every event and a physical agent, for every
phenomenon, have chosen to deny the very basis of me'raj and think that
modern natural and scientific laws do not confirm to the me'raj of the
Prophet. For example, they say:

1. Modern science says: In order to get away from the earth it is
necessary to neutralize its gravity. If you fling a ball in the air, the
power of gravity brings it back to the earth. With whatever force you
fling it, it will come back to the earth again. If we wish to neutralize
the gravity of the earth fully, so that the ball should move on and
should not return to the earth, it will be necessary to fling at the
minimum speed of 25,000 miles per hour.

Hence, the Prophet went out of the zone of gravity and became
weight-less. But here the question arises as to how he performed the
journey at this speed without necessary facilities.

2. The atmosphere in which one may breathe does not exist beyond a few
kilometers of the earth. Thereafter, as we go higher, air becomes
thinner and still more unfit for breathing and occasionally we reach a
point where there is no air at all. How did the Prophet manage to live
without oxygen while performing his journey in the aforesaid regions?

3. The mortal rays and celestial stones destroy every terrestrial body
which is touched by them. They do not, however, reach the earth on
account of their collision with the regions of air and in fact these
regions serve as a coat-of-mail for the inhabitants of earth. In the
circumstances, by what means did the Prophet remain safe from these
mortal rays?

4. Human life is deranged as and when the pressure of air increases or
decreases and man can live in only a particular pressure of the air
which does not exist in the upper regions.

5. The speed at which the Prophet performed his journey was decidedly
more than the speed of light. Light travels at the speed of 300,000
kilometers per second and modern science has proved that no body can
travel at a higher speed than that of light. Keeping this scientific law
in view, how did the Prophet commence his journey at a speed higher than
that of light and then returned safe and sound?

Reply To The Above Objections
-----------------------------

When we stretch the natural laws to this extent the number of
difficulties crosses the limit of those enumerated above. However, we
enquire from these gentlemen the purpose of explaining these natural
laws. Do they mean to say that journey in the upper worlds is
impossible?

It should be said in reply that fortunately the scientific research by
the astronomers of Eastern and Western blocs has made this matter
something usual and possible, because, by their sending into space the
first artificial satellite in 1957, which was given the name of
'Sputnic', it became clear that the power of gravity can be neutralized
by means of a rocket.

Similarly by their sending space-ships carrying astronauts by means of
rockets it became clear that the thing which man considered to be an
obstacle in the way of his journeying in the upper worlds is remediable
with the help of science and technology, and, with these industrial and
scientific tools available to him, man can solve the problems of mortal
rays and the difficulty about the lack of air in which one could
breathe.

And even now the sciences relating to space are in a state of expansion
and the scientists are confident that after some time it will be
possible for them to lead their lives in one of the celestial spheres
and they will travel quite easily to the moon and to Mars.[^12]

These scientific and technical developments clearly show that such an
activity is hundred per cent possible and is not something beyond
reason.

It is possible that some persons may argue that such a journey cannot be
undertaken without scientific and mechanical implements and as the
Prophet did not possess these resources during the night of me'raj how
could he travel in such worlds without them?

Reply to this statement becomes quite clear from our foregoing
discussions about the miracles of the Prophets and especially from the
detailed narrative which we have penned earlier about the events of the
'Year of the Elephant' and the incident of Abrahah's army being killed
with small stones, for it is an established fact that the things which
ordinary persons do with implements and scientific tools can be done by
the Prophets with the blessings of Allah, and without any apparent and
external means.

The Prophet of Islam went to me'raj with the blessing of Almighty Allah
to Whom the entire creation belongs and Who is the Creator of this
wonderful system. It is He who has given gravity to the earth and cosmic
rays to the sun, and has created different layers in the atmosphere. And
He can take these things back and control them whenever He likes.

In case the schedule of the historical journey of the Prophet was
accomplished under the command of Allah all these laws decidedly
surrender before His absolute Will and are in the grip of His power
every moment. In the circumstances what difficulty should there be if
the Lord who has given gravity to the earth and cosmic rays to the
heavenly bodies should take His chosen servant out of the centre of
gravity with His unlimited power and without any apparent means? Allah
who has created oxygen can certainly create air for His chosen Prophet
in the areas where air does not exist.

The efficacy of a miracle is basically different from that of the
natural causes and the strength of man. We should not consider the
strength of Allah limited like our own. If we cannot perform a job
without means we should not say that the Omnipotent Allah cannot also
perform it. From the point of view of difficulty and its solution the
bringing to life of the dead, the transformation of a rod into a boa and
keeping Prophet Yunus alive in the belly of a fish in the depth of the
sea-the events which have been confirmed by the Heavenly Books and have
been narrated for us-are not unlike the me'raj of the Prophet of Islam.

In short all the natural causes and external impediments are controlled
and conquered by the Will of Allah. His Will does not concern only that
which is an impossibility, but besides that He can do whatever He likes,
whether or not man possesses strength for it or not.

No doubt we are addressing here those people who recognize Allah with
the qualities and attributes which are peculiar to Him and who believe
that He is Omnipotent and can do whatever He wills.

The Object Of Me'raj
--------------------

A person asked the fourth Imam: "Is there a particular place for Allah?"
He replied: "No". The man said: "Then why did He make His Prophet
journey through the skies?" The Holy Imam replied: "He made him ascend
so that he might become aware of the expanse of the Universe and see and
hear wonderful things, the like of which had not been seen and heard by
the eyes and ears before".

It is no doubt necessary that the last Prophet should enjoy such a
position that he should rely on his vast information and should be able
to send a message to the people of the 20th century, who are still
thinking of travelling to the moon and to Mars, that he did this
performance without any means and his Creator was kind to him and made
him fully aware of the system of creation.

[^1]: Majma'ul Bayan Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:1, vol. III, page 395.

[^2]: For understanding fully the meaning of 'Sidratul Muntaha' refer to
books of exegeses.

[^3]: Some narrators have quoted thus: "I dropped the remainder".
Possibly the difference between the two versions is due to the action
having been repeated.

[^4]: For further details the readers are advised to refer to the
chapters on 'Ascension' of Biharul Anwar, vol. XVIII, pp 282 - 410 and
of Tafsir-i Burhan, vol. II, pp. 390 - 404.

[^5]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. III, page 395.

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 27.

[^7]: For further information regarding the time when wuzu, prayers and
call to prayers were made obligatory please refer to Furu'-i Kafi, vol.
I, p. 135.

[^8]: The great Shi'ah jurist, the late Shaykh Tabrasi, has stated in
Tafsir-i Majma'ul Bayan that all Shi'ah scholars are unanimous that the
'Me'raj' was physical, vol. III, page 395.

[^9]: Wasa'il, Book of Fasting, chapter-prohibition of fasting.

[^10]: Barzakhi body is like the body with which man performs all deeds
in a dream.

[^11]: The pamphlet entitled 'Qatifiyah' is one of his 92 pamphlets
which were published collectively in 1273 with the name of "Jawame'ul
Kalim". The text of his remarks is as under: "In the event of ascension
as the body goes above it abandons the elements connected with every one
of the spheres at that very place and moves on. For example, it leaves
the element of air in the sphere of air and that of fire in the sphere
of fire. And at the time of its return it regains all that it had
abandoned". Hence, at the time of 'Me'raj', the Prophet abandoned
everyone of the four elements of his body (in the past the basic
elements were considered to be four) in their respective spheres and
went for me'raj with a body which was devoid of these elements. Such a
body cannot be an elemental body and can be nothing else than 'barzakhi'
(according to his terminology a 'Herculian' body). In the book entitled
'Sharh-i Ziarat (pages 28 - 29) the Shaykh states that the nine skies
are not capable of rending and conciliation.

[^12]: After artificial moons had been sent in the space, a twenty seven
year-old Russian named Major Gagarin first commenced his journey into
space in a space ship on Wednesday, 12th April 1961. He was the first
human being to undertake such a journey. His spaceship went 302
kilometers above the earth and he travelled round the earth for one hour
and thirty minutes. Thereafter spaceships were sent into space by
America as well as by the Soviet Union. Eventually Apollo-12 with all
its occupants landed on the moon and it was for the first time that man
set his foot on it. This schedule has been put to test a number of times
thereafter and has been usually successful. All these activities go to
show that landing of man on the surface of the spheres is possible. And
the thing which man does by scientific methods is done by his Creator by
means of His Great Will.


