Chapter 25: The Event of Migration
==================================

The government of the Makkans resembled a constitutional government.
Their Darun Nadwah was like a national consultative assembly where the
heads of the tribes met at the time of crisis and exchanged views on
complicated matters and took collective decision.

In the thirteenth year of the Prophet's prophetic mission the people of
Makkah were faced with a great danger from the Muslims. It threatened
their very existence and freedom. The great base which the Muslims set
up in Yathrib and the responsibility taken by the residents of Yathrib
for the protection of the Prophet were clear signs of this threat.

In the month of Rabiul Awwal of the thirteenth year of the prophetic
mission, when the Prophet's migration took place, none of the Muslims
was left in Makkah except the Prophet, Ali, Abu Bakr and a few other
Muslims who had been detained by Quraysh or those who were old or sick.
There was however, every possibility of these persons also leaving
Makkah for Yathrib. In the meantime Quraysh suddenly took a categorical
and dangerous decision.

A consultative meeting of the chiefs took place in Darun Nadwah. A man
from among them spoke at the outset about the centralization of the
forces of Muhammad at Yathrib and the agreement made by Bani Aws and
Bani Khazraj.

Thereafter he added: "We, the people of the Haram, were respected by all
tribes. However, Muhammad sowed the seeds of discord and thus posed a
great danger for us. Now we have lost all patience. The only path of
safety for us is that a brave man should be selected from among us, and
he should put an end to his life secretly. And in case Bani Hashim stand
up to quarrel and dispute with us, we may pay the blood-money to them.

An unidentified old man who introduced himself as 'Najdi' rejected this
idea and said: "This plan is not at all practicable, because Bani Hashim
will not spare the life of the murderer of Muhammad and the payment of
blood-money will not satisfy them. Hence, whoever volunteers to execute
this plan should first part with his own life, and no such person is
found amongst you".

One of the chiefs named Abul Bakhtari said: "The best thing would be to
imprison Muhammad and to provide him food and water through a hole and
thus prevent the spreading of his religion". The old Najdi spoke again:
"This scheme is also not very much different from the first one, because
in that event Bani Hashim will wage war against you to get him released.
And even if they themselves are not successful in achieving this object
they will seek help from other tribes at the time of Haj and will get
him released with their assistance".

A third man put forward another suggestion and said: "It will be better
if we make Muhammad mount a refractory camel and tie both of his feet
and make the camel run so that it may strike him on hills and stones and
thus shatter his body. And if, by chance, his life is saved and he
alights in the land of some other tribe and wants to propagate his
religion amongst them they themselves, who are zealous idolaters, will
settle their accounts with him and will save us and themselves from his
mischief".

The old Najdi once again disapproved of this plan and said: "You are
aware of Muhammad's attractive and fascinating way of speaking. By his
sweet speeches and oratory he will make the other tribes his allies and
will then swoop down on you".

Perfect calmness prevailed over the whole assembly. Suddenly Abu Jahl,
and according to another version the old Najdi himself, expressed his
view and said: "The only proper and easy way is that some persons should
be selected from all the families and they should jointly attack his
house at night and cut him into pieces, so that all the families might
be held responsible for the murder. It is evident that in that case Bani
Hashim will not be in a position to take revenge on all the families".
This proposal was endorsed unanimously and the would-be assassins were
selected. It was then decided that when night fell those persons should
carry out their mission.[^1]

Divine Assistance
-----------------

These muddle-headed persons were under the impression that like other
mundane affairs the institution of prophethood, too, could be destroyed
with such schemes. They could not conceive that like other Prophets the
Prophet of Islam was also blessed with Divine assistance and the hand
that had protected this luminous torch from the hurricanes of accidents
for thirteen years could also frustrate the present plan of his enemies.

According to the exegetes the Archangel Jibreel came and informed the
Prophet of the nefarious designs of the polytheists. The Qur'an makes a
reference to this incident in these words:

***Remember how the unbelievers plotted against you. They sought to take
you captive or kill you or banish you. They devised plans-but Allah too
made a plan and Allah is the best planner.*** **(Surah al-Anfal,
8:30).**

The Prophet was ordered by Allah to proceed to Yathrib. However, it was
not an easy task to get rid of the cruel hands of the idolaters,
especially when they were on the look-out for him and the distance
between Makkah and Yathrib was also long. In case he had not left Makkah
after proper planning it was probable that the Makkans might have
overtaken and arrested him and had shed his blood before he could join
his friends.

The historians and biographers have given different versions about the
migration of the Prophet and the differences between them about the
particulars of the incident are unusual. The writer of Seerah-i Halabi
has succeeded to some extent in making the different narratives
compatible with one another, but has failed to eliminate the
contradictions in some cases.

The thing which deserves attention is that most of the Sunni and Shi'ah
traditionalists have put the Prophet's migration in such a way that one
concludes that it was a miraculous feat to get rid of the enemy, whereas
a careful study of the incident reveals that the Prophet's escape was
the result of his foresight, careful planning and the precautionary
measures taken by him; and Allah had willed to provide him safety
through natural channels and not by means of miraculous acts. The thing
which bears testmony to this view is that the Prophet availed of natural
causes and rational means (like making Ali sleep in his own bed and
concealing himself in the cave etc. and thus ensured his safety.

The Archangel Jibreel Informs The Prophet
-----------------------------------------

The Archangel Jibreel informed the Prophet about the wicked plan of the
unbelievers and asked him to migrate. The Prophet ordered Ali to sleep
in his bed, and pass through the terrible ordeal for the safety of
Islam, so that the unbelievers might not think that the Prophet had
left, but should remain under the impression that he was in the house.
Thus Ali remained contented with remaining in the house, so that he
himself could move freely through the streets of Makkah and in its
precincts.

The advantage underlying this plan was that the enemies kept guarding
the Prophet's house only, and he himself gained time to move to a place
of safety.

Now we should see as to who offers to sleep in the Prophet's bed and to
sacrifice his own life for him? You will naturally say: "He who believed
in him first and whirled round him from the day of his appointment to
the prophetic mission just as a moth whirls round a candle". It is he
who should make sacrifice in this path and that self-sacrificing person
is Ali.

The Prophet, therefore, turned to Ali and said: "Sleep in my bed tonight
and cover yourself with the green sheet which I use during sleep,
because the enemies have conspired to kill me and it is, therefore,
necessary that I should migrate to Yathrib".

Ali occupied the bed of the Prophet early in the night. When
three-fourth of the night had passed, forty persons encircled the house
and peeped into it through a hole. They saw the condition of the house
to be as usual and thought that the man who was sleeping in the bedroom
was the Prophet himself.

The Prophet decided to leave the house when the enemies had surrounded
it from all sides and were keeping perfect vigil. Almighty Allah willed
to save the great leader of Islam from the clutches of these mean
people. The Prophet recited those verses of Surah Yasin which suited his
condition at that time and after having read up to the verse:

***"so that they cannot see"***

 he came out of the house immediately and went to the appointed place.
It is not clear as to how the Prophet succeeded in crossing the blockade
and why the besiegers could not see him. It is learnt from the tradition
quoted by the renowned Shi'ah traditionalist, the late Ali bin Ibrahim,
while commenting on the verse:

***Remember how the unbelievers plotted against you...........***

***They devised plans -but Allah too has made a plan. Allah is the best
planner.*** **(Surah al-Anfal, 8:30)**

that, when the Prophet left the house, all of them had gone to sleep and
wanted to attack the house in the morning and did not imagine that the
Prophet was aware of their plot.

However, other historians clearly narrate[^2] that the enemies remained
awake till the time they attacked the Prophet's house and he came out of
the house miraculously and they could not see him.

There is no doubt about the fact that such a miracle is possible. But
the question is: Was such a miracle necessary on this occasion? Complete
scrutiny of the circumstances of migration proves positively that the
Prophet was aware of the plot of the enemies before they besieged his
house and the plan which he chalked out for his escape was perfectly
natural and had nothing supernatural about it.

By making Ali sleep in his bed he wanted to free himself from the
idol-worshippers by natural means and not through miracle. Hence, he
could very well leave the house before it was besieged and did not need
any miracle for the purpose.

It is, however, possible that the Prophet's stay in the house till the
siege took place was due to reasons which are not known to us at
present. Hence, the discussion about this matter (Prophet's leaving the
house at night) is not final in the eyes of all historians, because
according to some of them the Prophet left his house before it was
besieged and before sunset.[^3]

Enemies Attack The House Of The Prophet
---------------------------------------

The forces of infidelity surrounded the house of the Prophet and were
awaiting orders to make a rush and to cut the Prophet into pieces in his
bedroom. Some of them insisted that they should attack at midnight and
implement their scheme.

However, Abu Lahab stood up and said: "Women and children of Bani Hashim
are within the house and it is possible that they may be hurt during the
course of attack". Some say that the reason for their delay was that
they wanted to kill the Prophet in broad daylight before the very eyes
of Bani Hashim, so that they (Bani Hashim) might see that his murderer
was not a particular person. Evenutally they decided to execute their
plan at dawn, when there was light.[^4]

It was now dawn. A great zeal and enthusiasm was visible amongst the
unbelievers. They were under the impression that they would soon achieve
their desired object. With their hands on the hilts of the swords they
entered the bedroom of the Prophet making a great noise. Simultaneously
Ali raised his head from the pillow, threw aside the green sheet and
said very calmly: "What is the matter?" They replied "We want Muhammad.
Where is he?" Ali said: "Did you hand him over to me so that I may
deliver him back to you? Anyway, he is not in the house at present".

The faces of the agents flushed with anger and their throats were choked
on this account. They regretted having waited till morning and blamed
Abu Lahab who had restrained them from making an attack at night.

Quraysh became very much excited owing to the frustration of their plan
and the defeat which they had to suffer. They began thinking that
Muhammad could not manage to go out of the environments of Makkah within
such a short time and concluded that he had either concealed himself
within Makkah or was on his way to Yathrib. They, therefore, planned to
capture him.

The Prophet In The Cave Of Thaur
--------------------------------

It is an established fact that the Prophet spent the night of migration,
along with Abu Bakr in the cave of Thaur, which is situated in the south
of Makkah (a spot opposite Madina). It is not, however, clear as to how
this companionship took place and this point is perfectly ambiguous in
history.

Some believe that this companionship was a mere chance and the Prophet
having seen Abu Bakr on the way took him along with himself Others say
that the Prophet went to Abu Bakr's house that night and at midnight
both of them left the house for the cave of Thaur. Still others say that
Abu Bakr came in quest of the Prophet and Ali guided him to his hiding
place.[^5]

In any case many biographers of the Prophet consider this companionship
to be a proof of the Abu Bakr's greatness and quote this incident
prominently in connection with his virtues.

Quraysh Do Not Hesitate In Searching Out The Prophet
----------------------------------------------------

The defeat suffered by Quraysh made them change their strategy They,
therefore, decided to block the roads, to post watchmen on all the paths
leading to Yathrib and also to procure the services of those who could
locate a person by his foot-prints, so that, by this means, they might
trace him out at any cost. They also declared that whoever gave correct
information about the hiding place of Muhammad would be rewarded with
one hundred camels.

The Qurayshites became active and proceeded towards north of Makkah to
the road which leads to Madina, whereas the Prophet in order to
frustrate their plan, had hidden himself in the cave of Thaur. Abu Karz,
a famous physiognomist of Makkah, was acquainted with the foot-prints of
the Prophet. On this account he came near the cave and said: "It appears
that the Prophet intended to come to this place. It is possible that he
is hidden in the cave".

He, therefore, deputed someone to enter the cave. When that man came
near the cave he saw that a very thick web had been woven on the mouth
of the cave and the wild pigeons had laid eggs there.[^6] He returned
without entering the cave and said: "There are cobwebs on the mouth of
the cave, which show that there is no one inside it". These activities
continued for three days and three nights and then Quraysh lost all hope
and abandoned the quest.

Self-Sacrifice In The Path Of Reality
-------------------------------------

The most important point in regard to this event is the self-sacrifice
of Ali in the path of reality. Self-sacrifice in the path of reality is
the quality of those who are wedded to it- persons who ignore their
lives, property and position, and spend their entire spiritual and
material capital for the revival of truth.

Such persons are decidedly the lovers of reality and the perfection and
auspiciousness which they observe in their pursuit for it make them
surrender their temporary life and to embrace the eternal one. Ali's
sleeping in the Prophet's bed during that tumultuous night is an
outstanding specimen of this love for reality. There was no other
stimulant for this hazardous feat except love for the survival of Islam,
which is a surety for the prosperity of the society.

This kind of sacrifice is so valuable that the Almighty Allah has called
it sacrifice made to acquire the pleasure of Allah and, as quoted by
many commentators, the following verse was revealed in this behalf:

***Among men, there are those who sacrifice their lives to seek Allah's
pleasure. Allah is Compassionate to His servants.*** **(Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:207)**

The greatness and importance of this act has made the great sages of
Islam consider it to be one of the greatest virtues of Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful and they have introduced him as a brave and
self-sacrificing person.

And wherever this event has been mentioned in exegetes and history it
has been admitted that the said verse was revealed about him. This truth
can never be forgotten. The face of reality always shines through the
inner folds of superstition and the scattered patches of a cloud cannot
diminish the light of the sun.

The enmity of Mu'awiyyah with the family of the Prophet and especially
with the Commander of the Faithful needs no mention. He planned to bribe
some of the companions of the Prophet so as to get falsehoods forged
with a view to stain the luminous pages of history, but he could not
succeed.

Samrah bin Jundab who lived during the time of the Prophet and later
attached himself to the court of Mu'awiyah used to tamper with facts and
was paid for doing so. One day, while he was present before Mu'awiyah,
the latter asked him earnestly to mount the pulpit and refute that the
said verse was revealed about Ali. He also asked him to tell the people
that this verse was in fact revealed for the assassin of Ali (i.e. Abdur
Rahman, bin Muljam).

As a reward for this act, which would have ruined Samrah's faith,
Mu'awiyah offered him one hundred thousand dirhams. Samrah did not
agree. Thereupon Mu'awiyah raised the amount and the deal was finally
settled for four hundred thousand dirhams. The greedy old man began
falsifying the facts of history and worsened his guilt-stained
reputation. He said before a gathering that the said verse had been
revealed about Abdur Rahman bin Muljam and not about Ali.

The stupid and simple-minded people believed in what he said and it did
not occur to them that at the time of the revelation of the said verse
Abdur Rahman was not in Hijaz and was not perhaps born.

The face of reality did not, however, remain concealed with these
fabrications. Mu'awiyah and his family fell victims to vicissitudes of
time. The signs of those who fabricated lies during his time were
obliterated. Once again truth prevailed. Great and renowned exegetes[^7]
and traditionalists of all times have admitted that the verse:

***Among men, there are those who sacrifice their lives to seek Allah's
pleasure*** **(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:207)**

was revealed during the 'night's stay' about the self-sacrifice of
Ali.[^8]

Statement Of Ibn Taymiyah
-------------------------

Ahmad bin Abdul Halim Harani Hanbali who died in the prison of Morocco
in 728 A.H. was one of the Sunni scholars and most of the beliefs of
Wahabis originate from him. He held special views about the Holy
Prophet, Ali, the Commander of the Faithful and other members of the
Prophet's family and has recorded most of his beliefs in his book
entitled "Minhajus Sunnah".

Owing to his deviated beliefs most of his contemporary ulema accused him
of heresy and showed disgust for him. However, discussion of these
matters is beyond our aim. He has said something about this
distinction[^9] which may be placed before you with minor amendments.

It is seen at times that some incapable persons with scant or
superficial knowledge are influenced by his words and they propagate his
view among common people without any investigation and without
consulting those learned in the field, and the irony is that people may
consider them to be research scholars. They are, however, oblivious of
the fact that these words are those of a heretic who has been refuted by
his co-religionists and has been charged with heresy.

He says "Ali's sleeping in the Prophet's bed is not a matter of
distinction for him, because Ali was aware for two reasons that he would
not meet any harm that night. Firstly it was the remark of the Prophet
which was absolutely true, for he said to him that night: "Sleep in my
bed and you will not meet any harm".

And secondly the Prophet handed over to him the things which the people
had kept with him for safe custody, and naturally knew that his
representative would not be killed, for, otherwise, he would have
entrusted those things to some other person. And on account of this
recommendation Ali himself also understood that he would not meet any
harm and would be successful in discharging the responsibility which had
been entrusted to him by the Prophet.

### Reply To The False Interpretation

Before giving detailed replies to the abovementioned two points we may
say briefly: "By denying one distinction Ibn Taymiyah has proved a still
greater distinction for Ali, because his faith about the truthfulness of
the Prophet was either an ordinary faith or it was a strong and
extraordinary faith and all the words of the Prophet were clear before
him.

According to the first assumption (i.e. in case his faith was ordinary)
Ali did not at all possess any definite knowledge of his remaining
immune from any harm. This is so because the words of the Prophet do not
create a definite knowledge in the hearts of such people (and Ali was
decidedly not one of them).

Even if they apparently accept his words to be true they entertain
anguish in their hearts. And in case they sleep in his place at times of
danger their disturbance of mind increases all the more and the monster
of death appears before their eyes every moment. According to this
assumption, therefore, Ali undertook this task with the possibility of
being killed and not with the knowledge that he would remain safe.

According to the second assumption Ibn Taymiyah has proved a greater
distinction for Ali, because if the faith of a man is so firm that the
words of the Prophet are crystal clear to him and the excellence of such
a faith surpasses everything else. The result of such a faith is that
when the Prophet tells him: "Sleep in my bed and you will not meet any
harm from the enemies".

He walks with perfect peace of mind and occupies his bed and does not
feel the least fear in his heart. And if the view expressed by Ibn
Taymiyah (that Ali had knowledge of his safety, because the truthful
Prophet had told him so) be a proof of the highest degree of faith, he
should know that he has unconsciously proved this greatest distinction
for Ali.

### Detailed Reply

As regards the first argument it may be said that the sentence, "Sleep
in my bed and you will not suffer any harm", has not been quoted by any
reliable historian.[^10] No doubt Ibn Athir (d. 630 A.H.)[^11] and
Tabari (d. 310 A.H.)[^12] have quoted this sentence but it appears that
their source is Seerah-i Ibn Hisham[^13] who has quoted the matter in
this way-especially because the text of these historians in this regard
is exactly the same as that of Ibn Hisham. Besides this, so far as we
are aware, this matter is not found in the writings of Shiiah scholars.

Shaykh Muhammad bin Hasan Tusi (d. 460 A.H.), has quoted the event of
migration in his 'Amali' in great detail and has also mentioned the said
sentence with a minor alteration. However, what he says is different
from that quoted in the writings of Sunni scholars, for he clearly
quotes that, when the night of migration had passed, Ali and Hind bin
Abi Hala (son of Khadijah and step-son of the Prophet met him [the
Prophet]) during the following nights. During one of those nights the
Prophet said to Ali: "O Ali! Henceforth these people will never be able
to overpower you".

As will be observed, this is almost the same sentence which has been
quoted by Ibn Hisham, Tabari and Ibn Athir. However, according to the
quotation of Shaykh Tusi, the Prophet gave this assurance to Ali in the
second or third night and not in the first night.

Besides all this, the words of Ali himself are the best testimony on the
subject. As is evident from his couplets (translated below) he himself
has treated this act to be a sort of self-sacrifice in the path ot
truth:

"I have protected with my life the best man, who has laid his feet on
earth, and the noblest man, who has performed 'Tawaf' of the 'House of
Allah' and 'Hajar-i Isma'il'. That dignified person is Muhammad bin
Abdullah. And I acted in this way when the unbelievers were plotting
against him. At that time the Great Allah protected him from their plot.
I remained in his bed from night till morning and kept waiting for the
enemy, and prepared myself for captivity and death". (Suyuti has quoted
these lines from Ali in his exegesis entitled 'Durre Manthur').

In the presence of these expressive sentences and clear explanations
there remains no justification to rely upon the words of lbn Hisham,
because there are more chances of his committing mistake. And there is a
great probability that, as Ibn Hisham desired to narrate things in a
compressed manner, he contented himself with quoting only the actual
sentence.

And as it was immaterial for him as to when this sentence was uttered
(which was actually uttered during the second night) he ignored to quote
the time and narrated things in a way as if all these incidents occurred
during the very night of migration.

Another evidence which confirms this statement is the well-known
tradition which has been quoted by many Sunni and Shi'ah scholars.
According to this report Allah addressed the Archangels Jibreel and
Mika'il that night and said: "If I decide to grant one of you life and
the other death which of you would be ready to accept death and leave
life for the other?"

Neither of them agreed to this proposal. The Almighty then said: "Now
Ali has preferred death for himself and sacrificed his life for the
Prophet". Then He ordered them to descend to earth and undertake the
safety and protection of Ali.

The second argument advanced by Ibn Taymiyah about Ali's being aware of
his eventual safety is the order given to him by the Prophet to return
to their owners the things which they had entrusted to him for safe
custody.

According to him this would go to show that the Prophet knew that Ali
would not suffer any harm and, therefore, asked him to return those
things. However, we think that if the trail of events is studied
properly this difficulty may also be solved. And here is the trail of
the events of migration

Trail Of Events Of The Migration Of The Prophet
-----------------------------------------------

The initial stages of the escape of the Prophet assumed a practical
shape with the help of proper planning. The Prophet took refuge at night
in the Cave of Thaur and foiled the plan of the conspirators. He did not
feel any disturbance of mind. So much so that at critical moments he
consoled his companion with the words: "Don't worry. Allah is with us".

For three days and three nights they enjoyed the blessing of Allah.
According to Shaykh Tusi (in 'Amali'), Ali and Hind bin Abi Hala (the
son of Khadijah) and according to many historians, Abdullah bin Abu Bakr
and 'Amr bin Fuhayrah (the shepherd of Abu Bakr) used to go and meet the
Prophet.

Ibn Athir writes:[^14] "During nights Abu Bakr's son informed his father
and the Prophet about the decisions taken by Quraysh and his shepherd
made the sheep pass by the cave on their way to Makkah so that the
Prophet and his companion might use their milk. At the time of his
return Abdullah walked before the sheep so that his footprints might be
obliterated.

Shaykh says in 'Amali: "During one of the nights (after the night of
migration) when Ali and Hind had the honour to reach in the presence of
the Prophet he ordered Ali to arrange two camels for them (i.e. for the
Prophet and his companion). At that time Abu Bakr said: "I have already
arranged two camels for you and myself". The Prophet replied: "I am
preapred to accept this offer on payment". He then ordered Ali to pay
the price of the camel.

Among the directions given by the Prophet that night in the Cave of
Thaur some were that Ali should declare on the following day in broad
daylight with a loud voice that in case someone had kept something with
Muhammad for safe custody or if he (Muhammad) was indebted to any
person, the persons concerned should receive their property back.

Then he gave directions about the departure of 'Fawatim' (which means
his own dear daughter Fatimah and Fatimah daughter of Asad and Fatimah
daughter of Zubayr) and ordered Ali to make arrangements for their
journey as well as for such other members of the family of Hashim as
were inclined to migrate. And he pronounced on this occasion the
sentence which has been relied upon by Ibn Taymiyah for his first
argument. He said: "Henceforth these people will never be able to
overpower you".

As you can observe the Prophet ordered Ali to return the things
entrusted to him by the people when the 'night of stay' had already
passed. These orders were given by him to Ali when he himself was
getting ready to leave the cave.

Halabi writes: "When one night Ali presented himself before the Prophet
in the Cave of Thaur the latter told him *inter alia* to return to the
people the things which they had entrusted to him (the Prophet) and also
pay off his debts". Then he turns to the statement that Ali did not meet
the Prophet after the 'night of stay', but does not accept it himself
and quotes from the author of the book 'ad-Durr' that Ali did meet the
Prophet again after the night of 'migration'.[^15]

In short Shaykh Tusi quotes reliable authorities saying that orders
regarding the return of things entrusted to the Prophet by their owners
were given by him after the 'night of stay' we need not refute this
authentic version and get busy in amusing the people.

And as regards the Sunni historians having quoted the matter in a manner
which apparently gives the impression that all directions were given by
the Prophet during one and the same night viz. the night of migration,
it needs explanation and it is not improbable that their object was to
quote the original facts and they did not attach any importance to the
determination of time at which these recommendations were made and
directions given to Ali.

### Coming Out Of The Cave

As directed by the Prophet, Ali sent three camels to the cave during the
fourth night along with a reliable guide named 'Urayqit'. The Prophet
heard the bellowing of the camels and

came out of the cave along with his companion. They mounted the camels
and proceeded to Yathrib (Madina) from the lower side of Makkah, along
the coastal route. The details of this journey are recorded in
books.[^16]

### The First Page Of History

The darkness of night commenced. The Qurayshites, who had been roaming
about in the city of Makkah and its environments to find out the
Prophet, returned to their homes extremely tired and had lost all hope
of the big reward (100 camels) which had been fixed for capturing the
Prophet. The roads leading to Yathrib, which had been blocked by the
watchmen posted by Quraysh, were also reopened.[^17]

At this moment the low voice of the guide, who had three camels and some
food with him, reached the ears of the Prophet and his companion. He was
saying with a calm voice: "It is necessary to take advantage of the
darkness of night and get beyond the reach of the Makkans as early as
possible and to select an unfrequented path".

The history of the Muslim era commenced from that very night. Hence,
they determine the dates of all events according to the Hegira calendar
and record them in history accordingly.

Why The Year Of Migration Became The Era Of Islamic History?
------------------------------------------------------------

Islam is the most perfect heavenly religion and adapts the religions of
Musa and 'Isa in a more perfect form suited to all the conditions and
situations. It has brought blessing for mankind. Although Jesus and his
birth are respectable in the eyes of the Muslims, they did not adopt his
birth as the origin of their era, because they are an independent and
distinguished nation and it is not appropriate that they should follow
others in adopting their era.

For quite some time the 'Year of the Elephant' (the year in which Abraha
came to Makkah with an army of elephants and wished to demolish the
Ka'bah) was treated by the Arabs to be the origin of history and the
birth of the Prophet also took place in the same year. However, the
Muslims did not treat it to be the first page of the history of Islam.

The year of Be'that (appointment to the prophetic mission) was also not
treated to be the starting point of the history of the Muslims, because
at that time there was no trace of Islam and the Islamic faith, and the
number of the Muslims in those days did not exceed three.

However, in the first year of migration, Islam and the Muslims were
blessed with a great success. An independent government came into
existence in Madina. The Muslims got rid of homelessness and freely
gathered at a central place. On account of this very success and
victory, therefore, they decided to treat that year to be the starting
point of their history[^18] and till today they reckon the date of
everything; good and evil in accordance with it.

Schedule Of The Journey
-----------------------

The journey which the Prophet had to perform consisted of a distance of
about 400 kilometers, and covering this distance in the scorching heat
of summer necessitated correct planning. Furthermore, they (i.e the
Prophet and his companions) were also afraid of the Arabs, who met them
on the way, for they might report their whereabouts to Quraysh. They,
therefore, performed the journey at night and rested during day-time.

It seems that a camel-rider, having seen the Prophet and his companions
from a distance, went to Quraysh at once and informed them of the
itinerary of the Prophet. In order to earn the prize alone, Saraqah bin
Malik bin Ja'sham Madlaji dissuaded others from pursuing the matter and
told them that they (i.e. the persons seen by the said camel-driver)
were some other persons. Then he came to his house, armed himself, rode
a swift horse and reached, as quickly as possible, the spot where the
Prophet and his companions were resting.

Ibn Athir writes:[^19] "This state of affairs made the Prophet's
companion very sad and the Prophet had to console him once again with
the words: 'Don't worry. Allah is with us'. Saraqah was very proud of
his physical strength and sharp weapons and was quite ready to shed the
blood of the Prophet to earn the biggest prize offered by the Arabs.

In the meantime the Prophet prayed for himself and his companions with a
heart overflowing with faith and confidence and said "O Allah! Save us
from the mischief of this man". Suddenly Saraqah's horse got startled
and threw him violently on the ground. Saraqah realized that a Divine
hand was at work and these developments were due to the bad intention
which he had against Muhammad.[^20]

He, therefore, turned to the Prophet in a beseeching manner and said: "I
surrender my slave and camel to you and am prepared to do whatever you
like". The Prophet then replied: "I want nothing from you".

However, the late Allamah Majlisi says that the Prophet said to him:
"Return and dissuade others from pursuing us". Hence Saraqah told
whomsoever he met: "There is no trace of Muhammad on this route".[^21]

The Sunni and Shi'ah writers have quoted miracles which were performed
by the Prophet during his journey from Makkah to Madina. For brevity's
sake, however, we refrain from narrating them.

Arrival In The Village Of Quba
------------------------------

Quba, which is situated at a distance of two leagues from Madina, was
the seat of the tribe of 'Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf'. The Prophet and his
companions reached there on Monday the 12th of Rabiul Awwal and stayed
at the house of Kulsum ibnul Hadam, the chief of the tribe. A number of
'Muhajirs' (migrants) and 'Ansar' (helpers) were then awaiting the
arrival of the Prophet.

The Prophet stayed there till the end of the week and during this time
he laid the foundation of a mosque for the tribe of Bani 'Awf. Some
persons insisted upon his proceeding to Madina as early as possible. He
was, however, waiting tor the arrival of his cousin, Ali.

After the migration of the Prophet, Ali stood up at a place in Makkah
and said: "Whoever has entrusted anything to Muhammad should come and
take it back from me". Those concerned came and took back their things
after mentioning the marks of identification.

Thereafter, according to the directions given by the Prophet, Ali had to
take to Madina, along with himself, the Hashmite women including
Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet and his own mother Fatimah binte
Asad, and also those Muslims who had not till then been able to migrate.
Ali adopted the route of 'Zi Tuwa' and proceeded to Madina at night.

Shaykh Tusi writes:[^22] "The spies of Quraysh came to know about the
migration of Ali and his party. They, therefore, pursued him and came
face to face with him in the area of 'Zajnan'. Hot words were exchanged
between them. During that time the cries of women were reaching the sky.
Ali realized that he had no alternative left but to defend the honour of
Islam and the Muslims.

He, therefore, turned to the opponents and said: "Whoever wishes that
his body should be cut into pieces and his blood should be shed should
come forward". Signs of wrath were visible on his face. The agents of
Quraysh felt that the matter had become serious. They, therefore,
adopted a conciliatory attitude and took to the way they had come".

Ibn Athir writes: "When Ali reached Quba, his feet were bleeding. The
Prophet was informed that Ali had arrived, but was not in a position to
come up before him. The Prophet immediately went to the place where Ali
was, and took him in his lap, and when he saw the swollen feet of Ali
tears began to flow from his eyes".[^23]

The Prophet arrived at Quba on the twelfth of Rabiul Awwal and Ali
joined him there in the middle of the same month.[^24] This view is
supported by Tabari: "Ali stayed in Makkah for three days after the
migration of the Prophet and during this period he returned to their
owners the things which they had entrusted (to the Prophet)".[^25]

Tumult And Glamour Of Joy In Madina
-----------------------------------

There was a great excitement and jubilation among the people who had
expressed faith in the Prophet three years ago and sent their
representatives to him every year and used his sacred name every day in
their prayers, when they learned that their great leader had arrived at
a distance of only two leagues and was likely to enter their city soon.
What their feelings and emotions were cannot be described in words.

The Ansar had thirst for Islam and its sublime and invigorative
programme, and in order to purify Madina of all traces of polytheism and
idol-worship they had burnt the idols and had removed all signs of
idolatry from the homes, the streets and the bazaars of the city. It
will be appropriate if we quote here an example of the interest taken by
the Ansar in Islam.

'Arnr bin Jumuh, who was one of the chiefs of Banu Salmah tribe, had
placed an idol in his house. In order to make him realize that the
wooden idol was a useless thing, the men of his tribe took it away and
threw it upside down in a pit which was used in those days for easing
nature.

He got up in the morning and, after making a good deal of search, found
the idol in that pit. He picked it up, washed it and restored it to its
place. This drama was repeated many times. Eventually 'Amr tied a sword
round the neck of the idol and said: "If you are the origin of any
strength in this world defend yourself".

One day, however, he found the idol in a well, tied to the dead body of
a dog, and without the sword. Observing these events he realized that
the status of man was much higher than that he should bow his head
before every stone, wood or mud.

Then he recited some verses whose purport is this: "By Allah! If you had
been a true god you would not have been lying in a well tied to a dead
dog. Praise be to Allah Who owns all blessings. It is He Who is Merciful
and Who nourishes and gives reward. It is He Who grants us salvation
before we are consigned to the grave".[^26]

The Prophet proceeded to Madina. When his mount descended at Thaniyatul
Wida' and set its foot on the land of Yathrib the people warmly welcomed
and greeted him and began singing mirthful songs to this effect:

"The moon rose from Thaniyatul Wida'. It is our duty to be thankful for
this blessing till the day when even one person on the face of the earth
prays to Allah and worships Him".

"O you, who hate been sent by Allah for our guidance! It is necessary
for all of us to obey your orders".

The tribe of Bani 'Amr bin 'Awf insisted that the Prophet might stay on
in Quba and said: "We are assiduous, steadfast and brave people". The
Prophet did not, however, agree to this. When the people of the tribes
of Aws and Khazraj came to know about the migration of the Prophet, they
armed themselves and hurried to welcome him.

While he was proceeding on his way the people encircled his camel and
the chiefs of the tribes held its bridle. Every one of them insisted
that the Prophet might stay in his area, but he replied to all of them:
"Don't obstruct the camel. I shall dismount wherever it kneels down".
The camel stopped and bent its knees in a spacious piece of land which
belonged to two orphan boys named Sahl and Suhayl who lived under the
protection and guardianship of As'ad bin Zurarah.[^27]

This land was used for drying palm-dates and for agriculture. The house
of Abu Ayub was situated nearby. His mother, therefore, availed of the
opportunity and took the belongings of the Prophet to her own house.
Hence competition and solicitations began for taking the Prophet.

He, however, cut the argument short and said, "Where are my belongings?"
He was told that Abu Ayub's mother had taken them to her house.
Thereupon he said: "Let somebody go to the place where my belongings
are". And As'ad bin Zurarah took the camel of the Prophet to his own
house.

Seeds Of Dissension
-------------------

Abdullah bin Ubay is considered the chief of the hierarchy of
hypocrites. Before the people of Madina concluded an agreement with the
Prophet they had decided to select Ubay as their absolute ruler.

However, on account of the relationship which Aws and Khazraj developed
with the Prophet this decision was automatically dropped, and from this
very moment he nursed a grudge against the great leader of Islam and did
not believe in him till the last moment of his life.

On observing the welcome accorded by the people of Aws and Khazraj to
the Prophet he was very much disturbed and could not help uttering a
sentence, which fully indicates his envy and enmity against him. He
turned his face to the Prophet and said: "Go to the people who have
deceived you and don't deceive us here".[^28]

Said bin Ubadah, fearing that the Prophet might treat his words to be
true (i.e. indicative of the sentiments of the Ansar or take them to
heart, apologized for his remark and said to the Prophet: "He has said
these words on account of grudge and enmity, because it had been decided
that he should be the absolute ruler of Aws and Khazraj and now, by your
arrival, his rulership has become out of question.

The historians generally say that the Prophet arrived in Madina on
Friday and offered Friday prayers along with his companions at a spot
which was situated in the area of Bani Salim tribe. Here he delivered an
eloquent sermon which made deep impression on the hearts of the people
who had never heard such words before.

The text of this sermon has been quoted by Ibn Hisham,[^29] Miqrizi in
Amta'ul Asma' and by Allamah Majlisi.[^30] However, the wording and
contents of the sermon as quoted by the first two are different from
those quoted by Allamah Majlisi.

[^1]: Tabaqatul Kubra, vol. I, pp. 227-228 and Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol.
I, pp. 480-482.

[^2]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, page 228 and Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 100.

[^3]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. II, page 32.

[^4]: A'lamul Wara', page 39 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XIX, page 50.

[^5]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 100.

[^6]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. I, page 229 etc. Most of the biographers
have quoted this miracle. In view of what we have said regarding
miracles in connection with the narrative about Abraha it does not
appear appropriate that we should unnecessarily explain away or amend
this series of miracles.

[^7]: In Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah of Ibn Abil Hadid this distinction of
Ali has been mentioned in suitable words (vide vol. XIII, page 262).

[^8]: Samrah bin Jundab was one of the criminal elements of the Umayyad
period. He did not only tamper with facts to the extent mentioned above,
but as quoted by Ibn Abil Hadid he also added something to it and said
that what was actually revealed about Ali was this verse: And among men
is he whose speech about the life of this world causes you to wonder,
and be calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his heart, yet he is
the most violent of adversaries. (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:204) During the
period of the governor-generalship of Ziyad bin Abih in Iraq, Samrah was
the Governor of Basrah. One of the crimes of this man was that he killed
eight thousand Muslims and devotees of the family of the Prophet. When
Ziyad called for his explanation and said: "How did you pick up courage
to kill all these people? Did it not cross your mind that possibly there
might be some innocent persons amongst them?" He replied: "I won't mind
killing even more than these". His shameful acts are too many to be
inserted in these pages. This obstinate man was the very person who
rejected the recommendation of the Prophet about respecting rights of a
neighbour, and the Prophet said to him: "You are a harmful person and
Islam does not allow that one should do harm to others or tolerate harm
from them".

[^9]: Before him Jahiz partly mentioned this objection in his book
entitled 'al-Usmaniyah'. Please refer in this connection to Sharh-i
Nahjul Balaghah by Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. XIII, page 262.

[^10]: For example this sentence has not been mentioned in Tabaqat-i
Kubra, pp. 227 - 228. Its author was born in 168 A.H. and passed away in
238.A.H. Maqrizi too has not mentioned it in al-Imta'a.

[^11]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 72

[^12]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 99.

[^13]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 483.

[^14]: Tarikh-i Kamil, lbn Athir, vol. II, page 73.

[^15]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. II, page 37.

[^16]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 491; Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II,
page 75 and in the footnote of the Tarikh-i Ibn Athir.

[^17]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 104.

[^18]: lbn Wazeh Akhbari writes in his history entiitled 'Tarikh-i
Ya'qubi' that in the 16th year of 'migration' the second caliph
determined to fix a starting point of the history of the Muslims. He
wished that it should be the date of the birth of the Prophet or the
date of his appointment to the prophetic mission, but Ali did not
endorse his views and said that 'migration' should be the origin of
Islamic history. (Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol. II, page 135).

[^19]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 74.

[^20]: Most of the biographers of the Prophet, like Ibn Athir (Tarikh-i
Kamil, vol. II, page 74) and Majlisi (Bihar, vol. IX, page 88) have
quoted this incident, as narrated above, from the sixth Imam with
reliable sources. However, the author of 'Hayat-i Muhammad' says:
"Saraqah considered these occurrences to be a bad omen and thought that
the gods wished to prevent him from this task".

[^21]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XIX, page 75.

[^22]: 'Amali, page 300.

[^23]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 75.

[^24]: Imta'ul Asma, page 48.

[^25]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. I, page 106.

[^26]: Usudul Ghabah, vol. IV, page 99.

[^27]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XIX, page 108; but according to some books
including Tarikh-i Kamil they were under the guardianship of Mu'az bin
'Afra'.

[^28]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XIX, page 108.,

[^29]: Seerah, vol. I, pp. 500 - 501.

[^30]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XIX, page 126.


