Chapter 28: The Events of the Second Year of Migration
======================================================

Sexual inclinations appear in every individual at a particular stage of
life and at times it so happens that due to lack of proper training and
because of the availability of means to satisfy sexual appetite a young
person finds himself at the edge of a precipice. At this stage there
happen such things as ought not to happen.

Marriage is the best means for the protection of our chastity. In
conformity with the law of nature Islam has also made men and women
responsible to marry in specified conditions and has given various
directions in this behalf.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***Women and men should marry, and the fear of poverty and indigence
should not stop them from performing this ceremony: Allah will make them
rich.*** **(Surah al-Nur, 24:23)**

The Prophet says: "He who wishes to appear before Allah with a pure soul
should marry''.[^1]

He has also said: "I shall pride myself on the Day of Judgement over
other communities on account of the excessive number of my followers".

Difficulties Of Marriage During The Present Age
-----------------------------------------------

Difficulties of marriage during our age are not a few. Men and women of
modern times are not prepared to marry on account of unfavourable
circumstances and adverse conditions. The national publications point
out a number of problems in the frame-work of the family, but most of
the difficulties revolve on this point that the men and women of our
society do not intend to set up a family which should ensure their real
prosperity.

Some persons wish to acquire high public offices and wealth by means of
marriage. The thing to which least attention is paid in these days is
chastity and modesty, and though it may at times be taken into
consideration, usually no importance is given to it.

The proof of this is that men are very fond of those girls, who belong
to high families, although they may not at all be praiseworthy from the
moral point of view, and many virtuous and pious girls live in extreme
poverty in some corners of the society and no one cares for them.

Above all, there are the ceremonies of marriage which are a great source
of harassment for the bridegroom and also for the parents of the bride.
Another great difficulty is the question of dowry. Owing to these
problems there are many persons who avoid marriage and satisfy their
sexual appetite by unlawful means.

The Propllet Campaigned Practically Against These Difficulties
--------------------------------------------------------------

These are some of the social problems which exist to a considerable
extent in every society and the period of the Prophet was also not free
from them. The nobles of Arabia gave their daughters in marriage to
those persons who were their equals in regard to pedigree, strength and
wealth, and they rejected other suitors.

On account of this old custom the members of noble families were
desirous of marrying Fatimah, the dear daughter of the Prophet. They
were under the impression that the Prophet would not be severe in the
matter of the marriage of his daughter, because, according to their own
thinking, they possessed everything which could attract a bride and her
father, and then the Prophet had not been severe with regard to the
marriages of his other daughers (Ruqayyah, Zaynab etc.).

They were, however, oblivious of the fact that this daughter of the
Prophet was different from others. She was the daughter who enjoyed a
high position in the light of the verse (of Surah Ale Imran, 3:61)
pertaining to 'Mubahilah' (contest with the Christians).

The suitors were mistaken in their thoughts, because they did not
understand that only that person who was like her in the matter of piety
and faith could be her equal and a march for her. As according to the
verse of 'Tathir' (purification) Fatimah had been declared to be free
from all sins, hence, her husband must also be masum (free from sins).

Wealth and material manifestations are not the standard of equality.
Although Islam recommends that daughters should be given in marriage to
their equals, but it also explains that their equality, should be in the
matter of faith and Islam.

The Prophet had been directed by Allah to tell the suitors that the
marriage of Fatimah would take place according to Divine orders and in
offering this apology he removed, to some extent, their
misunderstandings. The companions of the Prophet realized that the
marriage of Fatimah was not a simple matter and none could marry her on
account of his affluence.

They also became aware that her husband could be only that person who
was next to the Prophet in the matter of truthfulness, faith, spiritual
merit and moral excellence and such a person could be none but Ali. To
put the matter to a test they encouraged Ali to ask for the hand of the
Prophet's daughter. Ali also desired this and was only waiting to fulfil
the necessary conditions before he made such a request.

The Commander of the Faithful went before the Prophet personally.
Modesty and shyness had overpowered him. He had cast his head down and
it seemed that he wanted to say something but was feeling shy. The
Prophet encouraged him to speak and he made his purpose known in a few
sentences. This type of suit is a sign of sincerity. However, our
training institutions have not yet been able to teach the prospective
suitors such freedom coupled with piety, faith and sincerity.

The Prophet agreed to meet the request of Ali and said: "You should wait
a little so that I may mention the matter to my daughter". When he spoke
about it to Fatimah she remained absolutely quiet. The Prophet then
said: "Allah is Great! Silence means consent". In those days, however,
Ali owned nothing except a sword and a coat-of-mail. He was advised by
the Prophet to sell the coat-of-mail to meet the expenses of marriage.
He gladly sold his coat-of-mail and brought the proceeds of sale to the
Prophet.

The Prophet gave a handful of the money to Bilal, without counting it,
to purchase some scent for Zahrah. He entrusted the remaining amount to
Abu Bakr and Ammar to procure, from the bazaar of Madina, the
necessities of life for the couple. They got up as ordered by the
Prophet and purchased the following things (which were in fact the dowry
of Zahrah) and brought them to the Prophet.

The Dowry Of The Prophet's Daughter
-----------------------------------

A shirt which was purchased for seven dirhams; a head-dress costing one
dirham; a black bath-robe which did not suffice the entire body; a bed
which was made of wood and date-palm fibre; two mattresses of Egyptian
linen, one of which was woolen and the other was made of date-palm
fibre; four pillows out of which two were made of wool and the other two
of date-palm fibre; a curtain; a hajri mat; a pair of millstones; a
water-skin; a wooden bowl for milk; a skin container for water; a green
pitcher, some jars; two silver armlets; and one copper vessel.

When the eyes of the Prophet fell on these articles, he said: "O Lord!
Bless the lives of those whose untensils are mostly earthen".[^2]

The dowry of the Prophet's daughter deserves consideration. Her dowry
did not exceed 'Mehrus Sunnah' which is five hundred dirhams.[^3] In
fact it was an example for others i.e. for the girls and boys, who cry
under the heavy burden of dowry and at times shun the obligation of
marriage on this account.

The matrimonial life should basically become agreeable and pleasant by
means of sincerity and love, for, otherwise, heavy dowry do not provide
any brightness to life.

Nowadays the guardians of the bride subject the son-in-law to a heavy
burden of dowry to strengthen the position of the girl so that he may
not on one day resort to divorce on account of his greed.

This action does not, however, provide total guarantee for the
achievement of the said purpose and the real and true treatment of this
malady is the reformation of the moral conditions of men. Our cultural
and social environments should be such that thoughts of this kind do not
take root in the brains of men. Otherwise, it so happens at times that
the girl agrees to forego her dowry to get rid of her husband.

The Ceremonies Of The Marriage
------------------------------

A number of persons were invited from the sides of the bridegroom and
the bride and Ali arranged a feast (walimah) in honour of his dear
spouse. After the feast was over the Prophet called for Fatimah. She
came before the Prophet feeling very shy. When her eyes fell on the
Prophet her foot slipped and she was about to fall on the ground. The
Prophet held his dear daughter by the hand and prayed for her saying:
"May Allah protect you from all slips".

That night the Prophet displayed such devotion and sincerity, as is not
displayed in the present societies in spite of their growth and
evolution. Holding the hand of his daughter he gave it in the hand of
Ali and informed her of the virtues of her husband.

He also made a mention of the sublime personality of his daughter and
said that if Ali had not been born there was none else to match her.
Then he divided the domestic affairs and the duties of life between
them. He entrusted the household affairs to Fatimah and made Ali
responsible for outdoor duties. The marriage took place after the Battle
of Badr.[^4]

According to some narratives the Prophet then asked the Muhajir and the
Ansar women to encircle the she-camel of his daughter and take her to
her husband's house and with this the marriage ceremonies of the
greatest woman of the world came to an end.

We reproduce below a tradition which gives an idea of the high position
enjoyed by the daughter of the Prophet.

Ans bin Malik says: "For a period of six months the Prophet used to come
out from his house at the time of Fajar (dawn) and proceeded to the
mosque and regularly stopped at that time in front of the house of
Fatimah and said: "O people of my household! Attend to prayers. Allah
desires to keep every sort of uncleanliness away from you Ahlal Bayt
(People of the Household)".[^5]

[^1]: Man la Yahduruhul Faqih, page 410.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XLIII, page 94, and Kashful Ghumah, vol. I, p.
359.

[^3]: Wasa'ilush Shi'ah, vol. XV, page 8.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XLIII, pp. 79 and III.

[^5]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. II, page 259.


