Chapter 34: The Jews Quit the Zone of Islam
===========================================

The hypocrites and the Jews of Madina were very happy on account of the
defeat of the Muslims and the annihilation of their missionary force.
They were awaiting an opportunity to create disturbances in Madina and
to make the tribes residing outside Madina realize that there was no
unity in the city so that the young State of Islam might be toppled down
by means of attacks by the external enemies.

In order to gain information about the intentions and the way of
thinking of the Jews belonging to Bani Nuzayr tribe the Prophet visited
their fortress along with some of his companions. However, the apparent
object of the Prophet's meeting Bani Nuzayr was to obtain assistance
from them in the matter of payment of blood-money for the two men who
had been killed by 'Amr bin Umayyah, because the tribe of Bani Nuzayr
were living under the protection of the Islamic State and it was only
proper that on such an occasion they should contribute towards the
compensation which was due to be paid.

Moreover they had also concluded treaties with the Muslims as well as
with the tribe of Bani 'Amir and the tribes which had concluded mutual
treaties always assisted each other on such occasions.

The Prophet dismounted opposite the gate of the fortress and mentioned
the purpose of his visit to the chiefs of the tribe. They received him
warmly and promised to contribute towards the blood-money. Then, while
addressing the Prophet with his patronymic, Abul Qasim, they requested
him to enter the fortress and spend the day with them. The Prophet did
not, however, accede to their request and, as quoted by some historians,
he only dismounted opposite the fortress and after taking his seat in
the shade of the wall of the fortress along with his companions began
conversing with the chiefs of Bani Nuzayr.[^1]

The Prophet felt that this glib talking was coupled with a chain of
mysterious activities. There was heavy movement of people in the
precincts of the place where the Prophet was seated. Whispering in one
another's ears which creates suspicion and pessimism was abundant. In
fact the chiefs of Bani Nuzayr had decided to take the Prophet unawares.
They had appointed one of their men named 'Amr Hajjash to ascend the
roof and kill the Prophet by throwing a big stone on his head.

Fortunately their plan was frustrated. Their evil plots and designs were
divulged on account of their activities, and, as quoted by Waqidi, the
Prophet learned about the conspiracy of the Jews through Divine
revelation.

He left that place in such a manner that the Jews thought that he was
going on account of some business and would return. In fact the Prophet
decided to go to Madina direct and did not inform even his companions
about his decision. They also kept waiting for his return, but it was
all in vain.

The Jews of Bani Nuzayr were greatly perturbed. They thought that the
Prophet had probably become aware of their plot and would, therefore,
accord them severe chastisement. They also thought within themselves:
"Now that the Prophet is beyond our reach we may take revenge on his
companions". But then the thought crossed their mind immediately that in
that event the matter would become very serious and the Prophet would
certainly take revenge on them.

At this juncture the Prophet's companions decided to follow him and to
find out his whereabouts. They had not yet gone far away from the
fortress when they met a man who told them that the Prophet had already
arrived in Madina. They visited him and became aware of the design of
the Jews which had also been confirmed by revelation.[^2]

How To Deal With This Crime?
----------------------------

Now what should have been the duty of the Prophet with regard to this
band? These were the people who enjoyed privileges granted by the
Islamic State and whose property and honour were protected by the Muslim
soldiers! They were a community who witnessed clear signs of prophethood
in the Prophet and read in their own books about the proofs of his
prophethood and the evidence of his truthfulness.

What was the proper way to deal with this group of people who, in spite
of enjoying all the privileges, plotted against his life and decided to
assassinate him instead of showing hospitality? What were the demands of
justice in this behalf? And what should have been done so that such
incidents were not repeated in future?

The way to solve the problem was the same which the Prophet adopted. He
ordered all the soldiers to remain alert. Then he called Muhammad bin
Maslamah, a member of the Aws tribe, and ordered him to convey the
message to the chiefs of Bani Nuzayr as early as possible. He contacted
the chiefs of Bani Nuzayr and said to them: "The exalted leader of Islam
has sent you a message through me that you should quit this place as
early as possible and within ten days at the latest, because you have
acted in a deceitful manner. And if you do not depart from this region
within ten days your blood will be shed".

They were dejected on hearing this message and every one of them held
others responsible for the developments. One of their leaders suggested
that all of them should embrace Islam. This suggestion was, however, not
accepted by the obstinate majority. They felt a strange helplessness.

Eventually they turned to Muhammad bin Maslamah and said to him: 'O
Muhammad! You belong to the tribe of Aws and before the arrival of the
Prophet of Islam we had a defence pact with your tribe. Why are you on
war terms with us now?" In reply he said with perfect valour which
behoves every Muslim: "That time has passed. Now the hearts have
changed".

The basis of Prophet's determination was the very pact which the Muslims
had concluded with the tribes of the Jews in the early days and which
had been signed by Hay bin Akhtab on behalf of Bani Nuzayr. We have
already reproduced the text of this pact in early pages and quote here
an extract from it:

"The Prophet concludes a pact with every one of the three groups (Bani
Nuzayr, Bani Qaynuqa'a and Bani Qurayzah) that they will not take any
steps against the Prophet of Allah and his companions and will not harm
him with their hands or tongue. As and when any one of these tribes acts
contrary to the text of the pact the Prophet will be free to shed their
blood, to confiscate their property and to captivate their women and
children".

Crocodile Tears
---------------

At this juncture also the orientalists have shed crocodile tears in
sympathy with the treacherous Jews, who violated the pacts and have said
that the action of the Prophet was not consonant with equity and
justice.

The deception and cavilling practiced by the orientalists is to hide the
facts, because the reference to the text of the pact shows that the
punishment imposed by the Prophet was much lighter than that stipulated
in the pact.

Nowadays hundreds of crimes and oppressions take place in the east and
west at the hands of the masters of these very orientalists and none of
them raises the least objection to them. However, when the Prophet of
Islam awards even lesser punishment to a group of conspirators than that
agreed on earlier, some writers who analyse the event with various
personal motives, raise a hue and cry against it.

Role Of The Hypocrites
----------------------

The most dangerous enemies of Islam were the group of hypocrites who
were wearing a mask of friendship on their faces and Abdullah Ubayy and
Malik bin Ubayy Nawfal etc. were their ring leaders. They immediately
sent a message to the leaders of Bani Nuzayr that they (the hypocrites)
would help them with two thousand warriors and their allies, i.e. the
tribes of Bani Qurayzah and Ghatfan, would also not leave them alone.

This false promise encouraged the Jews, and, though they had decided in
the beginning to surrender and quit the place, they now changed their
decision. They shut the gates of their fortresses and, having equipped
themselves with ammunition would defend themselves at any cost from the
towers and would not willfully allow the army of Islam to assume control
of their gardens and farms.

One of the leaders of Bani Nuzayr (Salem bin Mushkam) considered the
promise of Abdullah to be futile and said: "It is expedient for us to
depart". However, Hay bin Akhtab advised them to remain firm and
steadfast.

The Prophet became aware of the message sent by Abdullah to the Jews. He
appointed Ibn Umme Maktum to be his representative in Madina and with
*Takbir* (Allah is Great) on his lips moved to besiege the fortress of
Bani Nuzayr. He made the area between Bani Qurayzah and Bani Nuzayr his
encampment place and thus cut off the liaison between the two tribes.

According to Ibn Hisham,[^3] the fortress was besieged for one day and
one night and according to some others it was besieged for fifteen days.
However, the Jews became more steadfast and perseverant. The Prophet
ordered that the date palm trees around the fortress might be cut down
so that the cause for the Jews coveting the territory might be removed
once and for all.

At this moment the cries of the Jews became loud from within the
fortress and all of them said: "O Abul Qasim! (addressing the Prophet)
You have always prohibited your soldiers from cutting the trees! Why are
you doing this thing now?" However, the reason for resorting to this
action was as mentioned above.

Eventually the Jews submitted to their fate and said: "We are prepared
to be exiled, provided that we are permitted to take away our belongings
with us". The Prophet agreed that they might carry away their
belongings, except the weapons which they had to surrender to the
Muslims.

The greedy Jews made their best efforts to take away their property, so
much so that they pulled out the doors of their houses to take them away
and then destroyed the buildings. Some of them proceeded to Khayber and
others to Syria. Two from amongst them embraced Islam.

In order to hide their defeat the vanquished and helpless Jews left
Madina beating drums and singing songs. Hence, they wanted to give an
impression that they were not at all unhappy to leave the place.

The Farms Of Bani Nuzayr Are Distributed Among The Muhajirs
-----------------------------------------------------------

According to the Holy Qur'an (Surah al-Hashr, 59:6) the booty which the
Muslims acquired without fighting belonged to the Prophet and he could
spend it for the welfare of Islam and the Muslims, as he deemed fit.

The Prophet considered it proper to distribute the farms, water reserves
and gardens (left behind by Bani Nuzayr) amongst the Muhajirs, because,
since their migration from Makkah, they were hard up and in fact they
were dependent upon the Ansar of Madina and were their guests. Sa'd bin
Mu'az and Sa'd bin 'Ubadah also supported this view.

Hence, the entire property was distributed amongst the Muhajirs and none
from amongst the Ansar got any share except Sahl bin Hunayf and Abu
Dujanah, who were extremely poor. In this way the financial position of
the Muslims improved generally. A costly sword, which previously
belonged to one of the chiefs of Bani Nuzayr, was given to Sa'd Mu'az.

This event took place in the month of Rabi'ul Awwal of fourth year of
migration when Surah al-Hashr was also revealed to mention the causes of
this event and to invite the attention of the Muslims.

Most of the historians of Islam believe that no bloodshed took place in
this event. However, the late Shaykh Mufid[^4] says that during the
night of this conquest a brief skirmish did take place and ten Jews were
killed and their death provided a basis for the surrender of the Jewish
forces.

[^1]: Mughazi says that the Prophet arrived in their meeting (vol. I,
page 364).

[^2]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. I, page 365.

[^3]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 191.

[^4]: al-Irshad, pp.47-48.


