Chapter 36: The Events of the Fifth Year of Migration
=====================================================

The most important historical events of the fifth year of migration are
the Battle of Ahzab, the story of Bani Qurayzah and the Holy Prophet's
marriage with Zaynab daughter of Jahash. According to the historians the
first event which took place was the marriage of the Prophet with
Zaynab.

The Holy Qur'an has narrated the above-mentioned story in the 4th, 6th
and 36th to 40th verses of Surah al-Ahzab and has left no room for
fabrication of falsehoods by the orientalists and the novelists. We
shall study this event in the light of the most authentic source (viz.
the Holy Qur'an) and shall also scrutinize the remarks of the
orientalists very minutely.

Who Was Zayd Bin Harith?
------------------------

Zayd was a person who was captured during his childhood from a caravan
by the nomadic Arab plunderers and was sold as a slave in the market of
'Ukaz. He was purchased by Hakim bin Hizam for his paternal aunt,
Khadijah, and she made a gift of him to the Prophet after their
marriage.

Zayd was enamoured of the pure spiritual mind, sublime sentiments and
good morals of the Prophet; so much so that when, after some time, his
father came to Makkah and requested the Prophet to set him free, so that
he might take him to his mother and other members of his family, Zayd
declined to go and preferred remaining with the Prophet. He gave
complete authority to the Prophet whether he should stay with him or
return to his homeland.

This spiritual attachment and these deep sentiments existed on both the
sides. If Zayd was fond of the morals and sentiments of the Prophet, he
also loved him in such a way that he selected him as his son and people
began calling him Zayd bin Muhammad instead of Zayd bin Harith.

To make this matter formal the Prophet held his hand one day and said to
the people of Quraysh: "This is my son and we inherit from each other".
This cordial relationship continued to exist till Zayd breathed his last
in the Battle of Mo'ta and the Prophet was so much moved on this account
as if he lost his own son.[^1]

Zayd Marries The Prophet's Cousin (Paternal Aunt's Daughter)
------------------------------------------------------------

One of the sacred aims of the Prophet was to reduce class distinctions
and to bring together all human beings under the banner of humanity and
piety and to introduce moral excellence and natural human qualities as
the standard of superiority and distinction.

Hence, it was necessary that he should uproot, as early as possible, the
old despicable customs of the Arabs (that the daughters of the nobility
should not be married to indigent people) and nothing could be better
than that he should commence this programme from his own family and
should marry his cousin Zaynab, the grand-daughter of Abdul Muttalib, to
his former slave, who had since been set free, so that people should
know that these imaginary barriers should be removed as early as
possible and they should also know that when the Prophet says: "The
criterion of superiority is piety and a Muslim woman is equal to a
Muslim man" he himself was the first to enforce this law and the first
to act upon it.

In order to do away with this wrong custom the Prophet went to Zaynab's
house personally and formally asked for her consent to marry Zayd. In
the first instance she and her brother were not inclined to accept the
proposal, because the ideas of the Days of Ignorance had not yet been
completely wiped out from their minds. Hence, notwithstanding the fact
that it was an unpleasant task for them to refuse to comply with the
Prophet's orders, they excused themselves on the plea of Zayd having
been a slave in the past.

Soon afterwards Divine revelation condemned the action of Zaynab and her
brother in these words:

***The believing men and women must not feel free to do something in
their affairs other than*** ***that which has been already decided for
them by Allah and his Messenger. One who disobeys Allah and His
Messenger is in plain error. (*****Surah al-Ahzab, 33:36)**

The Prophet immediately recited the verse to them. The pure and perfect
faith of Zaynab and her brother Abdullah in the Prophet and his sublime
ideals was instrumental in the daughter of Jahash giving her consent
without any delay and as a result, a lady of noble birth was married to
a freed slave of Muhammad. In this manner, therefore, a part of the
invigorative programme of Islam was implemented and a wrong custom was
dispensed with in a practical way.

Zayd Separates From His Wife
----------------------------

Eventually, for certain reasons, this marriage culminated in divorce.
Some say that the reason for this separation was the mentality of Zayd's
wife, as she mentioned the lowness of her husband's descent to his very
face and prided herself on account of the greatness of her own family
and had thus made his life bitter for him.

However, it is probable that Zayd himself might have been responsible
for the divorce, because his biography shows that he led a sequestered
life, as he married many women and divorced all of them (except the last
one who was still alive when he was killed in a battle) and these
successive divorces show that Zayd possessed a spirit of unsociability.

The second testimony about the view that Zayd had a share in this
incident is the harsh manner in which the Prophet addressed him.
Because, when the Prophet came to know that Zayd had decided to divorce
his wife, he was annoyed and said: "Keep your wife and fear Allah's
wrath".

In case the fault was entirely his wife's, Zayd's separating from her
was not contrary to piety and virtue. Eventually, Zayd separated from
Zaynab.

Marriage For Banning Another Wrong Custom
-----------------------------------------

Before we look into the basic cause of this marriage it is necessary to
keep in view the role of lineage which is a vital factor for a sound
society. Admittedly the relationship like that of father and son has a
creative basis and in fact a father is the material source for the birth
of a child and the child is the heir of the corporeal qualities and
mentality of his parents. On account of this oneness and common blood
the father and the child inherit the property of each other and specific
laws regarding marriage and divorce become applicable to them.

Hence, a relationship, which has a congenital basis cannot be
established verbally (vide 4th and 5th verses of Surah al-Ahzab) and an
adopted son of a person cannot become his real son. As such, various
orders regarding inheritance, marriage divorce etc., as applicable to a
real son, cannot also apply to an adopted son.

For example, although a real son inherits from his father and vice versa
and although it is unlawful for a person to marry the divorced wife of
his real son it cannot at all be said that an adopted son has also the
same rights in these matters as the real son has. Undoubtedly the chain
of such a right besides being devoid of a correct basis, is also a sort
of buffoonery in respect of an important factor (lineage) of a sound
society.

In the circumstances, if adoption is resorted to with the aim of
expressing sentiments it is very appreciable and proper, but if it is
proposed to associate the adopted child with various social laws, all of
which originate from matters relating to birth, this act will be far
beyond social limits.

The Arab society considered an adopted son to be as good as a real son.
The Prophet, therefore, was called upon to eradicate this wrong practice
by marrying Zaynab, who was previously the wife of his adopted son
(Zayd) and thus to remove this unwholesome custom in a practical way
from amongst the Arabs, because this method is more effective than
enunciating a law.

This marriage had no other reason besides this, because in those days
none could pick up courage to take such an action in view of the fact
that it was imagined to be a very shameful act to marry the former wife
of an adopted son. Almighty Allah, therefore, formally invited the
Prophet to perform this task. He says:

***When Zayd set her free, We gave her in marriage to you so that the
believers would not face difficulties about the wives of their adopted
sons when they are divorced.*** **(Surah al-Ahzab, 33:37).**

We think that this marriage, besides doing away with a wrong custom,
also became a great manifestation of equality, because the Prophet
married a lady who was previously the wife of his freed slave and in
those days such a marriage was also considered to be socially
undignified.

This brave step of the Prophet brought forth a torrent of criticism by
the hypocrites and the short-sighted persons and they were spreading the
news: "Muhammad has married the wife of his adopted son".

In order to crush such thinking the Almighty Allah revealed this verse:

***Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the last of the Prophets.*** **(Surah al-Ahzab,
33:40).**

The Holy Qur'an did not content itself with this only. Allah praised His
Prophet, who had displayed great valour and bravery in carrying out His
orders vide the 38th and 39th verses of Surah al-Ahzab. The gist of
these two verses is this:

***Muhammad is like other Prophets who conveyed Allah's messages to the
people and he does not fear anyone in carrying out His order.***[^2]

This is the philosophy of the marriage of Prophet Muhammad with Zaynab.
Now we study minutely the viewpoint of the orientalists on the subject.

The Forged Story About Zaynab Is A Mere Fiction
-----------------------------------------------

The marriage of the Prophet with Zaynab is a simple matter which is free
from all ambiguities. However, as some orientalists have made this
incident a pretext for misleading the simple-minded and ignorant people
and have in this way tried to weaken the faith of those who do not have
correct information about the character of the Prophet, it appears
necessary that we should examine the remarks of this group of the
orientalists and make matters clear.

As is well-known, the colonial powers do not utilize their military and
economic power only to dominate the countries of the East, but at times
they also enter through the door of learning and research and try, by
means of carefully worked out schemes, to impose the worst type of
colonialism (viz. intellectual colonialism) on these people.

In fact an orientalist is that very expansionist colonialist who acts in
a particular manner in the heart of the society and amongst the
enlightened people and pursues his colonial ends by stupefying the
intellects of the educated class.

It is possible that most of the western writers and lovers of knowledge
and learning may not endorse our above remarks and may accuse us of
stiffness and fanaticism and may think that national or religious bias
has made us express this opinion.

However, the writings of the orientalists and their concealment of facts
and partial behaviour in matters relating to the history of Islam is a
clear proof of the fact that most of them have not been motivated by
thirst of knowledge and search for truth and their writings have been
contaminated by a series of anti-religious and anti-national
thoughts.[^3]390

The subject under discussion bears testimony to this fact. With the
imagination peculiar to the people of the West they have given this
marriage, the sole object of which was to abolish a false custom, the
colour of 'love' and, fabricated a story, like the novelists and the
story-tellers, associated it with the most sacred personality of the
human world.

In any case the basis of this fiction are the sentences which have been
quoted by Tabari[^4] and by Ibn Athir[^5] and some exegetes to the
effect that one day the Prophet chanced to see Zaynab, the wife of Zayd.
Zayd felt that the Prophet had fallen in love with Zaynab.

On account of the excessive regard which he had for the Prophet he came
before him and proposed to divorce Zaynab, so that there might be no
impediment in the way of the Prophet marrying her. The Prophet
repeatedly forbade him to divorce his wife, but he eventually divorced
her and the Prophet married her.

However, the orientalists, instead of studying authentic history, have
not contented themselves even with this fabricated story and have
embellished it so much that it has assumed the shape of the stories of
the Arabian Nights.

No doubt those persons, who are acquainted with the lofty character of
the Prophet have treated the original story and the embellishments
thereon to be fabricated and a mere fancy and whim as they are
absolutely incompatible with the positive standards of the life of the
Prophet of Islam.

Moreover, scholars like Fakhr-i Razi and Alusi have clearly contradicted
this story and say that it has been fabricated by the enemies of Islam
and circulated amongst the Muslim writers.[^6]

How can it be said that this historical fragment was believed in by
Tabari and Ibn Athir, when dozens have quoted the reverse of it and
consider the Prophet of Islam to be free from every corruption.

However, we should like to mention in these pages the signs and symptoms
of the story being a fabricated one and to make the position too clear
to need any further explanation and defence. Here are our testimonies:

1.The above-mentioned story is opposed to the final authority of Islam
and the Muslims, because as evidenced by the 38th verse of Surah
al-Ahzab the Prophet's marriage with Zaynab was to contradict the false
notion of the Arabs that a person was not permitted to marry the former
wife of an adopted son and this marriage took place in compliance with
the Command of Allah and not as a consequence of love and romance.

In the early days of Islam none contradicted this fact and in case the
remarks of the Qur'an had been opposed to reality the Jews, the
Christians and the hypocrites would have immediately stood up to
criticize them and would have kicked up a row, when, in fact, they could
not prove anything adverse, although they were always keen to find fault
with the Prophet.

2. Zaynab was the same lady who had, before her marriage with Zayd,
offered to marry the Prophet. However, notwithstanding her inclination,
the Prophet insisted that she should marry his freed slave, Zayd. If the
Prophet had really desired to marry her, there was no impediment in his
way to do so. Then why did he not marry her? On the contrary we see that
in spite of all the inclination which he observed in Zaynab he not only
did not give her a positive reply but persuaded her to marry another
person.

When their views are refuted by history there is no ground for
embellishments by the colonialist intellectuals. And we consider the
life of the Prophet, (who spent his time till the age of fifty years
with a lady who was seventeen years older than he) to be too pure and
superior to justify any repulsive remarks about him. We, therefore,
refrain from quoting here the narrations of the orientalists.

Explanation Of Two Parts Of The Verse
-------------------------------------

To complete the discussion we reproduce here the verse which has been
revealed on this subject including its two parts, which are the cause of
hesitation and doubt among some persons who are not well-informed, and
also give their explanation. Here is the text of the verse:

***Say to the person to whom you and Allah have granted favour: "Keep
your wife and have fear of Allah ".*** **( Surah al -Ahzab, 33:39)**

There is no ambiguity about this part of the verse. But the following
two parts need explanation:

1. *''You hide* *within yourself what Allah wants to make public".* Now
the question is while giving advice to Zayd what was the Prophet hiding
which Allah was to bring to light?

It may possibly be imagined that what the Prophet was keeping secret was
that although he was prohibiting Zayd from divorcing his wife he wished
that he should divorce Zaynab so that he might marry her himself.

Such an eventuality cannot be correct for any reason, because if the
Prophet was secretly thinking on these lines why did the Almighty not
mention this fact through other verses when He says in this very part
that whatever the Prophet was keeping secret would be divulged by Him?

Our great exegetes, therefore, say that what is meant by the thing which
he was hiding is the revelation sent to him by Allah. To state
explicitly: Allah had revealed to him that Zayd would divorce his wife
and he (the Prophet) would marry her so as to contradict the false
notion (i.e. it is unlawful for a person to marry the former wife of his
adopted son). Hence, when he was advising Zayd he had this revelation in
mind but kept it secret from Zayd and others. However, in the verse
mentioned above, Allah tells the Prophet that He would make manifest
what he has in his mind.

What has been stated above is supported by the fact that at the bottom
of the same verse the Holy Qur'an mentions the matter in these words:

***When Zayd set her free, We gave her in marriage to you so that the
believers would not face difficulties about the wives of their adopted
sons when they are divorced.***

From the portion of the verse reproduced above it is learnt that what
the Prophet was hiding was the very Divine revelation that to nullify a
wrong custom he should marry the wife of his adopted son when the latter
had divorced her.

***2. You are afraid of people while it is Allah whom one should
fear.***

This portion is the second part which is less ambiguous as compared with
the first portion, because to abolish a custom which has been prevalent
in the polluted surroundings for some years or more (i.e. marriage with
the former wife of an adopted son) is naturally coupled with mental
uneasiness which is eliminated from the hearts of the Prophets by their
paying attention to the Divine orders.

If the Prophet felt uneasy or was worried, it was because he was
thinking that the Arabs, who had dissociated themselves from him,
through ignorance and unclean thoughts would say: "The Prophet has
resorted to something indecent" although, in fact, it is not indecent.

[^1]: Refer to Usudul Ghabah, al-Isti'ab and al-lsabah under the
root-word Zayd.

[^2]: The text of the two verses are: The Prophet cannot be blamed for
carrying out the commands of Allah. It was the tradition of Allah with
those who lived before. The command of Allah has already been decreed
and ordained. Those who preach the message of Allah and are humble
before Him should not be afraid of anyone besides Allah. Allah is
sufficient in keeping the account. (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:38-39)

[^3]: For further information refer to the book, al-Mustashriqun.

[^4]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. ll.

[^5]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. ll, page 121.

[^6]: Mafatihul Ghayb Razi, vol. XV, page 212 and Ruhul Ma'ani, chapter
22, pp. 23-24.


