Chapter 38: The Last Stage of Mischief
======================================

During the first year of his arrival in Madina the Prophet drew up a
vital document and a basic law for Madina and its suburbs to put an end
to factions and internal differences and the Jews and the tribes of Aws
and Khazraj generally agreed to defend this region. The articles and all
the particulars of this document have already been studied by the
readers.

Besides this he also concluded another pact with the Jews of Madina. It
was endorsed generally by different groups of the Jews. It was agreed
that if they did any harm to the Prophet or to his companions or
supplied arms or animals of riding to their enemies the Prophet would be
free to execute them confiscate their property and captivate their women
and children.

The agreement was, however, violated and ignored by all groups of the
Jews in different ways. Bani Qaynuqa killed a Muslim. Bani Nuzayr
plotted to kill the Prophet and he, therefore, compelled them to leave
their country and go out of the zone of the Muslims. As regards Bani
Qurayzah, they co-operated wholeheartedly with the army of the Arabs to
harm Islam. Now let us see how the Prophet chastised and punished Bani
Qurayzah.

Before the day dawned the last unit of the tribes left the territory of
Madina under extreme fear. Notwithstanding the fact that the signs of
fatigue and weariness were apparent in the faces of the Muslims, the
Prophet was ordered by Allah to settle the affair of Bani Qurayzah. The
mu'azzin called the people to prayers and the Prophet offered noon
prayers along with the Muslims. Then the mu'azzin announced under the
orders of the Prophet: "The Muslims should offer their afternoon prayers
in the area of Bani Qurayzah".

Then the Prophet gave the standard to Ali. Brave soldiers marched off
under his command and besieged the fortress of Bani Qurayzah. The
watch-man reported the movements of the army of Islam to the inmates of
the fortress. The gates of the fortress were closed immediately but cold
war commenced with the arrival of the army of Islam.

The Jews of Bani Qurayzah abused the Prophet from the windows and the
towers of the fortress. The standard-bearer of the army, Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, proceeded to Madina to prevent the Prophet
from coming near the fortress so that he might not hear the indecent
words of the Jews.

The Prophet, however, told Ali that if they (the Jews) saw him they
would refrain from using abusive language. He, therefore, came near the
fortress and spoke to them somewhat harshly and said: "Did the Almighty
not humiliate you?"

This sort of harshness and vehemence on the part of the Prophet was
unprecedented for the Jews. In order to pacify the Prophet, therefore,
they said immediately: "O Abul Qasim! You were not a hot-tempered
person!"

These words stimulated the sentiments of the Prophet so much that he
turned back involuntarily and his cloak fell down from his shoulder.[^1]

Consultations By The Jews Within The Fortress
---------------------------------------------

Hay bin Akhtab Nuzayri, who had sparked off the Battle of Ahzab
participated in these discussions, because, according to the promise
made by him with Ka'b As'ad, the chief of Bani Qurayzah, he did not go
to Khayber after the dispersion of the tribes and instead came to the
fortress of Bani Qurayzah. The chief of the community put up three
proposals and requested the people to accept any one of them. He said:

1. "All of us should embrace Islam, because the Prophethood of Muhammad
is an established fact and proved to all, and the Taurat also confirms
it.

2. We should kill our women and children and then come out of the
fortress and fight with the Muslims with a free hand. If we are killed
we have nothing to worry and if we are victorious we can acquire women
and children once again.

3. This night is the night preceding Saturday. Muhammad and his
companions must be thinking that the Jews don't do anything on the night
preceding Saturday and on Saturday. Hence we should take advantage of
their negligence and attack them at night".

The consultative body rejected all the three proposals and said: "we
shall not renounce our religion and the Taurat, and our lives also will
not be pleasant after our women and children (are killed). As regards
the third proposal it cannot be acted upon in view of our religious
beliefs, because if we do so we may become subjected to Divine wrath in
the same manner in which former communities had to face God's punishment
on account of their not having accorded due respect to Saturday".[^2]

The speeches of the members of the consultative body are best guides for
us to understand their mentality. Their rejection of the first proposal
shows that they were an obstinate and inimical people, because if they
really believed in the prophethood, (as stated by their chief) their
opposition to him meant nothing except obstinacy.

As regards the second proposal the conversation which took place among
them shows that they were a cruel and hard-hearted people, because
killing of innocent women and children is not possible without acute
hard-heartedness. It deserves attention that the members of the
consultative body rejected this proposal on account of the fact that
their lives would not be pleasant without the women and the children.

Not even one person enquired as to what offence these helpless persons
had committed on account of which they should be put to death and how
could they, their kind and benevolent fathers, do such an act when the
Prophet would never kill them if he gained control over them.

The third proposal shows that they had not properly assessed the
spiritual strength of the Prophet and his knowledge of military arts and
principles of defence, and thought that the Prophet of Islam would not
take necessary precautions during the night and day of Saturday -and
that too about an enemy like the Jews who are well-known for their
deceit and cunning.

The study of the incident of Ahzab proves that there were only a few
clever and wise persons amongst this community, or else they could
protect their existence in a diplomatic manner without aligning
themselves with any party (i.e. Islam or infidelity). In fact they could
remain on-lookers of the fight between the Prophet and the army of the
Arabs and, whichever party succeeded, their existence and supremacy
would have been ensured.

Unfortunately, however, they were deceived by the glib-tonguedness of
Hay bin Akhtab and they aligned themselves with the army of the Arabs,
and their misfortune became acute when, after co-operating with the Arab
army for a month, they declined to assist Quraysh and, while
surrendering to the design of Na'im bin Mas'ud, sent a message to
Quraysh that they would not assist them against the Prophet unless they
handed over to them some of their noble persons as hostages.

At this moment these stupid persons completely lost their good sense.
They did not realize that, on the one hand, they had risen up against
the Prophet and if, on the other hand, they cut off their relations with
Quraysh and, if the Arab army felt weak and returned to their homes
abandoning warfare, they (Bani Qurayzah) would be at the mercy of the
Muslims.

If they had chalked out a proper political plan they should have,
immediately, on breaking off their relations with the Arab army,
expressed regret for having violated their pact with the Muslims, so
that they should have remained safe from the danger of their (Muslims)
probable victory. However, they fell prey to ill luck, for they cut off
their relations with Quraysh and did not also join the Muslims.

After the departure of the Arab army the Prophet could not afford to
leave Bani Qurayzah to themselves, because it was probable that they (
the Arab army) might come once again at some appropriate time, with
sufficient equipment, to conquer Madina and endanger the very existence
of Islam with the cooperation of Bani Qurayzah, who were the key to the
victory and defeat of Islam and were considered to be its internal
enemies. For this reason the solution of the problem of Bani Qurayzah
and settlement of their affair was a vital matter for the Muslims.

Betrayal By Abu Lubabah
-----------------------

After having been besieged, the Jews of Bani Qurayzah requested the
Prophet to send Abu Lubabah of Aws tribe to them so that they might
consult him. Abu Lubabah had already concluded an agreement of
friendship with Bani Qurayzah. When he arrived in the fortress the women
and men gathered round him wailing and said: "Is it proper that we
should surrender without any pre-conditions?" Abu Lubabah said: "Yes".

However, he made a sign with his hand towards his throat which meant
that if they did so they would be executed. Abu Lubabah knew that the
Prophet would not tolerate the existence of this community which was the
most dangerous enemy of Islam. However, he regretted very much to have
betrayed the higher interests of Islam and of the Muslims and to have
divulged their secrets.

He, therefore, came out of the fortress trembling and disturbed, and
went straight to the mosque. There he tied himself to one of the pillars
of the mosque and made a vow that if Allah did not forgive him he would
spend the rest of his life in the same condition.

The exegetes say that this verse was revealed with regard to the
betrayal by Abu Lubabah:

***Believers, do not be dishonest to Allah and the Messenger or
knowingly betray your trust.*** **(Surah al-Anfal, 8:27)**

The news about Abu Lubabah reached the Prophet. He said: "If he had come
to me before making a vow, I would have prayed for his forgiveness and
Allah would have forgiven him, but now he should wait till he is
forgiven by Allah".

His wife used to come at the time of prayers and untied the rope with
which he had tied himself to the pillar. And after he had offered his
prayers she tied him to the pillar again.

After six days the Archangel Jibreel came early in the morning with the
following verse when the Prophet was in the house of Umme Salamah:

***Some of them have already confessed their sins and have mixed
virtuous deeds with sinful ones. Perhaps Allah will forgive them. Allah
is All-forgiving and All-merciful.*** **(Surah al-Taubah, 9:102)**

The eyes of Umme Salamah fell on the face of the Prophet, while he had a
smile on his lips. The Prophet said to her:

"Allah has forgiven Abu Lubabah's sin. Get up and convey this good news
(to the people)". When the Prophet's wife informed the people of this
good news they rushed to untie him but Abu Lubabah said: "It would be
appropriate if the Prophet himself removes my cords". Later, the Prophet
arrived in the mosque to offer morning prayers and set him free.[^3]

The story of Abu Lubabah is instructive. His mistake was due to his
injudicious sentiments. Wailings of treacherous men and women deprived
him of his power of self-control and he divulged the secrets of the
Muslims. However, the strength of faith and fear of Allah was even
greater than that and he repented of what he had done in such a way that
the thought of betrayal should never cross his mind again.

The Fate Of The Fifth Group
---------------------------

One day Shas bin Qays descended from the fortress in the capacity of a
representative of the Jews and contacted the Prophet. He requested the
Prophet to permit the tribe of Bani Qurayzah to pick up their belongings
like other Jews and quit Madina.

The Prophet did not, however, accept his suggestion and said: "They
should surrender unconditionally". Shas amended his suggestion and said:
"Bani Qurayzah are prepared to surrender their property to the Muslims
and to leave Madina". The Prophet declined to accept that suggestion
also.[^4]

The reason for the Prophet's not agreeing to these suggestions was
absolutely clear, because it was quite probable that, like the tribe of
Bani Nuzayr, these people, too, while they were beyond the reach of the
Muslims, might have confronted the Muslims in a very dangerous way, in
collaboration with the forces of idolatrous Arabs and might have become
the cause of more bloodshed. For this reason, therefore, the Prophet did
not agree with Shas, who returned and made the position known to his
high-ups.

Bani Qurayzah eventually decided to surrender to the Muslims without any
conditions or, as stated by some historians, to accept as final the
decision of Sa'd Mu'az, with whom they had already concluded a pact. In
view of this the gates of the fortress were opened by them. The
Commander of the Faithful, therefore, entered the fortress with a
special corps and disarmed all the Jews. He then detained them in one of
the houses of Bani Najjar till their fate was finally decided.

As the Jews of Bani Qaynuqa', who had been arrested in the past by the
Muslim army, had been forgiven on the intercession of Bani Khazraj and
especially of Abdullah Ubayy and the Prophet had refrained from shedding
their blood, the people of Bani Aws also pressed the Prophet, with a
view to vie with Bani Khazraj, that as Bani Qurayzah had concluded a
pact with them he might forgive them.

The Prophet did not, however, concede to their request and said: "I
leave the decision to Sa'd Mu'az, your elder and the chief of Bani Aws.
Whatever he says will be acceptable to me". All those present sincerely
accepted this offer of the Prophet. Moreover, Bani Qurayzah themselves
had also agreed to abide by the decision of Sa'd Mu'az. As quoted by Ibn
Hisham and Shaykh Mufid, the Jews of Bani Qurayzah had sent a message to
the Prophet that Sa'd Mu'az should arbitrate their case.[^5]

In those days Sa'd Mu'az's hand had been wounded by an arrow-shot and he
was confined to bed for its treatment in the tent of a woman named
Zamidah, who was expert in surgery. The Prophet used to go there
occasionally to enquire after his health. The young men of Bani Aws got
up and brought the chief of their tribe before the Prophet with special
ceremonies.

When Sa'd arrived the Prophet said: "All of you should pay respect to
your chief". All those present stood up as a mark of respect to Sa'd.
Those who had accompanied Sa'd had also requested him repeatedly on the
way that he should do good to Bani Qurayzah and save them from death.

However, as opposed to all this insistence, he gave his decision that
all their soldiers should be put to death, their property should be
distributed (amongst the Muslims) and their women and children should be
made captives.[^6]

A Study Of Sa'd Mu'az's Judiciousness
-------------------------------------

There is no doubt about the fact that if the sentiments of a judge
overcome his intellect and reason the judicial machinery is disturbed
and the entire order in the society gets topsy-turvy. Sentiments are
like false hunger which displays harmful and undesirable things to be
useful and profitable, whereas, by acting upon such sentiments the
interests of thousands of persons including the welfare of the whole
society are violated.

The sentiments and feelings of Sa'd Mu'az, the heartrending scene of the
women and children of Bani Qurayzah, the tragic condition of their men
who were under detention and the general thinking of Bani Aws who
seriously insisted that the judge should ignore their offence-all these
things demanded that the judge appointed by both the parties should base
his judgement on the interests of a minority (Bani Qurayzah) in
preference to the interests of a majority (the Muslims in general) and
should acquit the criminals of Bani Qurayzah on some excuse or, at
least, reduce their punishment as much as possible or to act upon one of
the suggestions mentioned above.

However, logic, reason, freedom and independence as a judge, and regard
for public interest guided him towards a path which he eventually
adopted and gave his decision for the execution of the soldiers,
confiscation of their property and captivity of their women and
children. His judgement was delivered keeping in view the following
arguments:

1. Some time earlier the Jews of Bani Qurayzah had concluded a pact with
the Prophet stipulating that if they rose in opposition to the interests
of Islam and the Muslims or assisted the enemies of Islam and created
disturbance or instigated people to rise against the Muslims they (the
Muslims) would be at liberty to kill them. The judge was of the view
that if he punished them according to the terms of that pact he would
not be acting against the principles of justice.

2. These people had, in violation of the pact, kept Madina in a state of
insecurity for quite some time under the shadow of the spears of the
Arab forces and had poured into the houses of the Muslims to intimidate
them. And if the Prophet had not taken precautionary measures and had
not sent a unit from the army headquarters to the inner parts of the
city to maintain law and order it was quite possible that Bani Qurayzah
might have succeeded in the execution of their plan.

In that event they would have killed the Muslims, confiscated their
property and captivated their women and children. Sa'd Mu'az thought
that as he gave a similar judgement against them he would not be acting
against truth and justice.

3. Sa'd Mu'az, who was the chief of Aws tribe, had concluded a pact with
Bani Qurayzah and they had very good and friendly mutual relations. It
is, therefore, possible that he was aware of the penal laws of the Jews.

The text of the Taurat of the Jews is this: "When thou comest nigh unto
a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall
be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall
be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto
thee, and they shall serve thee. And if it will make no peace with thee,
but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: And when the
Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every
male thereof with the edge of the sword: But the women, and the little
ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil
thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of
thine enemies, which the Lord thy God hath given thee". (Book of
Deuteronomy, chapter 20:10-14).

Possibly Sa'd thought that if he, who had been nominated as judge by
both the parties, punished the transgressors according to their own
religious laws, he would not be doing anything other than the
administration of justice.

4. We think that the greatest reason for Sa'd Mu'az giving his decision
was that he had seen with his own eyes that the Prophet had excused the
people of Bani Qaynuqa' on the intercession of Bani Khazraj and had
contented himself with only banishing them from the environments of
Madina.

These people had not yet vacated the Islamic territories fully when Ka'b
Ashraf went to Makkah and shed crocodile tears for those who had been
killed in the Battle of Badr and did not rest till he had prepared
Quraysh for war. As a consequence of this the Battle of Uhud took place.
In that battle seventy soldiers of Islam were martyred.

Similarly Bani Nuzayr were forgiven by the Prophet. In response to this
kind gesture, however, they formed a military alliance and brought about
the Battle of Ahzab. And, but for the ingeniousness of the Prophet and
the plan of digging the ditch, Islam would have been destroyed, and
thousands of Muslims would have been killed.

Sa'd Mu'az visualized all these events. Past experiences did not permit
him to succumb to sentiments, because there was no doubt about the fact
that this time they would form a more extensive alliance and would
endanger the security of the centre of Islam by instigating the Arab
forces to rise against the Muslims as well as by chalking out other
schemes. He, therefore, considered the existence of this group to be
totally harmful for the Muslim society.

If these reasons had not been there it would have been very important
for Sa'd Mu'az to respect the public views on the subject, because the
chief of a tribe needs most the support of his people, and to annoy them
and to reject their recommendations and requests is very harmful for
him. However, he considered all these requests to be opposed to the
interests of the Muslims and consequently obeyed the dictates of reason
and logic.

A testimony of his deep foresight and rational judgement is that when
they (the Jews) were being taken away for execution they spoke out what
they had in their hearts. The eyes of the war-monger Hay bin Akhtab fell
at that time on the Prophet and he said: "I don't regret my being
inimical towards you. However, he, whom Allah wishes to humiliate, is
humiliated".[^7] Then he turned to the people and said: "Don't be
anxious on account of the Command of Allah. Allah has finally destined
suffering and humiliation for Bani Israel".

From amongst the women one of them was put to death, because she had
killed a Muslim by flinging a stone of the handmill at him. And out of
those condemned to death one person viz. Zubayr Bata was forgiven on the
recommendation of a Muslim named Thabit bin Qays; even his women and
children were set free and his property was also returned to him. Four
persons from amongst Bani Qurayzah embraced Islam.

The war booty was distributed amongst the Muslims after deducting out of
it one-fifth, which fell to the share of the Finance Department of
Islam. The mounted soldiers were given three shares each and the
infantrymen one share each. The Prophet gave one-fifth of the booty to
Zayd with instructions that he should go to Najd and procure horses,
arms and war provisions from its sale-proceeds.

[^1]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, v. ll, p. 234; Tarikh-i Tabari v. ll
pp.245-246.

[^2]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 235.

[^3]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 237.

[^4]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. II, page 501.

[^5]: lrshad Mufid, page 50.

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, p. 240; Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. II,
p. 510.

[^7]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. Il, page 250.


