Chapter 3: Conditions of Roman and Iranian Empires
==================================================

It is very important to study the following two phenomena in order to
evaluate the sacred Islamic movement:

1. The revelation of the Holy Qur'an i.e. the area in which Islam
originated and developed.

2. Way of thinking of the people who inhabited the most civilized areas
of that age and whose thoughts, manners, morals and civilisations were
considered to be the most developed and the best. History tells us that
the most enlightened spots of those times were the Roman and the Iranian
Empires.

To complete the discussion, it is necessary that we should study the
conditions of these two Empires separately, so that it may become
possible to make an estimate of the value of the civilisation introduced
by Islam.

In those days Rome did not enjoy a better position as compared with its
rival viz. Iran. Internal strife and continuous external wars with Iran
over Armenia etc. had prepared its people for accepting a revolution.
More than anything else, diversity of religious opinions had made these
differences much wider. Strife between the Christians and the idolaters
did not subside.

When the dignitaries of the Church took reins of government in their
hands they pressed their opponents hard and this by itself paved the
path for the creation of a dissatisfied minority; and the thing which
could be counted to be the great factor for the acceptance of Islam by
the Roman nation and warm welcome accorded by them to this movement was
the deprivation felt by different groups on account of the harshness of
the dignitaries of the Church.

Day after day the awe and power of the Roman Empire was diminishing
owing to differences amongst the priests on the one hand and existence
of various religious orders on the other. Besides, the white and yellow
nations of the north and the east respectively were always very keen to
acquire the fertile areas of Europe and at times they did great harm to
each other by their mutual warfare. This in itself became the reason for
the division of the Roman Empire into two blocs viz. the eastern bloc
and the western bloc.

The historians believe that the political, social and financial
conditions of Rome in the sixth century were very much disturbed. So
much so that they do not consider even the supremacy of Rome over Iran
to be an evidence of its military power. They attribute the defeat of
Iran to the maladministration of the Iranian Government.

These two Empires, which had been the leaders and rulers of the world,
were in a state of chaos and anarchy at the time of the advent of Islam.
Evidently such conditions create an unusual longing and desire in the
hearts of the people for a proper law which may ensure their welfare.

Seasonal Discussions in Rome
----------------------------

In some countries some idle and sensual persons put forward for
discussion a number of meaningless and futile problems with the object
of keeping back people from all sorts of scientific and industrial
progress and thus render the precious lives of the people useless. In
this context we have a large number of specimens and precedents in many
Muslim countries which it is not possible to recount at present.

It so chanced that Rome of those days was, more than anything else,
entangled in problems of this kind. For example, the emperors and the
statesmen held, under the influence of some religious institutions, the
belief that Prophet 'Isa had two natures and two wills, whereas some
Ya'qubi Christians were of the view that he had only one nature and one
will. This baseless proposition hit out the independence and harmony of
Rome and created a deep cleavage amongst those people, for the
government was obliged to defend its beliefs and, therefore, subjected
its opponents to severe persecution.

As a consequence of pressure and mental aversion some of them took
refuge in Iran. These were the very people who, on encountering the
Muslim army, quitted their trenches and greeted the Muslims with open
arms. Rome of those days was just like the Europe of the Middle Ages.
The famous French astronomer Camile Flammarion relates this story about
the level of learning in Europe in the Middle Ages:

"The book entitled 'Majmu'a-i Lahutiah' (Theological Collection) was a
perfect manifestation of the scholastic philosophy in the Middle Ages
and was taught in Europe for four hundred years as a text book. A part
of that book discusses whether it is possible for a few angels to settle
themselves on the point of a needle or how many leagues apart the pupils
of the right eye and of the left eye of the Heavenly Father are?".

How unfortunate for Rome! Just at the time when it was entangled in
foreign wars, torrents of internal differences, most of which were
manifested in the garb of religion, were drawing it, day after day,
nearer to the precipice. When the Jews, who were a wicked and intriguing
people, saw that the pressure by the Christian Emperor of Rome had
crossed the bounds they drew up plans to topple down the Roman
Government and even occupied the city of Antakia at one time and cut off
the ears, nose and lips of the Archbishop. After some time the Roman
Government avenged itself by massacring the Jews of Antakia.

Such merciless slaughtering was repeated in Rome a number of times
between the Jews and the Christians and at times this revengeful feeling
had its repercussions even beyond the frontiers of the Empire. For
example, once the Jews purchased eighty thousand Christians from the
Iranians and slaughtered them like sheep with the object of taking
revenge on the Christian community.

It is here that the learned reader can visualise the dark and chaotic
background of the world contemporaneous with the dawn of Islam and
acknowledge that these sublime teachings, which ensured deliverance of
mankind from that dark atmosphere, are not the outcome of human brain
and this exhilarating breeze of unity and unanimity and this message of
peace and sincerity, which is the object of Islamic religion, has no
source other than the occult one. How can it be said that Islam, which
has given right of existence even to the animals, is the child of such a
blood thirsty environment?

Islam set aside all these baseless and frivolous discussions about the
will of 'Isa and introduced him in the following words:

***'Isa the son of Maryam,was no more than a Prophet. Other Prophets
passed away before him. His mother was a chaste and truthful woman. They
both ate earthly food and were human beings.*** (Surah al-Ma'dah, 5:75).

By means of this verse Islam put an end to a large number of silly
discussions of the dignitaries of the Church about the spirit, blood and
individuality of 'Isa. At the same time it dissuaded man from disputes
and bloodshed by imparting sublime teachings to him and reviving his
excellent human attributes.

Iran, or The Cradle of Civilisation of that Age
-----------------------------------------------

The scholars of sociology are of the view that the weak point about the
government of the Iranians of that age was its despotic nature and the
rule of an individual over the masses. The ignorant Arabs, with all
their savagery and barbarism, possessed a sort of democratic government.
With the establishment of ***'Darul Nadwah'**,* which enjoyed the
position of the National Consultative Assembly, they had, to some
extent, eliminated the defects of despotic rule.

Although a government, whether constitutional or despotic, cannot solve
the difficulties without the rule of religion and faith and the
protection of secret police and cannot also maintain law and order which
is the aim of every government, but it is an admitted fact that the
wisdom and prudence of one person cannot equal the sagacity of a group
of persons.

Collusion and violence are comparatively lesser in a democratic
government. It is for this reason that the grandeur and supremacy or
weakness and humiliation of the Iranians have been closely related with
the weakness or strength of their one-man government. A study of the
Sasanian period of government and the oscillations which took place
during that period fully justifies this statement.

General Conditions of Iran Simultaneous with The Dawn of Islam
--------------------------------------------------------------

The advent of Islam and the appointment to the prophetic mission of the
Holy Prophet (611 A.D.) was concurrent with the reign of Khusro Pervez
(590-628 A.D.). The Holy Prophet's migration from Makkah to Madina also
took place during his time (Friday, the 16th July, 622 A.D.) and this
event became the beginning of the history of the Muslims.

In those days two big and powerful states (Byzantium and Sasanian) Iran
ruled a large part of the civilised world of that time. They had been
quarrelling and fighting with each other for long in order to dominate
and rule the world.[^1]

The prolonged wars which the Iranians fought against the Romans started
during the reign of Anushirwan (531-589 A.D.) and continued for twenty
four years i.e. till the time of Khusro Pervez. The great losses and
enormous expenditure which Iran and Rome had to bear on account of these
wars dealt severe blows to both of these powerful states and nothing
except only form, without any substance, was left of them.

In order that we may understand clearly the conditions of Iran from
different angles it is necessary for us to study briefly the conditions
of various governments from the end of the rule of Anushirwan onwards
till the time when the Muslims made their appearance.

Fondness for Luxuriousness during Sasanian Period
-------------------------------------------------

Sasanian kings were usually fond of luxuries and voluptuousness. The
pomp and gradiloquence of the Sasanian court dazzled the eyes.

During the Sasanian period the Iranians had a flag which was called
***'Dirafsh-i Kavyani'***. This flag was hoisted in the battlefield or
was installed at the top of the palace at the time of ceremonial
celebrations by the Sasanians. It had been decorated with very precious
gems. According to a writer this peerless flag was studded with gems and
other precious things, whose cost has been estimated to be 1,200,000
dirhams (or 30,000 pounds).[^2]

In the fabulous palaces of the Sasanians so many gems and other precious
articles and wonderful drawings and paintings had been collected that
the eyes of the onlookers were dazzled. If we wish to become with the
wonders of these palaces it would suffice if we have a look on a big
white carpet which they had spread in the hall of one of the palaces.

This carpet, which was called ***'Baharistan-i Kisra'**,* had been got
made by the Sasanian rulers for the purpose that at the time of
merrymaking they might be in good pirits and might always have the
beautiful and enlivening scenes of spring before their eyes.[^3]

It has been said that this carpet was 150 cubits long and 70 cubits
wide. Its entire wrap and wool had been woven with gold, and gems were
embedded in it.[^4]

Amongst the Sasanian monarchs the one who was most fond of luxuries was
Khusro Pervez. He had thousands of wives, slave-girls, singers and
musicians in his palace. In his book entitled 'Sanii Mulukul Arz' (grand
kings of the earth) Hamza Isfahani describes the luxurious life of this
King in these words:

"Khusro Parvez had three thousand wives and twelve thousand slave-girls
who were musical performers. He had six thousand men who served as
guards. As many as 8,500 horses were earmarked for his riding. He had
960 elephants and 12,000 mules for carrying the baggage. He also had one
thousand camels".[^5]

Then Tabari adds to this "This king was more fond of gems and valuable
vessels etc. than anyone else".[^6]

Social Conditions in Iran
-------------------------

The social conditions in Iran in the days of the Sasanians were in no
way better than the political conditions prevailing in the royal court.
Class rule, which had existed in Iran since long, assumed the most acute
shape during the Sasanian period. The aristocracy and the clergy were
absolutely superior to other classes. All the important public offices
and vocations were reserved for them. The craftsmen and peasants were
deprived of all social rights and privileges. Except making payment or
revenue and taking part in wars they had no other function to perform.

Nafisi writes thus about class distinctions during the period of the
Sasanians: "The thing which was mostly instrumental in sowing discord
amongst the Iranians was the very harsh class distinction which was
established by the Sasanians in Iran. It had its roots in the past
civilisation. but was much more tightened during the Sasanian period ".

Originally seven aristocratic families and after them five other classes
enjoyed privileges and the common man was deprived of them. Almost the
entire 'ownership' was confined to the seven families. The population of
Iran during the Sasanian period was about 140 million persons.

If we suppose the number of each of these families to be one hundred
thousand persons their total number would cone to seven hundred
thousand. And if we assume that the frontier officials and proprietors,
who too enjoyed possessory rights to some extent, were also seven
hundred thousand in number, the position would be that out of a
population of 140 millions, only a million and a half possessed rights
of ownership and all others were deprived of this natural right granted
to man by Allah.[^7]

The craftsmen and peasants, who were deprived of all rights and
privileges but had to bear on their shoulders the heavy burden of the
expenses of the aristocracy, did not consider it worthwhile to preserve
these conditions. Hence, most of the peasants and the people of the
lower strata renounced their professions and took refuge in monasteries
to escape payment of onerous revenues.[^8]

After giving an account of the misfortunes of the craftsmen and the
peasants of Iran, the author of the book 'Iran-dar Zaman-i Sasaniyan'
quotes this remark of one of the European historians named Amyan
Marcilinos: "The craftsmen and the peasants were leading a very
miserable and degraded life during the Sasanian period.

In the event of war they walked on foot and formed the rear of the army
They were considered to be so mean and worthless, as if perpetual
slavery had been pre-destined for them and they could get no wages or
reward for the work done by them".[^9]

In the Sasanian Empire only a minority which formed less than 1.5 per
cent of the population was the owner of everything, whereas others,
whose number exceeded 98 per cent, were just like slaves and had no
rights of life.

Right of Obtaining Education was Reserved for the Upper Classes
---------------------------------------------------------------

During the Sasanian period only the children of the rich people and the
aristocrats were entitled to receive education and the masses and the
middle class were deprived of the acquisition of knowledge and
distinction.

This grave defect in the culture of ancient Iran is so patent that even
the writers of epic poems (Khudainamah and Shahnamah) have mentioned it
in expressive terms, although their real subject had been the narration
of the achievements of the heroes.

Firdausi, the famous epic poet of Iran, has mentioned a story in
Shahnamah which bears a clear testimony to this fact. This story belongs
to the time of Anushirwan i.e. exactly to the period when the Sasanian
empire was passing through its golden age. And this story shows that the
majority of the people consisting of almost the entire masses had no
right to become educated and even the lover of wisdom and justice,
Anushirwan, was not prepared to grant the right of education to other
classes of the public !

Firdausi says "A shoemaker turned up and offered to give a large amount
of gold and silver to meet the expenses of the Iranian-Roman war. At
that time Anushirwan was in great need of financial help, because about
thrity thousand Iranian soldiers were faced with shortage of food and
armour. There was a clamour amongst the soldiers who made their
grievances known to the King himself.

Anushirwan was disturbed by this state of affairs and became alarmed
about his own end. He immediately called his wise minister, Buzurg Mehr,
to find out a remedy and ordered him to proceed to Mazandran at once to
procure money to meet the expenses of war.

However, Buzurg Mehr said "The danger is imminent, hence something
should be done immediately to remedy it". At that juncture Buzurg Mehr
suggested a national loan. His suggestion was liked by Anushirwan who
ordered that steps in this behalf might be taken without any delay.
Buzurg Mehr sent officials to the nearest cities and towns and made the
position known to the wealthy people of those places.

A shoemaker offered to provide the entire expenses of the war. The only
recompense that he desired for this service was that his only son, who
was very fond of education, might be permitted to obtain it. Buzurg Mehr
considered his request to be quite insignificant as compared with the
money offered by him. He hurried to the king and made the request of the
shoemaker known to him.

Anushirwan got annoyed, rebuked his minister and said "What a strange
request you are making! This is something inexpedient, for, when he gets
out of the classification, the tradition of class system in the country
will topple down and the harm caused by this will be much more than the
gold and silver which he is prepared to give".

Firdausi explains Anushirwan's Machiavellian philosophy in the king's
own words:

"When the son of a merchant becomes a secretary and also acquires skill,
wisdom and intelligence.

Then, when our son ascends the throne he will need a secretary endowed
with good luck.

If the son of one who deals in shoes acquires skill it will lend him
eyes which can see clearly as well as ears.

In that event nothing will be left with a wise man of noble descent
except regret and cold sighs".

Thus the money of the shoemaker was returned to him under the orders of
the "Just Monarch". This made the helpless shoemaker very unhappy and,
as is usual with the oppressed, he complained to Allah Almighty at night
and made the "bell of Divine justice ring".

In the words of Firdausi "The messenger returned with the money and the
shoemaker became very unhappy on account of that money.

He was very much grieved at the words of the king and when night came he
rang the Divine bell".[^10]

When speaking about the causes of the decline, unrest and disorder of
the Sasanian period, the author of the book "Tarikh-i Ijtima'i Iran",
who is himself one of the forerunners of the nationalists, draws a
picture of the right of education being restricted to the higher circles
in these words:

"During this period education and instruction in the usual branches of
learning was the monopoly of the children of the aristocrats and the
clergy, and almost all the other children of Iran were deprived of
it".[^11]

Indeed, this tradition of keeping the masses ignorant was so important
in this eyes of the Sasanians that they did not wish to forsake it at
any cost. Hence, the majority of the Iranians were deprived of the right
of education as well as of other social rights, so that the opportune
and improper desires of this pampered minority might be fulfilled.

Verdict of History on The Sasanian Kings
----------------------------------------

Most of the Sasanian monarchs adopted a harsh policy of government and
desired to subjugate the people by force. They extracted very heavy and
onerous taxes from the people. The people of Iran were therefore,
usually dissatisfied, but for fear of their lives they could not utter
any words of protest. So much so that even the learned and experienced
persons were not accorded any recognition by the Sasanian court.

The Sasanian rulers were so despotic and self-willed that no one could
express his own opinion in any matter.

Although history is always tampered with through the persons wielding
authority, stories have been told about the injustice and cruelty of the
tyrants.

Khusro Pervez was so hard-hearted that Tha'labi writes about him:
"Khusro was told that a particular governor had been asked to come to
the royal court but he had made excuses. The king immediately ordered:
"If it is difficult for him to come before us with his entire body we
shall be satisfied with only a portion of it so that matters may become
easy for him. Tell the persons concerned to send only his head to my
court".[^12]

Unrest during The Sasanian Rule
-------------------------------

While studying the last part of the Sasanian period the thing, which
should not be lost sight of, is the maladministration of government, and
the prevalence of arbitrariness, intrigue and chaos in the Sasanian
regime.

The princes, the nobles and the army chiefs were at loggerheads with one
another. One group elevated one prince and the other group removed him
and selected another.

When the Muslims of Arabia decided to occupy Iran, the Sasanian royal
family was very weak and was deeply involved in discord.

During four years ranging from the time of assassination of Khusro
Parvez and ascension to the throne of Sheroya to the assumption of
kingship by the last Sasanian monarch, Yazd Gard, numerous kings ruled
Iran. Their number has been stated to be from six to fourteen.

Thus the government of Iran passed from one hand to the other about
fourteen times during the span of four years. It can well be imagined
what the condition of a country would be when coup d'etat is staged in
it fourteen times during a period of four years and every time one
person is assassinated and another is installed in his place.

Everyone who assumed reins of government did away with all other
claimants to the throne and committed all sorts of atrocities to secure
his own position. The father killed the son, the son killed the father
and the brother extirpated his brothers.

Sheroya assassinated his father, Khusro Pervez,[^13] to occupy the
throne and also killed forty sons of Khusro Pervez (i.e. his own
brothers).[^14]

Shehr Baraz killed everyone about whom he was not certain whether or not
he would be a danger for his throne.

Eventually all those who came to occupy the throne, whether they were
men or women and whether old or young, killed their kith and kin (viz.
the Sasanian princes) so that no pretender to the throne might remain
alive.

In short, chaos and anarchy had assumed such dimensions during the
Sasanian period that children and women were elevated to the throne,
then killed after a few weeks, and others installed in their place.

In this manner the Sasanian monarchy, notwithstanding its apparent pomp
and grandeur, was speedily moving towards decadence, disintegration and
destruction.

Disturbed Conditions of Sasanian Iran from Religious Viewpoint
--------------------------------------------------------------

The greatest reason for the chaotic conditions of Iran during the
Sasanian period was differences and diversity of opinions in religious
matters.

Ardshir Babkan, as the founder of the Sasanian dynasty, was himself the
son of a Mubid (Zoroastrian priest) and had reached the throne with the
assistance of the spiritual people of Zoroastrian faith, he employed all
means to propagate the religion of his ancestors in Iran.

In the days of the Sasanians the official as well as the popular
religion of the Iranian nation was Zoroastrianism and as the Sasanian
Government had been established with the help of the priests, the
Zoroastrian clergy received every support from the royal court.

Consequently the Zoroastrian clergy acquired great strength in Iran
during the Sasanian period, so much so that they enjoyed the position of
the most powerful class in the country.

The Sasanian rulers were always mere satellites of the priests and, if
anyone of these rulers did not obey the spiritual people, he met with
their serious opposition and consequent disgrace. Hence, the Sasanian
Kings were more attentive to the clergy than to any other people and on
account of the support which the priests received from the Sasanians,
their number increased day after day.

The Sasanians utilised the spiritual people a good deal for the
strengthening of their empire. They erected many fire-temples in every
nook and cranny of the vast dominion of Iran, and in every temple they
accommodated a large number of priests.

It is said that Khusro Pervez constructed a fire-temple and appointed
twelve thousand priests in it to sing hymns and to offer prayers.[^15]

Thus the Zoroastrian faith was the court religion. The priests tried
their utmost to keep the deprived and afflicted masses quiet and to
create an atmosphere in which the people should not feel their
adversities.

The oppression by the priests and their unlimited powers were driving
the people away from the Zoroastrian faith and the common man was
desirous of finding for himself a religion other than that of the
aristocracy.

The author of "Tarikh-i Ijtima'i Iran" writes: " ....forced by the
pressure exerted by them (i.e. the priests) the Iranian people were
making efforts to get rid of these hardships. For this very reason, as
opposed to the official creed of 'Mazdesti Zartushti', which was the
religion of the government and the court, and was called 'Behdin', two
other schools of thought had also appeared amongst the
Zoroastrians".[^16]

Of course, it was due to the severity and harsh treatment of the
nobility and the priests that in Sasanian Iran different religions were
appearing, one after the other. Mazdak, and before him Mani,[^17] had
tried to bring about a change in the spiritual and religious conditions
of the land, but their efforts were not successful.

It was in about 497 A.D. that Mazdak came into prominence. He declared
nullification of restricted ownership, abrogation of polygamy, and
formation of harems to be the front piece of his reformatory programme.
As soon as the deprived classes came to know about Mazdak's programme
they flocked towards him and put a great revolution in motion under his
leadership.

The sole purpose of all these risings and movements was that the people
should achieve the legitimate rights granted to them by Allah Almighty.
Eventually Mazdak had to encounter the hostility of the spiritual people
and the opposition of the army, and this resulted in trouble and
destruction for Iran.

The Zoroastrian faith had also completely lost its reality in the last
days of the Sasanians. Fire had been accorded so much sanctity that it
was considered unlawful to hammer iron which had assumed the nature of
fire for its having remained in its vicinity and most of the principles
and beliefs of Zoroaster were given the shape of superstitions and
fables.

During this period the realities of this religion had given place to
certain futile, prosaic and absurd rites. Their formalities were
continuously enlarged upon by the priests to increase their own
strength. Fables and silly superstitions had penetrated into this
religion to such an extent that they made even the spiritual people
uneasy. And there were persons amongst the priests also who had realised
the hollowness of Zoroastrian rites and beliefs and were divesting
themselves of their burden.

From the time of Anushirwan onwards, the path of reflection had been
opened in Iran, and as a result of the penetration of Greek and Indian
learning as well as the contact of Zoroastrian beliefs with those of
Christianity and other religions, such reflection was gradually becoming
more intense and was occasioning the awareness of the Iranian people.
Hence, more than at any other time, they felt grieved on account of the
superstitions and the vain and baseless propositions of the Zoroastrian
faith.

At last the deterioration which had appeared in the Zoroastrian
spiritual community and the superstitions and silly fables which had
made inroads upon the Zoroastrian faith became the cause of diversity
and dispersion in the beliefs and views of the Iranian nation. The
appearance of these differences and the prevalence of various religions
made the spirit of doubt and indecision run into the minds of the
intellectuals and from them it gradually penetrated into others.
Consequently the masses totally lost the absolute faith and the perfect
belief which they possessed previously.

Thus chaos, irreligion and carelessness completely engulfed Iran.
Barzuyah, the famous physician of the Sasanian period, has drawn a
complete picture of the diversity of beliefs and disturbed conditions of
Sasanian Iran in his introduction to 'Kalilah wa Damnah'.

Wars between Iran and Rome
--------------------------

Buzurg Mehr, who was an efficient and clever man, and enjoyed the
foremost position in the organization of Anushirwan, saved Iran many
times from grave dangers by dint of his prudent policy and experience.
At times, however, crafty people and tale-bearers darkened his relations
with Anushirwan and having instigated the King to take action against
him got order of his arrest issued.

The same mischief-mongers poisoned Anushirwan's mind with regard to the
Roman Emperor and instigated him to ignore the treaty of permanent peace
and to attack the Romans in order to widen the frontiers of the country
and weaken a dangerous rival. Eventually war started and in a
comparatively short period the Iranian army conquered Syria, put Antakia
to fire and ravaged Asia Minor.

After twenty years' warfare and bloodshed both the armies lost their
strength and chances of success, and, after sustaining heavy losses,
made peace treaties twice and agreed to maintain their respective former
frontiers, subject to the condition that the Roman Government would
require the Iranian Government, with the payment of twenty thousand
dinars annually.

The extent to which such long wars, and those, too, fought in areas far
away from the centre of a country, can do harm to the economy and
industry of a nation can well be imagined. Keeping in view the resources
of those times it was not possible to repair speedily the effects of
such a long war.

This war and invasion provided the preliminaries for the sure fall of
the Iranian Government. The wounds of this war had not yet been healed,
when another seven years' war started. After ascending the throne, the
Roman Emperor, Tibrius, with a view to take revenge, made severe attacks
on Iran and threatened its very independence. The position of the two
armies had not yet become decisive when Anushirwan breathed his last and
his son Khusro Pervez ascended the throne.

In the year 614 A.D. he, too, relying on some excuses, attacked the
Romans afresh and as a consequence of the very first onslaught conquered
Syria, Palestine and Africa; plundered Jersusalem, set on fire their
sacred places and destroyed various cities. After the blood of as many
as ninety thousand Christians had been shed the war ended to the
advantage of Iran.

At this juncture, when the civilized world of that day was burning in
the fire of war and tyranny, the Prophet of Islam was entrusted the
prophetic mission. It was 610 A.D. He conveyed the invigorating message
of monotheism to the people and invited them to peace, sincerity,
discipline and bliss.

Defeat of the God-worshipping Romans at the hands of fire-worshipping
Iranians was taken to be a good omen by the polytheists of Mecca and
they thought that they too would be in a position in the near future to
subdue the worshippers of God (the Muslims). However, the Muslims were
very much concerned on hearing this news.

The Prophet of Islam awaited the Divine revelation and then this verse
was revealed:

***The Romans have been defeated in a neighbouring land. But in a few
years they shall themselves gain victory.*** (Surah Rum, 30:1).

The prediction made by the Holy Qur'an proved to be true in the year 627
A.D., when Hercules attacked and occupied Naynava. The two rivals were
breathing the last breaths of their lives and were planning
reinforcements.

However, as Allah Almighty had willed it that these two lands should be
illuminated with the worship of One Allah and the depressed spirits of
the Iranians and the Romans should be rejuvenated with the invigorating
zephyr of Islam, it was not long before Khusro Pervez was assassinated
at the hands of his son Sheroya, and the son too passed away after eight
months of the death of his father.

During this period Iran passed through such a chaos that after Sheroya
there were nine rulers who ruled during four years (out of whom four
were women) till, at last, the Muslim army put an end to this state of
affairs. These conflicts, spreading over fifty years, were, of course,
of great help for the advancement of the Muslim conquests.

[^1]: Tarikh-i 'Ulum wa Adabiyat dar Iran, Dr Safa, pp. 3 - 4, Iran dar
Zaman-i Sasaniyan, Christensen, page 267.

[^2]: Payambar-i Rehnuma, vol. I, pp. 42 - 43

[^3]: Payambar-i Rehnuma, vol. I, pp. 42 - 43

[^4]: Payambar-i Rehnuma, page 43. "In the book 'Ganj-i Danish',
Muhammad Taqi Khan Hakim, 'Mu'tamadus Sultan', has described the carpet
'Nigaristan' very minutely, while making research about the court of
Khosroes".

[^5]: Sanii Mulukul Arz wal Ambiya, page 420

[^6]: Tarikh-i Tabari, as quoted by Christonson, page 327

[^7]: Tarikh-i Ijtimai'i-i Iran, vol. II, pp. 24 - 26

[^8]: Limadha Khasir al 'Alam bi inhitatil Muslimin, pp. 70 - 71

[^9]: Iran fi 'ahdis Sasani'in, page 424

[^10]: Firdausi has narrated this story in Shahnamah as an event of the
reign of Anushirwan with reference to the war between Iran arid Rome
(Shahnamah, vol. Vl, pp. 257 - 260). Dr Sahib al-Zamani has analysed
this story in a very fascinating manner in his book "Dibacha-i bar
Rehbari" (pp. 258 - 262) See also, "Guzarish Nama-i Iran", Mehdi Quli
Khan Hidayat (page 232).

[^11]: Tarikh-i Ijtima'i-i Iran, vol. II, page 26

[^12]: Iran dar Zaman-i Sasaniyan, page 318

[^13]: Murujuz Zahab, vol. I, page 281

[^14]: Tarikh-i Ijtima'i-i Iran, vol. II, pp. 15 - 19 by Sa'id Nafisi

[^15]: Tarikh-i Tamaddun-i Sasani, vol. I, page 1

[^16]: Tarikh-i Ijtima'i-i Iran, vol. II, page 20

[^17]: Mani's religion was a combination of Zoroastrianism and
Christianity. He had thus invented a new religion by the admixture of a
local and a foreign faith.


