Chapter 41: A Religious and Political Journey
=============================================

The sixth year of migration was terminating with all its bitter and
sweet events when suddenly the Prophet dreamt a pleasant dream that the
Muslims were performing ceremonies of Haj in Masjidul Haram. He related
this dream to his companions and took it to be a good omen for the
Muslims as they would achieve their heart's desire soon.[^1]

The Prophet ordered the Muslims to get ready to perform the journey for
Haj and also invited the neighbouring tribes, who were still
polytheists, to accompany the Muslims in that journey. He also made it
known at all places in Arabia that the Muslims would be proceeding to
Makkah in the month of Zi Qa'd.

This spiritual journey, besides possessing spiritual benefits, also
carried a number of social and political advantages. It bettered the
position of Muslims in the Peninsula and became the means of spreading
Islam amongst the Arabs on account of the following facts:

1. The polytheist Arab tribes were under the impression that the Prophet
was opposed to all their national and religious beliefs and ceremonies
including Haj and 'Umrah which were memorials of their ancestors and for
this reason they feared the Prophet and his religion. The participation
of the Prophet and his companions in the ceremonies of Haj and 'Umrah on
this occasion could diminish the fear and disturbance of mind of some
polytheist tribes and make it clear in a practical manner that the
Prophet was not only not opposed to the pilgrimage of the House of Allah
and the Haj ceremonies which is one of their religious rites and
national observances but considered them to be an obligatory act.

Furthermore, that he was also endeavouring, like their grand-parent
Isma'il for the revival and preservation of these ceremonies. By this
means he could attract to himself those tribes who considered Islam to
be totally opposed to their national and religious observances and could
diminish their fears.

2. If the Muslims succeeded in performing Haj and carried out their
religious obligations freely in Masjidul Haram before the very eyes of
polytheist Arabs, this act would itself be a great source of the
propagation of Islam, because during Haj season the polytheists and the
Arabs from all parts of the Peninsula would come together at Makkah and
would, on return to their places, carry with them the news about the
Muslims. In this manner the message of Islam would reach all those
places where the Prophet could not send missionaries, and would have its
effect there.

3. The Prophet reminded the people in Madina of the sacred months and
said: "We are going for the pilgrimage of the House of Allah". He also
ordered the Muslims not to carry any arms with them, except a sword
which a traveller usually carries while performing a journey. These
actions of his made many non-Muslims inclined towards Islam, because, as
opposed to the propaganda which Quraysh had been carrying on against
Islam, they observed that, like others, the Prophet also considered
fighting in these months to be unlawful and was in favour of treating
them as sacred months of peace.

The Prophet thought that if the Muslims were successful at that time
they would be achieving one of their ardent desires (i.e. performing the
ceremonies of 'Umrah and Haj) and those who had been away from their
homes would be able to meet their relatives and friends.

And in case of obstruction Quraysh would lose their position in the Arab
World, because the representatives of neutral tribes would see as to how
they behaved towards the Muslims, who wished to perform 'Umrah and Haj
and were not carrying any weapons except the weapons of a traveller,
although Masjidul Haram and the ceremonies of Haj are common for all
Arabs, and Quraysh are only the custodians of the sanctuary.

Hence the righteousness of the Muslims and the oppression by Quraysh
would become evident, and it would not be possible for Quraysh to join
other tribes against Islam and form an alliance, because they would have
prevented the Muslims before thousands of pilgrims from enjoying their
lawful right.

The Prophet considered the pros and cons of the matter and ordered the
people to move. He put on ehram at a place named Zul-Hulayfah along with
1400[^2] or 1600[^3] or 1800[^4] persons and specified seventy marked
camels for slaughtering and thus made the purpose of this journey clear.

The intelligence organization of the Prophet proceeded in advance so
that if they encountered the enemy on the way they should immediately
inform the Prophet.

At a place near Asfan a Khuza'i, who was a member of the intelligence
organization of the Prophet, came to him and reported thus: "Quraysh
have become aware of your journey. They have collected their forces and
have sworn by Lat and Uzza that they will obstruct your arrival in
Makkah. The elders and influential persons of Quraysh have gathered in
Zi Tuwa (a place near Makkah) and in order to thwart the advance of the
Muslims they have sent their brave commander Khalid bin Walid to Kira'ul
Ghamim (a desert eight miles away from Asfan) along with two hundred
horse-soldiers and have encamped there,[^5] either to stop the Muslims
from entering (Makkah) or will lay down their lives for the achievement
of this purpose".

After hearing the report the Prophet said: "Woe be to Quraysh! War has
wasted them! I wish they had left me to deal with other idolatrous
tribes. In case they (i.e. other tribes) had been victorious over me,
Quraysh would have achieved their purpose, and if I had gained victory
over those tribes, they (Quraysh) could fight with me with their reserve
forces. By Allah! I shall continue my endeavours for the propagation of
monotheism either until Allah makes that religion victorious or I lay
down my life for the achievement of this purpose".

Then he asked for a guide who might take them (i.e. the Prophet and his
companions) by a route on which they did not encounter Khalid. A person
belonging to the tribe named Aslam undertook to guide the caravan and
made them pass through rough valleys and made them land at a place
called Hudaybiyah.

The Prophet's camel knelt down at that spot and he said: "This animal
has stopped at this spot under the order of Allah so that our duty may
become manifest". Then he ordered all of them to dismount and pitch
their tents.

The horsemen of Quraysh became aware of the itinerary of the Prophet and
made themselves reach near the Muslims. If the Prophet had wished to
continue his journey it would have been necessary for him to split the
rows of the horsemen of Quraysh and shed their blood. But all were under
the impression that he had no other motive except to perform pilgrimage
of the Holy Ka'bah.

At this place conflict and bloodshed would have dealt a blow to the
position and claim of peaceful intentions of the Holy Prophet. Moreover,
even killing of these horsemen would not have removed the obstacles in
the way because reinforcements were being sent by Quraysh continuously
and the matter was not coming to an end.

Besides this, the Muslims did not possess any weapon other than the
weapons of travellers and it was not advisable to resort to fighting in
such conditions. Rather it was expedient to solve the problem by means
of discussions.

For these reasons the Prophet turned, after dismounting, to his
companions and said: "If Quraysh demand from me today something which
strengthens the ties of kinship I shall give it to them and shall adopt
a conciliatory attitude".[^6]

The words of the Prophet reached the ears of the people and the enemies
also became aware of them. Quraysh, therefore, sent some persons to the
Prophet to collect the correct information

The Representatives Of Quraysh Come And Meet The Holy Prophet
-------------------------------------------------------------

Quraysh sent many representatives to the Prophet to find out the object
of his undertaking this journey. Budayl Khuza'i and some members of the
tribe of Khuza'ah contacted the Prophet as representatives of Quraysh.
He said to them: "I have not come to fight. I have come to perform
pilgrimage of the Ka'bah". They returned and informed Quraysh about the
position. However, the incredulous Quraysh did not accept their version
and said: "By God! Even if he has come for the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah,
we shall not let him enter Makkah".

Then Mikraz as a representative of Quraysh met the Prophet. He also
returned and confirmed what Budayl had said, but Quraysh did not believe
in the report submitted by him.

In order to put an end to the conflict they sent to the Prophet, Hulays
bin 'Alqamah, who was the chief archer of Arabia.[^7] He was still at a
distance when the Prophet got sight of him and said: "This man belongs
to a pure and pious tribe. Sacrifice the camels before him, so that he
may know that we have not come to fight and have no aim except
performing the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah".

Hulays saw seventy camels which were so hungry that they were eating the
wool of one another. He returned from the same spot and did not meet the
Prophet. He addressed Quraysh with great vehemence and said: "We have
not at all concluded a pact with you to prevent the pilgrims of the
Ka'bah from performing pilgrimage. Muhammad has no aim except performing
pilgrimage. By the Almighty, who controls my life! If you prevent
Muhammad from entering (Makkah) I along with all men of my tribe who are
mostly archers shall fall upon you and cut you to pieces".

The words of Hulays were not liked by Quraysh. However, fearing his
opposition, they deliberated over the matter and said to him: "Rest
assured. We ourselves shall find solution which will be acceptable to
you".

At the fourth stage, however, they sent to the Prophet 'Urwah bin Mas'ud
Saqafi in whose wisdom, intelligence and honesty they had full
confidence. In the beginning he declined to represent Quraysh as he
could very well see how they had behaved with their former
representatives, but they assured him that his position in their eyes
was fully established and they would not accuse him of breach of trust.

'Urwah bin Mas'ud came to the Holy Prophet and said: "O Muhammad! You
have gathered different groups around you and have now decided to attack
your birth-place (Makkah). Nevertheless, Quraysh will prevent your
advance with full force and will not allow you to enter Makkah. I am,
however, afraid that tomorrow these groups will leave you in the lurch".

When he had said this Abu Bakr, who was standing behind the Prophet,
turned to 'Urwah and said: "You are mistaken. In no circumstances will
the Prophet's friends desert him".

'Urwah used all the arts of diplomacy in his speech and tried to prove
the strength of Quraysh and weaken the morale of the Prophet; and with a
view to degrading the position of the Prophet he touched his beard while
talking. Mughayrah bin Sh'obah repeatedly struck his hand and said: "Be
respectful and don't misbehave towards the Prophet". 'Urwah asked the
Prophet: "Who is he?" (It appears that the persons, who were around the
Prophet, had concealed their faces).

The Prophet said: "He is your nephew Mughayrah bin Sh'obah". 'Urwah was
displeased and said: "O cunning person! I purchased your honour
yesterday. You killed thirteen persons of the tribe of Saqif a short
time before embracing Islam and I paid the blood-money from my own
pocket to prevent the flames of war flaring up amongst the families of
Saqif".

The Prophet interrupted 'Urwah and explained to him the purpose of his
journey as he had already explained to the former representatives of
Quraysh. However, in order to give a knockdown reply to the threats held
out by 'Urwah, he got up and performed wuzu (ablution). 'Urwah saw with
his own eyes that the companions of the Prophet did not allow even a
drop of the water of his wuzu to fall on the ground.

'Urwah got up and arrived in the assembly of Quraysh. He informed the
chiefs of Quraysh, who had assembled at Zi Tuwa, about his meeting with
the Prophet and the latter's aim. He also added: "I have seen great
kings. I have observed great powers like the power of the Emperor of
Iran, Kaiser of the Roman Empire and the King of Ethiopia but have not
seen the position of anyone of them amongst their nations as high as
enjoyed by Muhammad amongst his followers.

I have seen with my own eyes that they didn't let even a drop of the
water of his wuzu fall on the ground and divided it amongst themselves
as ***tabarruk*** (i.e. a sacred gift which brings blessings). If one of
his hair falls they pick it up immediately. Hence the chiefs of Quraysh
should ponder over this dangerous situation''.[^8]

The Prophet Of Islam Sends His Representative
---------------------------------------------

The contacts which the representatives of Quraysh had with the great
leader of Islam did not produce any result. The Prophet could very well
imagine that the representatives of Quraysh could not convey the facts
to the elders of Quraysh or did not do so clearly fearing reproach. He,
therefore, decided to send his own representative who should clarify to
them the real object of his undertaking the journey, which was nothing
except the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah.

Khirash, a clever man of the tribe of Khuza'ah, was selected for the
purpose and the Prophet placed a camel at his disposal. He met the
groups of Quraysh and discharged his duty. However, contrary to
expectations as well as the custom of the nations of the world that an
ambassador is always immune from any harm, they (i.e. Quraysh) cut off
the feet of his camel and were about to kill him, but his life was saved
through the archers of Arabia. This foul act proved that the Quraysh had
no intention to settle the matter peacefully and were bent upon
fighting.

Soon after this incident fifty experienced men of Quraysh were deputed
to go round the area where Muslims had encamped and, if possible, to
pillage their property and take some of them captives. However, this
plan of theirs was frustrated and on the other contrary they were
arrested and brought before the Prophet. Although they had shot arrows
and hurled stones at the Muslims, the Prophet directed all of them to be
set free. Hence, he once again proved his bonafides and made it clear
that he had no intention to fight.[^9]

The Holy Prophet Sends Another Representative
---------------------------------------------

In spite of all this the Prophet did not lose hope for peace and
sincerely wished that he might be able to solve the problem through
discussions and by changing the thinking of Quraysh. This time he wanted
to send a representative who had not shed the blood of Quraysh.

Hence Ali, Zubayr and other champions of Islam, who had combated with
the heroes of Quraysh and Arabs and had killed some of them, were not
qualified to act as representatives. Eventually he decided to depute
Umar bin Khattab for the purpose, because till that day he had not shed
even a drop of blood of the idolaters.

Umar, however, excused himself from assuming that responsibility and
said: "I am afraid of Quraysh as I am in fear of my life, and in Makkah
there is no one of my family who might lend me support. However, I
suggest Uthman bin Affan who is closely related to Abu Sufyan and can
convey your message to the chiefs of Quraysh.

Uthman was however entrusted with this task and he proceeded to Makkah.
While on his way he met Aban bin Sa'id bin As and entered the city under
his protection. Aban promised that none would interfere with him, until
he had conveyed the message of the Prophet in clear terms.

However, Quraysh replied to the message of the Prophet that they had
decided on oath that they would not permit Muhammad to enter Makkah
forcibly and on account of this oath any discussion with regard to the
entry of Muslims in Makkah is out of the question. Then they permitted
Uthman to perform tawaf of the Ka'bah, but he refrained from doing so,
as a mark of respect to the Prophet. What Quraysh did with regard to
Uthman was that they prevented him from returning and possibly their
idea was that in the meantime they would find out a solution of the
problem.[^10]

The Rizwan Pledge
-----------------

The Muslims got extremely perturbed on account of Uthman's delay in
getting back. It was then rumoured that Uthman had been killed. Hearing
this the Muslims were flared up and wanted to take revenge. In order to
strengthen their determination the Prophet said: "I shall not leave this
place until I have settled the affair".

At this moment, when danger was so near and the Muslims were not
equipped with arms, the Prophet decided to take the oath of allegiance
from the Muslims de novo and sat under a tree for this purpose. All his
companions shook his hand as a mark of fealty and swore that they would
defend the sacred religion of Islam till the end of their lives. It is
the very pledge of Rizwan, which has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an
in these words:

***Allah is pleased with the believers for their pledging obedience to
you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, thus he granted
them confidence, and rewarded them with an immediate victory.***
**(Surah al-Fath, 48:18)**

After they had taken the oath of allegiance the duty of the Muslims
became clear -either Quraysh should allow them to proceed to Makkah and
perform the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah or they should oppose the obstinacy
of Quraysh at the cost of their lives. The Prophet was thinking about
this when Uthman appeared from a distance and this in itself was the
vanguard of the peace which the Prophet desired so much. Uthman came to
the Prophet and said: "The difficulty in the way of Quraysh is the vow
which they have taken and a representative of Quraysh will have a talk
with you regarding the solution of this difficulty ".

Suhayl Bin 'Amr Contacts The Prophet
------------------------------------

Suhayl bin 'Amr was deputed by Quraysh with special instructions to put
an end to the dispute through a pact about which we shall read later.
When the eyes of the Prophet fell on Suhayl he said: "Suhayl has come to
conclude a peace pact between us and Quraysh". Suhayl came and sat down.
He said all sorts of things and, like a skilled diplomat, aroused the
sentiments of the Prophet for the accomplishment of certain things.

He said: "O Abul Qasim! Makkah is Haram and the seat of our dignity. The
Arab World knows that you have fought against us. If you enter Makkah in
the present state, which is coupled with force and strength, you will
make our weakness and helplessness known to the entire Arab World.
Tomorrow all the Arab tribes will think of occupying our land. I appeal
to you in the name of God to regard the kinship which you share with us,
and also remind you of the respect which Makkah enjoys and which is also
your birth-place".

When Suhayl said this the Prophet interrupted him and said: "What are
you aiming at?" He replied: "The chiefs of Quraysh are of the view that
you should return to Madina this year and postpone the pilgrimage till
the next year. Next year the Muslims may perform Haj like all other
tribes of Arabia, subject to the condition that they should not stay in
Makkah for more than three days and should not bring with them any
weapons except those which are usually carried by a traveller".

As a result of the discussions between the Prophet and Suhayl it was
decided that a general and extensive pact should be concluded between
the Muslims and Quraysh. Suhayl was displaying extraordinary severity
regarding the conditions and particulars of the pact and at times it
appeared that the peace negotiations would break down. However, as both
the parties desired peace and reconciliation the thread of discussion
was picked up once again.

In spite of all the severity on the part of Suhayl the negotiation came
to an end and it was decided that its text should be drawn up in
duplicate and the same should be signed by both the parties.

As written by most of the historians, the Prophet directed Ali to write
the Peace Pact; and said: "Write: In the name of Allah, the Rahman
(Beneficent) the Rahim (Merciful)" and Ali wrote it.

Suhayl said: "I am not acquainted with this sentence. Write: "In Your
name O' Allah!" The Prophet agreed that the sentence as uttered by
Suhayl might be written. Ali wrote it accordingly. Then the Prophet
asked Ali to write: 'This is the pact which Muhammad, the Messenger of
Allah, has concluded with Suhayl, the representative of Quraysh'.

Suhayl said: "We don't formally recognize your Prophethood and if we had
recognized you as a Prophet we wouldn't have waged war against you. You
should write your own name and that of your father and should omit this
title from the pact".

Some of the Muslims were not agreeable that the Prophet should surrender
to Suhayl to this extent. However, the Prophet agreed even to this by
keeping in view some higher interests, which will be explained later and
asked Ali to delete the phrase 'Messenger of Allah'. At this stage Ali
submitted with due reverence:

"It is not possible for me to take the liberty of deleting your title of
'Messenger' and 'Prophet' from beside your sacred name". The Prophet
asked Ali to put his (the Prophet's) finger on the word so that he might
delete it personally. Ali put the Prophet's finger on the word and he
deleted the title 'Messenger of Allah'.[^11]

The indulgence and temperament which the Prophet displayed in drawing up
this pact is unparalleled in the world. As he was not influenced by
material thoughts and egotistic sentiments and knew that realities do
not change by writing something or deleting it, he, in order to ensure
peace, adopted a conciliatory attitude and accepted the suggestions of
the opponent in spite of all his severity.

History Repeats Itself
----------------------

The first distinguished pupil of the school of the Prophet of Islam was
also faced with the same embarrassment and on this account, Ali, the
perfect model of the Prophet became, for various reasons, an embodiment
of his personality and they conformed with each other at many stages.
When the Commander of the Faithful excused himself from deleting the
words 'Messenger of Allah' the Prophet turned towards him and informed
him about his future, which fully resembled his own, in these words:
"The descendants of this band will invite you to a similar act and you
will give in under extreme oppression".[^12]

Ali remembered this thing till the Battle of Siffin took place and the
simple-minded followers of Imam Ali were impressed by the deceptive
demonstrations of the soldiers of Syria who were fighting under the
patronage of Mu'awiyah and 'Amr As and persuaded him to agree to make
peace.

A meeting was held to write the Peace Pact. The secretary of the
Commander of the Faithful named Ubaydullah bin Abi Rafe' was directed by
him to write the Peace Pact on these lines: "This is what has been
settled upon by Ali, the Commander of the Faithful."

At this moment 'Amr bin As (who was the official representative of
Mu'awiyah and the Syrian army) turned to the secretary of Ali and said:
"Write the name of Ali and his father, because if we had formally
recognized him to be the Commander of the Faithful, we would not have
fought with him at all." The discussions on this point were prolonged.

The Commander of the Faithful was not ready to provide any excuse to his
simpleminded friends. A part of the day was spent in dispute by the
parties till, on the insistence of one of his own officers, he allowed
that the phrase 'Commander of the Faithful' might be deleted. Then he
said: "Allah is Great! This is the observance of the tradition of the
Prophet". Thereafter he repeated before the people the event of
Hudaybiyah and what the Prophet had said to him at that time.[^13]

Text Of The Hudaybiyah Pact
---------------------------

1. Quraysh and the Muslims agree that they will not fight or commit
aggression against each other for a period of ten years so that social
security and general peace may be established at various places in
Arabia.

2. If a person from amongst Quraysh leaves Makkah without the permission
of his elder and embraces Islam and joins the Muslims, Muhammad must
return him to Quraysh. However, if one of the Muslims goes away to
Quraysh they will be under no obligation to surrender him to the
Muslims.

3. The Muslims and Quraysh will be at liberty to conclude pacts with any
tribes they like.

4. This year Muhammad and his companions will return to Madina from this
very spot. However, in the coming years they will be at liberty to visit
Makkah and perform the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah, subject to the
condition that they will not stay in Makkah for more than three days and
will not carry with them any weapon other than that usually carried by a
traveller.[^14]

5. According to this pact the Muslims residing in Makkah are free to
perform their religious rites and Quraysh will not be entitled to
torture them or compel them to abjure their religion or to ridicule
their religion.[^15]

6. The signatories to the pact agree to respect the property of each
other and to abandon deceit and artifice against each other and to keep
their hearts free from mutual grudge.

7. The life and property of the Muslims who arrive in Makkah from Madina
will be respected.[^16]

This is the text of the Peace Pact of Hudaybiyah, which has been
collected from different sources. The pact was drawn up in duplicate.
Some persons from amongst Quraysh and the Muslims witnessed the pact
whereafter one copy was given to Suhayl and the other to the
Prophet.[^17]

Glad Tidings Of Freedom
-----------------------

Glad tidings of freedom as contained in this pact reached every person.
Although every clause of this pact deserves discussion, the delicate
point which demands very serious consideration is the second clause
which aroused the indignation of some persons on that day.

Notwithstanding the fact that the companions of the Prophet felt very
uneasy on account of this discrimination and uttered words which should
not have been uttered regarding the decision taken by a leader like the
Prophet of Islam, this clause still brilliant, shows the way of thinking
of the Prophet in the matter of the propagation of Islam. It fully shows
the great respect which that great leader accorded to the principles of
freedom.

In reply to the objection raised by some of the companions of the
Prophet as to why they should surrender the refugees from Quraysh
whereas Quraysh should be under no obligation to surrender their men, he
replied:

"If a Muslim who adopts polytheism and runs away from the standard of
Islam, and prefers the environments of idolatry and anti-human religion
to the environments of Islam and monotheism, it shows that he has not
embraced Islam wholeheartedly and his faith has not acquired the proper
base which should satisfy his nature and such a Muslim is of no use to
us. And if we surrender the refugees from Quraysh it is on this account
that we are satisfied that Allah will provide the means of their
deliverance''.[^18]

The future proved that the prediction of the Prophet about this matter
(that Allah will provide the means of their deliverance) was absolutely
correct, because soon afterwards Quraysh themselves requested the
cancellation of this clause on account of the various unpleasant events
which they had to face owing to this clause.

This clause is a silencing reply to the partiality of most of the
orientalists who insist that the cause of the advancement of Islam was
the use of sword. They cannot afford to see that the glory of Islam lies
in the fact that within a very short time it spread in many regions of
the world. On account of personal motives and with a view to poison the
minds, therefore, they are obliged to say that the cause of the
advancement of Islam was material force.

This Peace Pact was concluded in the early days of Islam in the presence
of the great leader of Islam, as it fully reflects the spirit of Islam
and the sublime teachings and human principles which are contained in
all its laws, it is quite unfair that we should say that Islam has been
spread with the force of the sword.

In the light of the third clause, the tribe of Khuza'ah concluded a
defence pact with the Muslims and the tribe of Bani Kananah, who were
old enemies of Bani Khuza'ah, declared their alliance with Quraysh.

Last Effort For The Preservation Of Peace
-----------------------------------------

The preliminaries of the Peace Pact and its text show clearly that a
large part of it had an educational aspect, and the reason for the
Prophet accepting this pact, and agreeing to the deletion of the phrase
'Messenger of Allah' and to its commencing with the words "In your name,
O' Allah" (as it was in vogue during the Days of Ignorance) was that be
was desirous of maintaining peace in Arabia. And when he agreed that the
Muslim refugees from amongst Quraysh might be surrendered to the
authorities of the idolatrous government, it was due to the acute
obstinacy of Suhayl.

In case, therefore, the Prophet had not agreed with Suhayl on this point
with a view to protect the rights of this group (i.e. the Muslim
refugees from amongst Quraysh) and had respected the general thinking
which was opposed to discrimination in the matter of surrender of
refugees, the general peace would certainly have fallen in jeopardy and
this great blessing would have been lost.

Hence, with a view to achieve a higher and nobler object, the Prophet
bore up against all these pressures and requests so that the great
opportunity of ensuring peace, in the face of which all these
inconveniences were insignificant, might not be lost. And if he had
shown regard for the general opinion and the rights of the said group,
Suhayl, on account of his being very obstinate, would have sparked off
war and the following incident is a clear proof of this fact:

Negotiations with regards to the contents of the Peace Pact ended and
Ali was busy writing it when suddenly Abu Jandal bin Suhayl, the
representative of Quraysh, for the conclusion of the Peace Pact,
appeared on the scene with chains in his feet. Ali wondered on his
arrival, for he had been imprisoned and chained by his father since
long. He was an innocent prisoner and his only offence was that he had
embraced Islam and was considered to be one of the devotees of the
Prophet.

Abu Jandal had learned from the conversation which took place around his
prison that the Muslims had arrived in Hudaybiyah.[^19] He therefore,
managed to escape from the prison by some special contrivance and
arrived in the midst of the Muslims by adopting a deviated path through
the mountains.

When the eyes of Suhayl fell on his son he was so much displeased that,
filled with acute anger, he gave him a hard slap in the face. Then he
turned to the Prophet and said: "This is the first person who should
return to Makkah in accordance with the second clause of the pact". He
meant to say that Abu Jandal being a Quraysh who had fled Makkah should
be surrendered to them.

There is no denying the fact that the demand of Suhayl was unjustified
and baseless, because the pact had not yet been finally recorded and
signed by the parties. How could a party rely on a pact which had not
yet passed through its final stages? For this reason the Prophet said to
Suhayl: "Our pact hasn't been signed yet".

Suhayl replied: "In that case I ignore all these proceedings and render
them null and void". He was so stubborn in the matter that Mikraz and
Huwaytab, two big personalities of Quraysh were very much displeased
with his severity. They at once extracting Abu Jandal from his father,
made him enter a tent and said to the Prophet: "O Muhammad! Abu Jandal
is now under your protection".

They wanted to settle the dispute in this manner but Suhayl's insistence
frustrated their plan. He stuck to his words and said: "From the point
of view of negotiations the pact has been concluded".

The Prophet was obliged to make the last effort for the preservation of
the basis of peace which was extremely valuable for the propagation of
Islam. He, therefore, agreed to the return of Abu Jandal to Makkah along
with his father.

To console the chained Muslim who was to be surrendered to the infidels
in the presence of hundreds of brave Muslims he said: "O Abu Jandal! Be
patient. We wished that your father should hand you over to us by way of
love and affection. Now that he hasn't agreed to do so you should be
patient and forbearing and should know that Allah will open a path of
relief for you as well as for others who are under arrest".

The meeting came to an end. The copies of the pact were signed. Suhayl
and his friends left for Makkah and Abu Jandal, too, proceeded to Makkah
under the protection of Mikraz and Huwaytab. With a view to put an end
to the state of ehram the Prophet slaughtered his camel and got his head
shaved and others also followed suit.[^20]

Evaluation Of The Peace Pact Of Hudaybiyah
------------------------------------------

The Peace Pact was concluded between the Prophet of Islam and the
leaders of polytheism and after staying at Hudaybiyah for nineteen days,
the Muslims returned to Madina and the idolaters went back to Makkah.

Differences and disputes cropped up between the companions of the
Prophet at the time of writing the pact as well as after that. One group
of them considered it to be beneficial for Islam and another group,
whose members could be counted on fingers, assessed it to be against its
interests. Now that fourteen centuries have passed since the conclusion
of this pact we proposed to evaluate it in an unbiased and realistic
manner and shall conclude this chapter after alluding to the differences
mentioned above.

We are of the view that this Peace Pact proved to be perfectly
beneficial to Islam and made its victory final. Here are the arguments
which we should like to offer:

1. The continuous battles and attacks of Quraysh and their internal and
external instigations which have been mentioned briefly in connection
with the accounts of the Battles of Uhud and Ahzab did not leave any
time at the disposal of the Prophet to resort to propagation of Islam
amongst the various tribes, as well as in areas beyond Arabia, and his
valuable time was mostly spent in defence and in neutralizing the
dangerous plots of the enemy. After the conclusion of the Peace Pact,
however, the Muslims and their great leader were relieved of the danger
from the south, and ground was prepared for the propagation of lslam in
other areas.

The effects of the peace came to light after two years, because when the
Hudaybiyah pact was concluded the Prophet was accompanied by 1400
persons, but, two years later, when he proceeded formally to conquer
Makkah, as many as ten thousand persons marched along with him under the
shadow of the standard of Islam and this clear contrast in the number of
persons accompanying him was the direct consequence of the Hudaybiyah
pact.

It was due to the fact that previously many people did not join the
Muslims owing to fear of Quraysh, but when Quraysh themselves formally
recognized the presence of Islam and left the tribes free to associate
themselves with it, the fear in the minds of most of the tribe
disappeared and the Muslims became in a position to propagate Islam
freely.

2. The second thing which the Muslims achieved from the pact was that
the iron-curtain which the idolaters had placed between the common man
and the religion of Islam was removed and consequently the traffic to
Madina became free. The people had more contacts with the Muslims during
their journeys to Madina and they became acquainted with the sublime
teachings of Islam.

They were wonder struck when they saw the discipline and order amongst
the Muslims and their sincere devotion and obedience to the Prophet of
Islam. The cleanliness of the Muslims and their performing wuzu at the
time of prayers, their organized rows, the effective and enthusiastic
sermons of the Prophet and the sweet verses of the Holy Qur'an, with
their simplicity and eloquence, attracted them automatically towards
Islam.

The Muslims, who travelled to Makkah and its suburbs for different
purposes, after the conclusion of the pact, came in contact with their
relatives and old friends, propagated Islam amongst them and informed
them of the merits, laws and regulations, and the permissible and
unpermissible things of this religion. And this thing in itself became
the cause of a large number of the leaders of polytheism like Khalid bin
Walid and 'Amr bin As joining the Muslims before the conquest of Makkah.

In fact this sort of acquaintance of the people with Islam laid the
foundation of the conquest of Makkah and became the cause of this great
base of the world of idolatry coming under the control of the Muslims.
ConsequentIy the people embraced Islam in large numbers. This great
victory was the result of close contacts, removal of fear from the
hearts and propagation of Islam among the idolaters without any let or
hinderance.

3. Close contact with the Prophet at the time of the conclusion of the
pact removed many misunderstandings from the minds of the leaders of
polytheism, because the sublime morality of the Prophet and his softness
and forbearance as against the stubbornness of the other party proved
him to be the fountain of greatest human virtues.

Notwithstanding the fact that he had suffered a great deal at the hands
of Quraysh, his heart was still full of sentiments of human love.
Quraysh witnessed that in concluding the pact and accepting its forced
clauses, he differed with the views of a large number of his own
companions and preferred the honour of the Haram and the Ka'bah, and of
his own birth-place (Makkah) to the inclinations of a group of his.

This behaviour neutralized the adverse propaganda which had been carried
on about the temperament of the Prophet and proved that he was a friend
of humanity and a peaceable person, who would not show grudge and enmity
to his enemies, even if he happened to gain control over Arabia one day.
There is no denying the fact, however, that if the Prophet had engaged
himself in battle on that day he would have been victorious and as
stated by the Holy Qur'an his enemies would have fled:

***Had the disbelievers fought against you they would run away from the
battle and would have found no friend or helper.*** **(Surah al-Fath,
48:22)**

However, he displayed kind sentiments and love for humanity by his
mildness and neutralized the adverse propaganda against him.

The readers should realize, in the light of these arguments, the
grandeur of the remark of Imam Ja'far Sadiq about this Peace Pact. He
says: "No event during the life of the Prophet of Islam was more useful
than the Peace Pact of Hudaybiyah".

The future events proved that the objections raised by a few companions
of the Prophet (whose ring leader was Umar bin Khattab) to this pact and
its contents were totally baseless. The historians have given complete
particulars of the remarks of the objectors.[^21]

The value of the pact becomes evident from the fact that the Prophet had
not yet reached Madina when Surah al-Fath, which gave good tidings to
the Muslims, was revealed and it treated this act (conclusion of the
Peace Pact of Hudaybiyah) to be a victory in jihad. It says:

***"Surely, we have granted you (O' Muhammad!) a manifest victory".***

Quraysh Insist Upon Cancellation Of One Of The Clauses Of The Pact
------------------------------------------------------------------

Soon after that, however, bitter events obliged Quraysh to request the
Prophet to cancel the second clause of the Peace Pact. It was the same
clause, which had annoyed the companions of the Prophet and which he had
accepted on account of unusual stubbornness on the part of Suhayl. It
says:

"If a person from amongst Quraysh leaves Makkah without the permission
of his elder and embraces Islam and joins the Muslims, Muhammad must
return him to Quraysh. However, if one of the Muslims goes away to
Quraysh they will be under no obligation to surrender him to the
Muslims". This clause roused the indignation of some persons on that
day, but the Prophet accepted it from his heart and said: "Allah will
open a path for the relief of the weak Muslims who are prisoners in the
hands of Quraysh"

The path of such relief and the reasons for the cancellation of this
clause were as follows:

A Muslim named Abu Basir who had been imprisoned by the idolaters for a
long time somehow managed to escape to Madina. Two big personalities
named Azhar and Akhnas wrote to the Prophet and reminded him that
according to the second clause of the pact Abu Basir should be returned
to them. They gave their letter to a man belonging to the tribe of Bani
'Amir, who was accompanied by a slave of theirs, and asked him to
deliver it to the Prophet.

In accordance with the pact concluded by the Prophet he said to Abu
Basir: "You should return to your people and it is not at all proper
that we should practise cunning against them. I am sure that the
Almighty Allah will provide means of relief to you as well as to
others". Abu Basir said: "Are you handing me over to the idolaters so
that they may make me abjure the religion of Allah?" The Prophet,
however, repeated the said sentence and handed him over to the
representatives of Quraysh. The three men then left for Makkah. When
they reached Zil Hulayfah[^22]

Abu Basir leant on a wall on account of fatigue. He then asked the man
belonging to Bani 'Amir in a friendly way to give him his sword so that
he might have a look at it. When the sword came in his hand he
immediately killed the 'Amiri. The slave ran away on account of fear. He
came to Madina and said to the Prophet: "Abu Basir has killed my
companion". Soon thereafter Abu Basir also came up and related his story
and said: "O Prophet of Allah! You have acted according to the agreement
made by you. However, I am not prepared to join the people who ridicule
my religion".

Having said these words he proceeded to the coast of the sea which was
the route of the caravans of Quraysh and settled at a place named 'Eis.
The Muslims of Makkah came to know about the story of Abu Basir and
about seventy of them somehow got rid of Quraysh and joined him. These
seventy Muslims, whose lives had been made miserable by Quraysh, decided
to loot the trade caravans of Quraysh or to kill anyone on whom they
could lay their hands.

They carried out their programme so skilfully that Quraysh were put out
of patience by harassment. So much so that they wrote to the Prophet to
cancel the clause in question by mutual agreement and to call back Abu
Basir and his companions to Madina.

The Prophet cancelled the said clause by mutual agreement and directed
the fugitives who had settled in 'Eis to return to Madina.[^23] This
provided a great relief to the people at large and Quraysh realized that
a true believer could not be kept in captivity for ever and it was more
dangerous to keep such a person as a captive, because whenever he
escaped he would resort to taking revenge.

The Muslim Women Were Not Surrendered To Quraysh
------------------------------------------------

Hudaybiyah pact was signed. Umme Kulsum, daughter of 'Uqbah bin Abi
Mu'ayt, came to Madina from Makkah. Her brothers named 'Ammarah and
Walid requested the Prophet to return her to them in accordance with the
second clause of the pact. The Prophet replied to them: "Women are not
covered by the said clause as that clause applies to men only".[^24] And
Surah al-Mumtahinah made the position clear with regard to women. It
says:

***Believers, when believing immigrant women come to you as fugitives,
test them. Allah knows best about their faith. If you know that they are
believers, do not return them to the disbelievers. They are not lawful
for the disbelievers, nor are the disbelievers lawful for them. And give
the disbelievers whatever they have spent (upon them as dowry).***
**(Surah al-Mumtahinah, 60:10)**

This was the story of Hudaybiyah. As a consequence of the peace provided
by this pact, the Prophet was in a position to correspond with the kings
and rulers of the world and to extend his call and Prophethood to the
humanity at large.

[^1]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. IX, page 126.

[^2]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 309.

[^3]: Rawdah-I-Kafi, page 322

[^4]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. II, page 488

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XX, page 330

[^6]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp. 270-272.

[^7]: As quoted by Tabari, (vol. II, page 276) he came to see the Holy
Prophet after Urwah Saqafi had seen him.

[^8]: Seerahi Ibn Hisham, vol. II, p. 314; Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp.
274-275.

[^9]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 278.

[^10]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp. 278-279

[^11]: Irshad Mufid, page 6; A'lamul Wara', page 106; Biharul Anwar,
vol. XX, page 368; but Tabari erred on this point and has stated that
the Prophet himself wrote his name.

[^12]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 138; Biharul Anwar, vol. XX, page
353.

[^13]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. III, page 162.

[^14]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 24; and other sources.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XX, page 353; and other sources.

[^16]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. IX, page 117.

[^17]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, pp. 25-26.

[^18]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, p.12 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XX, p.
312.

[^19]: Hudaybiyah is at a distance of six to nine miles from Makkah and
most of its lands are a part of the Haram.

[^20]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 281; Biharul Anwar, vol. II, page
353 and Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 318.

[^21]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 316.

[^22]: lt is a place six or seven miles away from Madina. People put on
ehram there while going to Makkah.

[^23]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. II, p. 624; Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, p.
284.

[^24]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 323.


