Chapter 45: The Lapsed `Umrah
=============================

When the Peace Pact of Hudaybiyah was signed, the Muslims were entitled
to visit Makkah after a year from the date of the conclusion of the pact
and were to leave Makkah after staying there for three days and
performing 'Umrah.[^1] During these days they could not carry with them
any weapon other than the weapon of a traveller (viz. a sword).

A year passed from the date of the conclusion of the pact and the time
thus arrived when the Muslims could avail of the facility provided for
in the pact, and the Muslim migrants who had abandoned their homes seven
years ago for the sake of Islam and had chosen their abode in a foreign
land could proceed to Makkah once again to visit pilgrimage of the
Ka'bah and also to see their kith and kin.

As such, when the Prophet declared that those persons, who had been
deprived of visiting the Ka'bah a year earlier, should get ready for
proceeding to Makkah, an unprecedented enthusiasm appeared amongst them
and tears of delight trickled down their cheeks. If a year earlier the
Prophet had travelled along with 1300 persons the number of those, who
accompanied him a year later reached two thousand.

Great personalities from amongst the migrants and the Ansar could be
seen among those who got ready to proceed on the journey. They followed
the Prophet at all places and took along with them eighty camels which
bore marks of sacrifice round their necks. The Prophet put on ehram in
the mosque and others also followed him.

Thus two thousand persons clad in ehram and with the word *Labbayk*
(here am I) on their lips proceeded to Makkah. This caravan possessed so
much grandeur and dignity, and was so attractive for the Muslims as well
as for the idolaters, that it made many idolaters inclined towards the
spirituality and reality of Islam.

If we say that this journey was a missionary journey and these persons
were in fact an army of Islam we shall not be exaggerating. The
spiritual results of this journey appeared soon and the sworn enemies of
Islam like Khalid bin Walid, the hero of the Battle of Uhud, and Amr bin
As, the politician of Arabia, became inclined towards Islam on observing
this grandeur, and soon afterwards embraced this religion.

The Prophet had no confidence in Quraysh on account of their deceit and
jealousy. It was probable that they might attack the Prophet and his
companions unawares in the region of Makkah and shed the blood of some
of them, especially when they (the Muslims) were not carrying any arms
other than the weapons of a traveller, because, according to the terms
of the pact they could not enter Makkah armed.

To obviate every kind of anxiety the Prophet appointed one of his
officers named Muhammad bin Maslamah along with two hundred men who were
armed with necessary weapons like coats of mail and lances and had one
hundred swift horses with them to move before the caravan and to encamp
in the Valley of Marruz Zahran (which is situated near the area of
Haram) and to wait there for the arrival of the Prophet. The spies of
Quraysh who were watching the activities of the Prophet, reported the
matter to the chiefs of Quraysh.

Mikraz bin Hafs met the Prophet in the capacity of the representative of
Quraysh and conveyed their objection to him. The Prophet said in reply:
"I or my companions will not do any thing contrary to the pact and all
of us shall enter the Haram unarmed. As regards this officer and the two
hundred men who are equipped with arms they will stay at this point".

By this sentence the Prophet made the representative of Quraysh realize
that if they made a surprise attack at night and took undue advantage of
the Muslims being unarmed this auxiliary forces which was stationed at
the very edge of Haram along with equipment, would rush to their help
immediately and would place the arms at their disposal.

Quraysh became aware of the foresight of the Prophet and opened the
gates of the city for the Muslims. The leaders of idolaters and their
subordinates vacated the city and moved to the nearby mounds and hills,
so that they might not face the Prophet and his companions and might
observe all their activities from a distance.

The Prophet Enters Makkah
-------------------------

The Prophet entered Makkah mounted on his special camel, along with two
thousand persons who had encircled him and the sound of their saying,
*Allah humma labbayk (Here am I. O Lord! Here* *am I)* was resounding
throughout the city. The voice of this select gathering was so
attractive that all the people of Makkah were impressed by it, and they
began to entertain special interest and sentiments for the Muslims in
their hearts.

At the same time the unity of the Muslims created a peculiar fear in the
hearts of the idolaters. As and when the resounding of the word
*Labbayk* uttered by the Muslims broke of, Abdullah Rawahid who was
holding the rein of the Prophet's camel in his hands recited these
verses with a sonorous and imposing voice: "O children of blasphemy and
idolatry! Vacate the path for the Prophet of Allah. You should know that
he is the source of prosperity and goodness. O Lord! I believe in his
words and am aware of Your order regarding the acknowledgment of his
prophethood".[^2]

The Prophet performed tawaf of the Ka'bah while mounted on his camel. At
this stage he ordered that Abdullah bin Rawahid should recite the
following special invocation and others should also join him: "There is
no god but Allah He is One and matchless. He has acted according to His
promise (He had promised that the Muslims would visit the Ka'bah soon).
He helped His servant. He made the army of monotheism exalted, and
condemned the armies of blasphemy and polytheism to loneliness".

On that day all the centres of pilgrimage and the places where
ceremonies of 'Umrah are performed, including the mosque, the Ka'bah,
the Safa' and the Marwah were under the control of the Muslims. Ardent
and enthusiastic rites at a place, which had been the centre of idolatry
and polytheism for a very long period, dealt such a strong mental blow
to the leaders of polytheism and their followers that the victory of
Prophet Muhammad stood proved throughout Arabia.

Time for noon prayers arrived. It was now necessary that the Muslims
should carry out this divine obligation congregationally in the mosque
and their mu'azzin (announcer) should loudly pronounce the call to
prayers *(azan).*

As ordered by the Prophet, Bilal, the Ethiopian slave, who had been
tortured in this city for a long time on account of his having embraced
Islam ascended the roof of the Ka'bah, and, placing his hands on his
ears, pronounced in his special tone the sentences, well known to all of
us, at a place where declaration of the oneness of Allah and the
Prophethood of Muhammad, had once been the greatest crime according to
the infidels of Quraysh.

His voice and the acknowledgments which Muslims repeated after hearing
every part of *azan* reached the ears of the idolaters and the enemies
of monotheism, and disturbed them so much that Safwan bin Umayyah and
Khalid bin Usayd said: "Praised be god that our ancestors died and did
not hear the voice of this Ethiopian slave".

On hearing Bilal pronounce *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is Great), Suhayl bin
'Amr hid his face with a handkerchief. They did not only feel very
uneasy on account of the voice of Bilal, but felt mental torture because
of the various parts of *azan,* which were totally opposed to their
hereditary beliefs.

The Prophet began performing *sa'i* between the hills of Safa and
Marwah. As the hypocrites and the idolaters had spread the rumour that
the unwholesome climate of Madina had made the Muslims feeble, he
resorted to *harwalah*[^3] in a part of *sa'i* and the Muslims also
imitated him. After performing *sa'i* the Muslims sacrificed the camels
and ceased to be in the state of ehram and had their hair cut.

The Prophet then ordered that two hundred persons should proceed to
Marruz Zahran to look after the weapons and other military equipment so
that the persons, previously entrusted this duty, might come to the
Haram and perform the rites of 'Umrah.

The rites and ceremonies of 'Umrah came to an end. The Muhajirs went to
their homes and met their relatives. They also invited some Ansar to
their homes and thus made amends for the services which the Ansar had
rendered to the Muhajirs during the period of seven years.

The Prophet Leaves Makkah
-------------------------

The grandeur and glory of Islam and the Muslims made a deep impression
on the minds of the people of Makkah, and they became more acquainted
with the mentality of the Muslim community. The chiefs of Quraysh
realized that the stay of the Prophet and his companions had weakened
the morale of the people of Makkah with regard to their faith in
idolatry and enmity with monotheism and had created love and attachment
between the two parties.

Hence, when the last moment out of the three days had passed, a
representative of Quraysh named Huwaytab came to the Prophet and said:
"The period of three days stipulated in the pact for your stay in Makkah
has expired and you should, therefore, leave our territory as early as
possible".

Some of the companions felt uneasy on account of the bluntness of the
representative of Quraysh. However, the Prophet was not a person who
practiced delay in acting upon an agreement. The Muslims were,
therefore, ordered to depart and they left the region of Haram
immediately.

Maymunah (sister of Umme Fadl, wife of Abbas) was so much impressed by
the fervour of the Muslims that she told her brother-in-law, Abbas, the
uncle of the Prophet, that she was prepared to marry the Prophet and
considered it an honour for her. The Prophet accepted her offer and thus
strengthened his ties with Quraysh. Inclination of a woman towards a
man, who was much older than her is in itself a sufficient proof of his
spiritual influence.

The Prophet also asked the representative of Quraysh to give him time so
that he might perform the wedding ceremonies in Makkah and might also
invite all the chiefs of Makkah to participate in the Walimah (feast).
However, the representative of Quraysh did not agree to this proposal
and said: "We don't stand in need of your food".

The Prophet ordered that the Muslims should leave Makkah by mid-day. He
directed only his slave Abu Rafe' to stay there till evening and bring
his (the Prophet's) wife with him.[^4]

After the departure of the Muslims, the enemies of the Prophet
reproached Maymunah, but, as she had developed spiritual attachment with
the Prophet and had, therefore, offered to marry him, their words did
not have any effect on her.

Thus the promise, based on the true vision of the Prophet, which he had
made with the Muslims a year earlier about the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah
and the opening of the gates of Makkah to the Muslims was fulfilled, the
following verse was revealed:

***Allah made the dream of His Messenger come true for a genuine
purpose. If Allah wills, you (believers) will enter the Sacred Mosque in
security with your heads shaved, nails cut and without any fear in your
hearts.*** **(Surah al Fath, 48:27)**

[^1]: 'Umrah consists of particular ceremonies which can be performed at
any time during the year, as distinguished from, to Haj ceremonies,
which can be performed during the month of Zil Hajjah only.

[^2]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 37.

[^3]: A type of walking which is more brisk than usual but short of
running.

[^4]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. ll, page 372.


