Chapter 46: The Events of the Eighth Year of Migration
======================================================

The seventh year of migration came to an end and the Muslims were able,
according to the terms of the Peace Pact of Hudaybiyah, to perform
collectively the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah and to observe lovely and
moving rites for the benefit of monotheism in the very centre of
idolaters, so as to attract towards Islam the hearts of some chiefs of
Quraysh like Khalid bin Walid, 'Amr bin As,[^1] and Uthman bin Talhah.
Soon afterwards these three chiefs came to Madina and expressed their
attachment for Prophet Muhammad and his religion, and severed their
connections with Quraysh of Makkah of which nothing more than a lifeless
skeleton was left.[^2]

Some biographers say that Khalid and 'Amr As embraced Islam during 5
A.H. It may, however, be stated for certain that adoption of Islam by
them took place in 8 A.H., because Khalid was the commander of a unit of
the army of Quraysh at the time of the conclusion of the Peace Pact of
Hudaybiyah and both of them embraced Islam simultaneously.

In the beginning of 8 A.H., security prevailed in most of the localities
in the Hijaz and the call to monotheism had extended to many parts and
the influence of the Jews in the north, and attacks by Quraysh from the
south, did not threaten the Muslims any longer.

The Prophet now decided to extend his invitation to Syria and to open a
spot for the penetration of Islam in the hearts of the people who were
then living under the sovereignty of the Roman Emperor. For this purpose
he sent Harith Umayr Azdi with a letter to the court of the Ruler of
Syria. In those days Harith bin Abi Shamir Ghassani was the despotic
ruler of Syria, who ruled in the capacity of a satellite of the Kaiser.
The envoy of the Prophet reached the border towns of Syria and continued
his journey.

However, Shurahbil, who was the governor of the border areas became
aware of the arrival of the envoy. He imprisoned him in a village named
Mota and made detailed enquiries from him. The envoy admitted that he
was carrying a letter from the Prophet of Islam to Harith Ghassani, the
absolute Ruler of Syria. Disregarding all human and universal
principles, according to which the life and blood of an envoy is
respected throughout the world, the governor ordered his hands and feet
to be tied and that he should be put to death.

The Prophet became aware of the crime of Shurahbil. He was extremely
disturbed on account of the murder of his envoy and informed the Muslims
of the dastardly act of Shurahbil and asked them to take revenge on the
wild governor who had killed the envoy without even obtaining permission
from the higher authorities.

A Still More Tragic Event
-------------------------

Simultaneously with this incident, a still more tragic event took place
and further confirmed the determination of the Prophet to punish the
Syrians who had curbed the freedom of the propagation by the
missionaries of Islam and had murdered his envoy and the Muslim
missionaries cruelly.

The event referred above was this that in the month of Rabi' of 8 A.H.
Ka'b bin Umayr Ghifari was deputed, along with fifteen others, all of
whom were proficient missionaries, to proceed to the region of Zat
Atlah, situated on the other side of Wadiul Qura' and to invite the
people of that place to embrace Islam. They arrived there and performed
the duty entrusted to them.

Suddenly they met with severe opposition from those people and all of
them were attacked. The missionary party found itself encircled by a
large crowd. They defended themselves valiantly and preferred martyrdom
to humility. Only one of them, who was wounded and was lying amongst the
dead, got up at mid-night and proceeded to Madina. On reaching there he
related the entire incident to the Prophet.

The massacre of the missionaries and the execution of so many innocent
persons made the Prophet give orders for jihad. An army consisting of
three thousand persons was, therefore dispatched to punish the rebels,
and those, who obstructed the spread of Islam.[^3]

Orders for jihad were given. Three thousand swordsmen gathered in the
military station of Madina (Jurf). The Prophet came to the military
station personally and addressed the soldiers saying: "You should go and
invite those people again to embrace Islam. If they accept Islam you
need not avenge the murder of the envoy, but otherwise you should seek
help from Allah and fight against them.

Yes, O soldiers of Islam! Perform jihad in the name of Allah! Punish the
enemies of Allah and your own enemies, who live in Syria. Don't
interfere with the monks and nuns, who spend their time in monasteries,
far removed from the tumult of the world. Destroy all satanic elements,
with these very swords. Don't kill women, children and old people. Don't
cut trees and don't destroy buildings".[^4]

"Yes! O Mujahids! The commander of the army is my cousin Ja'far bin Abu
Talib. If he sustains an injury, Zayd bin Harith will bear the standard
and direct the army, and if he is killed Abdullah Rawahid will assume
the command. And if he too meets an injury, you may choose the chief
commander yourselves".

Then orders were given to march and the Prophet himself as well as some
other Muslims accompanied the army up to the point of Thaniyatul wida'.
There those who had escorted the soldiers bade them good-bye and said
according to the old tradition: "May Allah help you return safe and
sound and with war booty".

However, Abdullah Rawahid, who was the second assistant or third
commander, recited in reply this verse: *I seek forgiveness from Allah
and from the hard blows out of which the foams of blood gush out*.[^5]

From this verse one can very well assess the strength of the faith and
the love for martyrdom of this valiant commander. In the meantime people
saw him weeping. When the reason for weeping was enquired from him he
said: "I am not at all interested in the world, but I have heard the
Prophet reciting this verse: "It is the inevitable decree of Allah that
all of you should arrive in Hell" (and from there the pious persons
should proceed to Paradise). My arrival in Hell is, therefore, certain
but the end of this arrival is not clear and it is not known what will
happen thereafter".[^6]

Difference Of Opinion About The First Commander
-----------------------------------------------

Many biographers have written that the chief commander of the army was
Zayd bin Harith, the adopted son of the Prophet and Ja'far and Abdullah
were his second and third in command respectively.

However, as opposed to this idea, the Sh'iah research scholars treat
Ja'far bin Abu Talib to be the chief commander of the army and the two
other persons to be the second and third in command. The question now is
as to which of these views is correct.

The real position may be ascertained in two ways:

1. From the point of view of social standing as well as piety and
learning Zayd bin Harith did not equal Ja'far Tayyar. Ibn Athir says in
Usudul Ghabah about Ja'far: "He resembled the Prophet in temperament and
features, and declared his faith in the Prophet only a short time after
Ali. One day Abu Talib saw Ali offering his prayers standing on the
right side of the Prophet. He then said to his son Ja'far: "You too
should go and offer prayers standing on the Prophet's left side".

He was the leader of the people, who abandoned their homes for the sake
of their religion and faith and left Makkah, under the orders of the
Prophet, to take refuge in Ethiopia. He, in the capacity of the
spokesman of the group of migrants, attracted the King of Ethiopia
towards Islam with his strong and penetrating logic and proved the
falsehood of the representatives of Quraysh, who had come to Ethiopia to
arrange the return of the refugees to the Hijaz.

By reciting the verses of the Qur'an relating to the Prophet 'Isa and
his mother Maryam he secured the sympathy and protection of the Negus
for the Muslims migrants in such a manner that he turned away the
representatives of Quraysh from his court.[^7]

Ja'far was the same person who returned from Ethiopia at the time of the
conquest of Khayber and the Prophet, on hearing of his arrival, went
twelve steps forward to receive him, put his hand round his neck, kissed
his forehead, wept for joy and said: "I don't know for which event I
should feel more happy-for your return from Ethiopia or for the conquest
of Khayber, and that too at the hands of your brother, Ali".

Ja'far was the same distinguished person, who was remembered by the
Commander of the Faithful after his death for his bravery and valour.
When Ali came to know that 'Amr As had taken the oath of allegiance to
Mu'awiyah and they had settled that if they gained victory over Ali the
Governorship of Egypt would be given to 'Amr, he (the Commander of the
Faithful) felt uncomfortable and remembered his uncle, Hamzah and
brother, Ja'far and said: "If these two persons had been alive, our
victory would have been ensured".[^8]

Does it stand to reason that in spite of Ja'far's possessing the
distinguished attributes, some of which have been mentioned above, the
Prophet should have entrusted the command of the army to Zayd and should
have made Ja'far his first assistant?

2. The verses, which the great poets of Islam recited, mourning the
death of these commanders, show that the chief commander was Ja'far and
the other two persons were his assistants. On hearing about the tragic
death of these commanders, Hassan bin Thabit, the poet of the Prophet,
recited an elegy which is recorded in the Seerah-i Ibn Hisham.

He says: "May the commanders who were killed one after the other in the
Battle of Mota be blessed by Allah. They were Ja'far, Zayd and Abdullah
who successively welcomed death. (The word *tanabi'u* used in these
verses shows clearly that the three commanders were killed one after the
other and the first to be killed was Ja'far).

The most explicit of the poems is the elegy written by Ka'b bin Malik
Ansari to lament the death of those killed at Mota. In it he specifies
that the first commander was Ja'far. This poet was himself a witness to
the fact that the Prophet had entrusted the chief commandership to
Ja'far. He says: "Remember the time when the soldiers of Islam were
placed under the standard of the First Commander viz. Ja'far bin Abi
Talib and proceeded to perform jihad".

These verses which were written in those very days and have remained
safe from the vicissitudes of time are the most vital and authentic
witnesses of the fact that whatever has been written by the Sunni
writers on this point does not conform with historical facts and the
narrators have forged that version because of some political
considerations and the biographers have recorded it in their books
without necessary verification. It is, however, surprising that
notwithstanding the fact that Ibn Hisham[^9] has quoted these elegies
and has treated Ja'far to be the second in command.

Array Of Roman And Islamic Troops
---------------------------------

In those days Rome was faced with a strange chaos because of its
continuous wars with Iran. Although the Romans were elated by their
victories over Iran, they were also aware of the bravery and valour of
the soldiers of Islam who had won laurels by means of their personal
bravery and strength of faith.

Hence, when the Roman Government received reports about the preparations
and movement of the Muslim soldiers, Hercules and the Ruler of Syria set
up a formidable force to face the three thousand strong army of Islam.
Shurahbil alone collected one hundred thousand soldiers from different
tribes of Syria and proceeded to the frontiers of the territory to stop
the advance of the Muslim warriors.

Not being contented with this, the Kaiser moved, with advance
information, from Bayzantium with one hundred thousand soldiers and
encamped at Ma'ab which is one of the cities of Balqa'. They stayed
there as reservists and auxiliary force.[^10]

Collection of all this soldiery, to fight against an army which was
comparatively much smaller, was on account of the reports which the
Roman commanders had received about the conquests by the Muslims.
Otherwise even one tenth of this force containing only three thousand
soldiers, was sufficient to confront the enemies, however brave they
might be.

The notable fact is that, when the strength of the two armies is
compared, the army of Islam was many times weaker than the army of Rome
in view of their numbers as well as knowledge of war strategy and
tactics. On account of their having participated in protracted wars
between Rome and Iran, the Roman officers had gained many secrets of
military superiority and victory, whereas the knowledge of the young
army of Islam in these matters was only elementary.

And then the Muslims were not also at par with the Romans in the matter
of military equipment and means of transport. And the most important
thing is that the Muslim forces were going to invade a foreign country
whereas the Romans, possessing all facilities, were in their own country
and had only to defend themselves. In such circumstances it is always
necessary that the attacking army should be well-equipped and strong
enough to surmount the unfavourable conditions.

Keeping these points in view we shall now see that the commanders of the
Muslim army preferred steadfastness and fighting to flight from the
battlefield, and thus added to their historical honours, notwithstanding
the fact that they could see death at a distance of a few steps only.

After their arrival at the frontiers of Syria, the Muslims became aware
of the preparations and the military strength of the enemy. They,
therefore, immediately formed a military consultative council to decide
the strategy of war. Some persons were of the view that the matter might
be reported to the Prophet and further instructions obtained from him.

This view was likely to be confirmed, but in the meantime Abdullah
Rawahid, who was the second in command and had sought martyrdom from
Almighty Allah at the time of departure from Madina, rose up and
delivered a fiery speech.

He said: "You have been dispatched to achieve an object which you don't
like. You have left Madina to achieve martyrdom. In the battlefield,
Muslims don't depend upon superiority in numbers. We are going to fight
against these people in the path of Allah and Islam - the same Islam
which has made us honourable and respectable. If we are victorious we
shall have won laurels; and if we are martyred that, too, is one of our
wishes".

Abdullah's words changed the thinking of the officers and the members of
the consultative council. Hence, it was decided that complying with the
orders of the Prophet, fighting should be resorted to at the place
specified by him.[^11]

The two armies faced each other at a place called Sharaf. However, on
account of some military considerations, a part of the Muslim army
retreated and encamped in Mota. Ja'far bin Abu Talib, who was the chief
commander of the army, divided it into three divisions and appointed a
commander for each division. Single combats commenced. It was now
necessary for Ja'far to hold the standard in his hand and guide his
soldiers in making the attack and simultaneously being engaged in
fighting and defence.

His bravery and steadfastness in the cause of his objective is quite
apparent from the epic verses which he recited while attacking the
enemy. He said: "I am happy that the promised Paradise has become
nearer - the same pure Paradise which contains cold beverages. On the
contrary the destruction of Rome is also near. It is the nation, which
has been guilty of blasphemy according to the creed of monotheism and
whose contacts and connections with us have been severed. I am
determined to strike a blow on them as and when I face them".[^12]

The chief commander of Islam put up a courageous fight against the
enemies. However, when he found himself encircled by them and realized
that his martyrdom was certain, he, in order that the enemies might not
utilize his horse and also they might know that he had now severed his
ties with the world, dismounted his horse and struck it a blow which
made it incapable of movement, and then he continued to fight.

In the meantime his right hand was cut off. In order that the standard
of the Prophet might not fall on the ground he held it in his left hand
and when his left hand was also cut off he held it in his arms.
Eventually, after having sustained eighty wounds he fell down and
breathed his last.

Now the turn of Zayd bin Harith, the second in command arrived. He
carried the standard on his shoulder and performed his duty with
unparalleled valour and at last succumbed to his fatal wounds. Then
Abdullah Rawahid the third in command took the standard in his hand. He
mounted his horse and recited his epic verses.

During the course of fighting he felt very hungry. A morsel of food was
given to him so that he might get some relief from hunger. He had not
yet eaten anything out of it when he heard the noise of the torrent-like
swarming of the enemy. He then threw away the morsel of food, advanced
towards the enemy and continued fighting till he was martyred.

Army Of Islam In Distress
-------------------------

From then onwards the distress and perplexity of the army of Islam
commenced. The chief commander and his two assistants had been killed.
The Prophet had, however, visualized this situation beforehand and had
authorized the soldiers that if things came to such a pass they might
choose their commander themselves.

In the meantime, Thabit bin Aqram picked up the standard, turned towards
the Muslim soldiers and said: "Choose a commander for yourselves". All
of them said: "You should become our commander". He replied: "I am not
at all prepared to assume this office. You should, therefore, select
someone else". Then Thabit as well as other Muslims selected Khalid bin
Walid, who had embraced Islam recently and was available in the army, to
be their commander.

When Khalid was selected as the commander the situation was a very
delicate one. Terror and awe prevailed over the Muslims The commander of
the army resorted to military tactics which were unprecedented. He
ordered that at mid-night when it was dark everywhere they should engage
themselves in transfer and change-over and that too making a hue and
cry.

The right wing should give its place to the left wing and vice versa and
similarly the front column should come to the centre of the army and
vice versa. This change-over continued till dawn. According to one
narration he ordered that a unit of the Muslims should move to a distant
place at mid-night and then return in the morning and join the army
reciting *La ilaha illallah* (There is no god but Allah).

The object of the entire scheme was that the Roman army should think
that an auxiliary force had arrived to join the Muslims. By chance it
was on account of this impression that they did not attack the Muslims
on the following day and said to themselves that when the Muslims had
fought so valiantly in the absence of the auxiliary force they would
fight more bravely after they had been joined by additional troops.

The calmness of the Roman army provided the Muslims an opportunity to
return the way they had come. The greatest success which the Muslims
achieved was that they fought against an organized and powerful army for
one day or for three days. The military scheme adopted by the new
commander was a good one, because it delivered the Muslims from death
and made them come back to Madina safely. Hence, it deserves
praise.[^13]

The Soldiers Of Islam Return To Madina
--------------------------------------

Reports regarding the manner of fighting and retreat of the soldiers of
Islam had already reached Madina before they arrived there. The Muslims,
therefore, went to meet them as far as Juraf, the military station of
Madina.

The action taken by the new commander was a wise tactics, but as it did
not accord with the sentiments of the Muslims and with their natural and
real bravery, reared up under the auspices of faith, they did not look
upon the retreat of the soldiers favourably, and did not consider it to
be something graceful.

They, therefore, received them with biting slogans like: "O fugitives!
Why did you run away from Jihad?" and by throwing dust on their heads
and faces. The behaviour of the Muslims with this group was so rude that
some of the persons who had participated in the battle were obliged to
remain confined to their houses for quite some time and they did not
come within the public view. And, if they did come out, the people
pointed to them with their fingers and said: "He is one of the those
persons who ran away from jihad''.[^14]

Reaction of the Muslims to the wisely undertaken retreat by the soldiers
of Islam is indicative of the spirit of bravery and heroism which the
faith in Allah and in the Day of Judgement had created and perfected in
them, and on account of which they preferred death in the path of Islam
to the insignificant benefit derived from such retreat.

Myth Instead Of History
-----------------------

As the Commander of the Faithful, Ali bin Abi Talib is known amongst the
Muslims with the title of Asadullah (Lion of Allah), some persons have
thought it expedient to create, in comparison with him, a commander, who
should carry the title of Sayfullah (Sword of Allah) and such a person
should not be anyone except the brave commander of Islam, Khalid bin
Walid. They, therefore, say that on his return from the Battle of Mota
the Prophet gave him the title of Sayfullah.

No doubt if the Prophet had given him this title on some other occasion
there could be no question about it, but the conditions and
circumstances after the return of the Muslim army from the Battle of
Mota did not necessitate that the Prophet should give him such a title.
Is it justifiable that the Prophet should give a title like Sayfullah to
a person who is at the head of those people, whom Muslims call fugitives
and accord them reception by throwing dust on their heads and faces?

And even if he displayed the attribute of being 'the Sword of Allah' in
other battles, his achievement in this battle was nothing more than a
praiseworthy military scheme, for otherwise he and his subordinates
would not have been given the title of fugitives.

Ibn Sa'd writes: "At the time of retreat of the soldiers of Islam, the
Roman soldiers pursed them and killed some of them".[^15]

The forgerers of the myth of 'Sayfullah' have also added this sentence
to support their statement; "When Khalid became the commander, he
ordered the soldiers to attack the enemy. He himself attacked bravely
and nine swords broke in his hand, and only a shield remained with him".

However, the forgerers of this myth have forgotten one thing that is, if
Khalid and his soldiers performed such feats of bravery in the
battlefield why did the people of Madina call them fugitives, and why
did they receive them by throwing dust on their heads and faces when in
that case (i.e. if they had fought as bravely as mentioned above) they
should have received them honourably, for example, by slaughtering sheep
and sprinkling scent and rosewater in their path?

The Prophet Wept Bitterly On The Death Of Ja'far
------------------------------------------------

The Prophet burst into tears on the death and martyrdom of his cousin
Ja'far. He went to the house of Ja'far direct to inform his wife, Asma'
daughter of Umays, about the death of her husband and also to offer
condolences to her. Addressing Asma', he said: "Where are my children?"
She brought Ja'far's sons, Abdullah, Awn and Muhammad before the
Prophet. On observing the Prophet's intense attachment for the children,
she realized that her dear husband was dead.

She said: "It appears that my children have become orphans, because you
are treating them as such". The Prophet wept bitterly at this moment.
Then he asked his daughter, Fatimah, to prepare food and entertain the
family of Ja'far for three days. Even after this the Prophet remained
sad for Ja'far bin Abu Talib and Zayd bin Harith and as and when he
entered his own house he wept bitterly for them.[^16]

[^1]: Waqidi has given another version of the stimulant for this chief's
inclination towards Islam. (Mughazi, vol. II, pp. 743-745)

[^2]: Tabaqat-i Ibn Sa'd, vol. Vll, page 394.

[^3]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. II, page 128.

[^4]: Mughazi Waqidi, vol. II, page 757.

[^5]: And then he immediately recited another verse: When others see my
grave or my corpse, besmeared with blood, they may praise my bravery and
self-sacrifice and pray for me. (Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 60 and
Tabaqat, vol. II, page 128).

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 374.

[^7]: Usudul Ghabah, vol. I, page 387.

[^8]: Siffin-i Ibn Muzahim, page 49.

[^9]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. Il. pp. 384 - 387.

[^10]: Mughazi Waqidi, vol. Il. p. 760; Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, p.
375.

[^11]: Mughaz-i Waqidi , vol Il. page 760; Seerah-i Halabi, vol. II,
page 77.

[^12]: Seerah i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 378.

[^13]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. II, page 763.

[^14]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, pp. 382 - 383; Seerah-i Halabi,
vol. II, p. 79.

[^15]: Tabaqat, vol. II, page 129.

[^16]: Bihar, vol. XXI, pp. 54 - 55 and Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. II, page
766.


