Chapter 4: Ancestors of The Prophet
===================================

1. Ibrahim, The Champion of Monotheism
--------------------------------------

The object of giving an account of the life of Prophet Ibrahim is to
make known the ancestors of the Holy Prophet of Islam for he was a
descendant of Ismail who was the son of Ibrahim. And as these two
venerable persons as well as many other noble forefathers of the Holy
Prophet have a great share in the history of Arabia and Islam, it is
appropriate that a brief account of their lives may be given here,
because the events of the history of Islam have, like the rings of a
chain, a perfect relationship with the events simultaneous with the dawn
of Islam as well as those which are somewhat remote from it.

For example, the protection and support accorded to the Holy Prophet by
Abdul Muttalib, the favours bestowed upon him and the hardships suffered
for his sake by Abu Talib, the greatness of the family of Hashim and the
origin of the enmity of Bani Umayyah (with the family of Hashim) are
considered to be very important events on which the history of Islam is
based. It is for this reason that a chapter of the history of Islam is
allocated to the discussion of these events.

We come across some very prominent and outstanding incidents in the life
of Prophet Ibrahim. It is not possible to forget his struggles to uphold
the standard of monotheism and to uproot the worship of idols and men.
Similarly his significant and elegant debates with star-worshippers,
which have been quoted by the Holy Qur'an with the object of education
and guidance of the people, are the most sublime instruction in
monotheism for the seekers of truth.

### Why Worshop of Creatures Came Into Existence?

The factors which occasioned worship of created things by man were no
other than his ignorance coupled with the absolute commandment of nature
(which, as a general rule, believes in a cause for every phenomenon). On
the one hand man, being controlled by nature, was obliged to take refuge
in some locality, to consider a subduing and powerful authority
effective in creating this unique system and to imagine the beautiful
paintings in the shape of different phenomena to be the work of a
skilful painter.

On the other hand, however, as he wanted to traverse this path without
the guidance of the Prophets, who are the Divine guides and have been
appointed to ensure the completion of the spiritual journey of man, he
took refuge in inanimate objects as well as in animals and men before he
could reach his real object (i.e. the One Allah) and find His trace by
observing the signs of creation and seek refuge in Him.

He therefore, imagined that these were the objects which he had been
seeking. In view of this the scholars have acknowledged, after studying
the Heavenly Books and the manner of the invitation extended to the
people by the Prophets and their debates with them, that the object of
the Prophets was not to make people believe in the existence of the
Creator of the Universe.

In fact their basic role in the society was to free the people from the
clutches of polytheism and idol-worship. In other words they had come to
tell the people, "O people! Allah in whose existence all of us believe
is this and not that; He is One and not two. Don't give the creatures
the place of Allah. Accept Allah as One. Don't accept any partner or
peer for Him".

The sentence 'There is no god but Allah' bears a glowing testimony to
what we have stated above. This was the starting point of the preaching
of the Holy Prophet. The purport of this sentence is that there is no
one fit to be worshipped except Allah and this necessitates that the
existence of the Creator should evidently be an admitted fact, so that
the people may be invited to accept His 'Unity'and 'Oneness'.

This sentence shows that in the eyes of the man of that time the first
portion (i.e. the Universe has Allah) was not a matter of dispute.
Besides this, the study of Qur'anic stories and the conversations of the
Prophets with the people clarify this point further.[^1]

### Birthplace of Prophet Ibrahim

The Champion of 'Monotheism' was born in the environments which were
permeated with the darkness of idol-worship and man-worship. Man
expressed humility before the idols made with his own hands as well as
before the stars. In these circumstances the thing which elevated the
position of Ibrahim and crowned his efforts with success was his
patience and fortitude.

The birth-place of the standard-bearer of monotheism was Babylon. The
historians have considered it to be one of the seven wonders of the
world and have recorded many narrations about the grandeur and
magnificence of the civilisation of this territory. The famous Greek
historian Herodote (484 - 425 B.C.) writes thus: "Babylon was
constructed in the shape of a square. Each of its sides was 120 leagues
long and its perimeter was 480 leagues".[^2]

This statement, howmuchsoever exaggerated it may be, reveals an
undeniable reality (when read along with other writings).

Of those attractive scenes and lofty palaces, however, nothing can be
seen today except a mound of clay, between the Tigris and the Euphrates,
which is covered by the silence of death. This silence is at times
broken by the orientalists through the excavations which they carry out
in order to gain information about the civilisation of the Babylonians.

Prophet Ibrahim, the architect of monotheism, was born during the reign
of Namrud, son of Kan'an. Although Namrud was an idol-worshipper, he
also claimed to be a deity and, taking advantage of the ignorance of the
credulous masses, imposed his beliefs on them. It may appear somewhat
strange that a person should be an idol-worshipper and should also claim
to be a deity.

However, the Holy Qur'an provides us an example of this belief. When
Musa son of Imran shook Firaun's authority with his forceful logic and
gave the lie to him in a public gathering the supporters of Firaun said
to him:

***Will you allow Musa*** **and** ***his people to commit evil in the
land and to forsake you and your gods?*** (Surah al--A'raf, 7 125).

It is well known that Firaun claimed to be a god and used to declare "I
am your supreme lord". However, this verse shows that, notwithstanding
his belief and claim, he was also an idol-worshipper.

The greatest defence which Namrud acquired was the procurement of the
support of astrologers and fortune-tellers who were considered to be the
sages of that age. It goes without saying that their humility before
Namrud paved the way for the exploitation of the down-trodden and
ignorant classes by him.

Moreover, some relatives of Ibrahim (for example Azar who made idols and
was also conversant with astrology) were amongst the followers of
Namrud. This in itself was a great obstacle for lbrahim, for, besides
having to struggle against the general beliefs, he had to face the
opposition of his own Kith and Kin.

Namrud had plunged into the sea of superstitious beliefs. He had spread
the carpet of feasting and drinking when the astrologers rang the first
bell of danger and said "Your government will tumble down through a
person who is the son of this soil". The latent fears of Namrud were
awakened and he said. "Is he born yet, or not?" the astrologers replied
that he was not yet born.

He then ordered the separation of women and men (during the night in
which, according to the prediction and calculations of the astrologers,
conception of his fell enemy was to take place). In spite of this,
however, his executioners killed the male infants. The midwives were
ordered to send reports about the particulars of new-born children to a
special office.

The same night conception of Ibrahim took place. His mother became
pregnant and, like the mother of Musa son of lmran, she kept the fact of
her pregnancy secret till the very end. After delivery she resorted to a
cave, situated near the town, in order to protect the life of her dear
child. She left her son in a corner of the cave and visited it during
day or night, as the circumstances would permit. With the passage of
time Namrud acquired peace of mind as a result of this oppression, and
believed that he had slaughtered the enemy of his throne and government.

Ibrahim spent thirteen years of his life in the cave which had a narrow
passage and then his mother brought him out. When he appeared amongst
the people the supporters of Namrud felt that he was a stranger.
Thereupon his mother said, "This is my son. He was born before the
prediction made by the astrologers".[^3]

When Ibrahim came out of the cave he strengthened his innate belief in
monotheism by observing the earth and the sky, the shining of the stars
and the verdure of the trees. He witnessed a strange and astonishing
society. He saw a group of persons who behaved in a very stupid manner
vis-a-vis the shining of the stars. He also saw some people whose level
of intelligence was even lower than other. They made idols with their
own hands and then worshipped them. The worst of all these things was
that a man, taking undue advantage of the ignorance and foolishness of
the people, claimed to be their god and declared himself to be the one
who had given life to all the beings and foreordained all events.

Prophet Ibrahim was obliged to prepare himself to combat on these three
different fronts. The Holy Qur'an has narrated the story of his
campaigns in these three fronts.

### Ibrahimâ€™s Campaign Against Idol Worship

The darkness of idol-worship had complereIy permeated throughout
Babylon, the bitth-place of Prophet Ibrahim. Numerous terrestrial and
celestial gods had deprived different classes of the society of their
reason and intellect. Some of these people considered the gods as
possessing power themselves, whereas others treated them to be
intermediaries for obtaining favours of the Almighty Allah.

### Secret of Polytheism

The Arabs before the advent of Islam believed that every being and every
phenomenon must have an independent cause and that the One Allah is not
competent to create all of them. This was because of the fact that at
that time science had not discovered the relationship which exists
between different natural beings and phenomena and various events.

Consequently those people imagined all beings and various natural
phenomena to be separate from and unconnected with one another. On this
account they were obliged to assume an indepedent god for every
phenomenon like rain and snow, earthquake and death, famine and dearth,
peace and tranquillity, cruelty and blood shed etc. They had no idea of
the fact that the entire Universe is a unity and all its parts are
interconnected and everyone of them has a reciprocal effect on another.

The crude human intellect of those days had not yet realised the secret
of worshipping the One Allah and was not aware that Allah who rules over
the Universe is an Omnipotent and Omniscient Lord. He is the Creator who
is free from every weakness and defect. His power, perfection, knowledge
and wisdom are unlimited. He is above everything which may be assumed
for Him.

There is no accomplishment which He does not possess. There is no
possibility which He cannot create. He is the One Allah who is competent
to create all beings and phenomena without the help of any person and
without any supports. He can create other beings and phenomena in the
same manner in which He has created the present ones. Hence, according
to reason the existence of the mediation of an authority which may
detract from the independence of the will of the peerless Allah is
unacceptable.

The belief that the Universe has two creators, one of whom is the origin
of good and light; and the other is the source of evil and darkness is
also not acceptable. And the belief about there having been mediation by
some persons like Maryam and 'Isa in the matter of the creation of the
Universe, or the administration of the physical world having been
entrusted to a human being is a manifestation of polytheism and
exaggeration. A monotheist is one who, with due deference to the
Prophets and the saints, preserves the position of The Creator of the
Universe and does not attribute the work of one to the other.

The method employed by the Prophets for the teaching and guidance of the
people is that of logic and reason, because they are concerned with the
minds of the people. They desire to set up a government which should be
established on the basis of faith, knowledge and justice and such a
government cannot be established by means of violence, warfare and
bloodshed.

We should, therefore, differentiate between the goverments of the
Prophets and the governments of Firouns and Narnruds. The object of the
second group is security of their rule and government by all possible
means, although their State may break down after their death.

On the other hand the divine people wish to set up a government which
should have its way in private as well as in public and whether the
ruler is strong or weak at any particular time or is alive or dead. Such
an object cannot, of course, be achieved by use of force and pressure.

In the first instance Ibrahim campaigned against the faith of his kith
and kin (viz. idol-worship), amongst whom Azar occupied the top-most
position. He had not yet achieved complete success in this field when he
had to fight at another sphere of operations. The level of thinking of
this second group was somewhat higher and clearer than that of the
first, for as opposed to the religion of the relatives of Ibrahim, these
people had discarded the mean and worthless terrestrial beings and they
worshipped the heavenly stars.

While campaigning against star-worship Ibrahim stated in simple words a
number of philosophical and scientific truths which had not yet been
conceived by the people of that age and even today his arguments command
admiration of the scholars well-versed in the arts of logic and debate.
Above all this, the Holy Qur'an has also quoted the arguments of Ibrahim
and the author of the present book has the honour to reproduce them in
these pages with brief explanations.

After coming out of the cave Ibrahim, in order to guide the people,
fixed his eyes one night on the sky at the time of sunset and remained
awake till sunset on the following day. During these twenty four hours
he debated and conversed with three groups and disproved their beliefs
with strong arguments.

The darkness of night approached and hid all signs of existence. The
bright star 'Venus' appeared from a corner of the horizon. In order to
win the hearts of the Venus-worshippers, Ibrahim concurred with them and
affected to follow their line and said: "It is my nourisher" However,
when the star set and disappeared in a corner, he said "I cannot accept
a god which sets". With this cogent reasoning he rejected the belief of
the Venus-worshippers and proved its falsity.

At the next stage his eyes fell on the luminous disc of the moon with
its fascinating brilliance and beauty. With a view to win the hearts of
the moon-worshippers he outwardly admitted its being the deity, but
later tore this belief also to pieces with his forceful logic.

It so happened that the strong hand of Providence made the moon also
sink below the horizon and its light and lustre disappeared from the
face of the earth. Ibrahim, without injuring the sentiments of the
moon-worshippers, said with truthful insight "If my real Lord does not
guide me, I shall surely go astray, because this god sets like the stars
and is in itself subject to a constant order and system shaped by
someone else".

The darkness of the night came to an end and the sun appeared, tearing
the bosom of the horizon, and began scattering its golden rays on the
face of earth. The sun-worshippers turned their faces to their deity. In
order to observe the rules of debate, Ibrahim also acknowledged its
god-hood. However, the setting of the sun confirmed its being
subservient to the general system of the Universe and Ibrahim explicitly
repudiated its being fit for worship. (Vide Surah al-An'am, 6:75 - 79)

There is no doubt about the fact that, while staying in the cave,
Ibrahim had, through an extraordinary divine favour, acquired from the
fountain of the Invisible, that innate knowledge about monotheism, which
is a speciality of the Prophets.

However, after perusal and study of these celestial bodies he gave that
knowledge the shape of argument. Thus, besides showing the right path to
the misguided people and providing them with a means of guidance, he has
left behind a store of invaluable knowledge to be utilised by those who
are in search of truth and reality.

### Ibrahimâ€™s Logic Explained

Ibrahim was well aware that Allah rules over the Universe, but the
question was whether that source of power consisted of these celestial
bodies, or it was an Omnipotent Being, superior to them. After studying
the conditions of these itinerant bodies he found that these bright and
luminous beings are themselves subject to rising, setting, decline and
disappearance in accordance with a particular system and they rotate on
an unalterable path and this in itself proves that they are subservient
to the will of someone else and a greater and stronger power controls
them and makes them rotate in a specified orbit.

Let us clarify the point further: The Universe entirely consists of
'Possibilities' and 'Needs'. Various creatures and natural phenomena are
never independent of the Almighty. They need an Omniscient Allah during
every second of day and night - the Allah who should not, at any moment,
be oblivious of their needs.

Now as regards the celestial bodies they are present and useful at one
time and absent and useless at another. Such beings do not possess the
necessary competence to be the gods of other beings and to meet their
needs and requirements.

This theory may be propounded in the shape of various theoretical and
philosophical statements. For example we may say 'These celestial bodies
are in motion and move on their respective axes. In case their movement
is without any option and under compulsion there must he a stronger hand
that controls them. And if their movement is in accordance with their
own free will it will have to be seen as to what the object of this
movement is.

If they are moving to achieve perfection and are like a seed which rises
from the earth to grow into a tree and to bear fruit, this will
necessarily mean that they need a kind, powerful, wise and independent
being who should remove their short-comings and endow them with the
quality of perfection.

But, if their movement and rotation tends towards weakness and
deficiency and they are just like a person who is past his prime and has
entered the wrong side of age, then their movement will be an
inclination towards decline and destruction and will not at all accord
with the position of the deity who should rule the world and all that it
contains.

### Method of Discussion and Debate Adopted by The Prophets

The history of the Prophets shows that they commenced their reformating
programme by first inviting their relatives to the true path and later
they extended the 'invitation' to others. This is just what the Prophet
of Islam did immediately after his appointment to the prophetic mission.
First of all he invited his own people to Islam and laid the foundation
of his 'call' on their reformation, in compliance with the Divine
commandment

***Admonish your nearest kinsfolk*** (Surah al-Shu'ara, 26:214)

Ibrahim also adopted the same method and first undertook the reformation
of his own kinsfold. Azar enjoyed a very high position amongst his
relatives, because, besides being an educated man and an artist, he was
an expert astrologer. In the court of Namrud his word was treated to be
authoritative and his astrological conclusions were accepted by all the
courtiers to be correct.

Ibrahim was aware that if he could win over Azar to his side he would
have captured the strongest fortress of the idol-worshippers. He,
therefore, advised him in the best possible manner not to worship
inanimate things. For some reasons, however, Azar did not accept the
message and advice of his nephew Ibrahim.

So far as we are concerned, however, the most important thing in this
episode is the method of invitation and the manner of conversation of
Ibrahim with Azar. Deep and careful study of the Qur'anic verses in
which this conversation has been reproduced makes the method of argument
and invitation adopted by the Prophets abundantly clear. Now let us see
in which way Ibrahim invited Azar to the true path:

***He said to his uncle: Father! how can you serve a worthless idol, a
thing that can neither see nor hear?***

***Father, the truth has been revealed to me about many mysteries;
therefore, follow me, that I may guide you along an even path.***

***Father, do not worship Satan; for he has rebelled against the Lord of
Mercy.***

***Father, I fear that Allah's scourge will fall upon you and you will
become one of Satan's minions.*** (Surah Maryam, 19:44 - 47)

In reply to Ibrahim's invitation Azar said "Do you dare renounce my
gods, Ibrahim? Desist from this folly or you shall be stoned to death.
Begone from my house immediately"

Magnanimous Ibrahim bore this ill-speaking on the part of Azar with
perfect calmness and replied "Peace be on you. I shall implore my Lord
to forgive you".

Could there be a reply more appropriate and a conversation more mild and
agreeable than these words of Ibrahim?

### Was Azar The Father of Ibrahim?

The above quoted verses as well as 15th verse of Surah Tawbah and 14th
verse of Surah al-Mumtahinah would give the impression that Azar was
related to Ibrahim in the capacity of father and Ibrahim too, has
addressed him as 'father'. However, the idol-worshipper Azar's being his
father is not in harmony with the concensus of opinion of the Shi'ah
scholars, who believe that the forefathers of the Holy Prophet of Islam
as well as all other Prophets were pious people who believed in
monotheism.

The distinguished Shi'ah scholar, Shaykh Mufid has, in his exquisite
book,[^4] considered this proposition to be one on which all the Shi'ah
scholars are unanimous and a large number of Sunni scholars have also
concurred with them in holding this belief. The question, therefore,
arises as to what is the real import of the apparent contents of the
aforesaid verses and how this problem should be solved.

Many commentators of the Holy Qur'an assert that, although the word
***'Ab'*** *is* usually used in Arabic to mean 'father', this meaning is
not exclusive and at times it has been used in the Arabic lexicon and in
the Quranic terminology to mean 'uncle' as well. For example, in the
following verse the word ***'Ab'*** stands for 'uncle'.

***Were you present when death came to Ya'qub? He said to his children:
'What will you worship when l am gone' They replied: We will worship
your Allah and the Allah of your forefathers (Aba) Ibrahim and Isma'il
and Ishaq: He is the only Lord. To Him we have surrendered ourselves.***
(Surah Baqarah, 2: 132).

There is no doubt about the fact that Isma'il was the uncle of Ya'qub
and not his father, because Ya'qub was the son of Ishaq who was the
brother of Isma'il. However, inspite of this, the children of Ya'qub
have mentioned him as father of Ya'qub i.e. they have called him
***'Ab'*** vis-a-vis Ya'qub.

As this word carries two meanings it is possible that in the verses
related to Azar having been invited to the right path by Ibrahim it may
mean 'uncle', and especially so in view of the consensus of opinion
mentioned by Shaykh Mufid. And possibly Ibrahim called him 'father',
because he had acted as his guardian for quite a long time and he
(Ibrahim) looked upon him as if he were his father.

### Azar in The Holy Qurâ€™an

With a view to find out the verdict of the Qurtan about the relationship
between Ibrahim and Azar we should like to invite the attention of the
reader to the explanation of two verses:

1. As a consequence of the strenuous efforts made by the Holy Prophet,
Arabia was illuminated with the light of Islam. Most of the people
embraced this religion whole-heartedly and realized that polytheism and
idol-worship would end in Hell and torture. Although they were happy to
have come within the fold of the true faith, they felt grieved to
recollect that their fathers and mothers were idol-worshippers.

Hearing of the verses which depict the plight of the polytheists on the
Day of Judgment weighed heavily on them. To get rid of this mental
torture they requested the Holy Prophet to pray to Allah for the
forgiveness of their forefathers who had died as infidels, in the same
manner in which Ibrahim had prayed for Azar.

The following verses were, however, revealed in reply to their request

***It is not for the Prophet or the believers to beg forgiveness for
idolaters, even though they be related to them, after it has become
manifest that they have earned the punishment of Hell. Ibrahim prayed
for his father only to fulfill a promise he had made him. But, when he
realized that he was an enemy of Allah, he disowned him. Yet Ibrahim was
a compassionate and tender-hearted man.*** (Surah Tawbah, 9:113 - 114)

It would appear more probable that the conversation of Ibrahim with Azar
and his promising the latter to pray for his forgiveness, which ended in
the severance of their mutual connections, and renouncement of each
other took place, when Ibrahim was young i.e. at a time when he was
still residing in Babylon and had not yet intended to go to Palestine,
Egypt and the Hijaz. After studying this verse it may be concluded that,
when Azar persisted in his infidelity and idol-worship, Ibrahim, while
still young, severed his connections with him and never thought of him
thereafter.

2. During the last part of his life i.e. when he grew old, Ibrahim,
after discharging a great responsibility (i.e. construction of the
Ka'bah) and bringing his wife and child to the dry desert of Mecca,
prayed, from the core of his heart, for a number of persons, including
his parents, and sought acceptance of his supplication from Allah. At
that time he prayed thus

***'Forgive me, Lord, and forgive my parents and all the faithful
(believers) on the Day of Reckoning.*** (Surah Ibrahim, 14 41)

These verses clearly show that the ceremony of supplication took place
after the completion of the construction of the Ka'bah when Ibrahim was
passing through his old age. If the father for whom he has shown love
and devotion in this verse and he prayed for him is the same Azar it
would mean that Ibrahim did not remain dissociated from him throughout
his life and at times also prayed for him, whereas the verse which was
revealed in reply to the request of the descendants of the polytheists
makes it clear that after some time, when he was still young, Ibrahim
broke off all connections with Azar and kept aloof from him - and
aloofness and renouncement means ceasing to be on speaking terms, lack
of attention and abandoning supplications for each other's salvation.

When these two verses are read together, it becomes clear that the
person whom Ibrahim came to hate in his young age and with whom he broke
off all ties of interest and love was a person other than that whom he
remembered till his old age and prayed for his forgiveness and
salvation.[^5]

### Ibrahim The Idol-Breaker

The time of the festival approached and the neglectful people of Babylon
left for the jungle to get rid of their fatigue and to reinforce their
faculties and perform the ceremonies of the festival. Thus the city
became empty of them. The antecedents of Ibrahim and his reproaches and
criticisms had made them anxious.

They, therefore, insisted that Ibrahim should also go with them and
partake in the ceremonies of the festival. However, their proposal,
rather insistence, coincided with Ibrahim's illness. In reply to their
suggestion, therefore, he said that he was ill and would not participate
in the ceremonies of the festival.

Indeed, that was a day of joy for the one who was a monotheist, as well
as for the polytheists. For the polytheists it meant the celebration of
a very old festival and they had gone to the foot of the mountain and in
green fields to carry out the ceremonies of the festival and to revive
the custom of their forefathers.

And for the champion of the monotheism also it was the august day of the
first unprecedented festival for which he had longed for quite some
time, so that the city should be cleared of the opponents and he should
break up the manifestations of infidelity and polytheism.

The last group of the people left the city, Ibrahim considered this time
to be very opportune and, with a heart imbued with confidence and faith
in Allah, he entered the idol temple. He saw from a distance the
sculptured pieces of wood and the lifeless idols. He thought of the
enormous food which the idol-worshippers used to bring to their temples
as offerings to seek blessing, and went in search of it. He took a
morsel of bread in his hand and pointing it to the idols said jeeringly,
"Why don't you eat these all kinds of foodstuff?"

Evidently the artificial gods of the polytheists did not posses power to
make the slightest movement, not to talk of their being able to eat
anything. A deathlike silence prevailed over the spacious hall of the
idol-temple, which was broken only by the heavy blows which Ibrahim was
giving on the hands, feet and bodies of the idols. He broke all the
idols, till a big mound of broken and shattered pieces of wood and metal
was formed in the middle of the temple. However, he spared the biggest
idol and placed the axe on its shoulder. This he did purposely.

He knew that on return from the jungle the polytheists would understand
the actual position and would regard the apparent situation as
artificial and unreal, because they would never believe that these blows
had been given to the other idols by the big idol, which possessed no
power at all to move or do anything, and in that event he (Ibrahim)
would utilise the situation for his 'call' and say that when, according
to their own admission, that idol did not possess the least power, how
could it be possible that it should be the lord of the world?

The sun moved to the horizon and ceased to throw light on the world. At
that time the people began returning to the city in groups. Time for
performing the ceremonies of idol-worship arrived and a group of the
idolaters entered the temple. The unexpected scene, which clearly showed
the disgrace and humility of their gods, attracted the attention of all
of them. There was deathlike silence in the atmosphere of the temple and
everyone was impatient.

One of them, however, broke the silence and said ' Who has committed
this mischief?" Condemnation of the idols by Ibrahim in the past and his
open criticism of idol-worship convinced them that it was only he who
had done all this. A tribunal was, therefore, set up under the
supervision of Namrud and young Ibrahim and his mother were brought up
for trial.

The mother was charged with the offence of concealing the birth of her
child and not reporting it to the special office of government, so that
he could eventually be executed. She gave this reply to the charge "I
found that as a result of the final decision of the government of the
time (i.e. killing the children) the human race in this country was
being exterminated.

I did not inform the government office about my son, because I wanted to
see how he progressed in the future. In the event of his proving to be
the same person about whom the foretellers (priests) had predicted,
there would have been a reason for me to inform the police so that they
might desist from shedding the blood of other children. And if he does
not happen to be that person, then I have saved a young man of this
country from death". The mother's argument fully satisfied the judges.

Now Ibrahim was cross-examined. He said "The state of affairs would show
that the big idol has struck all these blows and if the idols possess
power of speech you had better ask him". This vague reply, tainted with
ridicule and contempt, was meant to serve another purpose; and that
purpose was that Ibrahim was sure that those people would say in reply,
"Ibrahim! You are well aware that these idols do not possess power of
speech. They do not also have any will or intellect".

In that event Ibrahim could invite the attention of the tribunal to one
basic point. By chance, the same thing happened which Ibrahim had
anticipated. He spoke thus with reference to the statement of those
people which testified the weakness, humility and helplessness of the
idols "If they are in fact like that as you describe them, then why do
you worship them and why do you pray to them to grant your requests?"

Ignorance, obstinacy and blind imitation ruled the hearts and intellects
of the judges, and in the face of irrefutable reply of Ibrahim, they
found no alternative but to give a judgement which conformed with the
wishes of the government of the time.

They, therefore, decided that Ibrahim should be burnt alive. A large
stack was set on fire and the champion of Divine monotheism was thrown
into the blazing.flames. However, Almighty Allah extended His hand of
Kindness and blessing towards Ibrahim and kept him immune from harm. He
(Allah) converted the artificial hell made by man into a green and
pleasant garden.[^6] (Vide Surah al-Anbiya, 21:51 - 70).

### Instructive Points of This Narrative

Although the Jews claim to be the forerunners of the Caravan of those
who believe in monotheism, this story was not well-known amongst them
and it does not find place in their present Torah. Amongst the Heavenly
Books it is only the Holy Qur 'an which has undertaken to narrate it.
We, therefore, mention below some instructive points of this story which
are in fact the very points which the Holy Qurtan wishes to bring home
to the people by narrating the stories of various Prophets.

1. This story is a clear proof of the extraordinary valour and bravery
of the friend of Allah (Ibrahim). His determination about breaking the
idols and destroying the manifestations and means of polytheism was not
a thing which could remain hidden from the people of Namrud because, by
his reproaches and criticism, he had already made his extreme aversion
and hatred for idol-worship quite manifest and he used to say openly and
clearly:

***"If you do not desist from your shameful practice I will take a
decision about them". And on the day people went to the jungle he openly
said: By the Lord' I will overthrow your idols as soon as you have
turned your backs.*** (Surah Anbiya, 21:57)

Allamah Majlisi quotes thus from Imam Sadiq: 'The movement and campaign
of one person against the rows of the infidels, whose number exceeded a
few thousands, is a living proof of the valour and perseverance of
Ibrahim, who did not harbour any fear in his mind in the path of the
exaltation of Allah's name and strengthening the base of the worship of
One Allah ".[^7]

2. While the smashing blows by Ibrahim were apparently an armed and
hostile revolt, but, as is evident from his talk with the judges, this
movement had actually a propagandistic aspect, because he considered the
last means of awakening the wisdom and conscience of those people to be
that he should break all the idols except the big one and place the axe
on its shoulder so that they might make further investigations into the
causes of this incident.

And as eventually they would consider the scene to be a mere mockery and
would not at all believe that the blows had been struck by the big idol,
he could utilise this thing for propagating his views and say:
"According to your own admission this big idol does not possess the
least power, so why do you worship it?"

This shows that from the very beginning the Prophets have used only
logic and argument as their sharp weapons, which have always borne
results. Or else what was the value of breaking a few idols as compared
with the danger to life with which Ibrahim was confronted? It was
necessary that this act should have carried a great service for his
mission in its lap, so that it should have been admirable for him, from
the point of view of reason, to sacrifice his life for it.

3. Ibrahim was aware that, as a consequence of this act, his life would
be finished. As a rule, therefore, he should have become agitated or
should have hidden himself somewhere or at least refrained from
witticism and humour.

Nevertheless, however, he had complete control over his spirits and
nerves. For example, when he entered the idol-temple he approached every
idol and asked it mockingly to eat food. After becoming desperate he
reduced the idol-temple to a heap or broken wood and treated all this as
something quite ordinary, as if it were not to be followed by his own
death or execution.

When he appeared before the tribunal he replied to their questioning,
"Surely (some doer) has done it, the chief of them is this, therefore
ask them, it they can speak.". Such witticism before the court could be
expected only from a person who was prepared for all eventualities and
did not feel any fear or awe in his heart.

Even more wonderful is the study of the attitude of mind of Ibrahim at
the time when he was stationed on the catapult and knew it for certain
that he would soon find himself amidst the flames of fire - the fire,
for which fire-wood had been collected by the people of Babylon to
perform a sacred religious rite, and whose flames were rising with such
intensity that even a falcon dared not fly around or above it.

Just at that time the celestial angel (Archangel Jibreel) descended from
the heavens, expressed his readiness to render him (Ibrahim) every
assistance and said: "Tell me about your heart's desire". Ibrahim
replied to him: "I do have a desire. However, it cannot be made known to
you but to my Lord only".[^8]

This reply clearly manifests the nobility and spiritual greatness of
Ibrahim.

In a big palace, situated a few miles away from the scene of the fire,
Namrud waited anxiously and impatiently for venegeance being wreaked
upon Ibrahim and wished to see how the flames of fire devoured him. The
catapult was put into operation. With one jerk the body of the champion
of Divine monotheism fell into the fire.

However, the penetrating will of the Lord of Ibrahim converted that
artificial hell into a garden in a manner which surprised them all, so
much so that Namrud turned involuntarily to Azar and said ''lbrahim's
Lord holds him dear"[^9]

In spite of all these incidents Ibrahim could not preach his faith with
complete freedom. Eventually the government of the time decided, after
holding consultations, to send him in exile. This opened a new chapter
in his life and became the beginning of his journeys to Syria,
Palestine, Egypt and the Hijaz.

### A New Chapter in The Life of Ibrahim

The court of justice in Babylon banished Ibrahim from the country and he
was forced to quit his birth place and to proceed to Egypt and
Palestine. 'Amaliqa' who ruled those territories accorded him a warm
reception and gave him many presents, one of them being a slave-girl
named Hajar.

Ibrahim's wife Sarah had not borne any child till that time and the
above-mentioned developments stimulated her sentiments for her
honourable husband. She, therefore, suggested to Ibrahim to marry Hajar
so that possibly she might be blessed with a son who should become a
source of their joy and happiness. The marriage took place and after
some time Hajar gave birth to a son who was named Isma'il. It was not
long before Sarah too become pregnant; and bore a son who was given the
name of Ishaq.[^10]

After some time Ibrahim, as commanded by Allah, took Isma'il and his
mother Hajar towards south (Makkah) and stationed them in an unknown
valley. This valley was uninhabitated and only the caravans which
travelled from Syria to Yemen and vice versa pitched their tents there.
For the remaining days of the year this place remained absolutely
isolated and was only a burning desert like other parts of Arabia.

Residence at such a dreadful place was very trying for a woman who had
spent her days in the the territories of Amaliqa.

The scorching heat of the desert and its extremely hot winds presented
the scene of death before her eyes. Ibrahim himself was also much
conerned about these developments. While he was holding the bridle of
his riding animal with the intention of saying good bye to his wife and
child a flood of tears began to flow from his eyes and he said to Hajar:
"O Hajar! All this has been done according to the command of the
Almighty and His command cannot be defied. Rely on Allah's blessings and
rest assured that He will not humiliate us". Then he prayed to Allah in
these words with perfect concentration:

***Lord! Make this a land of peace and bestow plenty upon its people,
those of them that believe In Allab and the Last Day.*** (Surah Baqarah,
2:126)

When he was descending the hill, he looked back and prayed to Allah to
shower His blessings on them.

Although apparently this journey was very difficlit and vexatious, but
later it became evident that it carried momentous happenings in its lap,
amongst them being the construction of the Ka'bah which provided a great
base for the monotheists, flying the flag of the worship of One Allah in
Arabia and laying the foundation of a great religious movement, which
was to take shape in future, viz. the great movement which came into
operation in this land through the last of the Prophets.

### How The Fountain of Zamzam Came Into Existence

Ibrahim took the bridle of his riding animal and, with tears in his
eyes, bade farewell to the land of Makkah as well as Hajar and his son.
After a short time however, food and water available with the child and
his mother was exhausted and the breast of Hajar also became dry. The
condition of her son too began to deteriorate. A flood of tears flowed
from the eyes of the banished mother and moistened her lap.

In utter confusion she got up on her feet and reached the Safa mountain.
From there she saw the spectacle of a mirage near Marwa mountain and ran
towards it. However, the bitterness of the deceptive landscape
disappointed her very much. The lamentations and uneasiness of her dear
child made her run more fanatically in all directions Thus, she ran
seven times between the mountains of Safa and Marwa to locate water, but
eventually lost all hopes and returned to her son.

The child must have reached his last breath by that time and must have
lost the capacity of weeping or crying any more. However, at that very
moment the prayer of Ibrahim was granted. The tired and weary mother saw
that limpid water had begun gushing out from beneath the feet of
Isma'il. The mother who was looking towards the last breaths of her son
and believed that he would pass away after a few moments felt extremely
happy on seeing this water. Both the mother and the son drank their fill
and the clouds of despair and hopelessness which had cast their shadow
on their lives were driven away by the zephyr of Divine blessings.[^11]

The appearance of this fountain, which is called "Zam Zam" since that
day, made the birds of air fly over it and spread their broad wings like
a cover on the heads of the afflicted mother and son. People of a tribe
named "Jarham" who lived at a distance from this valley saw the birds
going to and tro and came to the conclusion that water had become
available in the vicinity. They sent two of their men to verify the
position.

After a good deal of wandering those persons reached the centre of
Divine blessing. When they drew near they saw a woman and a child
sitting by the side of a pool of water. Thev returned immediately and
reported the matter to the chiefs of their tribe. The members of that
tribe soon pitched their tents around this blessed fountain and Hajar
was thus relieved of the hardship and bitterness of loneliness which she
had been suffering.

The growth and perfect sociability of Isma'il became the cause of his
making a matrimonial alliance with the Jarham tribe and thus benefit
from their support and society. Isma'il soon married a girl of that
tribe. From their mother's side, therefore, his descendants are related
to that tribe.

### They Meet Again

After leaving his dear son and wife in the land of Makkah, under the
command of Allah Almighty, Ibrahim thought at times of going there to
see his son. During one of his journeys, which was perhaps his first
journey, he reached Makkah and found that his son was not present in his
house. By that time Isma'il had grown up to manhood and had married a
girl of the Jarham tribe. Ibrahim asked Isma'il's wife, "Where is your
husband?" She replied, "He is gone out for hunting". Then he asked her
whether she had anything to eat. To this she replied in the negative.

Ibrahim was very much grieved to observe the rudeness and unkindness of
his son's wife and said to her, "When Isma'il returns home convey my
greetings to him and tell him to change the threshold of his house" He
then returned to his destination.

When Isma'il returned he smelt the odour of his father and realised from
his wife's account that the man who had visited his house was Ibrahim
himself. He also understood from the message left by his father that he
had desired him to divorce his present wife and choose another, because
he did not consider his present wife to be a suitable partner of his
life.[^12]

It may perhaps be asked as to why, after having performed so long a
journey, Ibrahim should not have waited till the return of his son from
hunting and why he went back without seeing him. The historians explain
that he returned hastilv because he had made a promise to Sarah that he
would not stay there longer and his early return was with a view to keep
the promise.

After this journey he was also ordered by Allah Almighty to perform
another journey to Makkah, to construct the Ka'bah there and to attract
to that point the hearts of those who believe in monotheism.

The Holy Qur'an testified that in the last days of the life of Ibrahim,
Makkah had grown into a city, because, having performed his task, he had
prayed to Allah in the following words:

***Lord! Make this (Makkak) a land of safety. Preserve me and my***
***descendants from*** ***worshipping idols**.* (Surah Abraham, 14:35)

***And at the time of his arrival in the desert of Makkah he bad prayed:
Lord! make this a land of peace*** (Surah Baqarah, *2:* 126)*.*

In order to complete the discussion, it would have been appropriate to
narrate the circumstances in which the Ka'bah was constructed and also
to give a brief history of it. However, lest we should minimise our real
object, we give below the particulars of some of the reverenced
forefathers of the Holy Prophet who are well-known in history.

2. Qusayy Son Of Kilab
----------------------

The following are the names of the father and forefathers of the Holy
Prophet in upward order:

Abdullah, Abdul Muttalib, Hashim, Abd-i Manaf, Qusayy, Kilab, Marra,
Ka'b, Loo, Ghalib, Fahr, Malik, Nazar, Kananah, Khuzamah, Mudrakah,
Ilyas, Mazar, Nazar, Ma'd and Adnan.[^13]

The genealogy of the Holy Prophet up to Ma'd son of Adnan is as
reproduced above. However, there is a difference of opinion with regard
to the number and names of intermediate persons from Adnan upwards upto
Isma'il, and, according to the report quoted by Ibn Abbas from the Holy
Prophet, when the genealogy of the Holy Prophet reaches Adnan one should
not proceed beyond it, because whenever, the Holy Prophet himself
mentioned the names of his forefathers he did not proceed beyond Adnan,
and ordered that other too, should not narrate the names of his other
forefathers upto Isma'il.

He also said that what was commonly known amongst the Arabs regarding
that portion of the pedigree was not correct. Hence we have also quoted
that portion of his genealogy which is admittedly correct and now
proceed to give detailed particulars of some of the persons concerned.

The above-mentioned persons are well-known in the history of Arabia and
the history of Islam, too, has relationship with some of them. Hence, we
give below an account of the lives of those from Qusayy upto the
reverenced father of the Holy Prophet (Abdullah) and refrain from
narrating the events of the lives of others who have no concern with the
matter under discussion.[^14]

Qusayy was the fourth ancestor of the Prophet of Islam. His mother,
Fatima, married Kilab and gave birth to two children named 'Zohrah' and
'Qusayy.' The second of them was still an infant when Fatima's husband
died. She then married another man named Rabi'a and accompanied him to
Syria. Qusayy received fatherly support from Rabi'a till differences
arose between him and Rabi'a's tribe, as a result of which they drove
him away beyond the frontiers of their home-land.

His mother was touched by the treatment meted out to him and decided to
send him back to Makkah. The hand of destiny pulled him to Makkah. His
hidden qualities enabled him to establish his superiority over the
Makkans and especially the tribe of Quraysh. Within a short time he
acquired the high governmental offices in Makkah and also became the
custodian of the keys of the Ka'bah and the undisputed ruler of that
city.

Many remarkable events are associated with his name. One of these was
that he encouraged the people to construct a house with the name of
'Darun Nadwah' adjacent to the Ka'bah and thus founded a Council Hall
for the Arabs so that their dignitaries and chiefs might sit together in
this public centre and solve their problems. He died in the 5th A.D. and
left behind two sons named Abdud Dar and Abd Manaf.

3 . Abd Manaf
-------------

He was the third ancestor of the Holy Prophet. His name was Mughirah and
he enjoyed the title of 'Qamar al-Bat'ha' (the moon of Bat'ha). He was
younger than his brother Abdud Dar, but enjoyed great respect amongst
the people. He was very pious. He invited people to virtue, behaved well
with them and maintained very good relations with his kinsfolk.

Although he enjoyed a very honourable position in the society he never
became a rival of his brother, Abdud Dar in the matter of acquisition of
high offices connected with the Ka'bah. According to the will of Qusayy
the rulership rested with Abdud Dar, but when the two brothers died
their sons began quarrelling for various offices. After a good deal of
contention and conflict they eventually got reconciled and divided the
positions amongst themselves.

It was decided that the custodianship of the Ka'bah and the chairmanship
of 'Darun Nadwah' would remain with the children of Abdud Dar and the
functions of providing drinking water to the pilgrims and their
entertainment would be performed by the sons of Abd Manaf. This division
of offices was still intact at the time of the advent of Islam.[^15]

4. Hashim
---------

He was the second forefather of the Holy Prophet. His real name was 'Amr
and he enjoyed the title of 'Ala. He and Abd Shams were twins and their
two other brothers were Muttalib and Nawfal. It is narrated by the
historians that at the time of the birth of Hashim and Abd Shams a
finger of the former was stuck on the forehead of the latter. Blood
flowed profusely when they were separated from each other and the people
took this occurrence to be a bad omen.[^16]

Halabi writes in his 'Seerah' that this bad omen later manifested its
effect, because, after the advent of Islam, fierce battles were fought
between Bani Abbas who were the decendants of Hashim and Bani Umayyah,
who claimed their descent from Abd Shams.[^17]

This shows that the writer of 'Seerah' has completely ignored the tragic
events connected with the descendants of Ali, although the bloody drama
which Bani Umayyah staged by shedding the pure blood of the progeny of
the Holy Prophet is a glaring evidence of the existence of enmity
between the two families. It is not, however, known as to why the said
writer has failed to mention these events.

One of the particular points about the descendants of Abd Manaf, which
are reflected in the battle-cries and literature of Arabia, is that they
died at different places viz. Hashim died in Ghaza, Abd Shams in Makkah,
Nawfal in Iraq and Muttalib in Yemen.

To quote an example of the magnanimity of Hashim it may be stated that
whenever Zil-Hajj moon was sighted he came to the Holy Ka'bah, leaned on
its wall and delivered a speech on the following lines:

'O people ot the tribe of Quraysh, you are the wisest and noblest
amongst the Arabs. Your race is the best amongst all races. Almighty
Allah has provided you accommodation by the side of His own House and
has granted you superiority, in this regard over all other descendants
of Isma'il.

O my kinsmen, beware! Pilgrims of the House of Allah are coming to you
this month with extraordinary favour They are Allah's guests and it is
your duty to receive them. There are many indigent persons amongst them,
who will be coming from far off places. I swear by the Lord of this
House that if I had been wealthy enough to entertain all the guests of
Allah, I would not have insisted upon you to provide assistance.

At present, however, I am going to spend all that I can afford, and
which I have earned bv lawful means. I administer an oath to you in the
name of the honour of this House that you will not spend, for this
purpose, anything which you have usurped, or give or spend anything
hypocritically or under compulsion. If anyone is not inclined to assist,
he is at liberty not to spend anything.[^18]

For all intents and purposes the leadership of Hashim was for the
welfare of the Makkans and had a great effect on the betterment of the
conditions of their lives. Whenever a famine occured, his magnanimity
did not permit that people should experience any hardship on this
account. One of the outstanding steps, which he took for the advancement
of the commerce of the Makkans, was the conclusion of an agreement with
the ruler of Ghassan.

It was in the wake of this agreement that similar agreements were
concluded by his brother Abd Shams with the King of Ethiopia and by his
two other brothers Muttalib and Nawfal with the Ruler of Yemen and the
Emperor of Iran respectively. Merchandise could be exchanged freely with
various countries.

This agreement solved many difficulties and brought into existence a
number of shopping centres in Makkah which also existed at the time of
the advent of Islam. Besides this, one of the beneficial activities of
Hashim was the establishment of journeying by the Quraysh to Syria in
summer and to Yemen in winter. This practice continued for quite some
time even after the birth of Islam.

### Umayyah Son of Abd Shams Feels Jealous

Umayyah, son of Abd Shams, was jealous of the greatness and dignity of
his uncle, Hashim, and endeavoured to attract the people to himself by
bestowing gifts on them. However, inspite of his best efforts and
obstructionist activities he could not divest Hashim of his position. On
the contrary his vilification and slandering of Hashim increased honour
and respect for the latter all the more in the hearts of the repeople.

The fire of jealousy continued to burn in the heart of Umayyah. At last
he insisted upon his uncle that both of them should approach one of the
sages (fortune-tellers) of Arabia and only he whom that sage confirmed
to be fit for rulership should take the reins of administration in his
hands.

Hashim's magnanimity did not permit him to enter into a dispute with his
nephew. However, as Umavvah was very much insistent, he (Hashim) agreed
to the proposal on two conditions. Firstly that whoever lost the case
should sacrifice one hundred black-eyed camels during Haj season and
secondly that he should remain out of Makkah for ten years.

Now it so happened that, as soon as the Arab sage (the fortune-teller of
Asfan) saw Hashim, he began praising him and decided the case in his
favour. Umayyah was, therefore, obliged to leave Makkah and spend ten
years in Syria.[^19]

The effects of this hereditary enmity continued to exist for 130 years
after the advent of Islam and occasioned crimes which are unprecedented
in the history of mankind. The above-mentioned story, besides bringing
to light the fact as to how the enmity between the two families
originated, also explains the reasons for the influence which Bani
Umayyah enjoyed in Syria, and it becomes known that their old relations
with the Syrians prepared ground for their rule in that area.

### Hashim Marries

Salma, daughter of 'Amr Khazraji, was a virtuous woman, who had obtained
divorce from her husband and was not prepared to remarry. While
returning from Syria, during one of his journeys, Hashim stayed at
Yathrib (Madina) for a few days and proposed to Salma. Salma was
impressed by the nobility, affluence and character of Hashim and by the
influence which he wielded amongst the Quraysh.

She agreed to marry him on two conditions, one of which was that at the
time of giving birth to a child she should be amongst her own people.
According to this agreement she spent some time in Makkah with Hashim
and when the time of her child-birth approached she returned to Yathrib.
There she gave birth to a son who was named Shibah and later came to be
known as Abdul Muttalib. The historians have mentioned the following
reasons for the assumption of this title by Shibah:

When Hashim felt that his death was approaching, he said to his brother
Muttalib "Brother! Find out your slave Shibah". And as Hashim (father of
Shibah) had called his son, "the slave of Muttalib", he later came to be
known as Abdul Muttalib (i.e. slave of Muttalib).

Another version is this: "One day, while a Makkan was passing through
the streets of Yathrib, he saw many children practising archery. When
one of the children won the match he said immediately "I am the son of
the chief of Bat'ha (Makkah)". The man from Makkah came forward and
asked the boy, 'who are you?". The reply was, "I am Shibah son of Hashim
son of Abd Manaf".

On his return to Makkah that man informed Muttalib, the brother of
Hashim and chief of Makkah, about this incident. The uncle was reminded
of his nephew and, therefore, went to Yathrib. The bearing of the nephew
personified before Muttalib the very personality of his brother and
tears trickled down his cheeks. Both of them exchanged kisses of love
and emotion. The mother was not willing to part with her son and
objected to his being carried away to Makkah, but her objections and
protests made the determination of Muttalib all the more stronger.
Eventually Muttalib succeeded in achieving his purpose and, after having
obtained the permission of the mother, made Shibah mount along with
himself and proceeded to Makkah.

During the course of the journey the scorching heat of the sun blackened
the silvery face of the nephew and his dress was also worn and torn. For
this reason, therefore, when the two arrived at Makkah, people thought
that the young man was a slave of Muttalib.

They whispered to one another "This young man (Shibah) is Muttalib's
slave". And, although Muttalib announced time and again that the lad was
his nephew, the wrong impression which had taken root in the minds of
the people continued to persist. The result was that the nephew of
Muttalib came to be known as Abdul Muttalib (the slave of
Muttalib).[^20]

Still another version is this Abdul Muttalib was called so, because he
had been brought up by his uncle and it was usual amongst the Arabs that
whenever a person was brought up by another man he was called the slave
of his benefactor.

5. Abdul Muttalib
-----------------

Abdul Muttalib son of Hashim, the first ancestor of the Holy Prophet,
was the chief of Quraysh and a renowned person. His entire social life
was replete with brilliant attributes. As the events of his chiefship
are also related to the history of Islam we narrate hereunder some of
them.

There is no doubt about the fact that however resolute and strong a man
may be, he is eventually influenced, to some extent, by his environment,
and the habits and customs of the society affect his way of thinking. At
times, however, some persons have an innate tendency to resist the
factors governing their environments with great daring and courage, and
keep themselves and their surroundings immune from all sorts of
contamination.

The hero of our discourse was a perfect specimen of those people in
whose lives we observe many brilliant points. If a person who, inspite
of spending more than eighty years of his life amongst people who are
habituated to idol-worship, drinking wine, usury and homicide, does not,
throughout his life, let wine stain his lips and restrains people from
committing murders drinking wine and doing wicked deeds, and prevents
them from marrying the persons with whom marriage is prohibited, and
from going round the Ka'bah unadorned, and remains firm in the matter of
vows and promises till the last breath of his life, he is certainly one
of those ideal men who are born rarely in human society.

Of course, it was necessary that the person in whose body the light of
the Holy Prophet (the greatest guide of humanity) had been deposited
should be pure and free from every pollution.

From the brief anecdotes and instructive sayings ascribed to Abdul
Muttalib it is learnt that everin those dark environments he was counted
amongst those who believed in monotheism and in the Day of Judgement and
used to say "An unjust person is punished in this very world. However,
if, by chance, he dies before being duly punished, he will meet
retribution for his actions on the Day of Judgement".[^21]

Harb son of Umayyah was a near relative of Abdul Muttalib. He was also
considered to be one of the distinguished persons amongst the Quraysh. A
Jew was the neighbour of Har'b. One day the Jew displayed harshness
towards Har'b in one of the bazaars of Tahamah and hot words were
exchanged between them.

This incident culminated in the Jew being murdered at the instigation of
Har'b. Abdul Muttalib came to know about the matter and severed his
relations with Har'b. He also made efforts to realise blood-money from
him and to pass it on to the survivors of the few. This brief anecdote
is a specimen of the enthusiasm of this magnanimous person for helping
the weak people and for dispensation of justice.

### Re-Excavation Of The Well Of Zamzam

From the day the well of Zamzam came into existence the people of the
tribe of Jarham had settled round it and benefited from its water during
the long years when they ruled over Makkah. However, as a result of the
advancement of Makkans in business, their affluence, negligence on their
part and lack of any restraint on the use of the water, the well
gradually dried up.[^22]

Another version is this: When the people of Jarham tribe were threatened
by Khaza'ah tribe and were obliged to abandon their homes, their chief
and distinguished man, Mazaz son of 'Amr, realised that he would soon
cease to be at the helm of affairs and the enemy would attack and
destroy his territory and government.

He, therefore, ordered that two deer made of gold and a few precious
swords, which had been brought as a present for the Ka'bah, should be
thrown into the well, which should then be filled up completely so that
the enemy might not lay his hands on these things, and later, when they
(Jarham tribe) recovered their territory and throne, they themselves
should utilise this treasure. After some time the tribe of Khaza'ah
commenced their attacks and the tribe of Jarham as well as a large
number of the descendants of Isma'il were compelled to leave Makkah and
proceed to Yemen, and none of them returned to Makkah thereafter.

From that time onwards the tribe of Khaza'ah ruled over Makkah till
Quraysh gained ascendancy by the coming into power of Qusayy son of
Kilab, the fourth ancestor of the Holy Prophet. After some time Abdul
Muttalib came at the helm of affairs. He decided to dig the Zamzam well
once again, but unfortunately the location of the original well was not
known for certain. After excavating a good deal he was able to locate
the real spot and resolved to take preliminary steps to dig the well
with the assistance of his son Harith.

In every society there is usually a group of negativists who try to find
one excuse or the other to prevent the performance of every positive
act. Hence, the rivals of Abdul Muttalib, fearing that this honour might
fall to his share, began criticising him and addressed him thus "O elder
of Quraysh As this well is a memorial of our ancestor Isma'il, and all
of us are reckoned to be his descendants, it is only appropriate that
you may let all of us partake in this task".

For certain reasons Abdul Muttalib did not accept their suggestion,
because his intention was to dig the well alone and let all of them use
its water free of cost. He also wished to assume himself the
responsibility of supplying water to the pilgrims on specific occasions
so that this function could be performed in good order under his
personal supervision. This could however, be ensured only when he had
this job in his own hands, being independent of others.

This resulted in a good deal of bickering and it was at last decided
that they should approach an Arab sage (fortune-teller) and his decision
should be binding on all. Thus Abdul Muttalib and his rivals started
their journey. They passed through many barren tracts of land. On their
way, they were faced with extreme thirst, and became almost certain that
they would perish.

They, therefore, became anxious about their death and subsequent burial.
Abdul Muttalib suggested that every person should dig a grave for
himself and, as and when anyone of them died, others should bury him.
And, if they continued to be deprived of water and all of them died,
they would all be buried and be saved from being devoured by beasts and
birds, except the person who would be the last one to pass away.

Abdul Muttalib's suggestion met approval and everyone of them dug a
grave for himself. Now they awaited death with dejected and pale faces.
Suddenly Abdul Muttalib cried out "Men! This will be a very ignominious
and disgraceful death. It will be better if all of us move about in the
desert in search of water. It is possible that Almighty Allah may have
mercy on us.[^23]

All of them mounted and began moving about. They were not very hopeful
of finding water and looked at one another with dismay. By chance,
however, they soon came across wholesome water and were thus saved from
certain death. From that very place they returned to Makkah and, gladly
agreeing with Abdul Muttalib's view with regard to the digging of the
well, gave him full authority to carry out his project.[^24]

Abdul Muttalib began digging the well with his only son Harith and a
mound of dust appeared around the spot. Suddenly they touched upon two
deer made of gold and a few swords. Now Quraysh kicked up another row
and claimed a share in this find. Eventually it was decided to settle
the dispute by drawing lots. By chance, the two golden deer fell to the
share of the Ka'bah and the swords to that of Abdul Muttalib, whereas
Quraysh received nothing. Noble-minded Abdul Muttalib utilised the
swords for constructing a gate for the Ka'bah and installed the deer
upon it.

### Steadfastness In Keeping Promise

Some of the qualities of the Arabs of the Age of Ignorance merit praise.
For example, they considered breaking of promise to be the most
loathsome act. At times they concluded very onerous and burdensome
treaties with the Arab tribes and respected them to the last. And on
some occasions they took extremely tiresome and intolerable vows but
made an all-out effort to fulfil them.

While digging Zamzam Abdul Muttalib felt that owing to his not having
many sons his position was rather weak amongst Quraysh. He, therefore,
resolved and took a vow that when the number of his sons would become
ten he would sacrifice one of them in front of the Ka'bah. He did not,
however, make a mention to anyone about his having taken this vow.

With the passage of time the number of his sons rose to ten and the time
therefore, arrived for him to fulfil his vow. The very thought of the
proposition was very trying for him. He was, however, afraid of lagging
behind in the performance of this task and thus becoming one of those
who failed to keep their promises. He, therefore, decided to mention the
matter to his sons and, after obtaining their agreement, to select one
of them for the purpose, by drawing lots.[^25]

The ceremony of drawing the lots was performed and the lot fell upon
Abdullah (father of the Holy Prophet). Abdul Muttalib immediately caught
the hand of Abdullah and led him to the sacrificial altar. Qurayshite
men and women came to know about the vow and the drawing of lots and
became very much grieved. A flood of tears was flowing down the cheeks
of men. One of them was heard saying: "O that they should have killed me
instead of this young men!"

The chiefs of Quraysh were saying "If his life can be redeemed by
property we are prepared to place all our wealth at his disposal". Abdul
Muttalib was wondering what to do in the face of the roaring sentiments
of the people. He was reflecting within himself lest he should be guilty
of disobeying the Almighty and breaking his vow.

Notwithstanding all this he was also thinking of finding a solution of
the problem. One of those present said: "Take this problem before one of
the Arab sages. It is possible that he may suggest a solution". Abdul
Muttalib and the chiefs of the tribe endorsed the suggestion and
proceeded to Yathrib, where the particular sage resided. The sage asked
for a day's respite to give a reply. On the following day all went to
him. He asked \`'What is the blood-money fixed by you for one human
being?" They told him that it was ten camels.

Thereupon the man said: "You should draw lots between ten camels and the
person whom you have selected for being sacrificed. If the lot falls on
that person then raise the number of camels to twice as many (i.e.
twenty). And if the lot falls on that person again then raise the number
of camels to thrice as many (i.e thirty) and draw the lots again and
continue doing so till the lot falls on the camels.

The suggestion made by the sage cooled down the emotions of the people,
because it was easier for them to sacrifice hundreds of camels as
compared with seeing a young man like Abdullah rolling in blood. One
morning, after their return to Makka, the ceremony of drawing lots was
performed for the tenth time, when the number of the camels had risen to
one hundred, the lot fell on them. The deliverance and safety of
Abdullah gave birth to very strange emotions.

However, Abdul Muttalib said "It is only appropriate that I should draw
the lots anew so that I may know for certain that the Almighty is
pleased with my action. He then drew the lots thrice and every time the
lot fell on one hundred camels. He was thus convinced of Divine pleasure
and directed that one hundred camels, out of those belonging to him,
should be slaughtered that very day in front of the Ka'bah and no human
being or animal should be restrained from eating their meat.[^26]

### Tumult Of The Year of The Elephant

When a great event takes place in a nation, its root-cause is at times
religious and occasionally national and political. It is usually admired
by the masses and is for this reason treated to be the starting point of
their history for past and future events. For example, the movement of
Prophet Musa, the birth of Prophet 'Isa and the migration of the Prophet
of Islam are the starting points of history for the Jews, the Christians
and the Muslims respectively and the followers of these religions reckon
the events of their lives with reference to these happenings.

At times, some nations, in spite of possessing a basic history, also
treat some particular events to be the starting points of their history.
As we find the great French Revolution and the October 1917 Communist
Revolution in the Soviet Union are the starting points of history for
many events in the Western countries. Uncivilized nations, which are
deprived of such political and religious movements, naturally consider
unusual events to be the bases of their history.

For this reason, the Arabs of the age of ignorance, on account of their
not possessing a proper civilisation, considered unpleasant occurrences
like wars, earthquakes, famines and other unusual phenomena as the
measure and origin of their history. In this way we observe, in the
pages of history, a number of starting points for the history of the
Arabs, the last of which was the disturbance of the Year of the Elephant
viz. the attack by Abraha to destroy the Ka'bah, which became the
starting point of history for other events. We give below a detailed
account and analysis of this great event, which occurred in 570 A.D., to
be the year of the birth of the Prophet of Islam.

### The Origin Of This Event

The event of the 'People of the Elephant' has been mentioned briefly in
the Holy Qur'an and we shall, after narrating the story, mention the
verses which have been revealed about it. The historians have stated the
origin of the event to be as follows:

After strengthening the capital of his government, Zu Nuwas, the King of
Yemen, passed, during one of his journeys, through the city of Yathrib
(Madina). At that time Yathrib enjoyed a high religious position. A
group of the Jews had concentrated at that place and had built a number
of synagogues at different points in the city.

The opportunist Jews accorded a warm welcome to the king and invited him
to their own faith so that, under the protection of his government, they
might remain safe from attacks by the Roman Christians and the Arab
idolaters Their efforts in this regard were fruitful. Zu Nuwas embraced
the Jewish religion and made maximum efforts for its advancement. Many
persons became inclined to him on account of fear. Some were awarded
severe punishments on account of differences.

However, the people of Najran, who were converted to Christianity some
time earlier, were not prepared at any cost to forsake their religion
and follow the teachings of the religion of the Jews. The King of Yemen
was very much annoyed on account of their disobedience and defiance and
came up with a large army to suppress the rebels.

The commander of the army encamped by the side of the city of Najran,
dug a ditch there, lit up a huge fire in it and threatened his opponents
with burning. The brave people of Najran, who had firm faith in
Christianity were not, however, dismayed. They welcomed death and
burning with open arms and their bodies were devoured by the flames of
fire.[^27]

The great Muslim historian Ibn Athir Jazari writes thus:

In the meantime one of the residents of Najran named Daws went
post-haste to Caesar, the Roman Emperor, who was a great supporter of
Christianity in those days, and informed him about the happening. He
also requested the Emperor to punish the blood-thirsty man who had
extinguished the lamp of guidance in Najran and to establish firmly the
tottering pillars of Christianity in that area.

The Roman ruler expressed his grief and sympathy and said: "As the
principal seat of my government is far away from your country I am
writing to the Negus, the King of Ethiopia, to take revenge on that
cruel person for killing the people of Najran. The Najrani took Caesar's
letter and proceeded to Ethiopia as quickly as possible.

On reaching there he related the complete story to the Negus. The sense
of honour of the king of Ethiopia was roused. He despatched an army
exceeding seventy thousand men to Yemen under the command of an African
named Abraha Ashram. The organized and well-equipped Ethiopian army
crossed the sea and pitched its tents on the coast of Yemen. Zu Nuwas
was taken unawares. All his activities proved to be of no avail and no
reply was received by him to the letters which he had written to the
tribal chiefs requesting them to take part in the battle.

One brief attack was sufficient to pull down the foundation of his
government and the populous country of Yemen came in the possession of
the Government of Ethiopia. The Ethiopian king appointed the commander
of the army, Abraha, as viceroy of that area.

Abraha was very happy for having taken revenge and achieved victory and
began leading a free life. In order to win the favour of the King of
Ethiopia he constructed a splendid Church at San'a which had no parallel
at that time for its grandeur.

Then he wrote a letter to the Negus on these lines: "In compliance with
the wishes of your Majesty the construction of the Church has been
completed. I hope that it will be possible for me to make the people of
Yemen abandon the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah, whose place will now be
taken by this Church".

When the contents of the letter became known, there was a very
unfavourable reaction amongst the Arab tribes. So much so that one night
a woman of the tribe of Bani Afqam polluted the precincts of the Church.
This act, which showed grave disrepect, contempt and enmity on the part
of Arabs for Abraha's Church, made the government of the time very much
excited. Besides this, the more Abraha endeavoured to increase the
apparent adornment and decoration of the Church the more the people were
attached to the Ka'bah.

These developments made Abraha swear that he would destroy the Ka'bah.
He organized an army for this purpose, put fighter elephants in the
fore-front, and decided to pull down the House, the foundation of which
had been laid by the champion of Divine monotheism Prophet Ibrahim.

The chiefs of Arabia realized that the situation was delicate and
dangerous and took it for certain that the independence and
individuality of the Arab nation was bound to collapse. The past
victories of Abraha also kept them from taking any useful decision.
Nevertheless, some zealous chiefs of the tribes who were facing Abraha
fought with great bravery.

For example, Zu Nafar, who was one of the nobles of Yemen, exhorted his
people, with fiery speeches, to defend the Sanctuary (the Ka'bah).
However, the immense army of Abraha soon cut down their organized ranks.

Thereafter Nafil son of Habib put up a fierce fight, but his people also
met with defeat. He himself was captured and requested Abraha for
forgiveness. Abraha agreed to grant his request on the condition that he
should guide his forces to Makkah. Thus Nafil became his attendant and
led him upto Ta'if. There he entrusted the job to one of his friends
named Ayurghal. The new guide led them upto Mughmas - a place near
Makkah - and there Abraha's army encamped.

According to an old custom Abraha ordered one of his officers to plunder
the camels and other domestic animals of Tahamah. Out of the camels so
plundered 200 of them belonged to Abdul Muttalib. Later Abraha ordered
another officer named Hanatah to carry his message to the chief of the
Quraysh.

He addressed Hanatah with these words: "I can visualize the actual scene
of the destruction of the Ka'bah. It is also certain that in the first
instance Quraysh will resist. However, to ensure that their blood is not
shed you should proceed to Makkah immediately. There you should contact
the chief of Quraysh and tell him that my object is to destroy the
Ka'bah and if Quraysh do not resist they will remain safe from
molestation"

The messenger sent by Abraha arrived in Makkah and saw various groups of
Quraysh discussing the matter at different places. On his enquiring
about the Chief of Quraysh he was led to the house of Abdul Muttalib.
After hearing Abraha's message Abdul Muttalib spoke thus: "We are not at
all inclined to fight. The Ka'bah is the House of Allah. It is the House
which was founded by Prophet Ibrahim. Allah will do whatever He deems
fit".

Abraha's officer also expressed pleasure on hearing the soft and
conciliatory words of the Chief of Quraysh which were indicative of his
spiritual faith. He, therefore, requested Abdul Muttalib to agree to
accompany him to the camp of Abraha.

### Abdul Muttalib Goes To The Camp of Abraha

Abdul Muttalib proceeded to the camp of Abraha accompanied by a few of
his sons. The sobriety, grace, and dignity of the leader of Quraysh made
Abraha admire and respect him. So much so that he descended from his
throne, took the hand of Abdul Muttalib in his own hand and made him sit
by his side. Then he very respectfully enquired from Abdul Muttalib,
through an interpreter, as to why he had some there and what he wished.

He said in reply: "The camels of Tahamah, which also include two hundred
camels belonging to me, have been seized by your soldiers. I would ask
you to give orders that those camels should be returned to their
owners".

Abraha replied "Your luminous bearing possessing a holy aspect made me
consider you to be a very great man. However, the request made by you
for insignificant things has diminished your worth in my eyes. Keeping
in view the fact that I have come to demolish and destroy the sanctuary
of your ancestors, I was expecting that you would talk about the Ka'bah
and request me to desist from accomplishing my object which will deal a
deadly blow to your independence and political and religious life. I did
not hope that you would talk about a few insignificant and worthless
camels and intercede in that behalf".

In reply to Abraha's remarks Abdul Muttalib spoke a sentence, whose
value and worth is still preserved. He said: "I am the owner of the
camels. The House too has a Master who forestalls every intrusion upon
it". On hearing this Abraha shook his head and said proudly "There is
none so powerful as to keep me from achieving my object". Then he
ordered that the plundered property should be returned to the owners.

### Quraysh Await Abdul Muttalibâ€™s Return

Quraysh were anxiously awaiting Abdul Muttlib's return to. learn about
the result of his talk with Abraha. So, when he met the Qurayshite
chiefs, he said to then "Take refuge immediately in the valleys and on
the hills along with your animals so that you may be safe from every
harm". Soon thereafter the people abandoned their homes and found
shelter in the hills. At night all the hills and valleys were resounding
with the cries of children, the lamentations of women and the noise made
by the animals.

In the very middle of that night Abdul Muttalib and some other
Qurayshites descended the summit of a hill and reached the gate of the
Ka'bah. He (Abdul Mutallib), with flowing tears and burning heart, held
the chain of the gate of the Ka'bah in his hand and recited a few verses
addressing the Almighty. He spoke thus:

"O Allah! We do not pin our faith on anyone except You, for remaining
immune from their mischief and harm.

O Lord! Hold them back from your Sanctuary. The enemy of the Ka'bah is
he who is inimical to you.

O Nourisher! Cut off their hands so that they may not pollute Your
House.

I have right over my own property, so I am endeavouring for its safety.

However, safety of Your House is Your responsibility.

Don't let that day come when the Cross becomes victorious over it, and
the inhabitants of their lands encroach upon Your land and conquer it".

Then he released the chain of the gate of the Ka'bah and took shelter on
the summit of a hill to watch the developments.

Early in the morning Abraha and his forces got ready to march towards
Makkah. All of a sudden, however, a flock of birds appeared from the
side of the sea, holding tiny stones in their beaks and claws. The
shadow of the black birds made the sky above the encampment dark and
their small and apparently insignificant weapons produced a very strange
effect. The birds, armed with small stones, showered those stones under
the command of the Almighty on the army of Abraha in such a manner that
their heads were broken and their flesh was severed from their bodies.

One of the stones hit Abraha on his head, whereupon fear overpowered him
and he began to tremble. He became sure that the wrath of the Almighty
had descended on him. Then he cast an eye on his soldiers and observed
that their bodies had fallen on earth like the leaves of the trees. He,
therefore, immediately ordered those who had remained safe to return to
Yemen and to proceed to San'a through the way they had come.

The remaining army moved towards San'a but, while on their way, most of
the soldiers perished on account of wounds and fear. And even Abraha
reached San'a in such a condition that the flesh of his body was turn
off and he died a very queer death.

This deadful and strange event became known throughout the world. The
Holy Qur'an narrates the story of the "People of the Elephant" in these
words:

***Have you not considered how Allah dealt with the Army of the
Elephant? Did He not foil their evil plots by sending against them
flocks of swallows which pelted them with claystones, so that they
became like left-over grass grazed by cattle.*** **(Surah al-Fil, 105:
2 - 5).**

What has been narrated In these pages is a gist of lslamic history on
the subject[^28] and that which has been stated specifically in the Holy
Qur'an. Now we shall study the comments made by the great Egyptian
exegete Muhammad Abdoh and the famous scholar, Dr Haikal, former
Education Minister of Egypt.

### A theoretical discussion about miracles

Recent surprising advancement of man in various branches of physical
sciences and coming to an end of the life of many scientific hypotheses,
created a strange tumult in the western countries. Although the
explanation for these changes lay in scientific transition and revolved
on the pivot of physical sciences alone (for example, Ptolemy's theorem
was falsified) and did not have the least connection with religious
beliefs, they created a strange pessimism amongst different classes
about the theories and beliefs which had still survived.

The secret of this pessimism lay in the fact that when the scholars saw
that the old theories which had ruled human thought and centres of
learning for centuries stood falsified now, with the strong hand of
knowledge and the might of experimentation, and, moreover, no
information was available about different heavenly spheres and minute
movements and centrality of earth, and also about scores of other
theories; they thought to themselves that no one knows the remaining
religious and scientific theories might also be like the other ones?

This way of thinking gradually sowed the seeds of doubt in the minds of
most of the scholars of physical sciences and within a short time this
doubt grew and spread to all the European scientific circles of that day
like a contagious disease.

Furthermore 'Inquisition' (Department for the investigation of beliefs)
and the severity of the Church authorities had full share in the
germination, rather the growth of this pessimism, because the schoalrs
of that time who succeeded in discovering some scientific theory were
being annihilated by the Church with torments and torture.

And it goes without saying that such pressure and persecution must have
had a bad reaction and it was predicted from that very day that if at
any time these scholars gained power and made sufficient progress in the
physical field they would say good bye to religion and piety on account
of the wrong policy of the Popes.

By chance matters did come to such a pass. As knowledge with regard to
various matters increased and the scholars penetrated more and more into
the inter-relationship of physical beings, disclosed the secrets which
had remained hidden from man for ages, and gained knowledge about the
causes of many natural phenomena like earthquakes and rain as well as
causes of various diseases, they devoted comparatively lesser attention
to metaphysical matters. (Origin, Resurrection, miracles and unusual
performances by the Prophets etc.) and the number of sceptics and
deniers increased day after day.

The self-conceit and pride with regard to their learning, which some
scholars harboured in their minds, and the pressure exerted by the Popes
and the priests, became the cause for some scientists looking upon all
religious matters with contempt and disregard. They were no longer
agreeable that the names of Torah or Evangel should be mentioned.

According to them the event of Prophet Musa's rod and his luminous hand
should be treated as a mere story and the breath of Prophet 'Isa which
brought to life many dead persons with the permission of Allah was also,
mere fiction.

It so happened because pride on account of advancement of scientific
knowledge and the memories of the pressures to which they were subjected
in the past made them think within themselves 'How can it be possible
that in the absence of a natural cause a piece of wood should assume the
shape of a dragon or dead persons may come to life by means of a
prayer?'

The scholars who were intoxicated with their successes in the field of
science thought that they had acquired the key for all branches of
knowledge and had understood the relations between all beings and
occurrences. It was for this reason that they could not find the least
connection between a piece of dry wood and a boa or between the prayer
and attention of a person on the one hand and coming to life of dead
persons on the other. Hence they either viewed these matters with doubt
and hesitation or denied them totally.

### Way of Thinking of Some Scholars

Nowadays this way of thinking, with slight modifications, has been
adopted by some Egyptian scholars. These scholars, who are in fact a
link between the centres of learning of the East and the West and have
for years been transferring, earlier than anybody else, the knowledge
and the ways of thinking of the West to the East and are truly
considered to be a bridge of learning and educational relationship
between these two blocs, have been influence more than anyone else by
this way of thinking (of course with particular modifications ) and
follow this method in the matter of explanation and analysis of
historical and scientific problems.

Some of them have chosen a method by which they wish to keep satisfied
the Muslims who believe in the obvious meanings of the Holy Qur'an and
of the decisive Ahadith (reports) and also to adopt the view-point of
scientists, or, at least, not to express an opinion which cannot be
explained in the light of the laws of physical sciences.

On the one hand they see that the Holy Qurtan comprises a chain of
undeniable miracles and this Heavenly Book is the final authority for
the Muslims, and whatever it says is correct and in conformity with
facts. On the other hand they find that the physical sciences and the
supporters of material learning do not recognize these phenomena which,
according to their own thinking (which insists on a natural cause for
every natural event), are at variance with scientific laws.

As a consequence of these two factors, none of which, according to their
belief, is flexible, they have adopted a course by means of which they
wish to keep both the groups satisfied ... viz. they safeguard the
apparent meanings of the Holy Qur 'an and the decisive reports and also
do not say anything against the scientific laws.

Accordingly, they endeavour to explain away the miracles and unusual
performances of the Prophets according to modern scientific standards
and account for the miracles in such a way that they appear to be
natural occurrences. In this way they have safeguarded the respect due
to the Holy Qur'an and the decisive reports, and have also freed
themselves from every kind of pessimism and protest. We narrate below,
as a specimen, the explanation offered by Muhammad Abdoh, the famous,
Egyptian scholar, about the event of the 'People of the Elephant', which
has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an.

"It was the disease of smallpox and typhoid fever, caused by petrified
dust, which spread in Abraha's army through insects like mosquitoes and
flies. And by 'clay-stones' is meant petrified infected clay which the
wind scatters everywhere and thus contaminates the feet of those
insects. As a consequence of the contact of those insects with the human
bodies the germs are transferred to the pores of human skin and make
painful and dirty wounds appear on it. And these germs are the strong
divine soldiers which are called 'microbes' in scientific terminology".

A modern writer says in support of the view expressed by the afore-said
scholar that the word 'Tayr' used in the Holy Qur'an means anything
which flies and includes mosquitoes and flies.

Before we take into consideration the remarks of the afore-said writers
we consider it necessary to reproduce once again the verses revealed in
connection with the 'People of the Elephant'. Almighty Allah says thus
in Surah al-Fil:

***Have you not considered how Allah dealt with the Army of the
Elephant? Did He not foil their evil plots by sending against them
flocks of swallows which pelted them with claystones, so that they
became like left-over grass grazed by cattle.*** **(105: 1- 5)**

On the face of it, these verses show that the people of Abraha were
subjected to Divine wrath and the only cause of their death was these
clay-stones which the birds were carrying and which were pelted on their
heads, faces and bodies.

A deep and minute study of these verses leads us to believe that the
death of those people took place on account of these very unnatural
weapons (apparently worthless and insignificant claystones but in fact
very powerful and destructive things). As such these Divine verses
cannot be interpreted to carry any meanings given to them by means of an
explanation which is at variance with their apparent text, unless a
positive proof about the correctness of such an explanation is advanced.

### Notable Points With Regard to The Above Mentioned Explanation

1. The above-mentioned explanation, too, cannot manifest the entire
event to be natural and some points still remain in the story which can
be explained by advancing unnatural reasons. Thus even if we suppose
that the death and annihilation of those people took place on account of
microbes of smallpox and typhoid fever, the question remains as to how
and by what means and as a result of whose guidance and training did
these birds come to know that microbes of smallpox and typhoid fever had
settled themselves in these clay-stones at that particular time, and
instead of going in search of their sustenance, they flocked together
towards the clay-stones and holding them in their beaks pelted them at
Abraha's people like an army attacking its enemy? In the circumstances
can we treat the entire event as usual and natural?

If we are prepared to admit that all these things happened in accordance
with Allah's command and that a supernatural power was at work in this
event where does the necessity lie that we should consider only a part
of that event as natural and run after explaining away its causes.

2. The minute animals called 'microbes" which are enemies of entire
mankind did not then have any relationship with anyone. As such how can
this thing be explained that they attacked only Abraha's army and
ignored the Makkans? The history books which we possess at present are
unanimous that all losses were sustained by Abraha's soldiers and the
Quraysh and the Arabs did not experience even the slightest harm,
although smallpox and typhoid fever are contagious diseases and various
natural factors transfer them from place to place and at times it so
happens that they ruin the entire country. In the circumstances can the
event in question be treated as something usual?

3. Diversity of opinions of those, who have furnished this explanation,
about the genus of the microbes, itself weakens their proposition. At
times they say that they were the germs of cholera and occasionally they
assert that they were those of smallpox and typhoid fever, whereas we
have not yet found any authentic and reliable document concerning this
dispute.

Amongst the exegetes only Akramah, who himself is an object of dispute
amongst the scholars, has considered this probable and, amongst the
historians, Ibn Athir, while quoting this probability as a weak
statement, has straightaway proceeded to refute it.[^29]

Most strange is the explanation given by the author of 'Hayat-i
Muhammad' (Dr Haikal, former Egyptian Education Minister), while
narrating the story of the 'People of the Elephant'. Notwithstanding the
fact that the object before his eyes is the verse 'We sent against them
flocks of birds', he, after quoting Surah al-Fil, says thus about the
death of the army of Abraha: "Perhaps cholera germs came with the wind
and from sea-side".

Now if wind had brought the cholera germs why were the birds flying on
their heads? Moreover, the birds were pelting clay-stones at them; - now
what part did those clay-stones play in their death? Hence, we should
not follow this way of thinking and unnecessarily explain the great
miracles of the Prophets and great spiritual people in this manner.

In principle, the attitude of religion in these matters, towards the
physical sciences, whose sphere is limited to the usual relations of
natural phenomena, is two fold. We should not, therefore, abandon our
established religious principles to please a few people whose religious
knowledge is insignificant and who do not possess information about
matters of this type, especially when we are under no obligation to do
so.

### Two Important Points

We would like to mention the two important points here.

1. There should be no misunderstanding about the fact that by the above
remarks we do not want to correct and explain the things which people
attribute to the Prophets and religious leaders by way of hearsay -
things which are not supported by any authentic evidence and have
usually a superstitious aspect. What we mean to say is that according to
the authentic evidence, which we have in hand, the Prophets of Allah
performed some unusual acts to prove their relationship with the
supernatural world. Our aim is to defend these kinds of miracles.

2. We do not at all say that a miracle is an exception to the law of
cause and effect. We fully respect this law and believe that all events
of this world have causes and no phenomenon makes its appearance without
a cause.

However, what we say is that it is not necessary that the causes of the
miracles should belong to the category of usual and material causes.
thence, the miracles and unusual acts of the Prophets have causes which
do not conform with the usual natural causes and everyone is not
familiar with these mysteries.

### After The Defeat of Abraha

The tumult of the 'Year of the Elephant', Abraha's death and the
destruction of the enemies of the Ka'bah and Quraysh, made the Makkans
and the Ka'bah very honourable in the eyes of the Arab world. Now no one
could dare think of attacking Quraysh or doing them any harm or
destroying the House of Allah.

The common thinking was to this effect, that: "Allah has, for the sake
of the honour of His House and for the honour and greatness of Quraysh,
made their sworn enemy roll in dust and blood. In view of this Divine
decree Quraysh and the Ka'bah have become respectable in the eyes of the
People". They seldom reflected that this development had taken place
simply for the sake of the protection of the Ka'bah and the greatness or
smallness of Quraysh had nothing to do with it.

This is proved by the fact that the enemy chiefs of that area had
attacked Quraysh several times but had never been faced with such a
situation.

This victory and success, which was secured without any toil and without
even a drop of the blood of Quraysh being shed, created new thoughts in
their minds and their conceit, pride and heedlessness increased. They
now began to believe in the limitations of others, because they
considered themselves to be the distinguished group among the Arabs and
thought that they alone were the object of attention of three hundred
and sixty idols and enjoyed their support.

From the day they became unrestrained their revelry and voluptuousness
knew no bounds. They quaffed cup after cup of palm-date wine and
occasionally indulged in wine-drinking in the precincts of the Ka'bah,
and according to their idiom, 'spent the best days of their lives' in
the neighbourhood of idols made of stone and wood which pertained to the
Arab tribes.

In these assemblies everyone who had heard any story about the
Manzariyans of Hirah and the Ghassaniyans of Syria and the Yemenite
tribes, narrated it to others and they believed that they owed their own
happy lives to the attention of idols which had humiliated ordinary
Arabs as compared with them and had granted them (i.e. Quraysh)
superiority over all others.

### Imaginary Frontiers of Quraysh

God forbid that this two-footed being (man) should one day find the
horizon of life clear and may assume himself to be of an imaginary
privileged class. It is on that day that he appropriates existence and
life to himself and does not believe that his fellow-beings are at all
entitled in the least to any life and worth.

In order to prove their greatness and superiority over others Quraysh
decided on that day that they would not extend the least respect to the
people of "Hil" (the area extending upto four leagues from the Ka'bah in
all the four sides is called "Haram" and the area beyond that limit is
called "Hil"), because, according to them, others were dependent on
their Sanctuary and had seen with their own eyes that they (Quraysh)
were the object of the favours of the gods of the Ka'bah.

From that time onwards Quraysh began meting our harsh treatment to
others. Exercising perfect dictatorship they decided that whenever the
people of "HiI" came to perform pilgrimage they should not utilize the
edibles brought by them but should obtain food from the people of the
"Haram". They also decided that at the time of going round the Ka'bah
only the local dress of the Makkans, which had a national aspect, should
be worn. If a person could not afford to wear that dress it was
necessary for him to perform the pilgrimage without wearing any clothes.

As regards some Arabs of high rank who did not agree to this arrangement
it was decided that after going round the Ka'bah they should take off
their clothes and throw them away and nobody was permitted to touch
those clothes. As regards women, however, they were obliged, in all
circumstances, to go round the Ka'bah unclad. They could cover only the
sides of their heads with a piece of cloth and were required to hum some
particular verses.

After the event relating to Abraha, who was himself a Christian, no Jew
or Christian was permitted to enter Makkah, except as a hired worker of
Makkan. In that case also it was obligatory upon him not to utter even a
word about his faith and religion.

Things had come to such a pass that they had abandoned some of the
ceremonies of Haj, which were to be performed outside the sanctuary. For
example, they were not prepared to perform the ceremony of staying at
'Arafah (it is a place beyond the "Haram" where the Hajis are required
to stay till sun-set on the 9th of the month of Zil Hijjah.[^30]

And this was in spite of the fact that their ancestors (the descendants
of Isma'il) considered stay at 'Arafah to be a part of the ceremonies of
Haj and for their entire apparent superiority Quraysh were indebted to
the Ka'bah and to these very Haj ceremonies, because it was on this
account that the people were obliged to come to this barren place every
year. But for the sanctuary no one would have been inclined to visit
this place even once throughout one's life.

From the point of view of social accountability such corruption and
discrimination is unavoidable. It was therefore necessary that the
environment of Makkah should have been submerged in corruption and
pollution so that the world should have become ready for a basic
revolution and a penetrating movement.

All these privations, feasting and drinking and lack of restraint were
making the environment more and more ready for the appearance of a great
reformer of the world and it was not without reason that when Waraqah
bin Nawfal, the sage of Arabia, who had embraced Christianity during the
last days of his life and had acquired knowledge of the contents of the
Evangel, spoke about Allah and the Prophets, he had to face the wrath of
the Firaun of Makkah in the person of Abu Sufyan who used to say "We
Makkans don't stand in need of Allah or the Prophets, as we enjoy the
mercy and favours of our idols"

### Abdullah â€“ Father Of The Holy Prophet

At the time when Abdul Muttalib purchased the life of his son by
sacrificing one hundred camels in the name of Allah, Abdullah was not
more than twenty four years old. This event, besides becoming the cause
of his (Abdullah's) renown amongst the Quraysh, ensured for him a great
position and honour in his own family, especially in the eyes of Abdul
Muttalib. The reason for this was that a person loves specially that
thing, which proves expensive for him, and for which he takes excessive
pains. As such Abdullah enjoyed extraordinary respect amongst his
friends and kinsfolk.

It goes without saying that when Abdullah was going with his father to
the sacrificial altar he was faced with violent antithetical sentiments.
The sentiment of respect for his father and appreciation of the great
hardships which he had suffered for his sake controlled his entire self
and for this reason he had no alternative but to submit to him. On the
other hand, however, as the hand of destiny wished that the spring
flowers of his life should wither like autumn leaves, a tide of
disturbance and agitation rose in his mind.

Abdul Muttalib also found himself, struggling betwixt two dominant
forces of 'faith' and 'attachment' and this situation had definitely
created a chain of acute worries in the minds of both of them. However,
when the problem was solved in the manner narrated above, he thought of
making amends for the bitter emotions by immediately marrying Abdullah
with Aminah and thus unite his life, which had reached the stage of
exhaustion with the most basic relationship of one's existence.

Hence, while returning from the sacrificial altar, Abdul Muttalib, who
was still holding his son's hand in his own, went straight to the house
of Wahab son of Abd Manaf son of Zohrah and concluded Abdullah's
marriage with Wahab's daughter Aminah, who was well-knowri for her
purity and modesty. In the same assembly he (Abdul Muttalib) himself
married Dalalah, a cousin of Aminah, who gave birth to Hamzah, the uncle
and coeval of the Holy Prophet.[^31]

The contemporary historian Abdul Wahhab (Professor of History in the
University of Egypt, who has written very useful notes on the history of
Ibn Athir) has treated the above-mentioned development as something
unusual and writes thus: "Going of Abdul Muttalib to the house of Wahab
on that very day (when the sentiments of the people were at a high pitch
and tears of delight were flowing down their cheeks) and that also with
the object of asking for the hands of two girls - one for himself and
the other for his son Abdullah - does not conform with the usual
standards. The only thing suitable and becoming for them was to take
rest, so that both ot them could get rid of their mental fatigue, and
then attend to some other business."[^32]

However, we believe that if the said historian had studied the matter in
the manner in which we have viewed it, it would have been much easier
for him to confirm their action. Abdul Muttalib had appointed a time for
the consummation of the marriage and, according to the custom of
Quraysh, when that time approached the wedding ceremonies took place at
the house of Aminah.

Abdullah and Aminah remained together for some time and then Abdullah
left for Syria for purposes of trade. During his return journey,
however, he breathed his last, as mentioned below in detail.

### Death Of Abdullah In Yathrib

By contracting marriage Abdullah opened a new chapter in his life and
his apartment was lighted up by his having had a spouse in the person of
Aminah. After some time he left for Syria for trade along with a caravan
which was proceeding there from Makkah. The bell for departure was rung
and the caravan proceeded on its way, carrying hundreds of hearts along
with itself. At that time Aminah was pregnant.

After a few months the van of the caravan appeared. A number of people
went out of the city to receive their kinsfolk. Abdullah's old father
was awaiting him and the curious eyes of his wife were also searching
for him amidst the caravan, but unfortunately he was not visible
anywhere. Alter making inquiries they learned that, while returning from
Syria, Abdullah had been taken ill at Yathrib and had, therefore, stayed
there with his relatives to take rest. On hearing this Aminah became
very sad and tears trickled from her eyes.

Abdul Muttalib asked his eldest son Harith to go to Yathrib and to bring
Abdullah along with him. On reaching there he learned that one month
after the departure of the caravan Abdullah had died owing to the same
ailment.

On his return Harith informed Abdul Muttalib as well as Abdullah's widow
of what had happened. The property left behind by Abdullah consisted of
five camels, a herd of sheep arid one female slave named Umme Ayman who
later nursed the Prophet.

[^1]: But what was their conception about the idols? Did they consider
them fit for worship and to be only intermediaries or they thought that
they too possessed power like Allah? This point is beyond our discussion
for the present, although the first view is firm and proved.

[^2]: Qamus-i Kitab-i Muqaddas, root 'Babal'.

[^3]: Tafsir-i Burhan, vol. 1, page 535

[^4]: Awa'il al-Maqalat, page 12

[^5]: Majma'ul Bayan, vol. III, page 319 and al-Mizan, vol. Vll, page
170

[^6]: As regards the particulars of this chapter and matters relating to
the birth of Prophet Ibrahim and his breaking the idols, refer to
Tarikh-i Kamil, pp. 53 - 62 and Biharul Anwar, vol. Xll, pp. 41 - 55.
For the sake of brevity we have refrained from mentioning the source of
all its contents.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol. V, page 130, Company Print.

[^8]: al-'Uyun, page 136; Amali Saduq, page 274 and Bihirul Anwar, page
35.

[^9]: Tafsir-i Burhan, vol. Ill, page 64

[^10]: Sa'dus Su'ud, pp. 41 - 42 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XII, page 118

[^11]: Tafsir-i Qummi, page 52 and Biharul Anwar, vol. Xll, page 100

[^12]: Biharul Anwar, vol. II, page 112 as quoted from Qassas-i Anbiya.

[^13]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, pp. 1 and 21

[^14]: Their lives have been discussed by Ibn Athir in Tarikh-i Kamil,
vol. II, pp. 15 - 21.

[^15]: lt is an admitted fact that the offices related to the Ka'bah did
not exist when the sanctuary was constructed, and they came into
existence gradually, according to the exigencies of time. Till the
advent of Islam these offices were divided into four parts: (1)
Custodianship of the Ka'bah and holding charge of its keys (2) Providing
water to the pilgrims during Haj season (3) Providing food to the
pilgrims. (4) Chiefship of the people of Makkah, standard bearership and
command of the army.

[^16]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 13

[^17]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 5

[^18]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 6 - 7

[^19]: Tarikh-i Kamil, by Ibn Athir vol. II, page 10

[^20]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 6; Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, pp.
8 - 9 and Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 8

[^21]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. 5, page 4

[^22]: One of the causes for a society being subjected to adversity is
the prevalence of sin and debauchery amongst its people and it is not
improbable that shameful deeds should bring famines and other calamities
in their wake. This proposition, besides being in conformity with
philosophical principles, has also been mentioned expressly in the Holy
Qur'an and in the Islamic traditions.

[^23]: The question arises as to why others did not come up with this
suggestion? Possibly they had lost all hope of finding water.

[^24]: Tarikh-i Yaqubi, vol. I, page 206 and Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol.
I, page 45.

[^25]: The above-mentioned incident has been narrated by many historians
and writers of Seerah. This story is worthy of appreciation for this
reason only that it manifests the nobility of character and
steadfastness of Abdul Muttalib and clearly indicates how ardent he was
in the matter of his faith and in keeping his promises.

[^26]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 153 and Bihar, vol. XVl, pp.
74 - 79.

[^27]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. I, page 253 onwards.

[^28]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, pp. 43 - 62; Faza-il Shazan, pp.
52 - 64, Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, pp. 146 - 155, and Tarikh-i Kamil, vol.
I, pp. 260 - 263.

[^29]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. I, page 263.

[^30]: Tarikh-i Kimil by Ibn Athir, vol. I, page 266.

[^31]: Tarikh-i Tabari, vol. II, page 4 and Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I,
page 54.

[^32]: Tarikh-i Ibn Athir, vol. II, page 4 - a part of the footnote.


