Chapter 53: The Battle of Tabuk
===============================

The lofty and strong fort, which had been built by the side of a spring
on the road leading from Hijr to Damascus in the border area of the
territory of Syria, was called Tabuk. In those times Syria was one of
the colonies of the Eastern Roman Empire. Its capital was
Constantinople. Its frontier people were the followers of Christianity
and the chiefs of the districts were satellites of the Ruler of Syria
who himself took orders directly from the Roman Emperor.

The rapid penetration and expansion of Islam in the Arabian Peninsula
and the brilliant conquests by the Muslims in the Hijaz were being
noticed in areas beyond the Hijaz, and were making their enemies tremble
and think of ways and means to check this tide.

The fall of the Government of Makkah, the adoption of Islam by the
prominent chiefs of the Hijaz, and the bravery and sacrifices of the
Muslim warriors, made the Roman Emperor decide to launch a surprise
attack on the Muslims with the help of a well-equipped army, because he
felt his empire to be in grave danger on account of the extraordinary
influence and expansion of Islam. He was very much afraid of the
increase in the military and political power of the Muslims.

In those days Rome was the only powerful adversary of Iran and possessed
the greatest political and military strength. It was very proud on
account of the victories which it had achieved against Iran and the
defeat which it had inflicted on the Iranian army.

The Roman army, which consisted of 4000 mounted soldiers and
infantry-men and was equipped with the armour of the latest model
available in those times, encamped in the frontier strip of Syria. The
tribes residing in the border areas (like the tribes of Lakham, 'Amilah,
Ghassan and Jazam) also joined them and the vanguard of the army
advanced up to Balqa'.[^1]

News about the encampment of a group of the Roman soldiers in the
frontier strip of Syria reached the Prophet through the caravans, which
were travelling between the Hijaz and Syria in connection with trade. He
found no alternative except to give a reply to the aggressors with a big
army and to protect, from the surprise attacks of the enemy, the
religion, which had spread at the cost of the lives of the dear ones of
Islam, and of his personal sacrifices, and had since taken root, and was
about to spread throughout the world.

This unpleasant news reached him at a time when the people of Madina had
not yet properly collected their produce, and the dates were about to
ripen, and Madina and its suburbs were, so to say, in the grip of a sort
of famine. However, for the godly persons the spiritual life and the
protection of high ideals, and jihad in the path of Allah are preferable
to everything else.

Inviting Warriors And Procuring Expenses Of War
-----------------------------------------------

The Prophet was aware to some extent of the capability and experience of
the enemy and was sure that besides necessitating spiritual capital
(viz. faith in Allah and fighting for the sake of Allah), victory in
this battle also depended on a big army. Keeping this fact in view he
sent men to Makkah as well as to the areas adjoining Madina to invite
Muslims to fight in the path of Allah and also to ask well-to-do Muslims
to provide for the expenses of war by making payment of zakat.

Soon after the proclamation made by the Prophet, 30,000 persons declared
their readiness to participate in the battle and gathered in the camping
ground of Madina (Thaniyya tul Wida'). The expenses of war were provided
by collecting zakat. Out of these 30,000 men, 10,000 were mounted
soldiers and the remaining 20,000 were infantry-men. Later the Prophet
ordered that every tribe should choose a standard for itself.[^2]

Persons Opposed To Participation In The Battle
----------------------------------------------

The Battle of Tabuk was the best occasion on which the self-sacrificing
persons and the pretenders and hypocrites could be recognized, because
general mobilization was ordered when the weather was very hot and the
business community of Madina was ready to harvest the palm-dates.
Refusal of some of them, on various pretexts, to take part in the battle
cast off the veil from their real faces and Qur'anic verses were
revealed condemning their action. All these verses are contained in
Surah al-Tawbah.

Some persons declined to take part in this sacred jihad for the
following reasons:

1. When the Prophet proposed Jadd bin Qays, who was an influential man,
for joining the army against the Romans, he replied thus: "I have a
fanatical attachment with women. I am, therefore, afraid that I may
chance to see Roman women and may not be able to control myself". On
having heard this childish excuse of his the Prophet decided to leave
him alone and to contact others. Jadd was condemned by Allah in this
verse:

***Some of them ask you, "Make us exempt from taking part in the battle
and do not try to tempt us by telling what we may gain from the battle;
many people have died in the battle". Hell certainly encompasses the
unbelievers.*** **(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:49).**

2. The hypocrites: those persons, who had ostensibly embraced Islam but
had, in fact, no interest in it, were preventing the people on different
pretexts from taking part in this jihad. At times they put forth the
excuse that the weather was very hot. The Divine revelation replied to
their objection in these words:

***Say: The fire of Hell is much severer in heat, if they but
understood.*** **(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:81).**

There were some persons who frightened the Muslims of participation in
this battle and said: "The Arabs are not competent to fight with the
Romans and consequently all the participants in the battle will be tied
with ropes and sold in the free markets ".[^3]

Discovery of the centre of espionage in Madina: The great leader of
Islam attached great importance to intelligence reports and half of his
victories were the result of prior information about the conditions of
the enemies and the mischief-mongers. By this means he nipped many of
their satanic deeds and anti-Islamic schemes in the bud.

A report was received by the Prophet that the house of a Jew named
Suwaylam had become the centre of anti-Islamic activities and the
hypocrites gathered there and chalked out schemes to prevent the Muslims
from participating in this sacred jihad. The Prophet therefore, decided
to frighten the conspirators in such a way that they might not entertain
any such satanic thoughts in future.

He ordered Talhah bin Ubaydullah to go with some brave companions and
set the house of Suwaylam on fire while their meeting was in progress.
As directed by the Prophet, Talhah set the house on fire when the
conspirators were busy discussing anti-Islamic plans. All of them ran
away from the flames of fire and one of them injured his foot. This
action was so effective that it served as a great lesson to the
hypocrites for the future.[^4]

A group of persons who shed tears: some of the companions of the
Prophet, who were very keen to take part in this sacred jihad came and
requested him to provide them facilities for the journey so that they
could discharge that sacred religious duty. When the Prophet told them
that he did not possess any animal for riding which he might place at
their disposal, they wept bitterly and tears trickled down their faces.

If there were some persons amongst the companions of the Prophet who
conspired or indulged in hindrances or coined excuses, there were also
others amongst them, who were anxious to participate in jihad, which at
times costs one one's life, and non-participation in it made them weep
bitterly. In the terminology of history these persons are called criers
and the Qur'an makes a mention of their faith in these words:

***Those who come to you (Muhammad) asking to be taken to the battle,
but you cannot find the necessary means for them, are exempt from the
duty of fighting for the cause of Allah, even though they leave you with
their eyes flooded with tears because of not being able to help the
cause of Allah.*** **(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:92).**[^5]

3. Another group consisted of persons like Ka'b, Hilal and Mararah who
had full faith in Islam and were also desirous of participating in
jihad, but as they had not yet collected their produce they decided that
after collecting the produce they would join the warriors of Islam. In
the terminology of the Holy Qur'an (vide Surah al-Tawbah, 9:118) they
are the same three violators who were severely reprimanded by the
Prophet on return from Tabuk and the rebuke administered to them also
served as an example for others.

Ali Did Not Participate In This Battle
--------------------------------------

One of the distinctions of the Commander of the Faithful is that he
accompanied the Prophet and was his standard-bearer in all Islamic
battles except in the Battle of Tabuk, he stayed in Madina and did not
participate in jihad under the orders of the Prophet himself. The
Prophet took this decision, because he knew very well that the
hypocrites and some persons from amongst Quraysh were seeking an
opportunity to bring about disorder and topple the newly established
Islamic Government in his absence.

Tabuk was the farthest point to which the Prophet travelled in
connection with the battles in which he participated. He realized
perfectly that it was possible that during his absence anti-Islamic
groups might create disturbance and might call their sympathizers from
different places to join them for the success of their nefarious
schemes. Hence, although he had nominated Muhammad bin Maslamah to act
as his representative in Madina during his absence, he also said to Ali:

"You are the guardian of the Ahl al-Bayt and my kinsfolk and the group
of the Muhajirs, and none except myself and you is suited for this
task".

The stay of the Commander of the Faithful in Madina upset the
conspirators very much, because they realized that they could not put
their schemes into practice in the presence of Ali who was continuously
vigilant.

Hence, in order to ensure the exit of Ali from Madina, they decided upon
another plan and circulated the rumour that the Prophet had asked Ali
very earnestly to take part in jihad but the latter had declined to
participate in this sacred battle on account of the very long journey
and excessively hot weather. In order to contradict these people Ali saw
the Prophet and placed the matter before him. At this moment the Prophet
uttered his historical sentence which is a clear proof of Ali's Imamate
and his immediate succession as Caliph after the demise of the Prophet.
He said:

"O my brother! Return to Madina, because none is more suited to preserve
the dignity and position of Madina than myself and you. You are my
representative amongst the Ahl al-Bayt and my kinsfolk. Don't you feel
happy when I say that your relationship with me is similar to the one
which existed between Harun and Musa except that no prophet will come
after me. Just as Harun was the immediate successor of Prophet Musa you
are my successor and Caliph after me".[^6]

The Army Of Islam Proceeds Towards Tabuk
----------------------------------------

The usual practice of the Prophet was that, while performing a journey
to chastise a people, who obstructed the advancement of Islam, or
intended to attack the Muslims, or had evil designs against them, he did
not make his aims and objects known to the officers and the soldiers,
and made the army march through comparatively unfrequented routes. Thus
he did not let the enemies become aware of his intentions and came upon
them absolutely unawares.[^7]

However, in order to rout the Roman forces, who had collected on the
frontiers of Syria to attack the Muslim territories, he made his aim
clearly known to all concerned on the very day the general mobilization
was proclaimed. The point in doing so was that the mujahids (warriors)
should become aware of the importance of the journey and the hardships
involved on the way, and should carry sufficient provisions with them.

Furthermore, in order to strengthen the army of Islam, the Prophet was
obliged to seek help from the tribes of Tamim, Ghatfan and Tayyi' and
they were residing at far-off places from Madina. In view of this the
Prophet wrote letters to the chiefs of these tribes and also wrote a
letter to 'Atab bin Usayd, the young Governor of Makkah, and invited the
tribes as well as the Makkans to partake in this sacred jihad[^8] as
extension of such a general invitation was not possible secretly.

Hence it was necessary that he should make the particulars of the
expedition and its importance clearly known to the chiefs of the tribes
so that they might place sufficient provisions and animals for riding at
the disposal of their mujahids.

March Past Of The Army Before The Prophet
-----------------------------------------

The day for the departure of the army of Islam arrived. On that day the
Prophet reviewed his troops in the army headquarters of Madina. The
magnificent scene of the march past of the faithful and self-sacrificing
men who had preferred, for the sake of their objective, hardships and
death to comfort and worldly gains with enthusiasm and faith, impressed
the audience.

At the time of departure the Prophet addressed the soldiers to
strengthen their morale, and explained to them his aim in ordering
general mobilization. Then the soldiers proceeded towards the prescribed
route.

The Story Of Malik Bin Qays
---------------------------

After the army of Islam had marched off Malik bin Qays returned to
Madina from his journey. It was very hot on that day. He found that
loneliness prevailed over Madina and came to know about the departure of
the soldiers of Islam. In the meantime he arrived in his garden and saw
that his beautiful wife had erected a shade for him. He cast a glance at
the attractive face of his wife and also stared a little at the food and
water which she had prepared for him.

Thereafter he thought of the painful difficulties of the Prophet and his
companions who were proceeding to perform jihad in the path of Allah and
to face death in such a hot weather. Then he decided not to avail of the
water and food prepared by his wife or the shade erected by her but to
ride his animal immediately, and join the army of Islam as early as
possible.

He, therefore, turned to his wife and said: "It is not at all fair that
I should take rest under this shade along with my spouse and eat
delicious food, and drink cold and wholesome water, whereas my master
should be proceeding for jihad in such scorching heat. No. This doesn't
accord with justice and the rules of friendship, and faith and sincerity
don't permit me to do so".

He said these words, picked up some small provisions for the journey and
went his way. On the way he met 'Umar bin Wahab, who, it would appear,
lagged behind the Islamic army, and both of them reached the Prophet
when he was at Tabuk.[^9]

This man did not acquire the blessing of accompanying the Prophet in the
beginning, still he eventually offered his services in this noble cause
by means of his commendable self-sacrifice. On the other hand there are
some persons at whose door good luck knocks itself but they remain away
from it on account of their lack of suitability and competence and
consequently throw themselves into adversity and perdition.

For example, Abdullah bin Ubayy, the chief of the hypocrites, had
pitched a tent in the camping place of the Prophet so that he might
participate in this jihad in the company of the Prophet. Since he was an
ill-intentioned person and a ruthless enemy of Islam, he changed his
mind when the army was about to march off and returned to Madina along
with his supporters so that he might create disturbance there, in the
absence of the Prophet. The Prophet did not also pay the least heed to
him, because he was aware of his hypocrisy and did not consider his
participation in the jihad to be of any use at all.

Difficulties On The Way
-----------------------

The army of Islam was faced with great difficulties on its way from
Madina to Syria and it is for this reason that it had been given the
name of *Jayshul 'Usrah* (the army of hardship). However, their faith
and fervour overcame all these difficulties and they welcomed all the
hardships that came in their way.

When the army of Islam reached the land of 'Thamood' the Prophet covered
his face with a cloth on account of the hot and scorching winds blowing
there, and passed by that place in great haste and said to his
companions "Reflect over the end of the lives of the people of Thamood
who became subjected to the wrath of Allah because of their obstinacy
and disobedience, and remember that no true believer should think that
the end of his life will not be like that of those people. The
death-like quietness of this place and the ruined houses which have gone
into deep silence are a lesson for other nations".

Thereafter, the Prophet ordered the soldiers not to drink water of that
place or prepare food or bread with it and that they should not even
perform ablution with it, and if they had, in some cases, prepared food
or kneaded flour with that water they should give it to the animals to
eat.

Then the army of Islam continued its march under the guidance of the
Prophet and when a part of the night had passed they reached a well from
which the camel of Swaleh had drunk water. On reaching that spot the
Prophet gave orders that all should encamp there and take rest.

Precautionary Orders
--------------------

The Prophet was fully aware of the poisonous and fast winds and the
violent storms of that area, which at times overtook the men and the
camels and buried them under the mounds of sand and dust. He, therefore,
ordered that the knees of the camels should be tied and none should go
out of the camping place alone at night.

Experience proved that the precautionary orders given by the Prophet
were very useful, because two men belonging to the tribe of Bani Sa'idah
violated them and came out of the camping-place alone at midnight with
the result that the intense storm suffocated one of them and flung the
other on a hill. The Prophet came to know about it and was very much
unhappy for those who lost their lives on account of their indiscipline.
He, therefore, asked the soldiers once again to maintain
discipline.[^10]

'Abbad bin Bishr, who headed a group which was responsible for the
safety and security of the army of Islam, reported to the Prophet that
the Muslim soldiers had become involved in difficulties owing to
shortage of water, and the entire storage of water was likely to be
finished soon. Hence, some of them slaughtered very precious camels to
utilize the water available in their bellies, and others had submitted
to the Divine will and were awaiting anxiously the blessing of Allah.

The Almighty Allah, who had promised victory to His Prophet, once again
helped him and his faithful companions. Torrential rains came and all
drank water to their fill. Furthermore, those appointed to stock
provisions, as well as the entire army, stored as much water as they
desired.

Occult Information Of The Prophet
---------------------------------

There is no gain saying the fact that, as clearly mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an,[^11] the Prophet could give information about occult matters of
which other people knew nothing. However the knowledge of the Prophet
was limited and depended on what he was taught by Allah. It is,
therefore, possible that he might not have been aware of certain
matters.

For example, he might lose some money or misplace the key of the house
and might not have been able to locate it. At times, however, he gave
occult information about most obscure and intricate matters and left the
people wonder-struck. The reason for this ascension and descent is the
same as mentioned above viz. whenever Allah willed the Prophet gave
information about matters related to the occult world.

On the way the camel of the Prophet was lost and some of his companions
went to search it. In the meantime one of the hypocrites got up and
said: "He says he is the Prophet of Allah and gives information about
the heavens, but it is strange that he doesn't know the whereabouts of
his camel".

The Prophet came to know about this and made the position clear by means
of an eloquent remark. He said: "I know only that what Allah tells me.
Just now Allah has informed me about the whereabouts of my camel. It is
available in this desert in such and such valley. Its bridle has got
entangled in a tree and has prevented it from moving further. Go and
bring it".

Some persons went immediately to that place and found the camel exactly
in the same position as was described by him.[^12]

Another Occult Information
--------------------------

The camel of Abu-Dharr became incapable of walking and Abu-Dharr was
left behind the army of Islam. He waited for some time but without any
result. Eventually he left the camel, loaded the provisions on his own
back and walked on so that he might join the army of Islam as early as
possible.

The Muslim soldiers had encamped on a spot as ordered by the Prophet and
were taking rest. Suddenly they saw, at a distance, the figure of a man
who was traversing the path with a heavy load on his back. One of the
companions informed the Prophet of the position. He said: "It is
Abu-Dharr. May Allah forgive Abu-Dharr! He walks alone, will die alone
and will be brought to life alone''.[^13]

The later events proved that what the Prophet had predicted was
absolutely correct, because Abu-Dharr died in a very pitiable condition,
away from habitation in the desert of Rabzah, when only his daughter was
by his side.[^14]

Army Of Islam Arrives In The Area Of Tabuk
------------------------------------------

The army of Islam arrived in the area of Tabuk in the beginning of the
month of Sha'ban 9 A.H. However, no trace of the Roman army could be
seen there. It appears that the commanders of the Roman army became
aware of the numerical strength of the Muslim soldiery and their bravery
and unparalleled self-sacrifices, a small specimen of which had already
been seen by them from very close quarters in the Battle of Mu'tah.
Hence, they considered it expedient to recall their army within the
frontiers of their own territories. By doing so they practically wished
to deny that they had mobilized forces against the Muslims, and wanted
to give the impression that they had never thought of launching an
attack, and that any such report was a mere gossip, and thus wished to
prove their impartiality regarding the events which took place in
Arabia.

At this juncture the Prophet assembled his esteemed officers, and acting
on the established Islamic principle of consultation, asked for their
views as to whether they should advance into the territory of the enemy
or should return to Madina.

As a result of military consultations it was decided that the army of
Islam which had suffered innumerable hardships while performing the
journey to Tabuk should return to Madina to revive its strength.

Furthermore, by performing this journey the Muslims had already achieved
their major aim, which was to scatter the Roman army. The Romans were so
much frightened and intimidated that for quite a long period they did
not think of launching an attack and during that period, therefore, the
security of Arabia from the northern side was ensured.

In order to safeguard the position of the Prophet and to make it clear
that their own suggestions could be rejected or withdrawn, the members
of the war consultative council added this sentence also: "If you have
been ordered by the Almighty Allah to advance you should give orders,
and we too shall follow you".[^15]

The Prophet said: "No order from Allah has been received and if any such
order had been received from Him I would not at all have consulted you.
According respect to the views of the consultative council, therefore, I
have decided to return to Madina from this very point".

The rulers who inhabited the frontier areas of Syria and the Hijaz and
wielded influence amongst their people were all Christians and it was
possible that one day the Roman army might utilize these local powers
and attack the Hijaz with their assistance. It was, therefore, necessary
for the Prophet to conclude non-aggression treaties with them so that he
might acquire better security.

He personally contacted those frontier rulers, who belonged to areas
adjoining Tabuk, and concluded non-aggression treaties with them,
subject to certain conditions. As regards areas lying at a greater
distance from Tabuk he sent deputations to the rulers concerned so that
better security could be ensured for the Muslims.

He also contacted the Rulers of Aylah, Azri'at and Jarba' and
non-aggression pacts were concluded between the parties. Aylah is a
coastal city situated on the coast of the Red Sea and is at some
distance from Syria. Its ruler named Yuhanna (John) son of Rowbah came
from his capital to Tabuk, wearing a golden cross round his neck. He
presented a white mule to the Prophet and expressed his obedience to
him. The Prophet appreciated his gesture and also gave him a present in
return.

The said ruler decided to remain a Christian and agreed to pay three
thousand Dinars per year as *jizyah* (tribute) and also to receive every
Muslim who passed through the region of Aylah. A pact on the following
lines was signed by the parties: "This is a non-aggression pact from the
side of Allah and His Prophet, Muhammad for Yuhanna and the residents of
Aylah. According to this pact all their means of transport whether by
sea or by land and all the persons belonging to Syria, Yemen and the
islands, who may be with them, shall be under the protection of Allah
and His Prophet. However, if anyone of them violates the rule his wealth
shall not save him from punishment. All sea routes and land routes are
open for them and they are entitled to frequent them''.[^16]

This pact shows that if a nation co-operated with the Muslims in a
peaceful manner it was provided all the facilities, and its security was
also guaranteed by them.

The Prophet also concluded pacts with the frontiers-men like the people
of Azri'at and Jarba' whose lands had great strategic importance, and
thus ensured the safety of the Islamic territories from the northern
side.

Khalid Bin Walid Is Dispatched To Dowmatul Jandal
-------------------------------------------------

The populous region with green trees, running waters and a strong fort
situated at a distance of about fifty leagues from Syria was called
Dowmatul Jandal.[^17] In those days the Christian Okaydar bin Abdul
Malik Kindi ruled there. The Prophet feared that in the event of a
renewed attack by the Roman army the Christian Ruler of Dowmah would
assist them and thus endanger the security of Arabia.

For this reason he considered it necessary to derive the maximum benefit
from the force available with him, and to depute a unit under the
command of Khalid to subjugate the said region. Khalid reached near
Dowmatul Jandal along with mounted soldiers and lay in ambush outside
the fort.

During that moonlit night Okaydar came out of the fort along with his
brother Hassan for hunting. They had not gone far away from the fort
they came face to face with the soldiers of Khalid. During the brief
encounter, which took place between the two groups. Okaydar's brother
was killed, and his men fled and took refuge in the fort and shut its
gate, and Okaydar was taken prisoner.

Khalid promised him that if the inmates of the fort opened its gate
under his orders and surrendered their arms to the army of Islam he
would forgive him and would take him before the Prophet .

Okaydar was aware that the Muslims were truthful and kept their
promises. He, therefore, gave orders that the gate of the fort might be
opened and the arms surrendered to the Muslims. The arms available in
the fort consisted of 400 coats of mail, 500 swords and 400 spears.
Khalid left for Madina along, with this booty and Okaydar also
accompanied him.

Before arriving in Madina, Khalid sent to the Prophet Okaydar's brocade
mantle, which the latter used to put on his shoulders like kings. The
eyes of the worldly-minded persons were dazzled to look at the mantle,
but the Prophet displayed perfect indifference towards it and said: "The
dress of the people who will go to Paradise will be more wonderful".

Okaydar reached the Prophet. He declined to embrace Islam, but agreed to
pay tribute to the Muslims and an agreement was concluded between him
and the Prophet. Thereafter the Prophet gave him costly presents and
appointed 'Abbad bin Bishr to convey him safely to Dowmatul Jandal.[^18]

Evaluation Of The Journey To Tabuk
----------------------------------

As a consequence of this tedious journey the Prophet did not come face
to face with the enemy and no fighting took place, but a number of
benefits were achieved.[^19]

Firstly, this expedition enhanced the prestige of the army of Islam and
the Prophet was enabled to impress his greatness and strength on the
hearts of the people of the Hijaz and the frontiers-men of Syria.
Consequently the friends as well as the enemies of Islam came to know
that its military power had grown so much that it could face the biggest
powers of the world and could frighten and intimidate them.

Crime and rebellion had become second nature with the Arab tribes.
However, their becoming aware of the strength of the army of Islam could
restrain them for quite some time from opposing the Muslims and
revolting against them.

Hence, after the return of the Prophet to Madina the representatives of
the tribes, which had not surrendered till then, began coming to Madina
and making declarations regarding their submission to the Islamic
Government and embracement of Islam, so much so that the ninth year of
migration began to be called the year of deputations.

Secondly, on having concluded various agreements with the frontiers-men
of the Hijaz and Syria the Muslims ensured the safety of this region,
and were satisfied that the chiefs of these tribes would not co-operate
with the Roman army.

Thirdly, by performing this painful journey the Prophet made conquest of
Syria easier. He made the commanders of the army acquainted with the
difficulties of this region and taught them the method of warfare
against the big powers of that time.

Hence, the first region which the Muslims conquered after the demise of
the Prophet was the territory of Damascus and Syria. Furthermore, by
general mobilization the true believers were distinguished from the
hypocrites and profound understanding was created among the Muslims.

The Hypocrites Plot Against The Holy Prophet
--------------------------------------------

The Prophet stayed in Tabuk for ten days[^20] and returned to Madina
after dispatching Khalid to Dowmah. Twelve hypocrites, out of whom eight
were from amongst Quraysh and the remaining four were the inhabitants of
Madina, decided to scare the camel of the Prophet from the top of a
defile situated on the route between Madina and Syria and to make him
fall into the valley.

When the army of Islam reached the first point of the defile, the
Prophet said: "Whoever desires to go through the desert may do so
because the desert is quite extensive". However, he himself went above
the defile while Huzayfah was driving his camel and 'Ammar was holding
its bridle.

When he turned back his head he saw in the moonlit night that some
mounted persons were pursuing him. To ensure that they might not be
identified they had covered their faces and were conversing in very low
voices. The Prophet became angry and challenged them and ordered
Huzayfah to turn away their camels with his stick.

The call of the Prophet frightened them very much and they realized that
he had become aware of their plot. They therefore, immediately went back
the way they had come and joined other soldiers.

Huzayfah says: "I identified them from the marks of their camels and
said to the Prophet: "I can tell you who they are so that you may punish
them". But the Prophet instructed me in a kind voice not to divulge
their secret, because it was possible that they might repent. He also
added: "If I punish them the non-Muslims would say that now that
Muhammad has achieved power, he has made a victim of his own
companions".[^21]

Cold War
--------

No scene is more grand than the scene of the return of a victorious army
to its homeland, and nothing is more pleasant to a soldier than victory
over the enemy which protects his honour and ensures his safety and
existence. It so happened that both of these things were apparent and
visible at the time of the return of the victorious army of Islam from
Tabuk.

After covering the journey between Tabuk and Madina the army of Islam
arrived in Madina with great splendour. The soldiers of Islam were very
much elated and the pride of distinction as a warrior and of
predominance was apparent from their gait and conversation. The reason
for this pride was also evident, because they had made a big power
retreat; the power, which had defeated earlier its powerful adversary
(Iran). The Muslims had frightened and over-awed the Romans and had also
subjugated the frontiers-men of Syria and the Hijaz.

These persons had admittedly secured an honour by overpowering the enemy
and were evidently justified in priding themselves over others, who had
stayed on in Madina without a just cause.

However, it was possible that this way of thinking and this victorious
return might create undue pride in the narrow-minded persons, and might
result in insult to some of those persons, who had stayed on in Madina
for some good excuse, but their hearts were with the soldiers in the
battlefield and they sincerely shared their weal and woe.

Hence, the Prophet addressed the army of Islam, at a place near Madina
where it had stayed for a short time, in these words: "There are some
persons in Madina, who joined hands with you in this journey and kept
step with you".

The Prophet was asked as to how it could be imagined that those, who
stayed in Madina also participated in the journey with the army. He
replied: "They, in spite of being very keen to take part in this sacred
obligation (jihad), could not join on account of some good excuse".[^22]

By means of this brief speech the Prophet alluded to one of the
instructional programmes of Islam and directed the people that good
intentions and upright thinking take the place of pious deeds, and those
people, who are deprived of doing good deeds on account of lack of
strength or resources, can become partners of others in the matter of
spiritual reward and recompense for good deeds.

If Islam desires outward reformation it is all the more keen on
spiritual reformation and purity of thinking, because the real source of
reformation is reformation of belief and the way of thinking, and all
our actions originate from our thoughts.

Thus the Prophet removed the unjustified pride of the mujahids and
guaranteed the position of the excusable persons, but he determined from
that very moment that he would award exemplary punishment to those
violators, who had no just excuse to offer, and would make their lives
miserable. The following event is an example of such an action.

On the day general mobilization was proclaimed in Madina three Muslims
named Hilal, Ka'b and Murarah came to the Prophet and requested that
they might he excused from participating in the jihad. The reason
mentioned by them was that their produce from the jungle and from their
gardens had not yet been collected and was still half-ripe. They also
promised the Prophet that when their produce was collected within a few
days they would join the army of Islam at Tabuk.

Those persons, who do not differentiate between material gain and
political independence, are the short-sighted people who consider the
transient worldly pleasures to be at par with respectable life, which is
passed under the banner of intellectual, political and cultural
independence and at times even prefer the former to the latter.

The Prophet was obliged, after his return, to punish such persons and
incidentally to prevent this disease penetrating into the minds of
others as well. Not only that these persons had not participated in the
jihad but they had also not kept the promise made by them with the
Prophet. They were still busy in their trade and in accumulating wealth
when suddenly the news of the victorious return of the Prophet spread in
Madina.

These three persons, in order to make amends for their misconduct and to
deceive other Muslims, went to welcome the Prophet like all others and
paid their respects to him and congratulated him; but he did not pay any
heed to them.

On reaching Madina he addressed the people amidst all the rejoicing and
tumult, and the first thing which he said was this: " O people! These
three persons belittled the Islamic orders and didn't keep the promise
they had made with me. They preferred worldly gains to the respectable
life under the banner of Islam. Hence you should cut off all relations
with them"

The number of the violators reached ninety, but as most of them belonged
to the group of hypocrites and it could not be expected from them that
they would join in jihad against the enemy, the pressure was directed
towards these three Muslims of whom, Murarah and Hilal, had participated
in the Battle of Badr and enjoyed a reputation amongst the Muslims.

The wise policy of the Prophet, which is an integral part Islam, had a
wonderful effect. The trade and business of the violators came to a
perfect standstill. Their commodities had no demand in the market. Their
nearest ones cut off their relations with them and refrained from even
conversing with them or visiting them. Social boycott by the people
lowered the spirits and morale of these persons, so much that the
spacious land of Madina was nothing more than a cage for them.[^23]

Hence, it was fortunate that these three persons realized, through their
intelligence and insight, that life in Islamic environments was not
possible without whole-hearted association with the Muslims, and the
life of an insignificant minority, opposed to the majority, could not
last long, especially when the minority consisted of a group of
mischievous, quarrelsome, and spiteful persons.

On the one side they had been called to account and on the other side
the natural and instinctive force pulled them once again towards real
faith, and they repented before Allah of their cowardly act. The
Almighty also accepted their repentance and informed His Prophet of
their being forgiven. Orders regarding the termination of the boycott
were, therefore, promulgated immediately.[^24]

The Event Of Masjid Zirar
-------------------------

In the Arabian Peninsula Madina and Najran were considered to be two
extensive areas and big centres for the people of the Scriptures. Hence
some Arabs belonging to the tribes of Aws and Khazraj were inclined
towards Judaism and Christianity and had become followers of these
religions.

During the Age of Ignorance Abu 'Amir, father of Hanzalah, the
well-known martyr of the Battle of Uhud, had become very much inclined
towards Christianity and had become a monk. When Islam dawned in Madina
and absorbed the religious minorities, Abu 'Amir was upset and began
co-operating earnestly with the hypocrites of Aws and Khazraj.

The Prophet became aware of his subversive activities and wanted to
arrest him, but he ran away from Madina to Makkah and then to Ta'if and
after the fall of Ta'if, to Syria. From there he began guiding the
spying network of the hypocrites.

In one of his letters Abu 'Amir wrote to his friends:

"Construct a mosque in the village of Quba' opposite the mosque of the
Muslims. Assemble there at the time of prayers and on the pretext of
offering prayers, discuss and chalk out plans against Islam and the
Muslims".

Like the present day enemies of Islam Abu 'Amir had also realized that
in a country in which religion is fully established, the best way to
destroy it, is to use the name of religion itself, and religion can be
harmed more by using its own name rather than by any other factor. He
knew fully well that the Prophet would not permit the hypocrites to
build a centre for themselves under any circumstances, except when they
gave that centre a religious tinge and erected a meeting-place for
themselves with the name of a mosque.

When the Prophet intended proceeding to Tabuk the representatives of the
hypocrites came to him and requested him to accord them permission to
construct a mosque in their own area, on the pretext that when the
nights were dark or it was raining their old men and invalids were not
in a position to cover the long distance between their houses and Masjid
Quba. The Prophet did not give them any reply, either in the affirmative
or in the negative, and postponed final decision in the matter till
after his return from the intended journeys.[^25]

The hypocrites selected a place in the absence of the Prophet and
completed the construction of their rendezvous as quickly as possible,
giving it the name of mosque. On the day the Prophet returned to Madina
they requested him to perform the opening ceremony of this place of
worship by offering a few rak'ats of prayers there.

In the meantime the Archangel Jibreel came and informed the Prophet of
the position and called the building Masjid Zirar as it had been
constructed to create differences amongst the Muslims.[^26] The Prophet
ordered Masjid Zirar to be razed to the ground, its beams to be burnt,
and its rubbish thrown there for some period.[^27]

Destruction of Masjid Zirar was a serious blow to the hypocrites and
thereafter their group broke up and Abdullah bin Ubayy, their sole
supporter, also died after two months of the Battle of Tabuk.

Tabuk was the last Islamic campaign in which the Prophet took part.
After that he did not participate in any battle.

[^1]: Tabaqat, vol.II, page 165

[^2]: Tabaqat, vol. II, page 166.

[^3]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, page 1003.

[^4]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 517.

[^5]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 518; Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol.
III, pp.992-993

[^6]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 520; Bihar, vol. XXI, page 207.

[^7]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. III, page 990.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 244.

[^9]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 520. But Waqidi has ascribed
this incident with a little variation, to Abdullah bin Khaythamah

[^10]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. III, page 152.

[^11]: (He is) the Knower of the Unseen, and He reveals to none His
secret, save to every messenger whom He has chosen. (Surah al-Jinn,
72:26 - 27).

[^12]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 523.

[^13]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 525.

[^14]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. III, page 1000.

[^15]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 161.

[^16]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 526; Seerah-i Halabi, vol.
III, page 160 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 160.

[^17]: Dowmah is situated within ten miles of Madina. (Mughazi-i Waqidi,
vol. III, page 1025).

[^18]: Tabaqat, vol. II, page 146 and Biharul Anwar, vol. II, page 246.

[^19]: The Prophet stayed in Tabuk for twenty days. One day, after
offering morning prayers he delivered a detailed, eloquent and
instructive sermon. Thereafter he quotes the text of the sermon.
(Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. III, pp. 1014 - 1015).

[^20]: The period of stay of the Prophet in Tabuk is stated to be twenty
days. (Seerah-i Ibn Hisham vol. III, page 527 and Tabaqat-i Ibn Sa'd
vol. II, page 168).

[^21]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol. III, pp. 1042 - 1043; Biharul Anwar, vol.
XXI, page 247 and Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 162.

[^22]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 163; Biharul Anwar, vol. XX, page
219.

[^23]: The contents of this sentence are an extract from the Qur'an
wherein it has been said: "As though there was no place in the whole
vast earth to hide them or in their souls to console them" (Surah
al-Tawbah, 9:118).

[^24]: (Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 165 and Biharul Anwar, vol. X,
page 119). The Prophet's instructive method serves as an example for us,
Muslims, in the matter of insignificant minorities. Such opposition can
be tackled only by sincerity, determination and unity. Waqidi has given
a more detailed account of the three persons. (vide Mughazi, vol. III,
pp. 1049 - 1056).

[^25]: Mughazi-i Waqidi, vol III, page 1046.

[^26]: Verses 107 -110 of Surah al-Tawbah were revealed in connection
with Masjid Zirar.

[^27]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 530 and Bihar, vol. XX, page
253.


