Chapter 55: The Prophet Mourning for His Son
============================================

"Dear Ibrahim! We can't do anything for you. Divine Will can't be
changed. Your father's eyes shed tears, and his heart is sad and grieved
for your death. However, I will not say anything which may invite the
wrath of Allah. If there had not been the true and certain promise of
Allah that we too shall come after you, I would have wept more and
become more grieved at the separation from you".[^1]

These sentences were uttered by the Prophet of Islam while mourning for
his dear son Ibrahim, who was breathing his last in the lap of his kind
father. The Prophet had fixed his kind lips on the rosy face of his son
and bade him goodbye with a very sad face and a heavy heart and at the
same time with full submission to the Will of Allah.

Love for one's off-spring is one of the purest and most sublime
manifestations of human spirit and is a sign of health and purity of
one's soul.

The Prophet used to say: "Be gentle to your children and display kind
sentiments for them.[^2] Furthermore, kindness and love for children was
one of his most pleasing attributes.[^3]

During the past years the Prophet had been faced with the death of three
sons named Qasim, Tahir and Tayyib[^4] and three daughters named Zaynab,
Ruqayyah and Umme Kulsum and had been deeply grieved on this account.
After their death his only surviving child and the souvenir of his
esteemed wife Khadijah was Fatimah.

In 6 A.H. the Prophet sent ambassadors to foreign countries including
Egypt. He sent a letter to the ruler of Egypt inviting him to accept
Islam. Although he did not apparently give a positive reply to the
Prophet's call, he sent him a respectful reply along with some presents
including a slave-girl named Marya.

This slave-girl later acquired the honour of becoming the Prophet's wife
and gave birth to his son Ibrahim, who was loved very much by him. The
birth of Ibrahim diminished to some extent the unpleasant effects caused
by the death of his six children, and provided him consolation. However,
to his great sorrow Ibrahim also passed away after eighteen months.

The Prophet had gone out of the house on some business when he came to
know about the critical condition of his child. He returned home, took
the child from his mother's lap, and while signs of uneasiness were
apparent from his face, he uttered the sentences quoted before.

The mourning of the Prophet for his son is a sign of his human
sentiments, which continued even after the death of the child, and
manifestation of sentiments and expression of grief was a sign of his
kind nature, which showed itself involuntarily throughout his life. As
regards his not uttering anything against the pleasure of Allah, was a
sign of his faith and resignation to the Divine Will, which none can
escape.

Baseless Objection
------------------

Abdur Rahman bin Awf, who belonged to a family of the Ansar, was
surprised to see the Prophet shedding tears. He objected to it saying:
"You have been restraining us from weeping for the dead. How is it that
you are now shedding tears at the death of your son? "

The objector was not only not aware of the sublime basic principle of
Islam but was also ignorant of the spirit and special sentiments with
which the Almighty has endowed human beings. All human instincts have
been created for particular purposes and it is necessary that everyone
of them should manifest itself at its proper time and place.

A person who is not moved by the death of his near ones, whose heart
does not move, whose eyes do not shed tears, in short, who does not
display any reaction on account of being separated from them is nothing
more than a stone, and should not be called a human being.

However, a delicate and appreciable point deserves attention here for
although this objection was baseless, it tells us that complete freedom
and perfect democracy existed in the newly formed society of the Muslims
at that time, so that a person could pick up courage to comment upon the
action of his absolute ruler with perfect freedom and without any fear
or awe and could also get a reply.

The Prophet replied: "I have never said that you should not weep on the
death of your dear ones, because it is a sign of kindness and pity and a
person whose heart is not moved for others does not become entitled to
the blessings of Allah.[^5] I have said that you should not make
excessive lamentations on the death of your near ones and neither utter
indecent or objectionable words nor tear your dress out of too much
grief".[^6]

As directed by the Prophet the Commander of the Faithful washed the dead
body of Ibrahim and shrouded him. Then the Prophet and some of his
companions escorted the funeral party and buried the child in the Baqi'
graveyard.[^7]

The Prophet looked into the grave of Ibrahim and saw a pit in a corner
thereof. In order to level it he sat down on the ground, smoothed the
surface of the grave with his own hands, and uttered this sentence:
"Whenever anyone of you does a job he should endeavour to do it in a
solid way".

Campaign Against Superstitions
------------------------------

Solar eclipse took place on the day Ibrahim passed away. Some persons,
who were ignorant of the laws of nature, thought that the sun had been
eclipsed on account of the death of Ibrahim. Although this thinking was
absolutely baseless, it could apparently be beneficial for the Prophet.
In case, therefore, he had been an ordinary and a worldly leader he
could very well confirm this view and thus prove his own magnificence
and greatness.

However, as opposed to this thinking, he mounted the pulpit and informed
the people of the factual position. He said: "O People! Be it known to
you that the sun and the moon are the signs of the Power of Allah. They
move in a particular course which Allah has prescribed for them
according to the laws of nature. They are not eclipsed on account of the
death or birth of anyone. It is your duty, at the time of solar eclipse,
to offer prayers".[^8]

As opposed to many people, who not only interpret facts in their own
favour but also take advantage of the ignorance and superstitious
thinking of the people, he did not conceal facts and did not try to
profit from the ignorance of the people.

If he had endorsed this false thinking on that day he could not have
been able to signalize himself and claim to be the eternal leader of
mankind and the representative and the chosen one of Allah during the
present age when astronomy has taken long strides and the reasons for
the solar and lunar eclipses have become clearly known to mankind.

His law and call are not for Arabs alone and are not confined to any
time and space. If he is the leader of those, who lived in earlier ages,
he is also the Prophet of the space age and of the period of the
discovery of the secrets of nature. On whatever subject he has spoken,
his words are so sound and firm that the recent scientific upheavals,
which have disproved many of the theories of the past scholars, have not
been able to find even one weak point in his statements.

[^1]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 34 and Bihar, vol. XXII, page 157.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXIII, page 114.

[^3]: Muhajjatul Baydhah, vol. III, page 366.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXII, page 166. However, some Shi'ah scholars
have stated that he had only two male children from Khadijah. (Biharul
Anwar,vol. XXII, page 151-new edition).

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXII, page 151.

[^6]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 348.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXII, page 156). According to Halabi the
washing and shrouding of the Prophet's son, Ibrahim was performed by
Fadl, the son of the Prophet's uncle Abbas.

[^8]: al-Muhasin, page 313 and Seerah-i Halabi, page 348.


