Chapter 57: Representatives of Najran in Madina
===============================================

The pleasant territory of Najran comprising seventy-two villages is
situated on the border of the Hijaz and Yemen. In the early days of
Islam this was the only region in the Hijaz which was inhabited by the
Christians, who had, for some reasons, forsaken idol-worship and
embraced Christianity.[^1]

Simultaneous with the letters which the Prophet of Islam wrote to the
heads of different countries of the world he also wrote a letter to Abu
Harith, the Bishop of Najran, and, through that letter, invited the
people of that area to embrace Islam. The text of the said letter runs
as under:

In the name the Lord of Ibrahim, Ishaq and Ya'qub.

This is a letter from Muhammad, the Prophet and Messenger of Allah to
the Bishop of Najran. I praise and glorify the Lord of Ibrahim, Ishaq
and Ya'qub, and invite you all to worship Allah instead of worshipping
His creatures, so that you may come out of the guardianship of the
creatures of Allah and take place under the guardianship of Allah
Himself.

And in case you do not accept my invitation you must (at least) pay
Jizyah (tribute) to the Islamic Government (in lieu of which it will
undertake the protection of your lives and property), failing which you
are hereby warned of dangerous consequences.[^2]

Some of the Shi'ah sources add that the Prophet also wrote down in his
letter the verse relating to the people of the Scripture wherein all of
them have been invited to worship the One Allah. Here the 64th verse of
Surah Ale Imran has been referred to viz: *Muhammad, say to the
followers of the Bible, 'We must come to a common term: 'Let us worship
no one except Allah' . . .*

The representatives of the Prophet arrived in Najran and delivered his
letter to the Bishop. He read the letter very carefully and then, in
order to take a decision, called a meeting of the religious and the
secular personalities for consultation. One of the persons called for
consultation was Shurahbil, who was renowned for his knowledge,
intelligence and experience.

He spoke thus in reply to the Bishop: "My knowledge of religious matters
is very meagre, and I have, therefore, no right to express my views
about them, but in case you consult me regarding some thing other than
this I may be able to suggest a solution of the problem. However, I am
obliged to point out one thing that we have heard time and again from
our religious leaders that one day the Office of Prophethood will be
transferred from the descendants of Ishaq to the descendants of Isma'il
and it is not improbable that Muhammad, who is a descendant of Isma'il,
may be the same promised Prophet!"

The consultative council decided that a body of men should go to Madina
as representatives of Najran so that they might contact Muhammad from
near and should scrutinize the proofs of his prophethood.

Sixty most distinguished and wise men of Najran were selected for the
purpose; they were headed by three religious leaders namely;

1. Abu Harith bin 'Alqamah, the Grand Bishop of Najran, who was the
official representative of the Roman Church in the Hijaz.

2. Abdul Masih, the chief of the representative body, who enjoyed great
renown for his wisdom, prudence and experience.

3. Ayham, an aged man, who was considered to be a respectable person of
the community of Najran.[^3]

The members of the deputation arrived in the mosque in the afternoon,
wearing silken clothes, golden rings, and crosses round their necks;
saluted the Prophet. However, their repulsive and improper posture and
that, too, in the mosque displeased the Prophet. They realized that he
had been displeased with them, but did not understand the cause of his
displeasure.

They, therefore, immediately contacted Uthman bin Affan and Abdur Rahman
bin Awf, who were their former acquaintances, and mentioned the matter
to them. They were of the view that the solution of their problem lay
with Ali bin Abu Talib. They then met the Commander of the Faithful and
he said in reply to them: "You should alter your dresses, and come to
the Prophet in a simple dress without any ornamentation Then you will be
accorded honour and respect".

The representatives of Najran put on simple clothes and removed the
rings and then came to the Prophet. The Prophet replied to their
salutation with great respect and also accepted some of the presents,
which they had brought with them. Before the commencement of mutual
discussions the members of the deputation said that the time for their
prayers had set in. The Prophet permitted them to offer their prayers in
the Masjid with their faces turned towards the east.[^4]

The Representatives Of Najran Have Discussions With The Prophet
---------------------------------------------------------------

A large number of biographers, traditionalists and Islamic historians
have quoted the text of the discussions between the representatives of
Najran and the Prophet. However, the late Sayyid bin Tawus has quoted
the particulars of the discussions and the event of Mubahilah
(imprecation) in a more exact, more comprehensive and more detailed
manner, as compared with others. He has quoted all the particulars of
Mubahilah from the beginning up to the end from Kitab Mubahilah by
Muhammad bin Abdul Muttalib Shaybani and Kitab 'Amali Zil Haj by Hasan
bin Ismail.[^5] However, it is beyond the scope of this book to give
details of this great historical event, which, unfortunately, has not
even been alluded to by some biographers.

We, therefore, mention here a few aspects of the discussions, as given
by Halabi in his Seerah.[^6]

The Prophet: I invite you to the religion of monotheism and the worship
of One Allah and submission to His commands. (Then he recited some
verses of the Holy Qur'an before, them).

The representatives of Najran: If Islam means faith in the only Lord of
the World we already believe in Him and act according to His Commands.

The Prophet: Islam carries a few signs and some of your actions show
that you do not believe in Islam. How do you say that you worship One
Allah when you worship the cross and do not abstain from the meat of the
swine and believe that Allah has son?

Representatives: We believe him (i.e. 'Isa) to be God because he brought
the dead to life, cured the sick, made a bird with clay and made it fly,
and all these things show that he is God.

The Prophet: No. He is the servant of Allah and is His creature. Allah
placed him in the womb of Mary. And all this power and strength was
given to him by Allah.

One of the represenatatives: Yes! He is the son of God, because Mary
gave him birth without marrying anyone, and it is, therefore, necessary
that his father should be the very Lord of the World.

At this juncture the Archangel Jibreel came and advised the Prophet to
tell them: "From this point of view the condition of 'Isa resembles that
of Adam who was created by Allah with His unlimited power from clay
without his having a father and a mother[^7] and if one's not having a
father is the proof of one's being the son of Allah, Adam is all the
more entitled to this position, because he had neither a father nor a
mother".

The representatives: Your words do not satisfy us. The best way to
resolve the issue is that we should engage in imprecation with each
other at an appointed time and may curse the liar and pray to Allah that
He may destroy the liar.[^8]

At this moment the Archangel Jibreel came and brought the verse
pertaining to imprecation and conveyed to the Prophet the Divine command
that he should engage in imprecation with those, who contended and
disputed with him and both the parties should pray to Allah that He
might deprive the liar of His blessings. The Holy Qur'an says,

***If anyone disputes with you after the knowledge has come to you, say,
'Let each of us bring our children, our women, our people and ourselves
to one place and pray to Allah to curse upon the liars among us'.***
**(Surah Ale Imran, 3:62)**

Both the parties agreed to settle the issue through imprecation and it
was decided that all of them would be ready for it on the following day.

The Prophet Goes For Mubahilah (Imprecation)
--------------------------------------------

The incident of Mubahilah of the Prophet of Islam with the
representatives of Najran is one of the most attractive and wonderful
events of the history of Islam. Though some traditionalists and
biographers have been negligent in quoting its details as well as in
analysing it, but a large number of them like Zamakhshari in
Kashshaf,[^9] Imam Razi in his Tafsir[^10] and Ibn Athir in Kamil[^11]
have been most eloquent on this subject. Here we reproduce a part of
Zamakhshari's narrative on the subject.

"The time for Mubahilah arrived. The Prophet and members of the
deputation of Najran had already agreed that the ceremonies of Mubahilah
should take place at a spot outside the city of Madina in the desert.
Out of the Muslims and many relatives of his, the Prophet selected only
four persons who were to participate in this significant event.

These four persons were Ali bin Abi Talib, Fatimah, daughter of the
Prophet, Hasan and Husayn, as amongst all the Muslims no purer souls
could be found. He covered the distance between his house and the place
fixed for Mubahilah in a special manner. He stepped into the field of
Mubahilah when he was carrying Husayn in his lap, and was holding the
hand of Hasan in his own hand, and Fatimah was following him and Ali bin
Abi Talib was walking behind them''.[^12]

Before arriving at the place fixed for Mubahilah he said to his
companions: "Whenever I utter an invocation you should pray for its
acceptance by saying Amin."

Before facing the Prophet the chiefs of the representatives of Najran
were saying to one another: "In case you see that Muhammad has brought
his warriors and officers in the field of Mubahilah and has displayed
his material grandeur and external strength you should conclude that his
claim is not true and he has no faith in his prophethood.

If, however, he comes for Mubahilah along with his children and the
dearest ones and appears before the Almighty Allah devoid of every sort
of material might and glory, it would mean that he is a true Prophet and
has so much faith and self-reliance that he is not only ready to be
annihilated personally, but is fully prepared with perfect courage to
let his dearest ones also meet destruction and extinction".

While the chiefs of the deputation were engaged in conversation, the
Prophet made a sudden appearance before the Christians of Najran along
with four of his dear ones, out of whom three were his own offspring.
All were wonder-struck to see that he had brought into the field of
Mubahilah even the innocent children of his dear daughter and said:
"This man has perfect faith in his call and claim, because a wavering
person does not bring his dearest ones into the arena of Divine wrath".

The Bishop of Najran said: "I see such faces that if they raise their
hands in supplication and pray to Allah that the biggest mountain may be
moved from its place, the same will happen immediately. We should in no
circumstances engage in Mubahilah with these sacred and virtuous
personalities because it is not improbable that we may be annihilated
and it is also possible that the Divine wrath may expand and engulf the
entire Christian world and not even one Christian may remain alive on
the face of the earth!"[^13]

The Represents Of Najran Give Up The Idea Of Mubahilah
------------------------------------------------------

On observing the aforesaid situation the representatives of Najran made
mutual consultations and unanimously decided not to participate in
Mubahilah at any cost. They also agreed to pay a fixed sum per year as
*jizyah* and requested that in lieu of this the Islamic Government might
protect their lives and property. The Prophet agreed to this and it was
settled that against the payment of that petty amount they should be
entitled to the privileges granted by the Islamic Government.

Then the Prophet said: "Trouble had spread its inauspicious shadow on
the heads of the representatives of Najran and if they had decided to
participate in Mubahilah and cursing they would have lost their human
shapes and would have been burnt in a fire which was being kindled in
the desert and the torture would have spread up to the territory of
Najran".

It has been quoted by A'isha that on the day of Mubahilah the Prophet
accommodated his four dear ones under a black cloak and recited this
verse:

***O people of the Prophet's House! Allah intends but to ward off all
sorts of pollution and blemish from you and to purify you with a
thorough purification.*** **(Surah al-Ahzab, 33:33)**

Then Zamakhshari mentions the points connected with the verse of
Mubahilah and says in the end of the discussion: "The incident of
Mubahilah and the substance of this verse is the greatest evidence of
the excellence of the People of the Mantle and is a vital proof of the
rightfulness of Islam".

Contents Of The Agreement Concluded Between The Parties
-------------------------------------------------------

The representatives of Najran requested the Prophet that both, the
amount of annual tax payable by them, and the security of Najran region,
might be recorded and guaranteed by the Prophet in the deed. As ordered
by the Prophet, the Commander of the Faithful wrote the deed as follows:

***In the name Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

This is a deed from Muhammad, the Prophet of Allah, in favour of the
people of Najran and its outskirts. The order and decision of Muhammad
about the entire property and wealth of the people of Najran is that
they will supply to the Islamic Government every year two thousand
garments the price of everyone of which will not exceed forty dirhams.
They will be at liberty to supply half of this quantity in the month of
Safar and the remaining half in Rajab.

And in case there is danger of war from the side of Yemen, they (the
people of Najran) shall, as a mark of co-operation with the Islamic
Government, place thirty coats of mail, thirty horses and thirty camels
at the disposal of the army of Islam by way of guaranteed loan and shall
also be responsible to entertain the representatives of the Prophet in
the territory of Najran for a period of one month.

Furthermore, as and when a representative of his comes to them they
shall receive him. And the lives, property, lands, and places of worship
of the people of Najran shall be under the protection of Allah and His
Prophet, provided that they will immediately give up usury, failing
which Muhammad will not be responsible for them and no commitment made
by him will be operative.[^14]

This deed was written on a red skin. Two companions of the Prophet
signed below it as witnesses, and thereafter the Prophet sealed it. This
Peace Pact, of which a summarized translation has been given above,
speaks of the justice and equity of the highest standard, as practiced
by the Prophet and shows that the Islamic Government was not like the
powerful states of the world which take undue advantage of the weakness
of others and impose tributes on them. Islam always kept in view the
spirit of conciliation and justice and the principles of humanity; it
always shunned transgression.

The event Mubahilah and the verse revealed in connection with it have
been the greatest merit and glory for Islam and the followers of Ahl
al-Bayt throughout the long span of history, because the words and
contents of this verse show the high status enjoyed by those, who
accompanied the Prophet to the place appointed for Mubahilah.

For besides calling Hasan and Husayn the sons of the Prophet and calling
Fatimah, only the lady belonging to his household, it calls Ali the
"self" i.e. the very soul of the Prophet. What honour could be greater
then this for anyone?

Is this verse not an evidence of the superiority of the Commander of the
Faithful over all other Muslims of the world? Fakhr-i Razi, whose
attitude in the discussions of the nature of scholastic theology and
matters relating to Imamate is well known, has mentioned the reasoning
of the Shi'ah and has ended the discussion with a petty and
insignificant objection. Its reply is quite clear to the fair-minded
people.

It is learnt from the narratives quoted from our religious leaders that
Mubahilah is not particular to the Prophet, and every Muslim can combat
his opponent by this means. The invocations connected with it are given
in the books on Hadith and the book entitled Nur-al-Thaqalayn may be
referred to for further information in this behalf.[^15]

In the tract written by the respected teacher Allamah Tabatabai we read
this: Mubahilah is one of the permanent miracles of Islam and every true
believer can combat with his opponent by means of Mubahilah to prove the
realities of Islam, following the first leader of this faith and can
request Allah to punish the opponent and condemn him.[^16]

[^1]: Yaqut Hamawi has related the reason for their embracement of
Christianity in Majma'ul Buldan, vol. V, pp. 266 - 267.

[^2]: al-Bidayah wan Nihayah, page 53 and Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page
285.

[^3]: Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol. II, page 66.

[^4]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 239.

[^5]: The details of this historical event is given in the book entitled
"Iqbal" by the late Ibn Tawus, pp. 496 - 513.

[^6]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 239.

[^7]: This is the purport of the verse: To Allah the case of Jesus is as
that of Adam whom He created from the earth and then said, "Be and he
came into existence". (Surah Ale Imran, 3:59).

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 32 as quoted from al-lqbal by Ibn
Tawus. It is, however, learnt from Seerah-i Halabi that Mubahilah was
suggested by the Prophet himself.

[^9]: Kashshaf, vol. I, pp. 282 - 283.

[^10]: Tafsir-i Mafatihul Ghayb, vol. II, pp. 481 - 482.

[^11]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 112.

[^12]: In some narrations it has been stated that the Prophet was
holding the hands of Hasan and Husayn in his own hands and Ali was
walking in front of him and Fatimah was following him. Biharul Anwar,
vol. XXI, page 338.

[^13]: Ibn Tawus quotes this in al-lqbal: "On the day of Mubahilah a
large number of Muhajirs and Ansar had gathered near the place where
Mubahilah was to take place. However, the Prophet left his house with
the said four persons only and none out of the Muslims was present at
the appointed place except those five. The Prophet removed his cloak
from his shoulder and flung it on two trees which were situated near
each other. He then sat under its shade along with the four others and
invited the "representatives of Najran to Mubahilah".

[^14]: Futuhul Buldan, page 76.

[^15]: Nur-al Thaqalayn, vol. I, pp. 291 - 292.

[^16]: This subject has been clarified in certain Islamic narratives. In
this connection refer Usulul Kafi, Book on Invocations, Chapter of
Mubahilah, page 538.  


