Chapter 58: The Events of the Tenth Year of Migration
=====================================================

The sharp and pungent proclamation read out by the Commander of the
Faithful during Haj season of the ninth year of migration at Mina, on
behalf of the Prophet, and official declaration by him to the effect
that Allah and His Prophet were disgusted with the idolaters and they
(the idolaters) should decide once and for all within a period of four
months, either to embrace Islam and forsake idol-worship or to get ready
for total war, had a very deep and quick effect.

The tribes of different regions of Arabia, which had so far declined to
submit to the logic of the Qur'an, and the law of Allah, on account of
enmity and grudge, and insisted on sticking to their evil and indecent
habits, superstitions, foolish beliefs, and worship of stones and clay,
became helpless now and sent their representatives to the headquarters
of Islam (Madina).

Everyone of these deputations had discussions and conversation with the
Prophet. Ibn Sa'd in his Tabaqat-i Kubra[^1] has recorded the
particulars of seventy-two persons out of them. Arrival of these
deputations in large numbers and that too after declaring the
proclamation, shows that in the beginning of the tenth year of migration
no dependable fort had been left for the polytheists of Arabia,
otherwise they would have taken refuge there and waged war with the help
of one another.

The period of four months had not yet passed when the entire Hijaz came
under the banner of Islam and not a single idol-temple or idol or
idolater was left in it, so much so that a number of persons belonging
to Yemen, Bahrain and Yamamah also embraced Islam.

Plot To Kill The Prophet
------------------------

The chiefs of the tribe of Bani 'Amir were widely known amongst the Arab
tribes for their obstinacy and mischief. Three persons from amongst
their chiefs named 'Amir, Arbad and Jabbar decided to arrive in Madina
at the head of a deputation and somehow to kill the Prophet while having
discussions with him in a meeting. Their scheme was that 'Amir should
engage himself in discussion with the Prophet and while their
conversation was in full swing Arbad should attack the Prophet with his
sword and kill him.

Other members of the deputation, who were unaware of this plot of the
three persons, declared their fidelity for Islam and the Prophet.
However, 'Amir refrained from expressing any inclination towards Islam
and said to the Prophet repeatedly, "I want to talk to you in
seclusion". Every time he uttered this sentence he looked towards Arbad.

However, although he looked at his face very intently he found him calm
and tranquil. The Prophet said to him in reply: "Unless you embrace
Islam this thing is not possible, (i.e. to see you alone)". At last
'Amir lost all hope of Arbad's assistance in the success of their plot.
It would appear that as and when Arbad intended to put his hand on his
sword he was stricken with terror and the Prophet's greatness kept him
(Arbad) from carrying out his plan.

When the meeting ended 'Amir stood up from his place, declared his
enmity for the Prophet and said: "I will fill Madina with horses and
soldiers to do harm to you".

On account of the great forbearance which he possessed, however, the
Prophet did not give him any reply, but prayed to Allah to keep him safe
from the mischief of the two men. The supplication of the Prophet was
accepted soon. 'Amir had an attack of plague while he was on his way,
and died in a very bad condition in the house of a woman belonging to
the tribe of Bani Salul.

As regards Arbad, he was struck by lightning in the desert and was burnt
to death. And the fate met by these persons, who had plotted against the
Prophet further intensified the people's faith (in Islam).[^2]

The Commander Of The Faithful Is Deputed To Yemen
-------------------------------------------------

Acceptance of Islam by the people of the Hijaz and the security which
the Prophet felt from the side of the Arab tribes enabled him to extend
the influence of Islam to the neighbouring areas of Hijaz. For the first
time, therefore, he deputed one of his wise companions named Mu'az bin
Jabal to Yemen so that he might explain Islam to the people of that
region.

While giving him detailed instructions the Prophet also said to Mu'az:
"Avoid harsh treatment with the people, and inform them of Divine
blessings which are meant for the true believers. When you face the
people of the Scriptures in Yemen, and they enquire from you about the
key to Paradise, you should tell them that it is the acknowledgment of
the Oneness and Uniqueness of Allah"

It would appear that with all his knowledge of the Book and the Sunnah
Mu'az did not give a satisfactory reply when he was asked about the
rights of a husband over his wife.[^3] The Prophet, therefore, decided
to send his distinguished disciple Ali to Yemen so that Islam might
spread there under his continuous teachings, logical arguments, the
strength of his hands, and his unparalleled bravery and moral heroism.

Furthermore, Khalid bin Walid had also been dispatched by the Prophet to
Yemen sometime earlier than Ali[^4] so that he might remove the
obstacles in the way of advancement of Islam, in that area. He did not,
however, do anything in this behalf during that period.

The Prophet, therefore, called Ali and said to him: "O Ali! I am sending
you to Yemen so that you may invite its inhabitants to Islam and inform
them about the Command of Allah as well as about the things, which are
lawful, and which are unlawful. At the time of your return to Madina you
should collect zakat from the people of Najran as well as the taxes
which they are liable to pay and should deposit the same in the public
treasury.

Ali replied to the Prophet most respectfully in these words: "I am a
young man and have never arbitrated throughout my life and have never
occupied the seat of justice". The Prophet placed his hand on Ali's
chest and prayed for him in these words: "O Allah! Guide the heart of
Ali and protect his tongue from errors". Then he said: "O Ali! Do not
quarrel with anyone and try to guide the people to the right path with
logic and good behaviour. By Allah! If Allah guides someone to the right
path through you, it is much better than that on which the sun shines".

In the end the Prophet made four recommendations to Ali:

1. Make prayer and glorification of Allah your profession, because
prayer is usually accepted.

2. Be thankful to Allah in all circumstances, because thankfulness
increases blessings.

3. If you conclude an agreement with an individual or a group of
persons, honour it.

4. Desist from cheating others, because the deceit of the evil-doers
returns to themselves".

During his stay in Yemen, Ali passed spellbound judgements, most of
which are recorded in the books of history.

The Prophet did not content himself with guidance but he also wrote a
letter to the people of Yemen inviting them to Islam, gave it to Ali and
directed him to read it over to them.

Bara' bin 'Azib was Ali's attendant in Yemen. He says that when Ali
reached the border of Yemen, he arranged the ranks of the Muslim
soldiers who were already stationed there under the command of Khalid
bin Walid and offered the morning prayers in congregation. Then he
invited the tribe of Hamdan, which was one of the biggest tribes of
Yemen, to hear the message of the Prophet.

First he praised Allah. Then he read out the Prophet's message to them.
The grandeur of the meeting, the sweetness of the narration and the
greatness of the words of the Prophet impressed the people of Hamdan
tribe so much that they embraced Islam within a day. Imam Ali wrote a
letter to the Prophet informing him of the developments. The Prophet was
greatly pleased to learn the good news. He thanked Allah and said: "May
the tribe of Hamdan be blessed".

The conversion of Hamdan tribe to Islam became the cause of other people
of Yemen embracing Islam gradually.[^5]

[^1]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. II, pp. 230 - 291.

[^2]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, pp. 568 - 569.

[^3]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 590.

[^4]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. V, page 163.

[^5]: Tarikh-i Kamil, vol. II, page 305; Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, pp.
360 - 363. Â 


