Chapter 5: Birth of the Prophet
===============================

The dark clouds of ignorance had completely enveloped the Arabian
Peninsula. Abominable and unlawful deeds, bloody campaigns, wide-spread
plundering, and infanticide had obliterated all moral virtues, and
placed the Arab society in a strange dclivity. The distance between
their life and death had become very short.

Just at this time the morning star of prosperity made its appearance and
that dark atmosphere was illuminated with the auspicious birth of the
Holy Prophet. Thus the preliminary step towards the foundation of the
civilization and the advancement and prosperity of a backward nation was
taken. Soon the beams of this light lit up the entire world and the
foundation of learning, wisdom and civilization was laid.

Every chapter of the lives of great men is worthy of study and scrutiny.
At times the personality of an individual becomes so great and grand
that all phases of his life, even his infancy and childhood, are
mysterious. The lives of the geniuses, leaders of the society, and the
forerunners of the caravan of civilization, are usually attractive and
contain sensitive and wonderful phases. From the cradle to the grave
their lives are replete with mysteries.

We read about the great men that the periods of their childhood and
youth are admirable and miraculous. And if we accept this proposition
about the great men of the world, the acceptance of something similar to
that about the Prophets and saints becomes quite easy.

The Taurat and the Qur'an depict the childhood of Prophet Musa as very
mysterious and say "Hundreds of innocent children were beheaded with the
object, so that Musa should not be born. However, as Allah had willed
that he should make his appearance in the world, it so happened that not
only could his enemies not harm him, but Firaun, his greatest enemy,
himself became his guardian and supporter". The Holy Qur'an says:

***We revealed Our Will to Musa's mother, saying: Put your chld in the
box arid let him be carried away by the river. The river will cast him
on the bank safely, and he will be taken up by an enemy of his and Mine.
I lavished my love on you, so that you might be reared under My watchful
eye.***

***The sister of Musa went to the palace of Fir'aun and said, "Shall I
bring you one who will nurse him?" Then the mother of Musa was hired to
nurse the child and her son was thus restored to her*****. (Surah Taha,
20: 41 - 43 ).**

The period of pregnancy, birth and nurture of Prophet 'Isa was even en
more wonderful than that of Prophet Musa. The Holy Qur'an narrates the
period of growth of 'Isa in this manner:

***We sent to her (i.e. Maryam) Our spirit (i.e. Archangel Jibril) in
the semblance of a full-grown man. And when she saw him she said "May
the Merciful defend me from you! If you fear the Lord, leave me and go
your way". "I am the messenger of your Lord", he replied and have come
to give you a holy son". "How shall I bear a child," she answered, "when
I am a virgin, untouched by man"? "Such is the Will of your Lord", he
replied, "that is no difficult thing for Him. He shall be a sign to
mankind", says the Lord, "and a blessing from Ourself. This is Our
decree".***

***Thereupon she conceived him, and retired to a far-off place. And when
she felt the throes of childbirth, she lay down by the trunk of a
palm-tree crying "Oh, would that I had died and passed into oblivion!"
But a voice from below cried out to her "Do not despair. Your Lord has
provided a brook that runs at your feet, and if you shake the trunk of
this palm-tree it will drop fresh ripe dates in your lap. Therefore
rejoice. Eat and drink, and should you meet any mortal say to him: "I
have cooled a test to the Merciful and will not speak with any man
today" .***

***Then she took the child to her people, who said to her, "This is
indeed a strange thing! Sister of Harun, your father was never a
whore-monger, nor was your mother a harlot".***

***She made a sign to them, pointing to the child, but they replied "How
can we speak with a babe in the cradle?"***

Whereupon he spoke and said,

***"I am the servant of Allah. He has given me the Gospel and ordained
me a Prophet ......*** ***(Surah Maryam. 19:18 - 32)***

When believers in the Qur'an and the Taurat and the followers of Prophet
'Isa confirm the above-mentioned facts connected with the birth of the
two great Prophets they should not wonder at the extraordinary events
which followed in the wake of the auspicious birth of the Prophet of
Islam and should not treat them to be superficial.

We learn from the books on history and ahadith (reports) that at the
time of the birth of the Holy Prophet the walls of the palace of
Khosroes split and some of its turrets collapsed. The fire of the
fire-temple of Persia extinguished. The lake of Sawah became dry. The
idols in the temple of Makkah were turned upside down.

A light ascended from the Holy Prophet's body towards heaven and
illuminated a distance of many leagues along its path. Anushirwan and
the Zoroastrian priests dreamt very horrible dreams. When the Holy
Prophet was born he was already circumcised and his navel too had been
cut. On coming into the world he said "Allah is Great and all praise is
due to Him and He is to be praised day and night"

All these details are given in authentic historical documents and in the
collections of ahadith[^1] and keeping in view the facts regarding
Prophet Musa and Prophet 'Isa, which have been mentioned above, there is
no justification for hesitation in the acceptance of these events.

Year, Month and Date of Birth of The Prophet of Islam
-----------------------------------------------------

The writers of "Seerah" (biographies of the Prophet) generally agree
that the Prophet of Islam was born in the "Year of the Elephant" in 570
A.D. As it is definite that he breathed his last in 632 A.D. when he was
62-63 years old, the year of his birth must have been 570 A.D.

Almost all the traditionalists and historians are unanimous that the
Prophet was born in the month of Rabi'ul Awwal, but they differ about
the date of his birth. It is well-known among the Sh'iah traditionalists
that he was born after sunrise on Friday, the 17th of Rabi'ul Awwal,
whereas it is believed by the Sunni scholars that his birth took place
on the 12th of that month on Monday.[^2]

Which of The Two Versions is Correct?
-------------------------------------

It is a matter of great regret that authentic information about the
dates of birth and death of the Prophet of Islam and, in fact, about
most of the religious leaders is not available with the Muslims and on
account of this ambiguity most of the celebrations of their birthdays,
and death anniversaries, do not take place on days which should be
definite from historical viewpoint.

Aithough the Muslins scholars have recorded various events of lslamic
history in a very systematic manner it is not known as to why the dates
of birth and death of most of the religious leaders have not been
recorded after due scrutiny.

However, this problem is solvable to some extent. In this connection let
us take an example. If you wish to write the biography of a scholar
belonging to a particular city and supposing that this scholar has left
a number of children and other relatives behind him, would you like to
enquire about the details of his life from strangers or from his friends
and acquaintances in spite ot there being present his children and other
members of his family, who naturally possess detailed and exact
knowledge about the particulars of his life? It is definite that your
conscience will not permit you to do so.

The Holy Prophet departed from amongst the people and left behind
himself his family and children. These relatives of the Holy Prophet
say, "If the Messenger of Allah is our revered father and we have been
brought up in his house and under his patronage, we say that the head of
our family came into this world on such and such date and departed from
it on such and such date. In the circumstances is it permissible for us
to ignore the statement of his children and rely on the version of other
people?

Ceremony of Giving A Name To The Prophet of Islam
-------------------------------------------------

The seventh day approached. A sheep was slaughtered by Abdul Muttalib as
an expression of gratitude to Allah and a number of persons were invited
to the feast. In that magnificent celebration, which was attended by
most of the Quraysh, he gave his grandchild the name "Muhammad".

When it was enquired from him as to why he had named his child
"Muhammad", while this name was very rare amongst the Arabs, he replied
"I wished that he should be praised in the heavens as well us on earth".
Hassan bin Thabit, says thus in this regard:

"The Creator derived the name of His Prophet from His own name. As such,
whereas Allah is "Mahmud" (laudable), his Prophet is 'Muhammad'
(praiseworthy). Both the words have been derived from the same root and
carry the same meaning".[^3]

It is certain that occult inspiration had a part to play in the
selection of this name, because, although the name 'Muhammad' was
well-known amongst the Arabs, very few persons had till then been given
this name. According to the exact statistics, which some of the
historians have collected, only sixteen persons had been given this name
before the Holy Prophet.[^4]

It goes without saying that the lesser a word is used the lesser is the
chance of any misunderstanding about it. As the Heavenly Books had
predicted the advent of Islam and the name, the particulars, the
spiritual and corporeal signs of the Prophet, it was necessary that his
signs should have been so evident that the question of any mistake
should not have arisen.

One of those signs was the name of the Holy Prophet and it was essential
that it should be borne by so few persons that no doubt should be left
about his identification, especially when his qualities and signs were
appended to it. In this way the person whose appearance had been
predicted by the Taurat and the Injeel could be easily identified.

The Holy Qur'an mentions two names of the Prophet.73
----------------------------------------------------

In the 138th, 2nd, 29th and 40th verses respectively of the Surah Ale
Imran, Muhammad, al-Fath and al-Ahzab he has been called 'Muhammad' and
in Surah al-Saff he has been called 'Ahmad'. The reason for this
difference is that, as mentioned in history, the Holy Prophet's mother
had named him 'Ahmad' before his grandfather gave him the name
'Muhammad'.[^5]

The Infancy Of The Prophet
--------------------------

The Prophet was suckled by his mother for three days only. Thereafter
two other women had the honour of being his foster-mothers.

1. **Suwaybah:** She was a female slave of Abu Lahab. She nursed the
Prophet for four months and remained the object of appreciation by the
Prophet himself, as well as of his virtuous wife (Khadijah), throughout
her life. Earlier she had also nursed Hamzah, uncle of the Prophet.
After his appointment to the prophetic mission the Prophet intended to
purchase her and sent someone to Abu Lahab to arrange the transaction,
but he refused to sell her.

However, she received assistance from the Prophet throughout her life.
When the Prophet returned from the battle of Khaybar he came to know
about her death and signs of grief appeared in his face. He made
enquires about her son, so that he might do some good to him, but was
informed that he had died earlier than his mother.

2. **Halimah:** She was the daughter of Abi Zuwayb and belonged to the
tribe of Said bin Bakr bin Hawazan. She had three children named
Abdullah, Anisah and Shima'. The last of them also attended upon the
Prophet. It was customary with the noble families amongst the Arabs that
they entrusted their children to wet nurses. The nurses usually lived at
places beyond the city so that the children could be brought up in fresh
desert air and might grow up strong and healthy.

Incidentally, while staying in the desert, the children remained immune
from the contagious diseases of the city of Makkah which were more
dangerous for the new-born babies and they also learnt the Arabic
language in an untempered region. The nurses who belonged to the tribe
of Bani Sa'd were famous in this area. They visited Makkah at a
particular time of the year and every one of them took a new-born baby
along with her.

When four months had passed since the birth of the Prophet the nurses of
the Bani Sa'd tribe visited Makkah. That year they were in the grip of a
severe famine and, were therefore, in great need of help from the noble
families.

The new-born baby of Quraysh did not suck the breast of any wet-nurse.
Eventually Halimah came and the child sucked her breast. At this moment
the family of Abdul Muttalib became very jubilant.[^6]

Abdul Muttalib turned to Halimah and said "To which tribe do you
belong?" She replied that she belonged to the tribe of Bani Said Then he
enquired about her name and she told him that it was Halimah. Abdul
Muttalib was very much pleased to learn her own name and that of her
tribe and said "Very good! Very good! Two good habits and two decent
qualities. One of them is happiness and prosperity and the other is
meekness and forbearance".[^7]

[^1]: Tarikh-i Ya'qubi, vol. II page 5; Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, chapter
3, pp. 231 - 248 and Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 64.

[^2]: Miqrizi has collected all the statements with regard to the day,
month and year of the birth of the Prophet in al-Amta' (page 3).

[^3]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 93.

[^4]: Mudrak Pesh, vol. I, page 97.

[^5]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 93.

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, page 442.

[^7]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. I, page 106.


