Chapter 59: The Farewell Haj
============================

Amongst the congregational articles of worship of Islam the ceremonies
of Haj are the greatest and most magnificent worship performed by the
Muslims, because the performance of these ceremonies and that too once
in a year is the sublime manifestation of unity and fellowship, a
perfect sign of freedom from belongings and place, a prominent example
of equality between different classes, a source of strengthening
relations between Muslims etc.

Now if we Muslims make little use of the opportunity afforded by Haj for
our betterment and convene this annual Islamic congress (which can
undoubtedly solve most of our social problems and can bring about
far-reaching changes in our lives) without deriving proper benefit from
it, it is not because the law is defective but the fault lies with the
Muslim leaders who do not, make proper use of this grand ceremony.

Since the day Prophet Ibrahim had constructed the Ka'bah and invited the
monotheists to perform its pilgrimage, this place has always been the
centre of attraction, where tawaf was done by the godly peoples and
every year groups of pilgrims came from different parts of Arabia and
from all corners of the world for the pilgrimage of this House and
performed the ceremonies taught by Prophet Ibrahim.

However, as a consequence of the passage of time and also because of the
people of the Hijaz being deprived of the guidance of the Prophets, the
selfishness of Quraysh, and the rule of idols over the Arab world, the
ceremonies of Haj fell prey to change and alteration from the viewpoint
of time and place and lost their real features.

For these reasons the Prophet was ordered by Allah in the tenth year of
migration to participate in the Haj ceremonies personally so that he
might practically teach the people their obligations and might discard
the old and unwanted practices of this article of worship and also
instruct the people about the limits of 'Arafah and Mina and tell them
about the time of departure from those places. As compared with its
political and social aspect, therefore, this journey carried a greater
educational aspect.

In the eleventh Islamic month (Zil Qa'dah) the Prophet got it proclaimed
in the city as well as amongst the tribes that he intended to perform
the pilgrimage of the Ka'bah that year. This news inspired great
interest in the Muslim ummah. Thousands of persons pitched up tents in
the outskirts of Madina and awaited the departure of the Prophet.[^1]

The Prophet appointed Abu Dujanah as his representative in Madina and
proceeded to Makkah on the 28th of Zil Qa'dah taking with himself sixty
sacrificial animals. When he reached Zil Hulayfah he put on, at Masjid
Shajarah, ehram, which consisted of two plain sheets of cloth, and while
putting on ehram he recited the well-known supplication, which commences
with the word *Labbayk* (Here am I) which is a reply to the call of
Prophet Ibrahim.

He said *Labbayk* every time he saw a rider or arrived at a high or a
low spot. When he reached near Makkah he discontinued reciting
*Labbayk.* He arrived in Makkah on the 4th of Zil Hajah went straight to
the Masjid Haram entering there through the gate of Bani Shaybah. He was
then glorifying Allah and seeking blessings for Prophet Ibrahim.

During tawaf he stood opposite the Black stone. In the first instance he
performed its istilam[^2] and then went round the Ka'bah seven times.
Thereafter he stood behind Maqam-i Ibrahim and offered tawaf prayers
consisting of two rak'ats. After offering the prayers he commenced Sa'i
between Safa and Marwah.[^3]

Then he turned to the pilgrims and said: "Those who have not brought
sacrificial animals with them should come out of the state of ehram and
all the things which are unlawful for them (during ehram) will become
lawful with taqseer (shortening the hair and/or cutting the nails).
However, I and others who have brought sacrificial animals with us shall
remain in the condition of ehram till we have slaughtered the animals in
Mina.

This thing weighed heavily on some persons and their excuse was that
they did not like that the Prophet should continue to remain in ehram
whereas they should go out of it, and the things which were unlawful for
him should become lawful for them. At times they said: "It is not
correct that we should be the pilgrims of the House of Allah and the
drops of the water of (ceremonial) washing should be falling from our
heads and necks".[^4]

The Prophet chanced to see Umar who was still in the state of ehram and
asked him whether he had brought any sacrificial animal with him. He
replied in the negative. Thereupon the Prophet said: "Then why have you
not come out of ehram.

He replied: "I don't like that I should come out of ehram whereas you
should continue to remain in the same state". The Prophet said "You will
stick to this belief not only now, but till the day of your death".

The Prophet was displeased on account of the doubt and indecision of the
people and said: "If the future had been as clear to me as the past, and
I had been aware of your unjustified indecision and doubt, I too would
have come for the pilgrimage of the House of Allah without a sacrificial
animal just like yourselves.

However, I can't help, because I have brought the sacrificial animals
with me and according to the Command of Allah, "Till the sacrificial
(animal) reaches its place". I must remain in the state of ehram till I
have slaughtered those animals at the sacrificial ground of Mina.

However, every person who has not brought a sacrificial animal with him
should come out of ehram and should treat, whatever he has already
performed, to be umrah and should, thereafter, wear ehram for Haj.[^5]

Ali Returns From Yemen To Partake In Haj Ceremonies
---------------------------------------------------

The Commander of the Faithful became aware of the Prophet's departure to
perform Haj. He also proceeded to Makkah along with his soldiers to
perform Haj and took thirty-four sacrificial animals with him. He also
brought with him the pieces of cloth which he had collected from the
people of Najran the prescribed tribute. While on his way he delegated
the command of the soldiers to an officer of his and himself hurried to
Makkah.

He met the Prophet, who was extremely pleased to see him and asked him:
"How did you make your intention?" He replied: "At the time appropriate
for ehram I put on ehram with your intention and said 'O Allah! I too am
putting on ehram with the same intention with which Your Prophet has put
it on'. Then he informed the Prophet about the sacrificial animals which
he had brought with him. The Prophet said: "The obligation of both of us
in this matter is one and the same and we must remain in the state of
ehram till the sacrificial animals are slaughtered".

Then he ordered Ali to go back to his soldiers and bring them to Makkah.
When Ali rejoined his soldiers he found that all the pieces of cloth,
which he had collected from the people of Najran in accordance with the
agreement concluded on the day of Mubahilah, had been distributed
amongst the soldiers and they were wearing them by way of ehram.

Ali was very much displeased on account of this action which had been
taken by his representative during his absence and said to him: "Why did
you distribute the pieces of cloth amongst the soldiers before I
delivered them to the Prophet?" He replied: They insisted that I should
lend the pieces of cloth to them and take back after the Haj ceremonies
had been performed". Ali said to him: "You were not authorized to do
so". Then he took back the pieces of cloth from them, packed them and
delivered them to the Prophet in Makkah.

People, for whom justice and discipline is painful, and who wish that
events should always take the turn liked by them, went before the
Prophet and expressed their annoyance at Ali's taking back the pieces of
cloth from them. The Prophet asked one of his companions to go to the
complainants and convey to them his message: "Desist from speaking ill
of Ali. He is dauntless in enforcing Divine laws and is not a
flatterer''.[^6]

Haj Ceremonies Begin
--------------------

Ceremonies of Umrah came to an end. The Prophet was not inclined to stay
in the house of anyone during the interval between the ceremonies of
Umrah and those of Haj. He, therefore, ordered his tent to be pitched
outside Makkah.

The eighth day of Zil Haj arrived. The pilgrims of the House of Allah
proceeded on the same day from Makkah to ''Arafah so that they might
perform the ceremony of ''Arafah from noon of 9th Zil Haj till the
sunset on that day.

On 8th Zil Haj, which is also called the day of tarwiyyah the Prophet
proceeded to ''Arafah via Mina and stayed in Mina till sunrise on the
9th of the month. Then he mounted his camel, left for ''Arafah and
alighted at a place called Numrah, where his tent had been pitched.
Addressing the splendid gathering there he delivered his historical
sermon while he was mounted on the camel.

The Historical Sermon Of The Prophet At The Time Of The Farewell Haj
--------------------------------------------------------------------

On that day the land of 'Arafah witnessed a great and splendid
gathering, the like of which had not till then been seen by the people
of the Hijaz. The voice of monotheism and the slogans of the worship of
One Allah were ringing in that land. The place which had been, till only
a little time earlier, the residence of the polytheists and idolaters
became, forever, the base for the worshippers of One Allah.

The Prophet offered the noon and the afternoon prayers in ''Arafah along
with 100,000 persons, and the victory of Islam over blasphemy became
decisive and final. Thereafter, the Prophet mounted his camel, and
delivered the historical sermon, which was repeated by one of his
companions, who had a loud voice, so that those at a distance might also
come to know what the Prophet was saying. On that day he commenced his
sermon thus:

"O people! Hear my words, for it is possible that I may not meet you at
this spot in future".

"O people! Your blood and property (honour and reputation[^7]) are
respectable for one another, like this day and this month, till the day
on which you meet Allah, and every transgression in this behalf is
unlawful".

In order to be sure of the desired impression of his words on the people
about the respectability of the lives and property of the Muslims the
Prophet asked Rabi'ah bin Umayyah to ask them: "Which month is
this?" -All of them replied: "It is a respectable month and warfare
during this month is prohibited and unlawful".

Then the Prophet said to Rabi'ah: "Tell them: Allah has declared your
blood and property unlawful and respectable for one another like this
month until you leave this world." He again said to Rabi'ah: "Ask them
which land is this?" - All of them replied: "It is a respectable land
and bloodshed and transgression in it is strictly prohibited". He then
said to Rabi'ah: "Tell them your blood and property are respectable like
this land and every sort of transgression in it is prohibited ".

Thereafter the Prophet said to Rabi'ah: "Ask them which day is
this?"-They replied: "It is the day of Haj-i Akbar (the Great Haj)". The
Prophet said: "Tell them your blood and property are respectable like
this day".[^8]

"Yes, O people! You should know that the blood, which was shed during
the Days of Ignorance should be forgotten and should not be avenged.
Even the blood of Ibn Rabi'ah (a relative of the Prophet) should be
forgotten.

You will return to Allah soon and in that world your good and bad deeds
will be weighed. I tell you. One, to whom something has been entrusted,
should return it to its owner.

Yes, O people! You must know that usury is strictly prohibited in Islam.
Those, who have invested their capital to earn interest can take back
their capital only. They should neither oppress nor be oppressed. And as
regards the interest which the debtors of Abbas owed to him before Islam
the same has lapsed and he has no right to claim it.

"O people! Satan has lost hope of his being worshipped in your land.
However, if you follow him in small matters he will be happy and
pleased. So do not follow Satan."

Making change[^9] in the sacred months (i.e. those months in which
warfare etc. is unlawful) shows excessiveness of blasphemy, and those
unbelievers, who are not acquainted with the sacred months are misguided
because of this change and consequently a sacred month becomes lawful in
one year and prohibited in another. They think that by doing so they
change things made lawful by Allah into unlawful and vice versa.

It is necessary that the arrangement of lawful and sacred months should
be according to the days on which Allah created the skies, the earth,
the moon and the sun. In the eyes of Allah the number of months is
twelve and out of these He has declared four months to be sacred. They
are the months of Zil Qa'd, Zil Haj and Muharram, which are consecutive,
and then the month of Rajab.

"Yes, O people! Your women have rights over you and you too have rights
over them. Your right is that they should not admit anyone in the house
without your consent, and should not be guilty of something unfair,
failing which Allah has authorized you to quit their beds and also
chastise them. In case, however, they revert to the path of truth, you
should treat them with kindness and love and should provide them with
comfortable means of life".

I recommend to you on this land that you should be kind to your women,
because you hold them in trust from Allah and they have become lawful
for you according to His laws.

"Yes, O people! Hear my words carefully and ponder over them. I am
leaving two memorable things amongst you-one of them is the Book of
Allah and the other is my speech and Sunnah,[^10] and if you abide by
them you will never get astray."

"Yes, O people! Hear my words and think over them. Every Muslim is the
brother of another Muslim and all Muslims of the world are brothers of
one another. And anything out of the property of the Muslims is not
lawful for a Muslim except when he acquires it with an honest
intention." [^11]

"Yes, O people! Those present should communicate these remarks to those
who are absent. After me there will be no prophet and after you Muslims
there will be no ummah.[^12]

"O people! You should know that I am announcing it today that I have
banned all the ceremonies and beliefs of the Age of Ignorance and am
informing you of their falsity".[^13]

At this Juncture the Prophet discontinued the sermon and making a sign
towards the sky with his forefinger said: "O Allah! I have communicated
your message". Then after saying thrice: "O Allah! Be witness to it", he
brought the sermon to an end.

The Prophet stayed in Arafah on the ninth of Zil Haj till sunset and
before the sun was hidden in the western horizon and the atmosphere
became somewhat dark he mounted his camel and spent a part of the night
in Muzdalifah, and the time between dawn and sunrise in Mash'ar.

On the tenth day he proceeded to Mina and performed the ceremonies of
Rami-i Jamrah, sacrifice and taqseer. Then he proceeded to Makkah to
perform other ceremonies of Haj and thus he practically taught the same
to others. In the terminology of Hadith and history this historical
journey is called *Hijjatul Wida'* (the farewell Haj) and at times it is
also named *Hajul Balagh* (Haj of the delivery of the message) and
*Hajul Islam* (Haj of Islam). Each of these names has some associations,
which are quite evident.

In the end it may be mentioned that it is commonly known amongst the
traditionalists that the Prophet delivered this sermon on the day of
'Arafah, but some of them believe that this sermon was delivered on the
10th day of Zil Haj.[^14]

[^1]: Seerah-i Halabi, vol. III, page 289.

[^2]: Istilam means rubbing one's hands with the Black Stone before
performing tawaf; the point underlying it is that, while constructing
the Ka'bah, Ibrahim stood on it. Hence this stone has acquired a
peculiar honour. During his ten years' stay in Madina the Prophet
performed 'Umrah twice -for the first time in the seventh year and for
the second time in the eighth year of migration, it was after the
conquest of Makkah. The present 'Umrah was the third one which he
performed along with the ceremonies of Haj. (Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. II,
page 174).

[^3]: Safa and Marwah are the names of two hills which are situated near
Masjidul Haram and Sa'i means covering the distance between those hills.
Sa'i commences from Safa and ends at Marwah.

[^4]: It is an allusion to sexual intercourse and the washing
necessitated by it, because one of the things prohibited, while one is
in the state of ehram, is sexual intercourse with a woman and its
prohibition ends with Taqseer.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 319.

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, voI. XXI, page 385.

[^7]: Khisal by Shaykh Saduq, vol. II, page 84.

[^8]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 605.

[^9]: The custodians of the Ka'bah used to change the sacred months
after taking money from those people, who were keen to wage war during
these months.

[^10]: In this historical sermon the Prophet recommended the Holy Qur'an
and the Sunnah to the people; and in the sermon delivered at Ghadir and
at the time of his death he recommended to them the Book of Allah and
his own progeny. There is nothing contradictory between these two
versions which were delivered on two different occasions, because there
can be no objection to the Prophet treating Sunnah as equivalent to the
Qur'an and announcing both of them as memorable things on one occasion
and recommending his family and successors on another occasion and
insisting upon their following them, which is in fact following the
Prophet and his Sunnah. Some ulema of Ahl Sunnat have imagined in their
exegeses that the Prophet said these words on one occasion only, and
have mentioned his progeny in the footnotes as an alternative, whereas
we do not stand in need of any such correction, because, as a matter of
principle, there is no contradiction between the two narratives.

[^11]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. II, page 605.

[^12]: Khisal by Shaykh Saduq, page 84.

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXI, page 405.

[^14]: Tabaqat-i Ibn Sa'd, vol. II, pp. 184-186.  


