Chapter 62: A Will which was Not Written
========================================

The last chapter of the life of the Prophet of Islam, when he was
confined to bed, is one of the most delicate and subtle chapters of the
history of Islam. In those days the Muslims were passing through very
tragic moments.

Open disobedience on the part of some companions and their refusal to
join the army of Usamah was an evidence of a series of underground
activities and the earnest determination of the persons concerned that
after the demise of the Prophet they would take possession of the
governmental and political affairs of Islam, and would push back the
person, who had been formally appointed on the day of Ghadir as the
successor to the Prophet.

The Prophet also knew to some extent their intentions and, in order to
neutralize their activities, insisted that all the senior companions
should join the army of Usamah and should leave Madina as early as
possible to fight against the Romans.

However, in order to put their own plans into operation, the political
jugglers excused themselves from joining Usamah's army on various
pretexts and even prevented the army from marching off, so much so that
the Prophet passed away but the army of Islam did not depart from Jurf
(camping-place at Madina) and returned to Madina after sixteen days.
Their detention was due to the death of the Prophet.

Thus the desire of the Prophet that on the day of his death Madina
should be free from political mischief-makers, who might indulge in
activities against his immediate successor, was not fulfilled. They did
not only fail to leave Madina but endeavoured to forestall every action,
which could possibly confirm the position of Ali as the uninterrupted
successor of the Prophet and to prevent the Prophet, by different means,
from talking on this subject.

The Prophet came to know about the shocking actions, and secret
activities of some of their daughters, who happened to be his wives. In
spite of the fact that he was suffering from high fever, he entered the
mosque, stood by the side of the pulpit, turned his face to the people
and said with a loud voice which could be heard even outside the mosque:

"O people! The mischief has been sparked off and rebellion has appeared
like the pieces of a dark night. You have no excuse against me. I did
not declare lawful anything except that which the Qur'an declared lawful
and did not declare unlawful anything except that which the Qur'an
declared unlawful.[^1]

This sentence shows the Prophet's grave anxiety about the future and
about the fate of Islam after his own death. What did he mean by the
mischief which had been sparked off? Could it be anything other than the
mischief and dispersion which was created after the death of the Prophet
and its flames have not yet extinguished but continue to flare up?

Bring A Pen And An Ink-Pot So That I May Write A Will
-----------------------------------------------------

The Prophet was aware of the activities which were in the offing outside
his house, to take possession of the caliphate. In order to check the
deflection of the caliphate from its real pivot and the appearance of
differences and disputes he decided to affirm the Caliphate of Ali, the
Commander of the Faithful, and the position of Ahl al-Bayt in writing so
that the document in question might serve as a clear-cut evidence on the
subject of caliphate.

One day, when the senior companions came to enquire about his health, he
lowered his head a little and reflected for some time. Then he said to
them: "Bring me a sheet of paper and an ink-pot so that I may write
something for you, after which you will never be misguided".[^2]

At this moment the Second Caliph broke the silence and said: "Sickness
has overpowered the Prophet. The Qur'an is with you. The Divine Book is
sufficient for us".

The view expressed by the Caliph became the subject of discussion, some
persons opposed him and said: "The orders of the Prophet must be obeyed.
Go and bring him pen and paper so that whatever he has in mind should be
recorded". Some others took the side of the Caliph and prevented the
procurement of pen and ink. The Prophet was extremely annoyed on account
of their dispute and presumptuous words and said: "Get up and leave the
house". (Be off from here).

After narrating this incident Ibn Abbas says: "The greatest calamity for
Islam was that the discord and dispute of some companions prevented the
Prophet from writing the deed which he intended to write''.[^3]

This historical event has been quoted by a number of Sunni and Shi'ah
traditionalists and historians, and from the viewpoint of a critical
study of tradition they consider it as falling under the category of the
authentic and correct reports.

The point, which needs attention is that the Sunni traditionalists have
quoted only the purport of the words of Umar and have not reproduced his
presumptuous remarks. Evidently they have refrained from quoting the
original remarks not because reproduction of such presumptuous remarks
amounts to taking liberty with the Prophet but have altered the words of
the Caliph with a view to protecting his position, so that the posterity
might not form an adverse view about him on coming across such insulting
remarks of his. Hence when Abu Bakr Jauhari, author of al-Saqifa,
reaches at this point in his book he says, while quoting the remarks of
Umar: "Umar said something the purport of which is that the sickness had
overpowered the Prophet".[^4]

However, when some of them wish to quote the text of the remarks of the
Caliph, they refrain, with a view to protecting his position, from
mentioning his name clearly and write only this: "And they said: The
Prophet of Allah has spoken in a delirious state of mind''.[^5]

It is an admitted fact that whosoever utters such an indecent and
repulsive sentence cannot be forgiven, because, as clearly mentioned by
the Qur'an the Prophet was immune from every kind of mistake and
whatever he said was revealed to him.

The dispute of the companions in the presence of the infallible Prophet
was so repugnant and annoying that some of his wives, who were sitting
behind a curtain, asked, by way of objection, as to why his orders were
not being obeyed. In order to silence them the Caliph replied: "You
women are like the companions of Prophet Yusuf. As and when the Prophet
falls ill you shed tears and when he regains health you rule over
him".[^6]

Although some fanatics have apparently coined excuses for the Caliph
having opposed the demand of the Prophet[^7] they have condemned him
from the standpoint of logic, and have considered his remark (The Book
of Allah is sufficient for us) to be baseless. All of them have admitted
it very clearly that the Sunnah of the Prophet is the second pillar of
Islam and the Book of Allah cannot at all relieve the Muslim Ummah from
the need of the Prophet's Sunnah.

It is, however, surprising that Dr Haykal, the author of the book
Hayat-i Muhammad has undertaken to side with the Caliph by way of a hint
and writes: "After this event Ibn Abbas believed that on account of not
writing what the Prophet wanted to be written the Muslims had lost
something important but Umar stuck to his view, because Allah says in
the Qur'an:

*We have neglected nothing in the book.*[^8]

If, however, he had studied the preceding and succeeding words of the
verse he would not have explained it in such an unjustified manner and
would not have risen in support of the Caliph against the clear-cut
words of the infallible Prophet, because the meaning of the word 'book'
in the said verse is the creation and the pages of existence and the
various species in the world of existence are different pages of the
book of creation and these innumerable pages give shape to the book of
creation. Here is the text of the verse:

***All the beasts on land and flying birds have different communities
just as you (men) have. We have not neglected anything in the book. They
will be brought into the presence of their Lord.*** **(Surah al-An'am,
6:39)**

As the words preceding the sentence under consideration relate to the
animals and the birds and the words succeeding it relate to the Day of
Resurrection it can be said definitely that in this verse the meaning of
the word book, from which nothing has been left out, is the book of
creation.

Besides this, even if we admit that what is meant by the word book in
this verse of the Qur'an is the Qur'an itself even then, as specified by
the Qur'an itself, it is an admitted fact that it can be understood only
in the light of the hadith and the guidance of the Prophet of Islam. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***Whom we had sent with miracles and revelations,***

***'Ask those who know about the Books, if you do not know about this'.
We have revealed the Qur'an to you, so that you may explain to mankind
what has been revealed to them and so that perhaps they will think.***
**(Surah al-Nahl, 16:44)**

In this verse it has not been said: "You may read to mankind". The words
used are: "You may explain to mankind". Hence even if the Book of Allah
be sufficient for mankind it stands in great need of explanation by the
Prophet.

If the Muslim ummah could really dispense with such a document (i.e. the
one which the Prophet proposed to write) why should Ibn Abbas have said
the following words, while tears were trickling down his cheeks: "What a
painful day was Thursday; when the Prophet said: "Bring me a
shoulder-bone and an ink-pot or a paper and an ink-pot so that I may
write something for you and you may not be misguided in future"; some
persons said "The Prophet is........"[^9]

How can it be said that in spite of the sentiments expressed by Ibn
Abbas and the insistence made by the Prophet himself, the Qur'an has
enabled the Muslim Ummah to dispense with the will in question. And as
the Prophet did not succeed in dictating such a will, can it be guessed
by means of any definite indications as to what he intended to record in
his will?

What Did The Will Aim At?
-------------------------

One of the best method of explaining the verses of the Qur'an, which
even now commands the attention and favour of the research scholars and
the ulema of the present times, is that the brevity and the ambiguity of
a verse which may have been revealed on a subject, may be removed by
means of another verse on the same subject, which may, from the point of
view of expression, be more clear than the former one. In the
terminology of exegesis, it is called explaining one verse with the help
of another.

This method is not peculiar to the explanation of the verses of the Holy
Qur'an; it applies to the Islamic traditions as well and the ambiguity
of one hadith can be removed with the help of another tradition, because
our great leaders have given emphatic and repeated directions on
delicate and appreciable matters, the expression of which with regard to
the aim is not identical and at the same level. Sometimes the aim has
been expressed clearly and at another time it has been considered
advisable only to allude to it.

As has been stated above the Prophet, while confined to bed, asked his
companions to bring him pen and paper so that he might dictate a will
and the same should be recorded. He also told them that the will would
ensure their not going astray at anytime. (As is clear, the reason
mentioned by the Prophet for writing the will was that people might not
go astray). Later, on account of differences between those present, the
Prophet abandoned the idea of writing the will.

It may possibly be asked: "On what subject did the Prophet want to write
a will?" Reply to this question is quite clear, because, keeping in view
the basic facts mentioned at the beginning of this discussion, it must
be said that the aim of the Prophet in writing the will was nothing
except confirming the Caliphate and succession of Ali, the Commander of
the Faithful, and making it obligatory for the people to follow the
members of his household.

This conclusion can be arrived at by studying the Hadith Thaqalayn which
has been accepted by the Sunni and the Shi'ah traditionalists
unanimously, because he spoke thus with regard to the will which he
wanted to execute: "I am writing this document to ensure that you do not
go astray after me".

And in the Hadith Thaqalayn also he used identical words and insisted
that the people should follow the two Siqls (weighty or precious things
viz. the Holy Qur'an and his progeny) so that they might not go astray
after him. Here is the text of the Hadith Thaqalayn:

I am leaving two weighty (valuable) things amongst you. So long as you
follow both of them you will not go astray. These two valuable things
consist of the Book of Allah (the Qur'an) and my progeny and Ahl
al-Bayt".

Can it not be concluded from the wording of these two traditions, and
the similarity present in them, that the aim of the Prophet in asking
for pen and paper was to record the contents of the Hadith Thaqalayn in
a more clear manner and to confirm the rulership and direct caliphate of
his successor, which had been announced verbally on the 18th of Zil Haj
when the Iraqi, the Egyptian and the Hijazi pilgrims were parting
company (at Ghadir Khum).

Furthermore, the strong opposition of one, who immediately after the
demise of the Prophet constituted a consultative body in Saqifah bani
Sa'idah for the selection of a caliph and made his old friend a
candidate for it in a special manner and the latter's nominating him as
a caliph in violation of all principles, perhaps in recompense for his
help, shows that there were indications in the gathering and into the
speech of the Prophet that he wanted to dictate something about the
caliphate and the rulership of the Muslims. He, therefore, strongly
opposed the bringing of pen and paper, for otherwise there was no reason
why he persisted so much that the pen and the paper should not be
brought.

Why Did The Prophet Not Persist In Writing The Will?
----------------------------------------------------

Why did the Prophet not exercise his power to write the will when, in
spite of the opposition by some persons, he could very well call his
secretary and dictate the same to him?

The reply to this question is also clear. If the Prophet had persisted
in writing the will, they, who were saying that illness had overpowered
him, would have persisted more in their impoliteness and their
supporters would also have given publicity to this view and endeavoured
to prove their viewpoint. In that case, besides the fact that
impoliteness towards the Prophet would have spread and continued, the
will, too, would have lost its value.

Hence, when some persons in order to make amends for the ill treatment,
asked the Prophet, whether they might bring pen and paper he was much
disturbed and said: "After all that has been said, do you want to bring
pen and paper? l recommend only that you should behave well with my
progeny". Having said this he turned his face from those present and
they too got up and dispersed. Only Ali, Abbas and Fadl remained
there.[^10]

Making Amends For The Matter
----------------------------

Although the open opposition by some companions made the Prophet abandon
the writing of the will, he made his object known in another manner.
History testifies that while he was very seriously ill he placed one
hand on the shoulder of Ali and the other on the shoulder of Maiymunah,
his slave-girl, and proceeded towards the mosque. In spite of severe
pain and inconvenience he made himself reach the pulpit and mounted it.
Tears trickled from the eyes of the people and perfect silence prevailed
over the mosque. People were waiting to hear his last words and
recommendations.

The Prophet broke the silence of the gathering and said: "I am leaving
two valuable things amongst you". At this moment a man stood up and
asked: "What is meant by two valuable things?" Then he added: "One of
them is the Qur'an and the other is my progeny".[^11]

Ibn Hajar Askalani has given another version of making amends for the
matter and it is not incompatible with the former. He says: "One day,
while the Prophet was unwell and his bed was encircled by his
companions, he turned his face towards them and said: "O people! The
time of my death has arrived and I will be leaving you soon. Be it known
to you that I am leaving the Book of Allah and my progeny and Ahl
al-Bayt amongst you . Then he held and raised the hand of Ali and said
Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali and they will not
separate from each other till the Day of Resurrection".[^12]

The Prophet had narrated Hadith Thaqalayn on different occasions and in
various ways, before he fell ill and had drawn the attention of the
people to these two weighty things but the fact that, even when
bed-ridden, he once again gave attention to the correlation between the
Book and his progeny and stressed their importance before the same
persons, who had opposed his writing the will, would make one believe
that the object of this repetition was to make amends for the
non-execution of the will.[^13]

Distribution Of Dinars
----------------------

The policy of the Prophet with regard to public treasury (Baytul Mal)
was that at the very earliest opportunity he distributed its property
amongst the needy persons and refrained from keeping the contents of the
treasury in custody for a long time. Hence, when he was confined to bed,
and some Dinars were lying with one of his wives, he asked her to bring
them to him.

When the Dinars were placed before him he took them in his hand and
said: "How will Muhammad expect anything of Allah if he meets Him and
has these with him?" Then he ordered the Commander of the Faithful to
distribute the money among the poor.[^14]

The Prophet Is Annoyed On Account Of The Medicine Given To Him
--------------------------------------------------------------

During her stay in Ethiopia Asma' daughter of 'Umays, who was a near
relative of the Prophet's wife, Maiymunah, had learnt the composition of
a medicine which was the juice of some herbs. She imagined that the
Prophet was suffering from pleurisy and in Ethiopia this ailment was
treated with the said syrup.

When the Prophet's condition was very serious and he was suffering from
acute pain, she dropped some of that medicine in his mouth. When the
condition of the Prophet improved somewhat, and he came to know about
the incident he was very much displeased and said: "Allah does not at
all make his Prophet suffer from such an ailment".[^15]

Last Farewell To Friends
------------------------

During the period of his illness the Prophet used to come to the mosque
sometime or other, and offered prayers along with the people, and also
talked on some matters. On one of those days he arrived in the mosque,
while he had tied a piece of cloth on his head, and Ali and Fadl bin
Abbas had placed their hands under his arm-pits, and he was walking with
dragging feet. He mounted the pulpit and began to speak, saying: "O
people! The time has arrived when I should leave you. If I have made a
promise with anyone I am prepared to fulfil it, and if I owe something
to somebody, he should speak out, so that I may make payment to him".

At this moment a man stood up and said: "You promised me some time back
that if I married, you would help me with money". The Prophet ordered
Fadl to pay the required amount to him immediately. Then he dismounted
the pulpit and went home.

Thereafter he came to the mosque again on Friday (i.e three days before
his death) and began to speak, and said *inter alia:* "Whoever has any
right over me should get up and mention it, for punishment in this world
is lighter than the punishment on the Day of Judgement."

At this moment Sawadah bin Qays stood up and said: "At the time of
return from the Battle of Ta'if, when you were riding a camel, you
raised your scourge to hit your animal, but by chance it struck my
belly. I now want to take revenge".

The offer made by the Prophet was not a mere formality for he was
seriously inclined to compensate others even for those rights, which are
not usually cared for by the people.[^16] He therefore, ordered the same
scourge to be brought from his house.

Thereafter he pulled up his shirt so that Sawadah might take revenge.
The companions of the Prophet were watching the scene with grieved
hearts, and with tears in their eyes, and were awaiting as to where the
matter would end, and whether Sawadah would actually take revenge.

However, they suddenly saw Sawadah kissing the belly and chest of the
Prophet. At this moment the Prophet prayed for him and said: "O Allah!
Forgive Sawadah in the same manner in which he has forgiven the Prophet
of Islam".[^17]

[^1]: Seerahi Ibn Hisham, vol. II, p. 654 and Tabaqat-i Ibn Sa'd, vol.
2, p. 216.

[^2]: Evidently what was meant was that the Prophet might dictate the
deed and one of his secretaries might write it out, because the Prophet
had never held a pen in his hand or written anything.

[^3]: Sahih Bukhari, Kitabul 'Ilm, vol. I, page 22 and vol. II, page 14;
Sahih Muslim, vol. II, page 14; Musnad Ahmad, vol. I, page 325 and
Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. II, page 244.

[^4]: Sharh-i Nahjul Balaghah, Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. II, page 20.

[^5]: Sahih Muslim, vol. I, page 14 and Musnad Ahmad, vol. I, page 355.

[^6]: Kanz al-Ummal, vol. III, page 138 and Tabaqat, vol. II, page 244.

[^7]: The late Allamah Mujahid Sharfuddin has collected all these
excuses his book entitled al-Muraji'at and refuted them in a decent
manner.

[^8]: Hayat-i Muhammad, page 475.

[^9]: Musnad Ahmad, vol. I, page 355.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXll, page 469, quoted from al-lrshad by
Shaykh Mufid and A'lamul Wara' by Tabrsi.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XXII, page 476, quoted from Majalis by Mufid.

[^12]: al-Sawaiq, Chapter 9 of Part 2, page 57 and Kashful Ghummah, p.
43.

[^13]: The Hadith Thaqalayn is one of those traditions which are
unanimously accepted by the Sunni and the Shi'ah traditionalists, and it
has been narrated by the companions of the Prophet in sixty different
ways. Ibn Hajar Askalani writes: "The Prophet invited the attention of
the people to the correlation between the Book and his progeny on
different occasions like the day of Arafah, the day of Ghadir, on return
from Ta'if, and even while he was confined to bed. (al-Sawaiq
al-Muhriqah, page 136). The late Mir Hamid Husayn of India has allocated
a part of his book to the narration of authorities for the Hadith
Thaqalayn. It has been published recently in Isfahan in six volumes. In
the year 1374 A.H. a tract about this hadith was published by the Darut
Taqrib Foundation (Egypt). Its importance from the viewpoint of
authorities and the esteem shown to it by the traditionalists in
different eras of Islamic history have been quoted in it briefly.

[^14]: Tabaqat-i Kubra, vol. II, page 238.

[^15]: Tabaqat, vol. II, page 236.

[^16]: Manaqib-i Al-i Abi Talib. vol. I. page 164.

[^17]: Furthermore, as the Prophet did not hit Sawadah's body
intentionally he had no right to take revenge, but the act could be
compensated by payment of 'diya' money (prescribed compensation). In
spite of this the Prophet decided to meet his demand.  


