Chapter 6: Childhood of The Prophet
===================================

History tells us that the life of the Prophet, the noble guide of the
Muslims, was replete with a chain of wonderful events from his very
childhood upto the time when he was entrusted with the prophetic mission
and all these events had an aspect of greatness. On the whole these
events testify that the life of the Prophet was not a usual one.

As regards the explanation of these events the writers are divided into
two groups, the materialists and a number of orientalists.

1. The materialist scholars who look at the world from the material
point of view and consider the organisation of existence as confined
within the four walls of matter and believe that.all the phenomena are
material and dependent upon physical causes do not attach any importance
to these events and even though they may be supported by a very strong
authority, they do not pay any heed to them.

The reason for such an attitude on their part is that according to the
principles of materialism the occurrence of such events is impossible.
As and when, therefore, they observe such happenings recorded in history
they adjudge them to be the offspring of the imagination, love and
devotion of the followers of the particular religion.

2. There is also a group of the orientalists, who apparently present
themselves to be theists and godly persons and express belief in the
supernatural, but, on account of weakness of their faith, their pride
about their knowledge and predominance of materialism over their
thoughts, while analysing events, follow the principles of materialism.

We frequently come across this sentence in their discourses "Prophethood
is the state of being a human genius. A Prophet is a social genius who
illuminates the path of life of human beings with his brilliant ideas
etc.... "

Discourses of this type originate from a sense of materialistic thinking
which considers all religions to be the outcome of human reflection,
although the doctrinal scholars have proved, while discussing 'general
prophethood', that prophethood is a divine gift which is the source of
spiritual inspirations and connections, and, unless there is a diffusion
from the side of the Almighty, not the slightest benefit can be derived
by this side (i.e. by the Prophets).

However, as the Christian orientalist looks at these matters from the
materialistic point of view and wishes to measure all events in
accordance with the scientific principles, which have been discovered
through tests and expert meets, he subjects to criticism all those
events which have a supernatural aspect and denies their genuineness.

Worshippers of Allah
--------------------

These are the people who believe that the properties and structure of
the material world are under the management of another world and another
power (the world of solitude and metaphysics) is responsible for the
order of the physical world.

In other words the material world is not free and independent and all
its fixed rules and natural and scientific laws are inspired by another
world viz. the Will of the Creator which surrounds all things that
exist. It is He who has created matter and enforced sound laws amongst
its ingredients and erected it on the basis of a chain of natural and
scientific principles.

Along with believing in the scientific laws and whole heartedly
accepting the statements of scholars about the connections of physical
beings upto the extent to which they have been substantiated by science,
the people belonging to this group also believe that these scientific
rules and principles and the wonderful system of the material world are
connected with another organization, all parts of which revolve
according to the Will of that High Being.

Furthermore, they do not consider these scientific laws to be permanent
and unalterable and believe that watchful Power can change them at any
time it likes, in order to achieve some special object. It is competent
to do so and (not only competent but) has actually done this many times
for such aims and objects as it has had in view.

They say that supernatural and surprising acts of the Prophets which do
not accord with the natural laws have been performed through this
channel. These people do not permit themselves unduly to reject or doubt
what they come across in the Holy Qur'an and in the Hadith as well as in
authentic and reliable history hooks merely on the ground that it does
not conform With the standards of nature and scientific laws.

Now we mention two events from the mysterious and wonderful life history
of the Holy Prophet relating to his childhood and when this narrative is
kept in view no room is left for any improbability or doubt about them.

1. The historians have quoted Halimah as saying: "When I assumed
responsibility for bringing up the new-born child of Aminah I decided to
feed the infant with my milk in the same assembly and in the presence of
his mother. So I put into his mouth my left breast which contained milk,
but the child was more inclined to my right breast.

However, I did not have anv milk in my right breast since I had given
birth to my first-born. The insistence of the child made me put my
milkless right breast in his mouth, and, as soon as he began sucking it,
its dry mammary glands were filled with milk and this incident made all
those present wonder.[^1]

2. She also says "From the day I took Muhammad to my house I became all
the more prosperous and my wealth and herd increased".[^2]

Undoubtedly in these matters the judgement of materialists and their
followers differs from that of the persons who worship Allah, although
none of them has observed these events and the only evidence for them is
the statement of the nurse of the Holy Prophet. As those who follow
materialistic principles cannot explain such incidents through natural
sciences, they immediately say that these events are the creation of
imagination.

If they are very much respectful they say that the Prophet of Islam did
not stand in need of such miracles. There is no doubt about the fact
that the Prophet did not stand in need of these miracles, but not
standing in need of something is a matter totally different from a
judgement on its being true or false.

However, a godly person, who considers the organism of nature to be
conquered and subdued by the Will of the Creator of the world and
believes that the entire Universe including the smallest being (viz.
atom) and the biggest phenomenon (viz. the Milky Way) rotates according
to His plan and control. After studying these events and their
supporting evidence, he looks at all these events with due respect and,
even if he is not satisfied, he does not reject them outright.

We come across a similiar event in the Holy Qur'an regarding Maryam
(mother of Prophet 'Isa) about whom it has been said:

***When the time for Maryam, being delivered of the child, drew near she
lay down by the trunk of a palm-tree and (on account of throes of
childbirth, loneliness and fear of accusations) she wished to Allah that
she might die. At this moment she heard a voice saying, "Do not despair.
Your Lord has provided a brook that runs at your feet and if you shake
the trunk of this (withered up) palm tree, it will drop fresh ripe dates
in your lap.*** **(Surah Maryam, 19:24 - 25).**

Although there is a great difference between Maryam and Halimah from the
point of view of their respective positions and virtues, but a similar
difference also exists between the two new-born babes. And if the
personal merit and excellence of Maryam made her an object of Divine
blessings it is also possible that the position and rank which this
infant (i.e. Muhammad) was to acquire later might have made his nurse
worthy of Allah's bounties.

We also learn something more about Maryam from the Holy Qur'an

***Her chastity and piety had elevated her so much that whenever
Zakariyah visited her place of worship, he found heavenly food there,
and when he asked her from where that food had come, she used to say
that it had come from Allah.*** **(Surah Ale Imran, 3: 32)**

On this basis we should not doubt the correctness of such miracles or
consider them to be impossible.

Five Years In The Desert
------------------------

The Holy Prophet spent five years amongst Bani Sa'd tribe and was
sufficiently grown up. During this period Halimah took him to his mother
twice or thrice and eventually made him over to her.

The first time that Halimah took him to his mother was when his suckling
period was over. She, however, insisted on her giving him back to her.
The reason for her insistence was that this child had become a source of
bounties and blessings for her, and the reason why his mother acceded to
her request was that cholera had broken out in Makkah at that time.

The second time that she took him to l\\lakkah was when a group of
Ethiopian clergymen came to the Hijaz and saw Muhammad amidst the tribe
of Bani Sa'd. They observed that all the signs of the Prophet who was to
come after Prophet 'Isa, as given in the Heavenly Books, were found in
this child.

They, therefore, decided to take hold of him, in whatever manner it
might be possible, and to take him to Ethiopia, so that the honour of
having the Prophet might fall to the share of that country.[^3]

This is not at all unlikely, because, as clearly mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an, the signs of the Prophet of Islam had been narrated in the
Injeel. It was, therefore, perfectly in order that the sages of that
time should have identified the person in whom those signs were present.
The Holy Qur'an says in this regard:

**And of 'Isa, who said to the Israelites: "I** ***have been sent to you
by Allah to confirm the Taurat already revealed and to give news of an
apostle who will come after me. His name is Ahmad". Yet when he (the
Prophet about whom 'Isa had foretold), came to them with all the signs
and proofs to support his truthfulness), they said: "This is plain magic
''.*** **(Surah al-Saff, 61 6).**

There are other verses also which show that the signs of the Prophet of
Islam were clearly described in the Heavenly Books and the earlier
peoples were aware of them.[^4]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. XV, page 345 quoted from Fazatil-i Waqidi.

[^2]: Manaqib-i Ibn Shehr Ashob, vol. I, page 24.

[^3]: Seerah-i Ibn Hisham, vol. I, page 167.

[^4]: Vide Surah al-A'raf, 7:157.


