Section 24, Fighting in Self-defense, Pilgrimage under Restrictions
===================================================================

Religious Calendar to be according to the Lunar Year, Regard for the
sanctity of the Sacred Month-Fighting in self-defense, Regard for the
sanctity of the holy city, Self-defense during the sacred month,
Pilgrimage under restrictions, combining 'Umrah' with 'Hajj'

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 189
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأهِلَّةِ قُلْ هِيَ مَوَاقِيتُ لِلنَّاسِ
وَالْحَجِّ وَلَيْسَ الْبِرُّ بِأَنْ تَأْتُوْاْ الْبُيُوتَ مِن
ظُهُورِهَا وَلَـكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنِ اتَّقَى وَأْتُواْ الْبُيُوتَ مِنْ
أَبْوَابِهَا وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**189.** ***"They ask you concerning the new moons; say: 'They are times
appointed for mankind and (for) the Hajj'. It is not righteousness that
you should enter dwellings from their backs but righteousness is this
that one should guard himself (against evil); and enter the dwellings by
their (proper) doors, and fear Allah: that you may be prosperous."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It has been said that Ma'az-ibn-Jabal came to the Prophet (S) and said
that he was frequently asked about the crescent of the moon and that why
it gradually changes to a full shape and then alters to its first
status.

Also, it is narrated that the Jews asked the Messenger of *Allah* (S)
what the crescent of the moon was for and what the use of it was. At
that time the above verse was sent down and announced that the different
states of the moon have different material and spiritual advantages in
the system of the human beings' lives.

As mentioned in the occasion of revelation of the verse, some people
asked the Prophet of Islam (S) a few questions about the reason of the
different peculiar shapes that the Moon seemed to have and the
concerning use of them.

In answer to these questions, *Allah* ordered the Prophet (S) to tell
them the effects and the different usages of the crescent for all
people.

***They ask you concerning the new moons; say: 'They are times appointed
for mankind and (for) the Hajj'. It is not righteousness that you should
enter dwellings from their backs but righteousness is this that one
should guard himself (against evil); and enter the dwellings by their
(proper) doors, and fear Allah: that you may be prosperous."***

The rising of the Moon at the beginning of each lunar month in the form
of crescent, and then its gradual change, can be the source of many uses
in the act of practicing worship and the accomplishment of religious
duties by people, and in their material career as well.

Everybody can easily count days of the month and enumerate the month of
the year by the help of the varying shapes or forms of the Moon when
dealing with trading and writing agreements due to appointing the times
of promises and contracts.

Besides that, fasting, the performances of the great worship of
Pilgrimage and festivals, etc., prescribed by Islam, are timed according
to the lunar months. The best way for people to recognize them and
decide to arrange the affairs is this very form of the crescent in
various shapes when they see them differently at the beginning, in the
middle, and at the end of the months.

It is obvious that the regularity of the social life of man without a
common and precise means of dating is impossible. So, the Moon, indeed,
is a natural calendar for all human beings. It is a natural phenomenon
that the entire people, whether literate or illiterate, wherever in the
world they are, can make use of it.

For this reason, the Creator, the Great, has made this worldly calendar
available for the use of the human race in their life system.

### Natural Measures

One of the advantages of Islamic laws is that their orders have usually
been arranged corresponding with the natural measures, for these
measures are some means that are available to all people and, besides
that, the passing of time does not affect them.

But, on the contrary, unnatural scales are not within reach to all human
beings for every thing. For example, the population of the world have
not been able to use of some international measures for timing the
evening yet.

Therefore, we see that Islam has sometimes assigned the measure of a
span, or a man's height and the like of it. And, for appointing a time,
phenomena such as sunset, break of dawn, decline of sun from the
meridian and the vision of the Moon are usually pointed out.

***"It is not righteousness that you should enter dwellings from their
backs..."***

In this verse the statement is partly about the Hajj Pilgrimage which
can be performed at its proper time by visual noting the crescent of the
Moon. It has also pointed to one of the superstitious customs of the Age
of Ignorance accomplished in the rites of pilgrimage which *Allah*
prohibited them from.

It was the practice among Arabs that after getting into the pilgrim
garments ('Ihr'am) they considered it unlawful to enter their house
through the usual doors. Hence they cut a new entrance under the ground
from behind their premises.

They did so because they thought it was a good action since it was
desuetude of habit and, therefore, they would complete the act of the
pilgrim garment which was desuetude of habits. [^1]

But the Qur'an explicitly says that righteousness lies in piety, not in
the superstitious customs. So, it immediately tells them seriously to
enter the houses from the very ordinary doors.

But the object and the significance of the revelation of this verse is
reasonably wider, greater, and more common. For the fulfillment of any
action, whether it is a ritual action or a non-religious one, we should
enter it through its proper way, not from a deviated path.

Here, entering from behind is a figurative expression for turning aside
from the right course, and entering by the door means sticking to the
right path. This meaning is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) by Jabir, one
of his companions. [^2]

In the commentaries from Ahlul-Bayt (as) it is narrated about this verse
that they have said:

*"We are the doors and the ways of Allah that invite unto (His)
Heaven...".* [^3]

This tradition means that in your total religious affairs you should
arrive by the main door and take your agenda from them (as) who are
trained in the school of revelation and the Divine Messages were
revealed in their house, (Ahlul-Bayt).

The phrase: ***"It is not righteousness..."*** may point to another
narrow meaning saying that you question about the crescent, instead of
inquiring about theology, is like the manner of the one who has put the
main and right path of the house aside and enters it through a burrow
from behind the premise. What a disgraceful manner!

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 190
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَاتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ الَّذِينَ يُقَاتِلُونَكُمْ وَلاَ
تَعْتَدُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يُحِبِّ الْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**190.** ***"And fight in the cause of Allah (against) those who fight
you, but be not aggressive, for surely Allah loves not the
aggressors."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It is narrated by Ibn -'Abbas that this verse was revealed about the
'Peace of Hudaibiyah'. The incident was in this manner that the holy
Prophet (S) started on a journey to go to Mecca for 'Umrah accompanied
by 1400 people out of his companions.

When they arrived Hudaibiyah, (a land near Mecca), pagans hindered them
from entering into Mecca and doing the sacred rites of the 'Umrah.

After a lot of debates and discussions, they agreed with the Prophet (S)
that Muslims would go to Mecca the following year when the pagans would
empty the City for them to circumambulate the Sacred House for three
days.

The next year, when they set out towards Mecca, they were scared that
the pagans might not be loyal to their promise and prohibit them, hence,
consequently, a battle could come forth and the Prophet (S) was not
willing to fight in the forbidden month. So, this verse was sent down
and .permitted them to defend and fight against the enemies if they
initiated fighting.

In this verse, the Qur'an has issued the command of fighting upon hose
who initiate war against Muslims. It lets Muslims use swords or any
weapons and defensive means in order to stop the enemies. This
condition, in fact, is for the time when the circumstances require and
the course of patience in Muslims has ended, so they can openly and
courageously defend their rights.

### Fight: Why & Against Whom?

There are three subjects pointed out in this verse. They make manifest
the logic of Islam about war.

1- The first phrase of the verse points to the ideal of the wars in
Islam. It says: ***"And fight in the cause of Allah..."***

Then, the main goal in Islamic fights (jihad) is the cause of *Allah*
and the stretch of the Divine laws including: truth, justice,
monotheism, and eradication of transgression, degeneration and
deviation.

Thus, Islam condemns the wars aiming for: vengeance, ambition,
conquering other countries, taking lands of others, and obtaining spoils
of war. So, taking weapon and setting to war is right only when it is
done in the path of *Allah.*

2- Now, the question is that against whom the holy struggle is right.
The second phrase of the verse answers:

***"...(against) those who fight you..."***

It clearly says that Muslims should not begin war unless the opponents
initiate fighting by using weapons, except for some peculiar cases which
will be pointed out when discussing the verses about Holy War.

By the way, it is understood from this verse that civil people (women
and children in particular), who have not risen for fighting, must not
be invaded and they are, therefore, privileged from invasion. .

Basing oil this principle, the great leader of Islam, Ali ibn Abu Talib
(as) orders his soldiers thus:

*"Do not fight them unless they initiate the fighting, because, by the
grace of Allah, you are in the right and to leave them till they begin
fighting will be another point (of right) from your side against
them..."* [^4]

3- The limit of war is defined by the next clause, saying:

***" …but not aggressive... "***

The basis of this meaning is that fighting in Islam is for the sake of
*Allah* and in the path of *Allah,* where there should not be any
transgression and aggression.

***"…for surely Allah loves not the aggressors..."***

That is why Islam, in spite of the wars of our Age, advises Muslims to
observe many ethical principles in war.

For example, it tells them not to kill in fight those who put down their
weapons and surrender, those who have lost their ability of fighting or,
basically, are not able to fight, like old men and women and children.

Such people should not be invaded. Gardens and trees should not be
destroyed. Muslims must not poison the water that their enemies use as
their drinking water by poisonous ingredients (the chemical and
microbial war).

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) says:

*"...If, by the Will of Allah, the enemy if defeated, then do not kill
the runner away. Do not strike a helpless person. Do not finish a
wounded. And, do not inflict on women even though they may attack your
honour with filthy words and abuse your officers..."* [^5]

The above mentioned explanations prove the invalidity of the numerous
accusations of the enemies of Islam against Islam about the Islamic Holy
wars. With these clear statements of the Qur'an, upon the aims of
fighting in Islam and the different dimensions that the Holy War has,
the answer to the objections of the enemies is made manifest.

There will come forth some more explanations, of course, when commenting
other verses of Jihad. *Allah* willing

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 191-192
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ ثَقِفْتُمُوهُمْ وَأَخْرِجُوهُم مِّنْ حَيْثُ
أَخْرَجُوكُمْ وَالْفِتْنَةُ أَشَدُّ مِنَ الْقَتْلِ وَلاَ
تُقَاتِلُوهُمْ عِندَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ حَتَّى يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ
فِيهِ فَإِن قَاتَلُوكُمْ فَاقْتُلُوهُمْ كَذَلِكَ جَزَاء الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنِ انتَهَوْاْ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**191.** ***"And slay them wherever you find them, and drive them away
from where they drove you away. And persecution is more grievous than
slaughter. And fight not with them at the Sacred*** ***Mosque unless
they fight with you therein; then, if they fight with you, slay them;
such is the retribution of the infidels."***

**192.** ***"But if they desist, then surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful."***

This verse tells Muslims to fight against the idol worshippers of Mecca,
who had expelled them (Muslims) from their own home and city, and to
drive them (the idol worshippers) out from that city, since they had
persecuted the Muslims for years.

That treatment was more grievous than slaughter, because slaughter is
taking the worldly life of a person instead of which the one reaches the
prosperity of the next world, while in torture the one has neither the
comfort of the present world nor the pleasure and ease of the coming
world.

Yet, it enjoins Muslims not to fight at the Sacred Mosque in order to
preserve the security and sanctity of it. But, if pagans did not observe
the respect of the Mosque and fought against Muslims, they would do the
same and punish them.

### Explanations

1- Reciprocation and conclusiveness with harshness is certain in some
respects.

2- Sacred premises of Mecca and the Sacred Mosque are holy but the
esteem of the blood of Muslims is more sacred. So, here, the comparison
of the state of important and more important is considered.

3- Since Muslims should not initiate in fighting, they must not initiate
destroying the sacred things, either.

4- Knowing the reason of a commandment is the secret of mirth and
obedience. The Qur'an expresses the reason for the command of fighting.
It says that they persecuted you for years, and that torture is more
grievous and dangerous than slaughter. If the Qur'an issues the command
of expulsion, it is for the reason that they had expelled the Muslims
from their houses for years.

***"And slay them wherever you find them, and drive them away from where
they drove you away.***

***And persecution is more grievous than slaughter.***

***And fight not with them at the Sacred Mosque unless***

***they fight with you therein; then, if they fight with you, slay
them;***

***such is the retribution of the infidels. "***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the next verse it says that *Allah* accepts their repentance if they
put aside the custom of infidelity and idolatry and, consequently, they
will be brethren of Muslims. They will be even exempted from the taxes
and from the punishments that offenders must tolerate.

***"But if they desist, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

The clemency enjoined by Islam upon its adherents even against their
bloodthirsty enemies in the battlefield, has no match in any religion.
The Muslims have been definitely commanded to sheathe their swords if
the enemy desists from fighting.

The fight allowed by Islam has to be only against the wrong done, and
there should be no rancor against the enemy when they correct themselves
or even when they end the hostility.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 193
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ لِلّهِ
فَإِنِ انتَهَواْ فَلاَ عُدْوَانَ إِلاَّ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**193** ***"And fight with them until there is no (more) persecution,
and the religion is only for Allah But when they desist, there should be
no hostility save against the (willful) aggressors."***

In this verse, the purpose of the Holy War in Islam (Jihad) is stated.
It says that fighting is not for the sake of ordinary aims that
humankind usually follow in their battles, nor for the sovereignty over
the earth and conquest, nor for earning so much spoils, nor for
preparing some selling markets and obtaining sufficient food stuff, nor
for giving superiority to a group or a race over another group or race.

The aim of Holy Struggle is one and only one thing, and that is the
attraction of *Allah's* pleasure which lies in the settlement of social
justice, supporting the person, who have encountered with deceit and
aberration, wiping out the environment of human societies from
infidelity and idolatry, and, finally and particularly, getting the
instruction, of *Allah* up in action.

Therefore, as it is realized, lighting is for eradiation or persecution
among humankind and settling the creed of monotheism in them throughout
the world.

***"And fight with them until there is no (more) persecution, and the
religion is only for Allah…"***

And at the end of the verse, it adds that if they return and leave out
infidelity, corruption and idolatry, Muslims should not bother them to
revenge the past. They must ignore the past because opposition and
reciprocal fighting is used only against oppressor when the
circumstances require

Islamic Holy War (Jihad), in fact can be divided into three categories:

### 1. The Preliminary Holy Wars for Freedom

*Allah* has designed some commands and programs for the sake of
happiness, freedom, development, prosperity, and tranquility of Man. He
has commissioned His prophets (as) to communicate these commands to
people.

Now, if a person or a group of people imagine that this communication is
against their personal mean benefits so that they produce some barriers
on the way of Prophets' invitation, the prophets are rightful to remove
those barriers from their way and acquire the freedom of delivering
propagation, at first, through a peaceful way and, if it is not
possible, then with the use of violence.

In other words, people of all societies have the right to hearken to the
heralds of truth and be free to accept their invitations.

Now, if some persons decide to deprive them of their lawful right and do
not let the call of the heralds of truth reach the ears of their spirits
and, as a result, become free from the bounds of mental and social
slavery, the adherents of these agenda are rightful to employ any means
in order to obtain that freedom. Hence, the necessity of preliminary
Holy Wars (Jihad) in Islam, as well as other heavenly religions, is made
manifest.

Also, if some persons bear pressure upon some Muslim believers to invert
them to their previous religion, they can apply any means to remove that
pressure.

### 2. A Defensive Holy War

It sometimes happens that war is posed to a person or a group of people,
viz, they are unexpectedly invaded or unwarily transgressed by an enemy.
Here, all the heavenly laws and human rules consider the attacked person
or group of persons rightful to rise and defend themselves.

Alongside this defense, they can use all their potentialities powerfully
and do their best to protect their entity. This kind of struggle is
called ***defensive Holy War.*** Wars such as the Battles of Ahzab,
Uhud, Mutah, Tabuk, Hunain and some other battles at the advent of Islam
are counted among this kind of Holy War, which have had defensive forms.

### 3. Holy War Against Infidelity & Idolatry

At the same time that Islam invites the people of the world unto its
call, which is the last and highest godly creed, it respects 'freedom of
belief'. For this reason, it gives the nations who have the heavenly
Book an enough respite to study and contemplate over Islam and willingly
accept it.

If they do not accept it, they will be treated as 'a confederate
minority', in a peaceful life under some particular conditions, of
course, which are neither complicated nor difficult.

But infidelity and idolatry is neither a religion nor a creed nor is
counted respectful. It is but a kind of superstition, a deviation, and
stupidity. In fact, it is a kind of mental and ethical disease which
should be, with any possible means, rooted out.

The terms 'honour' and 'respecting others' opinions' are used in the
cases that those opinions have a safe and sound foundation. But,
sickness, deviation, superstition, and aberration are not some things
that can be counted respectable.

That is why Islam orders that idolatry be rooted out from the human
societies, however much costly it may be, even at the cost of fighting.
Idol-temples and the signs of idolatry, if not possible peacefully,
should be destroyed by force.

### Why Was Holy War Legislated in Medina?

We know that Holy War was enjoined for Muslims in the second year AH,
while it was not compulsory before that.

The reason of this subject is clear because, on one hand, the number of
Muslims in Mecca was so small that rising practically meant suicide.

On the other hand, the enemy was quite powerful in Mecca, and, indeed,
Mecca was counted the main center of anti-Islamic powers. The opponents
of Islam were so strong there that it was impossible to fight them
inside Mecca.

But, when the Prophet (S) entered Medina, a great deal of people
believed him, so many that he was able to spread his invitation clearly
inside and outside of Medina. He (S) could form a simple government and
prepare the necessary means for fighting with his enemies and since
Mecca was a rather far distance from Medina, he succeeded to do it with
tranquility and peace of mind, and the revolutionary Muslim troops could
prepare themselves for fight and defense against enemies.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 194
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّهْرُ الْحَرَامُ بِالشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ وَالْحُرُمَاتُ قِصَاصٌ
فَمَنِ اعْتَدَى عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُواْ عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا اعْتَدَى
عَلَيْكُمْ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ مَعَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**194.** ***"The sacred month for the sacred month; and all sacred
things are (under the law of) retaliation. Whoever then commits
aggression (by fighting) against you, attack him in like manner as he
attacked you; and have awe for Allah, and know that Allah is with the
pious ones."***

According to the Islamic calendar, there are four lunar months in very
year which are specifically respected, and fighting is unlawful and
forbidden therein. One month of these four months, i.e., Rajab is
separate while the rest, i.e., Zil Qa'dah, Zil-Hajjah, and Muharram, are
consecutive.

One of the reasons that the month Zil-Qa'dah is so called is that in
this month it is necessary to have a halt of fighting.

This is the law of Islam that enjoins the adherents not to fight during
four particular months of the year, but non-Muslim enemies always lie in
ambush to misuse the opportunities. So, they may think that since
Muslims are obliged to observe this law, they had better attack.

This verse says that if your opponents rush upon you during these four
months, you can stand against them, too, and fight in the same months.
So, you may apply the sacred month for the sacred month, because the
sanctity of the blood and protection of the system if Islam is much more
than the sanctity of these months.

***"The sacred month for the sacred month…"***

Then, whosoever did not regard with reverences should be treated under
the law of retaliation.

***"and all sacred things are (under the law of) retaliation."***

Hence, as a, general rule, it says:

***"Whoever then commits aggression (by fighting) against you, attack
him in like manner as he attacked you..."***

Islam is not a religion of aggression and transgression, but it does not
accept the aggression of others. Yet, the style of action should be in a
manner that piety be always observed, and in retaliation, limits would
not be violated when we do know and ought to be aware that *Allah* is
with the pious ones.

***"...and have awe for Allah, and know that Allah is with the pious
ones."***

### Explanations

1- No path is blind in Islam. The protection of the unity of Islam and
the souls of Muslims are preferred to the sanctity of places and times.

2- We must be equitable even in contact with enemies.

***"Whoever then commits aggression (by fighting) against you, attack
him in like manner as he attacked you..."***

3- The necessity of piety, even at the time of fighting, is another one
of the Islamic training principles.

4- The order of legislation should not be in a manner that it becomes a
means of despair for Muslims and boldness in disbelievers. The principle
of similar reciprocation stands for this very sake.

5- At the time of fighting in similar reciprocation, if you do not
violate the limits of justice and be of the pious ones, you will enjoy
of the Divine help.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 195
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنفِقُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَلاَ تُلْقُواْ بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى
التَّهْلُكَةِ وَأَحْسِنُوَاْ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**195.** ***"And spend in the way of Allah; and cast not yourselves by
your own hands into perdition: and do good (to others), for verily Allah
loves the doers of good."***

Holy War needs as much money and property as it needs the sincere,
strong experienced battle men, because in Holy War, the existence of
both the spiritual and physical preparation, and suitable weapons,
artillery and other fighting equipments for troops are necessary.

True it is that the most important effective factor of the fate of a war
is the involving soldiers, but a soldier needs to be equipped. Hence,
the verse emphasizes that the lack of spending wealth in this way is to
bring themselves and other Muslims to destruction.

***"And spend in the way of Allah; and cast not yourselves by your own
hands into perdition..."***

At the time of revelation, in particular, a great deal of Muslims were
full of ardor and emotions for Holy War, but they were so poor that they
could not prepare the artillery. As the Qur'an states, they used to come
to the Prophet (S) and ask him to supply the necessary means in order to
send them to the battle-field.

But they usually came back with sorrow and grief while their eyes were
shedding tears because the required means could not be supplied. The
statement of the Qur'an in **Surah At- Taubah. No.9. verse 92** is thus;
***"...they went back while their eyes overflowed with tears on account
of grief for not finding that which they should spend."***

### Spending, a Prevention of Destruction

A general fact and a social rite can be taken from this holy verse in
account of disbursing, although the subject is mentioned next to the
verses of Holy War. The idea is that spending, in general, causes the
members of a society to be delivered from perdition.

And, on the contrary, when the custom of donation be neglected and the
properties be compiled in one pole of the society, there will come forth
a majority of the poor and deprived. So, very soon, a great burst
happens in the society in which the selves and wealth of capitalists
will be burnt by the fire of that revolution. Here, thereby; the
relation of 'donation' and 'prevention of destruction' is made clear.

Therefore, disbursement is useful for capitalist, before it would be
beneficial to the state of the deprived; that is, the justification of
wealth s a protector of wealth. Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) has
pointed to this very fact where he says:

*"...guard your properties by paying alms tax..."* [^6]

Next to the stage of Holy War and donation, it leads to benevolence and,
at the end of the verse, it commands to doing good because the stage of
doing good is the highest stage in the course of human development which
Islam regards to fully. It says:

***"...and do good (to others), for verily Allah loves the doers of
good."***

The occurrence of this phrase at the end of the verse on donation points
to this meaning that the act of donation must be fulfilled with an
absolute sincerity and affection: far from any term of reproach or what
annoys or hurts the person whom the favour is done to.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 196
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَتِمُّواْ الْحَجَّ وَالْعُمْرَةَ لِلّهِ فَإِنْ أُحْصِرْتُمْ فَمَا
اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ وَلاَ تَحْلِقُواْ رُؤُوسَكُمْ حَتَّى
يَبْلُغَ الْهَدْيُ مَحِلَّهُ فَمَن كَانَ مِنكُم مَّرِيضاً أَوْ بِهِ
أَذًى مِّن رَّأْسِهِ فَفِدْيَةٌ مِّن صِيَامٍ أَوْ صَدَقَةٍ أَوْ نُسُكٍ
فَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ فَمَن تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا
اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ الْهَدْيِ فَمَن لَّمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيَامُ ثَلاثَةِ
أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ وَسَبْعَةٍ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ تِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ
كَامِلَةٌ ذَلِكَ لِمَن لَّمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**196.** ***"And complete the Hajj (Pilgrimage) and the 'Umrah for the
sake of Allah; but if you are prevented (to complete it), then (send)
whatever offering (sacrificial animal) as may be obtained with ease; and
do not shave your heads till the offering reaches w place (of
sacrifice); but whoever among you is sick, or has an ailment in his
head, then he (should) make redemption by*** ***fasting, or alms-giving
or sacrificing. And when you are secure, then whoever enjoys from the
'Umrah to the Hajj (he should offer) of whatever offering is easily
available (for him).***

***But whoever finds none (to give), should fast three days during the
Hajj (Pilgrimage), and seven days when you have returned; these (make)
ten (days) complete. That is for the one whose family members do not
dwell near the sacred Mosque. Have awe of Allah, and know that verily
Allah is severe in penalty."***

### The Rites of Pilgrimage

The visitors of the holy shrine of Mecca usually perform the ceremonies
of minor pilgrimage first. The rites are as follows:

They put on pilgrim's garb ('ihram) from some definite sites known as
'Trusting Place'. It means that they undertake to abandon doing a series
of deeds which are unlawful for the person in a pilgrim state. They
cover themselves with pilgrim's garb which consists of two pieces of
unsewn cloth, and they continually say *'labbaika'* while going towards
Ka'bah.

When they reach Mecca, at first, they circumambulate Ka'bah in seven
rounds. Then, they keep up a two-rak'at-prayer in a place called
Maqam-i-Ebrahim (Station of Abraham). After that, they ply to and fro
between two mountains named Safa and Marwah for seven times. Finally,
they, having cut a piece of a nail or some hair of theirs, take off the
pilgrim's garb.

Then, again for the ceremonies of Pilgrimage, they put on pilgrim's garb
and go unto 'Arafat, which is a land 24 kilometers far from original
city of Mecca, in order to stay therein on the ninth of Zil-Hajjah, from
noon until sunset, busy praying with invocation. After sunset, they move
to Mash'ar-ul-Haram (Sacred Monument), which is located at a distance of
15 kilometers from Mecca, where they must remain until morning.

When the sun rises, they move into Mina, a land nearby there, and, on
the same day, which is known as Feast of Sacrifice, they throw seven
pebbles at a special Pillar called: 'Jamarah 'uqba', and then they
sacrifice before shaving their heads (while women cut off a piece of
hair from their heads). When they did their hair cut (Taqsir), they take
off their pilgrim's garb at last.

They return to Mecca .the same day or after that and perform the ritual
circumambulation of the Ka'bah, circumambulation prayer, running between
Safa and Marwah, Nisa' circumambulation and Nisa' circumambulation
prayer.

On the eleventh and twelfth of the month, they throw pebbles at three
special pillars in Mina which are called 'Jamarat', one after another
seven times at each pillar each day while, during the nights before
these days, they have to remain in Mina.

Thus, they accomplish the rites of the formal Pilgrimage (Hajj) each of
which is the survival of one historical event and that they are some
effective hints and implicit declarations to the matters of refinement
of character and social philosophies. (The description of each
philosophy will be delivered when commenting on the concerning verses).

Now it is necessary to notify that the verse indicates that all these
actions should be fulfilled for the sake of *Allah* and according to His
commandments, not for making display and pretence or for the sake of
idols.

Therefore, the first clause of the verse proclaims that in the deeds of
Pilgrimage, both the formal Pilgrimage (Hajj) and the lesser formal one
('Umrah), no motive should interfere but seeking to be nearer to
*Allah.*

***"And complete the Hajj (Pilgrimage) and the 'Umrah for the sake of
Allah..."***

Then it adds that if something like sickness and fear of enemy happens
that hinders you from performing the ritual rites of Hajj and 'Umrah
after you are clothed in pilgrim's garb you must sacrifice an animal as
it is possible for you.

***"... but if you are prevented (to complete it), then (send) whatever
offering (sacrificial animal) as may be obtained with ease..."***

It should be noted, of curse, that if the prevention is as a result of
sickness and the like and the pilgrim's garb is done for the lesser
formal Pilgrimage ('Umrah Mufradah), the sacrifice should be sent to
Mecca, but if it has happened from the side of an enemy, the duty of
sacrifice must be done at the same place where the prevention has
occurred.

The Prophet (S) behaved in the same manner in Hudaybiyah, too. But, if
the person is in the pilgrim's garb of Hajj and becomes sick, the one
must send the sacrifice to Mina.

***"and do not shave your heads till the offering reaches its place (of
sacrifice)..."***

One of the rites that should be done in Hajj (Pilgrimage) is shaving the
head (for men, and cutting some hair of the head for women). But they
must be careful that they are not allowed to do this duty before
sacrificing the offering in the place of sacrifice.

***"...but whoever among you is sick, or has an ailment in his head,
then he (should) make redemption by fasting, or alms-giving or
sacrificing...."***

The exception is for the person who has an ailment or a difficulty that
has to shave before the appointed time. If the person did so, (i.e.
shaved his head because of ailment and the like), it is necessary for
the one to give ransom. This ransom can be three days of fasting, or
feeding six indigents, or slaughtering a lamb.

***"...And when you are secure, then whoever enjoys from the 'Umrah to
the***

***Hajj (he should offer) of whatever offering is easily available (for
him).***

***But whoever finds none (to give), should fast three days***

***during the Hajj (Pilgrimage), and seven days when you have
returned..."***

When you are free from sickness and enemy and you want to perform the
'greater Pilgrimage', you must sacrifice whatever you can from animals
such as a camel, cow, or lamb. But if any of you cannot find the animal,
or financially is not able to afford it, he must fast three days during
the days of pilgrimage (the seventh, eighth, and ninth days) and seven
days after returning from Hajj so that it makes ten days.

***"...these (make) ten (days) complete..."***

It is evident that three days and seven days make ten days, yet the
Qur'an says that they are totally ten days complete. This meaning may
point to the idea that the ten days can be substituted for the sacrifice
completely.

This greater Pilgrimage with these orders is for those who are not
dwelling nearby the Sacred Mosque. (The known state among Muslim
jurisprudents is that everyone who is sixteen kilometers far from Mecca
his duty is to follow the rites of the 'greater Pilgrimage', but those
who are not far from Mecca by this distance, their duty is the
'separation Pilgrimage' (Hajj-i-Qir'an). This subject is detailed in
books of jurisprudence furnished with its concerning evidences.)

***"... That is for the one whose family members do not dwell near the
sacred Mosque..."***

Finally, at the end of the verse, the command is due to piety and that
believers be aware not to have any shortcoming about the divine
instructions in order to protect themselves from the severe punishment
of *Allah.*

***"...Have awe of Allah, and know that verily Allah is severe in
penalty."***

This emphasis may be for this that Pilgrimage (Hajj) is a great Islamic
worship so that if the rites of it be not carefully observed and its
spirit be neglected, there will be a large loss for Muslims.

This worship (Hajj) is the very one that Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as)
has considered it the 'flag' and 'magnificent motto' of Islam. At the
last moments of his life, he (as) has remarked in his will, thus:

*"Fear Allah (and) keep Allah in view in the matter of your Lord's House
(Ka'bah). Do not forsake it so long as you live, because if it is
abandoned, you will not be spared."* [^7]

Some enemies of Islam have also said that while Pilgrimage is in process
they cannot gain victory.

One of the great believing men says: woe unto Muslims if they do not
comprehend the meaning of Hajj, and woe unto others if they do not catch
its meaning!

[^1]: Tafsir-Baydawi, vol. 1, p. 40

[^2]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 282

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Nahjul-Balagha, Letter No.14

[^5]: Nahjul-Balagha, Letter No.14

[^6]: Nahjul Balagha, saying No. 146

[^7]: Nahjul-Balagha, Letter No. 4


