Section 30, Discipline during the Term, Re-marriage Negotiation
===============================================================

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 232
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاء فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَلاَ
تَعْضُلُوهُنَّ أَن يَنكِحْنَ أَزْوَاجَهُنَّ إِذَا تَرَاضَوْاْ
بَيْنَهُم بِالْمَعْرُوفِ ذَلِكَ يُوعَظُ بِهِ مَن كَانَ مِنكُمْ
يُؤْمِنُ بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ ذَلِكُمْ أَزْكَى لَكُمْ
وَأَطْهَرُ وَاللّهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**232.** ***"And when you divorce women, and they have reached their
waiting-period, do not prevent them from marrying their (former)
husbands, when they agree between themselves in a fair manner. With this
is admonitioned whoever of you believes in Allah and the Last Day; that
is more virtuous and purer for you; surely Allah knows and you know
not."***

### Occasion of Revelation

One of the companions of the Prophet (S) by the name of Ma'qal-ibn-Yasar
opposed the marriage of his sister with her former husband named 'Asim
ibn 'Ady. This man, 'Asim, had divorced her but, after concluding the
prescribed waiting-period, both of them were willing to fasten their
wedlock again by a new wedding.

For this reason the revelation was sent down and prevented him (Ma'qal)
from opposing such a marriage.

It is also cited in another narration that the verse was revealed when
Jabir-ibn-'Abdullah opposed the marriage of his cousin with her former
husband. Perhaps, in the Age of Ignorance, this right had been given to
many close relatives.

(No doubt, in our jurisprudence, brothers and cousins have no
guardianship (wilayat) over their sisters or cousins, but, as we will
explain in this discussion later, the meaning of the above verse is a
general ordinance about guardians and other than them that neither of
these people may rightfully oppose such a marriage: neither father nor
mother, nor cousin, nor non-relative persons.)

### Another Chain Was Broken!

As was stated in the former explanations, in old times women were living
bound in the chains of ignorance and were terribly captured by the will,
desire, and lust of lewd men without having any regard for women's
affection, thought and decision.

One of the examples of that status was the subject of choosing husband
where the like or dislike and willingness of women had no place.
Concerning to this style, even when the woman was formally married and
then separated from her husband thereafter, her second marriage with him
again depended on the decision of her guardian or guardians, although
those two (the man and the woman) wished to continue their former
conjugal life.

Their guardians, then, used to prevent that wedlock because of their
(guardians') own interests or for some vain imaginations and
superstitions.

The Qur'an has clearly condemned this style. It says that the guardians
and other individuals have not such a right, because when both the man
and woman, who are the main elements of marriage, have unanimity with
each other and after that separation they are willing to marry again,
opposition of others is meaningless.

***"And when you divorce women, and they have reached their
waiting-period, do not prevent them from marrying their husbands, when
they agree between themselves in a fair manner...."***

Thus, it is understood from this verse that divorcees need not to obtain
permission or agreement of their guardians to marry again, and even the
opposition of their guardians, if any, is invalid.

Now, the question is about the marriage of the virgin girls that: is it
necessary to obtain her guardian's permission? The above verse is silent
in this regard and we must refer to the jurisprudent books for its
explanation. It only continues saying:

***"…With this is admonitioned whoever of you believes in Allah and the
Last Day…"***

This part of the verse means that these ordinances, that are stated for
individuals' benefits, affect on those who believe both in *Allah,* the
Creator of the world, and in the Day of Judgment. It is in this case
that a person, under the light of theology, can detach from egoism and,
controlling his low desire, rescues himself from deviation.

***"...that is more virtuous and purer for you; surely Allah knows and
you know not… "***

This concluding statement points to the fact that the fruit of one's
action upon these ordinances is perfectly his, but as a result of
insufficient information some individuals may not be aware of the
philosophy of divine ordinances; while the Lord, Who knows all the
secrets, has assigned these instructions for the sake of protecting
their interests and purification and cleanliness of family members.

It is noteworthy that in this sentence, acting upon these instructions
are introduced as the causes of both virtue and purity, ***(more
virtuous and purer),*** which means that acting upon these instructions
removes both the different impurities, resulted from doing some wrong
deeds, from families so that it purifies them, and attains development,
improvement, favour and blessing for them.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 233
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَالِدَاتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلاَدَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كَامِلَيْنِ
لِمَنْ أَرَادَ أَن يُتِمَّ الرَّضَاعَةَ وَعلَى الْمَوْلُودِ لَهُ
رِزْقُهُنَّ وَكِسْوَتُهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ لاَ تُكَلَّفُ نَفْسٌ إِلاَّ
وُسْعَهَا لاَ تُضَآرَّ وَالِدَةٌ بِوَلَدِهَا وَلاَ مَوْلُودٌ لَّهُ
بِوَلَدِهِ وَعَلَى الْوَارِثِ مِثْلُ ذَلِكَ فَإِنْ أَرَادَا فِصَالاً
عَن تَرَاضٍ مِّنْهُمَا وَتَشَاوُرٍ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِمَا وَإِنْ
أَرَدتُّمْ أَن تَسْتَرْضِعُواْ أَوْلاَدَكُمْ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ
إِذَا سَلَّمْتُم مَّا آتَيْتُم بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**233.** ***"And the (divorced) mothers shall suckle their children for
two whole years for him (father) who desires to complete the period of
suckling. It is (incumbent) upon the father to provide (sustenance) and
their clothing (nursing mothers) in a fair manner. No soul shall have
imposed upon it a duty but to the extent of its capacity; neither shall
a mother be made to suffer harm on account of her child, nor a father on
account of his child, and the same devolves upon the heir. But if they
desire to wean by mutual consent and consultation, then it is no sin on
them. And if you desire to seek a wet nurse for your children, it is no
sin on you as long as you pay what you promised for in a fair manner;
and be in awe of Allah, and know that Allah sees what you do."***

In Arabic philology the term /walidah/ is used for 'mother' while the
term /umm/ has a wider meaning and, besides applying the term for
'mother', its concept sometimes refers to the 'root' or 'source' of
everything.

In this verse, the Qur'an points to several instructions about the
problem of suckling and the different rights that mother, child, and
father have in this regard. These instructions, on the whole, are seven
various ordinances.

### Seven Instructions upon Suckling

1- The right of nursing the child for two whole years is specialized to
mother, because it is she who can suckle and look after her child during
this time. In view of the fact that the nutrition of the baby, bodily
and spiritually, has a close and firm relation with mother's milk and
affections, although the guardianship of little children has been given
to father, the right of protection and maintenance of a child is given
to mother.

On the other hand, maternal affections should be observed, too, because
the mother cannot bear to see that her bosom is empty from her child
and. remain silent in such sensitive moments. Therefore, specializing
the right of suckling and maintenance of a child to mother is a kind of
mutual right which is helpful for both the circumstances of the mother
and the conditions of her child.

***"And the (divorced) mothers shall suckle their children for two whole
years..."***

2- It is not necessary that the duration of suckling to be positively
two years. This two-year-suckling period is for the one who wants to
accomplish it perfectly.

***"...for him (father) who desires to complete the period of
suckling...."***

But, regarding to the position of the child's body and observing its
health, the mother has also the right to diminish this course when she
thinks it is favourable.

A tradition from Ahlul-Bayt (as) says that the whole course of suckling
is two years while its incomplete course is twenty one months.

This idea may be abstracted from gathering the concepts of this verse
and **verse 15 from Surah Al-Ahqaf, No.46,** where it says: ***"...and
the bearing of him and the weaning of him was thirty months..."*** And,
we know that the course of pregnancy is usually nine months.

Therefore, the remaining time, which is twenty one months, is the
ordinary time of suckling.

And, also in view of the fact that, in Surah Al-Ahqaf, the matter has
not been cited in a compulsory form, hence, considering the health of
the child, mothers may rightfully diminish the suckling months to less
than 21 months, too.

3- Mother's expenses for food and clothing during the suckling course,
even when she is divorced, is upon the baby's father in order that
mother be able to nurse the child conveniently and with a peace of mind.

***"...It is (incumbent) upon the father to provide (sustenance) and
their clothing (nursing mothers) in a fair manner...."***

Here, the Qur'anic phrase /almaulud-i-lahu / (i.e. the one for whom the
child is born) which is used instead of applying the term, father
attracts the attention. It seems the revelation intends to move the
affections of the father all the more towards the path of doing his
aforementioned duty.

That is, if the expenses of the mother and child during the suckling
course have been trusted with father to pay, it is for the reason that
the baby is his own beloved child and is the fruit of his heart, not a
foreigner.

The occurrence of **'*****in a fair manner',*** here, shows that
mother's clothing and food should be given in a scale about the usage
and also appropriate to her position. Neither stinginess nor
immoderation is right in this regard.

Then, to remove any ambiguity, it explains more about this subject that
the duty of a father is due to his capacity, as *Allah* has assigned no
duty beyond the ability of any individual.

***"...No soul shall have imposed upon it a duty but to the extent of
its capacity..."***

4- Neither father nor mother should disregard the fate of their child
because of their own oppositions. This may cause harm for the mind and
spirit of the child which cannot be compensated later.

***"…neither shall a mother be made to suffer harm on account of her
child, nor a father on account of his child..."***

Men ought to be attentive to the mothers' right of suckling and
protection. They should not tread it by taking the child from them. By
the way, mothers should not abuse the right which is given to them,
either, by restraining suckling through some various vain pretexts, or
deprive the man from visiting his child.

5- After the death of the father, his heir should undertake this duty
and provide the necessities of the mother during the time she nurses the
child.

***"…and the same devolves upon the heir…"***

6- The allowance of weaning is given to parents though the previous
verses have defined some limits for suckling the child. Parents, with
the agreement of each other, can wean whenever they think it is suitable
for the physical state of the child.

***"…But If they desire to wean by mutual consent and consultation, then
it is no sin on them…"***

That is, if parents counsel and agree to decide to wean, there will be
no problem for them.

In the meanwhile, the mother is not obliged to nurse the baby. So,
whenever she wishes she can stop it, while it is better for her to
forsake some of her own desires for the sake of development of her child
and not let herself lose the cooperation and the due consultation of her
husband alongside this way, so that the mutual consent, pointed in the
verse, actually happens.

7- It is impossible to prevent the mother from nursing her child, unless
mother herself refrains from suckling, or there really comes forth a
barrier for her. Hence, it says:

***"...And If you desire to seek a wet nurse for your children, it is no
sin on you as long as you pay what you promised for in a fair
manner…"***

The last part of the above sentence means that engaging another woman to
suckle the child instead of mother after consultation and obtaining
mutual consent, does not matter. It is of course, upon condition that
this manner does not cause the mother's right due to the length of her
former suckling to be trodden. This right should be paid to her in a
fair manner.

Since disputes and oppositions between man and woman sometimes awaken
the spirit of revengefulness in them, and their fate or that of their
helpless child may be exposed to danger, and each of them may think of
evil planning for the other, at the end of these ordinances, the Qur'an
says: ***"...and be in awe of Allah, and know that Allah sees what you
do."***

### Note

A thin and delicate explanation is also cited upon this verse which we
narrate exactly here: The root, 'darara' meaning harm; in its original
form to do harm (transitive) and in its secondary form 'Tadarrar'
meaning to suffer or to receive harm (intransitive).

Here the secondary form 'Mudarra' has been used which usually means
mutual give and take, meaning neither to harm nor to get harmed. As such
this passage means that on account of the child or the disagreement
between the parents none of the three (viz. the father, mother or the
child) should be harmful to the other, or should be harmed by the other.
This interpretation covers the various commentaries given by the
different commentators.

The implication of the passage regarding the mutual rights of the wife
and the husband during the period of suckling of their issues, and the
right and the duty of the heir of the husband and the condition for the
permissibility of employment of a wet-nurse for the suckling of the
issue, there are very subtle points for which you may please refer to
'Fiqh', jurisprudent books.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 234
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا يَتَرَبَّصْنَ
بِأَنفُسِهِنَّ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَعَشْرًا فَإِذَا بَلَغْنَ
أَجَلَهُنَّ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا فَعَلْنَ فِي أَنفُسِهِنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَاللّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**234.** ***"And those of you who die, and leave widows behind, they
should keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten (days); when
they have completed their waiting period, then it is no sin on you for
what they do for themselves in a fair manner. And Allah is fully aware
of what you do."***

### Superstition against Women in Old Times

One of the main problems and basic difficulties for women is their
marriage after the death of husband. Since the immediate marriage of the
widow with another spouse after the death of her husband often
contradicts with affections and keeping the regards of the ex-husband,
it is not fitting, with the spirit and sensations of the relatives of
the Late, besides that the lack of a child in woman's womb must become
certain.

So, the above verse has conditioned the remarriage of the widows to
keeping themselves in waiting for four months and ten days.

Observing the honour of matrimonial life even after the death of the
spouse is a natural innate proposition. That is why there have always
been some special customs common on this purpose among different tribes.

Sometimes in these social traditions, the behaviour has been so
excessive that women would become helplessly captured in a manner that
sometimes the worst crimes could be committed upon them. For example, in
some tribes it was customary to burn the widow; and in some others they
would bury her alive with the man.

Some groups of people used to deprive the widows from their remarriage
forever and, thus, those kinds of widows were isolated thereby.

In some tribes, widows had to stay for a length of time beside their
husband's grave inside a black tent and in some dirty shabby clothing,
plain and without any ornamentation. They could not even wash themselves
during days and nights.

The above verse put an end to all of these superstitions, and, in the
meanwhile, it worthily and respectfully supported the principle of
observing the honour of matrimonial life by keeping the waiting-period
after the death of husband.

***"And those of you who die, and leave widows behind, they should keep
themselves in waiting for four months and ten (days)..."***

The Arabic term /tawaffa/, which is used in many occurrences in the
Qur'an, means 'to take'; and the term / baŎr/, which has no past tense
form in Arabic, means 'strewing'. So, the verse says the women who lose
their husbands have to wait for four months and ten days as
waiting-period and abstain from remarriage.

***"...when they have completed their waiting period, then it is no sin
on you for what they do for themselves in a fair manner...."***

The sense of / buluq-i-'ajal / refers to the conclusion of the period.
This part of the verse indicates that after finishing this length of
time, women can remarry everybody they want.

The prescribed waiting period of four months and ten days is
compulsorily to be observed by a widow whether she had intercourse with
the bereaved husband or not. In the case of her being pregnant the
maximum prescribed waiting period or the period or the delivery,
whichever be the later, should be observed.

Dealing with the divorce and the waiting period, it was appropriate to
deal with the question of an outsider overtly or covertly proposing to
marry the divorced one. Qur'an says there would be no harm provided the
talk does not exceed the limit of modesty and no contract is finalized
before the conclusion of the waiting period.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In view of the fact that sometimes concerning guardians hinder the
marriage of the widows because of some superstitions and vain
imaginations, the verse addresses them and tells them that they have no
responsibility in this regard and widows can have their re-wedlock on a
proper base with whoever they desire.

***"…And Allah is fully aware of what you do."***

The guardians should stand away from interfering in their children's
affairs, and know that the Lord is aware of everything, and He
recompenses all for their good actions and evil actions.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 235
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا عَرَّضْتُم بِهِ مِنْ خِطْبَةِ
النِّسَاء أَوْ أَكْنَنتُمْ فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ عَلِمَ اللّهُ أَنَّكُمْ
سَتَذْكُرُونَهُنَّ وَلَـكِن لاَّ تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرًّا إِلاَّ أَن
تَقُولُواْ قَوْلاً مَّعْرُوفًا وَلاَ تَعْزِمُواْ عُقْدَةَ النِّكَاحِ
حَتَّىَ يَبْلُغَ الْكِتَابُ أَجَلَهُ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ
يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ فَاحْذَرُوهُ وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ
غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**235.** ***"There is no sin on you if you make an indirect proposal of
marriage to (such) women, or keep concealed (the intention) to
yourselves; Allah knows that you will think of them; but make no promise
to them in secret, unless you speak in fairness. And do not resolve on a
wedlock until the prescribed period is completed, and know that Allah
knows what is in your hearts, so beware of Him; and know that Allah is
Forgiving, Forbearing."***

### Can Widows Be Engaged during Warning Period?

As to the foregoing Qur'anic discussion about the waiting-period of
women after their husband's death, in this verse, one of the important
ordinances in relation to the widows in their waiting-period is pointed
out. It says:

***"There is no sin on you if you make an indirect proposal of marriage
to (such) women, or keep concealed (the intention) to yourselves; Allah
knows that you will think of them; but make no promise to them in
secret, unless you speak in fairness...."***

It is, in fact, a natural phenomenon that a woman may think of her
future fate after the death of her husband. And, on the other hand, some
men may also be in thought of marriage with them because of easier
conditions that widows usually have.

Then, continuing the subject, the verse says:

***"…And do not resolve on a wedlock until the prescribed period is
completed… "'***

It is certain that if a person confirms a wedlock which is during the
waiting-period, it is totally invalid / batil /, Moreover, if he does it
intentionally, that action causes the woman to be unlawful / haram / to
him forever.

Then, it follows saying:

***"…and know that Allah knows what is in your hearts, so beware of Him;
and know that Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing…"***

That is, *Allah* does not hasten to punish His servants, because He is
'Forbearing' about what they do.


