Section 31, Extra Provision for Divorced Women & Widows
=======================================================

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 236
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ إِن طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاء مَا لَمْ
تَمَسُّوهُنُّ أَوْ تَفْرِضُواْ لَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً وَمَتِّعُوهُنَّ عَلَى
الْمُوسِعِ قَدَرُهُ وَعَلَى الْمُقْتِرِ قَدْرُهُ مَتَاعًا
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**236.** ***"There is no sin on you if you divorce women while you have
not yet touched them nor settled any dowry on them; yet make provision
for them, the rich according to his 'means, and the straitened according
to his means; a provision in a fair manner. (This is) a duty on the
doers of good."***

Continuing about the theme of divorce, there are also some other
ordinances in the above verse and the verse after that. It says:

***"There is no sin on you if you divorce women while you have not yet
touched them nor settled any dowry on them..."***

This circumstance is, of course, when either the man or the woman, after
confirming the marriage tie and before having any sexual relations,
understands that they can not live together as a married couple because
of some problems.

In this case, it is so much the better that at this time they separate
from each other by means of divorce and do not let it be postponed to
later stages when it surely will become more difficult.

After that, the verse pays to another ordinance concerning the subject,
where it says:

***"… yet make provision for them..."***

For the payment of this gift, in fact, the ability of man should also be
considered. That is why the verse continues saying:

***"...the rich according to his means, and the straitened according to
his means; a provision in a fair manner...."***

Both the wealthy men and the poor men should pay this gift, but due to
their ability. And, in view of the fact that this gift has a
considerable effect on the woman in preventing her from taking vengeance
and freeing her from the pressure or the weight which may fall on her
heart as a result of breaking their tie of marriage, the above verse
concerns the gift to the benevolent nature of man, and says:

***"... (This is) a duty on the doers of good."***

This idea points to the fact that the payment should be accompanied with
benevolence and also performed in a peaceful manner by the husband.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 237
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن طَلَّقْتُمُوهُنَّ مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَمَسُّوهُنَّ وَقَدْ فَرَضْتُمْ
لَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً فَنِصْفُ مَا فَرَضْتُمْ إَلاَّ أَن يَعْفُونَ أَوْ
يَعْفُوَ الَّذِي بِيَدِهِ عُقْدَةُ النِّكَاحِ وَأَن تَعْفُواْ أَقْرَبُ
لِلتَّقْوَى وَلاَ تَنسَوُاْ الْفَضْلَ بَيْنَكُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**237.** ***"And if you divorce them before you have touched them, and
you have already settled a dowry on them, then (pay them) one-half of
what you have settled, unless they (women) remit it,*** ***or he remits
it in whose hand is the marriage tie; and that you (yourselves
voluntarily) remit (the whole) is nearer to piety. And, do not forget
generosity among yourselves. Surely Allah sees what you do."***

In this verse, those women are spoken about who separate from their
husbands before any relations while there have been appointed a dowry
for them. It says:

***"And if you divorce them before you have touched them, and you have
already settled a dowry on them, then (pay them) one-half of what you
have settled."***

This lawful legislation is an ordinance which gives the right to the
woman to take half of the whole marriage-portion completely although
there has been no sexual intercourse.

After fixing this matter, it pays to some moral and affectional aspects,
and says:

***"…unless they (women) remit it, or he remits it in whose hand is the
marriage tie..."***

The tone of the verse, on the whole, is based upon the principle of
**'*****fair manner'*** and **'*****benevolence*****'.** It emphasizes
that even divorce and separation should not be mingled with any dispute,
conflict and opposition originated from the sense of revengefulness. On
the contrary, it should be based on nobility, generosity and
forgiveness. It says:

***"…and that you (yourselves voluntarily) remit (the whole) is nearer
to piety. And, do not forget generosity among yourselves, Surely Allah
sees what you do"***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 238
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَافِظُواْ عَلَى الصَّلَوَاتِ والصَّلاَةِ الْوُسْطَى وَقُومُواْ لِلّهِ
قَانِتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**238.** ***"Guard your prayers, and (especially) the middle prayer and
stand devoutly before Allah."***

### Occasion of Revelation

At the time of revelation of the Divine Messages, a group of hypocrites
did not participate in congregational prayer under the pretext of the
hot weather in order to disturb the order of the rows of Muslims.

Tracing and following them, some of the true Muslims did not take part
in the congregational prayer, either. The Messenger of *Allah* (S) was
annoyed about it so that he threatened them with a probable intense
heavenly punishment.

So, as it is narrated in a tradition, in the extraordinary hot midday of
summer, the Prophet (S) performed the prayer (midday prayer), in
congregation. That prayer was the most grievous canonical prayers for
the companions of the Prophet (S) so that it happened that usually there
stood no more than one or two lines of them behind the Prophet (S) for
midday prayer.

In that circumstance, he (S) said he had decided to burn the houses of
those who did not participate in their prayer there. Then the verse was
revealed and the importance of the noon prayer (in congregation) was
emphasized thereby.

The importance of the prescribed daily prayers, especially the midday
prayer, is emphasized repeatedly in the verses of the Qur'an, for prayer
is the most effective factor in the connection of man with *Allah.* As
an instance, in the above verse it says:

***"Guard your prayers and (especially) the middle prayer …"***

The verse recommends to stand humbly, and truly obedient, before the
Lord.

***"... and stand devoutly before Allah."***

Beware that the heat and the cold of weather, or the engagements of the
world, such as: wealth or wife and children, do not hinder you from this
great duty.

The purpose of / salat-il-wusta / (the midmost prayer) is the very
'midday prayer'.

### Note

The Arabic term /wusta/, used in the above verse, means: 'middle, or the
best, or the most excellent'. Commentators differ as to the exact
meaning of this phrase. The weight of the authorities seems to favour
interpreting it as the ***'asr*** or **the** ***midday prayer,*** since
it is mostly neglected and yet it is most necessary to remember *Allah*
in the midst of the worldly engagements.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 239
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنْ خِفْتُمْ فَرِجَالاً أَوْ رُكْبَانًا فَإِذَا أَمِنتُمْ
فَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ كَمَا عَلَّمَكُم مَّا لَمْ تَكُونُواْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**239.** ***"And if you fear (an enemy or danger), then (pray) on foot
or riding; but when you are safe, then remember Allah as He has taught
you that which you did not know."***

In this verse it emphasizes that you cannot abandon establishing prayers
even in the most grievous conditions such as in the battlefield. But in
circumstances like that many of the obligations of prayer are
diminished, for example: being to the direction of Qiblah, the
performances of bowing and prostration in ordinary manner, and so on.
Hence, it says:

***"And if you fear (an enemy or danger), then (pray) on foot or
riding..."***

Therefore, constant attending to prayers is not only for the time of
security and safety, but canonical prayers should be kept always and in
any condition.

***"...but when you are safe, then remember Allah as He has taught you
that which you did not know."***

And, when you are in security, then prayers in this status have to be
kept in the ordinary form and with all their ritual manners and
conditions.

It is clear that the thankfulness of servants due to this divine
teaching, in which He has taught them the way of establishing prayers
both in the secured time and in fear, is by way of the very performance
of them, as they should be kept.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 240
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يُتَوَفَّوْنَ مِنكُمْ وَيَذَرُونَ أَزْوَاجًا وَصِيَّةً
لِّأَزْوَاجِهِم مَّتَاعًا إِلَى الْحَوْلِ غَيْرَ إِخْرَاجٍ فَإِنْ
خَرَجْنَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي مَا فَعَلْنَ فِيَ أَنفُسِهِنَّ
مِن مَّعْرُوفٍ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**240.** ***"And those of you who are about to die and leave wives
behind, make a bequest in favour of their wives, a year's maintenance
without turning them out; but if they leave (of their own accord), there
is no sin on you in what they do themselves in a fair manner; and Allah
is the Mighty, the Wise."***

The Qur'an returns to the problem of marriage and divorce again and
deals with its concerning affairs. At first it speaks about the husbands
who are approaching death while they are leaving wives behind them. It
advises that they ought to bequeath for their widows a year's
maintenance and residence in their homes. Thus it says:

***"And those of you who are about to die and leave wives behind, make a
bequest in favour of their wives, a year's maintenance without turning
them out..."***

This ordinance is, of course, in the case that they (widows) do not
leave their homes, and if they leave the husband's house, they have not
any right of maintenance and residence.

***"...but if they leave (of their own accord), there is no sin on you
in what they do with themselves in a fair manner..."***

As if for the sake that such women be not anxious about their future, it
consoles them at the end of the verse, and says that the Providence is
able to open a new way to them after the lack of their former husband;
and, therefore, there is certainly wisdom in that calamity.

***"... and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 241
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلْمُطَلَّقَاتِ مَتَاعٌ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**241.** ***"And for the divorced women make a provision according to a
fair manner; (this is) a duty on the pious ones."***

In this verse, the Qur'an has paid to another ordinance of the
ordinances of divorce. It says;

***"And for the divorced women make a provision according*** ***to a
fair manner..."***

The ordinance in this verse, similar to what was said in verse 236, is
about the women whom are not appointed a dowry for at the time of
wedlock, and they are divorced before any sexual intercourse.

This provision is a gift which is paid from the side of husband, and it
is appreciated.

***"... (this is) a duty on the pious ones."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 242
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللّهُ لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**242.** ***"Thus Allah makes clear to you His Signs, so that you might
understand."***

In this verse, which is the last verse from the group of verses about
divorce, the Qur'an says:

***"Thus Allah makes clear to you His Signs, so that you might
understand."***

It is evident that the purpose of the Qur'anic phrase / la'allakum
ta'qilun / **'*****so that you might understand**'* is that the
intention of movement from the beginning should be towards the
destination of 'action'; else, mere contemplation upon ordinances and
understanding them, with no deed, will be fruitless.


