Section 33, Saul's Victory over Goliath
=======================================

Verse 249 in Deep
-----------------

***"So when Saul marched out with the troops he said: 'Verily Allah will
try you by a river, whoever drinks from it he is not of me, and whoever
tastes it not, he is surely of me, including the one who tastes but a
single handful.' But they all drank of it, except a few of them. And
when he (Saul) crossed it (the river), those who believed with him said:
'We have no power today against Goliath and his troops.' Those who knew
that they would meet Allah said: 'How often a small party has overcome a
numerous host by Allah's leave! And Allah is with the (steadfast)
patient ones'."(2:249)***

In this verse, the Qur'an announces the failure of a large group of
Israelites in their test when they drank water from the prohibited
stream. They did not tolerate the thirst therein. So, they were not
successful in that trial.

***"So when Saul marched out with the troops he said: 'Verily Allah will
try you by a river, whoever drinks from it he is not of me, and whoever
tastes it not, he is surely of me, including the one who tastes but a
single handful. ' But they all drank of it, except a few of them. And
when he (Saul) crossed it (the river)..."***

However, the remaining group, who succeeded in the foregoing
examination, had another practical examination, too. It was a spiritual
examination. When they encountered the great forces of Goliath, they
said that they could not fight against that armed force.

***"... those who believed with him said:***

***'We have no power today against Goliath and his troop'..."***

But, those who believed in the Resurrection and meeting *Allah* in the
Hereafter, said that victory is in *Allah's* hand, and it is by His
leave that a small group may win a large and numerous troop. It says:

***"... Those who knew that they would meet Allah said:***

***'How often a small party has overcome a numerous host by Allah's
leave! And Allah is with the (steadfast) patient ones'."***

Traditions
----------

**Traditions**[^1]

Muhammad ibn Yahya narrated from Muhammad ibn Ahmad from Muhammad ibn
Khalid and al-Husayn ibn Sa'id from an-Nar ibn Suwayd from Yahya
al-Halabi from Harun ibn Kharijah from Abu Basir from Abu Ja'far (as)
saying in a tradition, *inter alia:* "And Allah reports the words of
Talut: *'Surely Allah will try you with a stream; whoever then drink
from it, he is not of me, and whoever does not taste of it, he is surely
of me.'*

But all of them drank from it, except three hundred and thirteen men;
among them were those who took a handful of water as well as those who
did not drink at all. When they went out against Goliath, those who had
taken handful of water said, ' We have today no power against Goliath
and his forces'; and those who had not taken it said, 'How often has a
small party vanquished a numerous host by *Allah's* permission, and
*Allah* is with the patient ones.' " (al-Kafi)

The author ('Allamah Tabatabai) says: That there remained with Talut
only three hundred and thirteen men (equal in number to the Muslim
'army' in the battle of Badr) is mentioned in numerous traditions from
Shi'ah and Sunni chains.

The details that those who said: ***"We have today no power..."*** were
those who had taken a handful of water, and those who said, **"*****How
often a small party..."*** were those who had not tasted it at all, may
be inferred from the position of the exceptional clause in the verse,â€¦ "

***"So when they encountered Goliath and his troops, they said: 'Our
Lord! Pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm, and help us
against the disbelieving people'. "***

In this verse, the incident of those two forces facing each other is
pointed out. It says:

***"So when they encountered Goliath and his troops, they said: '(Our
Lord! Pour down upon us patience, and make our steps firm, and help us
against the disbelieving people'."***

In fact, Saul and his troops asked for three things from their Lord in
their prayer, and the prayer is well graded. First, patience and
perseverance was prayed for. Their second beseech from *Allah* was
steadfastness in the field.

They asked Him to make their steps firm in order that they would not
flee. The first invocation, indeed, had an inward aspect while the
second prayer had an apparent and outward aspect; and surely the
firmness of step is one of the consequences of the spirit of patience
and perseverance.

Their third prayer was that *Allah* might help them to be victorious
against those infidels. That was, of course, the result or the reward of
those two qualities: i.e. patience and perseverance, and being firm in
the battlefield.

Bible says:

9. "And it was so, that when he (Saul) had turned his back to go from
Samuel, God gave him another heart."

10. "And the spirit or God came upon him and he prophesied. [^2]

There is some similar incident mentioned in the Bible[^3] of trying the
people with thirst, but that is a different incident. It was when Gideon
tried his forces by the 'Well of Harod '. The trial of the people under
Saul was by the river.

From this verse it becomes clear that the one who leads the people
should have inspired knowledge of good and evil for his followers and be
able to conduct trials of the people's faith as was Saul who directed
his men not to drink more than one handful of water from the river, even
though they were dying of thirst. It was only a trial that a few, who
were true believers, succeeded and *Allah* helped them to win Goliath
and his troops.

***"Thus they routed them by Allah's leave, and David slew Goliath; and
Allah gave him the kingship and wisdom and taught him of that He willed.
And were Allah not to repel some people by means of other people, the
earth would certainly be full of mischief; but Allah is Gracious to all
(His) creatures."***

It is completely certain that *Allah* will not leave such believers
alone, although the number of them be small and the number of their
enemy be large. That is why the verse expresses that they set out to
fight against them and it was by the leave of *Allah* that they defeated
he enemy. It says:

**"*****Thus they routed them by Allah's leave..."***

David, who was a very young lad, but was vigorous and brave, had
attended the army of Saul to fight against the enemy. He succeeded to
all Goliath.

***"...and David slew Goliath..."***

The young warrior threw one or two stones by means of a sling which he
had with him, towards Goliath. He utilized the sling so skillfully that
the stone hit just upon the head and pierced the forehead of Goliath.

So, Goliath cried loudly and fell down on the ground. At that moment,
fear and terror rushed into the hearts of his troops. They began to
flee. It seemed, *Allah* had decided to show his authority, here, and by
demonstrating how a king, with all that glory and abundant force could
be destroyed by a lad inexperienced in fighting, and particularly with
an apparently simple and worthless tool, a sling. Then it says:

***"...and Allah gave him the kingship and wisdom and taught him of what
He willed...."***

In this verse it has not been explicitly stated that this David is the
same David who was the great prophet of the Israelites and was Solomon's
father, yet the above mentioned phrase of the verse indicates that this
David had attained the rank of Prophethood.

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an points to a general law, thus it
says:

***"... And were Allah not to repel some people by means of other
people, the earth would certainly be full of mischief; but Allah is
Gracious to all (His) creatures."***

This concluding part of the verse clearly indicates that the only, aim
or object of warfare should be nothing but dispelling of mischief and
the establishment of peace on earth and not at all any territorial
expansion.

Explanation
-----------

[^4]

An account of the formidable strength of the mighty forces of Goliath,
is given in the Bible[^5] David slew Goliath in a single combat. The
Philistines seeing Goliath killed by David all of them fled and that was
the end of the battle.

Quite a similar event took place in the early days of the start of
Islam. The infidels of Mecca with all the strength of the strongest of
their allies with the best and the choicest and the most experienced of
their warrior heroes attacked the Muslim refugees in Madina who then
numbered only a few hundreds including women and children and who were
practically unarmed and the enemy consisted of several full equipped
battalions.

The battle is called the battle of *'Ahzab'* i.e. the battle of the
Confederates. All the idolatrous tribes of Arabia had united in one body
against the few hundreds of ill-equipped or practically unarmed Muslims.

The mighty host was twelve thousand strong and there could be hardly any
fight at all. It was the question of life and death for Muslims and
Islam including the Holy Prophet himself. The well-known giant-like
warrior hero of the enemy's strength leapt across the ditch which the
Muslims had dug between themselves and the enemy's forces, and coming
forward challenged the Holy Prophet to send anyone to fight him in a
duel or a single combat.

The Holy Prophet turned towards the small band of his men and asked them
if there was anyone who would answer *'Amr'* on behalf of Islam and the
Muslims. Though there were those present in the Muslim ranks who later,
after the departure of the Holy Prophet prided themselves as the
greatest heroes and the defenders of Islam and who also claimed to be
the closest companions of the Holy Prophet during his life, but none
stirred, and some of them even tried to hide their faces lest the choice
of the Holy Prophet might fall upon them and they be commanded by the
apostle of God to go to fight the giant like warrior standing fully
equipped and well prepared to finish anyone that comes to face him.

Every time the call was sounded by the Holy Prophet to his men for a
match to meet *'Amr'* there was no response even from those who claimed
closest companionship with him save Ali Ibne Abi Taleb, who at every
time readily stood up and cried: ***'Ana lahu ya Rasullullah'*** (I am
here for him O Prophet of God!).

But the Holy Prophet asked Ali to sit down. Thrice did the Holy Prophet
call for a match from his ranks and every time none but Ali stood up.
Once, some of the people gave cowardly answers acknowledging the
matchless strength and the dauntless courage of the challenging hero of
the enemy.

Third time when again none but Ali stood up to fight the giant-like
warrior, the Holy Prophet called forth Ali, set right his dress and
placed his own turban on his head and bade him go to fight in the way of
the Lord, praying to God for the triumph of Islam against the total
strength of the idolatrous Arabia and declared:

***'Qad Barazal 'Imanu Kulleh 'ila Kufre Kulleh.'***

i.e. 'Certainly proceeds the Whole of the Faith against the Whole of the
Infidelity. ***'Ali met Amr',*** the details of which one can have from
ay of the detailed Muslim history, and ultimately within a few minutes
Ali brought the severed head of *Amr'* the challenging idolater herd of
the infidel's forces, and threw it before the feet of the Holy Prophet
saying: "***Here is, O Prophet of God! The head of the enemy of God and
Islam",*** at which the Holy Prophet (S) thanked God for the victory and
declared:

***Darbatu Aliyin Youmal Khandaq***

***Afdalu min 'ibadatuth thaqalayn.***

i.e. ***"The one stroke of Ali on the Day of the Ditch (The battle is
called the Battle of the Ditch), is superior to the service (prayers) of
both the worlds."*** This saying of the Holy Prophet (S) is well-known
to the Muslim world and is invariably recorded by all historians and the
traditionists and unanimously acknowledged and accepted by the Muslim
world as a whole.

As on the triumph of David against Goliath the enemy fled away, at the
triumph of Ali against *'Amr'* the combined forces of the Confederates
of the enemy gave up the, battle and left the field in chaos and
confusion and the battle ended completely routed and disappointed
forever.

***"These are the Signs of Allah; We recite them to you (Muhammad) in
truth, and verily, you are (one) of the Messengers."***

This expressive verse is the last verse of *the second part* of the Holy
Qur'an, the commentary of which has been discussed in the current
volume.

In this verse, the Qur'an points out that these stories and incidents
which were explained about, should be heeded as a warning and
instructive lesson for Muslims. In particular, where the story of the
death of a thousand people in one moment and then their coming back to
life again by the invocation of their prophet is stated.

All of these are the effects of the Signs of *Allah:* granting the rank
of leadership to an unknown young shepherd who, in the meanwhile, was
wise and eligible; the victory of a small group against a large group of
armed enemies; the bravery of a young lad in that fight and endowing him
the position of prophethood by the Lord.

These events, mentioned in the Qur'an, are totally some indicative hints
to the truthfulness of the speech and Messengership of the Prophet of
Islam (S)*.* It says:

***"These are the Signs of Allah; We recite them to you (Muhammad) in
truth, and verily, you are (one) of the Messengers."***

Considering the contents of the previous verses, makes it clear that the
elements of victory lie in the following factors:

1) A capable worthy leader; 2) truthful followers; 3) trusting in
*Allah;* 4) patience and perseverance; and, 5) having a godly motive.

On the whole, the Qur'an recognizes the clash and struggle for power and
authority as an important factor in the development of the terrestrial
life which is supported by 22:40.

The struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest is a natural
factor in the development and the progress of the creation as a whole
but with the advent of Adam and the birth of the intellectual faculties
and the development of inspiration in man, the natural tendencies and
values gave place to the conventional moral and legal values instead of
fighting for food and the material necessities, man began to struggle
for right and wrong, what ought to be done and what ought not to. To
stop this struggle means deterioration and reversion to animal life.

Islam advocates the sublimation of the natural tendencies and the native
urge in the best conventional and the highly improved forms by decrying
the false values and the evil use of the faculties.

There should be competition and struggle: for such an attainment and
rank which takes one closer and nearer to *Allah.* Hence one should
always be prepared to fight against the evil in his own self which would
take him back to animal life; and to fight against the evil in the
society and the state in which he lives. He should compete with the
others in attaining whatever *is* good and godly.[^6]

Explanation
-----------

[^7] So, this is history and its various defects which can never be
glossed over or corrected. With this background, we should never compare
the historical events mentioned in the Qur'an, with the narrations of
the same events given in the books of history.

The Qur'an is a divine revelation, free from mistake and falsehood. How
can it be judged with the help of history, the history which nobody
believes to be free from lie and error?

Many historical events, as given in the Qur'an, like this very story of
Talut, differ from the reports in the Bible. But why should we worry?
The Bible is no better than other history books. The alterations,
suppressions, additions and omissions carried out in these books are too
well-known to need any description. The story of Samuel and Saul was
written in the Bible by an unknown hand.

The story of Talut in the Qur'an is the true words of *Allah.*

This much about history in general; now letâ€™s see what is the Qur'anâ€™s
main object in such narrations. The Qur'an is not a book of history, nor
does it describe an event with all its details as a book of history
purports to do.

The Qur'an is divine speech, poured into the mould of revelation, "With
it *Allah* guides him who follows His pleasure into the ways of safety."
That is why it does not narrate an event from the beginning to the end
with all its details. It only picks out a few such points of an event as
will be useful to the listener as a lesson, sermon and moral.

[^1]: Al-Mizan, vol. 4, p. 112 (English Version), by al-'Allamah
as-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn al- Tabataba'i

[^2]: Samuel 10: 9.10

[^3]: Judges 7: 1-6

[^4]: Adopted from the footnote of The Translation of the Holy Qur'an,
by S. W. Mir Ahmed Ali, p. 221

[^5]: 1. Samuel 17: 4-11

[^6]: See the Qur'an 2: 148 and 5: 148.

[^7]: Al-Mizan, commentary, vol. 4 p. 123 (English Version) by
al-'Allamah as-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn at-Tabatabaâ€™i


