Section 19, Surah Al-Baqarah, Chapter 2
=======================================

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 155-157
--------------------------------

*Note: Part 2 of the Qur'an begins from verse 142 in Surah Al-Baqarah,
and the commentary of its beginning verses were added to the previous
volume in order to give the exegesis of the verses concerning the theme
of Qiblah together. Now, this volume begins from verse no.155 added to
those verses of part 2.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوفْ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِّنَ
الأَمَوَالِ وَالأنفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَالُواْ إِنَّا لِلّهِ
وَإِنَّـا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَـئِكَ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ
وَأُولَـئِكَ هُمُ الْمُهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**155.** ***"And We will surely test you (all) with something of fear
and hunger and loss of property, lives and fruits; but give glad tidings
to the (steadfast) patient."***

**156*****. "Who, when a calamity befalls them, (by showing
perseverance), say: 'Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him
shall we return'."***

**157.** ***"Those are they on whom are blessings and Mercy from their
Lord, and they are the ones that are guided (aright)."***

### Trial, an Indisputable Divine Rule

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said: *"Even though Allah, the Glorious,
knows them more than they know themselves, yet He does so to let them
perform actions with which they earn reward or punishment."* [^1]

Concerning the sense of trial, in a sermon, he (as) also has remarked:

*"...Certainly, Allah tries His servants in respect of evil actions by
decreasing fruits, holding back blessings and closing treasures of good,
so that he who wishes to repent may repent, he who wishes to recall
(forgotten good) may recall, and he who wishes to abstain (from evil)
may abstain...."* [^2]

*Allah (s.w.t.)* tests all human beings, but with varieties. All the
different sites of the world are the testing-places, and all the members
of humanity, even the prophets, are under trial, and all the pleasant
and unpleasant things are the means of trial.

We ought to know that the Divine examinations are not done in order to
clear out the ambiguity, but they are to evoke and train the capacities
and abilities of humankind.

The means of this trial are all bitter and sweet happenings of Man,
including: fear, hunger, loss of property, lives, agricultural products,
fear from enemies, economic siege, and taking part in Holy War himself,
or by sending children and dear ones to the battle of war.

These trials were experienced in the first war of Islam (battle of
Badr), and will also come forth at the time of the reappearance of the
Expected Mahdi, the twelfth Imam (May *Allah* hasten his glad advent),
for which Muslims should be prepared.

The inflictions, which human beings encounter with, are usually
concerned with wealth, life, children, or the fear of the loss of either
of them.

The secret of mentioning 'fear', among the means of trials, first, may
be that the purpose is the fear for the lack of either of those three
things. It is always before the loss of the very things that one fears
of losing them.

Then, next to fear, hunger is pointed out, which comes into being as a
result of poverty. Yet, in this respect, fasting is counted one of the
examples of hunger.

Loss of property has been situated in the third degree. The loss of
wealth, of course, is very bitter, especially for a rich person when he
becomes poor. Then there comes the loss of life, which often occurs
because of different ailments or after being wounded: in a battle-field
and Holy War in the way of *Allah,* and so on.

And, finally, the loss of fruits comes forth. Some of the commentators
have rendered this loss into the death of one's child, which is the
heaviest calamity.

***"...but give glad tidings to the (steadfast) patient."***

It addresses the prophet of Islam (S) that he gives glad tidings to
those people who persevere with patience in their calamities and
difficulties.

Some commentators have said that this 'glad tidings' points to the
reward of Heaven and the merit of Divine forgiveness for them, as Imam
al-Sadiq (as) has said: *"Allah, Mighty and Glorious, said: '...but give
glad tidings to the (steadfast) patient', or, (that is), with Paradise
and forgiveness."* [^3]

But in another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (as) has rendered the concept of
'glad tidings' into the reappearance of Imam Al-Mahdi (as), where he
says:

*"Before the rise of Qa’im (Al-Mahdi) (May Allah hasten his auspicious
reappearance) there will appear some signs by which Allah tries the
Muslim believers."*

Muhammad-ibn-Muslim, (who was one of the special followers of the Imam),
said that he required to know what those signs were; and he (as)
answered: *"Those are the same that Allah, the Glorious, has expressed
in the Qur'an, thus:*

***'And We will surely test you (all) with something of fear and hunger
and loss of property, lives and fruits;'***

So far as he (as) recited: ***'...but give glad tidings to the
(steadfast) patient',*** and continued to say: *'This means to give glad
tidings to the believers who show patience and perseverance in these
calamities for the advent of the Qa’im (as), (viz., Hadrat Mahdi May
Allah (s.w.t.) hasten his glad advent.)**"*** [^4]

Yes, the world is anxiously awaiting the advent of this great reformer
(as). When he comes, he will fill the world full of justice. Then, there
will be no inequity, no cruelty, and no transgression. *Allah* will open
the doors of blessings out of the earth and heaven because of his
auspicious appearance. At that time, the believing people can continue
to live peacefully and easily under his esteemed government, to prove
their worship and servitude to *Allah.*

Concerning this meaning, in a tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) has said:
*"Al-Mahdi is mine. His luminous forehead is high and wide, while over
whose nose there is a little projection. He will fill the earth with
justice, just as it is filled up with aggression and cruelty."* [^5]

***"Who, when a calamity befalls them, (by showing perseverance), say:
'Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we return'."***

After recounting different calamities, and giving glad tidings to the
patient, it introduces this group of patient who, with this competency,
rightfully deserve to be given glad tidings, It is clear that every
ordinary person is not fit to be rewarded with all these excellences and
dignities.

Hence, that reward, i.e. the glad tidings, is specialized to the ones
whose patience originates from a firm foundation. This particular glad
tiding is qualified by a special blessing and Mercy from the side of
*Allah.* These kinds of people are those ones whose hearts turn to their
Lord at the moment of meeting with a calamity when, they say:

***'... Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we
return'."***

They treat such because they have realized, through knowledge of
certainty or by visual certainty, that whatever exists belongs to
*Allah* and is under His Will. So, whatsoever He has given to human-kind
in this world, such as: soul, property, children, and all other similar
respects, are fictitious.

They also know that whatever *Allah* has bestowed upon them has been
based upon His Wisdom, and when He takes it from them, it is not taken
because of miserliness, but it is for His good that He takes a blessing
from a person to mercifully impart a better one. They have found out
that their return, their destination, as well as the return of
everything, is undoubtedly unto Him.

However, he who, based on these foundations, knows and remembers that
his soul, wealth, and whatever he possesses belongs to *Allah* and is
under His Authority, surrenders to His divine decrees. The one, with
this awareness, will be patient and thankful properly and reasonably.
Such a person, of course, is one of those eligible believers for whom
*Allah* says:

***"Those are they on whom are blessings and Mercy from their
Lord...",*** and they are prosperous.

Some of the commentators have said that / salawat / (blessings and
peace), which comes from *Allah (s.w.t.),* is the same as '
forgiveness', while some others believe that it is 'praise'.

The term / salawat / (blessings) is said in the plural form because it
refers to the abundant mercy of *Allah.* It may mean that there are many
frequent blessings for these steadfast patient from *Allah* which do not
cease.

It is narrated from the Prophet (S) who said: *"The person who receives
a calamity and thereafter, whenever the one remembers it, utters the
phrase 'Verily we belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we
return', Allah gives the believer once again the reward of the day when
the one received that calamity". (Even though there has passed a long
time after that calamity).* [^6]

He (S) has also said in another tradition that, for such a person,
*Allah* will amend that calamity with a better quality than before and
his destiny will conclude well. [^7]

***"...and they are the ones that are guided (aright)."***

This group of the patient, as was mentioned in the above, when they
entangle with a calamity, are patiently steadfast, since they have known
that they themselves and what they have are all *Allah's* and in His
possession.

They also know that their return is unto Him, and they express this
fact, too, by their tongue and with uttering the above holy phrase. Such
people have attained the rank and position of nearness to *Allah.* Their
march is gain after gain, i.e. an ever progressive gain. They are, in
fact, guided aright.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 158
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَآئِرِ اللّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا
وَمَن تَطَوَّعَ خَيْرًا فَإِنَّ اللّهَ شَاكِرٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**158.** ***"Behold, Safa and Marwah are among the Symbols (appointed
by) Allah; so whoever makes the pilgrimage (Hajj) to the House, or
Performs 'Umrah, therefore it is no blame on him to go round them both.
And for whoever (obeys Him and) initiates good, then verily Allah is
Grateful, All-Knowing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Running between Safa and Marwah, is obligatory with the Shi'ah, the
followers of Ahlul-Bayt (as), and it is one of the main actions in both
greater pilgrimage (Hajj) and lesser pilgrimage ('Umrah).

But, at the beginning of Islam, those Muslims were not willing to
perform it because they had imagined that there had been something wrong
in it, for, at the Age of ignorance, there had been an idol in Safa
called: 'Usaf, and another in Marwah named: Na'ilah, which pagans used
to touch both while running therein.

So, this very verse was revealed to make the Muslims free from that
false imagination. This very meaning is cited in At-Tibyan fi
Tafsir-il-Qur'an, narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) and Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq (as) [^8] The idea is also cited with more details in
Majma'-ul-Bayan, narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (as). It begins thus:

*"Muslims had usually seen some signs of innovation from the pagans of
pre Islamic era of Ignorance, (so they disliked to circumambulate them).
Then, Allah sent this verse down (to remove that aversion)."* [^9]

The expansion of this description is thus that before the advent of
Islam and also at the time of revelation some pagans and
idol-worshippers used to go to Mecca to make Hajj pilgrimage with a
particular form which was common at that time.

Their fulfillment of Hajj pilgrimage was principally originated from
Prophet Ebrahim (Abraham) (as) but with a mixture of superstitions and
polytheism. Some of their ritual actions were: halt at 'Arafat,
sacrifice, circumambulation, and run between Safa and Marwah, which were
done in a special state.

Islam, clearing out that noble performance from superstitions, accepted
Hajj pilgrimage as a great worship and approved all of its correct and
pure ceremonies.

One of the deeds which was to be done then was / Sa'y /, i.e., running
between two hillocks called Safa and Marwah, over which the
aforementioned idols were kept and pagans touched them when climbing
those two hillocks.

Hence, Muslims were averse to going to these hillocks and thought that
in that circumstance it was not right for them to perform running
between Safa and Marwah.

Then, it was at the time of 'Umrat-ul-Ghada (in seventh AH.) that the
above verse was revealed and announced that Safa and Marwah are among
the Symbols of *Allah* and, although some ignorant people have polluted
them with idols, it is not right that Muslims abandon the obligatory
running between them.

### Acts Done Ignorantly

This verse, regarding the particular psychological condition that was
mentioned in the occasion of revelation, preliminarily informs Muslims
that Safa and Marwah are among the symbols of *Allah:*

***"Behold, Safa and Marwah are among the Symbols (appointed by)
Allah..."***

After this introductory sentence, it subsequently comes to the meaning
that:

***"...so, whoever makes the pilgrimage (Hajj) to the House, or Performs
'Umrah, therefore it is no blame on him to go round them both...."***

The wrong behaviour of pagans, that had polluted the symbols of *Allah*
with those idols, should never decrease anything of the importance of
those two sacred sites.

At the end of the verse, it says:

***"... And for whoever (obeys Him and) initiates good, then verily
Allah is Grateful, All-Knowing."***

Therefore, the Lord, by giving good rewards bountifully, thanks the
servants for their obedience and doing right actions; while He is
completely aware of their intentions and knows who is interested in the
idols and who is averse to them.

### Explanation

It may be worthy to say that the terms Safa and Marwah are referred to
in the Qur'an only once.  
 These two hillocks stand nearly 420 meters opposite each other. This
distance is now set up as a covered hall under whose ceiling the
pilgrims perform the running, / sa'y /. The height of Safa Mount is 15
meters, and that of Marwah is 8 meters.

These two terms, used now as proper names for those two hillocks, are
philologically meaningful, too. The term / safa / means a hard smooth
stone, while / marwah / means a hard rough stone.

The Qur'anic term / Sa'a'ir / is the plural form of / Sa'irah / which
means 'ritual sign'. Therefore, the phrase / Sa'a'irillah / means
anything which reminds a person of *Allah,* and revives a sacred
remembrance in one's mind which, itself, would be an act of virtue or
devotion to *Allah.*

The term / 'i'tamara /, derived from / 'umrah /, originally means the
additional parts that are added to a building in order to complete it.
This word, used in religious terminology, is applied for special deeds
added to the performances of Hajj Pilgrimage.

(When 'Umrah is done separate from Hajj pilgrimage, it is called /
'umrah mufradah /, a single 'Umrah). This minor pilgrimage to Mecca is
very much similar to Hajj pilgrimage in many aspects, but its difference
is not so minute, of course.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 159-160
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَالْهُدَى مِن بَعْدِ مَا بَيَّنَّاهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِي الْكِتَابِ
أُولَـئِكَ يَلعَنُهُمُ اللّهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّاعِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُواْ وَأَصْلَحُواْ وَبَيَّنُواْ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ
أَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَنَا التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**159.** ***"Verily, those who conceal what We have revealed of the
clear evidence and the guidance, after We made it clear for mankind in
the Book; they are those that Allah does curse them and (also) curse
them (all) those who curse (such ones)."***

**160*****."Except those who repent, and amend (themselves) and make
manifest (the truth). These it is unto whom I turn (mercifully; and I am
the Oft-Returning (to mercy), the Merciful (to people)."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Jalal-ud-Din Suyuty has narrated in his book, 'Asbab-un-Nuzul, from
Ibn-Abbas that several Muslim people, such as Ma'ath-ibn-Jabal,
Sa'd-ibn-Ma'ath, and Kharijat-ibn-Ziyd asked scholars of the Jews
several questions about some subjects in the Torah (which concerned the
advent of the Prophet (S)). They concealed the reality of the subject
and, (in their answers), did not refer to the main idea. The above verse
was revealed about them. [^10]

In the occasion of revelation it was mentioned that the addressees in
this verse were the scholars of the Jews, but the meaning is general and
never limits the concept of the verse to them only. It covers all
whosoever that conceal the truth.

This holy verse intensively blames such people, saying:

***"Verily, those who conceal what We have revealed of the clear
evidence and the guidance, after We made it clear for mankind in the
Book; they are those that Allah does curse them and (also) curse them
(all) those who curse (such ones)."***

By this verse, we realize that both *Allah* and the servants of *Allah*
and angels totally hate this action. In other words, concealing the fact
is an action that stimulates the wrath of all adherents of truth from
jinn, mankind, and angels.

What a treachery is greater than that the scholars, for the sake of
their personal interest, hide the Messages and evidences of *Allah,*
which are His deposits, and cause people to go astray.

The phrase: ***"after We made it clear for mankind in the Book;"***
indicates that such persons, in fact, attempt to spoil the struggles of
prophets and the devotions of the godly people alongside the path of the
propagation of the Messages of *Allah.* This action is really a great
sin so that none can ignore.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The Qur'an, as a book of guidance, never blocks up the way of return and
does not shut the windows of hope to people. It never makes people
despair for the Mercy of *Allah,* however much they are sinful. Hence,
in the next verse, it shows the way of repentance of this great sin,
thus:

***"Except those who repent, and amend (themselves) and make manifest
(the truth). These it is unto whom I turn (mercifully); and I am the
Oft-Returning (to mercy), the Merciful (to people)."***

The phrase: ***"and I am the Oft-Returning (to mercy), the Merciful (to
people),"*** regarding that it has occurred next to the phrase:
***"These it is unto whom I turn (mercifully)"*** refers to the
particular affection and kindness of *Allah* unto the repentant ones.

It says if they return, *Allah* will return, too. If they return to the
obedience and servitude, and reveal the fact, *Allah* will return to
Mercy and again shower over them the blessings He had ceased.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 161-163
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ أُولَئِكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لَعْنَةُ اللّهِ وَالْمَلآئِكَةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَ يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنظَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِلَـهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ لاَّ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الرَّحْمَنُ
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**161.** ***"Verily those who reject faith, and die while they are
infidels, upon them shall be the curse of Allah, (of) the angels, and
(of) mankind all together."***

**162.** ***"Abiding therein forever, the torment shall not be lightened
for them nor shall they be given respite."***

**163.** ***"And your God is One God. There is no god but He; He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful."***

It was described in the former verses that if the people who conceal the
fact repent and express the reality, they will be involved in the mercy
and grace of *Allah.* But in this verse they are warned that if they do
not repent and remain in the state of infidelity until they die, they
will be in the same situation that *Allah,* angels and all people curse
them.

Of course, the repentance that occurs before death is accepted, but the
repentance at the moment of death is not helpful.

At first, it says:

***"Verily those who reject faith, and die while they are infidels, upon
them shall be the curse of Allah, (of) the angels, and (of) mankind all
together."***

This group of infidels, similar to the aforementioned group, is involved
in the curse of *Allah,* angels, and people, too. The difference is that
this group, because of their continuous insistence on being faithless,
can not have a way to return to the right path.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then, it adds:

***"Abiding therein forever, the torment shall not be lightened for them
nor shall they be given respite."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Since the principle of the Faith in theism can put an end to all these
misfortunes, in the last verse of this group of verses, it says:

***"And your God is One God...."***

Again, to emphasize more, it says:

***"... There is no god but He..."***

Then, at the end of the verse, as the reason for that statement, it
adds:

***"...He is the Beneficent, the Merciful."***

Yes, only the One, Whose general mercy encompasses all creatures, on one
side, and on the other side, Whose specific Mercy reaches the true
believers, deserves servitude, and no one else.

[^1]: Nahjul-Balagha, Saying No.93

[^2]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 143

[^3]: Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 1, p. 169

[^4]: Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. l, p.197

[^5]: Tara'if, by Sayyid-ibn-Tawus, p. 177; & Sunan Abi-Dawud, vol. 4,
p. 152

[^6]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 142

[^7]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 2, p. 143

[^8]: Tibyan fi-Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 2, p.44

[^9]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 240

[^10]: Lubab-un-Nuqul fi 'Asbab-in-Nuzul, p. 22


