Preface
=======

One of the most brilliant, gifted and worthy sons of Islam of our age --
a great scholar, thinker, philosopher, jurisprudent, writer of great
erudition and penetration, the defender of the honour of Islam during
the deposed Pahlavi regime, and the best pupil and the outcome of the
entire life of Imam Khomeini (may his soul rest in peace) - Ayatollah
Shaikh Murtaza Mutahhari (who was martyred on May 1, 1979 by the
Terrorist Furqan group in Tehran) had said regarding the need of
publishing suitable Islamic literature as follows:

"We are the responsible people; we have not produced sufficient
literature in various aspects of Islam in current languages. Had we,
therefore, made available the pure and sweet waters in abundance, people
would not have contented themselves with polluted waters."[^1]

Keeping the above in mind, I have tried to translate the present book,
Discourse on Patience (Guftari dar bab-e-sabr) by Ayatollah Sayyid Ali
Khamene’i from Persian into English, as my insignificant contribution to
produce a tiny drop of pure and sweet water.

In order to defend the Islamic Community against the cultural onslaught
of the enemies of Islam, and in order to achieve political and cultural
unity for them, there is a critical need to design a coat of arms
prepared by suitable Islamic literature, so that Muslims can equip
themselves and their children with this armour of Islamic culture. As
the writer of this book Ayatollah Khamene’i has stated:

"An indifferent, unaware believer could be compared to a soldier in the
battlefield, who is fighting naked without wearing armour. Such an
ill-equipped soldier is most likely to be killed or disappear from the
scene during the very first encounter.

But an aware, conscientious, and knowledgeable Muslim with Islamic
ideology could be compared to a soldier, who is fully clad in armour
from head to foot and is fully equipped with all the required armaments.
Obviously, for the enemy to defeat such a well-equipped soldier is a
relatively difficult task."[^2]

The war between total belief and total blasphemy is going on fiercely on
all fronts namely; militarily, economically and culturally. The most
severe among the three is the cultural onslaught being waged by the
enemies. This cultural battle is most crucial, because once people are
deprived of their ideology and culture, then the enemy becomes
victorious without firing a single bullet and without waging a single
military operation.

The Islamic "Andalusia" (modern Spain), was snatched away from the
Muslims by using this tactic. We must wake up before history repeats
itself. The enemy has already intruded within the privacy of the four
walls of our dwellings. Even the so-called cartoon video films for
children and the paper wrappings inside chewing gum packages are not
immune, and intermingled with their satanic sexual onslaught, without
mentioning the other horrible means at their disposal.

We Muslims are quite well aware of the power and richness of our
ideology. Even our enemies are fully aware of its revolutionary dynamic
force. In a famous sermon in his book Path of Eloquence
(Nahj-ul-Balagha), the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) speaks
about this ideology as follows:

"Have you fully realised what Islam is? It is a religion founded on
truth. It is such a fountainhead of learning that from it flow out
several streams of wisdom and knowledge. It is such a lamp that from it
several lamps will be lighted. It is a tall beacon lighting the path to
Allah. It is a set of principles and beliefs which will satisfy every
seeker of truth and reality.

Know you all that Allah has made Islam the most sublime path towards His
Supreme Pleasure and the highest standard of His Worship and Obedience.
He has favoured it with noble precepts, exalted principles, undoubtable
arguments, unchallengeable supremacy and undeniable wisdom.

It is up to you to maintain the eminence and dignity granted to it by
the Lord, to follow it sincerely, to do justice to its articles of faith
and belief, to implicitly obey its tenets and orders, and to give it the
proper place in your lives."[^3]

Well, we have in our possession such a rich ideology, the Holy Qur'an,
the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (may the peace of Allah be upon him and
his progeny), but it is just a matter of its implementation in our daily
lives and its execution in Islamic countries. Sometimes it happens that
a society possesses theoretical knowledge and ingeniousness, but
nevertheless the circumstances are such that its practical application
is not possible.

Fortunately, with the victory of the Islamic Revolution on February 11,
1979 (Bahman 22, 1358), under the enlightened leadership of that divine
iron-willed man blessed with foresight, whose very name and whose very
word inspire the hearts of Muslims, the idol-breaker, the holder of the
highest esteem, the dearest of the sons of Islam and a rare, gifted
genius, Imam Ayatollah ul-Uzma Ruhullah al-Musavi Khomeini (may his soul
rest in peace), the task of the implementation of this ideology was
accomplished.

So far the Islamic Flag stating "There is no god but Allah" is flying
high over the skies of the Islamic Republic of Iran, it awakens the
giant one-billion-strong Islamic Community, pumping fresh blood into
their veins and arteries. The existence of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
in the present situation could be compared to the motor of an
automobile, which is currently providing the required energy for the
motion of the Islamic World.

In this regard, I would like to share with the readers the reflections
of Nouruddin Shireen, a Turkish writer whose interview was published
recently in the Turkish newspaper "ALAMDAR", upon his return from a
recent trip to the devastated, oppressed and aggressed Islamic country
of Bosnia-Herzegovina. He writes as follows:

"As far as helping Bosnia by other governments was concerned, there was
only one single government and that was the Islamic Republic of Iran. In
principle, it should be mentioned that the goal of Imam Khomeini and his
holy struggle was to free all Muslims and to accomplish freedom and
independence for the entire Islamic Community. He stood for the defence
of oppressed Muslims all over the world. Till the Islamic Republic of
Iran exists (Insha’Allah), the Muslims of the world will never remain
without defence and support.

Praise to Allah, that today one leader -with honour and dignity is
following the holy path of Imam Khomeini. May Allah prolong the shadow
of this leader upon the heads of Muslims of the world. The existence of
Ayatollah Khamene’i is a ray of hope and Messing for all Muslims
throughout the world. I witnessed this reality in Bosnia with my own
eyes. Every time I encountered the picture of Imam Khomeini at some
homes and shops, the intense emotion and love shown by the Bosnian
Muslim people for Imam was something comparable to children who have
been separated from their father."[^4]

Unfortunately, pains and tragedies have befallen the Islamic Community,
which if they had fallen on a bright day, would have turned it into a
dark night. There is Palestine, where, day and night we see how Zionist
soldiers are hunting bare-handed and helpless children, and how
insolently under the very eyes of television cameras are breaking their
bones inside the torture chambers in Zionist prisons. On February 25 of
this year, we saw the most cold-blooded butchering and wounding of
hundreds of innocent, fasting Muslims while in the state of prostration,
offering their Friday prayer during the holy month of Ramadhan, inside
the Shrine of Prophet Abraham (S) in the city of al-Khalil committed by
savage Zionists.

There is Islamic Algeria, where democracy was beheaded in broad daylight
while the whole civilised world watched. The land of Jame' al-Azhar or
Egypt, where, every day Muslims are being sentenced to death for just
being Muslims, and for demanding an Islamic Government.

There is also Bosnia, where the most savage and horrible systematic
genocide is being carried out for more than three years in so-called
civilised and modern Europe, showing the impotence of International
Organisations in this regard. Barbaric acts such as forcing a Muslim
Imam of a mosque to drink the blood of his son, the live burial of a
young man while his would-be bride watches, the chemical bombing of the
besieged city of Gorazde and the killing of thousands of its defenceless
Muslim defenders, and the numerous shameful deeds of raping women and
young girls, and crimes which were not committed by even the most
notorious of the Nazis in Germany.

The modern and civilised world cries for the rights of dogs, cats, fish,
bears, and other animals all over the world, but for crimes committed
against Muslims, there is no crying, no tears, and no rights are
considered to have been violated. Nevertheless, this present state of
the world awakens and tests Muslims. The sun of hope is slowly rising on
the Islamic World, and there is absolutely no doubt that if we could
become united and preserve our steadfastness, the future belongs to
Islam. We, in the Islamic Republic of Iran, sincerely aspire for unity
and our hearts bleed for all of our brothers and sisters as the Prophet
(may peace be upon him and his holy progeny) said:

"Truly the believers in their acts of co-operation and mutual aid are
like the head to the body; should it complain, the rest of the body
rallies to it in vigilant defence."[^5]

This philosophy had been elegantly described by the late Ayatollah
Sayyid Mahmoud Taleqani, in his sermon, on the occasion of first "Qods
Day" on August 17, 1979 (Ramadhan 23, 1399) in Tehran, as follows:

"All Muslims, wherever they may be, in their co-operative relationships
with each other, their acts of compassion toward each other are like the
head to a body when it feels pain and complains. Whenever a member of
the human body feels pain, its complaint is brought to the command
centres by means of the nerves, afterwards to reach the other members.
This afflicted member becomes like the head; all thought and attention,
one's eyes and ears, attend it until it is taken care of.

Why? Because if it is not taken care of, all the members will become
paralysed. The Muslims of the world must know that they are all members
of a single body; they must not suppose that by remaining indifferent to
the lot of other Muslims they can preserve themselves from the painful
calamities that are besetting them."[^6]

This translation coincides with the tragic news of the chemical bombing
of the besieged city of Gorazde in Bosnia-Herzagovina and the heroic
defence and resistance offered by its defenders, despite the unmanly
withdrawal of the so-called peace-keeping forces of the United Nations.

I dedicate this translation work to the lofty spirits of the Martyrs of
this besieged city. As far as the brave and heroic Muslim defenders of
Bosnia-Herzegovina and all oppressed Muslims throughout the Islamic
world are concerned, 1 give them the glad tidings that victory is near
(Insha’Allah), and 1 invite their attention to the following sermon of
the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (a.s.):

"When Allah witnessed their patience in resisting the tortures and
hardships, which were inflicted upon them, because of their love for Him
and following the path of truth. He opened over them gates of divine
assistance in the midst of those difficult bottlenecks of misfortunes.
The deprived of yesterday, after that found themselves as rulers and
governors. Their glory, fame, prestige, reached to a point, which had
never been imagined by them in their best of dreams."[^7]

Further, Allah has clearly reminded us that Islam is the greatest source
of power and it can do wonders, that the power of faith is far mightier
than that of the superpowers. There is a saying of Imam Khomeini: "It is
our duty to struggle in this fashion, and the result is with Allah". In
the words of the Holy Qur’an, Allah has promised us the result as
follows:

***Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work righteous
deeds, that He will, of a surety grant them in the land, inheritance (of
power), as He granted it to those before them; that He will establish in
authority their religion -- the one which He has chosen for them; and
that He will change (their state), after the fear in which they (lived),
to one of security and peace.***

***They will worship Me (alone) and not associate aught with Me. If any
do reject faith after this, they are rebellious and wicked. So establish
regular prayer and give regular charity; and obey the apostle; that ye
may receive mercy. Never think thou that the unbelievers are going to
frustrate (Allah's plan) on earth: their abode is the Fire, -- and it is
indeed an evil refuge! '*** (The Holy Qur'an , 24: 55-57).

I have tried to be loyal to the Persian text to the best of my ability.
The notes added by the translator have been indicated by (Tr.) and those
by the editor by (Ed.). I am sincerely indebted to Ayatollah Ibrahim
Amini, the learned scholar and jurisprudent from the Religious Learning
Centre of Qum for his kind guidance and encouragement. I offer my
sincere appreciation to Dr. Ali Naqi Baqershahi, for his encouragement
and providing the Biography of Ayatollah Khamene’i, Sayyid Ali Shahbaz
for Editing, and Hojjat-ul-Islam Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Hakim and Mrs.
Saddigheh (Debra Ann) Bush, for proof reading. I am also indebted to my
wife Fatima Razavi and children for being patient with me while
completing this work during the New Year vacation. Sincere thanks are
also due to Mr. Ansariyan for his encouragement for publishing this
book. Also, I wish to thank all of my friends at Iran Water and Power
Development Company who have contributed to the realisation of this
translation, especially Mr. Reza Hadadian, Mr. Asghar Mesmarian and Mr.
Ali Reza Nouri. I apologise to my readers for possible errors, and
omissions and welcome their suggestions and comments.

Sayyid Hussein Alamdar  
 April 13, 1994  
 1 Ziqadeh 1414  
 Tehran

[^1]: Islamic Movements in Twentieth Century by Ayatollah Motahhari.

[^2]: Discourse on Patience by Ayatollah Khamene’i.

[^3]: Sermon of Imam Ali (a.s.) Path of Eloquence (Nahj-ul-Balagha
Sermon No. 203).

[^4]: Islami P. 13 - Jan 29, 1994.

[^5]: Society and Economics in Islam by Ayatollah Taleqani.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Sermon of Imam Ali (a.s.) Path of Eloquence (Nahj-ul-Balagha
Sermon No. 234).


