Chapter1: Discourse on Patience
===============================

Patience is considered to be one of the best-known terms in Islam. In
Islamic literature, this phrase occurs with frequency in proportion to
different occasions and in various fields, with a tone of encouragement,
discussion of rewards, and praise and explanation about its importance.
It is therefore natural that Muslims become familiar with its meaning,
understand this special phrase, and try to breed this quality within
themselves to the best of their ability.

Unfortunately, alteration or tampering, which is a very common calamity
especially for Islamic phrases, has not left this term untouched, and it
could be said that up to a large extent its form, matter, and substance
have been completely metamorphosed.

Common Understanding of Patience
--------------------------------

Normally, patience is defined as tolerant of unpleasant circumstances.
This definition, the way it is to a larger extent is intermingled with
ambiguities, justifications, opposing statements, and conflicts. For an
oppressed and vacuous society steeped in corruption and decadence,
patience as defined above will become the biggest tool and pattern for
oppressors and corrupters for maintaining the status quo, by keeping the
society in a state of backwardness.

When poor and backward nations exposed to all kinds of problems and
misery, or oppressed masses crushed under brute oppression, or societies
faced with moral corruption, poverty and human suffering, or any
individual or group trapped in a cesspool of misfortune and calamities
are told to be patient, the first result will be the taking of that
bitter and fatal dose, i.e. to suffer with, and not to overthrow the
existing state of oppression.

Not only will they not mobilize themselves to overthrow the existing
undesirable state of oppression, but on the contrary, keeping in mind
the supposed rewards for remaining indifferent and naive they would feel
happy and content to the extent that they would regard such behaviour as
tantamount to accomplishment of a grand victory. It is obvious that the
prevalence of such a mentality in that society, up to a large extent,
will be to the advantage of the class of exploiters and oppressors, and
to the further detriment of the deprived and oppressed masses.

Unfortunately, this wrong interpretation together with its disastrous
results presently constitutes the sorry state of affairs in Islamic
societies. Any other interpretation for free and unprejudiced minds is
quite logical and acceptable. But for those accustomed to its false
interpretation, even serious endeavours and fruitful results. When
detailed studies of verses of the Holy Qur’an and narrations (hadith)
about patience are conducted, grief and surprise for this deviation
becomes relatively intense.

Overall Views About Patience
----------------------------

If the meanings of patience are interpreted in the light of the clear,
explicit, and definite verses of the Holy Qur’an as well as in
accordance with the authentic traditions reported from the infallible
Imams (may peace be upon them), then the result derived would be
completely opposite to the current common understanding of the term.

The above interpretation transforms patience into a lever capable of
removing with ease, the heaviest obstacles and solving the biggest
problems with one hundred percent positive results. Thus, for an
unfortunate society, patience is the key to prosperity and blessings,
while on the other hand it will be a strong obstacle to be reckoned with
for troublemakers and mischief mongers.

In order to appreciate exactly the true meanings of patience and its
relevant fields, the best methodology is to resort to the Holy Qur’an
and authentic traditions. A thorough investigation would enable us to
reach a clear and decisive judgement. More than seventy verses of the
Holy Qur’an, deal with patience, glorifying the term and praising those
who possess this virtue. The Holy Qur’an describes in detail possess
this virtue. The Holy Qur’an describes in detail the relevant results
derived, and the circumstances where one could count on this
characteristic.

For the present discussion, we will not resort to the verses of the Holy
Qur’an regarding patience, rather it will suffice our discussion to
review the authentic traditions, and accordingly, derive inferences and
conclusions because of the following reasons.

Firstly, precise and detailed interpretation of the verses of the Holy
Qur’an regarding patience would mean a wide discussion, which requires a
lot of patience, energy and time.[^1]

Secondly, to try to compensate for the negligence shown towards the
traditions which were narrated by the infallible Imams (may peace be
upon them), our discussion will be based on traditions. The absence of
the use of traditions is clearly felt in current Islamic research and
currently published Islamic literature.

Summary of the Meanings of Patience
-----------------------------------

On the basis of traditions, patience is defined as the resistance shown
by man on the road towards perfection against mischief, corruption and
degradation. Which can be compared to the example of a mountaineer who,
in order to reach the peak, has to face internal as well as external
obstacles or barriers.

The internal obstacles are within his inner self, while the external
ones are outside beyond his control. Each of them in their own ways
interfere with his climbing efforts. Internal obstacles such as the love
for comfort, as well as fear, despair, and different types of similar
passions, try to stop him while the feeling of indecisiveness in many
forms tries to kill his determination for climbing. On the other hand,
external barriers such as stones, rocks, wolves, thieves, and thorns
etc. retard his progress.

Someone who is faced with these kinds of barriers will have the options
to either drop his journey on this road which is full of dangers and
hardships, or to go ahead by offering resistance against them and
overcoming each barrier with his power of determination. The second case
is defined as patience.

During his limited span of life in this world, the human being between
his birth and death is a traveller on the road towards the final
destination. He has been fundamentally created to endeavour as much as
possible to bring himself close to the final destination. All the duties
and responsibilities which have been assigned to man's shoulders are the
necessary means and ways to bring him closer to that target. The primary
aim of the divine religions and the great prophets was to build an
Islamic society providing a suitable field in which human beings could
travel, ultimately reaching their desired goal.

In a nutshell, that aim could be defined as the striving for perfection
and exaltation of human beings. In other words, it is the opening of the
fountainheads of talents of his inner self. His acquiring of superior
and noble characteristics overrides animalistic characteristics or lower
qualities.

Of course, this path is a difficult one full of troubles and plenty of
barriers. Each of these barriers alone is sufficient to deter the
climber from continuing his journey towards the peak of perfection and
exaltedness. The inner negative forces (inside the climber) of unweighed
evil passions, coupled with the external forces such as the troublesome
state of affairs of the real world, produce a series of obstacles of
thorns, rocks, etc., in his path.

Patience means to be able to stand up against all those obstacles and to
conquer them with determination and enthusiasm. Therefore, as was
mentioned earlier, all Islamic duties whether individual or collective
(social) are means and steps needed to approach that goal of perfection.

For a person on a journey towards a distant City travelling through the
deserts, the passing of each habitation that lies in his path means that
his journey is progressing or, he is getting closer to his final
destination. Of course these intermediate aims or targets themselves are
preliminaries of the path towards reaching the real and final
destination. Therefore each step taken, although a means for
accomplishing the ultimate aim, is nevertheless in itself a
multidimensional accomplishment and may be regarded as something closer
to the final objective.

The summary of this discussion is that to reach each of these goals and
destinations, the basic condition is the possession of patience and the
ability to utilise this sharp and decisive weapon. Just as the road
towards the accomplishment of the ultimate goal of perfection is full of
obstacles, similarly the paths of Muslims fulfilling their Islamic
duties and responsibilities are also full of these obstacles. These
paths are a means for reaching the final destination.

There are infinite internal and external obstacles scattered on these
roads. On one hand, the depressing internal feelings of laziness,
indifference, selfishness, self-praise, pride, greed, and improper
sexual desires, as well as other various harmful desires of comfort,
wealth, fame, etc., haunt the traveller. While on the other hand,
unfavourable conditions, interruptions, and situations forced or
superimposed onto people because of the social set up of ruling regimes
confront him.

Each one of the above in a way, discourages him from carrying out his
constructive duties, which either could be individual duties such as
offering prayers, or other social obligations like his efforts for the
proclamation of truth. The thing which would enable and guarantee the
dischargement of each duty, the undertaking of each step, the proceeding
on each road, and the accomplishing of each result, is the resistance
offered by man against obstacles. Thus the power which enables him to
proceed through these barriers, is defined as patience.

[^1]: A point in contrast to those who have totally disregarded the Holy
Qur'an for understanding the principles and branches of Islam, and
depend upon traditions, however weak, as the only source of religion


