Chapter 2: Importance of Patience in the Light of Traditions
============================================================

According to a few traditions selected from a collection of traditions
describing the importance of patience in Islam and other divine
religions, it may be summarised that patience has been recommended by
all the divine prophets and righteous leaders to their successors and
followers.

Let us consider the example of a kind father or a compassionate teacher
who has spent a life full of efforts and resistance, and suffered pains,
tortures, and deprivations for the sake of his goals. At the last
moments of his life, all the struggles which provided the purpose and
direction to his life are now nearing an end, and his goals are still
cherished. What will be his last advice for his successors, who in his
opinion will follow his struggle and will keep the movement alive by
taking other giant steps to carry this heavy load closer to the final
destination?

It will be nothing other than the extraction and summary of all the
theoretical and practical experiences and possessions acquired by him in
his life span. All those things which must be said in his last moments,
if he could manage to put them into one sentence, will be like a capsule
consisting all the precious accomplishments and practical know-how
acquired by him in the form of guidelines designed for a trainee. He
will hand this over to his successor and follower, which in reality
means transformation of the final designation of his life to the person
after him. This mission being accomplished, he leaves this world after
making due preparations.

The last parting recommendations of the prophets, the pious, the
righteous, the martyrs and the strugglers in the way of Allah for their
followers and the builders of the divine society, is to be patient.
Their last advice is their recommendation regarding patience.

Now let us pay our attention to the following two traditions:

First Narration
---------------

Abu Hamza Thomali, one of the famous and sincere followers of the
Prophet's Ahl-ul-Bait and a principal member of the righteous Shi'ite
movement quotes from his leader and teacher, Imam Muhammad AI-Baqer
(a.s.), as saying: "When the last moments of his life arrived, my father
Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) held me close to his chest and said: My son I,
recommend to you what my father (Imam Husayn) recommended to me at the
last Moments of his life. My son stand for truth even if it is
bitter".[^1]

Imam Muhammad Baqer (a.s.) is the vicegerent and successor of his father
Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abedin and is the inheritor of the heavy burden
of trust, and is responsible for the continuation of the struggle and
movement of his father, exactly in the same manner that Imam Ali ibn
al-Husayn (a.s.) was responsible for the continuation of the movement
left by his father Imam Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.), the martyr of Karbala.

Each personality from the household of the holy Prophet was responsible
for the continuation of the divine mission of his predecessor, and all
of them collectively were upholders of the divine mission of the last
Prophet of Allah. All of them are created from a single source of energy
(light) and are the seekers of one direction and one aim.

"My son I recommend to you what my father recommended me at the last
moment of his life..."

We all know how and where the last moments of the life of Imam Husayn
ibn Ali (a.s.) were spent. He was in the midst of turmoil on the day of
'Ashura' (10th of Moharram 61 Hijri -- 680 AD.). Pains, torture and
tragedy dominated the bloody state of affairs in the plain of Karbala.
In spite of the fact that he was completely encircled by his
bloodthirsty enemies, Imam Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) took advantage of a
short opportunity to go back to his camp before starting his final
attack. After having a brief meeting with the members of his household
who in their own ways were carriers of his mission, he held a short but
sufficient, effective and very important discussion with his vicegerent
and successor Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.).

These kinds of discussions in simple language may be called farewell
meetings. But it must be understood that a pious leader (Imam) is far
above sentimental passions, and that during the last opportunity of his
life, he would only open his lips for personal, private, and sentimental
affairs, instead of discussing the most important issues of his mission.
Whatever reports which remains regarding the other great pious leaders
(Imams) that has reached us, certifies the same thing.[^2]

He knew at that sensitive moment that the heavy burden of the trust for
which he had struggled for since the beginning of his leadership had
also been endured by the founder of the revolution, the holy Prophet
(S), the Commander of Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), and Imam Hassan (a.s.).
All of them had suffered all kinds of pains and were subjected to severe
hardships for following that path. The trust would now be handed over to
the next person. The powerful arms and steadfast steps of his
vice-regent would be assigned the responsibility to carry that burden of
trust forward. Therefore he had come to advise him about the most
important issues of his mission. What was this important and cherished
advice?

Now Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) who found himself more or less under
conditions similar to his father's time, explained the key issues to his
son and vice-regent, and offered recommendations accordingly. He also
emphasised that earlier, his father Imam Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.) had been
similarly instructed by his father Imam Ali (a.s.):

"What his father recommended..."

This advice has continuously been emphasised since it was first given by
the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) to the next Imam-designate
and onward through all the successive Imams by their proceeding Imams.
What was that recommendation?

The outcome and summation of that advice was „patience".

"My son stand for truth even if it is bitter."

My son! Stand for the truth and be patient, even if it is bitter and
inconvenient. Or in other words, on the road of truth one should never
give up, and should never be frustrated by obstacles. Once you know and
recognise the path of truth, you must support it all the way. All
hardships, bitterness, failures, and inconveniences should be borne
patiently to continue the journey forward. It is obvious that the
confrontation of truth and falsehood is full of hardship, bitterness,
and inconvenience and one should not expect this path to be like a bed
of roses. All these inconveniences and hardships should be resisted with
patience for the sake of truth.

This was the last will of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.)
given to Imam Hassan (a.s.), and subsequently it was given to all the
successive Imams by their predecessors. Also, we have witnessed that the
Commander of the Faithful himself, and all of the righteous Imams after
him, had actually followed that will. All of them, till the last moment
of their lives defended truth accepting all the consequences, even at
the cost of their lives (martyrdom). Their lives in practising patience
for the pleasure of Allah, were indeed manifestations of the following
Arabic couplet:

"I practised "patience" in my life to the highest level, whereby even
"patience" itself bears witness that in tolerating things even more
bitter than "patience", I remained steadfast and patient."

Therefore, for the importance of patience it is found, that all the
infallible Imams from the Prophet's Ahl-ul-Bait (a.s.) have enjoined
this priceless jewel and noble inheritance in their wills for their
successors, at the very last moment of their lives.

Second Narration
----------------

"From Fiqh al-Ridha’ (a.s.) We narrate of the wills of the prophets,
peace be upon them. Be patient for truth, even if it is bitter."[^3]

Fiqh al-Ridha’ is a famous book of jurisprudence attributed to the
eighth Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha’ (a.s.), a portion of which deals with
the legal affairs in Islam. In other words these issues may be termed as
jurisprudence. This term partly deals with the interpretation of the
Holy Qur’an, and traditions but the major portion of the book covers the
ways and means and overall issues related to Islamic learning. It is
this second part which constitutes the complete and comprehensive
portion of the term of jurisprudence. The above mentioned book contains
the following meaningful narration[^4] which could be interpreted and
expounded as follows:

We narrate this important narration, which is the inheritance and memory
of our noble family left by our fathers and their ancestors, who left
this last will for us, and in turn we willed it to our successors:

The will of all the divine prophets for their vice-regents, inheritors,
trustees, flag carriers of divine movements, and students of the divine
school of thought was:

"Stand for the truth and be patient, even if it is bitter and
inconvenient."

This is exactly the same sentence spoken by the Commander of Faithful,
without the least Variation. Perhaps, this short, but meaningful
sentence left by the prophets and their vicegerents, could be the best
example for showing the importance of patience. Therefore, on the basis
of the above two narrations, we may define patience, as the will
enjoined by the divine prophets and Imams on their inheritors and
disciples. It is quite explicit that this Islamic characteristic has so
much weight, importance, and influence, in the complex structure of the
divine religion of Islam that all the prophets had included it in their
Testaments.

[^1]: al-Kafi vol. 2

[^2]: Among the books of traditions, we may observe the wills of the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Hassan (a.s.), Imam
Sadiq (a.s.), and other leaders, which proves the seine point

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar

[^4]: Late Muhaddis Nouri, who was a most exalted and learned scholar of
his time in his book "Mustadrek al-Wasail" had presented numerous
logical convincing arguments, testifying the authenticity of the above
issues. Nouri's work is very interesting for the learned scholars in the
field of traditions


