Chapter 3: Patience in Islamic Codices
======================================

Faith may be defined as something which consists of ethics, legal
rights, and public instructions (learning). The same is the case for any
other constructive social school or organisation. We may therefore
classify faith into the following:

(I) The basis for understanding of man and the world. This is known as
world-view.

(II) On the basis of these principles, the overall direction for the
movement and human action (ideology).

(III) Within these boundaries, guidelines or regulations for
relationship of man with Allah, with self, with fellow human beings, and
with other creatures.

(IV) A series of moral guidelines for maintaining the required necessary
momentum or endeavour for achieving perfection or exaltedness, and
accomplishing success in various fields of life.

Of course, this vast complex, includes personal matters related to the
personal interests of individuals, as well as social matters pertaining
to various large groups of humanity, and affairs concerning these groups
and the Islamic community (Ummah). Let us see in the above complex of
faith, what is the influence and roll played by patience. In other
words, a person committed to religion will act as follows:

(I) He must believe in religious principles.

(II) He must obey the religious regulations.

(III) He must be familiar with the special clauses dealing with ethics.

If one fulfils all the above three, in his conduct, one could rightly be
called a true believer. We will now examine the role played by patience
in the life of a believer in following religion in the true sense.

In a geometrical figure which consists of lines and angles, each point,
arc and semi-circle creates a special effect. Let us see what influence
and role is played by patience in the geometrical figure representing
the faith of a true believer. Let us consider the example of an
automobile which is supposed to move someone together with his household
belongings to a certain location. After passing through various streets,
this automobile finally reaches the desired final destination.

What is responsible for moving this automobile? Is it the engine? What
thing is responsible for providing this strength or power to the engine?
Of course, it is the petrol. Therefore in the life of a believer,
patience may be compared to the engine or the petrol which gives life
and strength to that engine.

Without patience, the truth and steadfast logic of the exalted school of
religion would not have been understood. The divine learning
(revelations) of this school which blessed humanity would have lost its
colour with the passage of time. The ultimate hope of victory of truth
over falsehood, which provides fresh life-giving blood for powerful
hands and steadfast steps of believers, would have been silenced. And
the laws and guidelines of religion which control and check the human
tendencies of transgression would have become inactive.

The heroic field of valour and martyrdom for the sake of Allah and
religion would have been converted into a graveyards of ideologies. The
international congress of Hajj would have remained empty. The humming,
sensational and confidential communications of the burning lovers
(believers) in the middle of night, with the Beloved (Allah) would have
been silenced, the beautiful scene of "Jihad-e-Akbar" with the self
("great self-struggle"), namely fasting and self-restriction would have
lost its charms. The arteries of the economy of the Islamic state would
have dried up, and charity and alms-giving for the pleasure of Allah
would have been ignored.

Without patience all the higher educational and ethical values of Islam
(piety, trust, and righteousness) would have been forgotten; and in
essence, each parameter of religion which requires action and efforts,
would have remained deprived of them. Because religion requires
practice, which is not possible without patience. Therefore what
provides life-giving fresh blood to this giant complex, or what provides
motion to this train is nothing else but patience. With the above
discussion, the substance and meaning of this divine inspiration could
be clearly understood.

According to some documented narrations related to the infallible Imams,
the importance of patience has been defined as follows:

"Patience out of faith is like a head to a body."

The head of a person holds the most critical importance as far as life
is concerned. One may tolerate the absence of different parts in the
human body such as hands, feet, eyes, ears etc. But if the head which is
the controlling room for the whole nervous system, does not exist or is
crippled, then all the parts and systems of the body will become
crippled. The body may remain alive, but in reality it will not be
different than a dead body.

Sometimes, it may be that a part of the body may perform an outstanding
task. May be the fist, a powerful hand, fingers, or the eyes of a person
might conduct excellent performance in discharging many duties, but all
that is accomplished is because of the presence of the head. Patience
holds similar importance in the structure of religion.

Without patience the existence of Monotheism (Tawheed) will not be
possible either. The prophethood and the prophetic mission would not
have produced any fruits. The rights of the deprived people could not
have been obtained from the tyrants. Prayers, fasting, and other rituals
would also have been meaningless.

Therefore it is patience which fulfils all the aspirations of religion
and humanity. If at the very beginning of Islam, if the Prophet (S)
would have not offered resistance against all that severe opposition,
for the sake of truth, of course, the slogan "there is no god but Allah”
would have been suffocated within the boundary walls of his home, at its
very inception.

What kept Islam alive and intact was patience. If the pious people of
Allah and great divine prophets would have not been patient against
opposition and obstacles in their path, today there would have not been
left any trace and influence of monotheism. The single factor
responsible for keeping alive the system of monotheism, since the very
beginning of human creation has been patience. Which has been the flag
carrier for this heavenly ideology till today, and will continue to do
the same till the last day of judgement.

The most logical ideas and sayings of human beings, if not accompanied
by the patience practised by their founders, would have dried off in
their throats and tongues. They would have disappeared in the turbulent
waves of the ocean of history forever. It is therefore quite clear that
patience holds the similar relationship with the religious body, as the
position of head relative to a human body. The Commander of Faithful in
his sermon "Qaseah" explains the victory of the deprived of history over
the tyrants and success of their noble ideas as follows:

"When Allah witnessed their patience in resisting the tortures and
hardships, which were inflicted upon them, because of their love for him
and following the path Of truth, he opened over them gates of divine
assistance in the midst of those difficult bottlenecks of misfortunes.
The deprived of yesterday[^1] after they find themselves as rulers and
governors. Their glory, fame, prestige, reached to a point, which had
never been imagined in their best of dreams."[^2]

And, this is a Tradition of history, which will never be changed till
the very end, as the laws of Allah are constant, irrespective Of time.
Therefore after the above detailed explanation one could describe in a
nutshell the position of patience in the complex of Islam as follows:

Patience is responsible for the fulfilment of all the aspirations, and
all the short term and long term goals whether individual or social.

[^1]: The present book is based on the lectures of Ayatollah Khamene’i
at a Mashhad Mosque 20 years ago as mentioned in the introduction. Now,
in retrospect, the best manifestation of the above sermon of the
Commander of the Faithful could be, the victory of the Islamic
Revolution on February 11th, 1979. In an article a few years ago written
by Dr. Hassan Ghafourifard, the then Head of the Physical Education
Organisation in a Sports Magazine, it was mentioned that Ayatollah
Khamene’i was confined in Iranshahr (Sistan and Baluchestan Province), a
town with the worst climatic conditions in the south-east of Iran,
before the victory of Islamic Revolution. Today, by the Grace of Allah
he is the Leader of the Muslims. The honour and fame awarded to him and
to all other leaders, now who were imprisoned under the Pahlavi regime
is a clear manifestation of the above sermon. (Tr.)

[^2]: Nahj-ul-Balagha Sermon No. 234


