Chapter 4: The Fields of Patience
=================================

As explained in the earlier chapters of this book, one may define
patience as resistance offered by man on the road towards perfection
against the forces of mischief, corruption and degradation. Now let us
recognise the fields of patience, where its practice is most crucial. Of
course, we would like to examine the domain of patience, in accordance
with the texts of Islamic narrations and the Holy Qur’an, where,
practicing patience has been promised with plenty of rewards in this
world as well as in the Hereafter.

There is no doubt, that an ignorant soldier or a mercenary fighting in
the battlefield against the bearers of glad tidings of truth and justice
(soldiers of Islam), and even losing his life for the sake of the orders
issued by his master; or a tyrant, hoarder of wealth, and holder of an
important position, standing against truth for the sake of power,
wealth, and position; or various sections or special groups offering
resistance for the sake of their vested interests or other reasons, are
in fact not practising patience for the sake of human ideals but
opposing the truth.

On the surface all these cases show practising of patience. But this is
quite opposite than patience practised by pious individuals on the road
of perfection for the pleasure of Allah. Of course, as far as the
lexical meaning of the term "patience" is concerned both share it
equally.

But in all such situations, patience has not been practised for
accomplishing human perfection and ideals, rather for their suppression.
Here the resistance was not offered against the forces of mischief,
corruption and degradation, but instead it was offered to destroy the
shining manifestations of human perfection. Therefore, this domain of
patience is not the domain as defined in the traditions and the Holy
Qur’an.

It could therefore be concluded that patience may be defined as a means
of achieving perfection, excellence, and exaltedness, where man
endeavours and makes sincere efforts for the ultimate goal of creation,
to become a real servant of Allah. His personality ultimately becomes
manifestation of all the hidden Potential of human talents and
characteristics. In other words achieving the status of a perfect human
being (Insan-e-Kamil).

At this stage all the internal and external obstacles (explained in
detail earlier), which complement each other, and in any case are the
manifestations of Satanic tactics, are resisted by him, on his forward
journey. On this road, all kinds of dangers, headaches and obstacles
await the traveller. The opposition provided by them varies in
proportion to the traveller's location, movement, and duties. Sometimes
for discharging a duty one is confronted with a direct obstacle, while
at other times one is confronted with an indirect barrier in his path.

For a mountain climber, trying to scale the highest peaks, confrontation
with rocks, thorns, thieves and wolves, all are tantamount to a negative
force interfering with his ascent. But sometimes a beautiful scene, a
comfortable soft bed, and a shaky companion are also negative forces of
another sort, which force the climber to terminate his ascent. Still, at
other times it could be his own sickness, or he has to take care of some
sick companions, or might be confronted with some other mishap, which
ultimately forces him to terminate his expedition. This last case may be
regarded as an indirect obstacle in his path.

The above analogy of mountain climbing is also true for the journey of
man on the road of perfection. He is confronted with three kinds of
obstacles in this journey. If the compulsory duties and obligations of
religion may be considered as the instruments and steps required for
forward march on the road of perfection, the forbidden acts of religion
may be regarded as diversion from the straight path. And if the
unforeseen bitter happenings of life at the time of restlessness and
instability are considered responsible for slowing down and ultimately
cutting short his journey, then the obstacles and opposing motives could
also divided into the following three categories:

(I) Desires and passions which are responsible for negligence of
compulsory religious obligations.

(II) Desires and tendencies which encourage man to indulge in forbidden
sinful acts.

(III) Unforeseen, unhappy happenings which result in breaking his
courage and steadfastness.

Patience means resistance against all three types of barriers, and
providing moral courage and necessary momentum for the traveller to
continue his forward journey on the road of perfection. It offers
resistance against those desires and tendencies which discourage man
from performing compulsory obligations, resists the desires for
indulging in sinful forbidden acts, and provides zeal and strength to be
able to tolerate the unforeseen and unhappy occurrences, which threaten
to break his determination.

With the above explanation one may appreciate the context of this
important narration from the holy Prophet (S) as related by the
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), as follows:

"The Prophet of Allah had said: Patience is of three kinds -- Patience
in tragedies and unpleasant events, patience in performance of
compulsory obligations, and patience against sin".

On all the above mentioned occasions, like occurrence of a tragic
unfortunate happening resulting in loss of life or wealth or both, a
situation requiring performance of compulsory obligations, and an
alluring sinful pleasure tempting him to indulge in a forbidden act; a
type of patience is required where the human being could manifest or
display the most superior heroic potential of his hidden exalted
qualities. In order that the complete understanding of these Islamic
specialities related to the three types of patience could be made
explicitly clear, we will discuss all of them in detail.

Patience in Performance of Obligations (Obedience)
--------------------------------------------------

All duties and compulsory obligations are accompanied with some
headaches and inconveniences, or in other words, they demand some amount
of efforts and involvements (positive or negative), which are at odd
with the easy going and comfort loving nature of human beings. Starting
from the personal compulsory religious obligations such as prayers and
fasting till the financial obligations such as"Khums"[^1] and
"Zakat"[^2] and collective social obligations such as Hajj, the
separation from family and loved ones, sacrificing all the comforts and
pleasures of life, and sometimes self-sacrifice itself becomes
necessary. Of course, all this does not match with the easy going and
comfort loving nature of man. This holds true for all the laws of the
world whether heavenly or man-made, be they right or wrong.

Although in principle the law itself has been a necessity and for the
same reason it is accepted by mankind, but generally nowhere, it has
ever been accepted as something convenient, desirable and sweet by man.
The same holds true for the most common international laws and
regulations, whose benefits and advantages are explicitly clear for
everybody, and their violation will result in serious consequences such
as is the case with traffic laws.

Passing through a red light results in most horrible accidents sometimes
leading to loss of lives. Although everyone is clearly aware about the
consequences of traffic law violations, but in spite of the above it is
very common that while awaiting behind a red light, the inner human
nature is not comfortable and feels inconvenient. Similar is the case
for not being able to drive through a short cut route because of a
traffic sign, again one feels uncomfortable.

Although the compulsory religious obligations are based upon the
inherent human nature, and without exception to meet its genuine
demands, are in reality means and instruments to lead human beings
towards perfection and exaltation, but in spite of that it must be said
that in practice it requires efforts and difficulties of some sort. For
example, in order to perform the compulsory daily prayers one has to
spend some time, must clean his hands and face before prayers, and has
to meet other preliminary requirements regarding the dress and place in
accordance with the religious guidelines. It is obvious that all of the
above are in conflict with the easy going human nature.

During performance of daily prayers, to control thoughts and to achieve
the peace of heart and mind strictly for prayers, instead of getting
preoccupied in worldly affairs other than Allah, is very important. In
order for the prayers to be meaningful, and to be accepted by Allah, it
is very important that the gates which allow all external ideas should
be thoroughly closed during prayers.[^3]

Of course achieving the above state of mind and heart requires lots of
energy and efforts and is a difficult task.

Or fasting, which requires toleration of hunger and thirst for long
periods. To resist and struggle against the appetite for eating and
drinking, to restrain the eyes from looking at forbidden things of
beauty and to resist sexual passions are difficult tasks requiring
tremendous amount of resistance. In spite of possessing appetising food
and drinks, to be able to impose voluntary self-restrictions, to spend a
long hot summer day with empty stomach and dry lips of course, requires
a lot of will power and strong determination.

Or Hajj for instance, which requires tolerating the inconvenience and
hardships of a long distance journey, separation from home and
relatives, and joining groups of unknown companions, and spending money
and precious time. If Hajj is done only for the sake of pleasure of
Allah, without any motives of leisure and profit-making, it will also
require patience and self-sacrifice.

The obligations regarding encouraging whatever is good (Amr bil Ma'roof)
and prohibiting whatever is forbidden (Nahi anil Munkar), as well as
Jihad (Striving for truth), requires a lot of hardship, sacrifice,
tolerant and patience.

Proclamation of truth in front of the forces of falsehood and Corruption
is the most dangerous, unpleasant and bitter act, which is like standing
against a tyrant whose unsheathed sword is ready to fall on the
proclaimer's head. Or facing the enemies, who are like savage beasts,
the glint of whose electrifying eyes and swords stun the heart and soul
of superficial observers. Or, to be able to offer resistance against the
waves of corruption and diversion of a nation, a class, or mankind as a
whole, is the hardest, dangerous and menacing task.

Similar is the case with other Islamic obligations, which are
accompanied with headaches, hardships and inconveniences, but at the
same time without exception, all of them are the most beneficial, and
essential means and guarantees of salvation and prosperity for mankind.
Of course, for those who have recognised the straight path and have
tasted the sweetness of walking on the difficult road for the pleasure
of Allah, and the sacred and exalted aims of humanity, all the above
difficulties are desirable and tolerable.

The same prayer for men of Allah, who have tasted the sweetness of
fervent prayer and remembrance of Allah is something sweeter than honey.
The Prophet of Islam (S) at the time of prayers was so eager and
restless that he used to tell "Bilal"[^4]

"Oh! Bilal please recite the call for prayer (Adhan) and make my heart
and soul peaceful".

The same struggle for the sake of Allah "Jihad fi sabil lillah" for the
self-indulgent people without any insight for ultimate consequences is
extremely harsh and undesirable, but for someone with a good spiritual
insight and power like Imam Ali (a.s.), is sweeter than honey. For him,
all inconveniences and hardships in this struggle result in
strengthening his power of resistance and steadfastness. He himself
describes about his astonishing state of morale in a sermon
"Nahj-ul-Balagha" as follows:

"Together with the holy Prophet (S) we fought our own fathers, sons,
brothers, and uncles, (but all these unpleasant events had the least
influence upon us), except that these increased our faith to surrender
ourselves completely to Allah and made the hard things tolerable for
us."

But in general these difficulties and hardships exist for the common
people with weaker spiritual insight, and for those who are not
possessed with the required determination and will power, are bitter and
undesirable.

Now, what should be done regarding these difficulties which exist in
dischargement of religious obligations? Since offering of dally
compulsory prayers is difficult, presence of heart during prayers and
chaining the roaming and wondering thoughts are even harder. Since
Fasting, Jihad, Hajj, charity, encouraging good and forbidding evil and
other social obligations require pains and inconveniences, then all
these should be declared as void. Therefore, we should be allowed to
live according to the desires of our heart which is full of passions and
a spirit which loves ease and comforts of life.

It is here that Islam tells us No! Instead patience must be practised.
Patience in obedience must be practised against those passions which
lure the heart away from the prayer carpet, mosque and altar, by getting
it preoccupied with hundreds of kinds of amusements, and in turn make
prayers spiritless and meaningless. Patience must be practised against
these kinds of desires and prayers should be offered completely with
presence, of heart and concentration, so that they are accepted by Allah
and are fruitful for us. Patience must be offered against those
extremist tendencies which tempt us to enjoy eating and drinking on a
hot dry day instead of fasting.

Patience must be practised in confrontation with the enemies in
battlefield, where the danger shows its real and serious face, and where
red death with dynamic speed confronts the man. The pleasures and
sweetness of life, memories of children and relatives, and the faces of
the loved ones become incarnated in the eyes, and all profit-oriented
business transactions in one way or the other attract his attention, and
try to make his determination weak and shaky. Resistance should be
offered against all these forces. All obstacles and barriers which
interfere with the forward march must be removed from the road.

Patience must be offered against proud tyrant whose eyes burn with anger
and whose transgression and corruption has pushed a nation to the brink
of catastrophe. Such a tyrant must be opposed by each responsible
individual. In this situation it is a compulsory obligation for everyone
to try to overthrow such a despot.

Patience should be practiced against the whispers of Satan, who with
thousands of colourful deceits will try to close charitable hands by
reminding me of personal needs instead of helping others, by inciting
desires for material profits and other worldly ambitions, and will
ultimately prevent a person from righteous deeds. He will try to
emphasize that the light in the own home is more important than the
candle of the mosque's niche (Mehrab). Here, patience comes into picture
by offering the necessary resistance to the above desires, to enable one
to discharge his financial and religious obligations. Yes! Patience
should be practiced. Yes! One should be patient in obedience and
fulfilment of these religious commands. Resistance should be offered
against the Satanic whispers and passions encouraging transgression.

Each case where such resistance is offered assumes a special meaning and
special importance in proportion to the greatness of that particular
situation. At one place, resistance means to be steadfast in facing the
enemy in the battlefield, or it may be confrontation with the self, and
sometimes it may be the struggle to remain indifferent while facing the
pangs of poverty and other difficulties.

Therefore, patience means to be able to offer resistance in all the
above circumstances. Patience never allows us to surrender with folded
hands, to be insulted, to give up the initiative, and become prisoner of
the events.

Examples of Patience in Obedience in the Lives of the Infallible Imams
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The key phrase which has been emphasised a lot in the pilgrimage book
"Ziyarat-nama" of the Imams, is patience. i.e., "You! (Imams) remained
patient, and this patience was practiced with pleasure for the sake of
Allah. You! accepted the heavy load of carrying the trust, and in spite
of all the difficulties and hardships, you delivered it to its final
destination."

Truly, the responsibility of guiding mankind and explaining them the
truth of religion, and resisting tyranny, corruption, and transgression
during the days of the Imams, like any other time, was a difficult task
requiring a lot of patience and strong determination.

If the patience practiced by the Imams would have been of such a type
that although unhappy about the bad conditions of their times, with
hearts bleeding for the worsening plight of Muslims and Islam, they had
confined themselves to the safe boundaries of their homes without taking
any concrete steps for destruction of evil and betterment of situation
in favour of the community, then this type of patience would not have
been of any special distinction, prestige and honour. There is nothing
special in this kind of inert behaviour and anybody could do it easily.
Of course, this type of conduct is practiced by weak and uncommitted
persons.

The prominence and glory which distinguish the lives of the holy Imams,
and the special characteristics which may be repeated while reciting
salutations as mentioned in the "Ziyarat-nama", was their being patient
in obedience to Allah. This is an area, in which many ordinary people
found themselves helpless, and could not tolerate the hardships and
therefore failed to achieve that honour and distinction.

Review of the Holy Qur’an
-------------------------

It would not be out of context to remind here that among tens of verses
regarding the patience of those who have been patient, there are many
verses about patience in obedience, such as follows:

***"If there are twenty patient (steadfast) ones among you, they will
overcome two hundred (of the infidels) and if there are a hundred (such
ones), they will overcome a thousands"*** (The Holy Qur’an, 8:65)

The above verse emphasises the importance of offering resistance and
being steadfast while confronting the interior motives within the self,
which act as obstacles in the path of a soldier facing an enemy in the
battlefield. The patient people who have been mentioned in the above
verse are those that neither the flashing swords, nor the burning eyes
of the enemies, neither the angry face of red death nor the memories of
friends and children, and pleasures and charms of life, stop them in
discharging their obligation to engage in bloody hostilities in the
battlefield. And none of the above make a slight dent in their iron will
for obeying Allah.

Another verse from the Holy Qur’an regarding the importance of patience
in obedience is as follows:

***"Our Lord! Bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure, and give
us help against the disbelieving folk***.***"*** (The Holy Qur’an,
2:250)

The above verse refers to a group of believers who in order to discharge
a compulsory obligation have readied themselves to confront an enemy in
the battlefield. They are asking Allah to bless them with the spirit of
endurance and steadfastness in facing the obstacles in their path, and
with the result bestow upon them the fruit of their endurance, that is
achieving victory over the enemies (unbelievers). This verse very
explicitly explains the meanings of patience in obedience. There are
many such verses in the Holy Qur’an, and the detailed discussions about
them is beyond the scope of our present discussion.

Patience Against Sin
--------------------

Naturally, human beings are possessed with desires and passions, which
encourage as well as discourage them in doing certain acts. In reality
these are instruments for performing all actions, efforts and endeavours
by men in their live span. These are called instincts such as, love for
self, love for children, love for wealth, love for power, sexual
desires, and scores of other such attractions and desires.

What are the instructions of Islam regarding the above natural human
instincts? And how the human beings are supposed to behave while
confronting their natural instincts? Do they have to surrender
themselves to these instincts without any limit or condition? Should
these passions be suppressed? Or should they be made completely disabled
by means of superimposing rigorous self-discipline? According to the
Islamic view none of the above methods are the correct treatment.

On the contrary under no circumstances, Islam ignores the human
instincts, rather it considers them useful and something real to be
reckoned with. Islam closes the paths of transgression and Aggression,
but on the other hand by utilising realistic preventive measures. It
dissipates the pervasive energy associated with them. In reality, as the
basic existence of instinct among human beings is a means for
continuation of life, as well as for providing the essential necessities
of life, similarly mutiny, aggression and transgression of instinctive
passions result in catastrophe and misfortune to human life.

If the instinct of love for the self did not exist, continuation of
human life would have not been possible. But at the same time
excessiveness and transgression of the above instinct makes the affairs
of life difficult, and sometimes may make it impossible. Similar is the
case with other instincts. Among the three types of patience mentioned
earlier, patience against sin means offering resistance against the fire
of rage or diversion of instinctive passions, because basically sin or
transgression against Allah's law is nothing but the above acts of
diversion, transgression and aggression of instincts.

Human beings are naturally inclined to endeavour for arranging the
necessities of life and other essential requirements. Since this could
not be accomplished without having wealth and money, therefore the
motive to earn money and wealth constitutes a natural instinct.

Also, Islam being a school of mankind and way of life, encourages the
above instinct and certifies it by putting its own signature. Of course,
it does it for the right administration of the society and accordingly
establishes the methods, procedures and limitations, but never stops
human beings form making endeavours for earning a livelihood.

In spite of all that, in many instances, this instinct of love for money
and hoarding of wealth takes its roots in the human soul like a chronic
disease and with the result, the money no longer remains as a means for
providing the requirement. Rather it turns into an intense desire for
executing the inhuman goals or tools of self-glorification, which is
condemned from the Islamic point of view. It is here that Islam decrees
its followers to be patient by offering resistance against the
transgression and diversion of instinctive forces.

The other example of human instinct could be love for power. By nature
human beings crave for power. Certainly those who have accepted
weakness, and humility as essential elements of their existence must
believe that they have deviated from the assigned human nature. Islam,
in this regards too, utilises the same approach as it does for dealing
with all other instinctive desires.

On one side the efforts and endeavours in the path of achieving power
have been commended as something desirable and permissible, and in
certain circumstances even considered as compulsory. Yes! Islam
considers power necessary where it is required for establishing the
truth, for dischargement of important social obligations, for
reinstatement of lost rights of their rightful owners, and for execution
of divine commands and decrees. In these cases Islam has made it
mandatory for all Muslims to gain power.

While on the other hand, in Islam, the path of this instinct towards
aggression and ambitions has been closed. When the instinct of love for
power results in tyranny, oppression, brute force and savage crimes,
this has been condemned as an undesirable and forbidden act.

It is possible that association with a powerful tyrant or with a
destructive organisation may bring ample power for an ambitious person,
but Islam never sanctions such an association, because the act of
associating with a tyrant is a direct support for strengthening tyranny.
The balance of power which results from this kind of association is
responsible for commitment of crimes.

Here the decrees of Islam and the Holy Qur’an are in direct
confrontation with the outburst and diversion of human instincts and
closes the path for them. The Muslims are ordered to struggle and offer
resistance against the motives of this type of love for power, which
result in mischief and corruption, and should never surrender to such
ambitious tyrants, which means patience against sin.

There are other examples of instincts such as sexual desires, love for
fame, love for life, and etc., which could also be likewise examined,
resulting in a better understanding of important individual and social
issues.

The Importance of Patience Against Sin
--------------------------------------

In the light of this brief discussion and in view of the traditions and
Islamic learning which are generally full of social education, it may be
concluded that patience against sins and transgressions has been
assigned a special importance.

According to a few short traditions dealing with special circumstances
and giving a constructive lesson for the endeavouring Muslims of the
period of the infallible Imams, this branch of patience has been
considered a crucial support and has been assigned special privilege.
Perhaps it may be because offering patience in obedience is something
accompanied with the natural desire (instinct) existing within human
beings, the same natural instinct which is responsible for action and
efforts.

While on the other hand to be able to resist the desires for diversions,
and not to surrender to the appealing attractions of various obstacles,
which are full of sweet and desirable natural attractions, is the field
of patience against sin. In this case not only one is not supported by
natural attractions and instinct, rather one is acting in the opposite
direction.

Therefore, practicing patience in obedience although means struggling
against the natural instinctive[^5] attractions such as human desires
for ease and comfort, nevertheless it is accompanied and supported by
another natural instinct, however weak. But patience against sin or
transgression against laws of Allah, is in total and direct
confrontation with all the natural instinctive attractions and
pleasures, and accordingly this kind of struggle is more difficult and
therefore has been assigned special privilege.

Also, patience against sins plays a determining role as far as the
social affairs are concerned and since its effect is relatively more
conspicuous, this could be another reason for assigning special
privilege to this kind of patience.

[^1]: One fifth levy; a yearly tax upon one's personal savings

[^2]: Wealth tax to be paid on certain items

[^3]: In his book "Sirr-us-Salat"the mysteries of prayers, Imam
Khomeini, describes the presence of heart, as follows: "During prayers
one must try to completely cut off the heart's preoccupation with
worldly affairs. If a person is submerged in love and desires of this
world, naturally his heart is busy continuously from one involvement to
another. The heart behaves like a bird jumping from one branch to
another. So far we have this tree of worldly ambitions or desires
("Hubb-e-Duniya") in our heart, it will behave restless. If by struggle,
practice, efforts, and thinking about the severe consequences and
losses, if one could succeed in cutting this tree of worldly ambitions
or desires, then the heart will become reposed and peaceful. It will
achieve spiritual perfection. At least the more one tries to free
himself from worldly charms and temptations the more he succeeds in
cutting the various branches of that tree in his heart, with the result,
the presence of heart will be achieved in the same proportion." Imam
Khomeini further explains the term 'love of this world'
"Hubb-e-Duniya"."There are people who do not possess anything at all of
this mortal world, but still they could be the persons totally submerged
in the love of this world. While on the contrary one may be like Prophet
Sulaiman bin Dawood, (Solomon son of David) king of kings and possessing
all the treasurers of this universe, but at the same time may not be a
man of this world, completely detached from the lure of the world."
(Tr.)

[^4]: "He was born in Mecca, the son of an Abyssinian slave called
Rabah; in a city of idol-worship, he was tortured for his belief in the
One and Only Allah. He was made the first muezzin, the caller to prayer
in Islam the Prophet (S). After the Prophet's death Bilal's legs, in his
grief, failed him. He could not climb up the steps to make the call to
prayer again. He died in Syria, probably in 644, twelve years after the
Prophet's death. The Black Muslims in America have renamed themselves
the Bilali. Prophet (peace be upon him) called Bilal 'a man of
Paradise'."

[^5]: This instinct is a part of the real human structure, although its
transgression and diversion is something unnatural and undesirable which
should be resisted by human beings


