Chapter 5: Historical Examples
==============================

For example let us consider the two very prominent faces of Islamic
History and compare them with each other. One of them is enlightened,
honourable and exciting while the other one is hated and condemned.
These two faces belong to two persons who have been offered exactly
similar and equivalent opportunities. Or it may be said that they both
travelled together and reached simultaneously at an intersection, and in
action, each one selected a different direction.

One of them because of choosing the right path becomes the greatest and
most honourable Islamic personality, and the another one, because of his
choosing the wrong path becomes the most detested and deplorable face of
Islamic history. One of them is Omar bin Sa'd who is the commander of
the Omayyad army to suppress the rising of Imam Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.).
The other one is Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi[^1] who is another commander of
the same army and who had been dispatched earlier on an assignment to
follow and keep strict vigilance on the movements of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and his followers, and had already committed an act of Aggression
against the revolutionary army of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Each of them started their march on the road almost simultaneously. The
ruling Omayyad regime was being threatened by a revolutionary force. The
revolutionary freedom-giving fire was behind the ashes all over the
Hijaz and was about to ignite inside Iraq. Imam Husayn ibn Ali (a.s.)
considering the Islamic obligations and realising great responsibility
upon his shoulders had taken a giant revolutionary step by rising
against the corrupt and dictatorial regime of the Omayyads. He took this
giant heroic step to register forever in the history of Islam, the most
practical and fundamental lesson for the coming generations.

This rising therefore was a dangerous and a serious threat for the
ruling regime, and naturally it was forced to mobilise all the resources
at its disposal to suppress and crush this revolutionary uprising. The
above two persons (Omar bin Sa'd and Hur bin Yazid) were part of the
vast resources of that tyrant regime, which were mobilised against this
revolutionary movement and against its founder Imam Husayn ibn Ali
(a.s.).

Therefore, in the very beginning both these persons manifest themselves
as the two important pawns (of chess play) on the playground for the
game which was actually being played by an usurper caliph (Yazid ibn
Mua'wiyah). They were the mercenaries of the caliph to execute his
decisions and commands in Karbala. But apart from that, they[^2] too
voluntarily accepted this assignment for the sake of their love for
self, love for material gains, and desires and temptations aroused by
their animal instincts.

Omar bin Sa'd came to Karbala because of his obsession for achieving
power and position. Since his birth he was ignorant about religion and
faith. For him the promise made by the Caliph for the governorship of
Rayy (presently the southern suburb of modern Tehran), was the most
valuable and dearest thing than Yazid and obedience to his command.

Hur bin Yazid too started his assignment for accomplishing similar
goals. Both of them were aware that whatever they were going to
accomplish meant committing a sin and a major one. But human passions
and transgression of instinct for power and ambitions did not allow them
to ponder about the consequences of their would-be assignment (war with
Imam Husayn [a.s.]), and ultimately put them on the road, which
terminated into the most filthiest and beastly happening in human
history.

Both of them were faced with the most critical and sensitive decisions
of their lives. One of the road was leading them towards the sensual
desires which are the same natural instincts such as love for power and
ambitions, and the other one was leading them towards discharging their
Islamic duty by joining the righteous forces of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

At this critical juncture, the thing which could have rescued both of
them was supposed to be nothing else but patience. Yes! By practicing
patience one may overcome these destructive selfish passions. These
strange destructive forces can only be controlled by the power of
patience. Patience may enable you to resist against the temptations for
committing sins and transgression of the Laws of Allah.

At this sensitive and determining moment, Omar bin Sa'd could not resist
against these deadly passions, and therefore failed. The knotted rope of
love for power and position was fallen over his neck, and he was being
pulled towards hell. Although being a powerful and strong person, he was
helpless to offer any resistance about his being fallen into this
disgrace. Eventually he was overcome with impatience and was vanquished
by the motives of lust for power. And finally pulled by the rage of
deadly instinctive passions, fell down all the way into the bottom of
Hell.

Hur bin Yazid too encountered the same situation. He was being
confronted with a critical dilemma. If he would have allowed himself to
be led by the desires and passions of his soul, he would have completed
the assignment satisfactorily (which was assigned to him by Yazid), and
would have ignored the awakening inner voice of his conscience by
believing himself to be only an executioner of orders issued by the
caliph, and thus, could have achieved the highest position of power.

For him if the governorship of Rayy was not into consideration,
certainly something equivalent to that was kept in mind. For he too,
after all was a human being, and therefore a knotted rope of greed,
desire, and rage of instinctive passions was tied to his neck and was
pulling hi-m towards hell. He was pulled almost to the brink of fire
i.e. the line dividing the two opposing camps in the plains of Karbala.

The camp of Husayn (a.s.) was manifestation of ready paradise,
fountainhead of genuine Islamic values, splendour of human spirit, and
the defender of real Islam. It was in a direct face-to-face
confrontation with the Yazidi camp. Which was the manifestation of ready
hell, the degradation and humility of mankind, the scene of hypocrisy,
deceit and lies, and the bastion of ignorance which, in the name of
Islam was imposed upon the society.

Yes! The negative forces of degradation pulled him up to these limits
(i.e. brink of hell), but suddenly a heroic grand power, an awakening
from within, at the right moment took control of him and rescued him
from this sudden fall. It gave him, a severe jolt and sheared off the
rope of desires and passions which was tied to his neck.

By offering resistance against this violent instinctive passion, and by
remaining patient against this great sin, which was tantamount to waging
war against the forces representing the total truth for the sake of
forces which were the manifestation of total blasphemy, not only did Hur
rescue himself, but jumped into the kingdom of paradise from the very
brink of fire.

In the above event there is a lesson for those who are interested in
in-depth studies of human history. It clearly shows the importance of
this branch of patience (against sin), in organising the great struggle
between truth and falsehood, which ultimately determines the
interpretation of history, and decides the destiny of a society.

Some other Examples of Patience against Sin
-------------------------------------------

In order to study in detail the examples of this branch of patience, we
must recollect a series of different kind of deviations and great sins.
It will be proved that patience has played the most crucial role in each
situation, such as follows:

A powerful strong mounted fist has been raised and is about to fall over
the head of an innocent person, and there is absolutely -no obstacle in
its path, is a scene requiring this branch of patience. The strong
instinctive forces consisting of anger, pride, selfishness, and other
desires, urge this raised fist to strike against the innocent person's
head. In this situation patience means offering resistance against these
instinctive motives and to control oneself against committing this
transgression.

Someone may have an easy access to lot of money and wealth, only if he
could cross over the bridge, namely committing a murder, or indulging in
a sinful act. Here the natural lust for the love of wealth, an extremely
violent deviated instinctive force, takes control of the person to
commit that crime. Here patience means offering resistance against these
motives, and to ignore the potential gains at the cost of a crime or
sin. This may be regarded as another example of practicing this branch
of patience.

The sexual urges are extremely powerful and intense, which may be
compared to a swamp, which swallows the elephants together with the
elephant drivers. It is exactly for the reason that this super magical
characteristic had been exploited as an easy and suitable means for
humiliating and degrading the towering great human souls, by the enemies
of human progress and exaltedness throughout the history. Patience in
these situations means resisting the powerful sexual urges, by not
indulging in a lower shameful sexual act.

Fear or danger are common characteristics which are common among
ordinary people. It could be a product of many instincts or may consist
of a single instinct. But in many situations it plays a key role in
bringing all kinds of humiliation, insults, imprisonment, crimes and
catastrophes. In many instances the weak individuals under the influence
of fear or danger submitted themselves to perform the most lowly
shameful tasks as well as committed horrible crimes, and ultimately lost
their lives, wealth, position, honour, prestige, and children. In one
instance they fell down from the highest peaks of human exaltedness and
lowered themselves to become simply a tool without any determination in
the hands of enemies. Endurance against these forces of violence and
Corruption could be regarded as another scene for the display of this
branch of patience.

Review of some Narrations
-------------------------

Here it would be worthwhile to ponder over some of the narrations
regarding this branch of patience, which have been narrated by the
infallible Imams, and are full of important revealing lessons. Asbagh
bin Nabatah who is a companion of Imam Ali (a.s.) quotes from him as
follows:

"There are two types of patience, one of them is patience during
tragedies or catastrophes, which is very good and charming, but there is
another type of patience, which is far better and more charming than the
above, i.e. patience against acts forbidden by Allah."[^3]

### Narration No. 2

Here Imam Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (a.s.) quotes the Prophet's (S),
prediction of the state of affairs of his Ummah as follows:

"The people will face a period in which power and authority will come
only through bloodshed and brute oppression. Wealth will be amassed by
usurping the rights of others and by stinginess. Love will be realised
only by giving up faith and pursuing carnal desires. Whoever should find
that period should have patience in poverty because it will be better
than faith, patience against grudge because it will be better than love,
and patience against humility because it is better than honour. Allah
will grant the reward of fifty truthful persons who believed in the
Prophet".[^4]

This prediction was witnessed by the Muslims of that time, during the
shameful life of Mu’awiya and his son Yazid and their successor caliphs,
wealth and other financial comforts could only be achieved by means of
usurpation of the rights of the deprived, transgression of weaker
classes, exploitation of masses, stinginess and restrictions in
financial dues, and indifference to the genuine demands of deprived
masses.

Or in other words the Prophet predicted that the natural development of
the Islamic Ummah would not be such that each individual will be
possessing plenty of wealth and material comforts without inflicting the
least injury to the rest of the community (i.e. the rest of the
community would still have the fair opportunities to earn wealth and
other material comforts). Rather gaining wealth and other material
comforts, by a certain special class could only be made possible by
transgressing and exploiting the rights of the rest of the community.
This prediction was also witnessed as the Islamic Ummah transformed into
various social classes.

Popularity or fame could only be accomplished by discarding the spirit
of faith from one's life and existence, and by completely submitting to
the carnal desires of the self. In other words the love of masses or
corrupt leaders could be achieved only by practising flattery, lies,
hypocrisy, cheating, surrendering to desires and passions, deceiving and
making people feel proud, covering up blunders, misportraying the
realities and disregarding the famous notion of "Amr bil Maroof wa Nahi
anil Munkar" i.e. encouraging good and discouraging forbidden acts, etc.

The above prediction by the Prophet (S) is full of wisdom, foretelling
the would-be state of affairs of the Islamic community in the near
future, in which, the level of thinking and insight of the people will
be lowered, Islamic values will decline, the Islamic judicial system
will be degraded, and the general affairs of the Muslims will become
chaotic.

It is of course obvious, that these happenings in the life of the
Islamic community, which was founded on the pillars of real Islamic
values, or in other words the train of that community which started its
journey on the rails of Islamic thoughts and ideology, was not possible,
without the active involvement and subversive acts of some powerful,
hidden, and mischievous hands, operating to execute a calculated plan to
destroy the Islamic community from within.

The above prophecy by the Prophet (S) clearly throws light about the
usurpation of political power, which may be regarded as the most inhuman
act in the history of Islam. Yes! The Prophet warned about these
would-be occurrences. Alas! They happened too soon. When people appeared
before the Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali (a.s.), they witnessed in
his sayings and deeds, nothing but seriousness and decisiveness, for
correcting the deviated state of affairs of the Islamic community by
pulling all the violators and sinners before the court of law. And to
obtain Allah's justice for their violations and transgressions, to
restore the lost genuine rights of the rightful owners. His brother
Aqeel when approached him to seek a financial favour, had to face a red
hot iron bar and was turned down with a sad reply. Aqeel or any other
person, when he approached Mu’awiya, was welcomed with smiling face and
open arms and rewarded with plenty of ready money.

It was therefore natural that persons whose conscience was not
influenced by the logic of Islamic thoughts were more inclined towards
Mu’awiya than Imam Ali (a.s.). Therefore, this consideration that
Muawiya lacked fame and popularity during his reign is not correct.
Notwithstanding the fact that people of Medina and Kufa, who were under
the direct influence of the towering personality of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
were familiar with the basics of Islamic ideology, the rest of the
people of the Islamic lands, throughout Muawiyah’s rein, because of the
suffocation of free thinking and enquiry, the Propaganda practised by
the Omayyad bands, special characteristics of the people for loving to
be mercenaries of the regime, considered him a competent, respectable,
and charismatic personality. They bestowed upon him the honourable title
of "Khal-al-Muslimeen"[^5] i.e. the maternal uncle of the believers.

Of course, this fame and popularity was achieved by means of special
tactical conduct of Muawiya with the influential tribal chiefs who had
considerable domination over the masses, and some manipulated them to
lower their heads before Muawiya. For these services they were showered
with unlimited affection, were blessed with plenty of wealth and power,
and their hands were allowed to let open to commit all kinds of horrible
crimes and tortures against the poor deprived masses who possessed no
other shelter.

These chiefs, in order to be benevolent towards their "Lord of
Affluence" (Vali Nemat), and in order to maintain the status quo, and to
exploit the situation to their best advantage opened their tongues in
praising him, and all of his faults and defects, or the type of faults
he admired, were presented to the masses as his exalted qualities and
arts.

This was the picture of the would-be state of affairs of the Islamic
community as foreseen by the prophetic eyes of the Prophet (S). Now in
confronting with such a state of affairs and facing an incompetent and
sinister regime, what are the obligations of the people? The answer to
this question was provided by the narration in previous pages.

Anyone who happens to face that period as predicted by the Prophet,(S)
either in the near or distant future, must remain steadfast while facing
poverty and indigence and should offer resistance against the
instinctual motives for hoarding wealth and possessing other material
benefits. While he had the option to act like his contemporaries, who by
utilising the usual means, were busy in accumulation of wealth and other
material gains, and passed through this difficulties naively, as though
nothing unusual had happened. He too, by accepting the filth, by
indulging in crimes, submitting to insults and captivation, giving up
his dignity, honour, and exaltedness, and turning his back against all
the values and ideals, could have achieved the comfortable and luxurious
life and therefore would have fulfilled his carnal desires.

He should close his eyes over the wealth, power and riches in his reach,
at the cost of bringing poverty and destitution for thousands of people,
as well as over the hot and delicious food for him, at the cost of
hunger for unlimited number of destitute masses.

He should endure patiently for remaining lonely, unknown and blamed
against the instinctive motives of desiring status, fame and popularity.
While having the option of receiving the favour of ignorant masses or
leaders with vested interests, by opening his tongue for flattery,
praise, lies, deceit and shutting up his lips for supporting the truth,
closing his eyes for encouragement of good and forbiddance of evil, and
conscientiously electing to do otherwise.

Realising the divine obligations entrusted to him, and his personal
duties, with full awareness he accepts demotion of his status, becomes
hated in the eyes of tyrants, and lets his prestige and honour be
usurped and trampled by the oppressors.

He should be patient and satisfied for possessing only lower social
status and should tolerate deprivation from higher prestigious positions
offering better material gains and power. He should not opt for
accepting titles and important positions of power at the cost of
committing inhuman shameful crimes. Allah Almighty's reward for someone
who practices the above advises in his deeds, would be equivalent to the
reward earned by fifty righteous believers during the period of the
Prophet (S).

And therefore this heavenly saying which emanates from a celestial heart
and whose value is tantamount to a divine revelation, while offering the
most important and in-depth training, regarding social issues, also
reflects the meanings and value of this branch of patience (against
sin).

Patience Against Unpleasant Events (Tragedies)
----------------------------------------------

The human life is always accompanied by events and unpleasant
calamities, and there is no escape from such happenings. The human
structure has been created in such a way, that it has to deal with these
imposed situations, i.e. always encountering unpleasant events and
calamities during the entire span of our lives. The following famous
sentence of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) describes the
above theme as follows:

"The world is like a house which has been encircled with temptations and
calamities."

Sickness, physical handicaps, financial losses, death of loved ones and
deprivations are some of the few' examples of the inevitable happenings
from which there is no escape. Even the most prosperous class of people
are not immune against these types of occurrences. When such calamities
befall, naturally, without any choice or intention of our own, in our
lives, usually there are two types of reactions shown by the people, as
follows:

1. Some people, on account of the calamity give up their resistance
completely and therefore become spiritually handicapped.

2. The other group of people, bear with patience considering it a
natural thing of this worldly life, and come out of it intact and with
dignity.

According to the famous Persian poet Roudaki[^6] the merit, greatness,
and leadership of a man is tested during his encounter with calamity.
Grief, crying, and lamentation which are the ways of weak, timid-hearted
and impatient individuals, in itself is \` strong natural passion. Which
imposes a violent emotional force upon the human structure, whereby all
the body parts are employed to perform a particular function. The eyes
shed tears, the tongue complains, the throat groans, and the hands,
feet, and head, are all involved in performing special actions and
movements.

Patience, against calamities means not to surrender to these violent
emotional outbursts. A patient human being, while facing such tragedies
does not give up his morale and maintains his composure and control.
These tragedies do not make him depressed and discouraged, and do not
stop him from making efforts and endeavours for accomplishing the main
goals in the real life. Therefore this type of patience (against
calamities) is also important, and has been termed as fair and charming
in the narration quoted earlier.

Now, let us consider the case of a wayfarer who starts his journey in a
certain direction so that he could reach the final desired Destination
if upon encountering each unpleasant accident, and after receiving a
small injury, he gives up his morale and looses his composure, then it
is obvious that such a person will never complete this journey and will
never reach the final Destination Resistance, offered against these
motives of Depression while facing these tragedies is a key factor,
which not only secures the high morale, but moreover, this endurance in
itself, is an exercise, which is beneficial for building up the
determination and strong iron-will among human beings, which are the
pre-requisites for continuation of the difficult journey.

Therefore patience against natural tragedies which befall human beings,
without any option or choice, consists of the following two important
advantages:

Firstly, it secures and maintains the high morale, which is responsible
for all constructive involvement, and further acts as an obstacle to
prevent it from getting lost or being destroyed completely.

Secondly, it builds up the human determination or will power, which is
an important means for all positive actions, and further it provides the
required endurance to face the optional tragedies.

The special encouragement and excitement shown by the religious
guardians about this type of patience, clearly demonstrates its
constructive and miraculous role. In the following two narrations the
deep philosophy of this branch of patience could be clearly
demonstrated.

### First Narration

"Whoever has not equipped himself with the weapon of patience, during
hardships and calamities of the time, will be subjected to a state of
weakness and helplessness".[^7]

### Second Narration

"For a believer, if a position and rank, has been taken into
consideration by Allah, which could never be accomplished by deeds
alone, he is inflicted with physical sickness, or loss of wealth, or
tragedies to his loved ones, and in case, he remains patient, he is
awarded by Allah (the assigned position and rank)"[^8]

In the above narration the constructive and exalted role of patience has
been demonstrated explicitly.

Othman bin Maz'oon, who was an experienced Muslim and had migrated to
Ethiopia and Madina, during the early period of Islam, lost his young
son at Madina. This tragedy was so devastate that he decided to spend
all his remaining life inside his house in prayers, and suddenly stopped
all his social involvement completely. His depression after the death of
his young son was so intense, that he wished never to face the pleasures
of life again.

The Prophet (S) after hearing about his state of affairs, paid him a
courtesy visit and advised him to change his decision. The Prophet (S)
said that Islam does not allow monastic life (renunciation of world),
sitting in an isolated corner, engrossed prayers. The renunciation of
the world by Islamic Ummah means, participation in Jihad for the sake of
Allah.

Therefore, patience against unforeseen tragedies, for which we have no
choice, means to be able to tolerate the injury caused by the calamity
without giving up the morale, and to be able to continue the routine
normal involvement of the real life, and eventually forgetting the
tragedy with the passage of time.

Patience Against Optional Tragedies
-----------------------------------

This branch of patience surpasses in excellence other situations because
in this case a conscientious, and aware human being arises to accomplish
a certain goal, and offers resistance against all the hardships and
unpleasant events which are inflicted upon him during this course. But
in spite of facing all these severe calamities does not get demoralised,
depressed, and continues his movement towards the cherished goal.

If we perform an in-depth analysis for research purposes, regarding the
state of affairs of human societies in history, looking for lofty human
ideals, and specially the goals aspired by divine Prophets, which were
always in conflict with the classes representing the tyrants and
profiteers, and therefore were always opposed by them; it would become
crystal clear that there had always been permanent war and Confrontation
between the proclaimers of these higher goals and the powerful classes
of tyrants and oppressors.

There are plenty of verses in the Holy Qur’an which throw considerable
light regarding the historical Confrontation between the Prophets of
Allah and the representative of false deities (Taghout). Since this
Confrontation between truth and falsehood is inevitable, therefore it is
necessary for the followers of the path of truth, proclaimers of justice
and righteousness, and the truth seekers and researchers following the
path of divine Prophets, to know and predict in advance that the path of
truth is accompanied by all kinds of hardships and calamities.

The Holy Qur’an, in order to make the believers ready for confronting
the problems, announces in advance clearly the potential dangers on the
path of truth, and brings the historical realities to their attention as
follows:

***"Assuredly you will be tried in your property and in your persons and
you will hear much wrong from those who were given the scripture before
you and from the idolaters. But if you are patient and guard yourselves
(against evil), then it is a matter of (great) resolve. "*** (The Holy
Qur’an, 3: 186)

In reality, those who wanted to live like a believer or slave of Allah,
and also wanted to be responsible towards the divine obligations and
other commitments assigned to them, realised that they will be opposed
and subjected to different kind of hardships by their opponents, and
they soon witnessed the truth of this Qur'anic prediction with their own
eyes in their own period.

Of course, the one who enjoys an important position and rank and whose
faith and actions are more determined in the path of Allah would be more
effective. And therefore in the same proportion will be subjected to
severe hardships and tragedies by the opponents, whose tolerant is
indeed difficult. There is a famous narration quoted from Imam Jaffer
Sadiq (a.s.) as follows:

"Among all the people, the prophets were inflicted with the harshest
calamities, and after them, those who were closer to the prophets were
subjected to similar kinds of hardships and calamities".[^9]

Of course, these calamities are not like the type of unforeseen natural
tragedies, as described earlier, for which a human being has absolutely
no control or choice, rather in this case everyone has the option to
choose. In case he desires and prefers the comfortable and easy life of
this world, and to remain immune against these types of calamities, he
may elect to do so. What makes these events inevitable is the movement
towards the cherished goal.

Every easy going person who prefers the comfortable environment of his
home and never takes the trouble to venture outside the four walls of
his house, would never face the inconveniences and problems encountered
in a journey. But at the same time, he will never benefit from the
experiences which are possible only by going through an adventurous
journey. He would remain safe throughout his life from such events as,
slipping from the mountain peak, facing a beast in the jungle, and being
robbed by bandits, which are likely events of an adventurous journey.

Like every naive and irresponsible human being who has not recognized
the aims of life, and has not taken any steps towards that goal, and
prefers an uneventful life without headaches, would be better advised to
follow the decree of the following verse of Sa'di, the famous Iranian
poet as follows:

"Although inside the sea there are plenty of material gains. But if you
prefer safety, you better stay on the shore!"

According to this logic[^10], one could easily choose the option to
remain immune from all the troubles, headaches, and injuries etc., which
are a pre-requisite for joining the path of the prophets.

Therefore, the calamities on the path of the prophets are optional
tragedies, in the sense that they are inflicted upon those, who are
taking commands from the following saying of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) as follows:

"By taking giant steps on the divine path, they throw themselves into
the whirlpool of tragedies."

Therefore, they succeeded in announcing the positive and definite reply
to the divine invitation to support the truth. Hence, patience against
optional tragedies is the important type of patience, relative to other
categories. This branch of patience reflects the highest degree of human
exaltedness in facing the optional tragedies.

This type of patience means accepting tragedies in spite of the fact
that all instinctual motives, are forcing him to turn his back in the
middle of the path and stop offering resistance anymore; yet he
continues offering resistance, and never feels sorry or ashamed to be
inflicted with severe blows on the righteous path.

Khabbab bin al-Arth, is ranked among the top Muslims, who accepted the
invitation of the holy Prophet (S) to Islam, and offered a lot of
sacrifices. Because of his conversion to Islam, he lost a significant
portion of his property and possessions. One day, he complained to the
Prophet (S) about his severe financial loss. He himself narrates as
follows: "The Prophet (S) had spread his robe on the ground, and was
reclining with his back against the Holy Ka’bah. When he listened to my
complaint, he changed his relaxed sitting position, and his composure
changed, and said:

"Your predecessors [^11], sometimes were slaughtered by the iron saw,
cutting their skin, veins, and flesh all the way down till the bones.
But they remained committed to their faith, and never complained, even
when in some cases, their bodies were cut off into two equal pieces.
Allah will carry this movement (Islam) till its perfection. The distance
a rider travels between Sana (Capital of Yemen) and Hadhramut, (Region
in the southern part of Yemen) roads and highways will be so safe, under
the Islamic state and Islamic system that nobody will be afraid of
anything but Allah, and the flock of sheep will not be scared of anyone
but wolf."

Therefore, the Prophet (S) by delivering these fiery speeches instilled
his followers with the spirit of resistance and iron will, and
encouraged them to be Patient, while facing the calamities which were
inflicted upon them for the sake of their belief in Allah. It is quite
possible that some one by practising patience for discharging Islamic
obligations (i.e. patience in obedience), or by offering resistance
against instinctual passions (i.e. patience against sin), may be
genuinely included in the list of believers and may start walking on the
path whose other end leads to Allah.

But once confronted with accidents and tragedies, which are essential
and inevitable part of this journey, he may not withstand, and in the
middle of the path, face moral break down, weakness of faith,
hopelessness, and other such reasons and on account of impatience, may
decide to return without completing the journey, disregarding the
dischargement of duties, which were assigned to him. Therefore the
completion of journey on this path with certainty, and without any doubt
for not breaking in the middle, is made possible only by practicing this
type of patience (i.e. patience against optional tragedies).

Ways for Encouraging this Branch of Patience
--------------------------------------------

In view of its importance and fundamental role, many verses of the Holy
Qur’an focus on this particular branch of patience, so that Muslims
could feel the charm of this special struggle in their heart and spirit.
One of the ways for being patient against optional tragedies is to
ponder on tragedies which are beyond our control. In order that the
confrontation with death may not be difficult for the wayfarers on the
path of Allah, the Holy Qur’an reminds us that: Death is destined for
all human beings. Those who do not die on the battlefield will
eventually die on their beds in their homes. Life and death all belong
to Allah, and the deeds which are accounted for his path carry the best
of compensation and bonus from Allah the almighty.

***"Muhammad is not but a Messenger, (other) Messenger have passed away
before him. Will it be that, when he dies or is slain, you will turn
back on your heels? He who turned back does not hurt Allah the least,
and Allah will reward the thankful"*** (The Holy Qur’an, 3: 144)

***"Oh you who believe! be not as those who disbelieved and said of
their brethren who went abroad in the land or were fighting in the
field: Had they been (here) with us they would not have died or been
killed; that Allah may make it anguish in their hearts. Allah gives life
and causes death, and Allah beholds of what you do.*** (The Holy Qur’an,
3: 156)

***"Those who, sat at their home said to their brethren (who were
fighting for the cause of Allah): If they had been guided by us they
would not have been slain: say (unto them, 0 Muhammad): Then avert death
from yourself if you are truthful."*** (The Holy Qur’an, 3: 168)

The other method consists of reminding the progress accomplished by
accepting these calamities on the desired path, and the severe blows
dealt to the obstacles on the path by these means.

***"Faint not nor grieve, for you will overcome them if you are indeed
believers."*** (The Holy Qur’an, 3: 139)

***"If you have received a blow, the disbelieving people have received a
blow the like thereof. These are (only) the vicissitudes which we cause
to follow one another for mankind, to the end that Allah may know those
who believe and may choose witnesses from among you, and Allah loves not
the wrong-doers."*** (The Holy Qur’an, 3: 140)

The Holy Qur’an emphasises upon its followers not to worry or be slow
because victory eventually belongs to believers. If believers have
received blows, similar blows were also dealt to the enemy.

The third method consists of narratives of the predecessors and their
role against optional tragedies. The Holy Qur’an, puts the patience and
steadfastness of the supporters of prophets and pioneers of Islam in the
following language:

***"And how many a prophet had fought with whom were a number of devoted
men and they lost not heart at what befell them in the way of Allah, nor
did they weaken, nor did they demean themselves (before their enemies);
Allah loves the steadfast."*** (The Holy Qur’an, 3: 146)

There are many such verses in the Holy Qur’an describing similar
situations, and encouraging believers to tread the path of Prophets. Of
course, patience against such optional tragedies, while it is quite
difficult and requires strong determination and faith, but at the same
time, in itself plays a miraculous role in producing firm resolve and
righteous faith; and more important than that is responsible for
creation of the ideal society of Islam.

It is for this reason that many verses of the Holy Qur’an as well as of
narrations of the infallible Imams, emphasise in different styles the
importance of this branch of patience, and have issued the necessary
guidelines and instructions about its practice. Since this discussion
which is mostly based upon narratives, therefore let us quote one more
narration about patience against all kinds of tragedies as follows:

"Abi Basir quotes from Imam Ja'fer Sadiq (a.s.): "A free person is free
in all situations, if a terrible tragedy befalls him he is patient, and
tragedies and inflictions cannot break him. He might be arrested,
chained and tyrannised but converts hardships into comfort like Prophet
Joseph the righteous, whose freedom was the least affected by
oppression, tyranny and imprisonment."[^12]

[^1]: Hurr on the morning of Ashura, came over to Imam Husayn's (a.s.)
camp and preferred to die as a martyr. (Ed.)

[^2]: This has been explained by the lady Fatima daughter of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) in her sermon at Kufa.

[^3]: al-Kafi vol. 2

[^4]: al-Kafi vol. 2

[^5]: Since Mua'wiyah's sister Umm-e-Habibah was the Prophet's wife, and
like his other spouses was called Mother of Believers. With this
misconstrued logic Mua'wiyah's father Abu-Sufyan, a hard-core heathen
would be called as "Grandfather of Believers" and his wife Hind, the
eater of the liver of the Prophet's uncle Martyr Hamza would be called
"Grandmother of Believers"!

[^6]: Ja'far bin Muhammad 'Roudaki" regarded as the father of Persian
poetry, flourished in the Samanid Court at Bukhara in the 9th-l0th
century AD. (Ed.)

[^7]: al-Kafi vol. 2, p. 93

[^8]: Safinatul Bihar vol. 2, p. 5

[^9]: (Safinatul Bihar)

[^10]: Like the French poet Gautier who once during wartime stated: "I
prefer lying down to sitting, I prefer sitting to standing, and I prefer
remaining home to going out. I will know nothing of the war they say has
engulfed the whole world, unless a bullet shatters the window of my
house" (Tr.)

[^11]: The Prophet was referring to believers in the mission of earlier
Prophets, who in those distant times were subjected to all sorts of
inhuman atrocities by the idolaters. The main theme of the messages of
all divine Prophets was Monotheism (belief in the One and Only Allah)
and Islam, which means submission to Allah's will. (Ed.)

[^12]: al-Kafi vol. 2 p. 89


