Chapter 6: The Advantages and Effects of Patience
=================================================

In the end, it would be necessary to mention about the advantages and
constructive effects of patience. Although in our earlier discussions,
the topic has been covered to a certain extent, but in order to provide
more detailed information regarding the individual and social effects of
patience, further discussion is necessary.

It should be mentioned that, here we are not looking into the advantages
of patience in the next world, i.e. the rewards which will be awarded in
the Hereafter to a person for being patient in this life. But at the
same time, it should not be forgotten that those rewards cannot be
separated with some of the advantages of patience in the life of this
world.

At present, however, we are looking into rewards and advantages of
patience for a patient person, or a society and groups of patients, as a
ready cash, on account of their being steadfast and patient, right here
at this stage of worldly life. It is really difficult to start and to
select a certain advantage out of unlimited advantages of patience.

One could say in nutshell, that everything, this world as well as the
next world; the higher noble human ideals as well as the lowest
mischievous plots, and in summary, each goal or aim, desired by any one,
are all directly tied to their being steadfast and patient. If it is
required to produce a logical reasoning to support the above statement,
and if the vast experiences gained by mankind throughout history are not
sufficient enough for convincing, then let us present this definite and
explicit formula:

Accomplishment of a goal requires action, and action requires patience
and endurance.

Everyone must have, at least a couple of times in his lifespan, examined
the correctness of the above formula.

Permanence and Victory
----------------------

The Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) in the following
quotation, which is full of wisdom said:

"A steadfast patient person would never be denied success, however it
may materialise after a long time."[^1]

In another quotation from him, the same theme has been described in
other words as follows:

"Whoever mounts the horse of patience would definitely find his path to
the field of victory."[^2]

During the battle of Siffin, in an inspiring sermon for boosting the
morale of his forces, the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.)
said:

"Make your supports upon righteousness and patience (stability); because
it is only after patience (stability) that victory shall be bestowed
upon you."[^3]

Is it really true, that patience and endurance will enable a person to
achieve his goal? If this is a overall law or regulation, which is
always applicable, then why all along the history, we encounter many
groups, who in spite of their best efforts at endurance and
steadfastness could not accomplish their desired goals, and could not
witness the victory. During the early period of Islam, there are
incidents like Ashura, the uprising of the 'Tawwabin' [^4], of Zaid bin
Ali [^5], and similar incidents during later periods.

Of course many people are interested to know the answer to the above
questions, but if we ponder a little bit, the answer will become
explicitly clear. In our opinion, those who consider these historical
apparently unsuccessful and inconclusive events, such as Ashura, and
martyrdom of Hazrat Zaid, as a violation of the overall law (after
patience comes victory), have not recognised the aims and objects, which
were incorporated in each of these incidents, and whose attainment meant
achieving success and victory for these movements. Now let us ask this
question: What were the aims of these historical events? If this
question could be answered correctly, it would become quite apparent
that under no circumstances they were defeated or disappointed in their
endeavours and efforts toward achieving the cherished goals.

Incidentally, it should be reminded, that aims and objectives, as
regards to being long term or short term, differ from each other. Some
of the aims could be accomplished in short time, while some others could
only be materialised after a lengthy period. To plant a sapling, nurture
it and make all other necessary arrangements, are preliminary
requirements, in order to utilise the fruits of that tree. If all these
preliminary requirements were, without the least negligence, fulfilled
timely, and if precautions were taken to make it resist the negative
factors responsible for unproductiveness and decay, certainly this plant
will bear fruits, but a uniform and fixed period for all places does not
exist.

Sometimes the fruits under consideration will be obtained, say after a
period of one year. But occasionally the type of the tree, the fruits
under consideration, and the natural circumstances are such that one
cannot hope to have fruits at least before 10 years. Certainly, the
ultimate goal for taking care of this sapling, which will be achieved
after 10 years, is to have the desired fruits of this tree.

But during all these long waiting years, the aim behind each year's
efforts is to move the sapling one step closer to the date when it will
bear fruits. After passing of each progressive year, the gardener
becomes happy and satisfied, that his efforts during the past years have
produced results i.e. the sapling has grown through one stage, getting
on a year closer to its fruit-bearing date.

Now, if an observer, aware of the efforts and endeavours of this
hardworking and patient gardener all along the year, does not see any
fruits on the tree after passing of a year, and wrings his hands in
hopelessness and looses his confidence in the famous notion: "It is only
after patience, victory would have a chance," and out of immaturity and
inexperience were to criticise the gardener, then such an observer would
obviously be termed a narrow minded and impatient person by everyone and
would be reminded that he should not expect that the efforts and
endeavours of one year will produce a result equivalent to 10 years of
efforts.

The movement of Ashura, and all other later movements having the same
orientation and same direction, without exception succeeded in achieving
their desired aims and goals. Each of these movements were giant strides
for the destruction of power of tyrants ruling in the name of Islam, and
for the establishment of ideal Islamic society.

Without any doubt following these pioneering giant steps, if the courage
of later generations would have encouraged them, to take the next steps,
the ultimate result would have been certainly achieved. Therefore, to
expect that ultimate result, which could only be obtained through the
organised and continuous efforts and involvement of a few generations,
or few persons, or some people of a single Generation, is certainly
wrong, resulting from ignorance and over-expectation.

In the above example, it should be said to that impatient and
inexperienced observer, that those who had accepted the hardships of
gardening and discharged their duties understood well that the work done
by them, each day and each hour, had instantaneously produced desired
results, even before the passing of that hour and day, and they achieved
the result of their patience practised at each passing instant. Two
years of hard work of this gardener brings the fruit-bearing date closer
to two years. If his efforts were not there, the fruits of this sapling
would have been delayed by two years or perhaps two years of
fruit-bearing time would have been wasted. Is reality other than this?

Parallel to this reality, there exists another reality too. If, after an
obstacle which prevented the sincere gardener from continuing his job,
another gardener does not pursue the duties of his predecessor, by
undertaking the planned activities for the third, fourth years,
obviously this tree will never bear fruits.

Let us consider the example of a certain load, supposed to be carried to
a place, say ten steps ahead. Now, suppose it has moved by two steps,
one could say the load has reached close to its final destination by two
steps. If the first person, responsible for its delivery, is in a
position to undertake the remaining steps, he would do so, if not his
substitute will take the remaining steps to carry the load to its final
destination. But if this responsibility, i.e. moving the load past the
remaining eight steps was not discharged by the first person or by his
substitute, then obviously the load will never be delivered to its final
destination. However, there is no doubt, that the result of patience in
taking the first two pioneering steps has been achieved, because the
load has moved by two steps.

To uproot a deep rooted tree, and to remove a huge rock without having
proper equipment like drill, chain saw, nr powerful and strong hands, is
of course not possible, but having all of them, but not having patience
will not produce any result. If the first person having strong hands and
patience, after making a headway was forced to discontinue his efforts,
then the others who were supposed to take his place, are responsible to
carry on the job by one more step ahead, and another stage closer to
success.

Likewise, the uprising of Zaid bin Ali, because of an unexpected
tragedy -- an arrow struck him on his forehead and he fell down
instantly -- could not accomplish the final victory, but the result of
this pioneering step (i.e. to arise) was achieved immediately by him.
His uprising was a heavy blow to the huge rock of the usurper Omayyad
regime.

A heavy rock, which required repeated and continuous blows, to be
destroyed completely. If the initial blows would have been accompanied
by later blows, this black boulder of Omayyad rule, which was a heavy
burden upon the Islamic Ummah, and a source of oppression, would have
splintered into pieces. Certainly, without the initial severe blow being
struck, the later blows would not have achieved that desired result, or
may be, no one would have dared to strike those later blows.

There are narrations - refer to Bihar-ul-Anwar - which consider the
martyrdom of the Lord of Martyrs, Imam Husayn (a.s.), as the key factor
for the collapse of Sufyani rule and the martyrdom of Zaid bin Ali for
the downfall of the Marwanids[^6].

Psychological Traces of Patience in the Lives of individuals
------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from the constructive social advantages of patience such as
gaining victory and fulfilment of aims and goals, this characteristic is
also responsible for the positive and very important influences upon the
mentality and spirit of the patient person.

It is because of this miraculous awareness, that most of the historical
human sacrifices, and specially the supreme sacrifices of the martyrs of
Karbala, i.e. the companions and relatives of the Lord of Martyrs "Imam
Husayn (a.s.)", whose memories we are celebrating during these
nights[^7] will become easy to comprehend.

What we mean with the spiritual mentality, are the influences left by
the patient person upon his soul and mind, that before accomplishing the
external and definite results of his struggle, he instantaneously
obtains the personal result.

The Birth of Invincible Spirit
------------------------------

The foremost positive and constructive effect of patience is to produce
a strong and invincible personality. Like a good physical exercise
programme makes a person strong and healthy to enable him to offer
better physical resistance. Secondly, it produces all the required
elements for achieving success in accomplishment of aims, fulfilment of
desires, be material or ideological, among the patient individuals.

The defeats and failures suffered during the social, religious, and
ideological struggle has had a devastative moral effect, a blow,
inflicted by the vincible and week mentality upon the determination to
carry on the struggle, whose damage and devastation is many times severe
than the losses inflicted by trained professional armed forces and their
armament.

The soldier[^8], who decided to run away from the battlefield turning
his back to the enemy has indeed first suffered a moral defeat, before
giving up his physical strength. Until this psychological defeat is not
inflicted upon him, it is impossible that a soldier will be able to turn
his back and run away from the battlefield.

The historic behaviour of Tariq bin Ziyad -The commander of the Muslim
army -- the brave Muslim commander and victor of a portion of Spain in
the year 94 Hijri (711 AD.), who after crossing the Mediterranean Sea
and stepping upon enemy land, ordered the burning of all his ships, is
an example of this invincible spirit. The prime quality of patience is
to produce such an invincible spirit in a patient person.

Those individuals, who while facing routine events of day-to-day life,
such as financial losses, sickness, frustration, hatred, and death etc.,
do not offer resistance and endurance, and very soon become dejected,
aggrieved, annoyed, and helpless, when confronted with obstacles in
their path, and thereby leave the scene of struggle and are suspectable
to instant defeat. Contrary to these individuals of weak mentality there
are those, who in confronting every event in their life use patience as
their ultimate winning weapon, and offer resistance in the best possible
manner, achieving an invincible morale and strong will power to face the
problems of life.

An impatient person could be compared to a soldier in the battlefield
who is fighting virtually naked without armour. Such an ill-equipped
soldier is most likely to be killed and disappear from the scene during
the very first encounter. With the same analogy a patient person could
be compared to a soldier who is clad in a coat of mail from head to
toes, and is fully equipped with all the required armaments. Obviously
to defeat such a well-equipped soldier by the enemy is relatively a
difficult task.

The one, who would never be defeated in the battlefield of life, is the
one who had already made all the necessary arrangements, by putting on
the armour of patience. Such a person, never gets defeated easily, and
when faced with problems and unpleasant events, which abound at every
step on the road of perfection and prosperity, never flinches his
eyebrows, and his legs and heart remain firm and stable without showing
the least signs of trembling.

The following narration from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) throws ample light about
the depth of this divinely inspired Islamic characteristic:

"Anyone who has not prepared for himself logistics of patience to meet
every tragedy will find himself in a state of despair and
helplessness"[^9]

It means that the one who has not planned in advance, how to face the
problems and unexpected tragedies of life, and has not developed within
himself a spirit of resistance, would soon find himself in a state of
despair and helplessness. The opposite of this is, if someone for
confrontation with tragedies has equipped himself with the logistics of
patience shall never face disappointment and defeat.

The secret of steadfastness and permanence of great builders of the
history of mankind, and the foremost amongst them, the divine Prophets
and other pious statesmen, who in spite of being inflicted with the most
severe pains and tortures at the very beginning of their invitation,
remained relatively active and stable, lies in the same point.

With an accurate foresight regarding the bitterness and unpleasantness
of this path, and with their properly being equipped with the logistics
of patience, they were able to completely eliminate the possibilities of
their psychological defeat and with the result converted themselves into
robust and invincible creatures.

Their opponents and enemies that in many instances were equipped with
all kinds of resources became tired and helpless, but these great men in
spite of being deprived of proper resources diligently continued their
heroic invincible resistance.

Mutawakkil [^10] the Abbasid caliph once said: "Ibn al-Ridha’ [^11] has
put me in a state of perplexion."

How someone like Imam Hadi [^12] (a.s.), who has spent most of the
period of his leadership under the intense pressure of the ruling regime
of caliph Mutawakkil, was in a position to put the powerful caliph in a
state of annoyance. When one among the two combatant adversaries is weak
as regards to the outwardly resources, but in spite of being faced with
imprisonment, deprivations, being away from the comfortable and secured
environment, does not get harassed, pressures and hardships does not
break his iron will, and in spite of all these obstacles on the path of
his cherished goals, continues his long term march. It is obvious that
his adversary who, in spite of having equipped with better material
resources lacks the commitment and strong spiritual faith and therefore
becomes easily harassed and defeated.

Certainly, an impatient wayfarer cannot without first getting himself
tired, at the same time, would be able to make his adversary tired
undoubtedly he is going to loose and be defeated. This is the strange
characteristic of patience which makes a person invincible.

Appearance of Righteous Virtues Within
--------------------------------------

The people before testing, cannot evaluate themselves, and very often
are unaware about the hidden energy in their existence. Let us consider
the example of a strong person, who is possessed with plenty of natural
physical strength without doing any special practice or physical
exercise. Let us imagine that he has never participated in a weight
lifting or any other physical competition, such a person is certainly
not aware regarding the amount of physical strength in his body. We
could only discover the Allah-given energy in our existence, when we are
challenged to participate in a certain competition which requires the
utilisation of that particular energy.

The second important effect of patience is, that a patient person after
offering resistance in different fields of life and against the events
and obstacles, discovers about the amount of energy, its particulars,
and the noble and higher sublime virtues hidden within his existence,
which were never discovered by him earlier, during a routine life
without any headache.

Those who have suffered the pressures and harshness of life, and for the
sake of their cherished noble aims and ideals, were subjected to severe
tragedies and hardships appreciate the above meanings. Such individuals
with an irreversible decree of determination, in their confrontation
with great dangers, and severe pressures, while a strange naive observer
would have considered them defeated and destroyed completely, because of
their patience and endurance, were able to achieve a sense of relief and
victory, an unprecedented power and surprising grandeur; within their
existence, which was something completely new for them and was never
realised by them before.

Therefore, it is because of patience, that a patient person could better
recognise his self, as well as could better identify the positive points
within his existence, and could discover the energy which was never
identified throughout his life before.

More Attention and Reliance upon Allah
--------------------------------------

The third constructive quality of patience is that whatever stage or
extent a patient person may be, it helps him to bring relatively closer
and more reliant upon Allah. Now, some people may consider that reliance
upon Allah does not get along with the reliance upon self, and therefore
according to their logic, anyone who is dependent upon Allah, could not
rely upon his self.

When it is said: 'Rely upon Allah', such people complain: Let people
rely upon themselves, and let their eyes and hopes look towards
themselves, as if the one who invites the people to rely upon Allah,
wants them not to be relied upon themselves. While in reality for a
person committed to Allah, reliance upon self is complimentary and
inseparable with each other, even to the extent that reliance upon self
is regarded as one of the parameter of the patience, which in effect is
a means for reliance upon Allah as well as. Because impatience against
bitter tragedies of life, and fear against optional calamities, which
are reflections of lack of self-reliance, also means forgetting Allah.

When a person is inflicted with the severe tragedies of life, and the
millstone representing the testing of life is grinding him with intense
pressure, if he does not become impatient, aggrieved, and annoyed, the
channels of his communication with Allah would become wider and
independent, and his heart and soul would be enlightened with the Light
of Allah.

And on the contrary, his becoming weak and annoyed, makes him ignorant,
stranger and disconnected from his own self as well as from Allah.

This sentence speaks about a reality fully explicit with clear reasoning
and tested with the experience of those, who in their confrontation with
the adverse conditions were able to utilise patience as their winning
weapon, and believe and acknowledge this matter with certainty.

***"Our Lord! Bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure and give us
help against the disbelieving folk."*** (The Holy Qur’an, 2:250)

[^1]: Nahj-ul-Balagha

[^2]: Nahj-ul-Balagha

[^3]: Tarikh Kamil ibn Athir

[^4]: Tawwabin or penitents, as they are called in history books, were
mostly people of Kufa and Iraq, who rose up against the Omayyad rule in
64 A.H. (683 AD.), three years after the tragedy of Karbala to avenge
the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the Prophet's Household. Led by the
Prophet's ageing companion Sulayman ibn gurad al-Khazaei, who was one of
the leading Islamic generals in the conquest of Transoxiana, their sole
aim in battle, was either to kill the ungodly Omayyads or to achieve
martyrdom in the process. For almost two years, they fought the caliphal
forces, killing a great number of those troops who had fought against
Imam Husayn (a.s.) at Karbala.(Ed)

[^5]: Zaid was the son of the fourth Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (the
survivor of Karbala). Fed up with Omayyad tyranny, he started an
uprising in Iraq and was tragically martyred and his body was burned by
the caliphal forces in 124 A.H. (740 AD.). His movement like other Alid
uprisings, aroused people's conscience against the libertine and ungodly
rule of the Omayyads, who were swept into the dustbin of history ten
years later in 132 A.H. (749 AD.). (Ed)

[^6]: The Omayyuds who usurped power of the Islamic State in 41 A.H.,
when Muawiya the son of Abu Sufyan, forced Imam Hassan (a.s.) to
abdicate, were divided into two branches; the Sufyanids whose rule
terminated with the death of Muawiya ibn Yazid in 64 A.H. (683 AD.) and
the Marwanids, whose rule started with Marwan ibn Hakam and ended with
Marwan ibn Muhammad al-Hemar in 132 A.H. (749 AD.), when a new dynasty
the Abbasids usurped power. (Ed)

[^7]: These speeches were delivered during Muharram of 1394 Hijri at
Masjid-e-Karamat in Mashhad. (Tr.)

[^8]: General George C. Marshall, a great soldier had stated that "you
can have all the material in the world, but without morale it is largely
ineffective". He also said: "it is not enough to fight, it is the spirit
which we bring to the fight which decides the issue. It is morale that
wins the victory." (Tr.)

[^9]: Tuhaf-al-Aqool

[^10]: Mutawakkil is one of the Abbasid caliphs who was specially
hostile to the Ahl-ul-Bait and their followers, ruled from 232/847 to
247/861 (Tr.)

[^11]: After Imam al-Ridha’ (a.s.) the 8th Imam, three successive Imams
till the 11th Imam and some other prominent descendants of the 8th Imam,
during that period were called "Ibn al-Ridha’". In the above sentence
the reference is to Imam Hadi (a.s.) the 10th Imam

[^12]: The important point in this narration is the importance of
predicting dangers in advance, while making preparations for struggle.
Perhaps, those who without considering the potential dangers, conducted
a dangerous operation, do not have the strength to confront the danger
and therefore as soon as they face the signs of potential danger, became
disappointed, ashamed and helpless.


