Chapter 12: The Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government (Part 3)
==================================================================================

The Different Approaches in Discussing the Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The subject under discussion, i.e. the mutual relationship between the
people and the government, can be studied and examined from different
angles. One is from historical perspective; that is, for us to examine
the governments existing in human societies throughout history and how
they established relations with the people. This approach requires
extensive work which is in need of historical information.

Another angle is to examine the present condition in the world and the
relationships between the people and the present-day governments and it
shall be in the form of a descriptive discussion. Under this approach,
the relationships existing between the governments and the peoples under
their respective jurisdictions in the different societies shall be
stated from the perspective of the different schools and ideologies. Of
course, this description shall be the groundwork for the succeeding
assessment of the scale of desirability of the various elements of those
relationships. At any rate, the nature of the discussion is a
descriptive one.

Another angle is related to the viewpoint of Islam about the government
and its relationship with the people. This issue can be examined from
two perspectives: One is in the form of an imperative and theoretical
discussion, while the second is in the form of a thematic and objective
discussion. In the context of the actual observations of the Islamic
government, the government’s relationship with the people from the time
of the Islamic government established in Medina by the Holy Prophet (S)
can be examined as the evidence and basis for finding out and
understanding the viewpoint of Islam on social issues.

In the same context, similar to this kind of relations can also be
examined in other periods where governments were founded in the name of
Islam. What is more worthy to note for us is the examination of the
relationship of the government during the period of the Islamic
Revolution whose example was the Imam’s relationship with the people.
The mode of this discussion is an examination of actual and external
cases. In this method, the society serves as a laboratory to be studied
in order to arrive at a theory and to examine and evaluate it.

The other mode of the discussion is in the form of an analytical
discussion keeping in view of the foundations of Islam, how should the
government’s relationship with the people be. In this method, while
disregarding what relations have been established throughout the history
of Muslim societies, the point is to know which of them is consistent
with the standards and foundations of the Islamic thought and which of
them is not. Reciprocally, in a comparative discussion, one can examine
the type of relations of the governments with the people in the other
schools and societies, especially in the West in the present time. In
this method, one can study the said relations actually and externally
(descriptive discussion) as well as on the basis of intellectual
foundations they adopt in political philosophy (analytical discussion).

The fact is that many of these subjects can be expressed in theory,
discussion, speech, or writing, but cannot be put into practice
perfectly. Instead, a very wide gap (sometimes even to the extent of 180
degrees) between what is said and what is materialized in actuality can
be witnessed. In the Muslim world, the same manifestations also exist.
We have the theory of Islamic government but in different ages of the
Muslim history, in some parts of the Muslim countries, some people
obtained power to govern, adopted different methods of governance, and
organized their relations with the people in such a manner that has not
been far from that of the government of infidels. The governments of the
likes of Hajjaj ibn Yusuf[^1] or some other Marwanites (descendants of
Marwan ibn al-Hakam and their followers) under the name of Islam and
even under the name of the caliph (successor) of the Holy Prophet (S)
have been many throughout the history of Islam while they used to act
diametrically in opposition to the objectives of the Islamic government
and contrary to the theory of Islamic government.

Some people, especially those who are more inclined toward sociological
discussions, say, “We do not have much concern with theoretical and
hypothetical discussions. We rather observe the actual behaviors.” In
their opinion, Islam is that which the Muslims have while Christianity
is that which the Christians have. For us to say that Islam is
such-and-such, or Islam says that such a thing must be done, but in
practice we observe that the actual reality among Muslims is something
else, is a useless discussion. If we really intend to describe and
explain the Islamic government, we have to see how the government of
Muslims has been and what the condition of the present governments
reigning in the name of Islam is.

The above outlook is a sociological one which does not give much value
to theoretical and value-laden discussions. In this outlook, they
examine the actual happenings and pass judgment on the basis of the
events. Perhaps, throughout these two decades after the victory of the
Islamic Revolution, you might have observed such an approach in some
writings or speeches. Prior to the Revolution, there were those who used
to discuss and speak in the name of Islam and Islamology, saying, “Islam
is that which can be witnessed in the practice of the Muslims. For us to
imagine that Islam is something different from what we can observe in
the practice of the Muslims is nothing but sheer illusion, dream and
imagination.” However, the fact is that we, the Muslims, believe that
Islam is that which has been ordained by God the Exalted or that which
is required through the statements of the Holy Prophet (S) and the pure
Imams (*‘a*). Islam is that which is introduced by the Qur’an.
Therefore, the truth of Islam is not exactly consistent with what the
Muslims have done or are doing.

You can take this point as the theory of Islamic government after the
victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran. If they say, “The theory of
the Islamic government and the Islamic revolution must be presented
through the actual happenings and performance of the Islamic Republic,”
such an outlook is wrong and such a method is incorrect because in many
cases there may be deviations and that which was desirable might have
not been realized. There is a difference between theory and practice.

Of course, those who want that whatever they have accepted in theory is
also realized in practice will always try to see to it that their
behaviors are gearing toward the ideal point and their movement’s trend
as ascending, and if they suddenly and unexpectedly do not achieve their
ultimate goal, at least the direction is something which is always near
the ideal target. But if the direction of the movement is not like that,
we have not promised that throughout its path, this government is
totally and definitely the ideal Islamic government and that we have to
defend it thoroughly. We will defend the present government so long as
it is consistent with the principles and foundations of Islam as well as
the principles and theory of the Islamic government. As to whether there
is deviation or not throughout its lifespan, we do not guarantee that
since they are ruling in the name of Islam, certainly everything is
proper and we defend all its particularities.

Is there any considerable period throughout human history wherein a
religion government (prior to Islam) or an Islamic government (after the
advent of Islam) has been perfectly established according to what God
wanted and the requirement of the doctrine? My answer is, “I do not
know.” If there is really such a thing, it was only a short period
during the time of the Holy Prophet (S) and an equally short period
during the time of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). But in other
times, whatever has transpired to the followers of other religions and
Muslims, or done in the name of religious or Islamic government, we do
not know them as completely religious or Islamic, and we defend only
that extent which is consistent with the religious or Islamic
foundations and principles. We also criticize wherever there is
deviation.

Yet, those who have sociological inclination do not pass judgment in
this manner. They say, “The Islamic government is the same thing which
exists and is practiced in Iran.” As such, if lack of success and
deficiencies are observed, it is clear that the Islamic government has
these deficiencies. The outcome of such a statement will be this one: If
this government fails to realize its objectives, it will become clear
that Islam cannot actualize whatever it says and promises. Therefore, in
their opinion, that defect will be from Islam. We pointed out earlier
that in our opinion, such a judgment is not accurate, because Islam may
have given admonitions and orders, but for whatever reason we have
failed or did not desire to act upon those admonitions and orders, we
might have still failed to reach the ideal point.

Descriptive Study of the Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government in Islam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Concerning the relationship between the government and the people in
Islam, one method is to utilize actual studies, observations and
examination of external evidences. That is, we have to see what has
happened in the Muslim governments and which relations have existed
among the governments and the people. It must be noted that the outcome
of these studies does not bespeak of the relationship between the
government and the people in Islam. In reality, it expresses the
relationship between the government and the people in the government of
Muslims.

The fact is that in many cases, actions have been done in the name of
Islam, which apart from not being a source of pride for the school of
Islam, are in fact a source of ignominy for Islam. There are many
examples in this context. One of the examples is the same affairs for
which we sit in lamentation during the days of the month of Muharram.
Under which name were they governing those who ruled in Sham, martyred
the children of the Messenger of Allah (S) and took as captives his
daughters? They used to regard themselves as the caliphs of the
Messenger of Allah (S) while they used to drink forbidden drinks in
their parties, engage in vain talks, recite profane poetry, listened to
notorious songs, and watched dancers, while they ruled under the name of
Islam.

These issues are not new and are not related to today and yesterday.
There were also musicians and singers who used to sing national songs.
They used to praise the tribes and families, the nobles and the ancients
of these people, taking pride in their fathers. During those days, these
issues existed and they are not confined to the present that in the name
of national culture and Islam, many works contrary to the religious law
are done. The fact is that these cannot and must not be attributed to
Islam.

In any case, the issue of the relationship of the governments, which
were in power in the name of Islam, with the people throughout the
history of Muslims can be examined. As we have stated, they have no
identical actions. In fact, they have been very different from one
another. Sometimes, they have been near to Islam to some extent while at
other times a hundred percent anti-Islamic. Be that as it may, this
historical discussion is not so much useful for the point we are
presently driving at.

In this historical method, what may be useful for us is an examination
of some examples of governments which we regard as Islamic and can be
cited as an appropriate reference for understanding the theory of Islam.
A vivid example of them is the government of the Commander of the
Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*). It is so good that this year is the Year of ‘Ali
(*‘a*) and ‘Ali’s Conduct, and there are those who identify and examine
the characteristics of the government of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and present to the
society the result of those examinations in the form of articles, or
discussions and research works.

Of course, innovation in research and avoidance of repeating and
rewriting of the earlier writings as well as attention to our needs,
especially the issues which we demand today, should be observed. We
should strive to answer the questions of the society today from the life
conduct of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) How to govern? How
should one behave with the people? How should the people organize their
relationship with the government? When the Imam (*r*) was in Paris,
foreign journalists frequented his place of sojourn to ask him, “What is
the nature of the government that you want to establish?” The Imam used
to reply, “The model of our government is the Islamic government.”

They used to ask, “What does the Islamic government mean? How should it
be? What is your model?” The Imam used to reply, “The model of our
government is the government of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).”
By means of it that the personality of ‘Ali (*‘a*) has become known to
all societies and peoples of the world irrespective of religious
affiliations and nationalities, and everybody has learnt of something
from the life and conduct of ‘Ali (*‘a*) as well as his justice. The
Imam used to say, “The model of our government is the government of ‘Ali
(*‘a*).” As to what extent that the Imam succeeded in putting into
practice this model in our revolutionary society can be examined. But
what is fair is that the Imam did not indulge in negligence as far as it
was related to him.

The eminent Imam followed his master [*mawla*] as far as that which was
related to him was concerned. His simple living, nightly acts of
worship, benevolences to the deprived classes of the society, wailings
and lamentations, seeking of divine assistance, attachment to the truth,
overcoming the pressure of the nearest ones, and not preferring his and
his family and relatives’ interests are all indicative of his imitation
of ‘Ali (*‘a*). During last year’s Year of Imam Khomeini, they were
supposed to familiarize us better with the Imam, but unfortunately, they
made us instead more alien to him. Subjects under the rubric of the
Imam’s viewpoints were discussed and published and most of them were
contrary to the viewpoints of the late Imam. What can be done?! It was
the same during the time of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*). The late Imam spoke on a certain day and then the
following day they would distort his sayings notwithstanding the fact
that no leader in the world was as simple as him in his language.
Sometimes, he used to say, “I do not know how to speak so as to prevent
them from distorting my speech!”

In any case, the life of Imam was so similar to that of his grandfather
(Imam ‘Ali). Yet through a single man, a government cannot be set
aright, as the saying goes, “One flower cannot bring about the spring
season.” As far as he could, he used to be watchful of those who were
around him and directly under his authority. Sometimes, he would
admonish them while at another time, reprimand and criticize them. As
far as I remember, I heard from high-ranking officials of the country
saying, “It never happened that we came to the Imam without him
expressing criticism.

Whenever we visited him, he had a criticism.” Even his nearest kin whom
he loved so much, whenever they had a point of weakness, the Imam would
remind them. Of course, a reminder does not mean that it must be done
completely. The point is that he used to play his role. If we would like
to show two examples of government as exemplar Islamic governments
throughout the history of Islam, one is the government of ‘Ali (*‘a*)
and the other is the government of Imam Khomeini (*r*).

Of course, this does not mean that all the rest were or are at fault;
rather, the Imam had certain peculiarities both in his own personality
and the social conditions which appeared to him by the will of God.
These conditions will not be provided for everybody exactly. On the
other hand, the rest could not play the role which he used to play
because they do not have all the social bases and conditions. Therefore,
I mean to say that the rest are blameworthy though there are also those
whose certain behaviors could be criticized and have defects which they
can afford not to have. Anyway, human beings are not stereotypical
machines. Instead, everyone has his own certain peculiarities just as
people’s knowledge, faith, piety, willpower, and management skills are
diverse. Apart from innate characteristics of individuals and their
personality differences, skills are different among them. Of course, we
have to thank God that after the Imam, today we have his substitute, and
by His will, God will prolong his sublime presence with us.

Whatever the case may be, historical examination is also a method of
examining the relationship between the government and the people. One
can find the ideal behavior of rulers toward the people in the life of
‘Ali (*‘a*) and that of the Imam (may Allah be pleased with him). In
this regard, all of us have heard or read certain things, and we can
narrate them to others. There are so many outstanding points in the life
of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) that if someone intends to
express, after a whole year of sitting together and conversation, there
will still be many things to be said.

One day, while ‘Ali (*‘a*) was standing on the prayer niche and
preparing to utter the *takbirat* *al-ihram*[^2] after reciting the
*iqamah*,[^3] a woman entered the mosque and shouted, “O ‘Ali! Wait.” He
did not commence the prayer. Instead, he turned toward the woman and
asked, “What are you saying?” She answered, “The governor whom you sent
to our place is an oppressor; he is ill-mannered… etc.” The Imam of the
congregation and Islamic ruler was standing in the mosque, recited the
*iqamah* and wanted to utter the *takbir*, and a woman came to lodge a
complaint against the governor of her city. While tears flowed in his
eyes, ‘Ali (*‘a*) said, “O God! You know that I am not pleased with his
oppression.” He then said, “Bring me a pen and a paper.” After reciting
the *takbirat al-Ihram* of his prayer, he wrote the order of dismissal
of the said governor and gave it to the woman. Thereafter, he uttered,
“*Allahu akbar*!”

Where in the world have you ever heard that the relationship between the
government and the people is similar to that government? These examples
are so many that if they are inscribed and painted in golden tableaus
and displaced in the museums of the world, every fair-minded person who
takes a look at them will be shocked out of astonishment and amazement.
Can a person be as free as such?! Which school is this?!

There were also similar instances in the life of the Imam (*r*). Of
course, there is a very wide gap between ‘Ali (*‘a*) and the late Imam,
but examples similar to the life conduct of the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) can be observed in his behavior. In this age and in this
world, according to the testimony of all his friends and foes, he is the
most beloved person ever seen in this century throughout the world. The
enemies also confessed that during the last century, there has not been
any person in the world as beloved as the Imam. Although not in words,
his enemies secretly loved him and were enamored by his personality,
justice and sincerity. His inner and outer being, word and action were
one. He would do whatever he would say, and say whatever he would do.
His heart was indeed burning for all people—young and old, child and
adult, man and woman. Whenever he saw that someone was deprived, he
would really be upset.

Prophet Moses (*‘a*) heard in the Mount of Sinai that a number of his
people had become idol-worshippers, but there was no change in his state
of emotion. When he returned from the Mount and saw people worship in
idol, it was at this moment that he threw the heavenly tablets, his
color changed and took hold of the beard of his brother Harun (*‘a*) in
front of people and said, *“Did you disobey my command?”* Prophet Moses
(*‘a*) knew it beforehand, but knowing is different from seeing. The
Imam also knew that there were many deprived people in the society, but
whenever he would see an orphan or a deprived person, he would be so
touched and he felt a sense of responsibility.

This is one method of discussion through which we examined the Commander
of the Faithful’s conduct with people so as to know how the government’s
relationship with people in Islam is.

By disregarding the actual cases taking place, in the analytical
discussion we have to note what the intellectual and theoretical
foundations of Islam require in the realm of governance. How should the
government’s relationship with people be? We shall tackle this subject
in the next meeting, and in the remaining time of this session I shall
deal with a subject in the field of historical and actual discussion of
the mutual relationship between people and government.

Descriptive study of the Mutual Relationship between People and Government in the Democratic system
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Just as we can have an actual examination of the government’s
relationship with people in the Muslim world, we can also perform the
same actual studies about the government’s relationship with people in
other schools. We all know that the political developments in the world
and the people’s intellectual and rational advancement, especially in
the West, finally ended at the point where the best form to govern is
for us to set aside religion. The best model of government is the
democratic government and it represents the sovereignty of the will and
demand of people in all spheres. Of course, as to how this government be
established both in theory and practice, certain events took place until
it reached the present stage in the contemporary world whose common and
ideal mode, particularly in the advanced countries, is the democratic
model; that is the government by which every person describes everything
through his own thinking and will.

Now, in an actual study, one can examine how democratic government is
run in the world. In other words, we shall examine in practice what is
said that democracy is the government or sovereignty based on the will
of the people, and see how the governments that rule in the name of the
people actually govern, what their duties and role are, and how their
relationship with the people is.

By dispensing with every sort of fanaticism, we want to examine one
example of government in one of the most advanced countries which claims
to be the champion of democracy and defender of human rights, viz. the
United States of America. In this actual examination, we want to see how
government takes form in America, what form the power structure there
is, and how the government’s relationship with the people is.

By considering what the Western and American scholars themselves have
reflected through examinations, statistics and actual instances they
have written in the pertinent books and articles, with utmost neutrality
and in plain language we declare that the government whether that of the
Republican Party or that of the Democrat Party, is a medium between the
capitalists and the masses. What plays the pivotal role in the
policymaking of these countries is the interests of the capitalists.

Of course, the capitalists consist of different groups ranging from the
landowners to the industrial giants such as manufacturers of airplanes,
spacecrafts and war armaments and producers of electronics, computers
and Internet-related software and hardware, and other technologies at
the disposal of mankind today. This number is only a small population
which does not exceed ten percent of the American population or even
less. The rest of people have no share of the national capital except
meager food for survival. Of course, there is competition among these
capitalists, and in order to win the competition, a certain group works
more with the Republican Party just as some others support the Democrat
Party. The common aim of both groups is the triumph of capital. In the
words of the eminent Imam (*‘a*), their conflict is a mock war and they
are not very inimical to each other. In fact, their objective is to
ensure the interests of the capitalists.

But how is the ruling parties’ relationship with the capitalists? They
take money from them to fund their electoral campaign so that as a
result their party would win the city, federal and presidential
elections and take the government and power in their hands. If there is
no money paid by the capitalists, one of them will not come to power.
Many of these financial assistances are official, registered in the
offices, legal, and nothing is wrong about them. Yet, in accordance with
their principles and laws, much other assistance are bribery and
embezzlement. In one of the European countries (which is known
everywhere and thus, there is no need of explicitly mentioning it) a
party ruled in the country for many years and made successes for the
country in different areas such as economic progresses. Then, it became
clear how much bribe money it took and presently the issue on the legal
trial against their heads and leaders is raised.

The fact is that in America, the government’s relationship with the
capitalists is a master-slave relationship. They collect money from the
capitalists so as to win in the elections and later on provide for their
demands. These demands will be provided for by the statesmen both in the
legislative the Congress and the Senate and the executive branch. Since
the pulse of work is in the hands of the executives, they have to ensure
the interests of the capitalists. We hear every day that through a
thousand tricks and ruses, the US Secretary of Defense departs and goes
to different countries in order to sell a certain amount of war
ammunitions and earn money.

For what? So that the life of the owners of war industries is ensured.
If he does not do it, tomorrow they will not vote for his party. What
does it mean for them not to vote? It means that they will not give
money to the party for its election campaign. Winning in the election
depends on campaign while campaign depends on money while money, in
turn, is in the hands of the capitalists. The capitalists have to give
money so that the parties can launch an election campaign in order to
win and to form the government as a result of their election victory. In
this manner, the aim of forming the government is to ensure the
interests of the capitalists.

In this way, the connection between the government and the minority
group of capitalists will be established. So, how shall be their
relationship with the masses? It will be a relationship of a deceitful
fox for deceiving its preys in which it has to carry out diverse
propaganda so as to satisfy the people and control the society in
whatever way. Of course, this work requires a highly advanced psychology
because the people consist of different groups including religious
groups, religious minorities, young and old, retirees, and men and
women. As to how each of these groups and guilds are pleased so that the
propaganda is effective on them requires a particular psychology.

In the countries where the people imitate the Americans, they do the
same things. In the extremely underdeveloped or developed countries
which take America as a model, they try, for example, to identify the
religious minorities and to contact them and promise them thus, “If we
succeed in controlling the government, we will appoint governors and
mayors who are natives from among you,” so as to win their votes. They
also take into account a special propaganda campaign for women. They
say, for example, “Once we assume the helm of government, we will give
you these liberties.” Among these, the most important and diverse
election campaigns are focused on the youth. They are always the
greatest preys of the politicians.

These works are not confined to only one or two countries. In fact, in
all democratic countries these approaches are observed. The ethnic
minorities, religious minorities, women, and youth are the main targets
of propaganda campaigns of the politicians in the world. In these
neighboring countries, in India for example, whenever we want to hold
election campaigns there are many parties which bribe the Muslims.

During the election campaign period, they try to give promises and
pledge to the Indian Muslims, who are a considerable religious minority
(with a population of about two times that of our country), thus saying,
“Once we obtain power, we will do this and that for the Muslims,” in
order to win their votes. They promise the ethnic minorities who live
along the countryside to officially recognize their language and
culture, and respect their customs and traditions, and similar other
things. For what these promises and propaganda campaigns in this manner
are? They are meant to deceive the masses.

To be a Mercenary of the Capitalists as the Real Role of the Governments in the Western Democracy
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As such, the basic and important role of the governments in the
democratic countries is to serve as mercenaries of the capitalists and
to deceive the masses. Which act are they doing which cannot be included
in these two things? What and where is this promised heaven that they
make to you and me, saying, “You set Islam aside and you will achieve
this progress and development and human rights will be observed in your
countries”? Alongside some of these industrial advancements and
developments, only God knows what oppressions, crimes and corruptions
are made.

They are willing to relegate the whole humankind to quagmire just to
protect the interests of a few. Don’t you believe?! For instance, just
observe what Hollywood is doing in America. Hollywood is a filmmaking
company which is not concerned about anything except the protection of
its interests. In a study and survey they conducted, it became clear
that most of their viewers are adolescents who like violent scenes. As
such, more than eighty percent of films that Hollywood is producing have
violent scenes. What are the repercussions of watching these films? Its
smoke will first irritate the eyes of the people. Today, the worst and
most corrupt country in the world in terms of crimes committed by
youngsters is America. A day during which a crime is not committed by
this class in America is very rare. More than two hundred million
firearms are in the hands of people and have become the toys of their
children.

This is because their lives are in danger and they have to arm
themselves and their children to defend themselves and not let anyone
harm them in the street. In going and coming from school, the children
of those who are affluent are escorted by employed policemen. The
children are not safe from the metro to school. Why are these (film
producers) allowed to be free to show these violent scenes, moral
corruptions and sexual promiscuities to the youth and adolescents and
corrupt their morality? Why are they trying to sell these films to the
other countries? What is the reason for the persistence in selling them?
The answer is: In order to get money in return.

Canada is one of the close trading partners of the United States and its
neighbor as well, and as it was frequently said before, it is the
“private yard” of America. This country which is considered the main
partner of America in the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA)[^4] is not permitting the Hollywood films to be freely sold
there and the people of Canada to watch those scenes. Of course, you
have to bear in mind that the scenes existing in Canada itself are
hellish scenes for us and we cannot tolerate them. In spite of the
corrupt life they themselves have, they are not willing to watch
American films! Why does America insist on selling these films without
being censored and is this part of their trading agreements?

The only reason is for the film producing companies to get money and
profit and also give a share to the ruling party so as to be able to
launch an election campaign and by obtaining votes it can remain in
power and meet the demands of the companies. This form of government is
the same promised heaven they promise, saying, “If our government
becomes democratic, it will become like America. That is, a puppet
government at the service of the capitalists and a deceitful fox for the
masses.

Question and Answer
-------------------

**Question**: Is there no practical experience that can be used as the
perfect model for the Islamic government? If the answer is negative, can
it be accepted that the Islamic republican government starts in the form
of trial and error, and has to continue in this form?

**Answer**: When we said that we could hardly show a perfect model of
the Islamic government, it does not mean that there are defects in
theory and the rules of Islamic administration. Instead, it is due to
the nature of man. Man is not a being that can be stereotyped and
confined to a specific space and path and not stray from it. This is
because man is an autonomous being. As such, consciously or
unconsciously in practice, people in general will commit violation
including those who hold administrative positions. These individuals
(public servants) do not come from the Divine Throne or heaven.

They are also people. This is regardless of whether the creams of the
crop are elected according to the Islamic standards or garner votes
according to the same democratic standards and through election
campaigns. Even we who are engaged in theory and theorizing in the
Islamic government, whenever we are so strict with respect to the
necessary qualifications of the position-holders and believe that the
government should be close and similar to the government of the
Infallibles (*‘a*) as much as possible, we refer to the intelligence and
not to the method, for all positions to be held by infallibles is not
possible.

Even during the time of presence of an infallible Imam, infallibility
[*‘ismah*] pertains only to the intelligence. During the time of the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), were there no individuals sent by the
Imam (*‘a*) as governors who committed violations and treacheries,
embezzle the public treasury, left and joined Mu‘awiyah? He was in the
government of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and had a decree of appointment from ‘Ali
(*‘a*) but he used to misappropriate the public treasury, leave and go
to another person because he knew that if he went to ‘Ali (*‘a*),
everything he embezzled would be taken from him.

The reason for this is not the existence of defect in the theory of the
Islamic government. The nature of man is such that it tends to choose,
and based on the choices that people make, not everybody can be angel.
Finally, there are defects; violations will be made; and at least,
mistakes will be committed. Therefore, the ideal will never be perfectly
realized. Of course, during the time of the advent of Wali al-‘Asr
(*‘a*) as to what extent it will be close to the ideal state, I do not
know. We hope that we will experience that time and benefit from its
blessings. Nevertheless, during the time of the advent, will all
violations be stopped? Will no one be oppressed anymore? In each of the
works to be done by the different administrative workers of the Imam
(*‘a*), will the laws of Islam be accurately implemented? These
questions are worthy of reflection. God willing, we have to experience
and see that time. What is certain is that the violators will be
punished but we have supporting basis and guarantee that there will be
no violation at all.

Now, in these circumstances, should we discard the ideal form of
government and no longer take such a government as our goal? The answer
is negative. The nature of man is such that he should take into account
the ideal point, move toward it and try to get closer to it as much as
possible. So long as we see that our government is such that Islamic
standards are observed more and has a rising trend, we have to be
pleased to have good people, not that Islam is good because Islam by
itself is good. If we succeed in bringing ourselves closer to Islam and
better observe the Islamic values, we have to thank God that our society
succeeded in making itself closer to the ideal scheme of Islam.

Therefore, to expect that a government is formed in which no violation
is ever made and the Islamic standards are observed is an improper
expectation. But to expect that day by day we can get closer to it and
put into practice more the ordinances of Islam is not an inopportune
expectation; of course, provided that we also strive harder.

[^1]: Hajjaj ibn Yūsuf ath-Thaqafi (d. 714 CE) was a lieutenant
appointed by the Umayyad caliph, ‘Abd al-Malik (r. 685-705 C.E.). In
order to suppress dissent in Mecca, he ordered the bombardment of the
Sacred Mosque. He is famous for his bloody persecution of the Shi‘ah,
particularly for having killed Sa‘id ibn Jubayr (d. 713 C.E.), who was
one of the early exegetes of the Qur'an. It is reported that Hajjaj was
tormented by the image of this martyr in his dying moments. [Trans.]

[^2]: Takbirat al-Ihram: the recital of Allahu akbar [God is the
greatest] which is the formal beginning of prayer. [Trans.]

[^3]: Iqamah: a shortened form of adhan, heralding the commencement of
prayer [salah]. [Trans.]

[^4]: Members of NAFTA are the United States of America, Canada and
Mexico.


