Chapter 13: The Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government (Part 4)
==================================================================================

A Review of the Discussion in the Previous Session
--------------------------------------------------

The subject discussed in the previous session and about which there was
a discourse as far as the time permitted was the relationship between
the people and the government from the viewpoint of Islam. The summary
of the previous discussion was that this issue can be examined in two
methods: one in the form of a historical approach and another in an
analytical method.

In the historical method, this issue is examined—in the Muslim world,
how the relationship of those who have governed in the name of Islam
with the people has been; similarly, in the Western world, how the
relationship of those who have governed with non-Islamic ideologies has
been.

We have stated that unfortunately, in both the Muslim world and the
Western world, there are abundant criticisms and problems. We all know
that only a few decades had passed after the demise of the Holy Prophet
(S) when there were those who used to govern under the name of
succession [*khilafah*] to the Prophet (S) and even in the name of
vicegerency of God and did things which were rare even in a
non-religious government. The works the Umayyads and after them the
‘Abbasids did only show the absence of the Islamic government, but they
were rulers in the name of Islam anyway.

Therefore, if anyone wants to examine the government’s relationship with
the people from the perspective of the history of Muslims, he will
naturally not arrive at good results. This is because the government’s
relationship with the people in almost all cases has been that of a
master-servant relationship. Of course, sometimes at the margin there
had been some movements and to some extent the laws and values of Islam
had been raised, but generally the government’s relationship with the
people, like all monarchial systems, was a master-servant relationship.

One could hardly find the distinct difference between the government of
the Umayyads, Marwanites and ‘Abbasids and that of the Persian kings and
Roman emperors. Even the outward forms of the acts had reached a point
wherein those who governed as the successors of the Prophet (S) had an
assembly of impolite singing, drinking of forbidden drinks and carousal,
and the same practices had been used to be done in courts of other
kings.

In relation to the people, they did not refrain from committing
oppression whether against Muslims or non-Muslims. Under the name of
Islam, they started to pursue expansionism and conquering countries.
Instead of behaving with the people on the basis of the ordinances of
Islam and invite and guide them to the divine religion, they fought with
them under the pretext of being infidels; they thus killed them and took
as captives their wives and daughters and became a source of ignominy
for Muslims.

The bitter memories of these military expeditions still remain in the
minds of many and have become the source of abnormalities in the
relations between Muslims and Christians. Nowadays, one can witness an
example of such frictions in the events in the Balkans. In any case,
historically we are not satisfied with the relationship between the
governments that used to govern under the name of Islam and their
people, and we have no proof to acquit them either. We have no proof or
motive to present them as the original and real examples of the Islamic
government. Similarly, there were those in the West who used to govern
under the name of Christianity and were not behind these and perhaps
worse than these. Those who launched the Wars of Crusades or those who
formed the Inquisition were no better than the other kings.

Therefore, the examination of the government-people relationship from
the ideological viewpoint of Islam or the Western ideological viewpoint
through the study and examination of the actual and empirical examples
of the governments that claim to be Islamic or democratic is not a
proper method and the discussion will arrive at no conclusion. What can
be concluded from these examinations is what has happened in the
government of those who have ruled under the name of Islam and what
relationship has existed between them and the people, or what has
transpired in the government of those who have ruled under the name of
Christianity in the West and what relationship has existed between them
and their people as well as what happened during that time until it
ended to the period of Renaissance and then to the period of modernity
and the contemporary time in which the liberalist thought is dominant.

A Comparison of the Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government in Islam and the West a Descriptive Approach
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Meanwhile, the other method in examining the government-people
relationship is the analytical one; that is, to examine what the
intellectual and theoretical foundations of Islam or the intellectual
and theoretical foundations of the West require. Of course, we have to
bear in mind that in the West there have been no fixed intellectual
foundations for the past fourteen centuries. Many developments have
happened in the history of the Western thought, while we regard the
Islamic thought as fixed. Differences of opinion on some secondary
matters have come up but the principles and foundations have not
changed. Today, the Islamic thought about politics and government is the
same that existed during the time of the Holy Prophet (S), and what we
know as Islam is that which comes from the Qur’an, the *Sunnah* and the
life conduct [*sirah*] of the Prophet (S).

If we want to compare the theory of Islam with that of the West, it must
be specified with which part of the Western thought we want to compare.
Do we want to compare with Christianity which has been expelled for
centuries from the page of social life in the West, from the political
scene in particular? Should we compare the ideas during the Renaissance
and after it, i.e. the period of modernity and postmodernism with Islam?
What is most asked is the latter part; that is, if we want to compare
Islam with the West, we have to do so with the present West and not with
the West thousands of years or many centuries ago. That discussion does
not have much use for us. Today, the dominant idea in the Western
political and social circles is the liberalist thought. Therefore, it is
better for us to compare these two thoughts, viz. Islam and liberalism.

The liberalist thought is dealt with in the form of democracy in the
political and administrative scene. The origin of liberalist thought is
an extensive one that covers the different economic, political, moral,
legal, and other domains, but in the political domain, it is portrayed
more in the form of democracy. The intellectual foundations of democracy
are not identical with that of liberalism, but nowadays these two have
practically become synonyms? Wherever the government is democratic, it
is based on the liberalist ideas, and vice versa. For this reason, in
our comparative discussion, we will tackle this issue what relationship
between the government and the people the Islamic thought chooses and
reciprocally, what relationship between the government and the people
the liberalist-democratic thought prefers.

The Government People Relationship in Western Thought
-----------------------------------------------------

First, we will take a look at Western thought. In the Western thought,
“God” is absolutely not discussed. It does not mean that it is negated.
(For, sometimes they criticize the statement that Western thought is
atheistic for there are also many faithful people there. We do not deny
this fact.) What is meant is that in this totality of ideas, from the
foundations to its superstructures, nowhere is it said that one should
believe in God and divine revelation, observe the religious law, and
make the laws of God prevail in politics, society, ethics, and other
domains. In liberalist thought, belief in God is not a great deal.

Even if a person believes in God, it is mentioned merely as a personal
communion with God for, in the realms of politics, society, law, and
social rights and relations there is no room for God, religious law and
religion. This is the meaning of secularism. Of course, among the
seculars there may be believers in God and they go to church, but their
religiosity is only their personal and emotional relationship with their
Lord, and has no relation to their sociopolitical affairs.

That we say, “The dominant thinking in the West at the present (that is
the same liberalist thought) is an atheistic thought,” means the absence
of religion. In such an outlook, politics, man and all values mentioned
for him have emanated from man himself, and the originator of values is
man. Therefore, in this outlook a place for God and the Hereafter has
not been taken into consideration. If ever there are those who have
liberalist thought believe in God and the Resurrection, this belief of
theirs has no influence on the organization of their social relations
and it is regarded as a totally personal affair.

The humanist thought had been advanced centuries ago (more than 25
centuries ago) by the Sophists in ancient Greece. They used to regard
man as the barometer of everything including ideological, political,
legal, moral, and other issues. Its simple formula is that whatever the
people accept and vote for is credible; and nothing has credibility
unless it is accepted by people, be it in the spheres of law, ethics, or
social matters. If ever we say, “So-and-so is credible,” it is because
the people say so. If we also say, “It is not credible,” it is because
the people say so.

For this reason, it is possible that a certain thing is credible in one
society but not in another society, because the people of the former
society accept it while the people of the latter do not accept it. So,
the only criterion is the vote, wish, acceptance, and will of the
people. And since acceptance differs among people, it naturally follows
that values will become relative. The first outcome of the West’s
humanist thought is that we can never talk about a universal and fixed
value because we know that the tastes of people differ from one another.
Based on this perspective, to talk about all-encompassing universal
values has no logical underpinning unless someone says that some values
are common in all societies and have been accepted by all peoples.

Of course, the existence or nonexistence of such values is questionable
and worthy of reflection. A simple example which is usually cited is
that everybody accepts that truthfulness or honesty is good, but this
claim is not true and this case is not acceptable to some others, such
as the Marxists who explicitly declare that truthfulness or honesty is
actually not always good.

The Marxists used to say that stealing is not always bad; rather, it may
be good sometimes. If there is a time when stealing has effect on the
establishment of the communist system and the dominance of the
proletariats over the bourgeoisies, in this case it is good, because the
end justifies the means. The objective is to make supreme the “modern
level” system in the world and all people equal in terms of class
distinction. Whatever assists in the realization of this objective is
valuable. If one day the means of realization of this objective is to
steal, there is nothing wrong with it.

Of course, nowadays, nobody explicitly says so, but there are those who
believe in it in practice. In the name of freedom, in the name of peace
and in the name of human rights, they do things that the natural human
disposition abhors. They commit the most grievous crimes against
humanity, yet they name it human rights advocacy. One of its most vivid
manifestations can be witnessed in the Occupied Palestine. Although the
most horrendous and grievous crimes have been committed there against
humanity for many years, we can see that the powerful states in the
world who are alleged defenders of human rights and are at loggers with
the entire world over this issue are totally supporting Israel.
Outwardly, they say that peace is good and human rights are preeminent
and respectable, but they say so while they in practice do not believe
in it.

First Criticism to this Theory
------------------------------

Our first criticism to them is that based on this notion that all “musts
and must-nots” as well as values whether in the domain of law (including
civil law, penal law, international law, commercial law, and all other
branches) or in the domain of ethics depend on the will, acceptance and
approval of the people, we cannot have fixed values in the whole world
and expect all people to accept a certain value from us. The first
outcome is that we should strike a red line over the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

So, to say that everybody must acknowledge human rights because the
Declaration deals on universal values is idle talk. Based on their
notion, have they not said that values are based on the will of the
people? Therefore, if some people do not approve this declaration,
rejecting it, and their taste is something else, what is the reason that
this declaration acquires universal value and must be imposed upon
everybody? If one day certain people accepted and approved this
declaration but the next day changed their mind, why should they be
compelled to follow it? Have they not claimed that values are in
accordance with the will of the people? Thus, if one day (the people of)
a state decided to approve the Universal Declaration of Human Rights but
after sometime, they changed their decision, saying, “We are in regret
and from now on, we do not accept it,” what is your right to condemn
them and take into consideration punishments for them?

Second Criticism
----------------

Secondly, based on this outlook, you have to grant right to the people
to regard their choice as respectable whenever they change their mind,
while this issue has repercussions to which no country or government is
bound, and none of those who have signed the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights could abide by it. Among these repercussions is that if a
group of people in a country living in a province, a city, or even a
village say, “We want to live independently and to have independence on
sociopolitical issues,” no country can have any right to hinder them
because it is the will of the people.

Yet, is this observed in practice? Many wars in the Balkans and other
parts of the world have occurred because the people of those regions
said, “We want to be independent.” So, why do the claimants of
sovereignty on the basis of the will of people not pay heed to these
people?! No state, as much as it can, will permit a section of its
people to gather and form a separate state. This is while the
intellectual foundation of the West does not permit so, and in fact,
they have to submit to the will of the people.

They had been saying, “We want to have a single state.” But now, they
want to have two separate states. In consonance with the foundation of
liberal democracy, one should yield to the will of the people. In
practice, however, wherever this music is played, under the pretext of
insurrection and that a number of troublemakers are planning to
disintegrate the country and endanger the national independence and
territorial integrity, the central government suppresses them. Based on
the intellectual foundation of the liberal democrats, this should not be
done. Yet, according to another foundation, we may grant such a right to
the states and governments, but based on the thought acceptable to the
West, they have no right to hinder the realization of the will of the
people whatever it is.

Third Criticism
---------------

The third criticism to this way of thinking is that if one day the
people changed their choice, saying, “Yesterday, we voted for so-and-so.
Today, we realized that we were wrong,” or “Yesterday, we wanted that
thing, and today we want another thing and to change our vote,” they are
supposed to be able to do so. Yet, nowhere in the world are such people
given that permission. It is said to them, “You were supposed to be
aware from the very beginning.”

To claim that “They deceived us,” or “We were mistaken,” or “We wanted
it yesterday but now we do not like it” is not acceptable. The question
is: What hinders the people if yesterday they wanted something and cast
their votes on the basis of it but now they want to retrieve it? They
say, “It is the law.” But the crux of the matter is exactly here. The
law is anchored in the will of the people and the same people say that
they do not like it. Does this thought not claim that if a people
approve a law, the following day they have the right to amend it?!
Everywhere in the world, it is said that even the constitution is
amendable.

What does it mean by amendable? It means that yesterday the people
ratified this constitution and tomorrow they will say, “We do not accept
it.” If the people have such a right, why if one day they voted for a
president but tomorrow they have no right to say, “We do not like him?”
In reply to this question, it may be said that during the presidential
election it is said that to whomever you will vote for shall be the
president for two, four or seven years, and on the basis of that they
have cast their votes. The reply is that such was their will on that day
and today they like another thing, and based on the liberalist thought
the criterion is the will of the people.

Fourth Criticism
----------------

The fourth criticism is this: Where can you find in the world a place in
which the will of the people is a hundred percent identical and one?! In
all countries there are always minorities. Perhaps it is unprecedented
in the world the formation of a government like the Islamic Republic of
Iran in which ninety-eight percent of the people voted for it, but this
high percentage still means that a small percent of the people did not
accept it. If the criterion is the vote of the people, what shall be
done in this case with respect to them who do not accept the law or the
government? When two percent is faced with the ninety-eight percent, in
practice they are forced to yield and can do nothing. Yet, this is
something which your theory is not conforming with. If the criterion is
the will of the people, it follows that these minorities have a right to
form a government of its own.

In reply to this criticism, the liberal democrats argue, “We do observe
the rights of the minorities under the aegis of democracy.” It is
however clear that this answer is wrong because these people labeled as
“minority” do not want the essence of this government. Ten percent of
the people say, “We do not like this government at all,” and yet you say
to them, “We will observe your rights under the aegis of this
government!” Those people do not like the basis of this government. Does
the credibility of this government not depend on the votes of the
people?! Is this group not part of the people?! This minority
constitutes ten percent of these people and they say, “We do not like
you,” and still you make this promise: “We respect the minority,” but
the government runs on the basis of the will of the majority.

Therefore, in the democratic government the will of the minority remains
unanswered, and for the minority to submit to the majority while keeping
view of the basis that the criterion is the will of the people has no
logical justification. If the minority says, “We do not like this
government” and assuming that the credibility of this government depends
on the vote of the people, what right do you have to oppose it?

These and similar criticisms have no logical answers and are true with
respect to this theory. The last answer they will give is this: “We do
not know a better way and in the evolution of theory on the government
and its form, we have reached the point that liberal democracy is the
best form of government.”

A Summary of the Criticisms to this Theory
------------------------------------------

In any case, there is a series of logical criticisms and objections
which have still remained unanswered. Regarding the criticism of the
intellectual foundation of liberal democracy, hundreds of books have
been written by the Westerns themselves. If a government based on such
an idea is formed, these contradictions exist there, among which is that
the minority must be oppressed! It is their right not to approve this
government but it is imposed on them. This basis requires that if
tomorrow the vote of the people for their elected officials changes, it
shall have credibility. If today they vote for a president and tomorrow
they say, “We do not like him,” this must be given importance because
the vote is the vote of the people and their will. Yet, is such a thing
possible? Naturally, no one will do such a thing because in this case
the government will experience many instabilities and regarding
everything, it should always be through a referendum as to whether the
people want it or not.

It may be said that the representatives of the people come, cast their
votes and enact laws. The problem with this is that the representatives
themselves may change their votes. Today the representatives confirm
something, and it happens frequently that they change their votes
afterward. The law changes as easy as such. In addition, the main
problem is this: If tomorrow the people reject these representatives and
their enacted laws, what should be done?

These fundamental problems exist in this way of thinking and it has no
logical answer. Here, the relationship between the people and the
government changes into a relationship between the oppressed and the
oppressor in numerous cases. Even according to this very outlook, in
many cases the right of the people is not given to them while their
votes and views have no bearing at all. In some cases, very horrible
crimes are even committed.[^1]

The Government-People Relationship in the Islamic Thought
---------------------------------------------------------

Meanwhile, according to the Islamic thought, the basis of the rights,
laws and values is the real interests of human beings and the one who is
aware of all those interests is God the Exalted. As such, God acquires
the right to sovereignty over man. On the other hand, He is the Creator
of all human beings. The entire universe belongs to Him and all human
beings are owned by Him. He thus has the right to enact laws for His
creatures. What right can I whose eyes, hands, life, existence,
intellect, and common sense belong to Him have over Him except that
which He grants to me?!

According to such an outlook, all those criticisms and objections will
find logical answers and justifications. Concerning personal ownership,
does anyone have no right to do whatever he likes to his property? You
may fold a sheet of paper which belongs to you and put it in your
pocket, or write something on it with a pencil or ball pen, or give it
to someone, or draw on it, or solve a mathematical problem on it. You
may do whatever you like to do with it because it is yours. None can
complain to you, saying, “Why did you write on it with a pencil?” or
“Why did you write on it with a ball pen?” or “Why did you draw on it?”
or any other “why” because it is yours and you wanted to do what you did
to it. Does ownership mean other than this?!

Once we accept that everything belongs to God, there is no more point in
asking this question: “Why has God enacted such laws?” God is not in
need of such laws. Whatever law He enacts is for your and my interests.

So, on one hand, we believe that the criterion of credibility and
backing for the value of law is a real affair, and they are the good and
bad things existing in a subject. On the other hand, the one who has the
right to bid and forbid human beings must be their Owner and such a
being is no other than God the Exalted. Therefore, God Who knows what is
good and bad better than all, and He is the Absolute Owner of man and
the world, has the right to do whatever He likes to them. Of course, all
these utilizations and expropriations are meant for the interests of man
and God does not acquire any benefit.

In some cases, the people themselves need to enact rules and regulations
under certain circumstances. In such cases, God has given the authority
of legislation in a certain way and to specified individuals. They are
those who know the divine values better than the rest. Similarly, they
possess the necessary God-wariness [*taqwa*] so as not to sacrifice
these values before the altar of personal interests, and have the needed
talents in ratifying and implementing the laws in the realms of
individual and social affairs.

These individuals are no other than the jurists [*fuqaha'*]. The
jurist-guardian [*wali al-faqih*] is the person to whom God the Exalted
grants the right to enact unfixed laws and decrees and bestow religious
and legal credibility to them, and it is incumbent upon others to act
upon those laws. Who has the right to order that obedience to those laws
and the jurist-guardian is obligatory? It is God Who has created man,
this jurist-guardian and the entire earth and heavens. This theory has
no logical loophole.

God the Exalted can enact numerous general and universal values because
there may be good things which are identical for the whole mankind. Are
all humans not identical in terms of humanness? So, they may have common
interests. One set of these interests is related to the humanity of man,
and as such, so long as man is human, these interests are fixed and
permanent.

Hence, the existence of absolute and fixed values in the human society
is possible. Also, the global culture can exist only on the basis of
such an outlook. In a sense, we are followers of a universal culture,
but this universal culture which shall be established on the basis of
the real human values through the hands of Mahdi (*‘a*) is different
from the values which should be imposed on others on the basis of the
whims and caprice of some great powers.

The result is that these fixed and absolute values can exist under two
conditions: (1) They must be related to the humanity of man, and (2)
they must be conveyed by God. With these two conditions, we can have
fixed and absolute values, and the culture, which should be established
on the basis of these values, can become the universal culture. For
example, the universal culture means that all people worship the One and
Only God. Our ultimate dream is that such a day will pass:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is He who has sent His Apostle with the guidance and the religion
of truth, that He may make it prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists should be averse. (9:33)***

The value-system of this universal culture is not subservient to the
will of the people: *“…though the polytheists should be averse.”* That
is, it is not subservient to the pleasure and displeasure of others.
Even in the presence of aversion of the polytheists, this religion will
reign supreme and spread its values. This is the promise given by God
and it will certainly be fulfilled. Based on the Western outlook, there
is no sense that a value is against the will of the people. Based on the
divine outlook, values which are actually meant for the real interests
of the human beings are determined by God. Of course, some cultural
elements and particles are not necessarily universal. We do not expect
them to be so, nor does Islam want so.

It may be asked, “What does it mean to say that Islam brings about the
universal culture? Does it mean that all should speak in a certain
manner, have one script and language, and have uniform customs and ways
of living?” Generally, the answer is negative. The universal culture we
mean pertains to the moral principles of the culture and is expressed in
its beliefs and values, but not on the customs and traditions. Most of
customs and traditions are conventional. The manner of speaking is
conventional. You speak Persian here but once you go to an Arab country,
you have to talk in Arabic. Yet, will your identity change? When you go
to an English-speaking country, you have to talk in English. Does your
identity change in this situation? No, because they have no role in the
true identity of man.

The said universal culture is based on beliefs and values that make the
true identity of man. This cultural unity is preserved through the
conventional elements of culture. The cultural unity of society depends
on its unity of beliefs and values. The diversity of conventional
affairs under discussion includes the customs and traditions, and the
different life conditions which are consistent with geographical,
environmental, genetic, and so many other factors. There is nothing
wrong at all in this diversity on conventional affairs. Islam does not
want to eliminate this diversity. What is seriously given importance by
Islam is to focus on the real beliefs and values which are actually the
edifice of culture.

According to the Islamic outlook, the people’s relationship with the
government is that of the implementer of the laws of God with the rest
of His servants. All people, including the ruler and the subject, are
equal in servitude and none is different from the rest except in the
level of God-wariness. All of them observe the same law and in the eyes
of the law, the president is no different than the lowest of people.

Actual examples of this equality can be observed during the time of the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) cases even one
example of which cannot be found in all the cultures of the world and
all human societies. ‘Ali (*‘a*) who was the ruler of a magnificent
Islamic empire encompassing Egypt, Sham,[^2] Iraq, Hijaz,[^3] and Iran
as far as Marv and some parts of the Central Asian countries, came and
presented himself before a judge whom he himself appointed. He had a
legal dispute with a person belonging to a religious minority on matters
of law and they agreed to go to the judge.

The ruler of a country or let us say, the president of a federal country
with such a magnificence had a dispute with a subject belonging to the
Jewish minority of his own government and both of them referred to the
court for judgment. The judge said, “O Abu’l-Hasan [Father of Hasan]!
What can you say?” ‘Ali (*‘a*) said, “Why did you say ‘Abu’l-Hasan,’
while you addressed this Jew by his name? You should not have addressed
me by my epithet (which shows respect and appreciation). This is
discriminating!” Once you addressed him by his name and said, for
example, ‘Ya‘qub,’ you have to address me also as ‘Ali. You have no
right to say Abu’l-Hasan. Even that amount of respect (by addressing a
person by his epithet) from the viewpoint of ‘Ali will lead to
differentiation and discrimination. This is while that place is the
presence of judgment and locus of the implementation of justice, and the
two parties must be equal and treated equally.

We are very interested in the fact that someone can show us an example
of this justice in a certain part of the world. This is the Islamic
government’s relationship with the people.

Of course, it is necessary to point out that here it deals with the
theory and its consistency with its actual manifestations. And we have
no claim whatsoever with respect to the so-called “Islamic” governments,
for many of them have become directionless and deviants. We are talking
about the theory in Islam. Just as we talked about the Western theory,
we have no business with their activities. In this theory, all
individuals, even the ruler himself and one of the Infallibles (*‘a*),
are equal before the law. The station and greatness of an infallible
Imam (*‘a*) and a personage like ‘Ali (*‘a*) can never be discernible
for individuals like us. In spite of it, when he had a dispute with a
minority living under the protection of Islam, he would not talk in a
position of strength and authority. He rather referred to a judge whom
he himself had appointed. There in the court, when the judge showed the
least respect to him (by calling him by his epithet), he complained to
the judge and said, “You have no right to call me by my epithet while
calling my adversary by his name. You either call us by our names or
call us by our respective epithets!” This the government-people
relationship based on the Islamic outlook.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

**Question**: Please, explain about the statements of the eminent Imam
(*r*) when he said that the vote of the people is the basis or ‘The
criterion is the vote of the people’ and when he said that we overthrew
the monarchial government based on the vote of the people.

**Answer**: The famous statement of the eminent Imam (*r*), ‘The
criterion is the vote of the nation’ has a continuation which is usually
not quoted. The Imam said, “The criterion is the vote of the nation and
the nation wants Islam.” Therefore, the emphasis of the eminent Imam is
on the populism of this government which has been established in the
name of Islam. In other words, in countering the propaganda of the
Global Arrogance against our government that it is a government of
force, a government of coup d’état and not accompanied by the will of
the people, the eminent Imam emphasized that the Islamic Republic is a
government with the will of the people and a majority of ninety-eight
percent has voted for it. The eminent Imam wanted to prove to the world
that we did not impose the government on the people; rather, it was
based on their will.

In any case, if an incorrect conclusion is deduced from this statement
of the Imam (*r*), this is because of negligence of a very important
point; namely, it is different to say, “The criterion of credibility,
legality and legitimacy of this government is the vote of the people”
from saying, “This government is consistent with the vote of the people;
the criterion is the vote of the people.” The meaning of the latter
statement is that since the people have cast their vote for it and
approved and demanded for this government, it is because of it that we
are here governing them.

These two issues are different from each other. This is the same issue
discussed in the philosophy of politics is the criterion of legitimacy
the same acceptability of the people, or is the criterion of legitimacy
something other than the acceptability? Detailed discussions in this
regard have already been made and the correct viewpoint is that the
criterion is the legislative will of God the Exalted. Of course, the
activity of this government, which acquires its legitimacy from God the
Exalted, is realized under the aegis of obedience and will of the
people. Its vivid example is in the case of the caliphate of the
Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) and his statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلاَ حُضُرُ ٱلْحَاضِرِ وَ قِيَامُ ٱلْحُجَّةِ ٱلنَّاصِر…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If people had not come to me (and paid allegiance to me), and
supporters had not exhausted the argument [hujjah], I would not have
ruled…*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لأَلَقِيتُ حَبْلَهَا عَلى غَارِبِهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I would have cast the (camel’s) rope of caliphate on its own
shoulders.*[^4]

This is a literary expression. Once the camel is set free and its rope
is placed on its shoulders, it is no more a concern of the owner and it
can now go wherever it wants. The Imam (*‘a*) said: Had it not been for
the will and allegiance of the people, I would have cast the camel’s
rope of caliphate on its own shoulders and set it free.

In our belief, the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) had been
designated by God.[^5] Thus, once he ruled, his government had
legitimacy from God. But when was the argument exhausted for him and it
became obligatory for him to rise up for the realization and setting up
of the Islamic government? It was the moment when the people supported
him. At the time when the people had not yet supported him, the argument
was not yet exhausted. To say that prior to the support of the people,
the argument for him was not yet exhausted means that he had the right
to form the government but had no obligation to do so.

Based on the right granted to him by God, it was his right to rule and
the legitimacy of his government originated from God but so long as the
people did not pay allegiance to him, it was not obligatory for him to
establish the government. When the people came and paid allegiance to
him, promising to support him, the argument was then exhausted for him
and it became incumbent upon him to take steps in setting up the Islamic
government. His right to rule and its legitimacy have not emanated from
the people; rather, based on firm and numerous proofs we have, God has
given this right. Among these proofs is this statement of the Holy
Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كُنْتُ مَولاَهُ فَهٰذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Of whosoever I am Master [mawla], then ‘Ali is also his Master.*[^6]

Therefore, when the eminent Imam (*r*) says, “The criterion is the vote
of the people” and since the people wanted us to rule means that since
the people wanted it, the argument was exhausted for me and thus, I have
to come forward and endanger my life, be exiled for sometime,
imprisoned, and even die, but move in order to establish the Islamic
government. There was no distance between him and martyrdom. It was
God’s will that they changed their decision and banished him. They were
afraid that with the martyrdom of the Imam, a revolt throughout the
country would occur which they would not be able to control. In fact,
the decision of the regime was to martyr him on that very day of Khordad
15.[^7]

Their fear and apprehension started when they saw that as the Imam began
to deliver a speech, the people expressed their support. If it were like
other reform movements which experienced the sluggishness or
heedlessness of the people, the arguments would not have been exhausted
for him. (It was like what happened to the late Ayatullah al-‘Uzma
Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim in Iraq. He also initiated a movement but the
Iraqis did not support him and as a result, Hasan al-Bakr and Saddam
Husayn became dominant while he was deeply afflicted, suffered from the
failure and passed away. The argument was not exhausted for him because
the people did not support him.) But the noble people of this country
gave a positive reply to the call of the Imam. Thus, the argument was
established for him.

The other point which can be put in connection with the statement of the
eminent Imam is as follows: In the science of logic, there are two types
of reasoning; one is called “proof” [*burhan*] while the other is
“disputation” [*jadal*]. Both types of reasoning are correct, but
depending on the discussion and situation, at a certain time we use one
type while at another time, another. In the noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دْعُ إِلَىٰ سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
ۖ وَجَادِلْهُمْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ ۚ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ
بِمَنْ ضَلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ ۖ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good advice and
dispute with them in a*** ***manner that is best, (16:125)”***

it is stated that apart from wisdom [*hikmah*] and good advice
[*maw‘izah*], one has to dispute [*jadal*] also. But it must be *“in a
manner that is best.”* That is, to dispute is one of the ways of
inviting (others) to the way of the Lord, but it must be in the best
manner. In the Qur’an, the two types of reasoning have been used. In
proving religious instructions and conveying the truth, God the Exalted
has reasoned out through proofs as well as disputation. In some verses,
God the Exalted has resorted to disputation in refuting the belief of
the polytheists and infidels. For example, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَكُمُ الذَّكَرُ وَلَهُ الْأُنْثَىٰ,تِلْكَ إِذًا قِسْمَةٌ ضِيزَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Are you to have males and He females? That, then, will be an unfair
division! (53:21-22)***

The explanation is as follows: As you know, the Arabs hated their
daughters while loving their sons very much. On the other hand, they
believed that the angels are God’s daughters. God thus reasons out and
says to them: Why do you allot for yourselves the things you like and
love, but you associate the things you do not like to God? What logic is
this? This is an unjust division: *That, then, will be an unfair
division!”* That is, this division is illogical and baseless.

Now, if they said that the angels are God’s sons, was their statement
correct and did they have right to say so?! It is obvious that the
answer is negative. If this word of God the Exalted is a proof, they had
a right to say so. Since the proof holds, “You associate to God that
which you like,” they say, “We like sons, so also do we believe the same
for God.” In this case, none could raise an objection.

Regarding the belief of the Christians that God has a son, the Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنْشَقُّ الْأَرْضُ
وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدًّا, أَنْ دَعَوْا لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَلَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The heavens are about to be rent apart at it, the earth to split
open, and the mountains to collapse into bits that they should ascribe a
son to the All-beneficent! (19:90-91)***

That is, the heavens are about to be rent apart and the earth to split
open. Why? It is because the Christians believe that God has a son. Why
does the Qur’an say that it is bad to say that God has a son? There it
is the issue of disputation but here it is that of proof. Disputation
means to talk with someone according to his basis.

When addressing the world and wishing to defend the legitimacy and
rightfulness of the Islamic Republic, the Imam (*r*) also says, “Are you
not saying that once the people cast their vote for it, the government
has credibility? This government is legitimate based on the same
foundation you accept because the people have voted for it.” This is a
question of disputation; that is, to prove a point based on the basis
acceptable to the adversary though the same basis is not acceptable to
the party. God said in the Qur’an that if a daughter is bad, why do you
say that God has daughters?

This does not mean that once they say that God has sons, what they
believe is right and what they say is correct because this is a question
of disputation. Also, when the Imam spoke to you and me, he expressed
himself in this manner: “By virtue of the guardianship vested in me by
God, I do hereby appoint the Prime Minister.” In all decrees issued by
the Imam to the Presidents, he has either pointed out or stipulated that
“I designate the President.” If the criterion of credibility of the
President is the vote of the people, what right has the Imam “to
designate” him?

The Constitution stipulates that the jurist-guardian confirms the vote
of the people, and does not say “designates the President.” Yet, in all
his decrees issued to every President, he has written: “I do hereby
designate you,” or “You are hereby designated.” What does this mean? It
means that what gives you legitimacy is my designation which is
indirectly from God because I am designated by God. Therefore, in reply
to this question, two points should be noted: One is the difference
between acceptability and legitimacy while the other is the difference
between reasoning by proof and reasoning by disputation.

**Question**: If one day the Islamic Republic, which is in accordance
with the Islamic principles and has been materialized on the basis of
them, is no more approved by the people and making a move against it
they want to topple down this government, do we have to yield to it?
What is our duty in this regard?

**Answer**: This question has been raised time and again and in
different gatherings, and we have given reply to it, and it is also
mentioned in the book on questions and answers. At any rate, in reply to
this question, one of the ways is to refer to the life conduct of the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). We all know that after the demise of
the Holy Prophet (S), the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) was supposed
to assume the reign of government. Our belief is that he had the right
but failed to get it because the people did not permit. We again know
that after about twenty-three years he accepted to rule. Why? He himself
said:

*If people had not come to me, and supporters had not exhausted the
argument… I would have cast the rope of caliphate on its own shoulders,
and would have given the last one the same treatment as to the first
one.*[^8]

That is, if until now I have no supporters, I will abandon the
government, but as they gather around and paid allegiance to me, the
argument has already been exhausted for me. Once I have supporters and I
can establish the Islamic government, the argument is exhausted for
me.[^9]

Yet, sometime after the establishment of the Islamic government, some of
the Companions and a cousin of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and those who had paid
allegiance to him earlier than others initiated the Battle of the Camel.
Talhah and Zubayr came to the Imam (*‘a*), asking for their appointment
as governors of Basrah and Kufah respectively. The Imam (*‘a*) did not
deem it appropriate to give them governorship. Following that event,
they went to ‘A’ishah, widow of the Prophet (S), brought her to Basrah
and initiated the Battle of the Camel, the first battle against the
government of ‘Ali (*‘a*). Mu‘awiyah who was in Sham did not acknowledge
the government of ‘Ali (*‘a*) either and prepared for war against him.

But how did the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) behave with them? Did
he say, “As this is what you want, come and let us share in the
government. Iraq belongs to you. Hijaz belongs to me and Sham shall be
in the hands of Mu‘awiyah”? Under such circumstances, did ‘Ali (*‘a*)
yield to these people? No, it was not so. Why? It is because the Islamic
government had been established. The government of truth existed the
government which was backed by the people. These people who had gone out
of the Islamic state were dissidents and insurgents and ‘Ali (*‘a*)
brandished his sword against them. During his rule, the Imam (*‘a*)
engaged in three battles against “those who broke their allegiance,”
“the deviants” and “those who missed the truth of the religion.” He
never said, “Come and let us sit together. Let us talk and make peace.
Let us pacifically divide among ourselves the government and laugh
together!”

The Imam (*‘a*) drew his sword and as he said, “*Verily, I have put out
the eye of revolt,* *and did something which none could do except me*
(referring to the war with the Kharijites).[^10] Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) did
not make peace with the Kharijites and conclude a peace treaty with
them. Why? It is because the government of justice existed then and
there were those who supported and followed the government of justice.
Under such circumstances, one cannot submit to the enemies.

If one day history repeats itself and some people and groups want to
rise up against the Islamic government and dismember the Islamic state
(who in this case are outside the pale of Islam and treated as
insurgents), the Islamic ruler has no right to deal with them
pacifically; rather, he has to defend the Islamic sovereignty in the
entire territory of Islam and whole jurisdiction of the Islamic
government. Yes, if the people are not on the scene and withdraw their
support for the Islamic government, there is no point to insist on the
preservation of the Islamic government because it is no more applicable
and the government has no more supporters. If such circumstance occurs,
as in the twenty-three year period of ‘Ali’s solitude, we have to be in
solitude and suffer for failure. Of course, by solitude it does not mean
being heedless of the government and for us to sit in a corner and shut
the door.

In sum, in case of insurrection against the Islamic government and
struggle to overthrow it, there are two situations: One is the existence
of the Islamic government while the people voluntarily defend this
government of truth. In this situation, it is incumbent upon everybody
to struggle against the insurgents or secessionists. But if the people
turn their backs or there is the leader of truth but he has no or not
enough supporters to fight for the government of truth and its
sovereignty, there is no obligation to maintain the government and keep
the sovereignty through force and compulsion. Thus, the people have a
pivotal role in the establishment of the government and so long as they
support the government and leader of truth, the leader has to defend the
jurisdiction of Islam, not yield to the secessionist movements and
insurrections and not submit to the opponents. But if one becomes like
Muslim, the envoy of the Doyen of the Martyrs, Imam Husayn (*‘a*) in
Kufah, without having any supporter and helper, what could be done?!

Therefore, the reply to the question is that if through the auspices of
the support of the people the Islamic government was established (for,
without the help and will of the people, the Islamic government will not
be established), none has the right to engage in insurrection,
sedition-mongering and secession after the establishment of the Islamic
government. One has to wage war against those who will engage in those
activities, and to fight them is one part of *jihad*. But if the people
withdraw and reject the Islamic government except a few of them, there
is no more argument for the leader and he has to withdraw.

**Question**: In reply to the previous question, you have said that
after the establishment of the Islamic government, our duty is to
preserve it, even though the people do not accept it. Now, the question
is: What percent of the people shall be the criterion? If more than half
of the people opposes, will the situation be the same, or will there be
another one?

**Answer**: Quantity is not the criterion. The criterion is that the
population who support the Imam or the legitimate jurist-guardian is
such that they are able to preserve the government. Sometimes, the
government can stand with only ninety percent of the people. At other
times, it is possible with only eighty percent, or even fifty or forty.
He is commissioned to preserve the government. If the individuals are so
few that given that number they can no more preserve the government, the
case will be like the time when the people had not yet paid allegiance
to him and the argument had not yet been exhausted for him. There should
be the existence of a helper and there should be someone who assists him
in preserving the government. If it was like the people of Kufah who
dispersed from around Muslim ibn ‘Aqil and deserted him, the Imam of the
community could do nothing. So long as there are those who assist in
preserving the central government of Islam, the duty of the Islamic
ruler is to preserve the government and in this connection, the
criterion is not quantity.

[^1]: Sometime ago, it was reported in the news that a religious sect in
America committed suicide in accordance with their faith and burned
themselves. However, it was revealed later that it was committed by the
government and they had been burned in arson.

[^2]: Sham included today’s Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine.
[Trans.]

[^3]: Hijaz: the region in Western Arabia bordering the Red Sea that
includes Ta’if, Mecca and Medina. [Trans.]

[^4]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 3 (Shiqshiqayah). [Trans.]

[^5]: Among the proofs substantiating the designation of Imam \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib (‘a) to leadership of the Muslim community after the Holy
Prophet (S) is the Verse of Conveyance [ayat at-tabligh] revealed during
the event at Ghadir Khumm and addressed to the Holy Prophet (S): يَا
أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ ۖ وَإِنْ
لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ ۚ وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ
النَّاسِ “O Apostle! Communicate that which has been sent down to you
from your Lord, and if you do not, you will not have communicated His
message, and Allah will protect you from the people.” (5:67)

[^6]: Both Sunni and Shi‘ah transmitters of hadith, through various
chains of narration, have uninterruptedly reported that the Holy Prophet
(S) took the hand of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), raised it and then said: “Of
whosoever I am Master, then ‘Ali is also his Master.”

[^7]: On June 3, 1963 (Khordad 13, 1342 AHS), Imam Khomeini delivered a
historic speech in Qum, repeating former denunciations of the Shah’s
regime and warning the Shah not to behave in such a way that the people
would rejoice when he should ultimately be forced to leave the country.
Two days later, he was arrested at his residence and taken to
confinement in Tehran. His arrest prompted a major uprising in many
Iranian cities, which resulted in the deaths of no less than 15,000
people in the span of a few days when the Shah’s troops opened fire on
unarmed demonstrators. The date on which this uprising began was the 5th
of June, or the 15th of Khordad according to the solar calendar used in
Iran, and became known as the uprising or movement of 15th of Khordad.
[Trans.]

[^8]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Faydh al-Islam), Sermon 3.

[^9]: Literally, “The argument arises with the existence of the
supporter.” [Trans.]

[^10]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Faydh al-Islam), Sermon 92.


