Chapter 15: The Mutual Relationship between the People and the Government (Part 6)
==================================================================================

A Review of the Discussion in the Previous Session
--------------------------------------------------

The subject of discussion during these many sessions was the
relationship between the people and the government in the Islamic
system. The discussion reached the point where we said that all the
human systems can be divided into two groups: (1) statist
(government-oriented) and (2) populist (people-oriented).

The group of systems which regards the government as the sovereign and
master of the people holds that the government has the right to reign
over the people while the people are duty-bound to unconditionally
accept the orders of the government. In arguing for this theory, some
reason out that since the human nature is a fox-like nature (the same
famous statement of Hobbes that “Man is the fox of another man”), there
must be a strong and powerful body to prevent rebellion and these foxes’
cutting one another’s throat. The argument of some others is that the
order and security of the society cannot be established without such a
power. So, the government has to impose order upon the people through
naked force and other means. The people, in turn, have to obey such a
power. Other arguments to prove this theory have also been advanced.

Others (whose theory is the same currently well-known one), contrary to
the view of the first group, believe that the people are the sovereigns
while the government is the servant. In their opinion, the government
must be totally at the disposal of the people and obey whatever their
order; the government has to implement every law they approve; and
whomever the people elect to implement the law has the right to
implement the law. This is the same system which is called “populism” or
“democracy.”

As in the past, some try to say that there is no other way than these
two: either statism or populism. They add that statism is a reactionary
affair related to the period of slavery, and as we live in the modern
period, we cannot accept such a thing. Therefore, there is no other way
but to accept populism. Populism means that people choose whatever law
they like without any condition or inhibition. If there is any necessary
condition in enacting the law, people have to enact it. As such, all the
state power must be ascribed in a sense to the people and be chosen by
them.

The View of Islam on the People and the Government
--------------------------------------------------

During the previous session, we stated that it is not correct to confine
government into these two types and that in this regard there is another
way on the basis of which the Islamic theory lies. The third theory is
that neither the people have inherent dominance over the government nor
the government has inherent dominance over the people. No dominance of
any individual over another individual or a group over another group is
correct and credible except with the permission of God. From the Islamic
viewpoint, in essence the officials of the government are a group of the
same people.

So, there is no distinction between the people and the government. It is
not the case that the people have the right to enact the law while the
government has no corresponding role, or vice versa. It is God the
Exalted Who enacts the law because He is the Master of all people and He
knows best what is good for them. God the Exalted knows best, compared
to others including the people themselves, their welfare in this world
and the Hereafter, material and spiritual prosperity, and individual and
social interests.

Thus, since God the Exalted is the Lord of mankind, the Master and
Authority over them, and His knowledge is boundless and there is no
error along its way, only He has the right of legislation, and the
people, both the government officials and the rest of people, are all
equal before His law.

Now, the point is that this law requires an agent and in some cases, it
needs an interpreter. Similarly, in some cases, the law needs to
determine the branches and organize the executive rules. Naturally,
these affairs must be delegated to certain individuals. As such, these
affairs need a government to enact law and exercise mastership and
dominance over others. There must be someone who is at the service of
the decree of God, justice, the welfare human beings, and human values.

Along this line, there must be some people who take charge of this
function and they must be the most deserving, compared to others, to
assume it. Within a group of people under a commercial, economic or
educational establishment, or any other name, the responsibilities of
individuals are divided among themselves according to their respective
talents and merits. This is the way of the wise. In a factory, the one
to be the manager is the most expert in management. In an educational
institution, the one to be the director is the most expert in that work.

In a class session wherein a teacher conducts a lecture, it implies that
his merit to teach is more than that of the students. So, the teacher
has to give lessons while the students have to listen. Here, there is no
dispute that the teacher is the master of the students, or the students
are the masters of the teacher, as the case may be. Once the realization
of an objective lies in the struggle and coordination of the members of
a group, it is natural that the tasks must be divided among individuals.
In this division of labor, in every section those who are supposed to be
assigned are the most deserving of the work. The expression
“meritocracy” which is sometimes used in discussions is a very elegant
expression for our subject.

Given this viewpoint, we can consider, alongside the two forms, the
third form of relationship between the people and the government. In
this viewpoint, the issue of merit is not a deal in principle. Here, the
issue is that those who are designated by God the Exalted to implement
the decrees He has promulgated have the permission to offer this service
for the society. Of course, it is natural that this task requires that
an order given should be followed by others; otherwise, no progress can
be made and the existence of government will be rendered useless.

Similarly, if the principal of a school gives an order, the teachers
have to comply with it; otherwise, no progress can be made and in this
case the existence of the principal is senseless. Does the teachers’
mandatory compliance with the orders of the principal mean that the
principal is the master and they are servants and slaves?! In
materializing administrative objectives, the most deserving individuals
have to assume the posts, too. In the Islamic government, these
individuals are those who are authorized by God the Exalted. The
permission of God the Exalted is necessary because He is our Master. As
such, the affairs of people should be managed according to His approval.

Therefore, in the Islamic government, God gives authority to rule to the
deserving individuals and on the basis of this permission they manage
the society and implement the divine decrees. This is the spirit of the
theory of *wilayah al-faqih* [guardianship of the jurist].

Based on this, the authority of the jurist-guardian over the Islamic
society is grounded on the fact that he is the most meritorious person
who can apply the law of God to the society. According to the conditions
taken into account for the jurist-guardian, he has the greater and
better understanding of the divine law. In addition, he must have the
highest level of piety, moral excellences, management skills and
qualification to administer the society. It is by means of the aggregate
of these three qualifications that the jurist-guardian is identified.

The person whose knowledge of the law of Islam, whose piety in
practicing Islam and implementing the divine laws, and whose acumen in
managing the affairs of society are more than the rest has the
guardianship and right to rule in the Islamic society. By taking into
consideration these three elements, the person who should take charge of
the government and management of the society and has the permission from
God to implement the divine laws in the society can be identified.

For that reason, in the Islamic government and the theory of *wilayah
al-faqih*, the relationship between the people and the government is at
least like the relations of individuals belonging to an office, or that
of an academic staff with the head of that staff. The jurist-guardian is
designated to manage the society only because his merit in understanding
and discerning the divine laws and the manner of implementing them is
greater than that of others. Neither he enacts rules by himself nor do
the people do the same by themselves. Instead, the laws and rules have
been enacted by the Supreme Authority Who has conveyed them to the ruler
and the people for implementation.

Ensuring the Spiritual Welfare as the Duty of Government and the Right of People in the Islamic Government
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Concerning the people-government relationship, its spirit is traceable
to the implementation of the Islamic laws, and this affair guarantees
the material and spiritual welfare of the society. In this connection,
attention to the spiritual welfare and providing for it constitute a
significant part of the duties of the Islamic ruler, and one of the
important functions of the government is to ensure the spiritual welfare
of human beings. According to the Islamic perspective (which has
provable solid proofs), the humanness of man does not mean merely
engagement in mundane affairs. In fact, its main part is related to the
spiritual values and affairs. On this basis, the government has to
supervise the spiritual affairs which are related to the society so that
the activities are done properly and the society’s spiritual interests
are ensured.

The Duties of the Ruler and the People from the Viewpoint of the Commander of the Faithful
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a letter, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) wrote to Malik
al-Ashtar, he has mentioned the responsibilities at the very beginning
of the epistle. In the said charter, he describes the duties of the
Islamic ruler in this manner: “*…to collect zakat there, to combat the
enemies of Islam and Egypt, to work for the welfare of its people, and
to look after its prosperity.*” That is, as the governor of Egypt, you
have four responsibilities.

Firstly, you have to properly collect the *kharaj* and taxes and closely
attend to the public wealth so that it can properly be spent. Secondly,
if an enemy attacks and puts to danger the country of Egypt, you are
obliged to fight him and maintain the society’s security. Your third
responsibility is this: You are obliged to strive for the people’s
welfare. This is a responsibility, which is mentioned in the Islamic
government but not so in other political systems. In the rest of the
political systems, what is the duty of the government and to which it
has to utilize all facilities and talents for its realization is only
order and security,[^1] but as to whether the people are meritorious or
not, it is their own responsibility, and it has nothing to do with the
government, while in the Islamic government one of the very significant
issues is that the Islamic government has to strive and mobilize the
facilities of the Islamic country to reform the people. That is, it has
to engage seriously in proper training and education in society
according to the Islamic values.

Fourth: “to look after its prosperity.” Another duty of the workers of
the Islamic government is to develop the cities. While addressing Malik
al-Ashtar the governor of Egypt, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) says: “*I sent you to
Egypt so as to develop that place.*”

Things similar to these subjects are mentioned elsewhere in *Nahj
al-Balaghah*. These are rights the people have toward the ruler and can
claim from him. In sum, the government is responsible to strive hard in
ensuring the material and spiritual welfare of the people. Meanwhile,
the right of the ruler over the people is that the people have to assist
him in implementing the laws. There are two types of assistance: One is
where the ruler issues definite orders based on his discretions. Here
the duty of the people is to obey. In correctly implementing the divine
laws and decrees and providing for the material and spiritual welfare of
the people, they have to render assistance to the government; otherwise,
a person or a small group cannot duly do this function.[^2]

The other type of the people’s assistance to the government is an
intellectual one. If, for example, the governmental official commits an
error, the people must remind or criticize them, or present their
suggestion if they have any. This is the meaning of “the mild admonition
of the Muslims” mentioned in the traditions.

Elsewhere in *Nahj al-Balaghah*, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) expresses the
reciprocal duties and rights of the people and the leader in this
manner:

*O people! I have a right over you and you have a right over me. As for
your right over* *me, it is to counsel you, to pay you your dues fully,
to teach you that you may not remain ignorant, and to instruct you in
behaviorism that you may act upon. As for my right over you, it is
fulfillment of (the obligation of) allegiance, well-wishing in presence
or in absence, response when I call you, and obedience when I order
you.*[^3]

So, all the rights of the ruler over the subjects and the rights of the
subjects over the ruler can be traced back to the provision of the
material and spiritual welfare of man and whatever is really needed by
the society. The materialization of this objective depends on
cooperation between the people and the government, and thus, some of the
burdens can be shouldered by the ruler while some others by the people.
As we believe, providing for the material and spiritual welfare of man
is not possible except under the blessings of the Islamic laws. Hence,
there should be cooperation between the people and the government in the
implementation of the Islamic laws.

Questions and Answers
---------------------

**Question**: Can the Islamic ruler act against the executive laws of
the country? In essence, what is the station of the law?

**Answer**: What is meant here by “ruler” is sometimes a person while an
executive body at another time. What is meant by “executive body” in
turn is sometimes only the executive branch while at another time, all
the three branches of the government. So, what is meant by “ruler” must
be clarified. Probably, the questioner refers to the *wilayah al-faqih*
here, because on top of the hierarchy of power in the Islamic system is
the jurist-guardian who is the supreme ruler. Then, it will be asked:
Can he act against the current laws of the country or not?

In reply, it must be asked: Which law is referred to as current laws of
the country? If it means that Islamic laws mentioned in the Islamic text
or the laws which have been enacted with the confirmation of the
jurist-guardian, for the Islamic ruler to oppose them has no meaning.
Opposition to the Islamic laws negates the credibility of the
Guardianship [*wilayah*] and tarnishes the legitimacy of his rule
because in this case, he deviates from justice, for opposition to the
Islamic laws means opposition to Islam itself, which perversion is
graver than this?

But if the current law of the country is against the law of Islam and
what is stated in the Qur’an and the *Sunnah* or against an order given
by the jurist-guardian in accordance with his discretions, such a law
has no credibility. It is stipulated in Article 4 of the Constitution
that any bill enacted in whatever stage of legislation has no
credibility at all if it is contrary to the Islamic laws.

So, if what is meant by the current laws are laws that are ratified, for
example, by the former regime in the country or some individuals without
the approval, or even against or with the disapproval, of the
jurist-guardian, and are treated as laws, the Constitution stipulated
that such things have no credibility as they are against the law of
Islam. As such, the ruler’s opposition to them is not an opposition to
the credible law, but an opposition to a thing which is branded as
*law*, for the legitimate, credible and authentic law is harmonious with
Islam. This condition and qualification is stipulated in our
Constitution, and if ever it is not stipulated, the Constitution has no
credibility in principle. If it is not stated in our Constitution that
whatever is contrary to the law of Islam is not credible, in that case
we do not regard this constitution as credible. The credibility of the
Constitution owes to its Article 4 which states that whatever is against
Islam is not credible.

In sum, if the law of the country is credible, which means that it is
consistent with the laws of Islam, neither the ruler nor anybody else
has the right to oppose it, and if he does so, on the ground of
perversion [*fisq*], he deviates from justice and his Guardianship has
no credibility and legitimacy. However, if the law in question is
against Islam, that *law* is not credible for the jurist-guardian to act
in accordance with it.

**Question**: The discussion on the theory of the Islamic government is
correct, but in action the question of efficiency of the Islamic
government, which is certainly based on evaluation and decisions is
raised. How can this question (of efficiency) be solved so as for the
government to be responsive to the Islamic society?

**Answer**: Perhaps, what is meant by this question is that we have a
general theory that in the Islamic government the Islamic laws should be
observed and at the head of which is the jurist-guardian, and we accept
it. But the question is: Keeping in view the methods of execution which
require different times and places, how are these laws put into
practice?

During the past twenty years, the manner of putting into practice the
Islamic laws in the Islamic government has been clear. At the suggestion
of the late Imam (may Allah be pleased with him), the Assembly of
Experts [*majlis-e khobregan*] and by ratifying and implementing rules
and regulations, the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran was
established and reflected in the Constitution. The way of realizing the
Islamic government and implementing the Islamic laws is what has been
stated in our Constitution. All things stated in the Constitution are
not in the text of the Qur’an and the *Sunnah*, but their credibility is
with the credibility of the jurist-guardian’s signature. Since the
eminent Imam (*r*) and then the Supreme Leader have a favorable opinion
about his law, it follows that this law is credible for us and the law
has defined the manner of its implementation. Here, there is a need for
more specific rules. The manner of implementation of these general laws
is determined by the law; that is, the laws that the Islamic
Consultative Assembly enacts and must naturally pass through the channel
of the Council of Experts so as to ensure their conformity with the
Islamic ordinances.

In a nutshell, the ways of implementation are changeable according to
the demands of time and space, but these ways must (directly or
indirectly) be approved by the jurist-guardian so as to be credible and
for the people to be religiously obliged to regard these ratified laws
as credible and act upon them. In one of the discussions earlier, we
have mentioned that such a guarantee does not exist anywhere else in the
world that the people (at least on the basis of their own belief) are
bound to implement the administrative laws. Yet, the laws of the Islamic
state are religiously obligatory.

As a result, once it is ratified in the Islamic Consultative Assembly,
for example, that a certain group or class has to pay a certain amount
of taxes inheritance tax, income tax, or any other payment of such
taxes, as in the case of *khums* and *zakat*, is incumbent upon them.
This is the use of the approval of the jurist-guardian because any law
approved by him is a decree of God.

The Imam (*r*) says many times that to abide with the rules of the
Islamic Republic, as in the case of other religious laws, is religiously
obligatory. Such a guarantee exists only in an Islamic system and this
is a great service that the Islamic Revolution has offered to our
society. Of course, culturally speaking, this issue has not yet settled
well and many people do not pay attention to it since, for many years,
the people had been living in a despotic system and they had always
tried to circumvent the public laws because they regarded them as a kind
of compulsion and tyranny against them. In view of this mental
background, our people are not yet accustomed to faithfully abide by the
state orders. However, for those who are bound to this affair, this
issue will be a very strong executive guarantee.

Regarding what is related to my personal life in social issues, so long
as it is credible law and religious proof, I regard myself bound to
faithfully act upon it, though it might be against my material interests
or personal opinion. Once the Islamic government ratifies this law and
it is approved by the Supreme Leader, I consider it obligatory for me to
observe it and many people are the same.

**Question**: Based on the previous discussions, there are three types
of relationship between the people and the government: (1) statism, (2)
populism, and (3) meritocracy (with leniency). As you have said, in the
Islamic government, the only righteous position for legislation is the
Divine Sacred Essence. Yet, we know that God does not come to rule over
the people. He instead sends the Prophet (S) and the Imams (*‘a*). Up to
the time of the Infallibles, we do not encounter any problem. But after
the Infallibles, considering the openness of the gate of *ijtihad* among
the Shi‘ah and the multiplicity of the views of prominent jurists, we
are facing multiplicity of views and diversity of understandings.

Now, the first question is this: Which understanding should rule? Or,
which understanding is now ruling? On the other hand, if the gate of
*ijtihad* is open as it is and since the Constitution has been codified
based on certain juristic understandings, in case of difference in the
juristic foundations and understandings of a jurist-guardian with the
former jurist-guardian, what should be done regarding the amendment of
the Constitution? Secondly, it seems that Islam expresses the principles
and foundations, and not the method, of implementation. Method of
implementation is a rational affair. Based on the rational
understandings of the people and experts of the society, methods
anchored in the same Islamic principles and foundations can be selected.
Why should we insist that the method of implementation, which is totally
time-based, be also deduced by the religious text and then its outcome
is for the inefficiencies to be attributed to the religion?

**Answer**: This is an elaborate question. If we examine all its details
sentence to sentence, it will take time. Nevertheless, the gist of this
question consists of two points: One is that since the head of the
government is not infallible, mistakes will be committed. What is the
guarantee that once a person who is not an infallible heads the
government will not commit any error?

The reply is this: Are the experts who are responsible based on
prevailing foundations in the world to enact the law and determine the
methods infallible or do they have differences among themselves? Does
the difference among parties existing throughout the world, each
suggesting a particular method of implementing the government programs
with the aim of providing for the welfare of the people, lead to the
negation of the essence of existence of the parties and the government?
Their reply is that different parties present to the people their
considered views and policies, and whichever garners the highest votes
must be acted upon. Is it other than this?

The jurists [*fuqaha*] have their own differences in religious edicts
[*fatawa*], but in practice, the edict of the one who is superior to all
and whose superiority is proved, shall be observed. Is not there any
dispute in other issues?! Are not the physicians’ prescriptions
different from each other? If you consult two doctors and they give you
two different prescriptions, which prescription will you follow?
Undoubtedly, it is the prescription of the one who is more proficient.
Thus, the existence of differences of opinion among people about many
cases is undeniable, and in the end they prefer the view of the majority
or the most learned, and act upon it. Therefore, this affair is not a
problem pertaining only to the Islamic system because there is
difference of opinion everywhere. You will notice in the most advanced
countries in the world that there are different parties, and the
foundation of the multiplicity of parties is the diversity of viewpoints
and difference of opinions. In spite of all this, a party will finally
rule through alliance or as the majority and act upon its own view. Once
the jurist-guardian is determined, his view is credible vis-à-vis that
of others.

The other issue is: Has Islam mentioned the foundations but not the
methods, or mentioned some methods but not the others? This discussion
has three possibilities. One is that Islam has mentioned the foundations
but not the methods at all. The second is that it has mentioned all the
methods and left no stone unturned for man. The third is that it has
mentioned some methods and delegated the other methods to others (to
mention).

At the outset, it must be clarified what is meant by “foundations” and
“methods.” By saying that Islam has mentioned the foundations, does it
mean that Islam has only ordained that there should be security and that
is all?! Or, has it only said that justice must be established? If that
is so, it does not bring any excellence for Islam because all people
have said so and Islam has not mentioned anything special. No wise
person on earth says that justice must not be established in the
society. Every wise person dictates that there must be justice. No one
claims that security is something bad. All the wise in the world say
that security is something good. Therefore, Islam having mentioned the
foundations means that it has only mentioned these things and then
ordained that the human beings have to maintain security and establish
justice through whatever way they can and know.

If this understanding of Islam is correct, it follows that the people
have no more need for Islam because they know that security is something
good. We are not in need of Islam to teach us the way of maintaining
security. God the Exalted explicitly says in the Holy Qur’an, *“As for
the thief, man and woman, cut off their hands as a requital for what
they have earned*. (5:38)*”* This means that one of the ways of
maintaining the society’s security is for the hands of the male and
female thieves to be amputated.

Of course, those who intend to annihilate religion or confine it to the
personal affairs say that these are part of the methods, and methods
change—one time it is like this and like that at another time. They
sometimes say that 1,400 years ago Islam ordained that the hand of the
thief should be cut off. Now, this method is not appropriate and has no
use. They say that this kind of ordinances of Islam is like medicine
whose expiration date has already passed, and thus, it must be thrown
away! This statement implies that *“As for the thief, man and woman…”*
must be removed from the Qur’an because this order belongs to the time
1,400 years ago and now its expiration date has passed! Does it mean
anything except denial of Islam? Does denial of Islam have another
specific form than this?!

It must not remain unsaid that there is a set of methods of
implementation upon which the circumstances of time and space have
effect and it is for this reason that Islam has placed them at the
disposal of the ruler. In the words of some authorities such as the
eminent martyr, the late Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Baqir as-Sadr, they
are part of the *mantiqatu’l-faragh* of the Islamic laws which serve as
administrative laws. In cases where Islam has no specific order as to
which method of implementation is to be used, the jurist-guardian
through consultation and based on the Islamic standards chooses the
method which is not against the laws of Islam.

Thus, there are three assumptions here. One is that Islam has mentioned
the foundations only, but the other ordinances including the penal laws
are the methods of realization of those foundations. The methods have
nothing to do with Islam, and even if they are mentioned in the Qur’an,
they belong to the time 1,400 years ago and can be of no use today. In
our opinion, this assumption is totally inaccurate because this
statement means the denial of Islam and setting aside and burying the
Qur’an like the burying of medicines whose expiration date has passed.

The other view is that whatever we need is stated in the Qur’an and the
*Sunnah*, and there is no more room for legislation and decision-making.
With only a bit of reflection, it can be realized that this statement is
definitely false.

The correct view is that in some cases Islam has not promulgated a
specific law and has delegated this affair to the infallible Imam or the
jurist-guardian as the Islamic ruler such as the traffic and driving
rules which are not mentioned in the sources of the Islamic legislation;
namely, the Holy Qur'an and the *Sunnah*, and yet their existence is
necessary for the social order. Therefore, some methods which are not
mentioned in the Qur’an and the *Sunnah* and are needed by the society
are to be worth followed by the order of the jurist-guardian.

**Question**: In Islam, what are the preventive measures to ensure that
the jurist-guardian does not commit an offense? And in case the
jurist-guardian intentionally or unintentionally commits an offence,
what measure is undertaken in the Islamic government to supervise and
control these cases so as to assure the people?

**Answer**: One of these measures is that the designation of the
jurist-guardian is not done through direct vote of the people. If the
election of the jurist-guardian (like the elections of the president and
Majlis representatives) is directly delegated to the people, the way for
error and mistake will be opened from the very beginning. As you know,
in such kinds of elections, even in our country, there is space for
cheatings. For example, sometimes a candidate has thousands-and-so votes
in a ballot box but it is said that so-and-so has a zero vote! Now, if
the jurist-guardian is supposed to be elected in this way, what
credibility does it have? To what extent do the people trust such a
jurist-guardian?

As such, in designating the jurist-guardian, a precaution is made that
the elite or experts trusted by the people designate him to this office
so that possibility of committing error reduces, especially given the
fact that membership in the circle of the experts has no material and
worldly rights and advantages for a person to aspire for it. In
accordance with their religious duty, the people make their own
investigation and among the righteous *‘ulama’* they choose the more
meritorious for the Assembly of Experts. Then, these experts conduct
discussions in their meetings so as to see who among them or outside
their circle is worthy to be designated. Thereafter, according to the
law, the same Assembly of Experts continuously supervises the Leader and
his performance so that, God forbid, no error or deviation is ever made.

Therefore, measures and arrangements for this purpose are anticipated,
but since the jurist-guardian is not infallible after all, this
preventive measure does not mean that there is no probability of the
committing of error at all. However, does the jurist-guardian’s
fallibility make us say that he has no right to rule and he should not
be obeyed? Let us assume that we live during the time of an infallible
Imam, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) for example, and he
dispatched a person like Malik al-Ashtar to Iran for an administrative
post. Malik al-Ashtar is a person about whom the Imam (*‘a*) said, “You
are to me as I was to the Prophet.”[^4] So, the best person to govern a
country has been chosen. Yet, Malik al-Ashtar is not infallible and he
may commit error.

Does this probability prompt us to say that Malik al-Ashtar and his
likes should not be given a responsibility? In this case, is it possible
for the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) to directly govern such a vast
Islamic land?! Of course, the Imam (*‘a*) used to give orders to his
officials which if properly observed, the territories under his
jurisdiction would be duly administered to the extent possible. An
illustrious example of these admonitions has been stated in the famous
epistle to Malik al-Ashtar. All these are preventive measures so that
mistakes and errors are minimized. But not to commit a mistake at all is
an impossible thing in the social life of a non-infallible person. Man,
except the one under the special divine grace and possessing the quality
of infallibility, is always prone to commit error and mistake.
Therefore, the best system is the one that takes a measure to minimize
mistakes and errors therein. This is anticipated in the political system
of Islam and if properly acted upon, we will see that this system is the
best one in terms of the realization of objectives.

**Question**: Whatever is stated in the Islamic government theory (in
this discussion or in the previous ones) is all correct and factual. In
practice, however, we can observe that the best way of governance which
leads to the progress of countries is the same democratic way. It has
been made clear that real democracy does not exist anywhere, but the
same existing form of government in the West has these effects and
benefits in those Western societies. What is your opinion regarding
this?

**Answer**: Before anything else, one has to reflect on the judgment of
this respected questioner. What does he mean by saying that the best
existing form of government is democracy? Does it mean democracy even
where the laws are anti-Islamic? Democratic government which is based on
the will of the people may enact any law even if it is against the text
of the Qur’an and the Islamic standards. In the opinion of the respected
questioner, is such a government the best form of government? Or, by
democracy and populism, does he mean democracy within the framework of
the Islamic laws and values which is called “religious populism”?

The falsity of the first notion is clear and definitely this is not what
the respected questioner means. But if he means democracy within the
framework of the Islamic values, this is the same thing which exists in
our Constitution and is supposed to be faithfully acted upon as it is.
Of course, as to whether it is observed in a corner of the country or
there is violation of it in some cases, these words are raised
throughout the world. As we have stated earlier, the fact is that real
democracy is nowhere to be found in the world. Not too long ago, it was
published in the newspapers that a writer in Egypt has written that real
democracy in the world exists only in one country and that is Iran.

Anyway, democracy within the framework of the Islamic values exists in
our Constitution as well as in the way of governance of the eminent Imam
(*‘a*). The people have the right to elect their representatives for the
Islamic Consultative Assembly, the Assembly of Experts and other cases,
and to choose a person for the presidential post. But if by democracy it
means the second notion in which the people may even abrogate the laws
of Islam and as in the words of that gentleman, demonstrate against God
if they want, this notion is not consistent with Islam. Who has said
that such a government is better than the government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran?

Is that government in which annually thirty thousand people are killed
as the result of crimes committed therein better than the government of
the Islamic Republic of Iran? This statistic has been given by the
American government itself that every year more than thirty thousand are
killed as the result of crimes. Moral corruptions and social misconducts
as the outcome of libertarianism of the Western democracy have afflicted
the entire world and the American people in particular. Their own voice
scholars, reformers, congressmen, and senators is loud, and corruption,
family breakdown, parentless children abandoned in the streets and
thousands of other adversities have made their groaning louder. Is this
system better than the system of the Islamic Republic of Iran?

**Question**: God the Compassionate said that if the Holy Prophet (S)
acted beyond His order, He would deal with him severely and **“*****We
will cut off his aorta of life*****. (69:44-46)”** This legal threat
shows in reality the lofty station of the government of God the Exalted.
Now, since the Islamic government is the government of truth, why is it
that whenever some of its officials act against the law, they are not
dealt with severely so that another person, group, or official, in
whatever position he is, will not do wrong? In fact, the same
inopportune carelessness and indulgences lead to the spread of numerous
problems in the Islamic society.

**Answer**: There are two issues at hand. One issue pertains to the time
when an Islamic government can implement properly the Islamic laws. In a
short discussion in which it was pointed out, we said that an Islamic
government can properly discharge its duty if the people extend help. If
the people do not cooperate, the Islamic ruler cannot singly implement
the Islamic laws. This incapability is not a fault of the government but
that of the people who have left the government and the just ruler
alone.

Meanwhile, the other issue pertains to this: During this time, where
should there be severity of action and where should there be leniency?
This question is a religious decree. Who should determine this religious
decree? Based on some of our defective comparisons and pieces of
information, we say, for example, that the Prophet (S) did so and the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) also did. Thus, we have to do it. Yet,
we have to bear in mind that there are numerous cases where the Imams
(*‘a*) or the Holy Prophet (S) acted differently.

They used to show leniency. Given this, as to where leniency should be
shown and where severity of action should be shown is an issue which
must be decided upon by the jurist [*faqih*]. We say that it is
obligatory to obey the *wali al-faqih*. Here is one of the cases where
such obedience is necessary. If the *wali al-faqih* is the most informed
of people, the most pious of all and knows best what is for the interest
of society, it is he who should decide where severity of action should
be demonstrated and where leniency should be displayed.

Yes, there are cases where we imagine that more severity of action is
supposed to be shown and maybe we are indeed correct, but the reason for
not executing it is that through our own performance we have made the
social circumstances in such a manner that the ground for the Leader’s
measures is not ready. During the period of rule of the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*), did this problem not happen to him many times? During
the Battle of Siffin, he wanted to get rid of Mu‘awiyah but the behavior
of his people did not enable him to do what he wanted. At the present
time, if we had only properly responded to the call of the Leader, the
ground for implementation of the Islamic laws would have been paved
better. It is better for us to consider our actions and behavior and to
see if the behavior we have and the duties we are supposed to do are
properly discharged or not.

[^1]: This is the same thing which is described as the “minimal
government”. That is, the government has the least right to interfere in
the affairs of people and what the government has to strive to
materialize is the maintenance of order and security of society. This
outlook is a liberalist one which is founded on the absolute freedom of
individuals and except in case of necessity, this freedom should not be
limited. According to this outlook, the case of necessity is the same
public order and the absence of encroachment on the freedom of others.
See 1948 UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 29, Section
2.

[^2]: As Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says in Nahj al-Balaghah, “And it is an
obligatory right of Allah over the people that they should… cooperate
with each other for the establishment of truth among them. No person,
however great his position in the matter of truth, and however advanced
his distinction in religion may be, is above cooperation in connection
with the obligations placed on him by Allah.” Nahj al-Balaghah (Faydh
al-Islam), Sermon 207.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Faydh al-Islam), Sermon 34.

[^4]: For more information about the salient features and station of
Malik al-Ashtar with respect to Imam ‘Ali (‘a), see Nahj al-Balaghah
(Faydh al-Islam), Letter 38 and Saying 435.


