Chapter 16: Faith as the Essence of Invitation of the Prophets (Part 1)
=======================================================================

The subject of the discussion is: Faith as the Essence of the Invitation
of the Prophets (*‘a*). In order to clarify the subject, its importance
and the pertinent discussions to be made, we shall make a short
introduction:

Introduction
------------

The emergence of the prophets is recognized as a historical event
throughout the thousands of years of human history. Of course, among
them there have been false claimants to prophethood and forgers of
religion who presented fake goods in this sphere and concocted “heavenly
scriptures and religions.” In spite of this, among the claimants to
prophethood throughout history, there have been certainly tens of
thousands of worthy people who had been truly chosen for the prophethood
by God the Exalted. Based on what is mentioned in the narrations of the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), there were 124.000 prophets, out of whom only
twenty-four are mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and an equally very few
numbers are mentioned by name in the Islamic narrations. Therefore,
regarding most of these divine prophets (*‘a*) apart from having no
information about their life accounts, we do not even know their names.

Now, concerning this historical trend which had always surfaced in human
life as shown by history and as authentic religious sources show, this
question is posed: What is the cause of emergence of this trend and what
objective had the divine prophets (*‘a*) been trying to attain? Had all
the prophets the same axis for their invitation, or each of them had his
specific aim? Have there been any comparisons and contradictions between
the prophets’ objectives and promulgations for the religion?

Those who have materialistic inclinations and explain the philosophy of
history based on the historical materialism have their own specific
interpretation of the emergence of this historical trend. You may also
remember how some Marxist groups existing in our country prior to the
Revolution used to interpret the emergence of the prophets (*‘a*) and
their call. They believed in certain stages of history, regarding
contradiction as the essence of all historical movements. Accordingly,
they used to present the origin of the emergence of the prophets in the
scene of history as a kind of class struggle.

However, we have to set aside this kind of sociological interpretations
and philosophies of history based on materialism (Marxism) and refer to
the religious sources (particularly the Qur’an and narrations explaining
the Qur’anic texts) ask them to explain and interpret for us the
emergence of the prophets (*‘a*) and specify the axis of their
invitation. We will arrive at conclusions which are totally different
from the ones presented by the sociologists and philosophers of history.

Faith as the Main Axis of the Invitation of the Prophets
--------------------------------------------------------

What can be inferred from the religious sources, particularly the Holy
Qur’an, is that faith is the axis of the prophets’ invitations. In our
religious culture, the concept of faith [*iman*] and unbelief [*kufr*]
has taken form. To accept the prophets’ invitation is called faith,
while their followers are called faithful. In Arabic literature, the
word *mu’min* (faithful) is an active noun which means he who has *iman*
(faith). On the contrary, those who used to oppose the prophets (*‘a*)
and deny their invitation are called unbelievers [*kafir*]. *Kufr* means
to conceal, and *kafir* is one who conceals the truth.

In a simple mathematical example, we can consider the totality of the
prophets’ invitations throughout a historical event in the form of “axes
of peculiarities.” In this portrayal and similitude, all laws, decrees
and rules that the prophets presented shall be drawn in the x-axis. The
vertical axis (y-axis) is where the main axis of this totality of the
laws, decrees and rules is specified. Let us identify this axis as
“faith.” Thus, in short, let us consider the x-axis as the axis of
teachings and the y-axis as the axis of faith. Now, let us call the
positive y-axis as “faith” and the negative y-axis as “unbelief.” Those
who have accepted the invitation of the prophets (*‘a*) and acted upon
their ordinances are on the y-axis.

They have moved toward the positive direction, progressed, advanced, and
attained perfection. The scale of progress of every person on this axis
is actually an indication of the magnitude of his perfection, and
naturally, the more a person advances on this axis, the more perfect he
becomes. In other words, at the time of birth, man stands at the center
of the axes of peculiarities, i.e. the zero point (the point of
intersection between the x- and y-axes) while his humanness is
“potential”. The grounds for growth and perfection are inherently
endowed in him, but for them to blossom and put them into action depend
on the will and movement of man himself. On the contrary, by utilizing
the same grounds, instead of progress and perfection, he takes a
descending and downfall trend and moves from the zero point toward the
negative direction of the y-axis. This is a backward, inhuman and
anti-perfection movement.

In this manner, we can consider a general axis called “the axis of faith
and unbelief” for the invitation of all the prophets (*‘a*) throughout
history. We call those who moved toward the positive direction of this
axis as “faithful” and those who moved toward the negative direction of
this axis as “unbeliever.” By utilizing the same example, we can
consider stages for each of faith and unbelief. Keeping in view of the
same example, it becomes clear that none of the two ascending and
descending trends of man has an end, because they are infinite; that is,
in the axes of peculiarities, each of the two axes (x and y) continues
up to infinite positive (+ ∞) and infinite negative (- ∞). Thus, faith
and unbelief are of different stages, and man can move in any of the two
directions (ascending and descending) up to infinity.

Our claim is that the axis of invitation of all the prophets (*‘a*) is
not more than one. This axis has two directions (positive and negative)
to any of which man can choose out of his own volition and freewill.
Advancement along the positive direction leads to the increase in faith,
while advancement along the negative direction leads to the aggravation
of unbelief. All religious teachings revolve around this axis, and all
other issues will be evaluated in relation to this axis and through this
barometer.

The Correct Method of Conducting Research on this Issue
-------------------------------------------------------

The above claim cannot be proved through empirical science or
mathematical proofs; rather, it must be sought from the religion itself,
and its correctness or otherwise will become clear by referring to the
religious text. One should ask the prophets (*‘a*) who have made such an
invitation does the totality of your invitations have a single axis or
not? As such, examining this issue through an extra-religious outlook
which has been raised by some is not a correct approach. They say, “We
have to see what we need from religion and the prophets so as to be made
clear what function religion and the prophets have and which need of man
they should meet and to what they have made invitation.” In our opinion,
this subject is basically false and since we are presently not examining
the authenticity or falsity of the extra-religious outlook, we shall
only take a short and cursory treatment of this discussion:

Regarding any set of things, one general ruling is that if we want to
know its content, we have to look inside it. If there is a set of
knowledge called “physics” and you want to know what this set is all
about, you have to read and study a book on physics. If you want to know
what problems are dealt in the science of geometry, you have to refer to
a geometry book and see its content what sections and chapters it has
and consist of which subjects. In this kind of cases, without having any
information about the subjects and topics dealt with in a science, we
cannot just sit down in a closed room at home and prove that this
science should deal with what issues and which of our needs it has to
meet!

The same is true in the case of religion. Religion is a set of things
and in order for us to know what subjects constituting religion and what
things are expected of it, we have to refer to the content of the
religion. We are not supposed to sit in an empty space and decide for
ourselves what it has to deal with, with which things it has to get
involved and in what issues it should not interfere! At any rate, the
correct method of examining this issue is the intra-religious outlook,
and even assuming that through the extra-religious outlook, it can be
guessed which issues religion has to deal with, this venture beats
around the bush. The certain and correct way of examining it is for us
to refer to religion from within and see what issues it has dealt with.

The Axis of the Invitation of the Prophets (‘a) from the Viewpoint of the Qur’an
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The source which is credible for us and to which we have absolute
certainty is the Holy Qur’an. By referring to the Qur’an, it will become
clear that the main axis of the invitation of all prophets (*‘a*) is
faith, and its opposite point is unbelief. For example, it is stated in
these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَافِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ لَآيَاتٍ لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ
اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي
خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا
سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ مَنْ تُدْخِلِ
النَّارَ فَقَدْ أَخْزَيْتَهُ ۖ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنْصَارٍ
رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلْإِيمَانِ أَنْ
آمِنُوا بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا ۚ رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا
وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الْأَبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of night and day, there are signs for those who possess
intellects. Those who remember Allah standing, sitting, and lying on
their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth
[and say]… ‘Our Lord, we have indeed heard a summoner calling to***
***faith, declaring: Have faith in your Lord! So we believed’…
(3:190-3)***

The expression of the Qur’an in this verse is *uli’l-albab*; that is,
the people of intellect, wisdom and astuteness. Here, what is meant by
“mind” is not that which is located inside the skull; rather, it is the
opposite of empty skull; that is, those who have minds and not only mere
skull without a brain. It can be deduced from this expression that from
the viewpoint of the Qur’an, human beings are classified into two
groups; one comprises those who are idle and brainless and in terms of
humanness they have only eyes, ears, hands, and feet. Sometimes, their
inner and esoteric beings are more base and abject than the animals.

The Qur’an mentions this group with the expression, ***“the worst of
beasts*** **(8:22)*****”*** and likens some people to a donkey (62:5) or
a dog (7:176). The second group comprises those who have minds. These
people arrive at conclusions by thinking, reflection, and use of their
intellects, and discern the truths, which are the very roots of
religion. They then engage in litanies and open-hearted prayers, and one
of their litanies is this: *“Our Lord, we have indeed heard a summoner
calling to faith.”*

The perfect manifestations of this summoner are the prophets of God: *We
heard a caller from You calling, ‘Have faith in your God.’ We thus
accepted this invitation.* The reason for the acceptance of invitation
is mentioned in the previous verse; they reflect on the creation of the
heavens and the earth, the divine wisdom and the purpose of creation,
and the genesis and resurrection. Then, they say to God, “Now that we
believe, we ask You something:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلْإِيمَانِ أَنْ
آمِنُوا بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا ۚ رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا
وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الْأَبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our Lord, forgive us of our sins and absolve us of our misdeeds, and
make us die with the pious. (3:193)***

At any rate, our concern in these verses is presently the part that
says, *“Our Lord, we have indeed heard a summoner calling to faith,
declaring, ‘Have faith in your Lord!’ So we believed.”* What did those
callers who had come from God for the guidance of humanity call for?
What was the axis of their calls, invitations and guidance? The answer
is: *“calling to faith.”* They said, “*Have faith in your Lord*.” The
main axis was for you to have faith, and all other things they used to
mention were branches of the same axis. The faith is the root and by
setting it up, the branches and fruits will come out. What is important
is the root. If the root is corrupt, there is no hope for leaves and
fruits. Once the root is firm and sound, it will bear fruits for years:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً
كَشَجَرَةٍ طَيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاءِ
تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا ۗ وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ
الْأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is like a good tree: its roots are steady and its branches are in
the sky. It gives its fruit every season by the leave of its Lord.
(14:24-25)***

Its fruit-bearing has no limit and it can extend toward the sky
infinitely. This is the faith that grows, acquires lofty stages and
stations, and shows itself in the different spheres of life. It is this
faith that can play a role in the individual, familial, social, and
international prosperity, and finally, in the eternal life of man. This
life in the world with all its length and width, and all the importance
and extensive dimensions it has is a prelude to arrive at the Hereafter,
just as for the fetus to be inside the womb is a prelude to come into
this world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Twice did You make us die, and twice did You give us life.***
**(40:11)*****”***

Man is born twice: One is at the time when he is conceived in the womb
of his mother and from the stages of conception to the moment of
transfer to the world. The other one is at the time when he transfers
from this material world to the purgatorial world and the Hereafter. In
this condition, life in the world with respect to the purgatory and the
Hereafter in comparison is regarded as an embryonic period. Of course,
these two embryonic stages are different from each other. The first
fetus is nine months old while the second is ninety years old.

But these ninety years in the world, in comparison to the otherworldly
life which is infinite, is so much shorter than the nine months a fetus
spends in the mother’s womb. The other difference is that to make the
first fetus is not at the disposal of man, and it is totally subservient
to the external factors. Factors such as the father’s sperm, the
mother’s womb, nourishment, and the mother’s internal conditions which
are all beyond the control of man combine together to make a fetus.
During the period of the second fetus, however, so many factors are in
the hands of man and it is he who builds his main personality, because
we regard life in the world as the embryonic stage and prelude and the
main life of man is in the Hereafter, as the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هَٰذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا لَهْوٌ وَلَعِبٌ ۚ وَإِنَّ
الدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ ۚ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The life of this world is nothing but diversion and play, but the
abode of the Hereafter is indeed Life, had they known! (29:64)***

In any case, what constitutes the root of our felicity and the nucleus
of man’s felicity in this embryonic period that must grow, mutate and
form other cells, tissues and limbs is the same “faith.” If man, out of
his own freewill, plants the seed of faith in his heart, makes it grow,
irrigates it and protects it, then he will attain eternal bliss.
Therefore, one proof that the axis of invitation of all prophets (*‘a*)
is faith is this noble verse, *“We have indeed heard a summoner calling
to faith.”* By taking a survey of the Qur’anic verses, many other
testimonies can be established on this subject, such as the verses
mentioning the characteristics of the righteous people and those who
benefit from their lives and will be safe from perils. In all these
verses, the quintessence which is always highlighted is “faith.” In most
cases, there is talk about *“Those who have faith”* and *“those who do
good deeds.”* Even if in some cases, in terms of position, the action is
mentioned first, it will immediately require that this action must be
accompanied by faith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً ۖ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever acts righteously, [whether] male or female, should he (or
she) be faithful, verily We shall quicken with good life. (16:97)***

Denial as the Prime Origin of Deviation
---------------------------------------

The opposite of faith is “denial” [*kufr*]. The lack of faith is *kufr*
and the one who does not possess faith is called *kafir* [unbeliever or
denier]. The Qur’an says: Finally, the unbelievers will be wretched and
misfortunate. Even if they do good deeds, these will be of no avail,
because these do not stem from faith but motivated by their carnal
desires and material instincts; motivated by popularity among people or
at least to satisfy and please their own human emotions. Whoever does a
good deed for inner happiness and sense of contentment, his reward is
the same inner happiness and sense of contentment he experiences, and he
cannot expect anything else from God. This is especially true if the
person is basically evil and mischievous and does this good deed owing
to a momentary emotional excitement and instantaneous uproar of
feelings.

As to why no deed of man in a state of *kufr* and absence of faith can
give him felicity is not problematic (to discern). Let us assume that
you have done a great service to a person. For example, you have spent a
significant portion of your property and assets to save him from a
serious ailment such that you have become poor. Now, if this person did
not pay attention and was heedless of you and would not even express a
lukewarm empty gratitude, and after sometime met you and said, “I do not
know you at all,” what judgment would you really have regarding this
person? Even if you do not express it verbally, at least you will say in
your heart: “What an ungrateful man he is! He does not even deserve to
be called “human” because many animals do not forget the good things and
services that man gives to them.

Now, imagine a person who forgets God, and not only is he heedless of
God but also he says, “I do not recognize a being called God at all.”
Which God? It is the same God who has created us from nothing and
endowed the entire universe and our existence. It is the same God who
has placed the nutritious milk in the breasts of the mother so that the
helpless baby does not remain hungry. It is He under whose blessings we
live day and night. It is He who ordains that “any breath that is
inhaled extends life and as it is exhaled, it enlivens the person.”
Thus, there are two blessings in every breath, and thanksgiving is
obligatory for every blessing:

*Whatever gratitude the hand and tongue could express must be given for
the air.*[^1]

Now, after all these compassions, blessings, graces, and generosities,
should man say, “Who is God by the way?! Such a being does not exist in
the external world!” What an ungrateful applause indeed! In the words of
the Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا لَهُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ جُزْءًا ۚ إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ
مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Man is indeed a manifest ingrate. (43:15)***

This is the gravest ingratitude a person can show. If because of the
thanklessness for a kindness, you regard that person as unworthy of
being called “human”, if a person shows such ingratitude to the
boundless ocean of blessings, he is not worthy to be called “human.”

The Unbelievers from the Viewpoint of the Qur’an
------------------------------------------------

The Qur’an confirms the idea that the label “human” is not worthy for
the unbelievers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَهُمْ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed the worst of beasts in Allah’s sight are those who are
faithless; so they will not have faith. (8:55)***

In this verse, God refuses to use the word “human” for the unbelievers
and mentions them with the expression “beast” which is even more
despicable than the expression “animal.”

Therefore, the first stage in which man can be situated along the
correct path of humanity and in which he can activate his talents is to
pay heed to the same innate demands and values which are discerned by
every person through his God-given natural disposition *fitrah* which is
truth-acknowledging and grateful of the blessings and their Source. The
grateful-of-the-blessings-and-their-Source *fitrah* is not only confined
to man as it exists in many animals. An illustrious example of them is
the dog. In this attribute, this animal has reached such a point that it
becomes a symbol of truth-acknowledgment and gratitude for blessings.
The dog recognizes its benefactor and has total regard for him. In front
of him, it bows down and places its head and face on the ground.

If those who are not willing to admit the existence of the
All-benefactor Lord neither express gratitude for His blessings nor
assume any responsibility for them, such people will never have any hope
for their own advancement and perfection. The one who denies the
existence of his Benefactor, even if sometimes he does good deeds, it
has an arrogant dimension and no effect on the essence of his being. His
essence has become inhuman and filthy and such a person has killed and
annihilated the spirit of humanity and spirituality in his self. Through
such works, one cannot revive the dead spirit. Yes, his good deeds may
have effect on him in this world and he may benefit from them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُعْرَضُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا عَلَى النَّارِ أَذْهَبْتُمْ
طَيِّبَاتِكُمْ فِي حَيَاتِكُمُ الدُّنْيَا وَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهَا
فَالْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وَبِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The day when the faithless are exposed to the Fire, [they will be
told,] ‘You have exhausted your good things in the life of the world and
enjoyed them. So today you will be requited with a humiliating
punishment for your acting arrogantly in the earth unduly, and because
you used to transgress. (46:20)***

If he has ever done a good deed, in return of it he will receive benefit
in this world, but in the Hereafter he will receive nothing but the
hell, chastisement and the fire. One who believes in neither God nor the
Resurrection and naturally has no hope of receiving any reward from God
on the Day of Resurrection, from whom does he expect any reward?!

The Qur’an has elegant parables in this regard. For example, in *Surah
al-Furqan*, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا لَوْلَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا
الْمَلَائِكَةُ أَوْ نَرَىٰ رَبَّنَا ۗ لَقَدِ اسْتَكْبَرُوا فِي
أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَعَتَوْا عُتُوًّا كَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَرَوْنَ الْمَلَائِكَةَ لَا بُشْرَىٰ يَوْمَئِذٍ لِلْمُجْرِمِينَ
وَيَقُولُونَ حِجْرًا مَحْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدِمْنَا إِلَىٰ مَا عَمِلُوا مِنْ عَمَلٍ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ هَبَاءً
مَنْثُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who do not expect to encounter Us say, ‘Why have not angels
been sent down to us, or why do we not see our Lord?’ Certainly they are
full of arrogance within their souls and have become terribly defiant.
The day when they see the angels, there will be no good news for the
guilty that day, and they will say, ‘Keep off [from paradise]!’ Then We
shall attend to the works they have done and then turn them*** ***into
scattered dust. (25:21-23)***

The deeds of those who are at war with their Creator are like ashes
which are blown by the wind. If one stormy day, ashes are carried out by
the wind, what will happen? How much will remain and what benefit can
they give?

In *Surah an-Nur*, we read in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ
الظَّمْآنُ مَاءً حَتَّىٰ إِذَا جَاءَهُ لَمْ يَجِدْهُ شَيْئًا وَوَجَدَ
اللَّهَ عِنْدَهُ فَوَفَّاهُ حِسَابَهُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ
أَوْ كَظُلُمَاتٍ فِي بَحْرٍ لُجِّيٍّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ۚ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ إِذَا
أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا ۗ وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ
لَهُ نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As for the faithless, their works are like a mirage in a plain, which
the thirsty man supposes to be water. When he comes to it, he finds it
to be nothing; but there he finds Allah, who will pay him his full
account, and Allah is swift at reckoning. Or like the manifold darkness
in a deep sea, covered by billow upon billow, overcast by clouds,
manifold [layers of] darkness, one on the top of another: when he brings
out his hand, he can hardly see it, and one whom Allah has not granted
any light has no light. (24:39-40)***

The deeds of the unbelievers are like a mirage which appears to those
who are thirsty in the desert; they think that it is a stream, pond or
spring, but when they approaches it, they see that it is nothing; it is
a barren and desolate desert. The unbelievers expect something from
their deeds, thinking that when they are thirsty of success and
prosperity, those deeds will benefit them, while it is nothing but false
notion. The mirage is *“supposed to be water.”* Those who have killed
the spirit of “faith” in their selves have annihilated the capability
for human growth in them. No matter how much good deed they may do, it
will be of no use for them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَثَلُ كَلِمَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ كَشَجَرَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ اجْتُثَّتْ مِنْ
فَوْقِ الْأَرْضِ مَا لَهَا مِنْ قَرَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is like a bad tree: uprooted from the ground, it has no stability.
(14:26)***

Since the root is corrupt and not attached to anything, whatever good
deed they may do will not be attached to the root to become lasting.
There is no correlation between the root of *kufr* and good deeds. As
such, they will not be attached to each other. Once the root conceals
the truth, it is ungrateful to God and it denies the lofty human values;
so, how can it see good and sublime deeds? This bond will fade and not
last long.

This is contrary to the case when the root is sound. If the root is
sound, there is hope for fruit and produce. *Kufr* dries up and burns
the root. Once the root is dried, there is no hope. But those who have
faith, even if they sometimes commit mistakes, their case is like that
of pests that have affected only the branches and leaves, and by means
of insecticides and proper care, it can be treated and remedied, since
the root is sound. Through reformative measures, the tree can bear
fruits again.

It can be inferred from this group of verses that the main criterion of
human progress, advancement and perfection is faith, and on the
contrary, that which burns the root of humanity and shatters everything
is unbelief.

Other examples make us prove that from the viewpoint of the Qur’an, the
axis of the invitation of the prophets (*‘a*) and the main factor for
the salvation and felicity of man is faith, which also has requisites
that we shall deal, God willing, in the next session.

Some Fundamental Questions on the Issue of Faith
------------------------------------------------

After paying attention to the fact that the essence of the invitation of
the prophets (*a*) is faith, numerous questions in this context are
raised. Some of these questions are as follows: What is the definition
of *iman*? What is the relationship of *iman* with love [*hubb*] and
hypocrisy [*nifaq*]? What is the relation of *iman* with Islam? Is
*iman* identical with Islam, or are they different from each other? If
they are not identical, can Islam replace *iman* and play the same role
for the felicity of man, or that Islam without *iman* has no effect on
the attainment of felicity?

What is the relationship of *iman* with knowledge and learning? Is the
existence of *iman* possible without any prior understanding and
knowledge? Granting that knowledge and faith have a positive
relationship, is it a kind of correlation in the sense that whoever has
knowledge must have faith too? Is faith something more than knowledge
and knowledge does not necessarily end up in faith? Is it possible for a
person to have knowledge of God, the hereafter and the Resurrection and
yet be an unbeliever? What is the relationship between faith and action?
Can faith alone and without any action lead to the felicity of man? Is
action a part of faith, or is it regarded as an affair outside of faith?

Does faith have a specific and determined degree in the sense that
having or not having such degree is tantamount to *iman* or *kufr*, and
that all the faithful and unbelievers are in the same degree of faith,
or do *iman* and *kufr* have different levels? If they have different
levels, what is the effect of each of these levels? In the philosophical
parlance, does *iman* change the nature of the existence of man, or is
it an accidental affair and does not change the nature and essence of
man? In other words, are the faithful and the unbeliever common as far
as the human nature is concerned and only in one of the attributes that
they differ from each other? If *iman* and *kufr* are only an accidental
affair, they are like beautiful and ugly clothes that change the
external aspect of man and have no effect on his essence and nature.

The abovementioned questions are indeed serious questions on the subject
of *iman* some of which have been explicitly raised and discussed in the
pertinent usual talks and writings, while some others are given less
attention and not examined thoroughly. In the future sessions, we will
hopefully be able to discuss the most important of them as much as time
allows us.

Question and Answer
-------------------

**Question**: You pointed out in your talks that if we want to know, for
example, the coverage of physics, we have to refer to physics itself,
while the present discussion is what religion is supposed to deal with
and with which spheres it should get involved, and not what religions
deals with. As such, it seems that the answer you have given is not
consistent with the question.

**Answer**: If you observe well, I pointed out in the discussion that as
of the moment, I do not want to embark on the issue: regarding our
expectation from religion, shall we inquire from religion or shall we
prove it from beyond religion? I wanted to raise skepticism. If we
accept that religion has a set of precepts and teachings and proves
“beings and non-beings” as well as “musts and must-nots” and values, it
follows that religion is like any other form of knowledge. In any field
of knowledge (such as physics, chemistry, sociology, etc.), if you want
to know what the said field of knowledge deals with, it is clear that
its logical and direct way is for us to refer to its content and
resources and see what it really deals with. Since religion is a set of
accounts and knowledge, it is natural that the best way of discovering
what it deals with is to refer to its very text and resources.

Sometimes, it is asked if we can prove outside religion that it must
definitely exist and in which realm it must get involved and interfere
with. The answer to this question is positive. Yes, prior to entering
the realm of religious knowledge, we can prove “the need for religion”
on fundamental basis. In brief, there are many subjects to which the
common intellect and knowledge of man are not responsive and end up in
“I do not know.” In many values, it is such that the intellect is
incapable of identifying them, and its manifestation is that we can see
that there are many views among different individuals and societies on
the issue of values.

The intellect usually does not comprehend these affairs. For instance,
whether God should be worshipped or not, and how this worship should be
performed are things which the intellect is incapable of comprehending.
Is the form of worship of the Muslims correct, or that of the Jews or
Christians? In such cases of disputes, if we want to find a decisive
answer that solves the disputes, its way is not to refer to the
intellect, because we said that in these cases, the human intellects
have diverse views. In such cases, there is another way; that is, to
refer to the divine revelation and apostleship.

In the theological discussions and the roots of religion, we prove the
need for apostleship through the same way. There, we say that since
there is a set of vital and exigent issues in the life of man to which
the human intellect and knowledge are irresponsive and end up in “I do
not know”, it follows that God Who has created mankind must have set
another way of identifying them for mankind, because if He did not allow
mankind to understand them, there would be something wrong with the
purpose, and that purpose behind the creation of man (proximity to God]
and human perfection will not be realized.

It is at this juncture that God has given to mankind the answer to these
questions through the divine revelation and apostleship. It is clear
that the framework of divine revelation and apostleship is nothing but
the same religion. In this manner, we can prove the essence of man’s
need for religion. But for us to elaborately ascertain how many issues
are incomprehensible by the common human intellect and knowledge which
must be elucidated by religion is something to which we cannot get a
clear answer. In order to clarify this matter, the only way is for us to
refer to religion and its content in order to see which issues it has
explained for us.

In short, even assuming that these issues can be established through
extra-religious ways, the direct and best way is for us to refer to the
content of religion as a specific field of knowledge, like any other,
and identify the issues it has dealt with.

[^1]: Golestan-e Sa‘di, preface. [Trans.]


