Preface
=======

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be upon our Master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his
pure progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all of their enemies.

The link between the theological seminary and the university is a
blessed phenomenon which bears significant and numerous wholesome
fruits. On the contrary, the separation of these two culture-building
and influential pillars for the society always entails heavy losses. In
the attempt to foster this blessed and auspicious connection, many years
prior to the victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, some individuals
from both the seminary and the university have always been active in
this field and by understanding the importance of this issue and its
strategic standing, they have always tried in many ways to expand and
consolidate this connection.

The entrance of the figures such as Martyr Mutahhari,[^1] Dr.
Beheshti,[^2] Dr. Bahonar,[^3] Martyr Mufatteh,[^4] and other farsighted
and conscious *‘ulama’* (i.e. men of religious knowledge) to the
university campus has been motivated by their enlightened thinking and
along the line of fostering this connection. University personalities in
the past decades can also be founded who, by their conviction in the
expediency and importance of promoting this line of communication, have
exerted efforts in this context.

These efforts have earned new and more extensive dimensions after the
victory of the Islamic Revolution and the declaration of the motto of
unity between the seminary and the university by the great founder of
the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini (*r*).[^5]

Of course, there are still many shortcomings and failings, and in
attaining the desirable point in this movement, so many ifs and buts
must be removed along the way. At any rate, actual experience has shown
that further closeness and connection of the two students and
seminarians and the two strongholds seminary and university has extended
worthy assistance in making the ideas of the two sides more fruitful. In
the end, the society will also benefit from its blessings. In the same
manner, the separation and bifurcation of the two will also result in
their own destruction and that of the society.

Among the personalities who have realized, for the past three decades,
the importance and exigency of creating this connection and have exerted
many efforts in this direction is the erudite scholar, prominent
philosopher and outstanding jurist [*faqih*], Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi
Misbah Yazdi. On the issues surrounding the Supreme Council of the
Cultural Revolution[^6] during the first years of the Islamic Revolution
and established at the order of the Imam Khomeini, Ayatullah Misbah was
given special attention by the eminent Imam in guiding and setting the
program of this movement. This is a testimony and confirmation that the
distinguished professor has been involved in this venture for many
years.

Along this line, for more than a year, a number of the wary, concerned
and committed scholars in the university has set up a center with the
aim of holding cultural activities. One of its activities is to hold
monthly sessions in the presence of Ayatullah Misbah Yazdi. In these
sessions, the distinguished professor tackles issues suggested by the
other professors.

On account of the academic standing as well as the importance of these
discussions in the current conditions of the society, the host of these
sessions, namely, the Mobilization Center of Professors of the
University of Science and Technology [*kanun-e basij-e asatid-e
daneshgah-e ‘ilm va san‘at*] has insisted that the collection of the
distinguished professor’s lectures in those sessions to be published
according to the chronological order of their presentation. Thanks to
God, through the effort of Hujjat al-Islam wa’l-Muslimin Shaykh Muhammad
Mahdi Nadiri Qummi, a faculty member of this Institute and one of the
outstanding students of Professor Yazdi, now we can offer to all those
who are interested nine of these lectures in the form of the present
book.

We hope that in the future we will be able to continue presenting these
discussions to the academic and cultural centers of the country and all
the academicians and knowledge-enthusiasts.

**Imam Khomeini Educational and Research Institute**
**1382 AHS (2003)**

[^1]: Professor Ayatullah Murtadha Mutahhari (1298-1358 AHS) was born in
Bahman 13, 1298 AHS [February 3, 1920] in the village of Fariman near
Mashhad to a family of clergymen. At the age of 12, he went to Mashhad
where he learned the basics of Islamic sciences and then moved to Qum
where he attended the class sessions conducted by the great authorities
of the theological center. From 1319 AHS [1940], Mutahhari had taken
part in the sessions led by Imam Khomeini and other famous teachers of
the time. Moreover, he himself conducted lessons in subjects like Arabic
literature, logic, kalam [scholasticism], jurisprudence, and philosophy.
In 1331 AHS [1952], Mutahhari was transferred from Qum to Tehran and in
1334 AHS [1955], he was invited to teach Islamic sciences at the Faculty
of Islamic Sciences, Tehran University. He was arrested at the midnight
of Khordad 15, 1342 AHS [1963] and spent 43 days in prison. After Imam
Khomeini’s migration to Paris, France, Mutahhari went to meet him and
His Eminence assigned to him the responsibility of organizing the
Revolutionary Council. On the night of Ordibehesht 11, 1358 AHS [May 1,
1979], Mutahhari was martyred by an agent of the terrorist Furqan group.
He wrote more than 50 books and tens of articles, and delivered scores
of speeches. Imam Khomeini said of Mutahhari, “His written and spoken
words are, without exception, educational and enlivening… I recommend
that the students and intellectual group not to let Mutahhari’s words be
forgotten by anti-Islamic tricks…” [Trans.]

[^2]: Dr. Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Beheshti was among the
combatant clerics and a very high profile academic and political
personality of the Islamic Revolution. Imam Khomeini appointed him as
the first supreme judge. ayatullah Beheshti and seventy-one other
members of the judiciary, thinkers, writers, and revolutionary elements
were martyred by a bomb explosion at the Islamic Republican Party
Headquarters perpetrated by the hypocrites on Tir 7, 1360 AHS (June 28,
1981). [Trans.]

[^3]: Hujjat al-Islam Dr. Muhammad Jawad Bahonar: the Prime Minister who
was martyred together with President Muhammad ‘Ali Raja’i in the
explosion of his office perpetrated by the hypocrites on Shahrivar 8,
1360 AHS (August 30, 1981). [Trans.]

[^4]: Hujjat al-Islam Shaykh Muhammad Mufatteh, Dean of the Faculty of
Theology at Tehran University and a key promoter of the unity between
the university and the seminary, was martyred by the terrorist Furqan
group on azar 28, 1358 AHS (December 19, 1979). [Trans.]

[^5]: The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
rahmatullah ‘alayhi, rahmatullah ‘alayha, or rahmatullah ‘alayhim [may
peace be upon him/her/them], which is used after the names of pious
people. [Trans.]

[^6]: Imam Khomeini issued a decree on Khordad 23, 1359 AHS (June 13,
1980) on the formation of the Cultural Revolution Headquarters. On Azar
19, 1363 AHS (December 10, 1984) he made a directive regarding the
formation of the Supreme Council of the Cultural Revolution to replace
the Cultural Revolution Headquarters. [Trans.]


