Chapter 18: Faith as the Essence of Invitation of the Prophets (Part 3)
=======================================================================

In this session, we will talk about the “jurisdiction of faith.” We have
said that the essence of the invitation of all prophets (‘a) is faith.
Now, this question is posed: Faith in what? The importance of this
question becomes clearer when we pay attention to the deviant
perspectives on the interpretation of religious concepts that emerged in
the recent decades. The youths may not remember that during the movement
of Imam Khomeini (*r*), those who were under the name of Islam but with
Marxist, atheistic and eclectic tendencies used to embark on
interpreting the verses of the Qur’an and explaining religious concepts.

The remnants of these individuals still exist and as in the past, they
use labels as such *mujahid* [struggler], *inqilabi* [revolutionary] and
*islami* [Islamic]. For example, when they talked about faith which is
repeatedly emphasized in the Qur’an, they said, “It signifies that man
should have faith in an objective in life and although in the Qur’an it
is said, ‘*faith in Allah’* or ‘*faith in the Last Day*,’ these are only
manifestations of faith, but they do not indicate that faith cannot
belong to other than them. What is important is to have an ‘objective’
and to have faith in it.” Everybody used to interpret in this way all
that have been mentioned in the Qur’an and narrations about the
importance of faith and the condemnation of unbelief and polytheism.
They also used to reply in this manner, “Yes, they are all
manifestations of faith, and what is important is the essence of faith,
and as to what belongs to faith is not important.”

Maybe I have mentioned again that at the time a book with the title
“Tawhid” [Monotheism] was published and incidentally, its author was a
so-called turbaned man and pseudo-cleric advocate of the *Fada’iyan-e
Khalq*. In the said book, he claimed that what are meant by *Allah* and
*faith in Allah* are not an external being and faith in an external
reality. Instead, they mean morally ideal. *Allah* means morally ideal;
we have to imagine in our minds the ideal *good* which is the totality
of all that is good. This hypothetical and imaginary being is called
*Allah*.

The meaning of ‘*There is no god but Allah*’ is nothing but this. It
means the negation of all that are other than the morally ideal. Also,
*faith in Allah* means faith in all goodness. Of course, other related
subjects can be found in the said book. There were similar books by
other authors at the time, and even books with the title *Tafsir-e
Qur’an* [Exegesis of the Qur’an] contained similar subjects. During
those days, unfortunately, these words on account of their novelty and
the prevalence of the Marxist tendencies had found buyers from many of
our pure-hearted youth and led to their intellectual deviation.

Fortunately, after the victory of the Revolution, especially through the
efforts and enlightenments of the late Martyr Mutahhari who also offered
his life along this way, gradually these deviations have been uprooted
from the society’s public opinion, particularly through the statements
of the late Imam (‘r) for the people behind Hujjatiyyah Society, our
youth would no longer be deceived by this kind of intellectual
deviations and they kept away from those people. Yet, unfortunately, we
witness that the same mental tunes are played anew and in the nooks and
corners, especially in the universities and academic centers, the same
melodies, sometimes with new color and menu, can be heard. Again, so to
speak, new readings and interpretations of religion and the Qur’an
emerge while new concepts in this context are advanced. There is the
danger that the same atheistic inclinations would again gain currency in
a new form.

If you can remember, during those days, they used to interpret *tawhid*
[monotheism] to mean *the Marxist classless society*. They used to say,
“*Tawhid* means homogenization and unification of the society and the
same thing which Marx says.” They also put its name in their books and
writings “The New Class Society,” and they meant the same Marxist
classless society. Regrettably, there were those who believed in them
“Yes, *tawhid* of the Qur’an, the Prophet and ‘Ali is the same thing
mentioned by Marx, the atheist and denier of God!”

Nowadays, the same games and tricks, though with new forms and
expressions and under the rubric of “new readings of religion” are
advanced. The foundation of the notion “new readings of religion” is the
denial of religion in order to deceive the people and considering that
after all our society has been engrossed with “religion” for hundreds of
years, they resort to pretexts and demagogies, and mention terms from
Islam and religion in their speeches. In my opinion, there are solid
pieces of evidence that they have no faith in any of the truths of
religion.

The Jurisdiction of Faith in the Qur'anic Verses
------------------------------------------------

As such, considering the past and the movements, we can observe in the
recent years that there is reason why we have to pursue the issue
meticulously and with the special academic scrupulousness so as to see
in what we must have faith and what the jurisdiction of faith is when we
say that faith is the essence of the invitation of the prophets (*‘a*).
The best and most logical way in doing so is to refer to the Qur’an to
see which thing the Qur’an, which has invited us to have faith, has
asked us to have faith in. Many Qur'anic verses make mention of “the
jurisdiction of faith” and here we shall cite two or three examples
only.

One of the expressions common in the Qur’an and repeated many times is
*faith in Allah and the Last Day*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَقُولُ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَبِالْيَوْمِ الْآخِرِ
وَمَا هُمْ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And among the people are those who say, ‘We have faith in Allah and
the Last Day,’ but they have no faith. (2:8)***

Nowadays, there are also those who say: *“We have faith in Allah and the
Last Day”* but they are telling a lie as *they have no faith*. Regarding
this “Last Day”, prior to the Revolution there were those who used to
say: “The *Last Day* means the Day of Revolution” the revolution of the
workers and the hard-working against the capitalists and the affluent.
Some of them are unfortunately turbaned men, still living and heading
some of these groups and splinter groups. And maybe the tape record of
their lesson of *tafsir* still exists in which they used to interpret
*Last Day* as the day of revolution. Regarding *sa‘ah* [the Hour] which
is among the names of the Day of Resurrection in the Qur’an, they said
that it is the time that must remain secret so that the Revolution would
not be exposed! And there are similar tittle-tattles which are now
unfortunately gaining currency as in the past.

Another jurisdiction of faith which is repeated in the Qur’an as
correlative is *faith in Allah and the Day of Resurrection*.”

Other verses, such as the following one, have mentioned in more detail
the jurisdiction of faith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ الْبِرَّ أَنْ تُوَلُّوا وُجُوهَكُمْ قِبَلَ الْمَشْرِقِ
وَالْمَغْرِبِ وَلَٰكِنَّ الْبِرَّ مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ
الْآخِرِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةِ وَالْكِتَابِ وَالنَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Piety is not to turn your faces to the east or the west; rather,
piety is [personified by] those who have faith in Allah and the Last
Day, the angels, the Book, and the prophets. (2:177)***

In this verse, faith in the angels, the heavenly scriptures and the
prophets of God are added.

In other verses, faith in the angels is particularly emphasized:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ ۚ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا
وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Apostle has faith in what has been sent down to him from his
Lord, and all the faithful. Each [of them] has faith in Allah, His
angels, His scriptures and His apostles. [They declare,] ‘We make no
distinction between any of His apostles’. (2:285)***

Here, it is worthy to ask about the specific reason why we have to have
faith in the angels and *what has been sent down*.

Another verse states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُولُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنْزِلَ
إِلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ
وَالْأَسْبَاطِ وَمَا أُوتِيَ مُوسَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ وَمَا أُوتِيَ
النَّبِيُّونَ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ لَا نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ
وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ آمَنُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا آمَنْتُمْ بِهِ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَوْا ۖ وَإِنْ
تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا هُمْ فِي شِقَاقٍ ۖ فَسَيَكْفِيكَهُمُ اللَّهُ ۚ
وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, ‘We have faith in Allah, and that which has been sent down to
us, and that which was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and
the Tribes, and that which Moses and Jesus were given, and that which
the prophets were given from their Lord; we make no distinction between
any of them, and to Him do we submit.’ So if they believe in the like of
what you believe in, then they are certainly guided. (2:136-137)***

This verse means: if you say the truth and have real faith in God, then
real and true faith is to have faith in all that have been sent down by
God, not only in a particular prophet and what has been sent down to
him. If your faith is like this, it shall be accepted *“So if they
believe in the like of what you believe in, then they are certainly
guided.”* But if you want to believe in some and deny others, this faith
is unacceptable to God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ آمِنُوا بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ قَالُوا نُؤْمِنُ
بِمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَيَكْفُرُونَ بِمَا وَرَاءَهُ وَهُوَ الْحَقُّ
مُصَدِّقًا لِمَا مَعَهُمْ ۗ قُلْ فَلِمَ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنْبِيَاءَ
اللَّهِ مِنْ قَبْلُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when they are told, ‘Believe in what was sent down,’ they say,
‘We believe in what was sent down to us,’ and they disbelieve what is
besides it, though it is the truth confirming what is with them.
(2:91)***

Another verse states that those who want to make a distinction among the
apostles of God by believing in some and rejecting others are the true
unbelievers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ
وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ
سَبِيلًا أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا ۚ وَأَعْتَدْنَا
لِلْكَافِرِينَ عَذَابًا مُهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who disbelieve in Allah and His apostles and seek to separate
Allah from His apostles, and say, ‘We believe in some and disbelieve in
some’ and seek to take a way in between it is they who are truly
faithless. (4:150-151)***

In short, it is clear that the Qur’an which calls on us to have faith is
not referring to faith in any other thing than Allah, the Last Day, the
apostles of God, the heavenly scriptures, and the angels. Among them, it
is clear that faith in the apostles and the heavenly books are
intertwined; that is, once we have faith in and confirm the apostles of
God, we will affirm and have faith in the subjects and books which they
claim to have been from God. But the question that still remains is
this: What is special about faith in the angels? The answer will be made
clear by considering the preliminary remarks below.

The Relationship between “Belief in the Angels” and the Discussion on “Prophetic Experience”
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the points of skepticisms raised nowadays is that the prophets
are humans, and human understandings and knowledge have the probability
of error and mistake, and that technically, they are prone to commit
error. No person on account of being a human is safe from understanding
a subject wrongly, or although he understood it correctly, he might make
a mistake when expressing and narrating it to others. For this reason,
considering that all prophets are human beings, neither their
understanding nor transmission of what they understood can be trusted,
because there is the possibility of error and mistake in both cases, not
to mention the fact that historical and time distance between us and the
prophets increase extremely the possibility of error in transmitting the
subjects from them to us or the intentional distortions in their
subjects.

Even assuming that we disregard this issue, the speech or word is with
the prophets and since they are humans, they have no immunity from error
and mistake both in understanding and transmission of the subjects. In
addition, the divine revelation is actually a demonstrative knowledge in
which concepts and words have no role rather, it is the perception of a
thing which a person finds within himself; therefore, understanding the
divine revelation and connection with it is only at the time that the
Prophet perceives and experiences such a state within himself.

In such a state, there is no word and concept, but once he wants to
express to us his personal experience and feeling, it is only an account
and report of that demonstrative knowledge which the prophet or apostle
expresses and pours out in the form of words and concepts. So, what the
prophet expresses to us is not revelation at all; rather, his account of
the revelation and prophetic experience of the revelation, in essence,
has no concept and word, and it is a kind of demonstrative knowledge.
Hence, these verses of the Qur’an are the words of the Prophet and not
God’s Word. They are an interpretation of the revelation and not the
revelation itself. In interpreting the revelation, the Prophet would
naturally act based on current literature as well as knowledge and
learning of his time, society and environment. Similarly, the literary
style and taste as well as his understanding of the sciences of his time
would affect this interpretation. Therefore, the Qur’an cannot be
trusted at all, and the probability of mistake and error exists therein!

The outcome of such a frame of mind is clear. No matter how we strive to
prove a matter for religion and attribute it to religion, it will be of
no use, because our firmest source and document is the Qur’an, and the
status of the Qur’an became such that it was grouped along with human
knowledge of theoreticians and exegetes, while its credibility and
prestige are questioned.

This skepticism which nowadays has posed itself as *scientific* and been
presented as such, had been advanced before in this manner: We cannot
see that God and the angels really send down the words the Prophet is
uttering. From where is it obvious that these are not insinuations of
the jinn and devils?

During the time of the Prophet (S), they used to raise the same
skepticism, and it is narrated in the Qur’an from the words of the
unbelievers and polytheists, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ إِنَّمَا يُعَلِّمُهُ بَشَرٌ ۗ
لِسَانُ الَّذِي يُلْحِدُونَ إِلَيْهِ أَعْجَمِيٌّ وَهَٰذَا لِسَانٌ
عَرَبِيٌّ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We certainly know that they say, ‘It is only a human that instructs
him’. (16:103)***

The Qur’an strongly rejects these attributions, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تَنَزَّلَتْ بِهِ الشَّيَاطِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It has not been brought down by the devils. (26:210)***

It also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هُوَ بِقَوْلِ شَيْطَانٍ رَجِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it is not the speech of an outcast Satan. (81:25)***

In any case, since such skepticisms and insinuations have existed from
the beginning and God has foreseen that later on, during the period of
modernity and postmodernism, some people will advance these claims that
the Qur’an is not God’s Word but the word of the Prophet or even his
imagination, thoughts and personal feelings, He has emphasized on *faith
in the angels.* God stresses that His angels reveal these subjects to
the Prophet (S), and are not insinuations of the devils and their own
opinions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَنْطِقُ عَنِ الْهَوَىٰ إِنْ هُوَ إِلَّا وَحْيٌ يُوحَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He does not speak out of [his own] desire: it is just a revelation
that is revealed [to him]. (53:3-4)***

What kind of creature are the angels? We do not know the angels and
although the prophets and saints of God have talked about them and they
are mentioned repetitively in the Qur’an, the truth behind the existence
of the angels is not clear for us. We know of only some attributes of
the angels. The distinctive characteristic of the angels in opposition
to the jinn and any other force such as human imaginations is that they
do not err or commit mistakes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا
وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ عَلَيْهَا مَلَائِكَةٌ غِلَاظٌ
شِدَادٌ لَا يَعْصُونَ اللَّهَ مَا أَمَرَهُمْ وَيَفْعَلُونَ مَا
يُؤْمَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…who do not disobey whatever Allah has commanded them, and carry out
what they are commanded. (66:6)***

So, you should have faith in the angels; that is, you should have faith
in the creature which brings down the divine revelation and in whose
action there is no error or mistake:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلُ رَسُولٍ كَرِيمٍ ذِي قُوَّةٍ عِنْدَ ذِي الْعَرْشِ
مَكِينٍ مُطَاعٍ ثَمَّ أَمِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is indeed the speech of a noble apostle, powerful and eminent with
the Lord of the Throne, one who is heard and trustworthy as well.
(81:19-21)***

These verses were revealed in Mecca during the early part of the
Prophetic mission. From the beginning, it is emphasized that this Qur’an
being revealed to you is not your speech, but that of an angel: *“It is
indeed the speech of a noble apostle”* and that angel is *“powerful and
eminent*.*”* In *Surah an-Najm*, it says thus: ***“Taught him by One of
great powers.*** **(53:5)*****”***

What is the purpose behind the emphasis on this attribute (powerfulness)
of the angels? This is because the Qur’an wants to convey that this
angel that receives the revelation from God is powerful and he can
overcome all the devils and forces trying to distort the revelation. By
mentioning this attribute (among tens of others), it is intended to
express that the angels are so powerful that they can convey the divine
revelation to the Prophet (S) just as they receive it *“powerful and
eminent with the Lord of the Throne*,*”* and for this reason, God has
appointed him to be the carrier of revelation.

*“One who is heard and trustworthy as well”* means that the said angel
is obeyed. Many verses are brought down by Jibril (Archangel Gabriel)
along with other angels, and here it says that he is a commander whose
command is obeyed. In addition to his being heard, he is trustworthy. It
thus says elsewhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَزَلَ بِهِ الرُّوحُ الْأَمِينُ عَلَىٰ قَلْبِكَ لِتَكُونَ مِنَ
الْمُنْذِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[It (Qur’an) was] brought down by the Trustworthy Spirit, upon your
heart, so that you may be one of the warners. (26:193-194)***

It is again an emphasis that “The revelation is brought down to you
without any error, mistake, addition, or lacking. Perhaps the most
explicit of verses in this context are the last verses of *Surah Jinn*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا إِلَّا مَنِ
ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ
خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا لِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ
وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

>

***Knower of the Unseen, He does not disclose His Unseen to anyone,
except to an apostle He approves of. Then He dispatches a sentinel
before and behind him so that He may ascertain that they have
communicated the messages of their Lord, and He comprehends all that is
with them, and He keeps count of all things. (72:26-28)***

Firstly, it says that God, the Knower of the Unseen, does not inform
anyone of His Unseen. It is not because He is stingy but because not
everybody is inherently worthy and deserving to receive revelation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah knows best where to place His Apostleship! (6:124)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَجْتَبِي مِنْ رُسُلِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But Allah chooses from His apostles whomever He wishes. (3:179)***

After designating the Prophet (S), He sends down His revelation to him
in this manner: *“Then He dispatches a sentinel before and behind him.”*
Since our concern is the perceptible, sending down of the revelation is
embodied in such a way that it is as if it wants to be transferred from
a location in the Sublime Throne to a lower location on earth. This
distance actually is the existential distance of the Station of Lordship
to the blessed heart of the Prophet (S), and not really a spatial
distance. In any case, in its perceptible similitude, it is such that
along this distance from the Divine Station to the heart of the Prophet
(S), this revelation is well guarded at the front and rear, and with a
perfect entourage it reaches its destination safely.

*Rasada* means lurking place; that is, through the way, they are totally
lurking and on guard to ensure that the divine revelation and message is
free of even the least harm and distortion. The reason behind it is
clear *“so that He may ascertain that they have communicated the
messages of their Lord.”* That is to have perfect and absolute assurance
that the divine message is faithfully delivered to the people without
any addition or subtraction. It says: “We also have the account of the
number of words of this message and We are watchful so that even a
letter is not added or subtracted from it *“and He comprehends all that
is with them, and He keeps count of all things.”* If it is not so and
there is the probability of error and distortion in the transmission of
the divine message, the objective of the apostleship and the apostolic
mission, which is guidance, will not be achieved.

Thus, the description of the Qur’an of the manner of sending down the
revelation is that it is revealed through the powerful carriers that
have the power to repel any force aiming to distort the revelation.
These carriers are trustworthy, venerable messengers and honored
servants (21:26) who act by the command of God the Exalted. Also, at the
moment of revelation, complete protection of it is undertaken and with a
special entourage it is sent down from the Sacred Station of Lordship to
the blessed heart of the Prophet (S). All this is meant to have complete
assurance that the divine message and revelation is received and
conveyed correctly without any addition or mutilation *“so that He may
ascertain that they have communicated the messages of their Lord.”* [^1]

Now, compare these clear and firm verses with the statements of these
so-called intellectuals and national religious figures about the Qur’an
and revelation that the Prophet is a human and every human being is
prone to commit error; thus, from where is it known that he understood
it correctly and then expressed it correctly? These blind-hearted have
never read the Qur’an; they feign ignorance or attribute lies to it.

Of course, they may say that these very verses you quoted have the same
probability of error. If that argument is advanced, in short, the reply
to it is that in addition to the textual proof, we have also rational
proof for the point that the divine revelation should be immune from any
form of error and mistake while being conveyed to the people. That
rational proof is based on the wisdom of God the Exalted that if the
purpose of the All-wise God is to guide the people and through the
apostolic mission of the prophets (*‘a*) and the sending down of the
heavenly scriptures, He wants the people to receive guidance, then there
must be some measures undertaken to ensure that the message of guidance
will reach the people without the least distortion, exaggeration and
mutilation.

Belief in all the Prophets as a Requisite of True Faith
-------------------------------------------------------

In conclusion, the jurisdiction of faith in a nutshell is God, the
Resurrection, the angels, the heavenly books, and all the prophets. We
must have faith in all of them and all of the prophets, and not take any
one of them as exception *“We make no distinction between any of them.”*
If we say, “We accept one while denying the other,” this is tantamount
to the denial of them all *“It is they who are truly faithless.”*

This question may come to the mind: Why is denial of a prophet
tantamount to denial of all the prophets and true faithlessness? One who
accepts, for example, ‘Isa (*‘a*) or Musa (*‘a*), he accepts one prophet
at least. So, how can we say that he denies all the prophets? In reply,
we have to say that we ask those who accept one of the prophets, ‘Isa or
Musa (*‘a*) for example: Is this faith of yours based on the fact that
‘Isa or Musa belongs to your community and tribe, or because of the fact
that he is a prophet of God?

If they say, “It is because he is a relative and next of kin of ours,”
it is clear that this is worship of kinship and tribalism, and is not
worship of God. In short, it is not faith but true faithlessness. The
other option is for them to say, “Our faith is anchored in the fact that
‘Isa (or Musa) is a prophet of God, and what matters to us is God and
His command, and not ‘Isa, Musa or kinship. In this case, we say that if
the main criterion is the command of God, let us assume that God
initially sends prophet A and gives him commandments, and then sends
prophet B and abrogates some of the previous commandments sent through
prophet A, and issues new commandments. Here, faith in God requires
what? If a person has true faith in God, will he obey the commandments
of prophet A or prophet B?

Obviously, if a person is really bound by the commandments of God, once
God through prophet B annulled the commandments of prophet A, he will
obey the second set of commandments. Or, if a prophet initially brought
a commandment from God and after sometime, the same prophet brought a
new decree contrary to the earlier decree from God, annulling the first
commandment, it is clear that faith in God requires that the second
order be executed.

This case which is technically called *abrogation* has happened to some
of the decrees of our religion of Islam. One of them is the issue of the
*qiblah*’s direction. Based on a divine commandment, the Holy Prophet
(S) used to pray for many years toward Jerusalem. After some years, this
verse was revealed: ***“So turn your face toward the Holy Mosque***
**(2:144)*****”*** and the order was given that “From then on, you pray
toward the Masjid al-Haram and the *Ka‘bah*.” If a person really
believes in the Prophet (S), after the revelation of this verse, he will
pray toward the *Ka‘bah* and not toward Jerusalem. When two
contradictory orders are issued by the master, one after the other,
everyone can understand that the second order must be obeyed.

In our discussion, God has initially sent Musa (*‘a*) and then ‘Isa
(*‘a*), and the assumption is that we have accepted them on account of
being prophets of God. For some time, we acted upon the commandments
brought by Musa (*‘a*) from God, and after Musa (*‘a*), ‘Isa (*‘a*)
brought commandments from God some of which contradicted the decrees of
Musa (*‘a*). Here, if a person has faith in Musa, he has to accept ‘Isa
because both of them are prophets who came from the One and Only God.
The true follower of Musa is he who has faith in ‘Isa, and the true
follower of ‘Isa is he who has faith in the Prophet of Islam, because
one of the things mentioned by ‘Isa is that “After me a prophet whose
name is Ahmad shall come.”

>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمُبَشِّرًا بِرَسُولٍ يَأْتِي مِنْ بَعْدِي اسْمُهُ أَحْمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To give the good news of an apostle who will come after me, whose
name is Ahmad.*** **(61:6)*****”***

As such, denial of the Prophet of Islam means denial of the saying of
‘Isa and his apostleship. If a person says, “I have faith in ‘Isa but I
will not believe in the Prophet of Islam,” his faith in ‘Isa is a lie,
because one of the statements of ‘Isa is the glad tidings of the advent
of the Prophet of Islam and obedience to him. That is why we say that
faith in some of the prophets and denial of some others is actually
denial of all prophets. For the same reason, the Qur’an emphasizes,
thus: *“We make no distinction between any of them.”* For this reason
too, we in Islam regard not only blasphemy against the Prophet of Islam
(S) but also blasphemy against any of the prophets as tantamount to
disbelief and apostasy.

Other Viewpoints on the Jurisdiction of Faith
---------------------------------------------

As we have mentioned, opposite to this interpretation of the
jurisdiction of faith which is clearly deduced from the verses of the
Qur’an, the other interpretation of faith during the period of
prevalence of Marxism in Iran was that as they used to say, “What is
important is the essence of faith. What is important is for a person to
have faith in an ideal and objective, and strive hard to attain it. Once
a person has no faith in any ideal and objective, he will not strive
hard and experience passivity and decadence. The Qur’an gives emphasis
on faith for the same reason that man has to struggle, move, exert
efforts and make use of his talents to attain that considered ideal.”

Of course, during those days, they used to say, “That ideal in which is
the paradise of man is the communist and socialist classless society.”
Nowadays, they say, “That ideal is the liberal and democratic society,”
and they promote to have faith in such a society and to strive to attain
it faith is the fact that the source of everything is the will of the
people, and other than the people no one and nothing, including God,
should interfere in their destiny and determine their duties. Anyway,
this is a kind of interpretation of faith which is 180 degrees the
opposite of what can be understood from the Qur’an, and its falsity is
more vivid than the sunlight, and it does not need further discussion.

Another group is of the opinion that the jurisdiction of faith cannot be
anything except God and the prophet. Yet, faith in a particular prophet
is not necessary and faith in any of them is enough. Each of the
prophets is a straight path and faith in any of these straight paths is
enough for the attainment of felicity.

By studying the Qur’an, it became clear that this view is wrong.
According to the Qur’an, faith in all the prophets is necessary, and
faith in some and denial of some others is true faithlessness *“It is
they who are truly faithless.”* The implication of the statement that
any of the prophets is a straight path is that if you have faith in only
one of them and set aside the rest, there is no problem and you have
attained guidance. This is while from the viewpoint of the Qur’an even
if you accept all the prophets and have faith in all of them and deny
only one of them, you have taken a step along the path of falsehood and
the way of unbelief:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ ۚ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا
وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and all the faithful, each [of them] has faith in Allah, His angels,
His scriptures and His apostles. [They declare,] ‘We make no distinction
between any of His apostles’. (2:285)***

The Relationship between Faith and the Acceptance of the Prophets Historically
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other point which must be noted is that faith in the prophets is not
faith in a historical episode. For example, faith in the Prophet of
Islam (S) does not mean mere acceptance that 14.000 years ago, there
emerged a person name Muhammad in the Arabian Peninsula who said, “I am
the Messenger of Allah,” and brought a book named Qur’an from God. Then,
we believe what he brought at the time can neither be of use nor
implemented at this time! This faith is “the history of the prophets”
and not faith in “the prophets and the Messenger.” This is like
believing in a person called Hitler in Germany who was one of the most
notorious criminals in history.

Paying attention to this point is important, because nowadays, there
have unfortunately emerged people who present a historical
interpretation of faith in the Prophet of Islam. While claiming to be
Muslims and intellectuals, they say that the Prophet of Islam’s call was
monotheism and the acceptance of One God, and the essence of religion
and that which is the kernel of religion is this one matter while the
other matters are among the secondary things of religion and are
changeable according to the demands of time and space. Accordingly, even
the Prophet himself never claimed that the laws and orders he brought
are eternal. They add that the decrees and ordinances the Prophet
brought were appropriate for that time and society, and for this time,
they are neither useful nor executable. So, everything must be changed.

We have earlier explained that faith is a state of the heart which must
be put into practice. And if this obligation to put it into practice
does not exist, and it is mere knowledge and mental confirmation, it is
not faith. We pointed out that Pharaoh knew that Musa was a prophet of
God and his miracles were divine signs which manifested through him. The
people of Pharaoh also knew these facts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَحَدُوا بِهَا وَاسْتَيْقَنَتْهَا أَنْفُسُهُمْ ظُلْمًا وَعُلُوًّا ۚ
فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They impugned them though they were convinced in their hearts.
(27:14)***

Mere knowing is the criterion; undertaking it is necessary. For us to
merely know and accept that a prophet came fourteen hundred years ago
and to say that his words are of no use today is not faith. This is
faithlessness, indeed. What does *kufr* mean by the way? It means this
non-application into practice and for us to say, “I know that the
Prophet has said these words, but I do not act upon them.” Is *kufr*
other than this? Does to be a Jew or a Christian merely mean for us to
know a prophet named Musa or ‘Isa and a book called Torah or Evangel? If
to be a Jew or Christian is this knowledge, then all of us throughout
the world are Jews and Christians! The criterion of being a Jew is that
the person put into practice the sayings of Musa and whatever is
mentioned in the Torah. To be a Muslim means that you regard yourself
bound to put into practice what was brought by the Prophet of Islam (S).
(Of course, for one to commit sins sometimes on account of the carnal
desire and Satan is another story.) If a person only accepts the history
of the Prophet and is not supposed to act upon the Prophet’s decrees and
ordinances, this verse must be recited to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الْأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا ۖ قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَٰكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنَا وَلَمَّا يَدْخُلِ الْإِيمَانُ فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ ۖ وَإِنْ
تُطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَا يَلِتْكُمْ مِنْ أَعْمَالِكُمْ
شَيْئًا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Bedouins say, ‘We have faith.’ Say, ‘You do not have faith yet;
rather say, “We have embraced Islam,” for faith has not yet entered into
your hearts’. (49:14)***

Is one who accepts the advent of the Prophet of Islam in the Arabian
Peninsula fourteen hundred years ago and say that his ordinances are of
no use and cannot be implemented, a Muslim?! Does such a person have
faith in “what Allah has sent down,” “His books” and “His messengers,”
and among the faithful believers whom are described by the Qur’an as
follows: *“All the faithful. Each [of them] has faith in Allah, His
angels, His scriptures and His apostles”*? This is sheer disbelief. This
amount seems simple. If a person denies even one decree, and one decree
only, which he is certain to have been brought by the Prophet of Islam
(S), he goes outside the path of faith. If faith in the laws is because
God ordained them, has God not ordained this one? If acting upon the
rest is motivated by the fact that they are consistent with his like and
desire, this is self-worship and sheer disbelief, and not worship of
God.

Of course, sometimes, it is not proved to a person that this is a decree
of God and is among the decrees which has no decisive proof and in which
there is still room for juristic differences. That is another story. The
discussion here is that we are certain that God and the Prophet have
made a decree, and in spite of it, we do not submit to it. If that is
the case, this is *kufr*. It is not important whether that decree is
among the decrees on obligation or prohibition; rather, it is the same
for every decree. If a person is certain that the Prophet has really
recommended a certain recommended prayer and notwithstanding this, he
denies it and does not accept this decree to the extent of being
recommended, he is definitely *kafir*.

Of course, it must be borne in mind that many of these are inner
disbelief which can be reconciled with the outward Islam and it is
referred to by this passage: *“The Bedouins say, ‘We have faith.’ Say,
‘You do not have faith yet; rather say, “We have embraced Islam,” for
faith has not yet entered into your hearts’.”* The outward Islam which
is mentioned in this verse can be acquired through the recital of the
profession of faith [*shahadatayn*], though it is ostentatious and
nominal, and many of the laws of Islam are applicable to it. Such Islam
brings about the ritual purification of the body and one can take a
Muslim woman as wife, his daughter be married, inherit, and be buried in
the cemetery of Muslims, etc. The hypocrites during the time of the
Prophet were of the same type of Muslims, about whom the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَلَا يَأْتُونَ الصَّلَاةَ إِلَّا وَهُمْ كُسَالَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not perform the prayer but lazily. (9:54)***

Even if they pray, it is out of compulsion and social considerations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يُخَادِعُونَ اللَّهَ وَهُوَ خَادِعُهُمْ وَإِذَا
قَامُوا إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ قَامُوا كُسَالَىٰ يُرَاءُونَ النَّاسَ وَلَا
يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا مُذَبْذَبِينَ بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ لَا
إِلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ وَلَا إِلَىٰ هَٰؤُلَاءِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ
فَلَنْ تَجِدَ لَهُ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The hypocrites indeed seek to deceive Allah, but it is He who outwits
them. When they stand up for prayer, they stand up lazily, showing off
to the people and not remembering Allah except a little, wavering in
between: neither with these nor with those. (4:142-143)***

There are also those whose prayers are politicking and out of
sociopolitical considerations, and not motivated by submission of the
heart in front of God. This is outward Islam the follower of which may
marry a Muslim woman and whose daughter can be asked for marriage and on
whom the other laws are applicable. Yet, from the perspective of the
real decree, he may be worse than any unbeliever:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ فِي الدَّرْكِ الْأَسْفَلِ مِنَ النَّارِ وَلَنْ
تَجِدَ لَهُمْ نَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed the hypocrites will be in the lowest reach of the Fire.
(4:145)***

At any rate, the account of outward Islam is separate from faith in God,
and our present discussion is about faith and not what will make the
body ritually pure and the like issues. The discussion is about the
thing that will bring about man’s felicity, bliss, success and salvation
from the hellfire and chastisement, and not that which is reconcilable
with *the lowest reach of the Fire*. Yes, according to the explicit text
of the Qur’an, there are those who pray to assume the name of Islam and
the combatants of Islam, yet they are in the lowest ebb of the Fire.

[^1]: - In Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:26-27, the Qur’an thus says in describing
the angels:  بَلْ عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ  لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ
وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ  They are [His] honored servants. They do
not venture to speak ahead of Him, and they act by His command.


