Chapter 1: Our Responsibility in the Sphere of Culture (Part 1)
===============================================================

I thank God for giving me this opportunity to be in the company of the
committed and honorable professors. I hope that this will serve as the
beginning of a blessed and auspicious movement in discharging our heavy
responsibilities and sublime duties in this particular period. At the
outset, I beg your permission to touch on the importance of this
responsibility so that in the future session, I can deal on the subject
matters suggested by the dear brothers.

In the Islamic school of thought, there is a principle called the
balance between capability and responsibility. That is, God the Exalted
gives responsibility to every person commensurate to the extent of
blessing, capability and talent endowed on him. The issue on human
responsibility is an important subject with extensive discussions.
Before properly embarking on this principle, I will briefly explain it.

Responsibility Conscious or right-seeking man
---------------------------------------------

Apart from the fact that through his own natural disposition [*fitrah*],
man discerns that he is not like animals which are not set free and have
no responsibility. Religions have also emphasized this fact. Perhaps,
you might have heard that the famous Western philosopher, Immanuel
Kant,[^1] used to say, “Two things have touched and astonished me. One
is the visage of stars in the sky while the other one is the voice in
the natural disposition of man. In fact, this nature is the most
beautiful voice that exists.” Anyway, through his primary nature, man,
more or less, discerns that he has a certain responsibility. However,
elucidating and proving this natural discernment is not of our concern
in the current issue.

In contrast to the theory of instinctive essence of responsibility,
there is another theory which has existed since ancient times and has
gained special prominence and momentum in the recent decades. This
theory believes that to talk about human responsibility and duty is an
old-fashioned and retrogressive thinking which must be discarded.
Accordingly, man in the present day demands his rights and claims from
the world, nature, God, and government. Today, man is no longer regarded
as servant, and God as his Master. It is now the age of sovereignty and
supremacy of man the age when instead of searching for his duty and
responsibility, man is in pursuit of claiming for and demanding his
rights which have been trampled upon and denied to him for many
centuries.

Notwithstanding the second theory, intellect, conscience and natural
disposition of man testify that he is responsible and aware of his
obligations and duties to which he is responsible a fact that is
consensually agreed upon by all religions. Many holy Qur’anic verses
bear witness to the responsibility of man. Thus, the Holy Qur’an reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ , عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***By your Lord, We will question them all concerning what they used to
do. (15:92-93)***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَٰكِنْ يُضِلُّ
مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ ۚ وَلَتُسْأَلُنَّ عَمَّا كُنْتُمْ
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And you will surely be questioned concerning what you used to do.
(16:93)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ ۚ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ
وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُولَٰئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ مَسْئُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed the hearing and the eyesight, and the heart, all of these are
accountable. (17:36)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَانُوا عَاهَدُوا اللَّهَ مِنْ قَبْلُ لَا يُوَلُّونَ
الْأَدْبَارَ ۚ وَكَانَ عَهْدُ اللَّهِ مَسْئُولًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And pledges given to Allah are accountable. (33:15)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقِفُوهُمْ ۖ إِنَّهُمْ مَسْئُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***[But first] stop them! For they must be questioned. (37:24)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَنِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then, that day, you will surely be questioned concerning the
blessing. (102:8)***

The Principle of Balance between Responsibility and Capability
--------------------------------------------------------------

In principle, there is no dispute that man is responsible, but the point
to which we must pay attention is that responsibility to all individuals
at all times and places is not fixed and identical as it has variance
depending on different factors.

One of the factors that make the difference in the degree of obligations
is the capability of each person. This is the same principle of the
balance between capability and responsibility we have earlier mentioned.
Since capabilities of individuals in terms of mental aptitude, physical
or bodily prowess, emotional or psychological strength, social status
and standing, and the like are not identical, it follows that their
responsibilities are also not alike. Every person is responsible
according to his or her capacity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah does not task any soul beyond its capacity. (2:286)***

Undoubtedly, things that a president or a prime minister can do on
account of the position he occupies is not equal to what a common
employee can do, and thus, the responsibility of the former cannot be
compared to that of the latter.

Another factor that makes a difference in the degree of carrying out the
duties is the extent of danger that an individual or a community may
face. The greater the danger, the bigger the responsibility. If the
society is totally secured and everything is under control, you may
relax at night with peace of mind. But if insecurity is prevalent and
the security forces are too weak to protect people while thieves and
evils are free, you will feel a bigger sense of responsibility for
protecting your wife, children, house, and properties. If it is rumored
that there are poisoned meat and food stuffs in the market, one may make
inquiries and particularly think of what one is going to do.

In sum, when danger is more rampant, feelings to do something about it
become much more prevalent in the inner selves. Of course, such feelings
cannot be perceived if danger is not anticipated by means of evidence.
But sometimes, danger actually exists, but because we are not aware of
it and it is not proven to us, no matter how serious it might be, we
will have no reaction to it. Thus, we have to sense first the danger so
as to realize our corresponding responsibility.

The Extent of Capability and Responsibility in the Sight of University and Seminary Professors
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dear brothers! For different reasons, you are more responsible than
others are. One reason is the capabilities and talents that God the
Exalted has endowed in you. If your talent were just like the others’,
you would not become university professors. The fact that you have been
able to pursue higher education and research shows that your God-given
talent and skills are greater than the others’ are. Another reason is
your social ranks and the influence that you could have on the youths
and the students.

Ordinary people and even heads of offices and ministries cannot play the
role of yours. By training the young generation and imparting ideas and
views to them, you are actually charting the future of the country. In
the future, administrators and heads of the community as well as those
who will occupy the most important positions in the country, ranging
from the position of the Supreme Leader and the president down to the
deputies in the Majlis (Parliament), and other administrative posts,
will be none but these youths of university and seminary students. For
this reason, the responsibility of the professors, whether teaching in
the university or in the Seminary, is greater and more crucial than the
others’.

A third reason for which your and my responsibility is greater than
anyone else’s responsibility is related to the existing state of
affairs. At the present, we are experiencing dangers imposed by our
enemies in different aspects, the most serious of which is the cultural
one and, as a result, we can sense the enemies’ cultural attacks. If
until yesterday, some people used to describe such cultural attacks as
attempts of cultural exchanges and ideas, and claim that the so-called
conspiracy was nothing but a pigment of imagination, today I do not
think that those who have a bit of political understanding, insight and
awareness will doubt that a serious cultural danger is threatening our
community in general and the young generation in particular.

If we do not make haste to stop the cultural influence of the enemies,
we will soon experience total cultural degeneration. Today, the
information and communication technology as exemplified by the satellite
and the Internet have provided unprecedented tools to the wicked ones.
By using them, the enemies are extending on a daily basis the scope of
their destructive activities and in an unimaginable speed, they are
overrunning the cultural strongholds one after the other.

The Present Cultural and Moral Degeneration
-------------------------------------------

The moral and cultural corruptions that are being witnessed in these
days are so critical that even the Westerners themselves are suffering
from them while shouting in protest. Definitely, you yourselves know it
better and more specific than I do. Here, I will cite one case as an
example:

In the Holy Qur’an, the story of the people of Prophet Lut (*‘a*)[^3] is
emphatically highlighted. The Qur’an strongly condemns the people of
Prophet Lut who used to commit wicked acts and extremely abominable
practices of having sexual intercourses with others of the same sex
(i.e. homosexuality). Describing this wicked deed as the peak of
indecency, the Holy Qur’an says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلُوطًا إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ إِنَّكُمْ لَتَأْتُونَ الْفَاحِشَةَ مَا
سَبَقَكُمْ بِهَا مِنْ أَحَدٍ مِنَ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Lut when he said to his people: You indeed commit an indecency
none in the world has ever committed before you! (29:28)***

In the end, because of their persistence in this extremely abominable
practice and not paying heed to the admonitions and warnings of Prophet
Lut (*‘a*), the divine chastisement was sent upon them and all of them
perished. This story is related to a small city in one corner of the
world with a limited number of people that existed thousands of years
ago. As for today, look what is happening in the world! According to
statistics Westerners themselves have given, more than fifty percent of
the prominent figures in all countries in the world are afflicted with
this repulsive act. Moreover, they have become publicly indulged in this
wicked act in streets and staged demonstrations and rallies in support
for homosexuality.

In some of these countries, members of the parliaments have declared it
legal and officially given credence to it by approving pertinent bills.
Today, in many countries of the world, the homosexuals have their own
exclusive clubs, organizations, cultural centers, libraries, and
magazines. I would not have believed in it if I myself had not seen it
from a close distance. In one of my trips to the United States for a
speaking engagement in Philadelphia, it was an opportunity for me to
visit some cities like Washington.

I took a car together with a gentleman who is presently a deputy
minister. We reached a crossroad where a handsome and elegant library
could be seen in a corner. I said, “It would be better if we could pay a
visit to this library.” The gentleman said, “No, it is not advisable for
us to get out of the car here.” As I asked for a reason, he explained,
“This is a library for the homosexuals and if we get out of the car
here, we will be accused of being among them.” Right in that crossroad,
I saw handsome men who wore short female dresses while behaving like
women.

This is today’s state of affairs in the world. How impudent and insolent
this is! Now, by using the data communication technology and the
Internet, just imagine how fast and easy this contagious moral virus
could be spread. It is not without reason that psychologists and
educators in the West are warning against and deeming seriously
dangerous the children watching immoral articles through the Internet.
Today, by employing advanced technology, the Hollywood movie making is
producing very interesting films and distributing them throughout the
world, even though the most immoral articles are promoted in these
films.

We wish that corruptions would have ended there, but the more serious
menace is still the mental one. Just as moral corruptions in the present
day are unprecedented, mental corruptions that are currently prevalent
are still exceptional. If Satan has been the greatest agent of human
mental and ideological corruption from the beginning of creation, today
he himself is amazed by the misleading topics and skepticisms put forth
by some wicked people! These people are now so well-rooted and
established that if one expresses belief in something, they will answer,
“What a foolish and stupid person this one is!”

Yes, indeed! The source of pride and intellectuality in the conception
of the present man is to say, “I have doubt and skepticism in
everything, and there is not a certain, fixed and absolute thing in the
universe or anything that can be proved to be so!”

Preservation of the Relative Balance between Elements of Guidance and Deviation in Every Age
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The fact that we should keep in mind is that the divine wisdom dictates
that in every age when mental and moral blemishes, corruptions and
deviations grow and increase, the means, instruments and opportunities
for true guidance and reformation will also be made available at the
disposal of mankind. That is, God always keeps the balance between
reformation and corruption, guidance and deviation, and He allows
corruption and deviation to permeate the society in such a magnitude
that if there were those who want to be guided and to tread the right
path, they would not succeed in doing so. Today, if the communication
technology grants new opportunities for corruption and deviations, the
same technology also gives mankind opportunities and means for reform
and guidance, which had been unknown before.

Today, many people have become acquainted with and converted to Islam
through the Internet. If ever the radio, television, film and cinema,
satellite, and Internet have wrong usages and are used to promote mental
and moral deviation and corruption, there are also many people who have
become familiar with Islam, the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini, and
Iran through the same means, and have inclined toward them and embraced
Islam. There are many Muslims in the different parts of the world who
embraced Shi‘ism when they became familiar with the name, path and words
of Imam Khomeini (*r*) through satellite and television. I was once a
guest of a businessman in Singapore whose business was related to the
computer. He said, “At the beginning, I was a Wahhabi,[^4] but when I
became acquainted with Imam Khomeini (*r*), listened to his speeches,
and witnessed his movement, I had the conviction that the true Islam is
what Imam Khomeini (*r*) is saying, and in this manner, I became a
Shi‘ah.

During my trip to some Latin American countries, in one of these
countries, probably Chile, the officials and heads of a university there
said to me, “We are concerned of the young generation of our country and
their future, and we do not know exactly what we have to do. We are
placing at your disposal the youths of this university. You come here
and on the basis of your own method of teaching, set a program for them
and we will give you all facilities. It is because we are certain that
the best method of teaching in the present day is the method of you,
Muslims.”

The head of the said university used to accompany us to guide us and
introduce the different parts and centers of the university. When it is
noontime, we said that we wanted to pray. They provided a place for us
and we performed our prayer. Although he was Christian, the head of the
university participated with us in that prayer. As this act of him
surprised us, he said to us, “I do not know exactly what you are saying
and reciting in your devotional acts, but I really appreciated this
state of your prostration. I enjoyed it and I became inclined to
participating with you in this prayer.”

In Havana, the capital of a country ruled by Communism, a veteran
Spanish-origin professor of history stood up in front of the other
professors, who were our hosts, and delivered a speech in which he said,
“Since youth, I had been interested in studying and conducting research
about two figures; the Prophet of Islam as a world figure, and
Khayyam[^5] as an outstanding Iranian scholar. However, for some time
now, I have found intense interest in something which has cast shadow
upon the previous two ones. Today, I am interested in studying the
person who has changed the world; namely, Imam Khomeini.” At this point,
the old professor of the University of Havana became emotional and lost
his normal temperament. He bowed down twice in front of me and kissed my
hand, asking me for a copy of the Qur’an in Spanish. This took place in
Havana after fifty years of communist rule; a professor who perhaps is
the oldest one in the said university.

At any rate, my point is that we should not presume that during this
time when the instruments of corruption have multiplied and permeated
everywhere, it is too late and nothing can be done anymore. This is a
wrong notion and we should never feel hopeless and be dejected. God is
All-wise and it does not behoove Him to abandon this world which He has
created for the advancement and perfection of human beings and leave it
at the hands of some wicked souls. As I have said, if ever the tools of
deviation and corruption have multiplied, the new ways of true guidance
and reform which had never existed during the time of any prophet or
Imam have also come into being.

The social conditions we have today to effect change and make quantum
leaps are unprecedented, and we witnessed an example of which in this
Revolution and the eight years of resistance and sacred defense. The
same youths, who were trained in the corrupt environment and society
during the time of the Shah, all of a sudden experienced such a change
and acquired such lofty faith and gnosis. They led the eight years of
sacred defense heroically, formidably, selflessly, and valiantly, and
created enduring and unprecedented epics.

Even today, a deep glance proves that young men and women who are so
much willing to grasp and learn mystical topics and points related to
the love for God, and are covering within a day a hundred-year journey.
If they are properly guided, they will be willing to offer any sort of
sacrifice and selflessness and to be heedless of all materialistic
enjoyments something many examples of which you witnessed throughout the
Revolution and in the battlefronts. Today, the burden of guiding this
young generation who has the best talents and the purest natural
dispositions lies on the shoulders of you and I.

Most of the Great Transformations Owed to the Ideas of Thinkers
---------------------------------------------------------------

We are talking about responsibility and the subjects I mentioned are
meant to make us better understand our responsibility. If you are
observant enough, you will see that perhaps more than ninety percent of
those who were successful in different aspects and initiated great
changes and transformations in the entire world have been scholars from
the university and *‘ulama’* from the seminary. In the different fields
economic, sociology, politics, religion, and the like you will observe
that it is like that; the initial source of change had been the idea of
a single person and it has been gradually spread, and finally led to a
great transformation. Of course, transformations have not been always
positive as there have been also negative ones.

The cases that led to the emergence of moral or intellectual deviations
have multiplied exceedingly and become extremely dangerous. Among these
deviations, one may refer to the current sexual and moral deviation in
the West. As acknowledged by Westerners, the most crucial factor of this
deviation was the theory of the famous German psychologist, Sigmund
Freud. In studying the causes of psychological disorders, Freud
concluded that these ailments are the effect of suppressed desires and
cravings, especially sexual desires. Based on this analysis, Freud said
that in order to prevent the spread of psychological disorders, sexual
freedoms must be granted without restrictions in the community.

Freud may not have had bad intentions and motives in explaining this
theory, but whatever the case might be, this theory became the root of
sexual promiscuity and moral corruptions that are witnessed in the West.
Of course, whims and caprice of people and greediness of the profiteers
and opportunists also contributed to the intensity of this wave, but the
theory of Freud, anyway, made the first shoot. Nowadays, one of the most
profitable industries in the world is focused on sex and sexual matters.
The bestseller films in the world are pornographic films, and the most
viewed TV channels are those showing more sensual programs and films.
The origin of all that has been an idea of a psychologist.

In the perspective of intellectual corruption and decadence, one may
also refer to the Marxist thought and its catastrophic consequences. It
is a philosophy which ruled approximately a half of the globe in more
than seventy years, and as acknowledged by the countries and nations
that professed it, it brought about multiple destructive outcomes to
them. The Marxist thought which nurtured millions of atheists and
deniers of God and violently waged war against religion and God was also
a mental product of another German scholar named Karl Marx.

Of course, one must not be heedless of the positive transformations
brought about by scholars and *‘ulama’*. The great Islamic Revolution of
Iran which, as confessed by both foes and friends, was the greatest
event of the 20th century, and was also the product of the ideas of a
religious scholar named Imam Khomeini. The Imam was no more than a
single person and had no money, armament or power. The only thing he had
was a sublime idea an idea which at the beginning, perhaps, ninety-nine
percent of his close friends and well-wishers did not believe to be
realizable. Yet, all of them were witnesses that this man in one corner
of the globe at a humble and simple house was able to render helpless
the two superpowers of the East and West.

This happened while he was not seeking after power or fame. Although it
is normal that after the end of a class session of a professor, the
students escort him along the way, the Imam never allowed anybody to
escort him along the alley and street, and if ever he found someone
doing so, he would emphatically dissuade him from doing it. He was a
*marja‘ taqlid*[^6] yet for a long time he did not permit his treatise
on practical laws [*risalah ‘amaliyyah*] to be published, and when he
finally gave consent, he did not will to spend a single penny from the
share of the Imam [*sahm Imam*][^7] to be spent on it. I myself know who
raised the fund, for the first time, for the publication of his *risalah
‘amaliyyah*. He was far away from power and fame, as he kept aloof from
them. By relying only on an idea, he was able to affect such a great
transformation a transformation that disrupted all global equations. All
of these were positive impacts of an idea.

At any rate, I want to emphasize that a person, a professor in a
university or a seminary, can bring about even a global change, whether
it is positive or negative. If we pay attention to this fact, we will
then realize more the importance of our responsibility and be willing to
spend time. And if it is needed, we are ready to postpone our class
sessions and sit together to tackle these issues, think about our
society and youths, and undertake our mission in relation to Islam and
the Muslim community. Now, in view of these matters, the fundamental
question can be as follows: In discharging this responsibility, what
should be done?

In reply to this question, allow me first to deal with the following
preliminary point:

Importance of the Cultural Revolution
-------------------------------------

I do not know, dear fellows, to what extent you remember, but during the
first years of the Revolution, the late Imam mentioned the issue of
Cultural Revolution, and most of the universities in the country were
closed for a few years. Some people from different parts of the world
came here to see what paradigm this Cultural Revolution the Imam is
saying; for, a cultural revolution has a historical precedence and that
is related to the cultural revolutionary experience of China which had
been founded by Mao Zedong (Tse-tung). Anyway, numerous statesmen and
scholars around the world set off and came here to see for themselves
what the Imam wanted to do. I can remember it well that a Jewish
professor from Australia had come to Qum and I discussed with him some
points. He wanted to know what exactly the Imam’s cultural revolution
was, which I explained to him.

Unfortunately, the state of affairs was such that the Imam failed to
properly elucidate his ideal and to materialize it, because the
Revolution had been still fresh and there were multiple problems and
concerns. Then, it did not take long when the eight-year war was imposed
on us that emerged as the most serious problem of the country and so
many resources, facilities and thoughts were invested in it. However,
the wicked ones inside and outside the country joined together and did
not allow the Cultural Revolution that the Imam had in his mind to be
put into action.

Thus, if one had such an analysis that all these economic and military
pressures and sanctions and other problems were meant to hinder the
realization of the Imam’s Cultural Revolution, he had indeed not missed
the point, and his analysis should not be regarded as improbable. Take a
look at Bosnia! Why did they commit all those crimes, mercilessly and
brutally killing and beheading thousands of men and women, young and
old, and even infants, while those who constitute the associations for
the protection of animals and were staging demonstrations for the sake
of certain animals sat idle in this case and shamelessly shut their
mouths? Was it nothing but a cultural issue at stake? Were these Muslims
more than two or three million?

They have neither a large population, nor land, nor wealth, nor
armament, nor technology, nor anything else important. Yet, why was this
heavy assault brought upon them? The reply is only one thing: Islam and
culture! They witnessed that at the end of the twentieth century, a
Muslim country at the heart of Europe had come into being and announced
its existence. They feared lest Islam and Islamic culture would
gradually spread in the neighboring countries and then in the entire
Europe, and change everything in the long run. So, they decided to nip
this movement in the bud, and they did the same thing in Algeria, Turkey
and other Muslim countries.[^8] Why was that? It is because they fear
Islam. What is Islam by the way? It is nothing but an idea, a culture.
As such, they are afraid of ideas and culture.

The conclusion of this relatively long preliminary remark is that in
reply to the question, “What should be done?” we have to say, “A
cultural movement must be launched.” These discussions should make us
realize more than ever our responsibility, and we should not think that
intellectual discussion and cultural activity are worthless and that
every problem in the country is related to economic issues, foreign
policy and the like.

The Role of Cultural Movements in the Perpetuity of the Revolution
------------------------------------------------------------------

We also need to plan for a cultural movement. We have to make clear our
path and the form of our movement, understand the conditions we are in,
and identify proper solutions. Also, we have to predict the
vulnerabilities of this movement and path and to think of the necessary
measures to deal with them. The first step along this direction is that
we have to think anew, enhance our studies, reconstruct our way of
thinking, and commence our work with formidable and fundamental
infrastructure.

During the early days of the Revolution, we had an overall idea that
global arrogance and its agents must be vigorously resisted, and on the
basis of this overall idea we staged action and the Revolution triumphed
and reached this point. Now, many people are still attached to these
principles, but we have to bear in mind that such an overall
understanding is no longer enough for the consistency and perpetuity of
the Revolution. For the commencement of the movement and the victory of
the Revolution, it was more anchored in emotions and feelings and it
then fruited.

However, to continue the movement, the same method can no longer be
adopted. Rather, from then on, we have to transfer the essential basis
and gravity of the movement from the emotional and psychological aspect
to an aspect of understanding and insight. Today, people are no longer
kept in the scene through beast-beating, lamentation, slogan, and
agitation. Of course, those things must be preserved and kept intact,
but the point here is that the essential catalyst of the movement must
be designed and focused on cognizance, understanding and cultural
engineering. Today, the enemies have also found out the physiognomy of
this point, and instead of focusing the gravity of their movement on
economic, military and political pressures, they are spending most of
their resources, facilities and forces on cultural activities and
movements. In doing so, they are trying to penetrate into the camp of
the Revolution and gradually besiege it again.

If we want to prevent this cultural penetration and hinder the
infiltration of the enemies, we have to desist from this indifference,
lack of planning and dissension. If we want university professors to
undertake cultural work and inculcate Islam and Islamic values to the
minds and hearts of the students and the youths, we have to arm
ourselves first intellectually and culturally, and we have to understand
the principles and foundations of Islamic thought and culture as well as
the principles and foundations of Western thought and culture and the
skepticisms they are casting, so that we can be responsive to the
community in general and the young generation in particular, and attend
to their intellectual and cultural concerns, problems and doubts.

> Of course, God the Exalted is the protector and guardian of His
> religion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed We have sent down the Reminder and indeed We will preserve it.
(15:9)***

In the midst of all hostilities and darkness, God will anchor the ship
of religion and Islam off the shore of salvation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is He who has sent His Apostle with the guidance and the religion
of truth that He may make it prevail over all religions though the
polytheists should be averse. (61:9)***

Yet, we have to ask why this preservation of the religion [*din*] should
not be through us; and why we should not be among those who have been
chosen by God for the exaltation of the word of monotheism [*kalimah
at-tawhid*][^9] and the protection of His religion.

We hope that God the Exalted will give such an opportunity to all of us.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that, today, we have to realize
our very sensitive and historic responsibility, and in undertaking this
responsibility, we must acquire the necessary readiness by eliminating
our intellectual and philosophical shortcomings. We have to bear in mind
that if, God forbid, in discharging this crucial duty we are negligent
and we act listlessly, we will be held responsible before God the
Exalted the Prophet (S), The Holy Imams (*‘a*), and the martyrs
[*shuhada’*] who preserved this blessed tree [*shajarah at-tayyibah*] by
offering their blood, and they will not easily forgive us.

[^1]: Immanuel Kant (1724-1804): the German philosopher considered by
many as the most influential thinker of modern times. Describing in the
Metaphysics of Ethics (1797) his ethical system which is anchored in a
notion that the reason is the final authority for morality, actions of
any sort, Kant believed, must be undertaken from a sense of duty
dictated by reason, and no action performed for expediency or solely in
obedience to law or custom can be regarded as moral. [Trans.]

[^2]: In this volume, the translation of Qur’anic passages is adapted
from Sayyid ‘Ali Quli Qara’i, The Qur’an with a Phrase-by-Phrase English
Translation (London: Islamic College for Advanced Studies Press, 2004).
[Trans.]

[^3]: The abbreviation, ‘a stands for the Arabic invocative phrase:
‘alayhi’s-salam, ‘alayhim’us-salam, or ‘alayha’s-salam [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is used after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imams from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints. [Trans.]

[^4]: Wahhabi: follower of Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab, the founder of
the Wahhabi sect. For information on Wahhabism, see Ayatullah Ja‘far
Subhani, Wahhabism (Tehran: Naba’ Organization, 1996),
http://www.al-islam.org/wahhabism; Hamid Algar, Wahhabism: A Critical
Essay (New York: Islamic Publications International, 2002). [Trans.]

[^5]: Ghiyath ad-Din Abū’l-Fatah ‘Umar ibn Ibrahim al-Khayyam
(1044-1123) was an outstanding mathematician and astronomer as well as a
celebrated poet, philosopher and physician. In The History of Western
Philosophy, Bertrand Russell remarks that Khayyam was the only man known
to as both poet and mathematician. He reformed the solar calendar in
1079 CE with his calendar, At-Tarikh al-Jalali, which is superior to the
Gregorian calendar and is accurate to within one day in 3,770 years. His
work on Algebra, Maqalat fi’l-Jabr wa’l-Muqabalah, was highly valued
throughout Europe in the Middle Ages. In the West, he is best known for
his poetic work, Ruba‘iyat [quatrains], which was translated by Edward
Fitzgerald in 1859. For an overview of his contribution in other fields
of science, visit:http://users.erols.com/zenithco/khayyam.html. [Trans.]

[^6]: Marja‘ taqlid: a scholar of proven learning and piety whose
authoritative rulings one follows in matters of religious practice.
[Trans.]

[^7]: Share of the Imam [sahm Imam]: one half of the khums duty (the
other half being the share of the Sayyids/Sadat (descendants of the
Prophet) [sahm as-Sadat]) to be paid to the living Imam, and in the Age
of Occultation [asr al-ghaybah], to the most learned living mujtahid who
is the giver’s marja‘ taqlid [source of emulation]. For more
information, see Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Khums: An Islamic Tax (Toronto:
Islamic Education and Information Center, 1992),
http://www.al-islam.org/beliefs/practices/khums.html. [Trans.]

[^8]: It alludes to the acts of sabotage done against the victories of
Islamists in the electoral processes in recent years. [Trans.]

[^9]: Kalimah at-tawhid: the recitation of la ilaha illallah [there is
no god but Allah].


