Chapter 3: Religious Pluralism (Part 1)
=======================================

The Great Crisis of our Age
---------------------------

If we called the age in which we live, especially the past decades, the
age of cultural crisis, we would not have chosen a bad label. In the
history of human civilization, there are different periods which have
been described variedly depending on the unique occasions in each
period. But, perhaps, in no period before when in most countries in the
world a cultural crisis, which is likewise called the identity crisis,
had been to such extent as it is now. Nowadays, if we take a look at the
cultural problems in the advanced countries, we will witness an
astonishing confusion, bewilderment, uncertainty, and finally, intense
intellectual skepticism whose extent has been unprecedented throughout
history.

During the distant past, a group of “Sophists” emerged in the cultural
sphere of ancient Greece and existed for some time, but this movement
was soon relegated to oblivion. During the first two centuries of the
Common Era, once again the wave of skepticism or agnosticism appeared
through Pyrrho[^1] and some of his advocates which also did not last
long. The third wave of this movement appeared after the Renaissance
which had, more or less, greater influence and wider scope compared to
the first two waves, but again, it was still not very widespread as to
encompass all of the cultural and academic centers of the world. In
recent decades, however, a new wave of skepticism has surfaced whose
extent and intensity surpassed that of all the previous waves so much so
that we have to say that with the exception of a few cases, all
cultural, intellectual and academic centers of the world have been
subjected to cultural agitation and bewilderment.

Different philosophies and schools of skepticism, subjectivism and the
like, though outwardly may not imply “skepticism”, their essence is
nothing but elements of skepticism, have mushroomed. The cultural
atmosphere of the world has become such that if a person claims
objectivity and certainty, this act is treated as something reproachable
and negative, and if someone is to be belittled, he will be branded as
an objectivist and a votary of dogmatism. Today, objectivism is regarded
as an abusive language in the academic parlance while skepticism,
relativism and negation of absolutism have so pervaded in the
intellectual and cultural atmosphere of the world in that if some people
claim having certain convictions, saying that they believe in certain
things and perfectly understand them, they will be accused of
simple-mindedness, improvidence, silliness, and lack of deep
understanding and knowledge.

I have said once elsewhere that if we call this age the age of modern
ignorance [*jahiliyyah*], this will not be inaccurate, for it is a
source of pride now to say, “We do not know.” It is said that we have to
reach the stage where we will understand well that everything is
doubtful and that no certain thing ever exists. That is to confess
ignorance and doubt with respect to everything. This is modern ignorance
we are facing today in contrast to the ignorance that the Holy Qur’an
describes as the “former Times of Ignorance” [*al-jahiliyyah al-ula*
(33:33)].

Anyway, according to them, dogmatism and objectivism cause one’s
crookedness of understanding and silliness, but according to us,
skepticism and belief in relativity in everything which the world today
is defending are nothing but ignorance and unawareness. We have learned
from the Qur’an that we have to be in pursuit of certainty and certain
knowledge and of drawing the curtains of doubt and uncertainty. In its
very first page and at the beginning of *Surah al-Baqarah*, the Qur’an
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. وَبِالْآخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and are certain of the hereafter. (2:4)***

The culture of the Qur’an is such that whenever it wants to reproach,
rebuke and criticize certain individuals and groups, it brands them as
“people of doubt.” It is the opposite of what exists in the world today;
if certain individuals are supposed to be branded with something
unwholesome in the academic parlance, they will be called as “people of
certainty!”

Pluralism, Indulgence and Negligence: Tools at the Hands of the Crisis-Mongers
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In any case, according to us, belief in relativism and skepticism is a
great menace for the human society, or at least to our society, and it
causes the fading away of the values, culture and beliefs for the sake
of which we offered sacrifices and for centuries we longed their
realization until finally the same has been materialized during the
recent decades. Now, the question is: What shall we do with this wave of
skepticism in the world which, in our view, is a pervasive crisis and
hazardous disease? As an Islamic government and country, what Iran has
to do in the realm of culture, apart from the tasks to be done in the
spheres of economy, industry and science? Of course, by culture we do
not mean its modern implication which only includes dancing, singing and
music.

Instead, we mean the religious beliefs and values. In our view, Islam
possesses a set of definite, pristine and fixed principles and values.
Our duty is firstly to preserve them and secondly to invite others to
get to know them, and not to withdraw and be passive in facing the waves
of secularism, liberalism and hundreds of other isms. Today, by adopting
diverse cultural schemes, the enemies of our nation are trying to cast
doubt upon the beliefs, values and convictions of our people, especially
the youths. One of these schemes is the promotion of an idea called
“pluralism” which is so dangerous, and because of its importance, there
is a need for us to address it.

The pluralists claim, “Human beings have different ideas and diverse
opinions, and every idea and opinion that is acceptable to a person or
society is worthy of respect, and we have to treat them with respect. Of
course, if we have also certain idea and opinion, others should respect
them. We should not oppose the ideas of others nor refuse to replace our
idea with that of others. No one should regard as absolute his own idea
and opinion. It should be borne in mind instead that there are others
who have different ideas and opinions. What is the basis that your idea
is correct while the ideas and views of others are not?

On what basis are you charging as erroneous the ideas and views of
others while considering yours as the truth? If you are Muslims and are
professing Islam, there are also others who accept Christianity,
Buddhism and other creeds. There is no reason at all that your Islam is
superior to the other creeds. We have to respect one another and treat
as respectable each other’s belief. We should not have bigotry and
endeavor to definitely bring others to the fold of our creed and faith.
We have to treat the ideas and beliefs of others with indulgence and
negligence, and also entertain in our mind the probability that others
are true and say what is right.”

As indicated, this idea is actually a tool in the hands of the
imperialist powers in the world firstly, to prevent the spread of the
Islamic culture in general and the Islamic Revolution in Iran in
particular, and secondly, to pave the way for the penetration of the
materialistic and atheistic culture of the West. As of the moment, we
witness that in some publications, tribunes and speeches, the same way
of thinking is promoted and its scope of influence is such that even
some figures and personalities who have never been expected to succumb
to such concepts have been under the influence of this idea.

Our Heavy Responsibility to the Youth
-------------------------------------

During the lifetime of the eminent Imam (*r*), because of the greatness
of his personality, he had exerted such influence upon the minds and
feelings of his followers that the people were passionately fond of him,
and his behavior, views and words were unconditionally and undoubtedly
the paradigm for the thinking and action of all people and officials and
the criterion of their movement. But this matter necessitated his
exceptional personality, and since such a thing will not remain always
for all generations, we have to think that if those ideas and ways were
indeed correct, as they were, we have to defend them through argument
and logic, consolidate their foundations and promote them.

For the future generation, it is not enough to say that the Imam has
said or done so. It is natural that the zeal and ardor that we used to
see on the first generation of the Islamic Revolution and in those
volunteer mobilization forces [*Basijis*] who were fond of martyrdom,
battlefront and war will not exist in the future generation and those
who have not seen from a close distance the celestial countenance of the
Imam nor listened every day or every week to his speeches that are full
of wisdom. For them, we have to think of logical explanations and strong
and convincing arguments.

Surely, if we put ourselves in the place of these youth who have newly
attained puberty, acquired independent thinking, and encountered diverse
and contradictory claims, views and cultures, we will see that the issue
is not as simple as we think. For these youths, this question is
actually posed: In the midst of all these various and contradictory
ideas and views, what is the proof that only the opinion, view and way
of the Imam Khomeini (*r*) are correct? What is the ultimate reason that
Islam is the best religion and way of life?

Is there no multitude of followers of Christianity and other religions?
How to know that their religion and beliefs are not better than Islam
and that of the Imam? Why should I accept Islam, the Revolution and the
Imam? These and other similar questions are the issues existing in the
minds of our youths and are troubling them. There are even times when
they explicitly pose and express them. Having said this, it is evident
that the necessary ground and favorable condition for the propagation
for pluralism are completely present in the realm of religion and
culture.

In reply to the above and similar questions, pluralism states thus: “You
may choose the one you like from among the different existing religions.
All of them are similar and equal to one another. They have differences,
more or less, but they are all good religions! If there are one billion
in the world today, it is not a proof for the superiority and more
credibility of Islam, because another five million believe in another
thing than Islam.”

In various countries of the world, I myself encountered people who were
Christians but had a good idea about Islam. Whenever I would ask them,
“So, why don’t you embrace Islam?” they would say in reply that
Christianity is also a good religion. Even higher than them, today, the
Pope himself acknowledges that Islam is a progressive and excellent
religion. Of course, he never says that Christianity is bad, or that
Islam is better than Christianity. When the “leader of the Christian
world” announces that Islam is a very good religion, it automatically
implies that we have two good religions; one is Islam while the other is
Christianity. If you would meet the leader of the Buddhists Buddhism
being a religion followed by millions of people in the world probably he
will also say that Buddhism is good and so is Islam.

This is called religious pluralism. That is, we do not have a single
good and authentic religion; rather, we have many. No one should
unreasonably insist that to become Muslim is the prerequisite for
admission to paradise and attainment of bliss. Rather, a Christian,
Zoroastrian, Buddhist, and others may also be admitted to heaven and
attain felicity. Similarly, within a religion, the different schools of
thought [*madhahib*] have no preference over one another, since all of
them are good and in truth. In Islam, for example, Sunnis and Shi‘ah
should not charge each other as erroneous, or in Christianity, the
Catholic, Protestant and Orthodox should not accuse one another of being
misguided.

What Pluralists Say?
--------------------

With the aim of proving religious pluralism, pluralists cite other
examples outside pluralism. For example, they claim that today the
countries in the world are administered through various political
systems and regimes. In some advanced countries such as the UK and
Japan, constitutional monarchial system exists. In many others, it is
republicanism. Among the republican countries, some are presidential
while others are parliamentary. In political philosophy, whenever the
different political systems are discussed, a definite answer will not be
given in reply to the question, “Which of these systems is the best?”
Instead, it will be said that each of them has its peculiar advantages
and limitations.

Therefore, none of them could be considered bad. All of them are good in
one way or another. This is what is called political pluralism. That is,
in choosing the political system, there is no need to say that a certain
system is good and right, while the rest are wrong and defective. In the
same vein, the multiplicity of parties and party coalitions in forming a
government or cabinet is another example of political pluralism. Among
the various parties with diverse and varied political views and stances
existing in a country, it cannot be said that only one specific party is
right while the rest have to be set aside.

In principle, in the world today, if the overwhelming majority of people
in a country support only a single party, it is regarded as sign of
backwardness and retrogression. It is believed that the advanced
countries and civilized societies have definitely multiple political
inclinations, and each group of people supports a particular party.
Basically, it is this contradiction and disagreement in the stance of
the different parties that fosters competition among the parties and
makes the non-ruling parties watchful of the performance of the ruling
party or parties and for every party to report the mistakes and
weaknesses of the other party. In this manner, all parties are watchful
of their own performance and trying to improve their performance by
minimizing their deviations, weaknesses and errors so that they could
win the vote of the people.

All of these, in the end, lead to the improvement of the entire
performance of the officials and statesmen of a country, which in turn,
is beneficial to the public. For this reason, we can see that political
pluralism and multiparty system is a desirable and beneficial affair,
and one-party political systems and tendencies are usually less
effective in comparison to multiparty systems and tendencies.

Also, in the economic sphere, it is so evident that the multiplicity and
diversity of the economic poles and powers is desirable, and the
single-pole economy has ample disadvantages and loopholes and is
indefensible. In the sphere where there are numerous economic poles,
there is competition among them, and as a result of this competition,
higher quality, and at the same time, cheaper goods and services will be
given to the costumers and consumers while the economic growth and
development will have also desirable trend. Whereas, in a single pole
economy, monopoly arises, and as the effect of the absence of
competition, usually, there will be less motive to improve the quality
or lessen the price, and the trend of growth and progress is slow.
Therefore, economic pluralism is also desirable, beneficial and
justifiable.

By mentioning such cases, pluralists conclude that just as pluralism and
multiplicity in such spheres like politics and economics is desirable
and beneficial, there must also be pluralism in the sphere of religion
and culture, and the way for the emergence of religions in the society
must also be completely paved. With respect to belief and conviction of
the heart, we also have to believe that no religion is superior, and
that acceptance of any of them is as valuable as acceptance of the rest.

To divide them into true and false, perfect and defective, good and bad,
and other similar differentiations is totally baseless and meaningless.
Islam and Christianity, Shi‘ah and Sunni, Catholic and Protestant, and
all religions, sects and schools of thought are ways toward the truth
and paths leading to the destination and the shore of salvation.
Fanaticism and rigidity on any of them is a sign of illogicality and
imprudence. Just as he accepts economic and political pluralism, a
rational and wise person has also the same belief in the realm of
religion, and for him, multiplicity of religions is a totally natural,
rational and acceptable matter.

In any case, this is an idea which is promoted today in our society
through various means. As we have indicated earlier, for our youth there
is really the right to pose question. Just as we accept multiplicity in
the domains of politics and economics, and for instance, in the economic
domain economists have no consensus of opinion on implementing the
policy of expanding exports and minimizing imports to attain growth and
development of a certain country and that this difference in opinion is
totally a natural phenomenon and there is no need at all for them to
arrive at a consensus, what is wrong then if this becomes the case in
matters of religion and culture? By the way, why do I have to profess
Islam and not Christianity? What is the need for professing a religion
and believing in the existence of God? Many people deny God or are
doubtful and skeptical of His existence. This is also a form of belief
which is equal to the rest of beliefs, and why should I not accept such
a belief, too?

In this manner, we can observe that the issue is indeed serious. It is
far beyond an article, an author and a book. It requires us to fasten
our seatbelt, and by presenting logical and reasonable answers, we have
to entertain the inquiries of our young generation and solve for them
this doubt.

A Critique of the First Proposition of the Pluralists
-----------------------------------------------------

In refutation of the above proposition in support of pluralism, firstly,
we have to state that logically speaking, acceptance of multiplicity in
politics and economics does not necessary mean acceptance of
multiplicity in religion and culture. In other words, in the said
proposition, it is argued that “Since pluralism in economics and
politics and some other affairs is desirable and beneficial, it follows
that the same is desirable and beneficial in the realm of culture and
religion.” Our main contention is that this proposition is a mere claim
and no proof is presented to support it. It is similar to the case when
one says, “Since the presence of eleven players in a soccer game is
desirable and beneficial, it follows that the presence of the same
number of players in volleyball is desirable and beneficial!” Exactly
just as the second claim is baseless and unbelievable, so is the first
claim. Let us elaborate on this.

It is true that we have questions in such fields like economics and
politics that have more than one answer, and that multiplicity and
diversity concerning them is possibly desirable. Yet, there are also
questions in other fields like mathematics, physics, geometry, and the
like that do not have more than one answer, and multiple correct answers
for them are inconceivable and unacceptable. In mathematics, for
instance, two times two does not have more than one answer and that is
four.

In geometry, the aggregate of triangular angles in a plane surface does
not have more than one answer and that is 180 degrees. Computation of
the distance covered by a moving object at a specific time with a
determined speed does not have more than one answer which is computed by
using the formula, *v(t)=d*, where *v* stands for velocity, *t*
represents time and *d* as distance. Could anyone say that as in the
case of economic problems and political issues where there are various
opinions and there is no such thing as a single correct answer, the same
is true in the case of two times two, and every mathematician could give
an answer different from the others, and that in fact, there is the
probability that each of them is wrong or correct? It is important to
note that mathematical problem or something similar to it may have two
or many ways of solving it, but the point is that finally, all these
ways of solving will arrive at the same correct answer. Having many
solutions is different from having many answers.

Therefore, in the realm of knowledge and human phenomena, we have
problems which could have more than one answer. We have also other
problems each of which has no more than one answer. The main question
regarding religious pluralism is that how it could be determined that
religion does not belong to those problems having no more than one
answer. If you say that religion is like economics and politics in which
there are many answers and pluralism is desirable and beneficial, we can
also say that it is not so. Religion is like physics and mathematics in
which every problem has no more than one answer. We claim that the
question, “Does God exist or not?” is like the arithmetic problem, “Two
times two is equal to what?” which has one and only one answer.

The Pluralists’ Resort to another Basis
---------------------------------------

Trying to prove their claim, the proponents of religious pluralism
resort to a different proposition, saying, “Human affairs can be divided
into two. Some affairs are real and true while some others are extrinsic
and conventional. Real and true affairs are those you claim having no
more than a single answer. They are things which could be proved and
perceived through senses and experience. But regarding the extrinsic and
conventional affairs, as their name implies, they have no truth and
reality other than agreement, relish and taste of human beings. For this
reason, they change according to the agreement, relish and taste of
individuals and societies. This is contrary to the real affairs; for
example, the dimension of a certain room does not follow relish, taste
and what is conventional.

Instead, in truth and in fact, the dimension of the said room is
equivalent to the mosaics spread in its floor. In extrinsic and
conventional affairs, there is essentially no point in using
descriptions such as better and worse, good and bad, right and wrong,
and the like, and in case we want to use them anyway, we have to say
that all of them are good, right, excellent, and that there is nothing
bad, wrong, and poor among them. If someone is attracted to pink color
while another is interested in green, none of them can charge the other
of being wrong and use the descriptions such as bad, incorrect and false
in describing the other’s taste. It must be said instead that both pink
and green are good and beautiful. In a nutshell, extrinsic affairs and
issues do not have a single answer as they can have more than one
answer.

Pluralists claim that religion, culture and moral values belong to the
extrinsic affairs and they follow taste, liking and what is
conventional. Just as there is no single reply to the question, “Which
color is better?” and to be more exact, such a question is meaningless
in reply to the question, “Which religion, culture, or set of moral
values is better or correct?” a single choice cannot be specified. In
other words, in essence such a question is meaningless. If someone
prefers Islam as religion, so be it! If another one accepts
Christianity, so be it! If someone says that God is One, that will be
correct; and if another one claims that God assumes the form of a
trinity, that will be correct, too.

And more serious than this, if someone says that there is God while
another claims the opposite, both statements are correct and truthful. I
would like to pray facing the Bayt al-Maqdis (in Jerusalem) and there is
no problem if you would like to pray facing the Ka‘bah (in Mecca). Both
ways are good. Just as I may prefer a certain food while you like
another food, I profess Islam as religion and you Buddhism. None of
which can be regarded as more preferable to the other, neither is there
any dispute between us because both religions are good. In the Western
culture, thumbs up are a symbol of approval, success and triumph, while
in the Iranian culture, the same is treated as a sign of abuse and
disparagement. Nevertheless, on account of such a gesture, we cannot
condemn the Westerners because it is merely a conventional affair. The
same is true in the case of religious affairs.

The issue we have mentioned above and cited by the pluralists in their
attempt to prove religious pluralism is technically called “moral
relativity.” The gist of argument of moral relativity is that good and
bad, as well as moral and ethical issues have no reality but taste and
what is agreed upon. There may be difference among various societies and
individuals. Just as the taste of food and ideal and pleasant color vary
among different people, good and bad and moral values have the same
ruling. Just as we do not have absolute good regarding food and color,
and every food and color are good for some people while unacceptable for
others, acceptability and unacceptability of values and moral issues may
also vary among different peoples and societies.

So, the trend of the discussion has so far assumed this form: In the
beginning, pluralists say that since pluralism in such fields as
economics and politics is desirable and beneficial, we believe that
pluralism in the realm of religion is also desirable and beneficial. In
reply to this contention, we say that there are also issues such as that
of physics and mathematics each of which has only one answer. Why should
religious choices not be like the solutions in mathematics and physics?
Here, pluralists raise the issue of moral relativity, and by citing some
moral and social customs and traditions, we firstly want to prove that
the general feature of moral issues is relativism so that they can
conclude that religion, which belongs to moral issues, is also a
relative and subjective matter.

The Third Attempt to Prove Pluralism
------------------------------------

In continuation, pluralists take a step further and claim that in
essence, all knowledge and human issues in all fields of life succumbed
to relativity in one way or another and that in principle, there is no
such thing as non-relative or non-subjective knowledge. Yet, in some
cases, this relativism is perfectly clear and everybody can notice and
easily confirm it while in other cases, it is not so clear and people
imagine that in those cases they have acquired absolute and inalterable
knowledge though that is not the case. This is the same thing we have
mentioned at the beginning.

We have said that the truth of the claim to relativity in knowledge is
nothing but the same skepticism or agnosticism, which have appeared
among the philosophers and scholars in two or three waves before the
recent decades, and before and after the Common Era. Yet, it was not
widespread and it did not have much influence then. Its last wave has
been so widespread and pervasive, encompassing the intellectual and
cultural centers of the present world. The source of pride of a scholar
is to say, “I do not know and I am doubtful.” If one claims knowledge
and certainty, such an act is regarded as a sign of one’s silliness as a
result of one’s poor level of knowledge and understanding.

In sum, if the entire human knowledge is relative, religion and
religious knowledge will not remain safe; rather, they will become
relative and changeable. The result will be for us to say that according
to society A, Christianity is good, correct and rightful; while in the
view of society B, it is the religion of Islam. In relation to the same
society, it is possible that at one time a certain religion is good and
rightful while at another time, it is another religion. And it is also
uncertain which one is the true. Indeed, the truth is the issue of
relativity, and with respect to a certain time and society, the truth is
one thing while in relation to another time and society, the truth is
another thing.

In their attempt to prove religious pluralism, Muslim pluralists (or to
be more exact, pluralists who are feigning Islam) sometimes cite verses
of the Qur’an and traditions. At another time, they resort to some
passages from the statements and poems of Mawlawi,[^2] Hafiz,[^3]
‘Attar,[^4] and others who have said that the Ka‘bah, idol-temple,
mosque, and synagogue, in spite of their outward differences, are all
manifestations of search for God, worship of God and a single truth:

*My purpose in [going to] the Ka‘bah and the idol-temple is to enter in
You.*

*To come inside the Ka‘bah and the idol-temple is just a pretext.*

In this manner, the trend of the discussion in pluralism begins with
multiplicity in social issues and followed by discussion on moral
relativism, and it finally reaches relativism in human knowledge. It is
so evident that through acceptance of pluralism, there will be no more
need to cling to Islam, the Imam, the Islamic Revolution, and moral
values, and any belief, deeds, behavior, and moral corruption can easily
be justified. In the sequel to this discussion, we have to meticulously
study and assess each of these subjects, and reveal the truth of the
matter concerning them.

[^1]: Pyrrho of Elis, whose primary concern was ethics, maintained that
human beings can know nothing of the real nature of things, and that
consequently the wise person will suspend judgment. [Trans.]

[^2]: Mawlawi, Jalal ad-Din ar-Rūmi (1207-1273) was the greatest mystic
poet in the Persian language and the founder of the Mawlawiyyah order of
dervishes (The Whirling Dervishes). He is famous for his lyrics and for
his didactic epic, Mathnawi-ye Mathnawi (Spiritual Couplets). [Trans.]

[^3]: Khwajah Shams ad-Din Muhammad Hafiz Shirazi (ca. 1325-1391) was
the 14th century Persian lyric bard and panegyrist, and commonly
considered as the preeminent master of the ghazal form. [Trans.]

[^4]: Farid ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ibrahim al-‘Attar al-Nayshabūri
(1145?-1221?): a Sufi Persian poet, whose most celebrated work is Mantiq
at-Tayr (The Conference of the Birds), a poem consisting of 4,600
couplets (two successive lines of verse that rhyme, forming a single
unit). [Trans.]


