Chapter 4: Religious Pluralism (Part 2)
=======================================

To continue the discussion on pluralism, it is appropriate in this
session to examine the rational motives behind the rise of religious
pluralism and see, apart from the political motives that may possibly be
behind this thought, what motivates some to raise this issue with
rational and logical motives (at least according to them) and really
free from any spite and rancor. In analyzing this issue, we have to say
that excluding the political motives, at least two motives for it can be
taken into account.

Involvement of the Psychological Factor in the Emergence of Pluralism
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The first motive is a psychological one: At the present, almost six
billion people are living in the world having different sects, creeds,
and faiths. Their inclination to a certain religion, sect and
denomination is not out of enmity to the other religions and denial of
their rights; rather, most of them have accepted a particular religion
and sect merely because they have been born in a certain geographical
region and country, and/or their parents have professed the said
religion and sect. Many of them are also really devoted and faithful to
the ordinances and laws of their respective religion.

Given this explanation, if we believe that all religions apart from
Islam are false and those who profess them will be thrown to hellfire,
and that among Muslims all schools of thought [*madhahib*] and sects
apart from Shi‘ah Ithna ‘Ashari Islam are false and all their followers
will be thrown to hellfire, then we have to say that with the exception
of only twenty million people in the world (and even this number depends
on each individual’s level of faith and good deeds), the rest who are
nearly five billion and eighty million people, are misguided, deviants
and dwellers of the hell where they shall be chastised.

Can such a thing be accepted? What is wrong with the blind who merely
because of being born in Christian countries, having Christian parents
and having accepted Christianity to which they are so much devoted and
committed that they ought to incur the divine wrath and chastisement?

This issue is compounded by the fact that even among the Shi‘ah ‘Ithna
‘Ashari Muslims, many are sinners, transgressors [*fasiq*] and
debauchees [*fajir*]. They have correct faith but because of their
wicked and wrong actions, they will also have to face the divine torment
in hellfire. If it is really such, then everybody will be thrown to
hell! As the famous Persian proverb says, “Only ‘Ali and his pond (of
*kawthar*) shall remain!” That is, in the Hereafter, nobody will remain
(in the list of those who will be admitted to paradise) to drink from
the Pond of *Kawthar*!

As such, this psychological issue, which exerts pressure on the mind and
spirit of man, annoys him and makes its acceptance difficult, prompts
him to think that all are good and people of salvation. Muslims, the
Shi‘ah ‘Ithna ‘Ashari in particular, are in truth while the religions of
others are also good and rightful. Indeed, some of them are more pious
and sincere and more faithful to their respective religions than we are.
In any case, the acceptance of multiplicity of religions being correct
and rightful relieves man of spiritual trouble and psychological
agitation.

The Social Factor in the Emergence of Pluralism
-----------------------------------------------

The second factor that perhaps enhances religious pluralism in the mind
of individuals is a social one. Throughout history, numerous destructive
wars and conflicts had religious and sectarian underpinnings. Human
beings have fought with one another and engaged in war, murder and
pillage merely on account of religious and sectarian differences. An
illustrious and famous example of these wars is the Crusades in which
thousands of Christians and Muslims were killed, so much destruction it
brought and so much wealth, resources, and facilities were spent in
conducting the wars wealth, resources and facilities could have been
used for the development and welfare of humanity.

Even today, in one of the progressive countries and in the so-called
civilized world; namely, the United Kingdom, we witness bloody conflicts
between the Catholics and Protestants. Moreover, in India, Pakistan and
some African countries, at the beginning of the 21st century, we still
witness religious wars and sectarian conflicts and the subsequent
destructions, killing and pillage though these problems could easily be
solved. If we believe that both Islam and Christianity are good, both
the Catholics and Protestants in truth, and both the Sunni and the
Shi‘ah on the straight path [*sirat al-mustaqim*], the ill-tempered
Devil’s hand called “religious wars” and “sectarian disputes” will be
severed from the lap of human society.

By the way, is it not proper that the civilized humankind of today,
instead of violent and aggressive attitudes toward faiths and religions,
observe coexistence, peace and sincerity, set aside dogmatism and
absolutism, treat with respect all religions and creeds, and regard the
beliefs and views of others as rightful just like our beliefs? War and
conflict is the work of ignorant and uncivilized human beings. The
present-day man is supposed to be civilized and intelligent!

Apart from political and selfish motives, there are at least two
rational motives for the rise and acceptance of pluralism. One is the
emotional reason, arguing that it is inconceivable for all human beings
to go to hell, while the second one is meant to prevent war and
bloodshed. Now, the question is: Is this the solution to these problems?
If we want to prevent religious wars and sectarian conflicts, is the
only way to say that all religions are correct and truthful? And if we
want to avert innumerable people who have no fault and merely because of
some social problems and their views that they have failed to identify
the right path which in our view is Islam from going to hell, is the
only way to say that the idolatry of the Hindus, the doctrine of Trinity
of the Christians and the monotheism [*tawhid*] of Muslims are all
correct and rightful? Is there no other way?

Assessing the Psychological Motive in Presenting Pluralism
----------------------------------------------------------

In reply, we have to say that regarding the going to hell of all people
who have not accepted the Shi‘ah ‘Ithna ‘Ashari Islam, it must be stated
that this matter has no validity and Islam does not say so. It is true
that we say that the correct school of thought is only one, but people
whom we deemed as people of hell and chastisement are the obstinate ones
[*ahl al-‘inad*]. That is, although the truth is clear for them, they do
not accept it on account of enmity and other motives. If a person failed
to identify the truth for whatever reason, the ruling about him is
different from that of a person who identifies the truth but does not
accept it. The root of this issue is traceable to the discussion on the
mentally downtrodden [*mustadh‘af fikr*i], weak (or excusable) ignorant
[*jahil qasir*] and culpable (or inexcusable) ignorant [*jahil
muqassir*], which is a discussion on jurisprudence [*fiqh*] and
scholastic theology [*‘ilm al-kalam*].

The term *mustadh‘af* is sometimes applied to the persons who are
socially under the dominance of the powerful tyrants, and are deprived
of the truth [*haqq*] and their rights [*huquq*]. But the same term is
also related to scholastic theology and it refers to a person who, due
to weakness in understanding, is deprived of arriving at the correct and
right path. Weakness of understanding may be caused by different
factors. For example, Islam is never introduced to him and nothing about
it reached him; or, it is introduced to him but because of the weakness
in understanding, he fails to grasp its proofs; or, he can grasp the
proofs but he lives in a society where doubts about these proofs are
brought forth which he himself could not answer nor could he consult
somebody to clarify those doubts; and many other factors.

Similarly, ignorance of the truth is sometimes culpable ignorance [*jahl
taqsir*i], and at other times, faultless (or excusable) ignorance, and
accordingly, the ignorant can be classified into two, i.e. culpable
ignorant [*jahil muqassir*] and weak ignorant [*jahil qasir*]. *Jahil
muqassir* is applied to a person who in spite of the access to all the
facilities and faculties such as intellectual maturity, mental power,
social freedom, and access to the information, and others, he has
slackened and procrastinated and not gone to conduct research and study
about the truth. *Jahil qasir* refers to the person who, for whatever
reason, has no access to the truth and it has not been possible for him
to identify it.

Thus, we have actually three types of people:

(1) those who have recognized the truth but do not submit to it because
of spite, fanaticism, enmity, and other factors;

(2) those who do not know the truth but all means to discover it are at
their disposal; and

(3) those who do not know the truth and do not have the means to
discover it.

According to the teachings of Islam, as it is obvious, the first group
shall be the people of chastisement and dwellers of hellfire. The *jahil
muqassir* shall also be punished commensurate to the extent of his fault
but he may not dwell in hell forever. The *jahil* *qasir* who can also
be regarded as mentally downtrodden [*mustadh‘af*] shall be dealt with
peculiarly on the Day of Resurrection as indicated in some traditions.
In any case, it is not correct that he shall directly and
unconditionally be thrown to hellfire. Therefore, there is no
correlation between the belief on the oneness of the true religion and
the belief on the overwhelming majority of people on earth as inmates of
hell.

Assessing the Social Factor in Presenting Pluralism
---------------------------------------------------

With respect to the second motive, i.e. wars caused by religious and
sectarian disputes, we also have to say that we believe and agree that
the followers of the different religions, schools of thought and sects
should not fight one another on the ground of religious and ideological
differences. Instead, they are supposed to live together peacefully.
However, for us to believe in all the religions as true is not the only
solution to this problem. Rather, there are other ways, and Islam has
offered another solution to it. Firstly, Islam invites both Muslims and
followers of other religions to hold intellectual discussions and
logical discourses with one another about their beliefs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And dispute with them in a manner that is best. (16:125)***

Secondly, in practice, in terms of the Muslims’ treatment of and dealing
with non-Muslims, the latter are also divided into groups:

(1) **Followers of monotheistic and heavenly religions**: Islam gives
special treatment to the followers of religions like Christianity,
Judaism and Zoroastrianism notwithstanding the distortions of the
correct root and essence that have taken place in them, dealing with
them with much civility. Their lives, properties and honors are
respected; they can put up their synagogues, temples and churches in the
Islamic society and worship therein; they may conduct marriage, divorce
and other transactions according to their religious laws; similar to
such religious taxes as *khums* and *zakat* that Muslims have to pay to
the Islamic state, Islam also levies a tax which is technically called
“*jizyah*” and in exchange for that, their lives and properties are
protected and other social services are rendered to them. In many of the
rights, they are equal to Muslims, having no difference at all. We have
all heard that the learned and just leader of Islam, ‘Ali (*‘a*), in
reaction to the injustice done to a non-Muslim subject of the Islamic
state and Mu‘awiyah’s army’s confiscation of a Jewish woman’s anklet,
said, “If a Muslim dies out of grief for this incident, it is not
surprising and he cannot be blamed.”

(2) **Contracting unbelievers** [*kafir mu‘ahid*]: Another group of
non-Muslims, the contracting unbelievers are not followers of the
monotheistic religions, but on the basis of contract and treaty with the
Islamic government, they can live along with Muslims and even within the
Islamic society. Of course, their rights, statuses and conditions are
not identical; they differ depending on the types of contract they have
concluded with the Islamic government, but Islam deals well with this
group of non-Muslims, and their lives, properties and honors are
protected.

(3) **Hostile unbelievers** [*kafir harbi*]: The third group of
non-Muslims consists of those who, as it is commonly called, are not in
any “straight path” [*sirat al-mustaqim*] and are not willing to abide
by any sort of agreement or treaty, and if ever they sign a treaty, they
will violate it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لَا يَرْقُبُوا فِيكُمْ إِلًّا وَلَا ذِمَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They will observe toward you neither kinship nor covenant. (9:8)***

Regarding this group, Islam says that if they are not inclined to any
kind of discussion and debate and to observe any type of treaty, we have
to wage war against them and make them submit by force. Of course, even
in this case, Islam does not say that they have to be killed and
exterminated along with their descendants. Rather, war must continue
until they are ready to condescend and come to their senses and do not
incite sedition anymore.

Therefore, in relation with non-Muslims, Islam at the initial stage
calls for discussion and debate so as for them to realize the truth
through logic and argument and know to whom the right is. In the second
stage, even in case of absence of an individual or group’s acceptance of
it, Islam does not unilaterally wage war against them. It rather invites
them to peace and peaceful coexistence.

Historical Account of Islam’s Treatment of Non-Muslims
------------------------------------------------------

At this juncture, it seems appropriate to narrate an account of the
Christians of Najran with whom the Prophet (S) had a reason-based
discussion and defeated them, but in spite of that, they did not submit
and did not will to become Muslims. The Prophet (S) was ordered by God
to invite them to an imprecation [*Mubahalah*] and the following day,
they were supposed to meet at a certain place where to curse one another
so that whoever was on the wrong side would incur the divine wrath.
Initially, the Christians of Najran accepted the imprecation, but when
the following day came and they saw that the Prophet (S) came along with
his dearest and nearest of kin, viz. his daughter Fatimah, ‘Ali, Imam
al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*), they withdrew and did not will to
accept the challenge of imprecation. They instead forged a treaty and
paid *jizyah* to the Islamic government.

In any case, we can see that to regard as truthful all the religions and
sects is not the only way to prevent religious wars and sectarian
conflicts. In fact, there are other ways and Islam itself has a logical
and very advanced solution to this problem.

Let us now return to the main discussion and engage in examining,
analyzing and criticizing the proofs of pluralism. At the outset, we
have to note that, as mentioned earlier, pluralism is presentable in the
different areas. Presently, we are examining religious pluralism and we
are not dealing with other areas such as political pluralism, economic
pluralism and the like, and their validity or invalidity and other
aspects are beyond the scope of our discussion.

It is true that in the contemporary period, John Hick is regarded as the
founder of religious pluralism and has written many works in this field,
but there is no single interpretation of religious pluralism and what it
means. There have been different interpretations of it, and at least
three ways of interpreting it can be identified.

First Interpretation of Religious Pluralism
-------------------------------------------

The first proposition is that “All religions are an amalgamation of
truth and falsehood, and there is no pure truth or falsehood among
them.” To explain this position, it is advanced that if you study the
different religions in the world, you will observe that we have no
thoroughly authentic or false religion. There are so many common
elements among them. Many laws, beliefs and moral values of a religion
are also affirmed by another one. For example, the Qur’an says that
**“*****We have also ordained to you whatever we have ordained to the
Children of Israel*****.”** For example, regarding the issue of
retaliation [*qisas*],[^1] it explains that “It is the decree that We
have set for the Jews and Christians.”[^2]

Accordingly, you can also find superstitious issues and wrong beliefs in
all religions. Therefore, in all areas of beliefs, laws or moral values,
there are truths in the world, but their totality is not found in a
single place. Rather, there is a parcel of truth in every religion. For
this reason, there is no need for you to abide by and believe in only a
particular religion. In fact, you may be a Jew, a Christian, a Muslim, a
Buddhist, and others at the same time in the sense of believing in and
submitting to the good elements found in each of them.

You can also find positive elements such as peace of mind,
concentration, deliverance from the world, and the like in Buddhism in
which there is no belief in God. Of course, this proposition has also
dogmatic underpinning when it holds that the amalgamation of truth and
falsehood in each religion has reached such a proportion that it cannot
even be said that one is better than the other but rather they are of
the same degree.

This proposition’s somewhat moderate tone is that there are both truth
and falsehood in all religions but the percentage of truth and falsehood
in all of them is not the same as there is difference among them which
makes some relatively superior to others. Yet, in any case, none has
absolute superiority and all of them have both positive and negative
points.

Assessment
----------

In assessing this proposition, first and foremost, we have to state that
in view of the same general information about the different religions,
every fair-minded person will confirm that it cannot be said that there
is no preference among the different religions and that all of them are
equal. There are practices and beliefs in some of these religions about
which the tongue and pen are ashamed to mention and write. By the way,
can worship of such animals as a cow and a dog be treated equal to the
worship of God?

Is the creed and belief of the idol-worshippers in India who worship a
genital organ and bow down in front of it and of the barren individuals
who drink and bode well in its semen equal and the same with the
salvation-giving school of Islam which is a set of innumerable
excellences and goodness and teaches the worship of the One True God?!
At any rate, in our opinion, it is so evident that to talk about the
equality and sameness of all religions and claim about the parity of
values and to choose any of them is a subject which is not convincing to
any rational person.

Secondly, especially according to us, Muslims, who believe in Islam and
the Qur’an, such a subject can never be acceptable. We cannot accept a
part of the Qur’an while denying another part. To deny a part of the
Qur’an is like denying it in totality, no one can regard himself as a
Muslim while not accepting a part of the Qur’an. In this regard, the
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّ أَنْتُمْ هَٰؤُلَاءِ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ
فَرِيقًا مِنْكُمْ مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ تَظَاهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِالْإِثْمِ
وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَإِنْ يَأْتُوكُمْ أُسَارَىٰ تُفَادُوهُمْ وَهُوَ
مُحَرَّمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ ۚ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ
الْكِتَابِ وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ ۚ فَمَا جَزَاءُ مَنْ يَفْعَلُ
ذَٰلِكَ مِنْكُمْ إِلَّا خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَيَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَىٰ أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ ۗ وَمَا اللَّهُ
بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What! Do you believe in part of the Book and defy another part? So
what is the requital of those of you who do that except disgrace in the
life of this world? And on the Day of Resurrection, they shall be
consigned to a severer punishment. (2:85)***

Elsewhere, it also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ
وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ
سَبِيلًا أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا ۚ وَأَعْتَدْنَا
لِلْكَافِرِينَ عَذَابًا مُهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who disbelieve in Allah and His apostles and seek to separate
Allah from His apostles, and say, ‘We believe in some and disbelieve in
some’ and seek to take a way in between—it is they who are truly
faithless. (4:150-151)***

According to us, Muslims, whatever has been conveyed to the people as
Islam and the Qur’an from God and His Apostle (S) is thoroughly correct
and truthful, and no falsehood and superstition have crept into it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِالذِّكْرِ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ ۖ وَإِنَّهُ
لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ
تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed it is an august Book. Falsehood cannot approach it, from
before it nor from behind it. (41:41-42)***

Of course, there is nothing wrong in believing, as we do, in the
existence of some elements of the truth in other religions, and it will
not create any problem at all. For example, this famous Zoroastrian
motto, “Good speech, good thinking, good deed” is a good motto and
nobody rejects it. This is especially true in the case of such religions
as Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism which have divine origins
and are rooted in divine revelation though in our belief, they have
suffered from distortions.

Yet, beliefs and elements of the truth still exist in them. It must be
noted, however, that this does not mean that we have to believe also
that Islam, like other religions, is an amalgamation of truth and
falsehood, and to say that it makes no difference if you are a Muslim, a
Jew, a Christian, or a Zoroastrian. Rather, as stated earlier, according
to our belief, Islam which God has revealed through the agency of His
Apostle (S) is the absolute truth and does not contain an iota of
falsehood.

Second Interpretation of Religious Pluralism
--------------------------------------------

The second proposition being advanced among the points and subjects in
elucidating religious pluralism is that “All religions are diverse ways
leading to the single truth.” The first proposition argues that the
truths are divided among the different religions and every religion
contains only a part of it. The second proposition, however, holds that
the truth is not more than one thing and there are various ways to
arriving at it which refer to the different religions. For example,
there are different passageways to Tehran, and people go to Tehran
through various ways from east, west, north, and south. The truth that
people are searching for is nothing more than a single thing, but one
may arrive at it through various ways such as Islam, Christianity,
Judaism, Buddhism, and other religions.

Like the first proposition, this one has also dogmatic and moderate
versions. The dogmatic version maintains that in terms of quality and
quantity, all these ways are identical and there is no difference among
them. The moderate version is of the opinion that these diverse ways
converge at a single point but they have differences in terms of
distance, farness and nearness (quantity) and in terms of straightness
or curviness (quality). One is a longer route while the other is
shorter; one is straight while the other is curvy. For example, compared
to Christianity, Islam is a straight and shorter route, but if one
professes Christianity and faithfully observes its ordinances, one will
also arrive at the truth.

In a bid to prove and consolidate this second proposition, sometimes
poems and parables and allegories in the poems of mystics are cited.

In sum, if the veil of fancy is lifted, the countenance of the Beloved
can be seen and “*Our words are diverse and different but in reality
they are nothing but a description of the same Beautiful Countenance*.”

Assessing the Second Interpretation
-----------------------------------

Is this claim acceptable and based on which religious pluralism can be
accepted and said that all religions including Christianity,
Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Islam, Buddhism, etc. will draw man toward the
truth, perfection and felicity?

To answer, of course in theory and principle, such an assumption is
possible. Take for example a circle; its various radiuses lead toward
the center and meet at a single point. Yet, can it be proven that the
same is true in the case of the existing religions? Through a bit of
reflection, it will become clear that the answer to it is negative.

The first issue taken into account in Islam is the issue of monotheism
[*tawhid*] and the acceptance of One and Only God:

*Say, ‘There is no god but Allah’ to attain success.*

But the view of Christianity regarding the same issue is this:

*Verily, Allah is the third [person] of a trinity.*

That is, we have three persons of God. One is the Father who is the main
person of God. Another is the Son, while the third one is the Holy
Spirit. Some also say that the third person of God is Maryam (Saint
Mary). This belief which is technically called Trinity is strongly
condemned and confronted by Islam and the Holy Qur'an, regarding as
unbelievers those who believe in it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ ثَالِثُ ثَلَاثَةٍ ۘ
وَمَا مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ إِلَّا إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ ۚ وَإِنْ لَمْ يَنْتَهُوا
عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ لَيَمَسَّنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They are certainly faithless who say, ‘Allah is the third [person] of
a trinity,’ while there is no god except the One God. If they do not
relinquish what they say, there shall befall the faithless among them a
painful punishment. (5:73)***

The Qur’an describes as extremely astonishing the Christian belief in
God and that ‘Isa (Jesus) is the son of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَلَدًا لَقَدْ جِئْتُمْ شَيْئًا إِدًّا
تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنْشَقُّ الْأَرْضُ
وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They say, ‘The All-beneficent has taken a son!’ You have certainly
advanced something hideous! The heavens are about to be rent apart at
it, the earth to split open, and the mountains to collapse into bits.
(19:88-90)***

It is indeed a very emphatic description. Belief in the Trinity and that
Jesus is the son of God is so corruptive and destructive that as the
effect of which the heavens, the earth and mountains are about to be
ruined and extinguished. Keeping in view of such descriptions, can it be
said that both the belief in the Trinity and belief in monotheism will
arrive at the same truth?! One religion (Islam) says that pork is
unlawful and filthy while the other says that it is so good and
delicious, and there is nothing wrong to eat it. Islam says that
alcoholic beverage is the worst of things and a handiwork of Satan,
while Christianity says that some wines are the blood of God.

During the Eucharist,[^3] the priest offers bread and wine to you,
saying that once this wine is mixed with your blood, it will become the
blood of God![^4] Given these diverse beliefs, rational and mature
people, even the children, will understand that these two religions will
never end up at the same point. One says that so long as you do not
drink wine, you will not become Godly while the other says that drinking
the same is a satanic work. Yet, we are still saying that both of them
are leading to the same truth! It is evident that it is an unpalatable
statement and that it is more akin to fiction and poetry than to the
reality unless we also take as identical both God and Satan and say,
“You are my goal in going to the Ka‘bah and the idol-temple!”

It is indeed not surprising and unexpected that notwithstanding the
undeniable facts, some are still insisting on the existence of “straight
paths,” thinking that in spite of all these apparent contradictions and
contrasts among religions, all of them will arrive at the same
conclusion. How could Islam which says that “There is God” and Buddhism
which holds that “God does not exist” be both true?! How could both ‘Ali
(*‘a*) and Mu‘awiyah, Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and Yazid and Shimr ibn
Dhu’l-Jawshan[^5] be both in truth, and to follow any of them means to
tread the straight path that leads to the same point?! One is toward the
east while the other one is toward the west; one is toward the north
while the other one is toward the south, and the two directions are
totally opposite to one another and they are two opposing poles. Yet, we
are still insisting that all are straight paths leading to the same
truth!

*O Bedouin! I’m afraid you would not arrive at the Ka‘bah because the
way you are treading is leading toward Turkistan (and not Mecca)!*

In any case, this second interpretation of religious pluralism that all
our religions and sects will arrive at the same destination is of course
good and attractive as a poem, but is devoid of reality and truth, and
its falsity is more vivid than sunlight.

Third Interpretation of Religious Pluralism
-------------------------------------------

The third proposition for religious pluralism is actually based on a
certain epistemological foundation according to which all insensible and
non-empirical experiences are meaningless and cannot be negated or
posited. Of course, lengthy explanation of this foundation is related to
epistemological discussions, but in this volume, what we could say in
explaining this foundation is the following:

On the discussion about knowledge and epistemology, some (i.e. the
positivists) say that knowledge and gnosis we have are generally divided
into two: one category consists of the knowledge and information that
can be objectively experienced by the senses. For example, I say that
this lamp is switched on. This case can be experienced by senses. Just
turn off the switch and everywhere will become dark and nothing can be
seen. Again, when you turn on the switch, there will be light everywhere
and you will be able to see the things around you. Or, when we say that
fire can burn, this claim can be experienced by senses. You place your
hand near fire and you will see that it will burn it. This set of cases
and knowledge that can be sensed and experienced is said to be true and
false, correct and wrong. The way to discover it is also made through
experience and senses.

Meanwhile, the other set of our cases and knowledge consists of those
that cannot be sensed and experienced. This is the group of things that
cannot be objectively and empirically negated and proved, or is said to
be devoid of any meaning, or is said to have truth and false, and as
such, one cannot give judgment about it. The radical positivists say
that this kind of things has no meaning at all and it is like saying
that the light of this lamp tastes sour, or that the light of this lamp
is the King of England!

Just as these two accounts are meaningless and ridiculous, the same is
true in the case of all the non-empirical and imperceptible accounts.
Religious accounts belong to this category. Accounts such as “There is
God,” “God is One and Only,” “God consists of a trinity,” and “God does
not exist” are meaningless and pointless statements, and to dispute
about their validity or invalidity is of no use. It makes no difference
which statement you will make. Whether you say, “God is One and Only” or
“God consists of a trinity,” these two accounts in terms of value are
perfectly identical because in reality, they have no value, meaning and
sense at all. None of them is a garment to be worn, a food to be
consumed, and none of our problems in life can be solved by them!

However, regarding the unperceivable and unempirical accounts or the
so-called metaphysical, the positivists who are moderate to some extent
say that these accounts are not meaningless, but anyway, since they are
beyond the scope of human senses and experience, we can neither negate
nor posit them. The outcome of this view is a kind of skepticism and
relativism. That is, with respect to the unperceivable and unempirical
accounts such as religious ones, either we say that we do not know their
truthfulness or falsehood, or that their truth or falsehood, correctness
or incorrectness differs according to the difference of times,
individuals and societies. All of them are true and false, correct and
incorrect at the same time, depending on whose person, which period,
society and environment we assess them.

It is also sometimes said that moral concepts and things pertaining to
good and evil, dos and don’ts have nothing to do with validity or
invalidity, truth or falsehood. Such accounts as “One must act justly,”
“One should not oppress others,” “To tell the truth is good,” and “It is
bad to tell a lie” are feelings, tastes, emotions, and the like. Similar
to them is one’s color preference, which though a sensible matter has no
argumentative and evidential basis and foundation.

At any rate, according to this third interpretation of religious
pluralism, the difference among religions and religious accounts is
either like the difference between green and yellow about which it
cannot be absolutely said that one is an unattractive color while the
other is beautiful, but it must rather be said that both colors are good
and beautiful, or that in the end, since their reality and essence are
not known to us, and presently we cannot discard or accept any of them,
we are not supposed to dispute about them. They are the same, and it
makes no difference which of them we would believe and abide by.

Assessing the Third Interpretation of Religious Pluralism
---------------------------------------------------------

In examining this interpretation of religious pluralism, there is no
option but to scrutinize and tackle its epistemological foundation. In
doing so, initially, we have to bear in mind that in the realm of
epistemology, we shall be dealing with the following questions:

1. Are the accounts which are not suggestive of perceivable and
empirical reality meaningless as the radical positivists claim?

2. Can’t the accounts consisting of moral values and dealing with good
and bad, dos and don’ts be characterized as valid or invalid, and that
truth and falsehood are not at stake about them?

3. In general, is any knowledge, whether in the sphere of dos and don’ts
or in the sphere of is and is-not is relative, and that we have no
absolute, fixed and certain account? Or, is it not so and that we can
also have certainties both in the spheres of being and ought-to-be?

4. With respect to religious knowledge, do we have anything certain,
fixed and absolute? Are all kinds of religious knowledge depending on
our interpretations and so-called readings? This is the same hermeneutic
discussion and hermeneutic interpretation of religious text.

In examining the validity or invalidity of the third interpretation of
religious pluralism, the reply to the above questions must be clarified.
We shall deal with them in the future discussion, God willing.

[^1]: Qisas (literally means retribution or retaliation) in the Islamic
jurisprudence is to be executed against a criminal, according to the
legal decree, who committed such crimes as murder, amputation of a body
limb, or laceration and beating in case the victim or his guardians are
seeking retribution in lieu of receiving fine or blood money. [Trans.]

[^2]: Sūrah al-Ma’idah 5:45-48: “And in it We prescribed for them: a
life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, and an ear for an
ear, a tooth for a tooth, and retaliation for wounds. Yet whoever remits
it out of charity, that shall be atonement for him. Those who do not
judge by what Allah has sent down—it is they who are the wrongdoers. And
We followed them with Jesus son of Mary, to confirm that which was
before him of the Torah, and We gave him the Evangel containing guidance
and light, confirming what was before it of the Torah, and as guidance
and advise for the God-wary. Let the people of the Evangel judge by what
Allah has sent down in it. Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent
down—it is they who are the transgressors. We have sent down to you the
Book with the truth, confirming what was before it of the Book and as a
guardian over it.”

[^3]: Eucharist: the central and most solemn Christian liturgy, which is
called the Lord’s Supper, or Holy Communion in most Protestant churches;
the Divine Liturgy in Eastern Orthodoxy; and the Mass among Roman
Catholics and some Anglicans. [Trans.]

[^4]: The Christian notion of the miraculous transformation of the bread
and wine into the body and blood of Jesus Christ during the Eucharist is
called “transubstantiation”—an idea most elaborately formulated by the
13th-century Italian theologian St. Thomas Aquinas and has been the
official teaching of the Roman Catholic Church since the Middle Ages.
During the 16th century, Martin Luther advanced the notion of
consubstantiation as an alternative interpretation of the Eucharist by
teaching that Christ is present “in, with, and under” the elements
(bread and wine). [Trans.]

[^5]: Shimr ibn Dhū’l-Jawshan is the notorious ‘Umayyad general who
actually murdered Imam Husayn (‘a) during the battle at Karbala’.
[Trans.]


