Chapter 5: Religious Pluralism (Part 3)
=======================================

A Review of the Psychological Motive in Presenting Pluralism
------------------------------------------------------------

In the previous session, we pointed out that one of the motives in
presenting and promoting pluralism is a psychological motive which is in
the mind of many individuals, especially the youngsters. When they see
that there are different religions and sects in the world and that there
are individuals who in outmost sincerity, truthfulness and seriousness
believe in these religions and faithfully observe their ordinances, this
question comes to their minds: Is it possible for all of these people to
be dwellers of hell and only a few Muslims from a particular sect
(Shi‘ah) be the inhabitants of paradise?

This is true if it is taken into account that among the Shi‘ah, only
those who we are sure to be admitted to paradise are those who have
either not committed any sin or in case of committing any sin they have
repented afterward. Since this matter is, in a sense, so improbable for
people and could not accept it, the same thing gives more credit to the
notion that the followers of other religions, at least those who are
faithful to their own religion and abide by its commands, are also
people of salvation and will be admitted to paradise.

We explained during the previous session that in order to remove this
probability, we have to bear in mind that when we say that the only true
religion is the religion of Islam and following it will lead to the
felicity and salvation of man, it does not necessarily follow that all
other human beings will be thrown to hellfire. In general, other people
(non-Muslims) can be divided into two groups. Of course, as to which of
these two groups is in majority or in minority is a statistical
discussion which has nothing to do with our concern.

The first group refers to those who have strived hard in recognizing the
truth and really wanted to attain it but for whatever reason they have
failed. The second group consists of those who, in spite of the presence
of the suitable conditions to search for the truth, they have not
pursued it, or in spite of their recognition of Islam as the true
religion they have decided not to accept it. Those who will be thrown to
hellfire are the latter group, but the former group that has strived in
searching for the religion of truth but committed errors in identifying
it or failed to attain it shall be dealt with differently.

In case those who in the science of jurisprudence [*fiqh*] and
scholastic theology [*kalam*] are technically called “downtrodden”
[*musta‘af*] that is, mentally downtrodden abide by the truths they have
found through their own intellects or through the teachings of a certain
faith, they will receive the reward of their good deeds. Of course, as
to whether on the Day of Resurrection these people will be placed at the
lowest level of heaven or in an intermediary world between heaven and
hell, or the scene of trial on the Day of Resurrection will be held for
this kind of people is another issue. At any rate, this group will not
be subjected to the eternal punishment.

Explaining the verse, “Should anyone follow a Religion other than Islam, it shall never be accepted from him”
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The question which is posed here and the reason behind reviewing a part
of the previous session’s discussion is actually to deal with this
question is this: The Holy Qur’an states, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
وَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Should anyone follow a religion other than Islam, it shall never be
accepted from him, and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter.
(3:85)***

This Qur'anic verse is explicit in stating that no religion other than
Islam shall be accepted from the people. This is while your line of
argument maintains that the other religions, more or less, will somehow
be accepted also. How will you solve this problem?

This verse has an exegesis-related discussion and if we lengthily embark
on it here, we will drift away from the main discussion. Nevertheless,
the general point is that the religion sent down by God the Exalted to
the people during the time of Ibrahim (Patriarch Abraham) was the
religion of Islam and the people were obliged to act upon its
commandments until such time that a new set of laws [*shari‘ah*] would
be revealed. When Prophet Moses was commissioned to the apostleship, the
law of Abraham was abrogated, but the religion of Moses was the same
religion of Islam with the only difference that some of its laws
abrogated the pertinent ones in the *shari‘ah* of Abraham (*‘a*).

The *shari‘ah* of Musa (Moses) was also abrogated with the coming of
‘Isa (Jesus) and the people were commissioned to act upon the new
*shari‘ah* which was different from that of ‘Isa (*‘a*), but the
religion of ‘Isa (*‘a*) was the same Islam (which is submission to God’s
will). And finally, with the advent of the Prophet of Islam (S), all the
previous *shari‘ah*s were abrogated and thereafter the people were
ordered by God to act upon the *shari‘ah* of Muhammad (S), and as we
know, the *shari‘ah* of Muhammad (S) is the same Islam. Of course, this
*shari‘ah* has peculiar laws, decrees and features which makes it
superior to the past *shari‘ah*s. Here, Islam acquires a certain meaning
as we refer to it today. Given this explanation, it became clear that
Islam is conceived differently.

It was once referred to as the *shari‘ah* of Ibrahim (*‘a*); at another
time as the *shari‘ah* of Musa (*‘a*), and so with the other
*shari‘ah*s. The meaning of the verse, *“Should anyone follow a religion
other than Islam, it shall never be accepted from him”* is that every
person at the time of any of these representations of Islam must follow
it and any religion other than it shall not be accepted from him.
Anyhow, there is no doubt that the religion of those who have accepted
the religion of Ibrahim, Musa or ‘Isa (*‘a*) will be accepted by God the
Exalted. So, the meaning of this verse that at this time, any religion
other than Islam will not be accepted is that at this time, you have to
accept whatever God has sent down through the other prophets (*‘a*).

Besides, you have to accept as well the particular laws brought by the
Prophet of Islam (S). Of course, abrogation of laws is not only confined
to a certain *shari‘ah*’s abrogation of some laws of the earlier
*shari‘ah*. In fact, it is also possible in a certain *shari‘ah* for a
new law to abrogate an old law. For example, in Islam, as you know,
during the early years of the Prophet’s prophethood, Muslims used to
pray facing Bayt al-Maqdis (in Jerusalem) and this decree remained even
after the Prophet’s migration [*hijrah*] from Mecca to Medina. However,
after sometime and during his lifetime, the *qiblah* [direction in
prayer and other rituals] was changed from Bayt al-Maqdis to the Ka‘bah
(in Mecca). Therefore, the abrogation of some laws [*ahkam*] does not
change the essence of a religion, which consists of the belief in
monotheism, prophethood and the Day of Resurrection. Belief in
prophethood means to believe in all the prophets (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ ۚ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا
وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Apostle has faith in what has been sent down to him from his
Lord, and all the faithful. Each [of them] has faith in Allah, His
angels, His scriptures and His apostles. [They declare,] ‘We make no
distinction between any of His apostles’. (2:285**)*

We do not have the right to deny any of the prophets (*‘a*) as we regard
it as obligatory to obey [*wajib al-ita‘ah*] all of them. Of course, if
Musa or ‘Isa (*‘a*) would have lived at the present time, they would
have definitely behaved according to the *shari‘ah* of the Prophet of
Islam (S).

Our Responsibility toward Freedom of Religion and the Ruling on the Followers of Other Religions
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, during this time, we are obliged to act upon the injunctions of
the Qur’an, and the orders of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Immaculate
Imams (*‘a*) and if we do anything other than this, it will not be
accepted from us. But this does not mean that our religion is in essence
different from the previous religions. Rather, all of these are
(monotheistic) religions. If individuals do not have the power of
discerning and recognizing the truth, they are (mentally) downtrodden
[*mustadh‘af*] and they have to act upon the extent of their
understanding and they are blameless in the sight of God. But those who
have recognized the truth at any time and in spite of it, they have
opposed and been hostile to it, such individuals shall abide forever in
hellfire, and this is the purport of the statement we read in the *Du‘a'
Kumayl*:[^1]

*[O Lord!] You have sworn that You will fill it (hell) with the
unbelievers, both jinn and men, and that You will place those who
stubbornly resist therein forever.*

Anyway, eternal chastisement is applicable to those who stubbornly
resist. If a person does not have that stubbornness, even if he will
ever be chastised, it will only be commensurate to the faults he has
done while the mentally downtrodden are excused to the extent of their
failure to recognize the truth, and as such, they shall not incur
punishment. The important point is to pay attention to the fact that in
any case, if non-Muslim and non-Shi‘ah individuals are not to go to
hell, it is because of their being blameless and not because of their
respective religion or sect being not the truth and correct one.

Of course, we have mentioned earlier that those who had lived during the
times of the previous *shari‘ah*s such as that of Musa and ‘Isa (*‘a*)
were obliged to act according to the *shari‘ah* of their own times. At
any rate, the true religion and straight path is not more than one, and
the fact that other people outside this path will not be thrown to
hellfire does not necessarily mean the multiplicity of the true religion
and straight path.

A Psychological Point
---------------------

Another point is that man is not always such that at the beginning,
being a good reason and proof of a thing or subject, or its correctness
is clear for him, and in establishing this proof and evidence, he
becomes adherent to the thing or idea; rather, it is sometimes the
contrary. That is, at the outset, man is attracted to a thing and likes
it, and then, he looks for a reason to prove it as good and true. In
such cases, man is actually in pursuit of what he likes, which of course
sometimes is something really good and correct, while at other times bad
and wrong. Many people are like that. Initially, they are attracted to a
certain thing. Thereafter, they will try in one way or another to
rationalize their liking.

This fact is true in the case of many of those who believed in the
Prophet of Islam (S). That is, people were not such that at the
beginning they came to conduct research and study about Islam and its
doctrines, and as the result of the investigation, the truth about God,
monotheism and the like would be proved for, and believed by them.
Instead, by merely observing the behavior and manner of the Prophet (S),
they wished to be like him and be in his company. First, they accepted
him by their hearts and then they looked for reason behind it. This
issue is also true in the case of falsehood.

That is, since a person inclines toward a certain false thing and wants
it, he tries in one way or another to justify it for himself. Many
people are used to commit sin and enjoy unrestrained freedom, and they
want to be free in all aspects and do whatever they want. Naturally,
such individuals do not want the reckoning, the book of account, the
grave, and the Day of Resurrection to be existed.

They neither want to acknowledge that at every moment and the most
trivial act and gesture of theirs are under surveillance and they will
be held accountable for it. Therefore, firstly, a person wants to have
no reckoning and book of account, and in line with such desire, he tries
to coin a justification to deny the Day of Resurrection and the
Reckoning. In this regard, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيَحْسَبُ الْإِنْسَانُ أَلَّنْ نَجْمَعَ عِظَامَهُ بَلَىٰ قَادِرِينَ
عَلَىٰ أَنْ نُسَوِّيَ بَنَانَهُ  بَلْ يُرِيدُ الْإِنْسَانُ لِيَفْجُرَ
أَمَامَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Does man suppose that We shall not put together his bones? Yes
indeed, We are able to proportion [even] his fingertips! Rather, man
desires to go on living viciously. (75:3-5)***

“Does one who denies the Day of Resurrection really thinks that We
cannot resurrect him?” If he thinks a bit and makes use of his mind, he
will understand well that the One Who at the beginning created man from
nothing can also revive him, and incidentally, this work is easier
because in the past, He created man from nothing, but there is now at
least an array of decaying or decayed flesh and bones.[^2] Therefore,
the human mind easily admits that the same Hand that created man for the
first time has also the power to gather the decaying or decayed flesh
and bones and revive that man. Thus, why do the deniers of the Last Day
insist on their denial? The reason for this is that *“Rather man desires
to go on living viciously.”*

That is, he wants to have no restraint and be free to do whatever he
wants to do, and that there should be no reckoning and book of account.
So, here, the heart suggests that there is no Day of Resurrection and
Reckoning, and then, the mind tries to look for its justification.
Social issues are mostly like that. Instead of the heart following the
mind, it is the mind following the dictate of the heart. An illustrious
example of this fact in our present time was some people’s inclination
toward Marxism. Those people who became Marxists were not such that at
the beginning they discussed about the principles of dialectical
materialism, and through proof and evidence, it was proved to them that
nothing exists beyond matter and that the Marxist conception of
economics and other issues pertaining to Marxism are correct. I myself
knew persons who were Muslims and used to pray and fast, but were
Marxists.

They thought that one might be a Muslim and a Marxist at the same time.
Why had they inclined toward Marxism? It is because they had seen these
oppressions, discriminations and tyrannies in the society, and witnessed
how a clique of the affluent did not know how to spend its wealth while
there was a group of people who lived in extreme poverty and starvation.
Then, they used to imagine that one has to accept either capitalism or
Marxism and that the outcome of capitalism is that wide class gaps and
lamentable state of affairs. So, they started inclining toward Marxism.
After accepting Marxism, they also gradually conceived of a so-called
scientific proof and held fast to materialism and the primacy of matter.

The same is also true about pluralism in many cases and regarding many
individuals. Initially, this idea came to their minds: How could we say
that the overwhelming number of people will go to hell and only a very
few will attain salvation? No, this is unacceptable; we have to look for
ways so that the rest will also be admitted to paradise. Along this
frame of mind, the issue about the truthfulness of all religions is
advanced and effort is also made to coin a basis for this.

Which philosophical or Epistemological Foundation Can Logically Lead to Pluralism?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are also individuals who begin with certain intellectual and
philosophical foundations and then arrive at pluralism on the basis of
the said foundations, and it is not that his heart desires for it and
then his mind follows the dictate of the heart. Here, we would like to
examine which philosophical foundations will end up in pluralism which a
person begins with.

In understanding the reality and discovering the truth, if a person
believes that the intellect can obtain the truth, he will naturally not
accept the existence of numerous truths about a single subject.
Instinctively, such a person regards the truth as one, and it is in
pursuit of it that he would discover this single truth through proof and
evidence. If he is given a mathematical or physics problem, he believes
that the correct solution is not more than one, and if ever he solves
it, he knows that this solution is either correct or not, and it is
possible to have many ‘correct’ solutions.

In recognizing the truth, if a person believes that man has no way of
knowing the truth and no matter which instrument he uses the intellect
or experience at most he will become nearer to the truth, but never
attain the truth itself, it is here that the way will be opened for the
different theories of relativism, agnosticism and pluralism. Today, many
people throughout the world advocate the theory that the truth is beyond
human intellect, knowledge and understanding, and that no matter how he
strives, he will only acquire some manifestations of the reality and
only some aspects and dimensions of the truth will be unraveled for him.
Various schools such as Kantism, Neo-Kantism, agnosticism, and
relativism are common in saying that “We can never grasp the truth as it
is.”

According to such a philosophical foundation, the correctness or
falseness of accounts will become relative. That is, every account shows
only a certain percentage of the reality and embodies only a certain
part of the truth, and the account that shows the truth completely
simply does not exist. All scientific accounts possess such
characteristics and, in essence, knowledge is actually nothing other
than this. One should not imagine that knowledge exists in order to say,
“This is it and there is nothing but this.”

No, knowledge does not have this claim and it can never be such. In
scientific theory, the point is to confirm and falsify, and not to ravel
and unravel the reality. At most, what could be claimed by a scientific
theory is that “So long as no gross defect is found in me, I am
acceptable. The moment a gross defect is found in me, I shall be
falsified and another theory will replace me.”[^3] Thus, this trend
continues unabated. Scientific theories evolve one after another, and
the theory that does not change and is fixed at all times does not exist
at all in science.

Those who, in the discussion of epistemology and the value of
understanding, advocate such a way of thinking somehow despise the
so-called metaphysical logic, philosophy and arguments, regarding them
as unscientific and devoid of any credibility. Whenever such discussions
are raised in a certain sarcastic manner, they will say, “Let them be;
they belong to the domain of philosophy.” They say, “We only give value
to science and science does not mean that it will unravel the reality in
totality.” Rather, every theory shows one aspect, and not all aspects,
of the reality. Newton’s law on gravity unravels for us one aspect of
the reality, while Einstein’s law of relativity shows another aspect.
None of them unveils to us the whole reality and since it is such, both
of them are correct.

It is in this manner that we arrive at a sort of pluralism in
epistemology which in itself is a kind of relativism or agnosticism. Of
course, some people do not will to associate this theory to agnosticism,
saying that it logically belongs to relativism and not agnosticism (or
skepticism). At any rate, it is not important whether we shall call it
relativism or agnosticism. The main premise of this theory is that
reality will not be attainable by us and science can never give us a
certain belief (in the sense of total discovery of the reality).

Explaining Pluralism by Using the Similitude of a Prism
-------------------------------------------------------

As we have said, this theory can serve as the intellectual foundation of
pluralism because, according to this interpretation of science, every
scientific theory is like a reflection and angle of a prism that shows a
part of the reality. Depending on the angle he is looking at, a person
can only see that part of the reality. The whole reality cannot be seen
by anyone as it is distributed in the different sides of the prism. If
we interpret pluralism in this way, we can then say that the truth is
one; of course, the only truth as it is manifested to every person. That
is, the only truth is actually the whole prism which has different sides
and angles, and every scientific theory is like one of these sides and
angles. And the final conclusion is that none of these sides and angles
embodies the whole truth.

If we consider the same similitude and allegory of the prism and want to
have a clearer exposition of pluralism and its various interpretations,
one interpretation is for us to say that there is only one truth but
there are various ways of arriving at it. Similarly, prism is no more
than a thing but since every person looks at it from a certain angle,
one’s perception of the reality may possibly be different from that of
the others, because its different angles may possibly have diverse
colors and properties.

Take for example a prism whose one angle is convex, the second one
concave and the third one neither convex nor concave. If three persons
look at the prism from these three different angles, they will
definitely have three distinct imageries of it. This is while we as
outside viewers know for certain that all of them are a portrait of the
same thing. Because of the difference in the angles of perspective and
where they are standing, they imagine that they are looking at three
different things.

In any case, this is the same pluralism’s interpretation of the
‘straight paths’ while arguing that we have nothing more than a single
truth though there are various ways of arriving at it. The aspiration
and goal of all religionists, nay all humanity, is nothing more than one
thing, and everybody is looking for the identical truth. The only
difference is that one does it through the path of Christianity while
another through the path of Islam, and yet another through the path of
Judaism. Finally, all these ways will end up in a single point of
destination.

The other interpretation of pluralism is for us to say that there is no
such thing as a single truth. Rather, it is as numerous as the angles of
a prism. For every person, the truth is whatever he sees of the prism
from any angle he is looking at. The diversity of colors and properties
of the different angles of the prism is the reason why one person sees
the truth as green and convex; the second blue and conclave; the third
yellow and neither convex nor conclave. And the truth is nothing but
these imageries, and imageries are also extemporaneously diverse.
Accordingly, the truth is also diverse. It is evident that this
interpretation of pluralism is different from the interpretation of
straight paths leading to a single truth.

The third interpretation of pluralism is that we should not treat as
separate from the other accounts the truthfulness or falsehood of any
account of a religion or science. Rather, we have to judge all its
accounts as a whole. For example, once we ask whether the Shi‘ah school
is the truth or not, we have to keep in view the totality of Shi‘ah
beliefs. On the basis of this interpretation of pluralism, we cannot
give judgment on the truthfulness or falsehood of any religion because
accordingly, all religions embody both true and false accounts. In other
words, all religions are right and wrong at the same time. They are
truthful due to some of their precepts (which are correct) and they are
false owing to some of their precepts (which are false). As such, since
every religion consists of a set of correct and incorrect, true and
false doctrines, ideas, laws, and values, it follows that all religions
are equal in terms of value, and there is no difference in choosing any
of them.

The Theory on the Unity of Truth in the Realm of Religious Knowledge
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In contrast to religious pluralism with its various interpretations, the
other notion is to say that there is a set of religious accounts which
are all correct and true, and to believe in their opposite accounts is
sheer falsehood. This theory holds that there is only one truth and
there is no difference between this and that person, this and that
society, and this and that time. According to this theory, we have a set
of beliefs, values and laws which are all true while the other sets are
either totally false or an amalgamation of true and false accounts.

That which is in our mind, we the Shi‘ah, is this theory. If you survey
people in the streets and bazaars, you will observe that their belief is
that the only truthful and correct one is the Shi‘ah belief and
knowledge that emanate from the spotless and pure members of the
Prophet’s Household [*Ahl al-Bayt*] (*‘a*) and the fourteen Infallibles
while the rest of religions and schools of thought are either totally
false or partly so depending on the proximity and concordance of their
doctrines to Shi‘ism. This is the thing which exists in the mind of each
of us prior to the emergence of pluralism. No one had a certain notion
of the truthfulness of religion and school of thought other than this.

The Difference of the Maraji‘ At-Taqlid’s Religious Edicts as Nothing to do With Pluralism
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this juncture, the question that comes to the mind is that in the
Shi‘ah school, there are also differences of opinion whether on the
issues of beliefs or jurisprudence and laws. Given these differences,
how could a set of coherent laws and beliefs be attributed to the
Shi‘ah? The difference of the religious edicts [*fatawa*] of the Shi‘ah
*‘ulama’* and *maraji‘ at-taqlid* is something which is proverbial to
all and sundry. For example, a *marja‘ at-taqlid* says that in the third
and fourth *rak‘ah*s of prayer, it is enough to recite once the
*tasbihat al-arba‘ah*[^4] while another *marja‘ at-taqlid* says that the
same must definitely be recited thrice. Another example is about the
issues pertaining to the purgatorial world [*‘alam al-barzakh*] such as
the first night in the grave and others, or regarding the descriptions
of the matters pertaining to the Day of Resurrection. There are
differences of opinion among the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* concerning these
issues. Among these diverse opinions, which one is true and which one is
false?

On religious matters, it is said that we have to imitate or follow
[*taqlid*] the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*] *marja‘ at-taqlid*, and in
identifying the most knowledgeable there is a difference of opinion
among people and authorities. Everyone regards a certain person as the
most knowledgeable and follows him, but anyway, it is not so that only
the followers [*muqallidin*] of a certain *marja‘ at-taqlid* will be
admitted to paradise. Rather, anyone who acts upon the religious edicts
of any *mujtahid*[^5] whom he regards as really the most knowledgeable
shall be among the people of salvation and be admitted to paradise. It
is here that this skepticism comes to the mind: If we do not accept the
existence of ‘straight paths’ among the different religions, at least
within the Shi‘ah school of thought, we are supposed to believe in the
existence of ‘straight paths’ and consider as correct and truthful the
different sets of beliefs and laws. Therefore, we again end up in
professing pluralism.

To answer, in this context, the domain of theory has been confused with
the domain of application. Admittance to paradise does not necessarily
follow proper obtainment of the real and true decree of Islam. What
exists in the case of emulating the religious scholars is that if you
regard anyone as the most knowledgeable and emulate him, in case some
edicts of this *mujtahid* have been contrary to the true decree of God,
you are excused and shall not be thrown to hellfire on account of not
acting upon the true decree of Islam.

Regarding the issue of *tasbihat al-arba‘ah*, the truth is not more than
one and the true decree of God is either to recite it once is enough or
to recite it thrice is obligatory. The religious edict of any jurist
[*faqih*] whose edict is consistent with the real decree of God is the
correct one while that of others are definitely incorrect. However, it
is a mistake for which both the *mujtahid* and his followers will be
excused because they have strived hard in identifying the true decree of
God but failed to do so for some reasons. At this point, the issue is
similar to the discussion on the mentally downtrodden which we mentioned
earlier.

Absence of Difference in the Domain of the Essentials and Fundamentals of Islam
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Islam, we have a set of axiomatic, fixed, absolute, and inalterable
truths, which are technically called the “essentials of Islam.”
Sometimes also the scope of these truths is extended to include the
definite and certain points in Islam. These are things about which all
Muslims have no difference of opinion. For example, all Muslims regard
the dawn [*subh*] prayer as having two *rak‘ah*s and this issue is not
in need of (further) investigation. It is rather among the essentials
and it is also for this reason that the jurists [*fuqaha*] say that
there is no need of practicing *taqlid* in matters of laws pertaining to
the essentials of Islam. Some even believe that there is no place for
*taqlid* in absolute things as it is only applicable to disputable
matters. Everyone knows that in Islam the dawn prayer consists of two
*rak‘ah*s.

The issue of incumbency of prayer in Islam is something indisputable not
only among Muslims but even among non-Muslims who accept neither Islam
nor the Islamic prayer [*salah*] and prayer refers to the same knelling
down [*ruku‘*], prostration [*sujud*] and other actions [*af‘al*] and
recitations [*adhkar*]. Today, is there anyone who does not know that
the *Hajj* of Muslims is the same set of acts that Muslims are doing in
going to Mecca on the days of the lunar month of Dhu’l-Hijjah? If one
says that the prayer and *Hajj* are not parts of Islam, his claim will
not be accepted and it will be said to him that they are among the
essentials and fundamentals of Islam, and there is no doubt about them.

They are not bound by time and space; they are inalterable; and there is
no place for *taqlid* in them, because every Muslim knows each of them
(prayer and *Hajj*). For this reason, it is also said that denial of the
essentials of Islam leads to apostasy [*irtidad*]. Of course, the late
Imam did not say that denial of the essentials is tantamount to
apostasy, which in turn is tantamount to the denial of apostleship
[*risalah*], but some jurists do not regard as necessary this condition
as they consider denial of the essentials as absolutely leading to
apostasy.

Difference in the Domain of the Disputable Matters in Islam and its Explanation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is no controversy in the domain of the laws and doctrines of Islam
which are called “essentials” or “absolutes” of Islam. Anyone who does
not believe in any of the laws and doctrines within the boundary of this
domain is not considered to be a Muslim. We have also a set of matters
in Islam which are not absolute. In the domain of the non-absolutes of
Islam, the authorities and *mujtahid*s may have numerous edicts and
opinions. According to the reason [*‘aqli*] and religious text
[*naqli*], the duty of those who are not *mujtahid* is to refer to the
*mujtahids* and to emulate [*taqlid*] them.

Of course, the truth behind *taqlid* is the non-expert’s referral to the
expert, which is a general rule and is not confined to the realm of
religious laws and issues. In fact, in every affair, if a person is not
an expert, he should refer to an expert of a certain field. For example,
if you are sick, you will consult a physician who is expert in
diagnosing and curing diseases. In religious laws, people also refer to
the experts who are the same *maraji‘ at-taqlid*, and there is no way
other than this. Of course, when the religious edicts of the *maraji‘
at-taqlid* differ with one another, the practices of their respective
followers [*muqallidun*] will not also be identical. It must be borne in
mind, however, that the difference among religious edicts of the
*maraji‘ at-taqlid* is like the difference among the prescriptions of
doctors. If two physicians gave two different diagnoses of the same
ailment, one of them is wrong, provided that both of whom are not wrong.
Similarly, regarding a physician, not all his diagnoses and
prescriptions are correct. Instead, among the hundreds of prescriptions
he is giving, one may also be incorrect.

If the religious authorities have different opinions, assuming that all
their opinions are not wrong, naturally only one view is correct while
the rest are wrong. Similarly, among the hundreds of religious edicts
issued by a jurist [*faqih*], it is possible that some of them are
incorrect. It is true that such is the case, but there is no alternative
either. Once we have no direct access to the infallible Imam (*‘a*),
there is no way other than this. Should medical science be totally
discarded on account of some mistakes in the prescriptions of doctors?
It is evident that no reasonable person will give a positive answer to
this question.

So, if what is meant by pluralism in Islam is the difference among the
religious edicts of the *‘ulama’* and religious authorities regarding
the non-absolutes in Islam, then this is a definite and acceptable
matter. In the domain of non-absolutes, the authorities may have
differences of opinion while one may follow the religious edict of any
*mujtahid* whom he regards as the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*]. And it
cannot be said to any *mujtahid* that “Your opinion is definitely wrong”
because our assumption is that the issue is a non-absolute one and we do
not know for certain the truth of the matter. Of course, the condition
in expressing opinion is that the person must be an expert or authority
in religious issues. It is not the case that since the issue is a
non-absolute one, everyone may come to the front and say that my opinion
is so-and-so. Do the people and the Ministry of Health give permit to
everyone to open a clinic and engage in treating diseases?

At any rate, if someone calls it pluralism, we have to say, “Yes, we
have also pluralism in Islam.” Yet, it must be noted that no one has
ever called it “pluralism” because pluralism means that the truth or the
ways of reaching it are numerous whereas regarding the difference of
opinion of the *mujtahids*, we said that the truth and the real decree
of God is not more than one. If a *mujtahid* arrives at this decree, his
opinion is correct while any religious edict apart from this is
definitely wrong. Yet, as we have said earlier, it is a mistake about
which both the *marja‘ at-taqlid* and his followers [*muqallids*] are
excused. Therefore, this cannot be called “pluralism.”

Negation of Pluralism in the Declarative Accounts and Acceptance of it in Ethical and Moral Issues
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other issue here is related to the difference between declarative
and imperative accounts. In the epistemological discussion, it is said
that the cases to which knowledge belongs are of two groups. One group
is the declarative accounts, which are technically described as “beings
and not-beings.” That is, the accounts which talk about the realization
and existence, or non-realization and non-existence of an affair. The
second group is the accounts which are technically called “must and
must-not” and not including the reports about the realization or
non-realization of an affair. This kind of accounts is also called
“imperative accounts.”

Possibly, one would not dispute that declarative accounts could be
proved and falsified and have truths and lies, but concerning the
imperative accounts, he would say that this group of accounts could not
possess truths and lies, and there is no such thing as incorrect or
correct about them. Just as in our present discussion, it is sometimes
said that in the sphere of religious doctrinal issues, truth and
untruth, correct and incorrect have no meaning. An opinion can be
regarded as correct while the others as incorrect, but this ruling is
not true about the category of religious accounts which bespeak of
values and encompassing “must and must-not” and are not revealers of
objective reality for us to say that there is only one correct view and
the rest are wrong.

All the laws and decrees as well as moral values of Islam are of this
kind. For example, one must pray; one should not tell a lie; one should
not infringe upon the rights of others; and the like. We cannot say
about such things that they are true or not, correct or not, because
they do not contain any objective reality for us to compare their
contents with the objective realities and see if they are consistent
with them or not. In principle, the truth of such accounts is nothing
but taste, credence and contract. If one says that green is beautiful
while another says that yellow is beautiful, each of their statements is
nothing but the taste and temperament of the person which are consistent
with the green color while the taste and temperament of the other person
are more consistent with the yellow color. However, it cannot be said
that the first person tells the truth while the other tell a lie and
that, for example, green is really and truly attractive while yellow is
not. In this case, to talk about truth and falsehood, correct and
incorrect is totally pointless.

Anchored in this epistemological basis regarding the accounts on moral
values, the way for relativism and the acceptance of different views
about a single matter is opened.

One may just say that green is good and so are yellow, pink and violet,
and it depends on which color a person accepts. Concerning religion or
at least a part of religion (laws and issues pertaining to the moral
values), such a view can also be held. When what is at stake is the
issue of dos and don’ts, we can have different acceptable pluralisms
according to the diversity of time, place and persons. During the first
century AH, a certain matter was treated as good but during the fourth
century, the same thing is deemed as bad and both of which are correct
according to their respective time.

One thing is good for the Japanese while another is good for the
Britons, and both of them are correct. In the societies, we know, to be
totally nude in public is regarded as an abominable act, but possibly,
one day in a society, the same practice may be considered as common,
desirable and even valuable practice. This issue depends on the social
contract and custom and it makes no difference whatever form it assumes.
The same is true in the case of the good and bad things in Islam or any
other religion, and it cannot be said that the laws and values of
Christianity, Islam, or Judaism are the most correct ones. Rather,
whatever a person accepts is correct.

In sum, even if we accept pluralism in beliefs and the part of religion
which encompasses the “being and not-being”, in laws and subjects
pertaining to religious moral values, definitely we have to accept and
uphold pluralism and multiplicity.

As we have indicated, in the epistemological discussion some people
regard as relative all human sciences and knowledge in whatever field
but some others believe in relativism only in the realm of values and
ethics, or basically regard the moral and ethical accounts as true or
false, correct or incorrect. Now, we have to examine whether relativism
and subjectivism in moral values are correct or not.

Critique of Pluralism in the Realm of Ethics and Moral Values
-------------------------------------------------------------

There are undoubtedly things whose goodness or badness changes, and are
good at a certain time but bad at another, good in a certain environment
but bad in another, good under a certain condition but bad under
another. Even telling the truth or telling a lie, for example, is such
and it is not that telling the truth and telling a lie are always good
and bad, respectively. Kant believed that telling a lie is always bad
while telling the truth is always good and there is no exception about
it. But we all know that it is not so and, for example, if saving the
life of a faithful [*mu’min*] requires us to tell a lie, in that case
telling the truth is not only bad but even forbidden [*haram*], and one
should tell a lie in order to save the life of a *mu’min*.

During the time of the *taghut*,[^6] if the SAVAK[^7] agents come and
ask from you the whereabouts of a person, would you tell the truth so as
for them to go and arrest the said person and send him to prison or
execute him? It is very clear that in this context one should not tell
the truth to the SAVAK agents. An Islamic precept maintains that if a
certain practice causes humiliation and embarrassment to a *mu’min*, he
is not supposed to do so. The logic behind this precept is that a
*mu’min* should behave according to the customs and mores of the society
he lives in of course, so long as it does not impinge on the religiously
obligatory [*wajib*] and prohibited [*haram*] and he is not supposed to
do any practice which is repugnant to the norms and customs, and causes
humiliation and embarrassment to him.

At any rate, there are many instances similar to the case we have
mentioned, whose outcome is seemingly the acceptance of a sort of
pluralism and relativism in the moral and social principles and values
of Islam. To tell a lie and to tell the truth are good as well as bad;
it depends upon the situation. Of course, it must be borne in mind that
the logical consequence of this proposition is only relativism and not
skepticism. That is, it is not that, for example, we have skepticism as
to whether telling the truth is good or bad; rather, we certainly know
that telling the truth under a set of circumstances is good while the
same is bad under a different set of circumstances. In any case, by
citing this kind of cases, there are those who want to say that there is
moral and ethical relativism even in the Islamic thought and it has been
an accepted matter. Of course, the technical and scientific statement in
elucidating this issue has its own peculiar exposition, which is beyond
the scope of our present discussion.

What we can say at this point is this: The truth is that if we take into
account every case in all its properties and conditions, all cases are
absolute, and relativism has no place in them. For instance, in issues
pertaining to chemistry and physics, if you are asked, “At what degree
does water boil?” you will answer, “At 100 degrees.” Then, a very salty
amount of water is brought to you, or let us say, a certain amount of
water is brought to a place where the air pressure is more or less than
the usual one and is boiled, you will see that it does not boil at 100
degrees. Its boiling point is rather greater or less than 100 degrees.
In this case, the outcome of the work is not relativism. Instead, the
issue is that you have made shortcoming and deficiency in stating
exactly the case as you have not stated it exactly with all its
conditions and properties.

The complete and exact account of the case is for us to say, for
example, that in a certain percentage of salts and in a specific degree
of air pressure, water boils at 100 degrees. All physicists and chemists
know that under certain circumstances, water boils at 100 degrees. But
in writing and stating this subject, they are usually negligent and by
not mentioning those properties and conditions, they generally and
briefly say that the boiling degree of water is 100. There are similar
cases in many fields of science, and as we have explained earlier, the
existence of such cases is not the proof of its relative nature and the
lack of its general characteristic. Instead, it is merely the result of
negligence in completely stating the case and mentioning all its
conditions and properties. The same is true in the case of moral issues.
In this kind of cases, even if we state every case with all its
conditions and properties, the ruling about it will never change, and if
it is good, it will be always so, and if it is bad, it will be always
so.

The reason why we see that the ruling on telling the truth and telling a
lie changes and sometimes it is good while bad at another time is
because we have been negligent in mentioning all their conditions and
properties. But ethical pluralists and supporters of relativism on moral
values say that even if we mention all the conditions and aspects of
moral accounts, we still do not have absolute good and absolute bad.
Rather, goodness and badness are varied, depending on the taste,
temperament and choice of individuals and societies, and the reason for
this is that in essence, issues pertaining to values have no concordance
with the reality. As indicated earlier, they are similar to the
attractiveness of the green and yellow colors, which merely bespeak of
the taste and choice of people, and no truth is hidden behind them.

It is here that there is a foundational and essential debate between us
and others. We have to discuss whether pluralism is applicable to values
conceived as such or not. That is, can we have different and conflicting
moral rulings regarding a particular issue and regard all of them as
correct and truthful, or that if we state all the conditions and aspects
of the case, the ruling of it will be always consistent and identical
anytime and anywhere?

Moral Decrees of Islam as Consonant with the True Expediencies and Corruptions
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What we understood from Islam and we believe that to dispense with
religious discussion can also be proved through rational proof is that
regarding values and dos and don’ts, like the declarative cases
encompassing “being and not-being”, the truth is nothing but one, and as
such, it cannot be treated as multiple and diverse. We have also an
array of good and bad things, which are purely based on social contract
and have no real and true foundation, but not all good and bad are like
that. The morally and ethically good and bad which are credible in Islam
are all consonant with expediencies and corruptions.

For example, telling a lie is unacceptable and not permitted because it
brings about people’s mistrust to one another, and as a result, it will
end up in the collapse of the social order, and man can never live in
such a society. Imagine a community whose members are liars and they all
tell lies in one way or another. In such a community, the social bond
will loosen and the system of living will shatter. The edifice of social
life is founded on trust in one another. If lies are supposed to be
rampant and everybody tells lies, you can no longer trust anybody
ranging from your spouse and child to your relative, friend, neighbor
and colleague, and life will break down. It is because of this
tremendous and irreparable social loss that telling a lie is prohibited
in Islam and is considered as a major sin.

On the contrary, telling the truth wins the trust of one another and
people can enjoy the benefit of social life. If students of schools and
universities do not trust what their teachers and professors tell them
and have written in books, all sessions in schools and universities and
textbooks there will be rendered useless. Therefore, the goodness of
telling the truth and the badness of telling a lie are consistent with
the expediencies and corruptions associated with them, and it is through
their association with expediencies and corruptions that Islam has
considered honesty as good and lying as bad.

The point we have to add is that according to Islam, goodness and
badness of things are not only related to the material and worldly
goodness and badness. In fact, there is a set of good and bad things
which are related to the spiritual and otherworldly affairs of man. In
the good and bad things that Islam has promulgated, in addition to the
material and worldly good and bad things, it has also taken into account
the spiritual and otherworldly welfare and perdition.

Summary
-------

In conclusion, religious knowledge, whether pertaining to the doctrines
or to the ethical and moral laws and issues, is consonant with the
realities, and in all these fields the truth is not more than one and
the true religion is only one and has no room for multiplicity and
plurality. In the section about laws and values, it can occasionally be
seen that the ruling about a certain thing changes; for example, telling
the truth is sometimes good while at other times it is bad. The reason
behind it is that we have not taken into account and stated the subject
in all its dimensions. And if it is done and we consider certain limits
and conditions, to be honest will be always good or bad and it will
never be changed.

From the viewpoint of philosophical and epistemological foundation, we
also said that the source of pluralist thought can be one of these three
isms: positivism, skepticism and relativism. If, like the logical
positivists, we said that metaphysical and non-empirical cases such as
“There is God,” “There is the Day of Resurrection” and the like are
essentially meaningless accounts, or if we became advocates of
relativism in human knowledge in totality or on particular ethical and
moral cases, or if we embraced agnosticism and said that no part of
human knowledge is definite and certain, and all of them with varying
degrees are inseparable with doubt and skepticism, through one of these
three philosophical and epistemological foundations, one could lead to
pluralism and the acceptance of the multiplicity of truth in human
knowledge, including religious knowledge.

Of course, at the outset of the discussion we have also noted that it
does not mean that everyone who has turned pluralist had initially
accepted positivism, relativism or agnosticism. Rather, it is also such
that at the beginning one had inclined toward pluralism, accepted it and
then sometimes looked for evidence to justify and prove it. But, at any
rate, if one wants to follow the logical conclusion, at the outset, he
has to accept one of these three foundations in epistemology and then
arrive at pluralism through it. And in essence, we have to bear in mind
that the logical conclusion is that all scientific issues are in one way
or another anchored in philosophical principles and premises and the
philosophical issues in turn are based on epistemological issues. That
is, from the viewpoint of logic, at the beginning we have
epistemological discussions and then philosophical discussions and
thereafter current scientific issues.

For example, when a physician or a researcher tries to invent medicine
for curing a certain ailment, initially he does not come to deal with
philosophy and prove the philosophical rules, but this research is
definitely based on a philosophical principle; namely, the principle of
causality. This researcher goes to the laboratory and spends many hours
for research to invent a medicine means that he has believed that
illness does not come into being spontaneously and without a cause;
whenever there is a disease, there must certainly be a cause. And he
also believed that there is another cause and factor that could affect
and eliminate the factor leading to the disease and thus cure the same.

In this manner, without accepting the principle of causality, no
researcher can conduct research. But this does not mean that initially,
he has studied philosophy and used the principle of causality by
indisputable evidence and has then gone to the laboratory and conducted
research. Rather, belief in the principle of cause and effect
unconsciously and half-consciously exists in his mind.

[^1]: Du‘a’ Kumayl [Supplication of Kumayl]: The supplication taught by
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to one of his loyal companions and staunch supporters of
Islam, Kumayl ibn Ziyad. Usually said on every night preceding Friday
[Laylat’ul-Jum‘ah] individually or in congregation after the Isha’
prayers, this supplication envisages divine teachings and solid
foundations of religion in order to enable everyone to follow the right
path for becoming a worthy Muslim. The Arabic text, English translation
and commentary of this famous supplication are available online at
http://www.al-islam.org/dua-kumayl-a-translation-and-commentary-husein-a...
[Trans.]

[^2]: This is for argument’s sake only vis-à-vis the disbelievers
because in reality, as God is Omnipotent to create a thing from nothing
and to create a thing from something else are both easy for Him. The
existence or non-existence of a transient agent in His Act does not make
it ‘easier’ or ‘harder’, as the case may be. [Trans.]

[^3]: See the classic book on the history and philosophy of science,
Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962) in which the author argues that
science is not a steady, cumulative acquisition of knowledge; instead,
it is “a series of peaceful interludes punctuated by intellectually
violent revolutions”, which he described as “the tradition-shattering
complements to the tradition-bound activity of normal science,” and
after such revolutions, “one conceptual world view is replaced by
another”. [Trans.]

[^4]: Tasbihat al-arba‘ah: literally, the four tasbihs; it refers to the
recital of “Subhan Allahi wa’l-hamdulillahi wa la ilaha illallahu
wallahu akbar” [Glory be to Allah; praise be to Allah; there is no god
but Allah; Allah is the great]. [Trans.]

[^5]: Mujtahid: an authority on the divine law who practices ijtihad,
i.e. “the search for a correct opinion in the deduction of the specific
provisions of the law from its principles and ordinances.” Here, it is
used as synonymous with marja‘ at-taqlid. [Trans.]

[^6]: Taghut refers to the Pahlavi regime in Iran prior to the Islamic
Revolution. [Trans.]

[^7]: In 1957 (1335 AHS), the Shah ordered the establishment of the
State Information and Security Organization (SAVAK) and in 1971 (1350
AHS) on his orders a joint committee of SAVAK and the Town and City
Police was organized. Agents of this organization arrested the opponents
of the regime and took them away to political prisons. In these
penitentiaries, prisoners were subjected to various forms of physical
and psychological torture which included abuse; whipping and beating;
long periods of interrogation; sleep deprivation; extraction of nails
and teeth; tying to a metal table heated to a white heat or an iron
frame like a bed-frame covered with wire mesh which was electrically
heated like a toaster; breaking of limbs; electric shocks; beating the
soles of the prisoner’s feet with an electric cable; hanging to the roof
and broadcasting the screams of torture victims by means of tape
recorders. Another of SAVAK’s heinous methods of torture was placing the
legs of prisoners in boiling oil. For more information on SAVAK’s
activities and abuse of human rights, refer to Fred Halliday’s Iran,
Dictatorship and Development, pp. 78-90. [Trans.]


