Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet’s Household [Ahl
al-Bayt] (may peace be upon them all) and their followers’ preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of the
all-encompassing school [madrasah] that embraces all the different
branches of Islamic knowledge.

This school has been able to train many talented personalities by
quenching them with this gushing fountain. This school has given
scholars to the Muslim ummah who, by following the Holy Prophet’s
Household (a.s), have done their best in order to clear away the doubts
and skepticisms put forth by any various creeds and intellectual
currents both inside and outside Muslim society. Throughout past
centuries, they have presented the firmest answers and solutions to
these doubts.

Anchored to the responsibilities upon its shoulders, the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) World Assembly has embarked on defending the sanctity of risalah
[message] and its authentic beliefs—truths which have always been
opposed by the chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects, religions and
trends.

In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself as a follower of the
upright pupils of the School of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)—those who have
always been ready to refute those accusations and calumnies and have
tried to be always in the frontline of this struggle on the basis of the
expediencies of time and space.

The experiences in this field, which contained the books of scholars
belonging to the School of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), are unique in their
own right. It is because these experiences have been based upon
knowledge [\`ilm] and the preeminence of intellect and reasoning, and at
the same time, they are devoid of blind prejudices or whims and
caprices. These experiences address experts, scholars and thinkers in a
manner that appeals to healthy minds and pure human natural disposition
[fitrah].

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) World Assembly has endeavored to enter a new phase of these worthy
experiences by conducting research and translating the works of
contemporary Shi\`ah writers or those who, through divine guidance, have
embraced this noble school.

The Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of the
valuable works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shi\`ah
personalities so that those who search for the truth may quench their
thirst from this palatable fountain which the School of the Prophet’s
Household (a.s) offers to the entire world.

It is hoped that the dear readers will not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)
World Assembly of their valuable opinions, suggestions, and constructive
criticisms in this arena.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist us
in propagating pure Muhammadan (s) Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this humble effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth and give us
success with al-Mahdi (may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious
advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to ayatullah
Makarim Shirazi for writing the book and to Dr. Mahmoud Farrokhpey for
translating this work. We should also like to thank colleagues who took
part in accomplishing this task especially the staff of the Translation
Office for fulfilling their responsibility.

Cultural Affairs Department

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) World Assembly


