Lesson 7: Examples From Creation
================================

Throughout the world, ‘order’, ‘goal’ and ‘design’ are apparent. Now pay
attention as we study some examples of this. We will present some large
and small examples for you.

Fortunately, today, with the progress made in natural sciences, the
discovery of the secrets and wonders of the world of nature, and the
subtleties in the existence of human beings, animals and plants, the
wonderful structure of a cell or an atom and the wonderful system of the
stars, the doors of knowing God have been opened to us in such a way
that one can clearly say that all books of natural science are books
about the oneness and unity of God which teach us great lessons about
the great Creator because these books remove the veils or curtains which
cover the interesting order of the creatures of this world and show how
important the Creator of this world is.

The center of administration of the country of your body
--------------------------------------------------------

Our skull has been filled with grey matter called the brain. This brain
forms the most accurate and exact system of our body because it commands
all of the powers of our body and it manages all of the organs of our
system.

In order to understand the importance of this great center, it would be
a good idea for us to explain the following for you.

The newspapers had printed that a Shiraz university student in Khuzistan
was in an automobile accident and his brain was damaged but it seemed
that nothing at all had happened to him. All of his organs were healthy
but strangely enough, he had forgotten all of his past life. His mind
worked well.

He could study but if he saw his mother and father, he did not recognize
them. When they said to him that this was his mother, he was surprised.
They took him to his home in Shiraz. They showed him the handicraft work
he had done and then hung on the walls of his room.

But he looked at it all in amazement and said that he was seeing these
things for the first time.

It became clear that in the brain damage he suffered, cells which were,
in reality, transitions between thought and his memory were no longer
working and like a blown out fuse which cuts off the electricity and
brings darkness, his memory of the past had been disconnected.

Perhaps the point which no longer works is no bigger than the size of
the top of a pin but what an effect it has had upon his life and from
this it becomes clear how complicated and how important our brain is.

Our brain consists of two separate parts: first, the part which is
controlled by our voluntary which controls all of our voluntary motions
like walking, looking, speaking.

Second, the involuntary part which controls the movement of our heart,
stomach, etc. and if one part of this part of the brain does not
function, the heart or another organ will no longer function.

One of the Most Wonderful Parts of the Brain
--------------------------------------------

The cerebrum is the center of will power, consciousness and memory. In
other words, it is one of the most sensitive areas of the brain and many
of the reactions of the inner senses like anger, fear, etc. relate to
it.

If we take out the cerebrum in an animal but we leave the other organs
as they are, it will remain alive but its understanding and
consciousness will be totally eliminated.

They have removed the brain of a pigeon. It remained alive for a while
but it could not eat seeds that were placed in front of it. Even though
it was hungry, it would not eat.  
 If it was allowed to fly, it flew until it hit a barrier and fell down.

Another Wonderful Part of the Brain is the Sense of Memory
----------------------------------------------------------

Have you ever thought how wonderful our sense of memory is? If our sense
of memory is taken from us for even one hour, what a difficult situation
we will be placed in.

The center of memory which forms a small part of our brain is where all
of our memories of our lifetime are stored. Whoever is related to us,
the particularities of that person as to size, form, color, clothes and
spirit, are kept in storage in their own area and a special file is
formed for each one.

Thus the moment we confront that person, our mind removes him from the
file and immediately, completely reviews what we know about him and then
it commands us as to what reaction we should have.

If it is a friend, respect and if it is an enemy, the showing of hatred
but all of this is done so quickly that there is more or less no lapse
of time.

The wonder of this becomes more apparent when we try to recall what is
stored and draw it or write it down or record it in a tape recorder.

Without any doubt, it will require a great deal of paper or a great
number of tapes which can fill a large storage room.

Even more wonderful than this is when we want to find one drawing or one
tape among them, a file clerk will be necessary but our sense of memory
does all of this work very simply, easily and quickly.

How can an Unconscious nature create a conscious one?
-----------------------------------------------------

Many books have been written about the wonders of the human brain. Can
you believe that such an extraordinary system which is so subtle,
accurate, complicated and mysterious be made from unconscious nature?

More wonderful than this is to believe that an unintelligent nature
could create intelligence!

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“On the earth are signs for those of assured faith as also in your
own selves: will you not then see?’’(51:21)***

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Do you have any other information about the wonders of the human
brain?  
 2. What has God created in order to protect the human brain against
accident?


