Lesson 8: A World of Wonder in a Small Bird
===========================================

In this lesson, we want to leave aside the large country of our body,
which we have only very briefly touched upon, and turn to a look at the
wonderful order of other creatures.

We look at the sky in the darkness of night. We see an exceptional bird
which is searching for food with all of its energy. This bird is a bat.
There are many wondrous things but flying at night is among the most
wondrous.

The swift flight of bats in the darkness of the night without hitting
anything is so wondrous that no matter how often one studies this, new
mysteries of this are revealed.

This bird flies with the same speed and accuracy as a pigeon does in the
day time. If it flies into a dark and narrow tunnel which is full of
smoke and twists and turns, it will fly through all of the twists and
turns without hitting any of the walls and not the smallest amount of
smoke will be found on its wings.

This strange ability of the bat is proof of an effect within it which is
similar to radar. We now need to know what radar is in order to be able
to see it in a small bat.

In physics, in the discussion on forms, waves are discussed which are
beyond sound waves. These waves are those same waves whose length and
frequency are so great that the human ear cannot hear them. This is why
they are called meta-sound waves.

When these waves are set off by means of a very strong transmitter,
these waves move forward but whenever they meet up with any kind of a
barrier in a point of space (like the aircraft of the enemy, etc), just
like a ball when it hits a wall and bounces back, like our voice before
a mountain or a high wall and based on an accurate record of how long it
takes for the sound to return to us, we can measure the exact distance
to the object.

Many aircrafts and ships are guided by means of radar and it takes them
to whatever direction they want.

It is also used to find out the location of enemy ships and aircraft.

Scholars say that within this small creature, there is something similar
to radar so that if the bat flies in a room which at that same moment a
microphone is put to use to transform meta-sound waves into sound waves
which can be heard, in each second (30 to 60 times) the meta-sound waves
will be heard by the bat.

Scholars in answer to this say, “These waves leave the larynx through
the nose of the bat by means of strong organs and its ears, which are
the receivers, receive these.

Thus, this bat, in its night travels, is obligated to its ears. A
scholar, through experiment, has proven that if you remove the ears of a
bat, it cannot fly avoiding things whereas if you completely remove its
eyes, it will very expertly still be able to fly. That is, a bat sees
with its ears! Not its eyes. And this is most strange.

Now think who created these two wondrous organs in this small creature
and how was it taught how to use them? And how can it avoid the dangers
which exist during its night flying? Who?

Is it possible that nature have the intelligence and consciousness to do
this? and place these organs which scientists copy, at great expense, in
its body?

Hadrat ‘Ali, peace be upon him, in the Nahj al-Balaghah, in a very long
sermon about creation, mentions the bat, saying, “It is never prevented
from the way because of the darkness of the night. Great and glorious is
God Who, without a previous model, brought everything into being.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What other interesting information do you have about the bat?  
 2. Did you know that the bat’s wings and how it bears children and that
even its method of sleeping differs from other animals and that it is
most exceptional?


