Lesson 9: Love for Insects and Flowers
======================================

One spring day when the weather is, little by little, growing warmer,
make a visit to a park or a farm. You will meet up with all sorts of
small insects, honey bees, flies, butterflies and mosquitoes, who,
without making a sound, fly from one flower to the next and from this
branch to that branch of the trees.

They are so busy with their work that one could imagine an employer is
overlooking their progress and continuously telling them what to do.
Their wings and feet are colored yellow by the pollen of the flowers,
giving them the look of workers who have put on their work clothes and
with love and seriousness, they continue their work.

In truth, they have a very important assignment which is so great that
Professor Leon Briton says, “Few people realize that without the work of
insects, our fruit baskets would be empty.”

And we add this sentence, “The next year, our green gardens and pastures
would be completely lost.” Thus, insects are, in reality, the real
nourishers of fruit and providers of flower seeds.

You most probably ask why. Because the most sensitive act in the life of
flowers is performed with their help. You have probably heard that
flowers, like many animals, have two parts, masculine and feminine, and
that reproduction takes place through their union, giving us seeds and
fruit.

But have you ever thought how the two parts of flowers, which do not
move, are attracted to each other? And how the male spermatozoa mix with
the female ovary and provide the beginning of a marriage between the
two?

This work is most often the work of insects and, in some cases; it is
the work of the wind. But this is not as simple as we think it is. This
fruitful marriage, in which insects act as the intermediates, has a
history, formality and long adventure, only a small part of which we
mention here with a short story.

Two old and close friends: Natural scientists, after study, have
concluded that flowers and plants appeared in the second geological age
and strangely enough, insects appeared at the same time. These two,
throughout the eventful history of creation, were like two old and close
friends who have remained loyal to each other and have been complements
to one another.

Flowers have always stored sweet nectar within themselves in order to
further attract and sweeten the relationship. At the time when insects
enter the flower in order to transfer the masculine group, provide the
preliminaries for the marriage and pregnancy, the flower freely gives of
its sweetness to them. This sweet and valuable sugar is so good tasting
to the insect that they are naturally pulled towards it.

Some botanists believe that the beautiful colors and good smelling
perfume of flowers also play an important role in attracting the insects
to them. Various experiments with honey bees have shown that they
distinguish colors and the aroma of flowers.

In reality, it is these flowers which grow for insects and have a
good-smelling aroma in such a way that a butterfly and honey bees are
attracted to them. They accept the invitation with all of their being
and quickly begin the preliminaries and eat of their sweetness.

This very sweetness is a special kind of sugar which is considered to be
the best food for insects. When it is stored in one place, it makes
honey because insects are attracted to flowers. It eats some of this
sweetness and takes most of it with them to their honeycomb to store.
This is a contract of friendship and love which is based on mutual
interest, always existed and will continue to exist between flowers and
insects.

A lesson about monotheism: when a human being studies these wondrous
points in the lives of insects and flowers, he or she automatically
asks, “Who established this pact of love and friendship between insects
and flowers?”

Who gave this special sweetness and good tasting nectar to flowers? Who
granted flowers these attractive colors, beauty and this sweet-smelling
perfume? Who invited in sects towards it? What were the fat and tiny
bodies of insects, butterflies, honey bees and golden bees given to make
them prepared to collect the pollen of flowers?

Why do bees, for a certain period of time, move towards one kind of
flower? Why did the life of flowers and insects begin at one time in the
created world?

Can anyone - no matter how stubborn - accept the fact that all of these
events were without any plan or pre-design? And the unconscious laws of
nature automatically brought such wondrous scenes into being? Never!

***“And thy Nourisher taught the bee to build its cells in hills, on
trees and in habitations then to eat of all the produce (of the earth)
and find with skill the spacious paths of its Nourisher…” (16:68-69)***

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What use does the sweetness, color and perfume of flowers have?  
 2. What do you know about the amazing life of honey bees?


