Lesson 11: What is Justice?
===========================

 

1. Why was Justice selected among all of God’s Qualities, considered to be a principle of religion?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this study, before anything else, this point must be made clear as to
why the great ‘ulama consider justice, one of God’s Qualities, to be a
principle among the five pillars of religion.

God is the Knower (*Alim*), Powerful (*Qadir*), Just (*Adil*), Wise
(*Hakim*), Merciful (*Rahman*), Compassionate (*Rahim*), Primordial
(*Azali*), Eternal (*Abadi*), Creator (*Khaliq*) and Sustainer
(*Razzaq*). Why was only justice selected from among all of these and it
became one of the five pillars of religion?

In response to this important question, several points should be noted:

a. Among God’s Qualities, justice is so important that many other
Qualities return to it because justice in the general, extensive sense
means ‘putting everything in its place’.

Here, then, Hakim, Razzaq, Rahman and Rahim, and similar Qualities, are
all dependent upon it.

b. Resurrection — just as we have mentioned — is related to Divine
Justice as well as the mission of the Prophet and the responsibility of
the Imams.

c. At the beginning of Islam, a difference of Opinion arose over the
issue of the justice of the Creator:

A group of the Sunni Muslims, who were called the Ash’arites, completely
denied God’s justice. They said that justice and oppression make no
sense in relation to God. He is the Ruler of the entire created
universe. It belongs to Him and whatever He does is just.

They did not even believe in the intellect’s good and evil. They said,
“Our intellect alone cannot distinguish between good and bad, even the
goodness of doing good or the evil of oppression...” and many such
similar errors.

Another group of the Sunnis, who were called the Mu’tazilites, and all
of the Shi’ites, believe in the principle of justice in relation to the
Creator and they believe that God never commits oppression.

In order to separate out those two groups from one another, they called
the second group, the Adliyah, in which justice (adl), as a principle,
was the sign of the school and the first group were called ‘qhayr
adliyah’ (other than justice). Shi’ites were among the ‘Adliyah.

The Shi’ites, in order to distinguish their school from that of the
other Adliyah, placed imamate as one of the principles as well. Thus,
wherever there is a discussion of ‘justice’ and ‘imamate’, this is in
reference to the Shi’ite Imami school.

d. As the fundamentals of religion are continuous rays of the principles
of religion and as the ray of justice of the Creator is extremely
effective in human society, and the most important base for human
society is formed by ‘social justice’, the selection or choice of the
principle of justice as one of the principles of religion is a means to
establish justice in human society and to struggle against any kind of
oppression.

Just as the unity of Essence, Qualities of the Creator, the unity of
worship of Him, the light and unity of His Oneness, a solidification of
human society and the unity of Qualities are strengthened, the
leadership of the prophets and imams is also inspired by the issue of
‘real leadership’ in human society. Thus, this principle of justice of
the Creator, Who rules over the entire world, is the sign of the
necessity for justice in all areas of human society.

The great created universe is based upon Divine Justice. Human society
will also not remain without it.

2. What is Justice?
-------------------

Justice contains two varying meanings.

a. The extensive meaning of this word, just as we have said, is ‘to put
everything in its place’. In other words, it is being in balance and
equilibrium. This meaning or sense of justice rules over the entire
created universe, in the galaxies, within an atom, in the structure of a
human being’s existence and all plants and animals. This is what the
famous Tradition of the Holy Prophet refers to when he says, “It is by
means of justice that all of the heavens and the earth exist.”

For example, if the powers of ‘attraction’ and ‘repulsion’ of the earth
lose their sense of balance and one of these two is removed or
destroyed, the earth will be drawn towards the sun, set on fire and
destroyed or it will leave its circuit and wander in the endless space
of the universe until it is destroyed.

b. Another meaning of ‘justice’ is ‘the following of individual rights’
and the point opposite is ‘oppression’ in the sense of taking ‘the
rights of someone’ and giving them exclusively to others or to take away
someone’s rights arid give them to another, to discriminate in the sense
that some people are given their rights and others are not.

It is clear that the second meaning is a ‘particular’ one and the first
one is ‘general’. It should be noted that both meanings are truthful in
relation to God, even though the second meaning will be more emphasized
here.

The meaning of God’s justice is not to remove the rights of a person nor
give the rights of one to another nor to discriminate between people. He
is Just in all sense of the word and the reasons or proof of His Justice
will be mentioned in the next lesson.

Oppression, whether it be the taking away of a person’s rights or by
giving the rights of one to another, or wastage and discrimination, does
not exist in the pure Essence of God. He never punishes a person who
does good deeds. He never encourages a person who does evil, no one will
be held responsible for the sins of another. He does not burn the wet
and dry together.

Even if everyone is in error in a large society, other than one person,
God separates the accounts of that one person from that of others and
does not punish that person along with sinners.

And the fact that the Ash’arites said, “Even if God sends all of the
prophets to hell and all of the criminals and sinners to heaven, it is
not oppression,” is vain babble and baseless.  
 The intellect, which is never polluted with superstition and
discrimination, will not listen to these ugly words.

3. The Difference between Justice and Equality
----------------------------------------------

Another important point which should be pointed out in this lesson is
that sometimes ‘justice’ is confused with ‘equality’ and it seems that
the meaning of justice is that ‘equality should be maintained’ whereas
this is not so.

Equality is not a condition for justice. Rather, rights and priorities
must be considered.

As an example, justice in a classroom of students is not that they all
receive equal grades and justice between two workers is not that they
receive equal wages. Rather, justice is in this that each student to be
graded according to his knowledge and ability and each worker to be
judged according to his work and activity.

In the world of nature, also, justice in the extensive sense means just
this. If the heart of a whale, which weighs one ton, be compared to the
heart of a sparrow, which is perhaps not more than one gram in weight,
if they were equal, there would be no justice and if the roots of a very
tall tree were equal to the roots of a small plant, this is not justice
and is equivalent to oppression.

Justice is that every creature receives its rights in proportion to its
abilities.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why, among all of the Qualities of God, is Justice known to be or
recognized as being one of the principles of religion?  
 2. Who were the Ash’arites? What do you know about their beliefs?  
 3. What reactions does belief in Divine Justice have in human
society?  
 4. How many meanings does justice have? Explain them.  
 5. Does justice mean the same as equality?


