Lesson 14: The Philosophy of Undesirable Events in Life
=======================================================

We have said that a group of the materialists have coercively made use
of the issue of unpredictable occurrences of calamities and difficulties
which occur in the life of human beings as an excuse to deny the justice
of the Creator and sometimes, to deny even the existence of God!

Now we will continue the discussion of the previous lesson.  
  

3. A Human Being is nurtured through Facing Difficulties
--------------------------------------------------------

We again repeat that we should not create difficulties for ourselves,
but, at the same time, it often happens that difficulties increase our
will-power just like iron which is strengthened when placed in hot
smelting pots. In the smelting pot of difficulties we become experienced
and more persevering.

War is basically not good but sometimes a difficult and long war causes
the abilities of a nation to blossom and transforms dispersion into
unity and quickly makes up for our falling behind.

A famous Arab historian says, “The blossoming of civilization has
appeared throughout history in various parts of the world. It followed a
country being attacked by a powerful foreign country, being awakened and
mobilizing their forces.”

Of course, reactions to difficulties are not similar among all people
and all societies. One group falls into despair, weakness and pessimism
and reaches a negative conclusion but there are individuals who have the
right attitude when faced by these difficulties and are stimulated,
mobilized by them, begin to move and they are filled with excitement and
enthusiasm.

But because in such situations, many people judge by what appears on the
surface, they only see the bitterness and difficulties and ignore the
positive and constructive effects.

We do not claim that all bitter events have such effects in a human
being but at least some people are in this way.

If you study the life of geniuses of the world, you will see that almost
all of them suffered difficulties and great misfortunes. There are fewer
people who are raised in comfort and luxury who have shown themselves to
be geniuses and who have arisen to a high position.

A good commander of an army is a person who has seen a difficult and
long battle. Their economic genius’ are people who have fallen into
difficulties in the economic market.

Great politicians are those who have passed through hard and difficult
political struggles.  
 In summary, we can say that the difficulties and anguishes which human
beings bear, nurtures them.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***"It may be that you dislike a thing and God brings about through it a
great deal of good".(4:19)***

4. Difficulties cause one to turn back to God
---------------------------------------------

In the previous discussions, we have seen that, little by little, our
being has a goal or purpose. Our eyes are for a purpose; our ears are
for a purpose; our heart, brain and nerves each have been created for a
purpose. Even our finger tips have a philosophy behind them. Thus, how
is it possible that our total being be without a purpose?

At the same time, for the completion of this task, one must look every
once in a while at one’s sins and one’s transgressions must be shown or
pointed out. In facing difficulties in following God’s Commands, one
becomes familiar with one’s ugly and evil deeds and will turn back to
God. It is here that a part of the difficulties and unforeseen events
are, in reality, Divine blessings.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***"Corruption has appeared on land and sea because of (the deed) that
the hands of men have earned, that (God) may give them a taste of some
of their deeds: in order that they may turn back (from evil).”
(30:41)***

Noting what we have said above, painful events are confirmations of evil
and interpreting them as calamities that are considered to be in
opposition to Divine Justice is far from logic and intellectual
reasoning because the further we go into this narrow way, we will better
understand the various philosophies.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the purpose of our Creation? How can we reach there?  
 2. How is a person strengthened by facing difficulties?  
 3. Have you ever seen people or read about them in history who have
suffered difficulties and developed themselves? Write about their
Lives,  
 4. What does the Qur’an say in relation to our Sins?  
 5. Which people attain positive results from bitter events and which
ones, negative results


