Lesson 15: Once Again the Philosophy of Signs and Catastrophes
==============================================================

Because of the fact that a discussion about signs, catastrophes, sudden
events and unpleasant events is a very difficult and complicated one and
is most often discussed in the area of ontology and monotheism we are
obligated to the student to study this issue further from another point
of view which is more readily understandable by the general reader.

5. Difficulties and Ups and Downs give Spirit to Life
-----------------------------------------------------

Perhaps it is difficult for some people to understand that if life was
only filled with blessings, it would lose its value.

It has been proven today that if you place an object in the middle of a
room, and you give it a strong, uniform light from all directions and
the object and the room both be completely smooth, we will not be able
to see the object because when shadows are placed next to light, the
dimension of the form is made clear and the shadow separates the object
from the light and then we can see it.

The value of the gifts of life as well as the weak or strong shadows of
difficulties cannot be seen. If throughout life, there were no such
thing as sickness; the pleasure of health would never be sensed.
Following a night of a high fever and the morning dawn, when the fever
breaks, the memory of such a night, when one regains one’s health and
thinks back on that night of fever and pain, one realizes what a jewel
good health is.

In general, a uniform kind of life, even the most comfortable kind of
life is tiresome, spiritless and death like. It has often been seen that
individuals, because of a comfortable life, empty of any kind of
difficulties, find it so boring that they attempt to commit suicide or
else they continuously complain about their life.

You will find no architect with taste who will design the walls of a
large room to be totally smooth and uniform. Rather, he carves curves
and lines into it.

Why is the world of nature so beautiful? Why is the view of jungles
which fill the sides of mountains and streams with twists and turns
among the small and large trees so interesting and attractive?

One reason is the lack of uniformity.

The order of light and darkness and the coming and going of day and
night which the Holy Qur’an emphasizes in various verses, has a great
effect upon ending any kind of a tiresome life of human beings, why?

Because if the sun continuously be in one place in the sky and uniformly
give light to the earth, if its position never changed and night would
never come, in addition to the other problems this would have, in a
short period of time, all human beings would get tired.

It is because of this that we must accept that at least most of the
problems caused by unforeseen events give a spirit to life, making it
sweet and bearable. It manifests the values of blessings and gives the
human being the possibility to benefit from the gifts to the extent
possible.

6. Difficulties one makes for one’s self
----------------------------------------

Another point which we feel it is necessary to mention at the end of
this discussion is that many people fall into error in their reckoning
of the causes and effects of unforeseen events and the oppression which
takes place through the hands of oppressors are considered to be signs
of the injustice of the Creator of the world and the disorder in the
work of humanity is considered to be the fault of disorder in the
structure of creation.

Just as they sometimes say, “Why is each stone made to block the way?”
Why do some earthquakes strike cities and cause little damage but in the
rural areas, many people are taken as sacrifices and many lose their
lives in the fallen refuge of their homes. What kind of justice is this?

If calamity is to be divided, why is it not divided up equally?

Why the edge of sorrowful catastrophes always falls upon the deprived
people?

Why in contagious diseases, these people most often suffer?

These are all beside the fact and do not relate to the system of
creation and justice of God. These are the results of oppression,
exploitation and colonialism of human beings in relation to one another.

If it were not for the fact that the rural people are abased and
poverty-stricken because of the oppression of the cities and they were
able to build better and stronger homes for themselves like those in the
cities, earthquakes would not have such an effect upon them.

But when their houses are built of mud or stones or wood and very little
stucco or cement is used in the building of their homes, and in a simple
way, it is piled on top of each other, even a strong wind or a very
slight earthquake makes the earth open up, we should not expect the
situation to be better than this. But what does this have to do with
God?

This criticism should be made against the unbalanced situation and
erroneous system of society. We must arise and end these injustices to
society. We must fight with abasement and poverty and give the deprived
their rights so that such phenomena do not appear.

If all groups of society have sufficient nourishment health and
treatment, they will be able to face diseases and sicknesses with
greater strength and perseverance.

But when an erroneous and false social system rules a society in the
form of colonialism, one person is given so many possibilities that even
their cats and dogs have a doctor, medicine and receive special medical
care, but others do not have even the most basic necessities of life and
health to care for their children, such unpleasant scenes are plentiful
and are seen by all.

Instead of complaining about God in such situations, we should reproach
ourselves.  
 We have to tell oppression not to be oppressive! And we have to tell
the oppressed not to bear oppression!

We must make efforts so that all individuals of a society have at least
the minimum amount of health facilities, food and housing, educational
and cultural possibilities.

In summary, we should not place the blame for our sins on Creation. When
did God ever impose a system like this upon us? Where has He ever
recommended this?

Of course, He created us free because our being free is the key to our
development and progress. But it is we who misuse our freedom and
oppress each other and this oppression then shows itself as unevenness
in society. But unfortunately, this error has come to include a great
many people.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***"Verily God will not deal unjustly with man in aught: it is man that
wrongs his own soul." (10:44)***

And now we end the discussion of signs and catastrophes here even though
there is still a great deal which could be said, but this brief
discussion is sufficient for us in this short study.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why did the discussion on signs and catastrophes continue for three
lessons?  
 2. What ill effects does a uniform and monotonous life have? Have you
ever seen a person who has a high life style, suffer?  
 3. What can we surmise from the light and darkness in the world of
creation?  
 4. Do all of the difficulties which exist in society relate to Creation
or are we also responsible?  
 5. To do away with social inequalities, does a correct way exist? What
duty do we have towards the deprived?


