Prelude
=======

The most salient feature of our Islamic revolution is its Islamic nature
and the most prominent characteristic of Islam is its personality
building aspect based on Divine standards.

Our aim is to prepare an interesting, logic-based and rigorous
collection of papers for the general public on the one hand, and for the
youth in particular so that they could, under existing Islamic
conditions, build a sturdy faith which could in the long run influence
their behavior and also be used as an impetus for further studies.

This collection which has been prepared with special precision and
initiatives could pave the way for those who need to acquire the Islamic
principles on faith for both their personal interests or for
instruction.

This collection has been written and prepared by Ayatullah Nasir Makarim
Shirazi, a profound pioneer and initiator of religious discussions in
the Qom Seminary for the last forty years.

The instructors who wish to teach these lectures to their students
should make note of the following points:

1. These lessons should be accompanied with historic evidence and
interesting observations based on current affairs.

2. The students’ preferences and previous knowledge should be considered
in teaching these lessons. A question and answer approach should be used
during instruction.

3. The relevant Qur’anic verses on which the lecture is based should be
elegantly written on the board and the students should be presented with
a literal translation of the verse under consideration. This will lay
the foundation for their familiarity with the Holy Qur’an. It is
recommended that the relevant verse be recited by one and repeated by
the students in unison.

4. If it is not necessary to cover one lecture in one sitting: it could
be covered within two sessions.

5. There are subtle and detailed points hidden in each lecture. The
lecturer is well advised to study the lecture beforehand in order to
bring up those points during the presentation.

6. These lectures are prepared for the students of junior-high school
and high school, for both boys and girls, and for the general public who
wish to improve their knowledge of the principles of the Islamic faith.

7. Giving prizes to those who successfully pass the exams based on these
lectures is highly recommended.

8. Students who are exposed to these lectures might have some
theological questions in mind. The following sources could be used as
references in order to arrive at appropriate answers: "The Creator of
the Universe," "In search of Allah," and "Religious Questions and
Answers."


