Lesson 20: God’s Justice and the issue of Eternity
==================================================

We know that the Holy Qur’an directly speaks of the eternal punishment
to be given to the *kuffar*. That is, it speaks about eternity.

***“God has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the kafirs, the
fire of hell,’ therein shall they dwell,’ sufficient is it for them; for
them is the curse of God, and an en during punishment. “(9:68)***

Just as in the verse following that, the Qur’an promises the believing
men and the believing women gardens in Paradise forever.

***“God has promised to believers, men and women, gardens under which
rivers flow, to dwell therein and beautiful mansions in gardens of
everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the good pleasure of God,
that is, the supreme felicity.” (9:72)***

This question then arises and that is, how can one accept that in one’s
lifetime of eighty or one hundred years, one commits evil deeds and then
for eternity — millions of years — is punished.

Of course, this is not important as to rewards because the ocean of
God’s Mercy is very great and however much greater is the reward, it
shows greater virtue and mercy but as to evil deeds, they are punished
for eternity because of limited sins. How can this be reconciled with
God’s justice? Should a balance not exist between punishment and reward?

Answer: In order to reach a final solution to this discussion, several
points need to be noted:

a. Punishments on the Day of Resurrection do not resemble punishments in
this world. For instance, a person is found guilty of aggression and
plunder and he spends some time in prison whereas the punishment at the
Judgment takes the form of efforts of one’s deeds and the
particularities of a person’s acts.

In clearer terms, the difficulties which one bears in the other world
are the direct result of his deeds. The Holy Qur’an explains this very
clearly where it says,

***“Then on that Day, not a soul will be wronged in the least and you
shall but be repaid the meeds of your past deeds. “(36:54) “***

With one simple example, we can visualize this truth that a person who
goes after narcotics and alcoholic drinks and no matter how much one
explains that these things will ruin him, and sicken his heart and
destroy his nerves, he does not listen.

He spends several weeks or months drowned in these killing pleasures and
gradually develops ulcers, heart disease, nerve disease and then he
spends tens of years until the end of his life suffering because of this
and he groans night and day.

Can one object here why does a person who only sinned for several weeks
or months have to suffer for tens of years?

It is readily stated in response that this is the result of his own
actions. Even if he were to live longer than the Prophet Noah and were
to live for tens of thousands of years and we were to continuously see
him in pain and anguish, we would say that this is something he brought
upon himself with his deeds.

Punishment on the Day of Judgment is like this.

Thus, no one can object to the justice of the situation.

b. This is wrong that some people assume that the time limit of the
punishment must be the same extent as the sin because the relation
between a sin and punishment is not a temporal one. It depends upon the
result and quality of the sin.

For instance, it is possible that a person in one second kills an
innocent person and according to the laws of some countries, he is given
life imprisonment. Here we see that the time of the sin was one quickly
passing second, whereas the punishment is for tens of years. No one
considers this to be oppressive.

Why? Because the question here is not one of days or weeks or months or
years. It depends upon the quality of the sin and its result.

c. Eternity in hell and eternal punishment only belongs to those people
who have closed all doors to salvation for themselves and they have
drowned themselves in corruption, licentiousness, kufr and hypocrisy so
that the darkness of sin takes over their entire being and, as a result,
that person takes on the color of sin and kufr.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Nay, those who seek gain in evil and are girt round by their sins —
they are companions of the fire: therein shall they abide (forever).
“(2:81)***

These kinds of individuals have completely cut off their connection with
God and have closed all doors to their salvation and well-being.

These kinds of individuals are like birds which purposefully break their
own wings, pull out their feathers, are obliged to walk forever upon the
earth and are deprived of flying through the skies.

Noticing the three points given above clarifies the issue that eternal
punishment which belongs to a particular group of hypocrites or kufar
does not oppose the principle of justice. This is the ominous result of
their deeds themselves. The Divine Prophets had previously told them
that their deeds would have these results.

It is clear that if individuals are ignorant and the invitation of the
prophets not are known to them and if they commit evil deeds out of
ignorance, they will not receive such a difficult punishment.

It is also necessary to point out that verses of the Holy Qur’an and
Islamic Traditions are used because the ocean of Divine Mercy is so
great and extensive that a large group of transgressors are included.
Some by means of intercession; some by means of forgiveness and some
because of small, good deeds which they performed. God, in His
greatness, gives great reward for those small, good deeds.

And another group, after they have been punished for a time in hell, and
have been purified, they will return because of Divine Mercy.

The only group remaining is the one which has enmity towards the truth
and commit oppression, corruption and hypocrisy so that their whole
being is covered in oppression, *kufr* and faithlessness.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. How is it that some people think that eternity does not conform to
Divine Justice?  
 2. Are the punishments in the other world similar to the punishment in
this world? If not, what are they like?  
 3. Does justice demand that there be a balance between the time of a
sin and its punishment?  
 4. Who will receive eternal punishment?  
 5. Who will receive Divine Forgiveness?


