Lesson 23: Why are the Prophets Free of Sin and Error?
======================================================

Without doubt, more important than anything else, a prophet must attract
the trust of the general public in such a way that his words contain no
possibility of being lies or erroneous, otherwise, his position of
leadership will be a shaky one.

If they are not immaculate, using the excuse that the prophets have
erred, people who seek the truth from what they say will begin to doubt
their invitation. It will not be accepted, or, at least, their words
will not be accepted with all of their hearts.

This reason which can be called ‘trustworthiness’ is one of the most
important reasons for their being immaculate.

In other words, how is it possible that God give His Commands for His
people to follow a person who is not truthful for if this person were to
err or sin, people would not follow him. If they do, they have erred and
if they do not, they have weakened his position of leadership, in
particular, since the position of the leadership of the prophets
completely differs with the leadership of others for people receive
their entire program of life from the prophets.

Because of this, we see that the great commentators speak about the
verse,

***“Obey God and obey the Prophet and those charged with authority among
you.” (4:59)***

saying that the command for Absolute obedience is because the Prophet is
immaculate as well as ‘being charged with authority’. The pure leaders
like the Holy Prophet are referred to as ‘being charged with authority’.
If not, God would never give the command to unconditional obedience to
them.

Another way of proving the immaculateness of the Holy Prophet in
relation to any sin is that any factor of sin is condemned to defeat
within the very being of the Holy Prophet.

The explanation of this is: when we turn to ourselves, we see that we,
too, are immaculate in relation to some sins or evil or unacceptable
deeds.

Note the following examples:

Can you find an intelligent person who thinks about eating fire or trash
or filth?

Can you find an intelligent person who will walk naked through the
streets and bazaars?

Clearly not! If we saw such deeds from someone, we will be assured of
the fact that he is no longer normal and has become insane because an
intelligent person would never do these things.

When we analyze such behavior, we see that the ugliness of such deeds is
so clear that an intelligent person would never even consider them.

It is here that we can imagine what this short phrase means and say that
every intelligent and healthy person is ‘free of’ unacceptable deeds.

From this stage, we take a step further. We see some people who are free
from unacceptable deeds.

For instance, an aware physician and expert who knows the various kinds
of microbes well is never prepared to drink the polluted water of the
dirty clothes of a person who has one of the most dangerous contagious
diseases whereas an illiterate person , perhaps, would be indifferent to
such a thing.

With another simple example, we reach the point that however much the
level of a person rises in the area of awareness, they are less likely
to do evil or ugly deeds.

Taking into consideration that if a person’s faith and awareness were to
rise and have so much faith in God and His court of justice, so that
everything that he sees is present before his eyes, such a person will
be free of all sin and every ugly deed in relation to him, like walking
naked through the streets, will be in our eyes only.

For such a person, the property of something forbid den is just like the
flames of fire, and just like we do not put fire in our mouths, he does
not put something which is forbidden into his mouth.

We can then conclude that the prophets, because of the extraordinary
knowledge, awareness and faith which they have, tame the motives of sin
and the most exciting factors causing sin will not prevail upon his
intellect and faith. This is why we say that the prophets are
immaculate; they are insured against sin.

How can the Station of Purity be a Honor?
-----------------------------------------

Some people who do not understand the meaning of purity and the factors
of immaculateness and being free from sin are not aware of the fact that
if God prevents one from sin and destroys the factors which cause sin,
this will not be an honor for that person!

This is coercive purity and therefore is not considered to be a virtue.

But with the discussion which he had above, this issue is very clear:

The freedom of the prophets from sin in no sense is a coercive one.
Rather, it is born from their strong faith and absolute certainty, their
awareness and extraordinary knowledge and this is the greatest honor for
them.

If an aware physician takes care of and treats a person with the worst
of diseases is this a sign of his being forced to do so?

If such a person were to follow the rules of health, would this be
Considered to be a virtue?

If a person, a lawyer, were to take the disgraceful considerations into
effect of a dreadful crime and try to prevent it, is this a virtue?

Thus, we reach this conclusion that the fact that the prophets are free
from sin is both one of their own choice and great honor for them.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. How many branches are there to being immaculate?  
 2. If prophets were not free from sin, what would happen?  
 3.  What is the truth of the station of immaculateness?  
 4. Other than the examples given here, can you point out another
example of someone who is immaculate in relation to another group?  
 5. Is the immaculateness of the prophets coercive or a result of free
will? Why?


