Lesson 24: The Best Way to come to Know the Prophets
====================================================

Without doubt, accepting the claims of every pretender to prophethood is
unintelligent and illogical.

It was possible that the claims to prophethood and the mission on behalf
of God were true but the possibility also existed that an opportunist
and a cheat was introducing himself as a prophet. Because of this, it is
necessary that certain criteria be established for evaluating the claims
of the prophets and their relationship with God.

In order to reach such a determination, various ways exist, the most
important of which are two:

1. To study the content of the invitation of the prophets and to collect
the laws and signs.

2. Miracles and deeds which exceed normal human ones.

Let us be allowed to first speak about miracles.

There are some people who are surprised by the word ‘miracle’ or
consider miracles to be equivalent to fairy tales and myths whereas if
we look carefully at the meaning of the word ‘miracle’, we would not get
such an incorrect picture of it.

A miracle is not an act which is not possible and without reason or
cause. Rather a miracle is something as simple as an interpretation of
an extraordinary deed, the performance of which is beyond the means of
normal people and can only be undertaken with the help from something
beyond nature.

Thus, a miracle has the following conditions:

1. Something which is possible and accepted.

2. Normal people and even geniuses, by relying on the strong power of
humanity cannot do the deed.

3. The miracle-maker must be so certain of what he is doing that he can
challenge others to try.

4. No one else was able to offer these miracles and everyone was
impotent before them.  
 Miracles must be connected with the claims of prophethood or imamate
(thus any work which is extraordinary and comes from someone other than
a prophet or pure Imam is not called a miracle, but a blessing).

Several Clear Examples
----------------------

Many people are familiar with the miracles of the Prophet Jesus, peace
be upon him, who was able to raise the dead to life and heal the
incurably sick.

Is there any clear and intelligent reason why a human being, after
death, is not able to return to life?

Is there any scientific or intelligent reason why a person with an
incurable disease cannot be cured?

Doubtlessly, however, the power which a human being has, under the
present conditions, is not sufficient to be able to raise the dead and
give them life or to treat some diseases, even if all the doctors of the
world were to Work together and give each other of their experience and
knowledge.

But what is to prevent a person with a divine power and with particular
awareness which has come from God’s endless ocean of knowledge, to be
able to give life to the body of a dead person or to cure one who has an
incurable disease?

Science says, “I do not know and I do not have the ability,” but it
would never say that it is impossible or unintelligent.

And other examples: It is not possible for any human being to journey to
the moon without making use of a space ship but at the same time that
there is nothing to prevent a superior force and a horse which is
stronger than horses which we know to be placed at the disposal of a
person and without using a space ship, that person go to the moon or
planets above it.

If a person can do such an extraordinary feat, and along with that,
claim prophet hood, and ask others to try and challenge everyone and
everyone prove to be impotent in relation to him, we will find certainty
that it is from God because it is not possible that God give such a
strength to a human being who lies and would cause His creatures to be
misled. (Note this with care).

Miracles Should Not be Confused with Superstitions
--------------------------------------------------

Extremism, of the right or the left, has always been the source of
corruption and darkening of the truth.

As to miracles, this very statement is true. Whereas some pseudo
intellectuals speedily and directly deny miracles, another group tries
to extend miracles and take the weak traditions and fairy-tale
superstitions which were most often done with the help of the enemies
and mix them with miracles and the scientific visage of miracles of the
prophets and cover them with fairy tale like stories and unclarities so
that the real miracles of these kinds of stories not be known.

It is because of this that our great scholars were always very careful
to avoid such mistakes in Islamic Traditions relating to miracles.

Also, it is because of this that the ‘Science of Biography’ came into
being so that the methods of Traditions be known and that the correct
and the weak traditions be separated from one another, and that the
useless not mixed with the truth.

The policies of the colonialists and the extremists today have been busy
trying to mix the pure with the impure and in this way give an
unscientific image to all of them. We must be very aware of these
conspiracies of the enemies.

What is the Difference Between Miracles and Extraordinary Deeds?
----------------------------------------------------------------

We have often heard that a group of ascetics have undertaken
extraordinary feats. People who have seen these deeds are not few. This
is a reality, not a fairy tale.

It is here that this question arises as to what difference is there
between this extraordinary work and the miracles of the prophets? And
what criteria should we use to separate them?  
 Here the question arises as to what the difference is between these
extraordinary feats and the miracle of the prophets and what criteria we
use to distinguish them.

This question has several responses, the two clearest of which are:

1. An ascetic always does work which is limited In other words, no
ascetic is ready to do what you ask him to do. He undertakes an
extraordinary feat which he himself wants to do, that is, something
which he has practiced a great deal, learned how to do well and at which
is an expert.

The reason for this is clear because the power or force of every human
being is limited and in one or several things only can he attain skill.

But the extraordinary deeds of the prophets had no limits, no conditions
to be able to perform them. They can, whenever they want, perform a
miracle which is suggested to them because they receive help from the
endless power of the Creator and we know that God’s power is not
limited, whereas the power of the human being is very limited.

2. The work done by an ascetic, another ascetic does the same thing in
the same way, that is, it is not beyond the power of the human being.
Because of this, an ascetic who does extraordinary feats never invites
others to try and to do what he has done and he does not challenge him
because he knows that in his town or in the surrounding areas, there are
other individuals such as himself who can do the same thing.

But the prophets, with complete assurance and certainty, challenge
others and they say, “Even if you were to bring together all of
humanity, they could not do what we are doing or can do.”

This difference is also true in relation to magic. These refer to the
two differences which we have mentioned and they divide a miracle from
magic. (Note this with care).

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why do we call a miracle, a miracle?  
 2. Is a miracle an exception to the law of causes?  
 3. How many differences can you name between the work of the prophets
and that of the ascetic and magician?  
 4. What is the main condition for a miracle?  
 5. Have you ever seen something which is similar to a miracle?


