Lesson 26: A Glance at the Miracle of the Qur’an
================================================

What do the letters stand for at the beginning of some of the Surahs?

We see that the beginning verse of many of the surahs of the Holy Qur’an
are letters, like alif lam mim, alif lam mim rah and ya sin.

One of the secrets and the philosophy behind these letters, according to
some of the Islamic traditions, is that God is showing the great
miraculous and eternal quality of the Holy Qur’an.

That is, how can the Qur’an make use of these simple letters and create
such words which are greater than the letters while every child can
repeat them and in truth the appearance of this important fact is one of
the most important miraculous issues.

Now this question arises. From what point of view is the Qur’an a
miracle? It is only because of its simplicity and tone, or, in other
words, the sweetness and clarity of its expression and the extraordinary
influence of it or is it because of something else?

The truth is that whenever we look at the Holy Qur’an from different
points of view, each one presents another image of its miracle. For
instance:

1. Eloquence: The sweetness and extraordinary attraction of the
miraculous words and concepts.

2. The expression of the highest content from every point of view,
especially beliefs which lack any sort of superstition.

3. Scientific miracle: That is, the uncovering of issues which human
beings during that age had not come to know.

4. To foresee and speak directly and accurately about some future events
(the hidden news of the Qur’an).

5. The lack of contradiction, disputes, disorderliness and others.

A discussion about each of these five areas is very extensive but we
will discuss some of them here.  
  

1. Eloquence
------------

We know that every discussion has to aspects: letter and content.

Whatever letters and words of beauty contain the necessary unity and are
free of complicated and complex expression and also the sentence
structure is such that they are exactly what one desires to hear and
they attract the heart, that expression is called eloquence.

The Qur’an has both of these two qualities to the highest extent
possible so that to date no one has been able to bring verses and surahs
with such attraction, sweetness and tone.

In the previous lessons, we saw that Walid ibn Mugharayah, a skilled
Arab linguist, was enraptured by hearing a verse of the Holy Qur’an and
was made to think about how to express something to the Quraysh which
would lessen the Holy Prophet in the eyes of the people, finally thought
of the word ‘bewitchment’ and called Muhammad a be This is what they
called the Prophet of Islam, even though they wanted, in this way, to
condemn him, but, in truth, they were unable to do so.

At the same time, this calling the Prophet a magician is to admit to the
extraordinary effects of the Qur’an in the sense that it cannot be
explained and justified in simple terms and it must be recognized as
being something miraculous.

But instead of them accepting the truth, and considering it to be a
miracle, and gaining faith, they took the way of myth and legend. They
were led astray and said that it was magic.

In the history of Islam, it can very often be seen that whenever harsh
individuals went to see the Prophet, or hear verses of the Holy Qur’an,
they changed their direction in life and allowed the light of the Holy
Qur’an to guide them. This well shows that the attractions and eloquence
of the Qur’an are miraculous.

We do not need to go far to see that whenever those people who are
familiar with the Arabic language read the Qur’an, and they repeat it,
they receive pleasure; they do not tire or become satiated.

The words of the Holy Qur’an are very accurate, are mixed with the
purity of expression, and, at the same time, are clear and enlightening
as well as, when necessary, they are firm.

It is necessary to point out that the Arabic language at that time had
progressed a great deal as a language and examples of poetry during the
Age of Ignorance, before the appearance of Islam, are among the best
poems from the point of view of language.

It was famous that every year, the greatest literary men of the Hijaz
would gather together and would offer the best examples of their poems
in a commercial-literary center in the ukaz bazaar. One poem would be
chosen as the best of the year. They would write it down and recite it
in the Ka’bah. At the time of the Prophet, seven of these still existed
and were called mu‘alaqat sab’.

But after the descent of the Holy Qur’an, they paled in comparison to
the eloquence of the Holy Qur’an, so that one after another, they were
removed from there and were forgotten in history.

The commentators upon the various verses of the Qur’an express all of
the wondrous qualities of the verses so that reference can be made to
them to gain a familiarity with it.

A familiarity with the Holy Qur’an shows that this saying of the Prophet
of Islam, is not an exaggeration, “The Holy Qur’an has a beautiful
exterior and a deep and subtle interior. The wonders of the Qur’an can
never be counted and the miraculous qualities of the Qur’an will never
age.”

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, peace be upon him, a great student
of the Holy Qur’an, also says in the Nahj al-Balaghah, “The spring of
hearts is in the Qur’an and it is the source of the springs of
knowledge. There is no better way to remove the rust of the hearts and
souls of people than through the Holy Qur’an.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the philosophy behind the beginning letters of some of the
verses of the Holy Qur’an?  
 2. Is the Holy Qur’an a miracle from only one point of view? Or from
several points of view?  
 3. Why did the opponents of the Holy Qur’an refer to the Prophet of
Islam as a ‘bewitcher’?  
 4. What is the difference between eloquence and bewitching?  
 5. What age did the mu’alaqat sab’ refer to and what does it mean?


