Lesson 30: The Prophet of Islam is the “Seal of Prophecy”
=========================================================

A Clear Meaning of ‘Seal’
-------------------------

The Prophet of Islam is the last Prophet of God and the hierarchy of
prophethood ends with him. This is one of the necessary precepts of
Islam.

What is meant by necessary is that whoever joins the ranks of the
Muslims must understand that all Muslims believe this and that this is
among their decisive beliefs. That  
 is, just as those who have dealings with Muslims know that they
emphasize the principle of unity, they must also know that the seal of
the prophethood by the Prophet of Islam is also agreed to by all and
there is no group of Muslims who are in anticipation of the coming of
another prophet.

In truth, the movement of humanity upon its way towards perfection has
passed through various states with sending of the prophets and they have
attained a level upon this way so that they can stand on their own two
feet. That is, by relying upon the universal teachings of Islam, they
can solve their problems.

In other words, Islam is the final law and it is the age of maturity of
humanity. From the point of view of belief, it is the most perfect of
contents of religious thought and from the point of view of practice, it
has so been formulated that it is coordinated with every age and every
generation.

The Reason for the “Seal of the Prophecy”
-----------------------------------------

In order to prove this, we have many reasons, the most clear of which
are three:

1. The necessity of this issue — we have pointed out that whoever deals
with Muslims, wherever in the world they may be, may come to know that
they believe in the seal of prophethood with the Prophet of Islam and
that if a person accepts Islam with sufficient reasons, they have no
choice but to accept the ending of prophethood with him. And as in the
previous lessons we have given sufficient proofs of this, we must also
accept this idea, which is one of the necessities of this religion.

2. Verses of the Holy Qur’an are also clear proof of the end of
prophethood with the Prophet of Islam.

***“Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but (he is) the
Apostle of God and the Seal of the Prophets: and God has full knowledge
of all things.” (33:40)***

This verse was revealed when the idea of foster children was prevalent
among the Arabs. They would accept a child who had a different mother
and father as their adopted child and they accepted the child into their
home as if it was their own child. The child was Mahram and would
inherit, etc.

But Islam came and did away with this ignorant custom saying foster
children are not covered by the Divine Law like real children. Among
them was Zayd, the foster child of the Prophet of Islam who was
considered to be a child of the Prophet.

Thus the Holy Qur’an says that you should only describe the real
qualities of the Prophet which are two: Divine mission and Seal of
Prophethood instead of introducing him as the father of one of these
individuals.

This shows that the seal of prophethood by the Prophet of Islam was
clear for all, permanent and decisive as was his mission.

The only question which remains here is, “What exactly is meant by
‘seal’?”

Seal means to end something. For instance, a seal is placed at the end
of a letter and if we see that sometimes a ring is called a ‘seal’, it
is because in that age, it was used in place of the signature of a name.
Whoever at the end of his letter sealed it with the ring in which his
name was carved, used it as a seal and every image on the ring was
particular to that person.

In the Islamic Traditions, we read, “When the Holy Prophet wanted to
write a letter for the kings and leaders of these times, and invited
them to Islam, his servant told him that the kings would not accept a
letter unless it had a seal. The letters of the Holy Prophet to that
time did not have a seal. He ordered that a ring be made for him in
which was imprinted, “There is no god but God and Muhammad is the
Prophet of God.” The Prophet, after this, ordered that his letters be
sealed with that from then on.

Thus, the meaning of seal is clear.

1. We have many traditions which prove the seal of the prophethood of
the Prophet of Islam, among which are:

Among the Traditions recorded by Jabir ibn Abdullah Ansari, he records
the Prophet as saying, “Among the religions, Islam is like a house which
has been built and completed and made beautiful and only one mud brick
remains; whoever enters through there or looks through that, says, ‘How
beautiful,’ but this has an empty place. I am that last mud brick and
all prophets end with me.” *(Tafsir Majma’ al-Bayan,).*

Imam Sadiq says, “The permissible of Muhammad is permissible until the
Day of Resurrection and the forbidden is forbidden until the Day of
Resurrection.” (Usul al-Kafi, volume 1, p.58).

In the famous Traditions of the Shiites and Sunnite from the Prophet, we
read that he said to ‘Ali, “You are like Aaron in relation to Moses in
relation to me, other than the fact that after me there will be no
prophet,” and tens of other Traditions.

As to the seal of the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam, there are
some questions which we should turn our attention towards.

1. Some people say that if the sending of the Prophets was through
Divine Grace, why should the people of our age be deprived of this
Grace? Why do you not find a new way to guide the people of our age?

But they are negligent of one point and that is that the deprivation in
our age is not because they do not merit it, but because humanity’s
thoughts and awareness have ended and by understanding the precepts of
the Holy Prophet of Islam, they can continue them.

It is perhaps a good idea to give an example here.

The prophets, who came and brought a law or a book, were five: Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, peace be upon them and Muhammad, peace and the
mercy of God be upon him and his descendants. They made efforts in a
particular area of the history for the guidance and perfection of
humanity and this passed beyond a certain stage. The second phase of the
prophets was handed over and has reached a level whereby they have found
their final state and the strength to continue the way.

It is just like a five stages study program which must be followed to be
completed.

If a physician does not go to school and college, it does not mean that
he does not have merit, it is because of this that this amount of
knowledge which he gains will help him to solve the scientific
difficulties he faces.

2. As human society is continuously changing, how can we with the
permanent laws of Islam, answer the needs of that?

In response, we say that Islam has two kinds of laws: one is a series of
laws which resemble permanent qualities of particular human beings, like
the necessity for the belief in unity, the implementation of the
principles of justice, struggle against any kind of oppression.

But another part is a series of general principles which, with other
changes and by the doing away of them, they take on a new form and they
answer the problems of each age.  
 For instance, a universal principle of Islam is: respect the agreements
that you make and be loyal.

It is clear that with the passing of time, new social and commercial and
political ties will be made whereby a person can answer them by taking
the major principle into consideration.

We have another principle, *la zarar*, which says that any law which
will harm an individual or society must be limited.

You can see to what extent these universal principles of Islam are
effective in solving problems and we have many such laws in Islam.

3. There is no doubt that leadership is a vital part of Islam with the
lack of a prophet and the occultation of his successor, the issue of
leadership will be terminated. Because of the principle of the seal of
prophethood by the prophet of Islam, we cannot wait in anticipation for
another prophet. Does this not have harmful implications for an Islamic
society?

In response, we say that for this era, the necessary things have been
suggested through *vilayat-i-faqih*, the leadership of religious
jurisprudents who have the necessary conditions of knowledge, piety and
political awareness. The means of recognizing such a leader also has
been clearly expressed in Islam. There is thus no need for concern in
this area.

Thus, *vilayat-i-faqih* is the end of the line of the prophets, the
leadership of a religious jurisprudent who has all of the necessary
conditions so that Islamic society is not left without a guardian.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the exact meaning of ‘seal’?  
 2. How can we use the Holy Qur’an to understand the meaning of ‘seal?  
 3. Why are the people of our age deprived of the Divine prophets?  
 4. How many kinds of laws are there in Islam and how do they answer our
needs today?  
 5. Can an Islamic society exist without a leader? How can you solve the
issue of leadership in our times?


