Lesson 31: When did Imamology Begin?
====================================

We know that after the death of the Prophet of Islam, Muslims were
divided into two groups:

One group believed that the Holy Prophet did not designate a successor
to himself. This group believes that he left it up to his nation to meet
and decide among themselves who their leader should be. This group is
called Sunnite.

The other group believes that the Holy Prophet was infallible,
immaculate and free of sin and error and had knowledge so that he could
spiritually and materially lead the people and preserve the essence of
Islam so that it would find continuation.

They believe that selection of such a person could only come from God
through the Holy Prophet of Islam and that the Holy Prophet did this and
he selected Imam ‘Ali as his successor. This group is called Shiites.  
 Our goal in these brief discussions is to follow-up these issues by
using intellectual and historic reasoning verses, of the Holy Qur’an and
Traditions of the Holy Prophet.  
 But before we begin the main discussion, several points should be
mentioned.

1. Will this Discussion cause Differences?
------------------------------------------

The moment that the discussion centers on imamate, some people
immediately say something to the effect that, “Today is not a day for
such discussions!”

Today is the day to discuss Muslim unity and any discussion about the
successor to the Holy Prophet only causes differences and separation!

Today we have common enemies and we have to do something about them,
namely, Zionism and eastern and western colonialism. Conflicting issues
must be put aside.

But this way of thinking is completely wrong.

In the first place, that which causes differences and separation is
discussions and debates which are based on prejudice, illogic and
hatred.

But discussions which are logical and reasonable free of discrimination
and quarreling, held in a friendly environment, not only are not a cause
for differences of opinion and separation, but rather they decrease the
distances and common points of belief are strengthened.

In my journey to the Hijaz, with the intention of the pilgrimage to
God’s House, I held many discussions with the scholars and learned Sunni
men. Both of us felt that these discussions not only were not
ineffective, but that they caused greater unity and understanding; they
decreased the distance between the two sects and everyone washed away
their prejudices.

The important thing is that which will become clear in these lessons; we
have many points in common with one another and we can rely upon them in
face of our Common enemy.

Sunnis are divided into four sects: Hanafis, Hanbalis, Shafi’s, and
Malikis. Existence of these four groups have not caused separation among
them and when they, at least, accept Shi’ism as a fifth school of
thought, many of the differences fall away. Recently, the great Muftis
and head of the al-Ahzar University (in Cairo), Shaykh Shaltut, took an
effective step and formally announced the acceptance of the Shi’ite
school of thought among the Sunnis.

This was a step towards the understanding of Islam and establishing
friendly relations between himself and the late Burujerdi, the great
leader of the Shi’ites.

Secondly, we believe that Islam is crystallized in Shi’ism. While we
have respect for all of the Islamic sects, we believe that Shi’ism can
better introduce the real Islam in all of its dimensions and solve the
problems related to the leadership of the Islamic community.

Why should we not teach our children this school with reason and logic
and if we do not do this, clearly we have committed an act of treason.

We are certain that the Holy Prophet selected his successor. What is
wrong with following up this belief with reason and logic?

But in these lessons, we must be careful that the religious emotions of
others are not slighted.

Thirdly, in order to destroy the principles and unity of Muslims, the
enemies of Islam tell such lies and so instigate Sunnis against
Shi’ites, tell so many lies and so insult Shi’ites about the Sunnis so
that in some countries, in general, they have grown distant from each
other.

When we discuss the issue of imamate in the method described above, and
mention the points which the Shi’ites emphasize, and we use proof from
the books of the Sunnis, it becomes clear that the propaganda was lies
and that the common enemy has tried to poison the environment.

As an example, in one of my trips to the Hijaz, I held a meeting with
one of the important religious leaders of the Sunnis. He said, “I have
heard that the Shi’ites have a Qur’an which is different from our
Qur’an.”

I was very surprised. I said: “Proving that this was not true is very
simple. I invite you or your representative to come to Iran after the
hajj umrah, without any previous notification. You will see that on
every street, in every bazaar or mosque or home, there are Qur’ans. We
will go into any mosque that you choose, and study the Qur’ans there. So
that it becomes clear that our Qur’an and yours are exactly the same.
Most of the Qur’ans which we use are printed in the hijaz or in Egypt
and other Islamic countries.”

This very friendly conversation clearly did away with the amazing
misconceptions which had been planted in the mind of one of the famous
religious leaders.

The point is that a discussion on imamate, in this manner, confirms the
unity of Islamic society, helps in clarifying the truths and decreasing
the differences of opinion.

2. What is Imamate?
-------------------

Imam means leader, leader of the Muslims. In the principles of belief of
the Shi’ites, an immaculate or pure Imam refers to a person who is the
successor to the Holy Prophet in all areas, with the difference that the
Holy Prophet is the founder of the school and the Imam is the guardian
and preserver of it. Revelation was revealed to the Holy Prophet but not
to the Imams. They learned from the Holy Prophet and they had an
extraordinary knowledge.

From the point of view of Shi’ism, an immaculate Imam does not just mean
leader of Islamic rule, but rather, includes spiritual and material,
internal and external leadership as well. In other words, they are
responsible for leadership on all levels; they are responsible for the
preservation and guardianship of Islamic beliefs and ideology, without
any errors or deviation and they are the selected people of God.

But the Sunnis do not see imamate in this way. They only understand
imamate as leader of the rule of Islamic society. In other words,
leadership in every age and time is the caliph of the Prophet and the
Imam of the Muslims!

Of course, in the future lessons we will prove that in every age and
era, there must be a divine representative; a prophet or a pure Imam
must be upon the earth to preserve the precepts of truth and guide those
who long for the truth.

If one day this person is hidden from the people, a person, as his
representative, is responsible for the preservation of the precepts and
the formation of a government.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the reason behind people saying that today is not a day to
hold such discussions about imamate?  
 2. In response to this, how many answers can you give for the necessity
of this discussion?  
 3. How does the enemy cause disputes among the Muslims and what is the
way to seal these breaks?  
 4. Can you recall an example of a dispute which is caused by the
enemy?  
 5.  What is the meaning of imamate in Shi’ism and what is the
difference with the definition given by the Sunnis?


