Lesson 33: The Conditions and Special Qualities of the Imam
===========================================================

Before anything else, in the discussion of this issue, we must note ore
necessary point and that is that:

It can clearly be seen in the Holy Qur’an that the position of
leadership is the highest station that a human being can possibly attain
and that it is even higher than the station of Prophethood and having a
Divine mission because in the story of Abraham, the idol destroyer,
peace be upon him, it says,

***“And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commands which he fulfilled: He said, ‘I will make thee a leader to the
nations.’ He pleaded, ‘And also (Imams) from my offspring?’ He answered,
‘But My promise is not within the reach of evil-doers’” (2:124)***

In this way, Abraham, after moving through the station of prophethood
and his Divine mission and victory in the various Divine tests made of
him, is then given the valuable position of external and internal,
material and spiritual leadership of the people.

The Prophet of Islam, peace and the mercy of God be upon him and his
descendants, also, in addition to the position or station of prophethood
and mission, has the station of leadership and imamate as well. Others
among the prophets also had this station. This is one point to note.

On the other hand, we know that the conditions and qualities necessary
for the receiving of any position relate to the duties and
responsibilities which a person must perform in that position or
station. That is, however much the station is elevated, the
responsibilities are heavier and greater, in the same proportion, the
conditions and qualities necessary for the position are greater.

For instance, in Islam, a person who has the responsibility to judge and
even to bear witness and becomes the congregational prayer leader must
be just. When the necessity for bearing witness arises or the duty to
recite the surah Hamd and another verse in the congregational ritual
prayer, justice is necessary, it is clear what conditions are honored in
order to reach the position or station of imamate, with the
extraordinary importance which it has.

In general, the following conditions are vital for an Imam.

1. Infallibility or Being Free From Sin and Error
-------------------------------------------------

An Imam, must, like a Prophet, have the station of purity, that is, be
free of sin and error, otherwise he cannot lead and be a model for the
people and receive the trust of society.

The Imam must consume the heart and soul of the people and his command
be accepted without questioning.

A person who has sinned can never receive such trust and from all points
of view, be trusted and confirmed.

How can a person who in his daily life commits errors, have his opinions
be relied upon in the work of society and be followed without
questioning.

Doubtlessly, a prophet must be immaculate and this quality is necessary
for the Imam as well, as we pointed out above.

This can be proven in another way as well. That is ‘the law of kindness’
which the existence of the prophet and Imam relies upon requires the
infallibility of the prophet or Imam and the mission which we pointed
out in the last lesson, will be incomplete.

 

2. Overflowing with Knowledge
-----------------------------

The Imam, like a Prophet, is a place of refuge of knowledge for the
people. He must know all principles and practices of the religion, the
external and internal meanings of the Holy Qur’an, the Traditions of the
Prophet and whatever relates to Islam, and, in a complete way, be aware
because he is the preserver and guardian of the Divine Law as well as
the leader and guide of the people.

A person who when a complicated issue is presented either becomes
conscious or asks another person for the answer, their knowledge and
information will not answer the needs of an Islamic society. They can
never be given the position or station of imamate and leadership of the
people.

In conclusion, the Imam must be the most aware and most knowledgeable
person in relation to the religion of God after the death of the Holy
Prophet who does not allow Islam to deviate.

3. Courage
----------

An Imam must be the bravest individual of Islamic society because
without that courage of the leader, it is not possible to accept him as
leader.

He must have courage in face of the difficult events of life and sudden
and unexpected happenings, courage before those who use coercion and who
are oppressive and courage before external and internal enemies of
Islam.

4. Austerity
------------

We know that those who are captives of the gold and attractions of this
world, are easily deceived and it is possible that they deviate from the
way of truth and justice.

Sometimes this happens by way of greed and sometimes by way of threats,
whereby the captive of this world is deviated from the straight path.

Imam must be above the possibilities of gifts of this world and not to
be a captive to it.

He must be free from any chains or bonds of the material world, from all
whims and lusts, from any ambition, from wealth and position so that he
cannot be deceived and influenced and he then surrender and compromise
because of these desires.

5. Ethical or Moral Attractions
-------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an says about the Holy Prophet:

***“It is part of the Mercy of God that you deal gently with them. Were
you to be severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from
about thee.” (3:159)***

Not only the Holy Prophet, but the Imam and any leader of society are in
need of goodness so that the people are magnetized towards him.

Without doubt, any kind of harshness and evil intentions towards the
people for the Prophet and Imam is a great defect and they are free from
any such defect, otherwise, many of the philosophies of existence would
not be fulfilled.

These are the most important conditions which the great Ulama have
mentioned for the Imam to have.

Of course, in addition to these five qualifies mentioned above, there
are other qualities in the Imam, as well, but we have just mentioned the
most basic ones.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why is the station of leadership of the highest station of a human
being?  
 2. Why do the Prophet of Islam and other prophets who brought a divine
law have the station of leadership or imamate?  
 3. If the Imam is not immaculate, what problem will arise?  
 4. What is all abundance of knowledge necessary for the Imam to have?  
 5. For what reason must the Imam be brave, austere and the most pure
from the point of view of attracting the ethics of the people?


