Lesson 34: Who has to Select the Imam?
======================================

A group of Muslims (Sunnis) believe that the Prophet of Islam (S) died
not having selected his successor and they believe that this
responsibility belongs to Muslims themselves to select their leader.

They undertake this act through Ijma (consensus) which is one of the
reasons given in the Divine Law.

They add that this program was implemented the first time for the first
caliph who was selected with the consensus of the Ummah.

And he selected the second caliph and introduced him as such.

And the second caliph selected a council of six people to select the
person who should succeed him.

This Council consisted of: Imam ‘Ali, peace be upon him, Uthman, Abdal
Rahman ibn Awf, Talha, Zubayr and Sa’d bin Abi Waqas.

This Council, with a majority of Sa’d ibn Waqas, Abdal Rahman and Talha
voted for Uthman. (The second caliph had directed that if the Council
should be divided three to three, the side that Abdal Rahman ibn Awf
(‘Uthman’s son-in-law) was on would be the person selected).

Towards the end of Uthman’s reign, the people arose against him for
several reasons and before he had a chance to select his successor or
select a Council, he was killed.

At this time, the majority of the people turned to ‘Ali, peace be upon
him, and selected him as their caliph.

They pledged their allegiance to him as the successor of the Prophet,
other than Mu’awiyah who was the governor of Damascus and who was
certain that Imam ‘Ali would not support him. He then raised the flag of
opposition which was the beginning of disgraceful events in the history
of Islam and caused the shedding of the blood of a great many innocent
people.

Here, in order to intellectually and historically clarify what happened,
several questions arise, a few of which will be mentioned here below.

1. Can the Ummah select the successor to the Prophet?
-----------------------------------------------------

The answer to this question is that if we take the meaning of imamate to
be external leadership of an Islamic society, the selection of a leader
on behalf of society with the vote of the people is possible.

But if we take imamate to mean that which we have previously mentioned
and as the Holy Qur’an has described, doubtlessly, no one other than God
can chose the Imam and the caliph.

The conditions for imamate, according to the commentaries on the Holy
Qur’an, is knowledge of all of the principles and practices of Islam, a
knowledge whose base is in heaven and relies upon the knowledge of the
Prophet so that he can guard and preserve the Divine Law of Islam.

Another condition is that Imam must be immaculate and infallible, free
from sin and error and is the selected of the Divine immaculateness so
that the station of imamate and spiritual and material, external and
internal leadership of the imamate can be assumed as well as austerity,
piety, courage which is necessary to confirm this important post.

The discrimination of these conditions can clearly only be done through
God and the Prophet. It is He Who knows in whose spirit immaculateness
has shown its rays, and it is He Who knows who has the highest knowledge
needed for leadership, the sufficient courage and spiritual strength.

Those who placed the selection of the Imam and the caliph of the Prophet
in the hands of the people, in truth, changed the meaning of imamate in
the Holy Qur’an and limited it to meaning only leadership and giving
organization to the affairs of this world of the people. Otherwise the
conditions of imamate in the general and complete sense can only be
determined by the Creator and it is He Who knows who has these
qualities.

The Holy Prophet, as well, could not have been selected by the vote of
the people, but must rather have most definitely been selected by God
Almighty, because other than God, no one can discern the necessary
qualities in the Prophet.

2. Did the Prophet not select a Person to succeed him?
------------------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that the precepts of Islam were universal and eternal
and according to the direct verses of the Holy Qur’an, special to no
time or place.

There is, also, no doubt that at the time of the death of the Holy
Prophet, the precepts of Islam had not moved beyond the Arabian
peninsula.

On the other hand, 13 years of the life of the Prophet in Mecca were
spent in struggle against polytheism and idol worship and 10 years of
the life of the Prophet, which began from the time of the migration to
Medina which was the period of the blossoming of Islam, was spent mainly
in conflicts and wars imposed upon him by the enemies.

Even though the Holy Prophet spent night and day endeavoring to have
Islam be better understood and to teach the precepts of Islam, but is it
clear that many of the Islamic issues needed more time and a person
similar to the Holy Prophet was needed to be able to do so and to accept
this heavy responsibility.

Beyond this, the foreseeing of future events and providing the
preliminaries for the school was among the most important tasks which
was something that every leader thought about and would never allow
himself to forget.

Beyond this, the Prophet of Islam had provided commands for all of the
affairs of life from the most simple possible. Could it be, then, that
he would not have provided for the important issue of the person who was
to succeed him and not determine the imamate for the Muslims?

The totality of these three directions are clear reasons why the Prophet
(S) most certainly took steps for the determination of his successor
which we will mention in the later lessons so that this logical reality
will become more clear, because the Holy Prophet was never negligent in
this area even though many political waves, after the Prophet, tried to
fill the people’s minds with the idea that he had neglected to select a
successor.

Can one really believe that considering that when the Holy Prophet left
the city for just a few days for a conflict (like Tabuk), he did not
leave Medina empty of his successor and he took steps to assign a person
to succeed him and act in his place, he not guarantee the future
generations after his death by selecting his successor but rather left
the Ummah in the middle of an abundant number of groups who had
differences of opinion on the method of the continuity of Islam?

It is clear that the lack of assigning a successor would have been a
great error for Islam which was recently formed and developing. Our
intellect and logic tells us that such a situation is impossible to have
come from the Prophet of Islam.

Those who say that this was the responsibility of the Ummah must at
least show that the Prophet directed this issue whereas no such proof of
this is offered

3. Consensus and Council
------------------------

Let us assume that the Prophet of Islam ignored this vital issue and the
Muslims themselves were duty-bound to choose his successor, but we know
that consensus means the consensus of the Muslims and such a consensus
did not exist in relation to the first caliph.

Only a group of the Companions who lived in Medina made the decision to
do this and the rest of the cities of Islam were not in agreement and
did not participate in this decision. In Medina itself, ‘Ali, peace be
upon him, and a large number of the Bani Hashim, did not participate in
any way. Thus, such a consensus cannot be accepted as such.

And if this method be correct, why did the first caliph not use the same
method in choosing the second caliph?

Why did he personally select his successor? If the determination of one
person is sufficient, the Holy Prophet, who was of the highest station
should have his method of selection be accepted and if the later
allegiance of the people would solve this problem, in relation to the
Holy Prophet, they solve it better.

Beyond this, a third difficulty arises as to the third caliph and that
is why did the second caliph not use the method which was used to select
the first caliph? Why did he ignore it as well as the tradition which
had been used in his own case, that is, neither did he choose Consensus
nor did he chose election of an individual but chose a council to do so.

If a council or the idea of consultation is correct, then why just six
people? And how can the vote of three people out of six be sufficient?

These are questions which arise for every scholar of Islamic history and
they have remained unanswered showing that the way to select the Imam
was none of these.  
  

4. ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib was the most worthy of all
------------------------------------------------

Let us assume that the Prophet of Islam (S) did not determine who was to
succeed him. Let us also assume that it was the responsibility of the
people but can it be that at the time of choosing a person, from the
point of view of a person who has knowledge and piety and other
qualities, and is superior to all others, be put aside and that a person
who is lower on this ladder be chosen?

A large group of Islamic scholars, even those who are among the Sunnis,
have directly stated that ‘Ali, peace be upon him, was the most aware
person of Islamic affairs and the Traditions and traces which have
remained from him, bear witness to this truth.

The history of Islam says that he was a place of refuge for the Ummah in
all intellectual knowledge and difficulties and even if the other
caliphs were asked difficult and complicated questions, they asked ‘Ali
to answer them.

His courage, piety and austerity and other outstanding qualities which
he possessed were superior to those of any other. Thus, if we assume
that the people should select the most superior person, ‘Ali, peace be
upon him, was the most deserving.

(Of course, this discussion has many, many documents which are beyond
the range of this brief study to be presented here. Students who are
interested may study further in this area).

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why can the people not select and choose the successor to the
Prophet?  
 2. Does our intelligence and logic tell us that the Prophet did not
select any one to succeed him or not?  
 3. What method was used to choose the first three caliphs?  
 4. Was their method of selection based on Islamic precepts and logic?  
 5. Why was ‘Ali the most deserving of all?


