Lesson 38: The Tradition of Thaqalayn and Noah’s Ark
====================================================

The Documentation of the Tradition of Thaqalayn
-----------------------------------------------

One of the famous Traditions among the ‘ulama of the Sunnis and Shi’ites
is the Tradition of Thaqalayn.

A large group of the Companions, without any break, recorded this
Tradition from the Prophet and some of the great ‘ulama say that 30 of
the Companions have mentioned it (*Sirah Halabi*, vol. 33, p. 308)

A large group of the recorders have mentioned this in their books and
there can be no doubt as to this Tradition.

The great scholar, Sayyid Hashim Bahrani, in his book, *Ghayat
al-Maram*, mentions this Tradition with 39 documentations from the Sunni
scholars and 80 documentations from the Shi’ite ‘ulama. Mir Hamad Husayn
Hindi, another great scholar who studied this issue further, mentioned
200 Sunnis who have recorded this Tradition and he has compiled them in
6 volumes.

Among the individuals of the famous Companions who have recorded this
are Abu Sa’id Khudari, Abu Dharr Ghifari, Zayd ibn Arqam, Zayd ibn
Thabit, Abu Rafa’, Jabir ibn Matam, Huzaifah, Damarah Islami, Jabir ibn
Abdallah Ansari and Umm Salimah.

The basic Tradition, according to Abu Dharr Ghifari, is that once when
he was in the Ka’bah, he turned to the people and said that I heard that
the Holy Prophet had said “I leave two things of value among you: the
Qur’an and my family. These two will never separate from each other
until they enter unto me in the Fountain of Abundance (kawthar) in
Paradise. Thus, take care to follow what I have recommended” (Recorded
from *Jama’ Tarmjghi as from Niyabi’al-mawadah*, p. 37)

This Tradition is found in the most reliable of the Sunni sources such
as *Sahih Tarmidhi Nisai Musnad* *Ahmad Kanz al-Amal and mustadrak
Hakirn*, etc.

In many of the books, this Tradition has been called Thaqalayn (two
valuable things) and in some it is called *khalifitin* or two successors
which do not differ in meaning.

It is interesting to note that in the various Traditions of Islam, this
verse has been used by the prophet for the people on different
occasions.

In the Tradition of Jabir ibn Abdallah Ansari, we read that he said this
on the hajj on the day of Arafah.

It is recorded in a Tradition of Abdallah ibn Khattab that in Juhfah (an
area between Mecca and Medina where some of the pilgrims enter the state
of ihram).

It is recorded in a Tradition of Umm Salimah where this is said at
Ghadir Khum.

It is recorded in a part of the Tradition during the last days of his
blessed life, while he was on his death bed.

It is recorded in a Tradition he said this upon the pulpit in Medina
(*al-Marajat*, p. 42)

Even famous Sunni scholars mentioned it ibn Hajar in his book, *Sawaiq
al-Mahraqah* says from the Holy Prophet, “The Holy Prophet of Islam,
after saying this Tradition, took ‘Ali’s hand and pulled him up and
said, ‘It is ‘Ali and the Qur’an and the Qur’an and ‘Ali. They will not
separate from each other until they enter unto me in the Fountain of
Abundance” (*al-Sawa’jn al-Mahraqah*, p.75)

In this way, it becomes clear that the Prophet has expressed this as a
principle many times and emphasized this and that he made use of many
opportunities to express it so that it would never be forgotten.

The Content of the Tradition of Thaqalayn
-----------------------------------------

Here, several points should be noted:

1. The introduction to the Qur’an and his family as ‘two caliphs’ or
‘two valuable things’ is clear proof that Muslims must never turn away
from these two, especially with the condition in many Traditions where
it states that, “If these two are released or freed from each other, you
will be lost.”

2. Placing Qur’an beside his family and his family beside Qur’an is
proof that as the Holy Qur’an will never be altered and that it will be
preserved, the family of the Holy Prophet had the position of
infallibility.

3. In some of these Traditions, it has been stated that the Prophet
said, “On the Day of Resurrection, I will question you about how you
behaved towards these two great souvenirs, to see how you have acted
towards them.

4. No matter how we interpret the Ahlul Bayt, ‘Ali is the best
confirmation. According to the repeated Traditions, he will never be
separated from the Holy Qur’an nor Qur’an from him.

In addition to this, in the repeated Traditions, we read that when the
verse was revealed about *mubahilah*, the Holy Prophet called ‘Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, peace be upon them, and said, ‘This is my
Ahlul Bayt.’ (*Mash kat al -Masbaih*, p. 568, printed in Delhi and
*Riyadh al-Nafarah*, Vol. 2, p. 248, recorded from Muslim and Tarmidhi).

5. Even though it is not clear to us who are enclosed in this world what
will be questioned of us, but on the Day of Judgment, we know from the
Traditions, that the meaning of the Fountain of Abundance which is a
special stream in Paradise with many special privileges is for the real
believers, the prophets and the Ahlul Bayt and the followers of that
school.

From what has been said, it becomes clear that the leadership of the
ummah of Muslims after the Prophet is through ‘Ali and after him, also,
through the Imams from this family.

The Tradition of Noah’s Ark
---------------------------

An interesting statement is recorded from the Holy Prophet, in both
Sunni and Shi’ite books on Traditions, which is the famous Tradition of
Noah’s ark.

In this Tradition, Abu Dharr says, “The Prophet said, ‘My family is like
Noah’s ark. Whoever uses it will be saved and whoever separates from it
will drown.” (*Mustadrak Halcam*, vol.3, p. 151).

This Tradition, which is also among the famous Traditions and mentions
the necessity for the people to follow ‘Ali and the family of the
Prophet after his death, has been emphasized.

Noting that the ark of Noah is a place of refuge and a means of
salvation for when the great storm comes, this truth becomes clear that
the Islamic ummah will be saved in the storm which came after the death
of the Prophet through the Ahlul Bayt.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What does the Tradition of Thaqalayn say and what benefits does it
prove for the Ahlul Bayt?  
 2. Who recorded the Tradition of Thaqalayn?  
 3. What does Thaqalayn mean? And can other interpretations be given
about its meaning?  
 4 In what situation did the Prophet say it?  
 5. Describe the Tradition of Noah’s Ark from the point of view of its
content and documentation.


