Lesson 40: The Twelfth Imam, The Great Leader and Peace-Maker of the World
==========================================================================

1. The End of the Night of Darkness
-----------------------------------

When we look at our present situation, and we see the increase in
crimes, massacres, wars, bloodshed, conflicts, international differences
and the daily increase in corruption, we ask ourselves if the situation
will continue in the same way and the extent of the crimes and
corruption will so grow that all of society will be included in a
continuous war and destroyed?

Or the ideological differences and ethical corruption will, like
quicksand, take society along with it or is there still hope that one
day humanity will be saved and reformed?

There are two answers to this important question.

The first answer: This is mentioned by the materialists and the
pessimists and that is that the future of the world is dark and that
every moment, a danger exists.

The second is of those who believe in the divinely revealed religions,
in particular, the Muslims and, especially the Shi’ites, who give
another answer to this question and they say: Behind this dark night
lies the morning of hope.

These dark, stormy, death-like clouds and the flood of destruction will
finally be eliminated and the clear heavens and the brilliant sun and a
quiet environment will follow.

These hidden hurricanes will not always be before us and in the near
future, we will be taken to the shore of salvation.

The world is in anticipation of a great Reviver who will, through a
revolution, transform the world to the advantage of truth and justice.

Of course, we must note that each religion calls this leader by a
different name. As an Arab poet says, “We call you by different names.
But your beauty is not more than one thing and all of our words are
directed towards that world of beauty!”

2. The Primordiality and Manifestation of this Great Reviver
------------------------------------------------------------

Our inner inspirations whose waves come through the judgment of wisdom
are more powerful, not only in the issue of ontology, which can guide us
in all of our religious beliefs, but also guides us in this issue.  
 Its signs:

First, the general love for justice of the world because all of the
people of the world, in spite of all of the differences which they have,
without exception, show love for peace and justice. We all cry out and
make endeavors upon this way and we seek peace and justice of the world
with all of our being.

A more important reason than this for the primordiality of the
manifestation of a great Reviver cannot be found because the generality
of such a need is proof of its Primordiality (Note this with care).

Every love and primordiality speaks of the rule of existence of a
beloved and is moving to attract it.

How is it possible that God place this thirst in the inner spirit of the
human being and not provide a fountain which will quench this thirst?

It is here that we say that the primordiality and nature of the seeking
of justice of human beings cries out.

One day justice and peace will take over the entire world. The
organizations of oppression will be destroyed. Humanity will take on the
form of one country and will live under One flag, with solidarity and
Unity and Purity of life. Another sign is the commonality which exists
in all religions of the world as to the existence of a great Reviver.

In more or less all of the religions, such a chapter exists and the idea
of the belief in the manifestation of a savior of the people who will
heal all of the wounds of humanity is not only present among Muslims but
rather all of the documents show that this is a universal belief which
is primordial and exists in all of the religious groups of the East and
the West, even though Islam, which is a more complete religion, places
greater emphasis upon it.

3. Intellectual Proof
---------------------

A. The order of the creation is a lesson for us that the world of
humanity must, in the end, be ruled by the law of justice and remains
based on a system of justice and peace.

This means that the world of existence, to the point that we know, is a
complex of orders, systems and laws which are proof of the unity of the
world and the connection to this system.

The issue of order and law and programming and accounting is one of the
most serious and basic issues of this world.

From the Milky Way to a minute atom, several million of which can be
placed upon the head of a pin, all are of a special order.

The various organs of our body, from the amazing structure of a cell to
the system of nerves and veins to the brain and the heart and the lungs,
all have a particular order which is such that some scholars say that
each one is like a clock which works within the body and the greatest
computers are nothing in comparison to it.

In such a world, can a human being exist as a part of this universal as
an non-conformed and disorderly part with wars and bloodshed and
oppression?

Does injustice and the real corruption of a society, a type of disorder,
always rule over humanity?  
 The result is that the witnessing of the world of existence makes us
aware of the fact that the end of human society is justice and order and
that it will return to the man line of creation.

B. The evolutionary or transformative line of society is another proof
for the future which is clear of the world of humanity because we can
never deny this truth that human society, from the day that it
recognized itself, has never stopped at one stage and is continuously
moving forward.

From the material point of view, from the view of clothes, housing, type
of food and means of transportation humanity has lived through the most
basic of situations and today it has reached the stage which surprises
the sight and intellect and most certainly this ascent will continue.

From the point of view of knowledge and culture, also, the direction is
always one of ascent or increase and every day new discoveries and new
information is gained.

This law of transformation or evolution will include spiritual, ethical
and social aspects as well as humanness and will move towards a just
law, permanent peace, justice and moral and spiritual virtues and if we
see that today, moral corruption is increasing, this is also an area to
prepare for a transformative revolution.

We can never say that corruption should be encouraged but we say that
when corruption reaches beyond a certain point, it will bring about the
reaction of a moral revolution. When human beings find themselves before
a dead end as a result of their undesirable sins, their heads hit a
stone wall, and their lives are near ending, they will at least, be
prepared to accept such a principle that comes on behalf of a divinely
inspired leader.

4. The Qur’an and the Manifestation of the Mahdi
------------------------------------------------

In the great heavenly book, there are multiple verses which give the
glad tidings of a great manifestation. We will only select one verse
from among all of them to show this truth.

***“God has promised, to those among you who believe and work righteous
deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land, inheritance
(of power) as He granted it to those before them; that He will establish
in authority their religion — the one which He has chosen for them; and
that He will change (their state), after the fear in which they (lived),
to one of security and peace. They will worship Me (alone) and not
associate aught with Me. If they do reject faith after this, they are
rebellious and wicked”*** **(24:55)**

This verse well shows that finally the rule on the earth will be free of
tyranny and oppressors and the righteous believers will rule over the
universe.

Imam ‘Ali ibn ‘Husayn, in commentating upon this verse, said, “This
group, I swear by God, is those very followers of our school. God, by
means of a man from our family will realize this promise and he is the
Mahdi of this ummah.

5. Imam al-Mahdi in the Traditions
----------------------------------

The Traditions about the world rule and its realization along with peace
and justice, by means of an individual of the family of the Holy Prophet
who is called the Mahdi, is so great in the Sunni and Shi’ite source
books that they are beyond counting.

And Traditions in relation to the twelfth Imam and the successor to the
Holy Prophet, and the ninth child of Imam Husayn and the immediate child
of Imam Hasan Askari is also extensive in Shi’ite resources.

In the first part, that is, the extent of the Traditions about the
appearance of the Mahdi from Sunni resources, it is sufficient that the
Sunni scholars, in their books, directly recall it. In a publication
from the Rabitah al-’Alim Islami, the greatest center of learning in the
hijaz, it says, “He is the twelfth orthodox caliph which the Holy
Prophet mentioned in the Traditions of sahabah and these Traditions of
the Mahdi have been recorded by many of the Companions of the Holy
Prophet of Islam.”

Then, after naming the 20 Companions of the Prophet who have recorded
the traditions of the Mahdi, it continues, “Other than them, there is a
large group who have recorded these Traditions... some of the Sunni
scholars, have written books on the appearance of the Mahdi among Whom
are Abu Na’im Isfahani, ibn Hujar Haitha, Shu Kani and Idris Maghrabi,
Abu Abbas ibn Abdallah Mu’min.” Then it adds, “A large group of the past
and today of the Sunnis directly have accepted the succession of the
Traditions of the Mahdi.

Then after mentioning the name of a group of them, it ends with these
words, “A large number of commentators and memorizers have directly said
that the Traditions of Mahdi are directly, clearly and decisively
successive and the belief in the appearance of the Mahdi is obligatory.

This is among the clear beliefs of the Sunnis and none but the ignorant
and heretics will deny it.

6. But as to Shi’ite Traditions
-------------------------------

It is sufficient for us to know that hundreds of Traditions of the
Prophet and the Imams have been recorded in this area so that it is
beyond succession.

Among the Shi’ites, it is considered to be obligatory and no individual
can be among the religious people and be unaware of it and not accept
the appearance of the Mahdi, his particularities, his type of rule and
his program. The great Shi’ite ‘u1ama, from the beginning until today,
have written many books in this area and they have gathered Traditions
in this area.

As an example, we will present two or three Traditions and those who are
interested in further study should read *Mahdi, Inqilabi Bozorg, Nuvid
Imam* and *Imam* and the translation of the book al-Mahdi written by
Sayyid Sadr al-din Sadr.

The Holy Prophet of Islam said, “If only one day remains from the life
of this world, God will lengthen it so that the Mahdi will be sent from
God to fill the earth, which is filled with tyranny and oppression, with
justice and equity.”

In a Tradition of Imam Sadiq, we read, “When the time of the arising of
the rule of the Redeemer comes, he will establish it upon justice.
Tyranny and oppression during his rule will be eliminated; roads and
passage ways during his rule, will be safe and the earth will be
blessed.

Every right will be given to its rightful owner and he, among the
people, will judge like David and Muhammad. At this time, the earth will
reveal its treasures and it will reveal its blessings. No needy person
will be found because all believers will be without need.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the difference between the thoughts of the believers and the
materialists as to the future of the world?  
 2. Can one come to understand the manifestation of the Mahdi by means
of primordiality? How?  
 3. Do we have intellectual proof for his appearance? Which proof?  
 4. What does the Qur’an say about this?  
 5. What does a study of the Traditions show?  
  


