Lesson 2: The Signs of God in our Daily Life
============================================

1. Knowing God and the Progress of Science
------------------------------------------

Pretend that a friend has come from a trip and has brought a book as a
present for you. He says that it is an excellent book, because the
author of this book is full of information by a very great scholar, who
is accurate, an expert and a genius in his own field.

You will most certainly not study this book carelessly. Rather you will
concentrate on every sentence and even the choice of words made and if
there be a sentence there that you do not understand, perhaps you will
spend hours and even days, whenever you can, studying it until the
meaning of it becomes clear to you.

Why? Because the author of this book is not a normal average person but
rather a great scholar who considers every word he uses carefully.

But if the opposite were true and they had said to you, “This book may
appear to be beautiful and pleasing on the outside, but the author is
not very literate and he has no base in science and has not taken any
care,” it is clear that you will only quickly glance at the book and
wherever you found something unclear in it, you would say, “This is
because the author was uninformed and it is a waste of time for a person
to study this.”

The world of creation is like a great book in which every creature forms
a word or sentence in that. From the point of view of a person who
worships God, every atom of this universe is worthy of study.

A person who has faith in the ray of the light of worshipping God, will
make use of a special sense of curiosity in studying the secrets of
creation and it is this very fact which helps science and human
knowledge to progress - because he knows that the Creator of this
universe has endless knowledge and power and everything He does is based
on a wisdom and a philosophy. Thus, he studies with greater care, more
profoundly in order to be able to understand the secrets better.

But a materialist has no reason to discover the secret of creation for
he believes that nature is senseless. If we look at the work of a
materialist scholar, it is in the same rank because he accepts God but
calls him ‘nature’. Why? Because he accepts an order and a program in
nature.

2. Knowing God, Endeavoring and Hope
------------------------------------

Whenever a difficult and complicated event takes place in the life of a
human being, whenever all doors are somehow closed, one senses weakness,
hopelessness and loneliness, when confronted by these difficulties, a
person with faith in God then seeks His help, which He gives.

A person who has faith in God does not see himself or herself as being
alone or powerless. He or she does not despair. He or she does not sense
weakness or inability, because God is above all difficulties and
everything is easy for Him.

With hope in His kindness, support and help, he or she will struggle
against the difficulty and will use all of his or her energies. With
love and hope, one will continue his or her endeavors and efforts and
will overcome the difficulty.

Yea. Faith in God is a great place of refuge for a human being. Faith in
God is the substance of perseverance and steadfastness. Faith in God
always keeps hope in hearts alive. Because of this, individuals with
faith never attempt to commit suicide because attempts at suicide come
from despair, a complete lack of hope and a feeling of having failed but
individuals with faith neither lose hope nor do they sense failure.

3. Knowing God and the Sense of Responsibility
----------------------------------------------

 We know a doctor who, when poor people visit him, not only does he not
get money from them for the visit, but he gives them money and drugs and
if he senses a danger for that person, he will stay all night in his
home. These are people who worship God and have faith.

But we also know a doctor who, until the money of the visit is not paid,
he will not take the first step for the sick person because he does not
have a strong faith. A person who has faith, no matter what his or her
profession is, senses responsibility, knows his or her duties, does
good, readily forgives and constantly sees a spiritual policeman within
his or her soul who watches over one’s deeds.

But people who lack faith are selfish and dangerous people who have no
sense of responsibility. Oppression, suppression and aggression against
the rights of others is easy for them and they are less prepared to do
good.

4. Knowing God and Peacefulness
-------------------------------

Psychologists say that mental and psychological diseases are greater in
our time than in any other. They say that one of the factors is anxiety
over future events, anxiety over death, anxiety over war and anxiety of
fear and failure.

They add, “Among the things which can take anxiety away from a person’s
spirit is faith in god because whenever an anxiety wants to penetrate
one’s spirit, faith in God pushes it away”.

A God who is kind, a God who helps one meet one’s needs, a God Who is
aware of His servants’ condition and if they turn towards Him, He helps
them and frees them from anxiety.

Because of this, a real believer always has a sense of peacefulness and
no anxiety exists within his or her spirit. Whatever such a person does,
is for God. Even if one suffers a loss, one seeks its replacement from
Him. Such a person even enters the war front with a smile.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“It is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with
oppression — that are (truly) in peacefulness, for they are on (right)
guidance.” (6:82)***

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Do you recall the fate of the people in the past which the Qur’anic
verse refers to?

2. Do you know why some individuals, who pretend to have faith in God,
are morally corrupt and none of the four effects mentioned above can be
found in them?


