Lesson 44: Belief in Resurrection is Manifested in our Primordial Nature
========================================================================

We most often see that coming to know about God is within the
primordiality and nature of a human being.

If we search into the awakened and non-awakened consciences of the human
being, his faith and desire in a source which is metaphysical, we come
upon a metaphysical source which is gained through knowledge, program
and goal which created this world.

But this issue is not limited to monotheism and coming to know about
God. All of the principles and practices which are basic to religion
must be seen within this very primordial nature. Otherwise, the harmony
which is necessary to exist between creation and the Divine Law will not
be found. (Pay special attention here).

If we take a look at our heart and we discover the depths of the spirit
and our soul, we hear these whisperings from the world that life does
not end with death, but rather death is a window upon the world of
survival.

In order to understand this truth, we must turn to the points below.

1. Love of Survival
-------------------

If the human being has been created for annihilation and non-being, that
person should desire non-being, and receive pleasure from death at the
end of life whereas we see that this is not the case. Instead we see
that death is in no time or era a pleasure and that many people flee
from it with all of their being.

Looking for ways to lengthen one’s life, looking for the Fountain of
Youth, the Elixir of Life, the Water of Life are all signs of this
truth.

This love for survival shows that the human being was created to survive
and if we had been born for being and annihilation, this love would have
no meaning.

All of the basic loves which are within our being are completed by it
and the love for survival is a love which completes or perfects our
being.

Note that we discuss the issue of the Resurrection after we have
accepted the existence of God, the Wise, the Knower.

We believe that whatever He created in our bodies is based on a known
measure and because of this, the love and desire of a human being for
survival must also have an accounting and that can be nothing other than
the existence of a world after this one.

2. Resurrection Among the Tribes of the Past
--------------------------------------------

The history of humanity, as it bears witness, in a general sense, in the
tribes of the past, from the earliest of times shows clear proof of the
clear belief of the human being to life after death.

The traces which have remained from the human beings of the past, even
those who existed before written records, in particular, the method of
making graves for the dead and how they buried the dead, all bear
witness to this truth that they believed in life after death.

This rooted belief which has always existed in humanity, cannot be
believed to be a simple idea or only a habit.

Whenever a belief is found in the form of something which has roots, and
throughout history, we see it in human society, we should know that it
is part of primordial nature because it is only primordial nature which
can persevere with the passage of time and social and intellectual
changes and remain in its place. Otherwise, customs will be forgotten.

The wearing of a special type of clothes is either a question of habit
or a form of custom, which, over time, either changes or is destroyed.

But the love of a mother for her child is instinctive. It is a part of
nature and a symbol. Thus, with the passing of time, the flame of love
does not decrease in various environments. Whatever efforts are made in
this way are reasons why this is part of the primordial nature of a
human being.

When scholars say that careful study has shown that the earliest of
people had a kind of religious belief because they buried their dead in
a special way and they placed their tools of work beside them, and in
their own way and with their particular belief, they showed that they
believe in the existence of another world.

We can then well see that they had accepted life after death, even if
they were in error. They thought that life there was just like life in
this world and that they would need those very same tools.

3. The Existence of the Inner Trial
-----------------------------------

The existence of the inner trial or court called the Conscience is
another reason for the resurrection being primordial.

Just as we have previously said, we all well sense that there is a trial
or a court within us which judges what we do. It gives rewards for good
deeds. We feel satisfied and our spirit overflows with joy and happiness
in such a way that the feeling is incapable of being described. In
relation to evil deeds, and, in particular, great sins, they are felt in
such a way that life becomes bitter.

It has often been seen that individuals, after committing a great crime,
like murder and trying to escape from the scales of justice, voluntarily
give themselves up. They surrender to the hangman’s noose and the reason
is the torture which the conscience gives.

A human being, on bearing witness to this trial or court, asks himself
or herself, “How can I, who am but a small creature, have such a
conscience but the great universe and the world of creation not have a
trial or court which it is worthy of?”

In this way, we can prove that the belief in the resurrection and life
after death is primordial in three ways:

1. Through love of survival.

2. Because of the existence of this belief throughout history.

3.   Through a small example of that in our own selves.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. How can one distinguish that which is primordial from that which is
not primordial?  
 2. What is the reason why a human being has a love for survival and
what reason can this be for the primordiality of the resurrection?  
 3. Did the early people believe in the resurrection? Why?  
 4. How does the condemnation by our conscience encourage or punish us?
Give examples of that.  
 5. What relation is there between the trial by one’s conscience and the
great Day of Judgment?


