Lesson 46: We Have Seen the Resurrection Many Times in this World
=================================================================

The verses of the Holy Qur’an clearly show this truth that the
idol-worshippers and also the other kufar, not only at the time of the
Holy Prophet, but in other ages as well, were surprised or amazed by the
issue of resurrection and life after death and they were frightened by
it to the point that whoever mentioned it was considered to be insane
and  
 they would say to each other:

***“The kuffar say (in ridicule), ‘Shall we point out to you a man that
will tell you when you are scattered to Pieces in disintegration that
you shall (then be raised) in a flew creation?” (34:7)***

Yes. In that age, because of a lack of knowledge and short-sightedness
any mention of the belief in a life after death and a world after death
was considered to be insanity or an insult to God and the belief that
giving life to a dead body was considered to be insanity.

But it is interesting that opposed to this Way of thinking, the Holy
Qur’an refers to various reasons of life which both a common average
person can understand as well as scholars, each one to their own extent
of ability Even though referring to all of the Qur’anic verses in this
area requires a separate book, we have tried here to present some of
them.

1. Sometimes the Qur’an says to them:

***“It is God Who sends forth the winds so that they raise up the clouds
and We drive them to a land that is dead and revive the earth therewith
after its death; even so (will be) the Resurrection.” (35:9)***

We look at the visage of nature in the winter time.

Every place smells of death. The trees all lack leaves, fruit and
blossoms and the only thing remaining of it is dry branches. Neither do
the flowers laugh nor blossoms blossom nor is any movement of life to be
seen.

The spring season arrives. The weather grows warmer, life-giving drops
of rain fall. Suddenly a movement is seen in all of nature: flowers
bloom, trees grow leaves, blossoms and flowers appear, birds find their
places upon the branches of trees and it is glorious to see.

If life after death had no meaning, we would not see this scene every
year before our eyes. If life after death was something which was
absolutely impossible, and words of the insane, we would not be able to
sense it every year before our eyes.  
 What difference is there between the life of the earth after death and
the life of human beings after death?

2. Sometimes, the Qur’an also grips their hands and takes them to the
beginning of creation and recalls it to them and refers to that Arab
Bedouin who picks up a rotten bone and goes to the Prophet of Islam and
says, “O Muhammad, who will be able to enliven this rotten bone? Tell me
who?”

And he thinks that he has found the final proof for disproving the
Resurrection.  
 The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Say, ‘He will give them life Who created them for*** ***the first
time. For He is well-versed in every kind of creation!” (36:79)***

What is the difference between initiating creation and a new creation?

And the answer is found in another verse.

***“Even as We produced the first creation shall We Produce a new one.”
(21:104)***

3. Sometimes the great Creation of God of the heavens and the earth is
mentioned:

***"Is not He Who created the heavens and the earth able to create the
like thereof? Yea, indeed! For He is the Creator Supreme of skill and
knowledge. Verily, when He intends a thing, His Command is, ‘Be,’ and it
is.,, (36:81-82)***

Those who doubted this issue were individuals who had short-sightedness
and never saw beyond their own environment. Otherwise, they would know
that a new creation or a recreation is easier than initiating of
creation and the new life given by .God with all of His strength is not
a difficult issue, and new creation is not a difficult task.

4. Sometimes the Resurrection energies have been mentioned whereby it
says:

***“The same Who produces for you fire out of the green tree, when
behold! you kindle therewith (your Own fires).” (36:80)***

When we study this wondrous verse of the holy Qur’an with care and we
seek aid from today’s science, science tells us that only green trees
can store the energy of light of the sun and that when we burn a piece
of wood and we make a fire, that is the same heat and energy which is
similar to the heat of the sun which has been stored in it for years and
we thought that that light and heat had died and had been destroyed but
we see today that it has found new life.

For God Who has all of this power, who can store tens of years of the
energy of light from the sun within a tree and in one moment bring all
of it forward, and it receives new life, it is not a difficult task.

At any rate, we see with what logic and clarity the Holy Qur’an explains
the issue of the resurrection to those who have doubts about it and they
even thought that anyone who believed such a thing was insane. It
clearly proves the existence of the resurrection, only a small part of
which we have been able to mention here.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. Why are the multi-theists surprised by the issue of the
Resurrection?  
 2. How is the Resurrection created each year for us in nature?  
 3. The Qur’an in a part of its verses shows that the life of a fetus is
similar to the Resurrection Why?  
 4. What is the energy of the Resurrection?  
 5. Why has the Holy Qur’an emphasized the green tree?


