Lesson 48: The Survival of the Spirit, a Sign of the Resurrection
=================================================================

When the philosophers began to express the philosophy of humanity, they
mentioned the spirit as being an important element in relation to other
elements.

From then on, all philosophies presented a point of view about it to the
point where some of the Islamic scholars have presented a thousand
reasons for the truth of the presence of the spirit and issues relating
to it. Much has been stated in this area but the most important issue
which should be noted is that the answer to this question is:

Is the spirit material or not? And in other words, is it independent or
not? Or does it have special chemical and physical properties like the
brain and nerves?

Some of the materialist philosophers have said that the spirit and
spiritual phenomena are both material and non-material and it is like
the special cells of the brain and when the human being dies, the spirit
disappears just like a watch which when broken, no longer works.

Alongside these philosophies are the philosophers of the divinely
revealed traditions and even some of the materialist philosophers who
believe in the originality of the spirit, believe that at the death of
the body, the spirit does not die and continues to live.

In order to prove this, that is, the originality, independence and
subsistence of the spirit, there are many complicated reasons. Here we
will present some of the clearer ones in clear and simple terms.

1. A Great World Cannot be Placed Within a Small One
----------------------------------------------------

Assume that you are seated beside the sea and behind it are extremely
high mountains. The roaring waves and the shaking of the water against
the shore and with great strength, return to the sea.

We look at this scene for a moment. Then we close our eyes and see this
scene in our minds with all of its greatness.

This shows that other than a body and cells of the brain, another jewel
exists which can reflect any design no matter how great and at any
scale. Clearly, this jewel must be something which is beyond the
material world because we find nothing like it in the material world.

2. The External Particularity of the Spirit
-------------------------------------------

We have many chemical and physical properties in our bodies, the motion
of the heart has a physical quality but the effects on food is a
chemical substance and examples like this are many in our body.

If the spirit, thought and reflection were all material and had physical
and chemical quantities of the brain cells then why among them and our
other physical properties is there a great deal of difference?

Our thoughts, ideas and spirit relate and correct us to the external
world and make us aware of that which passes outside but the chemical
particularities of the stomach and the physical motion of our eyes and
tongue and heart never has such a state.

3. Experienced Proof of the Originality and Independence of the Spirit
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Fortunately, today scholars by various scientific and experimental means
have proven the originality and independence of the spirit and
permanently answered those who deny the truth of the independence of the
spirit and all people who believe it to be material.

Hypnotism is among the clear reasons for this which the experiments have
proven this.

We see dreams and scenes appear in our dreams which sometimes speak of
the future and sometimes they clarify something which had been ambiguous
in such a way that it cannot be called chance or accident which is a
further proof for the independence of the spirit.

These examples show that the spirit is not material and that it is not
the result of special physical or chemical properties of the human brain
but rather it is a metaphysical truth which does not end when the body
dies but, instead, prepares itself for the Day of Resurrection and the
Hereafter.

Think and Answer
----------------

1. What is the difference of opinion between the Divine philosophers and
the materialists as to the spirit?  
 2. What is the meaning of the non-conformity of something large with
something small? Which is among the major reasons for the spirit?  
 3. How can truthful dreams be proof of the authenticity and
independence of the spirit?


