Lesson 4: An Answer to an Important Question
============================================

**Question:** In the previous lesson, we realized or recognized that we
always hear the voice of monotheism (tawhid) and worship of God from
within our souls and especially at times of difficulty, this voice
becomes stronger and clearer and we naturally begin to think about God
and we seek His help and kindness.

Here it is possible that this question arises that this inner voice
which we call the voice of our ‘God-given nature’ (fitrat) is the result
of things which we have heard from our environment and our mother and
father have told us or from school and it has become very normal and
common for us.

**Answer:** The answer to this requires a brief introduction. Customs
change. We cannot find a custom which has not changed throughout history
among all nations.

Thus, when we see that this is something which exists among all nations,
has existed at all times and during all ages, without exception, we
should realize that its roots are in fitrat and that it is woven into
the spirit and soul of human beings.

For instance, the love of a mother for her child. This can in no way be
said to come from propaganda or habit or custom because in no tribe or
nation, or at any time or age, can you see that a mother does not love
her child.

Of course, it is possible that a mother, because of a mental
disturbance, do away with herself or a father during the Age of
Ignorance in Arabia (the time before the appearance of Islam) buried his
girl children alive because his thoughts were wrong and based on
superstitions but these are very rare cases.

Looking at this introduction, recalling how people in the past and in
the present worship God, we see (as this lesson is a little bit more
difficult, please pay careful attention).

1. As stated by sociologists and historians, there has been no time in
history when belief in God and faith did not exist among people. Rather,
in every age and time and at all moments of this world, some form of
belief existed and this, itself, is clear reason why the worship of God
is from the depths of the spirit and its source is fitrat of human
beings, not that it is a result of customs we have accepted because if
it were the consequences of habit and custom, it would not be so
extensive and eternal.

We even have rules which show that tribes who lived before written
history began, had some kind of a belief system. Of course, there is no
doubt that at times, when people had forgotten God as the Being Who is
above nature, they searched for Him and looked for Him among creatures
in nature and they made idols for themselves of things in nature.

But with the development of thought, human beings gradually were able to
see the truth, stop worshipping idols which were material creatures and
become familiar with the One God.

2. Some of the well-known psychologists clearly and directly say that
the human spirit or soul has four senses:

First, the sense of knowledge which sends a person after science and
knowledge and makes one’s spirit thirsty for knowledge whether or not
this has any material benefit.

Second, the sense of goodness which is the source for moral and human
issues in the world of humanity.

Third, the sense of beauty which is the source of poetry and literature
and art in their real sense.

Fourth, the sense of belief which invites the human being to come to
know God and to implement His Commands. In this way, we see that the
sense of worship is one of the senses with the deepest roots of the
spirit. That is, they are never separate from each other.

3. In our future lessons, we will see how most materialists even admit
to the existence of God, even though they do not mention His Name and
instead refer to nature or give Him other names but qualities are given
to nature which are, in fact, qualities of God.

For instance, they say, if nature has given two kidneys to human beings,
it was because it knew that if one of these failed, the other would
continue life, etc.

Does this explanation hold for a nature which lacks awareness and
consciousness? Or is this not a reference to the All-knowing and
Infinite God but calling Him, nature?

We can conclude from what has been said that:

A love for God has always existed in us and will always continue.

Faith in God is an eternal flame which warms our heart and spirit.

In order to come to know God, we are not obliged to take a long and
complicated way.

We quickly turn inward and see we have faith in Him. The Holy Qur’an
says:

***“We are closer to the human being than his jugular vein.” (50:16)***

Think and Answer
----------------

1 Write several examples of customs and several examples of things which
are part of our God-given nature (fitrat).  
 2 Why do ignorant people turn to idol worship?  
 3 Why do materialists refer to God as Nature?


