Lesson 5: A True Story
======================

We have said that in the depths of the spirit of those who deny God with
their tongue, a faith in God exists.

There is no doubt that victories and successes — especially for
individuals with few possibilities develop pride and this very pride
becomes the source for forgetfulness, to the point where often a person
even forgets his or her own opinions.

But the moment that a storm of difficulties throws their life into chaos
and the strong wind of difficulties attacks that person from all sides,
the curtains of pride and selfishness moves away from their eyes and
divinely-created nature (fitrat) and monotheism (the belief that God is
One) appears.

History gives many examples of individuals who were like this, whose
lives were full of deceit:

There was a minister who was very strong and powerful in his age. He had
taken control of most of the power and no one opposed him. One day he
entered a meeting in which a group of religious scholars were present.
He turned to them and said, “For how long will you continue to say that
God exists? I have many reasons to prove otherwise.”

He said this with special pride. As the scholars who were present knew
that he was not a reasonable or logical person and that power and
strength had made him so proud that no words of truth would affect him,
they ignored him and remained silent, a meaningful and humble silence.

This event passed. After a time, the minister insulted someone. The
ruler of the time had him arrested and thrown into jail.

One of the scholars who were present at the gathering thought to himself
that the time to awaken him had come.

Now that he has gotten off the horse of pride and the curtain of
self-interest has moved away from his eyes, and the sense of accepting
the truth was awakened in him, if he contacts him and gives him words of
advice, it may produce good results. He received permission to visit him
and he went to the prison.

As he neared him, he saw that he was in a room all alone, walking back
and forth and thinking and he was recalling a poem which said, “We are
all like drawings or paintings of a lion which are painted or drawn on a
flag. When the wind blows, it moves and perhaps even attacks, but in
reality it has nothing from itself. Its strength is the wind which gives
it power. We, also, as we gain more power, have nothing from ourselves.
It is God who has given this strength to us and whenever He wills, He
can take it from us.”

The above-mentioned scholar saw that under these conditions, not only
does he not deny the existence of God, but he has become ardently aware
of God. After greeting him he said, “Do you recall how you said you have
many reasons for the non-existence of God.

I have come to answer those many reasons with just one response, “God is
He Who, with such ease, took your power away from you.” He hung his head
in shame and did not answer because he knew that he had been wrong and
he saw the light of God within himself.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“We took the Israeli tribes across the sea; Pharaoh and his hosts
followed them in pride and insolence. At length, when overwhelmed with
the flood, he said, ‘I believe that there is no god except Him whom the
Israeli tribes believe in. I am of those who submit (muslimin)’ ”
(10:90)***

Think and Answer
----------------

l. Describe the consequences of the true story in several lines.  
 2. Why are the Israeli tribe called “Israeli tribe”?  
 3. Who was Pharaoh? Where did he live? What claims did he make?


