[Text of Interview]
===================

**Iqbal:** *Aslamu ʿalaykum* .

**Nasr:** *Wa ʿalaykum as-salām* Dr. Iqbal, how are you?

**Iqbal:** *Al-ḥamdu Lillah* . Finally, the spring is here, and birds
are singing.

**Nasr:** I always think of you sitting up there in the cold, surrounded
by vast white land…

**Iqbal:** Yes, most of the time, it is like that, but now trees have
new leaves and it is simply amazing to watch this metamorphosis.

**Nasr:** *Al-ḥamdu Lillah* . You wanted to talk about*Islamic Sciences*
, I am at your service; next hour is yours.

**Iqbal:** *Jazāk Allah* . What I had in mind is a range of issues
related to*Islamic Sciences* . As you know, we have changed the name of
the journal from Islam & Science to*Islamic Sciences* after due
consultation with the Advisory Board and I wanted to discuss with you
the scope of the*Islamic sciences* , both historically and their
prospects today, in the traditional Muslim lands and beyond. The issues
I hope we can address in this conversation range from the definition of
Islamic science to the trajectory of this discipline in the Western
academy, but we can let the conversation flow on its own. Perhaps you
might begin by providing some definitions of these terms.

**Nasr:** The question of what “Islamic science” means, when we are
using the English language and trying at the same time to remain
faithful to the Islamic understanding of the subject, is somewhat
problematic and difficult because the word “science” in English does not
have the same connotations as the word ʿilm in Arabic and some other
Islamic languages. Even within the European languages, English usage of
the word is particularly limited. It is spelled the same as it is in
French, but the French*la science* (Latin*scientia* ) has much broader
meanings. For instance, in America if you ask someone, “What are you
studying at college,” and the person says, “I am studying science,” one
understands by this physics, chemistry, biology, or other natural
sciences. But if they are studying at the Sorbonne or the University of
Paris, and respond using the word*la science* , that could also mean
moral sciences-a term first used by Hume in his*Enquiry Concerning the
Principles of Morals* , and referring to the systematic study of human
nature and relationships. The wider French usage has been gradually
percolating into English and now we can also speak of “*human sciences*
” in English-the equivalent of the French*les sciences humaines* -as
referring to those branches of knowledge that deal with the human
person. Philosophically, the broadest definition of science is organized
knowledge.

**Iqbal:** And this is how the term ʿilm has been traditionally
understood, so that when we say ʿ*ulūm al-Qurʾān* , we mean the
systematic and organized field of study of the Qurʾān-the entire field
dealing with all branches of knowledge about the Qurʾān, whether tafsīr
(commentary), lugha (language), balāgha (rhetoric), or any other
science. Likewise for terms such as ʿ*ulūm al-Ḥadīth* and*ʿulūm al-fiqh*
.

**Nasr:** Yes, indeed, as I have written in various books, in Islam, all
branches of knowledge are interconnected and none is divorced from
religion; they are organized as are roots (*uṣūl* ) and branches
(*furūʿ* ). Thus, in

traditional Islamic civilization, even if you studied a book of
medicine, like the Qānūn of Ibn Sīnā, the book starts by mentioning the
Name of God and goes on to the praise of the Prophet-upon him blessings
and peace-before anything else. That is, we try to relate the subject
under study to the Creator, to God Himself. The same is true for
mathematics, astronomy, and so on. Muslim scholars of the past, who were
some of the greatest scientists in human history, considered the root of
what they were studying to be the Divine Reality. This truth and the
consequent interrelation of the branches of the tree of knowledge are
something that we have now forgotten. And therefore the sclerosis that
has taken place in the modern scientific world has reduced the human
mind to something like a set of drawers: in one drawer you put socks,
another is for shirts, but there is no necessary relationship of one to
the other. Like students in our modern institutions, who may take a
course on biology from 9 to 10, the next hour a course on the history of
South America, the next hour a linguistics class…but there is no
intellectual relationship of these with each other. It is all segmented.
When students are sitting in a class and discussing Shakespeare, it has
nothing to do with the math class that they are going to take the next
hour. This segmentation in the lack of common principles is what
characterizes modern education.

Islamic education was exactly the opposite of this. It was considered a
type of intellectual sin to separate knowledge into compartments,
although each branch of knowledge had its own methodology which was
strictly adhered to. That is, the methodology for the study of logic was
not the same as that of grammar, and you would not mix the two together.
Or if you were studying chemistry, you could not apply methods of the
study of Sufism to it, and vice versa. But the methods themselves were
rooted in a worldview and hierarchy of knowing that related them
together. The universal figures we have in Islamic civilization, people
such as al-Fārābī, Ibn Sīnā, and Omar Khayyām, were all polymaths. These
people were not only many-sided geniuses; they were also totally
integrated personalities who had a wholesome view of knowledge-all based
on*tawḥīd* , Unity, which implies not only*tawḥīd* of the Divine Being,
but also the*tawḥīd* of His creation, existentially, that is the
relation of creatures to each other, as well as*tawḥīd* of knowledge. I
have alluded to this matter in my*Knowledge and the Sacred* [SUNY Press,
1989], which is a heavy metaphysical book meant for those who have
studied such matters for some time.

So, on the one hand, all of the different intellectual rational and
transmitted disciplines in Islamic civilization are to be designated by
the term “*Islamic sciences* ”, whether they are Qurʾānic commentary,
grammar, or logic; and on the other hand, one has to differentiate the
term from “Islamic science”, which usually refers specifically to the
natural and mathematical sciences. In my own writings, depending on the
context, I have used both terms, plural and singular. When I write
“Islamic science”, let us say in my book*Science and Civilization in
Islam* [Harvard University Press, 1968], I mean the natural and
mathematical sciences, not the religious or linguistic and literary
sciences.

However, sometimes, when we talk about Islamic education, I have written
“*Islamic sciences* ” in the sense of organized knowledge. Science
ultimately means organized knowledge, and “*Islamic sciences* ” are
those branches of knowledge that have been cultivated in Islamic
civilization according to the principles of Islamic revelation. At least
that is my (and other traditional scholars’) understanding of it. Now,
it is very important for Muslims who are engaging this discourse and
using the English language to be aware that even in the English-speaking
world, during the twentieth century, there have been debates among a
number of philosophers of science as to what exactly is meant by
“science.” This was prominent when I was at Harvard some fifty years
ago, for instance. Some Western philosophers of science say that the
only possible definition of science is organized knowledge. Others hold
that “science” is what a particular culture says it is. I have also
heard it from leading Western authorities that the only definition of
science is, “what scientists do.” All of these nuances, these different
senses and meanings of the word “science,” must be taken into
consideration. But there is one other issue I want to add to this topic.

There are some people who have been very sensitive to use of the term
“Islamic science”. These are usually secularist scholars of the history
of science, some of them with Muslim names, who are influenced by the
Western understanding of science as being a completely autonomous
discipline-whereas in contrast, before modern times, the science of
every civilization was closely related to the intellectual perspective,
to the presiding Idea you might say, to the worldview of that
civilization. Islamic science is no mere exception to this principle; it
is one of its best examples. For one of the fundamental aspects of Islam
(from a metaphysical point of view) is integration. That is why, when it
comes to Islam, we laugh when we hear about separation between Church
and State, between the secular and the Sacred. The word “secular” did
not even exist in Arabic. We had to force ourselves to invent new words
such as “*ʿālamāniyya* ,” which did not exist in classical Arabic
because the very idea of the secular as a category of reality had no
legitimacy in the Islamic worldview. It is exactly the same in your own
mother tongue of Urdu and mine, Persian. One has to pay attention to the
way these words come about, the reasons why they are invented. The
reason there was no domain corresponding to the term “secular” is
because the integrating power of Islam, as the way of looking at reality
and living according to that perspective, is a religion in the broad
sense, with a specific worldview, a religion not just limited to worship
but in the vast sense of dīn. It is the integrative power of Islam that
is operative behind the integration of knowledge. When I first started
to use the term “Islamic science”, many people criticized me for it.
They still do. They do not understand why this is not simply a
chauvinistic term used by me as a

Muslim for my ideological ends; it has a very important intellectual
root in the nature of things.

When I began working in this field over fifty years ago, I became a
student of George Sarton at Harvard. I went to study with him because he
was the great authority in the West on Islamic science, but he used the
word “Arabic science”, which I recoiled against for several reasons.
First of all,

because it was (as it still is) being used by modern Arab nationalists,
and you know that story and the ideological reasons behind it. I do not
want to get into that matter here. Second, it had no equivalent in Islam
itself. Employing the phrase*al-ʿulūm al-ʿarabiyya* in Arabic would
probably indicate to a listener that we are talking about the Arabic
language. I mean, before modern times you would not call a mathematical
treatise by Omar Khayyam*al-riyāḍiyāt al-ʿarabiyya* . These terms are
artificial-these are modern inventions. Secondly, the term Arabic
science was a heritage of the West in medieval times and then it was
understandable because the West, in medieval times, used these languages
not as a sign of a regional worldview to a particular ethnicity but
simply as languages used in scientific discourse. And that is why in the
Middle Ages and even later, Western science was also called “Latin
science”. It had nothing to do with nationality or ethnicity. If you
were an Englishman or a Scotsman, let us say a Roger Bacon, you were
called a Latin scientist or Latin philosopher, and that was
understandable in the context in the Middle Ages. But today no
Englishman would accept being called a Latin philosopher or scientist:
now these terms have other meanings than they did during the Middle
Ages. This usage also draws on the medieval heritage in another sense,
for the West even then called all things Islamic “Arabic,” whether it
was science or philosophy or anything else, because it had no access to
Persia and other non-Arab Islamic lands. (Persian texts traveled farther
east, not westward, and so there is a historical logic to the medieval
European use of the term “Arabic science” (*scienta arabes* ).)

The most important reason for using the term “Islamic” rather than
“Arabic” science today is that the latter detaches the meaning, the
framework, the worldview of the sciences from Islam itself, and that is
totally fallacious. Ibn Sīnā and al-Bīrūnī functioned in an Islamic
universe that they understood in terms of the Qurʾānic revelation. Of
course there were many variations of this, many interpretations, but
they all believed that the world had a Creator, that it had an origin,
that reality was not limited only to the material realm, and so on.
Every Muslim scientist, whether Sunnī or Shīʿite, Shāfiʿī or Ḥanafī, or
following any other school, whether living in Morocco or the Punjab, all
shared the broad worldview which emerges from the Qurʾānic revelation.
My humble task for the last fifty years has been to show that the
science cultivated by Muslims is Islamic in a significant sense and that
it is related to Islamic revelation. Many modern authors are very much
against this very category of “Islamic science.” Most secularists do not
understand what is meant by this. Many of them have never really studied
the broader*Islamic sciences* from the Islamic point of view and so do
not understand their integration with Islamic science. They are
therefore very uncomfortable with the term.

**Iqbal:** Now to move the discussion slightly towards what we
traditionally understand by the term “*al-ʿulūm al-islamiyya* ”
(*Islamic sciences* ), referring to all branches of knowledge-*tafsīr*
,*lugha* ,*Ḥadīth* ,*fiqh* , botany, chemistry, trigonometry, in short,
all sciences, rooted in and emerging from the Islamic revelation,
whether as foundational or as branches, all collectively called
“*Islamic sciences* ” in English: where do we

stand today, in reference to this integrated view of knowledge and as
far as their study is concerned?

**Nasr:** That is a big question! Let me first repeat what I have said
elsewhere-I do not recall exactly where, because when you are at the end
of your life as I am and have written a large number of articles, you do
not always remember what you have written where-about the distinct use
of these two terms: In English, in the general academic world, when we
say “Islamic science” in the singular, people think of the natural and
mathematical sciences. But “*Islamic sciences* ” in the plural can have
two meanings. Either different branches of the natural or mathematical
sciences, such as trigonometry, geometry, algebra, mathematics, physics,
etc., or it can mean all of the*Islamic sciences* , both the
intellectual sciences (*al-ʿulūm al-ʿaqliyya* ) and the transmitted
sciences (*al-ʿulūm al-naqliyya* ). Already over fifty years ago, when I
wrote*Science and Civilization in Islam* [Harvard University Press,
1968] in my twenties, I alluded to this at the beginning of that book.
Some of the people who have worked with me, especially Osman Bakr, who
did a PhD thesis with me on the classification of sciences in Islam,
have also written about this issue. I think that, at the present moment
in the history of the Muslim world and in fact of scholarship globally,
it is very important to bring out the second meaning, that is, the
integrated sense referring to the natural sciences but also the
transmitted sciences, the linguistic sciences (ʿ*ilm al-lugha* ), the
Qurʾānic sciences (*ʿilm al-tafsīr* ), the Ḥadīth sciences (ʿilm
al-Ḥadīth). That is, the Islamic use of the term as you would understand
it in Arabic has to find a place for itself in the English language. It
is very important to note that Muslims classified sciences in order to
relate them to each other and to the central trunk of the tree of
knowledge, which for us has its roots in the Qurʾān. Classification was
an aid not only for learning but also to relate various disciplines.

**Iqbal:** There has been a certain Oriental legacy that dichotomizes
these disciplines, as in the well-known theory of Ignác Goldziher, the
“Islamic Orthodoxy against natural sciences” thesis…

**Nasr:** Goldziher made a great mistake here-and him the dean of
Islamic studies in the West!

**Iqbal:** Yes, very influential.

**Nasr:** Goldziher, the Hungarian scholar, was a great scholar, but
harbored a false notion of an Islamic orthodoxy which was against
science. This is not true. Not true, at all. Yes, there were certain
theological and legal schools which wrote against the philosophers and
some scientists, but there were others who were both scientists and
religious scholars. It is like saying that if somebody wrote a treatise
against Ibn Taymiyya, therefore, Islam was “against” Ibn Taymiyya. This
yields a model of Islamic civilization imposed upon the Islamic world by
Western Orientalism, and I don’t believe it for one minute. The fact
that after, let’s say, the twelfth century there was not too much
scientific activity in Egypt or North Africa doesn’t have to do with
dominance of this Islamic orthodoxy, it has to do with other
factors-because shortly thereafter you have the Islamic revival of
mathematics and astronomy, the Marāgha school, Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī, and
others.

Nonetheless, what Goldziher did with his theory dovetails well into the
Western historiography of Islamic science, which considers Islamic
science to have ended mysteriously in the thirteenth century when the
intellectual contact of the West with the Islamic world came more or
less to an end. (These accounts usually include a note on the later Ibn
Khaldūn as an exception.) This means the entire intellectual tradition
of Islamic world after the thirteenth century is totally neglected in
the West, that is, a full seven hundred years! Totally neglected, both
its philosophy and science. I am not saying that figures such as
al-Bīrūnī were running in the streets of Lahore in the seventeenth
century, of course.

But no civilization necessarily spends all of its intellectual energy on
one discipline or field all the time. And we have no guarantee-as I have
said many times-that the West is going to be pursuing the natural
sciences as its primary concern as it is doing now one hundred years
down the road. For seven or eight centuries-the longest span of all
global scientific traditions-Islamic civilization was leading the world
in the natural and mathematical sciences as well as in many other
branches of knowledge. The sheer volume of works produced by Muslims in
various sciences is staggering, and a lot of manuscripts have not been
studied yet. Just in the field of philosophy, which is very closely
aligned to science and the field of logic, I discovered so many
manuscripts in India in 1962, that had never been studied by modern
scholars. There are more than three thousand manuscripts of al-ʿulūm
al-ʿaqliyya in India alone that are yet to be tapped. This is because
even the little bit of what we Muslims have studied of our own tradition
was based to a large extent on what Western scholars had said about it.
Unfortunately, if you were at the

University of Punjab or Tehran University, where I was professor and
dean for so many years, again our scholarly worlds were disconnected-you
were not interested in what was going on in southern Iraq, where people
built those remarkable bridges, mosques, and public works, nor in the
science behind them, because you were told by Western scholars that
Islamic science had already died in the thirteenth century. So, the task
ahead of us is immense: to study our whole tradition and to study it
from the Islamic point of view; to reformulate the whole schema
according to which Islamic science developed, and the interrelation of
these sciences and the cosmology behind them; and the question of why
some disciplines were discontinued in one place but flourished in
another. For example, Ibn Sīnā’s philosophy was discontinued at al-Azhar
during the Mamlūk period, but not his book of medicine, al-Qānūn, though
the two are interrelated. Look at all the medicine that was being
practiced and written about in Damascus. Those people were ḥakīms; they
were scientists, but they also knew Islamic philosophy. We still really
do not have a good history of Islamic science, though things are
changing. Your own work helped a great deal in opening up this
perspective; now there are many scholars of a new generation who are
ready to deal with these matters more seriously.

**Iqbal:** Let us focus on the current status of*Islamic sciences*
within*dār al-Islam* . During the pre-modern period, scholars who
studied*tafsīr* , for instance, also studied*Ḥadīth, fiqh, ʿilm
al-rijāl* , and many of them also

studied medicine, philosophy, and other branches of knowledge. There was
a unification of*Islamic sciences* . However, with the impact of
Westernization and especially during the colonial era, that tradition of
learning suffered a great deal such that we now have Hodjas and Mullas
who have little say in the public affairs of state, while the entire
social, political, and economic scene is dominated by men and women who
have been formed by the institutions of modern education. Thus, even
within the traditional lands of Islam (*dār al-Islām* ), the dichotomy
between the religious and so-called worldly sciences reigns supreme.

**Nasr:** This is a very important issue, and I am glad for the
opportunity to address it. Let me begin by saying that there are several
phases of the process which has lead us to where we are. First of all,
for reasons which no historian has been able to satisfactorily explain,
in many parts of the Islamic world (though, importantly, not all) the
curriculum of the*madrassas* gradually narrowed at around the sixteenth
to the seventeenth century CE (that is, the ninth Islamic century). This
is not the nineteenth or twentieth century, but even before even the
advent of colonialism. If you look at the curriculum of the courses
taught at al-Azhar University at the time of the Fatimids and then the
Ayyubids and then the Mamluks, you will see what happened. The only
intellectual science that endured in the curriculum was logic, while the
other philosophical and scientific disciplines were taught less. We have
to study why this happened.

And it was in this already-narrowed gauge of education into which
modernism entered. Each of these three elements is significant and
deserves further study; the traditional curriculum and education; the
gradual narrowing of its courses and topics; and the entrance of the
Western educational system. Alongside the middle phase, parallel with it
though earlier in time, is the Mongol invasion, which devastated many
universities and intellectual centers. Sir Hamilton Gibb used to say
that if the Mongol invasion had taken place in Europe, there would no
longer be a European civilization. It is remarkable that Islam had the
resilience to rise from that. Even after the Mongol invasion, in
addition to the*madrassas* , we had other centers at which various
sciences were taught, observatories where astronomy was pursued, private
circles of study that taught philosophy and mathematics. These survived
until my own days in Iran-I have direct, personal experience of this.
So, alongside the madrassa curriculum we also have to consider these
less formal circles of knowledge transmission.

**Iqbal:** Having understood the term “*Islamic sciences* ” in its
proper sense and considering the historical situation, the next step is
to talk about operationalization of this kind of knowledge. I mean, all
well and good to pursue such historical research or lay out its
theoretical integration, but what are the ground realities? A few
decades ago, you had prepared a blue print for Hakim Mohammad Said for
starting an institution where an integrated approach to knowledge could
be the basic principle. That institute never came into existence. Then,
there have been efforts in Iran to integrate and combine what is taught
in the university with that what is taught in the traditional seminaries
(the Ḥawzas), but there is still no real school or institute where this
approach is being practiced.

**Nasr:** The question that you pose is extremely important and I have,
in different places, alluded to what I consider to be the solution. This
was actually what led to the establishment of Islamic universities in
the 1970s, but unfortunately that did not come to be the right solution.
Sayed Ali Ashraf-God bless his soul-myself, and certain others attempted
to create new Islamic institutions based on the philosophy of education
derived from the holistic Islamic worldview. A great deal of effort was
made to bring together Muslim intellectuals and we had the great
conference on Islamic education in Makka, where I gave a keynote lecture
and laid out a plan to achieve the task; but we did not realize then
that the people who were going to actually create these institutions did
not share our point of view. So what we ended up with was Islamic
universities, such as those at Kuala Lumpur and Islamabad, where they
teach Sharīʿa and other “*Islamic sciences* ,” but have a totally
secular approach to other forms of knowledge. If they teach chemistry,
they teach it as they would at the University of Punjab, for instance.
They do not understand that Islamic principles should apply to every
form of science.

Now, to come back to your question about what we should do practically:
I said this fifty years ago and I am still saying it-as in the famous
Persian proverb,*sang-i buzurg ʿalāmat-i nazadanast* , when you pick up
a big stone, it is a sign you are going to throw it. That is, this idea
of having a grandiose institution, let us say a university with 50,000
students based on the Islamic view of knowledge, is not going to work at
the present stage. Every important intellectual transformation in human
history has begun with a few people. Even the modern scientific
revolution, which changed the face of Western civilization and then
later all other civilizations, likewise began with the achievements of a
few. It wasn’t that everyone suddenly changed their worldview. If you
walked in the streets of Rome or Florence itself, where Galileo lived,
most of the people still functioned within the worldview of pre-Galilean
physics and astronomy. Then the change started to spread.

Now, that is what we have to do in the Islamic world today. The one
thing that has been accomplished since I first wrote on these subjects,
back in the 1950s when I was just finishing my PhD, is that first of all
a great deal of debate has taken place with various groups (like
Ijmālis); these debates, though not all equal in quality, were
nevertheless important, because they eliminated certain false premises.
The second important thing is that the philosophical vision for a
unified Islamic educational system and sciences has been more or less
fully articulated by various intellectuals, not more than fifteen or
twenty in number. When they began this intervention there was barely
anything written on these topics in this way, but now we have a solid
core of texts. Third, there are enough people in the world today, who
have accepted the idea of authentic*Islamic sciences* , to start one or
two small centers (no more than that) at which these issues are both
studied and taught to others, and let this be used as seed for the next
season. If you’re hungry, and you have just one sack of wheat, but you
have to feed a whole village, rather than converting the entire quantity
of wheat at hand into loaves of bread, it is better to sustain your
hunger and keep some to plant so

that the next harvest provides you more than enough to meet the needs of
the whole village. This is what we need to do. That is what you are
doing and I am doing-we do not have the financial and political power or
even the intellectual means to institutionalize this vision on a vast
scale, but we have to state our perspective. We have to state realities
and train the students we can.

However, there are some countries, including Iran, where there are some
people who are very influential and who understand these matters. The
program that I tried to develop when I was president at what is now
called Sharif University, which is Iran’s leading scientific
institution, to integrate modern science with the Islamic worldview, to
study the philosophy of science from the Islamic and not the Western
point of view, was exactly this kind of effort, and has had some
success. We need to fortify and multiply these kinds of efforts.
Concretely, there needs to be a center, either somewhere in the West or
in the Islamic world, where a small batch of students is taught and
research is conducted, specifically toward this vision. This, I think,
is the only possibility for revitalizing*Islamic sciences* . Perhaps we
could establish one such place in the West and another in the Islamic
world; just two such institutes where serious work could be done would
do wonders.

At one time, I had proposed the same thing for Islamic art, given the
imperative to revive the philosophy of Islamic art in order to revive
Islamic art and architecture. Then the Prince of Wales Institute of
Islamic Art was established in London, which is exactly what was needed.
A number of very good Muslim students in architecture and design
attended this institute-one of whom, Khalid Azzam, from the famous
Egyptian family of that name, is now the head of that institution. And
then the Jordanian authorities of the highest level became interested,
and established a wonderful school of Islamic art which is now
functioning in Amman under the direction of Minwar al-Maheid, who has an
excellent grasp of the principles of Islamic art and architecture. So we
have an example of success and I am very pleased that they are now
creating one like it in Indonesia.

But, back to*Islamic sciences* : I want to say that you can play a very
important role in this endeavor. I am at a stage in my life when I am
about to meet my Creator. I cannot undertake any more administrative
duties or start establishing institutions, as I have done in the past.
Now, you are younger than I am and it is your turn, but I am at your
service and will help you in any way that I can, God willing.

**Iqbal:** Operationalizing this vision hinges upon the availability of
material resources. Traditionally,*Islamic sciences* have always been
supported by public funds through*awqāf* or sometimes individual
patronage of kings,*wazīrs, ʿulamā* ʾ, and merchants. But today, that
glorious institution is in ruins. We have individuals with large amounts
of money, who are mostly interested in construction of tall buildings
and plazas rather than funding serious scholarship. When we talk of
establishing even a single institute, we immediately run into the
question of funding-I do not see any real hope of this happening in the
near future, even though just one or two individuals could fund it.
People who control public money-mostly oil

money-do not seem interested in the revival of*Islamic sciences* . So
where is the hope for such an institute to come into existence, either
in the West or in the Islamic lands?

**Nasr:** Your analysis of the economic dimension of any educational
enterprise in the Islamic world is completely correct. I will tell you
where the hope is-but as a prelude, one has to underscore, as you did,
that educational institutions throughout Islamic history were generally
supported by endowments, like the*Niẓāmiyya* at which al-Ghazālī taught.
All of these endowments were funded by individuals, whether Kings and
Wazirs or rich merchants. Many such institutions abide even now, like
the Wazir Khan Mosque and madrassa in your own city, Lahore. Now,
several things have been changed from the traditional situation. First
of all, institutional*awqāf* have been taken away from the*ʿulama* ;
this major Islamic institution has been to some extent secularized.
“Ministries of*Awqāf* ” were created, and the endowments came under the
ambit of governments in Egypt, Pakistan, Turkey, Iran, and many other
countries. Today, the people who usually endow the*waqf* are generally
interested in funding places of worship, rather than centers necessarily
involving intellectual activity. We are thus faced with a dilemma in
which the governments that took over the*awqāf* are, by and large,
secular, and so think primarily of modern Western science and technology
if they think of intellectual activity. There are exceptions-for
instance, today is the first of*Khurdād* , the third month in the
Persian calendar, when there are big celebrations for Mulla Ṣadra in
Iran, some with government funding. Second, and this is the main
problem, most of the wealthy in the Muslim world today are nouveau
riche; they lack rooting in Islamic culture and intellectual tradition,
unlike the aristocracy of old. Of course, there is a great deal of
fluidity in Islamic societies, but the new merchant class is more
inclined toward Western science and technology, imports from Germany and
the United States, and the like; you know what I am talking about. These
people do not breathe in the same cultural matrix as did their
predecessors a century or two ago. Third, you have new types of
institutions, such as universities, which have their own budgets and
funding, whether government-controlled or private, and today (unlike
the*Niẓāmiyya* at which al-Ghazālī taught) are not based on a*waqf* .
Within this context, as you said, what is to be done? Where is the hope?

Let me give you an example. I told you about the Prince of Wales
Institute in London for the Revival of Traditional Islamic Art, also
touching on the sciences and traditional geometry and so forth, created
through the patronage of Prince Charles. It has been doing very good
work over the last two decades, and a similar institute-unique in the
Muslim world-has been established in Amman. Now, the question is, how
did this happen? The first cousin of the King of Jordan, Prince Ghazi
bin Muhammad-a close friend of mine, a remarkable man among Arab
princes, a Princeton and Oxford-educated doctor, who writes very well
and thoroughly understands Islamic tradition as a whole (especially its
artistic tradition)-was there on the ground, you might say. This is a
good lesson for us, and is the only thing we can do now, that is, search
for one or two effective patrons. I have no hope that, for instance, a
newly elected Egyptian president will decide to establish

a new university for traditional sciences. That is not going to happen.
But this second possibility is always there. I shall give you a second
example: the late King of Morocco, King Hasan, who was very much a
modernist-the way he dressed before becoming king was very much like a
French gentleman, his ties cost hundreds of dollars, and I knew him well
personally when he was still crown prince-but who also had a great love
for Islamic art and architecture. This was a kind of spiritual love. He
did more than any Muslim ruler in the twentieth century for the revival
of Islamic art. It is unbelievable what he did in Morocco: he
established a school for the revival of Islamic architecture, design,
geometry, Arabic, and other traditional sciences, all amounting to a
really remarkable contribution to Islamic artistic (and therefore
intellectual) tradition. He was neither a philosopher nor a
mathematician; he did not understand*Islamic sciences* the way you and I
do, but the application of those sciences to the domain of arts was of
interest to him. So we have two examples from the Arab world: one in
Jordan, one in Morocco. Both of them appear as kind of accidents: nobody
educated King Hasan, nor Prince Ghazi, to be interested in these
matters. We must therefore not lose hope and pray that such a thing may
happen for the*Islamic sciences* .

Among the billion and a half Muslims, there are probably several million
who are fairly well off financially. Surely five or ten such people can
undertake this task for the broader*Islamic sciences* what some people
did for Islamic art and architecture. I know, for example, that there is
a new class of very wealthy businessmen in Turkey; they are very pious,
not like the nouveau riche I mentioned before. Many of them sponsor
books, publishing houses, and other intellectual activities; they are
interested in universities, and it is not difficult to imagine that some
of them will see value in the idea of funding an institute of the kind
we have mentioned. You only need one or two such people with whom you
can work to establish a small center for the revival of
traditional*Islamic sciences* -a center where one would teach both
the*naqlī* and the*ʿaqlī* sciences as an integrated vision.

Another country with such prospects is Indonesia, where there is a lot
of interest in*Islamic sciences* , even among the wealthy. They already
have an institute of perennial studies in Jakarta, which is a very
interesting development, especially because one could not even imagine
it a few decades ago. With forty or fifty gifted students, the entire
intellectual landscape can be changed. The other countries where one
might picture such possibilities include Turkey, Iran, Indonesia, and
also Malaysia; unfortunately, I cannot name any country in the Arab
world, despite their massive libraries and manuscripts, which are today
the site of the Arab Spring and the construction of tall buildings, as
you so perceptively wrote of Makka in the previous issue of your
journal… The political culture and situation are not currently amenable
to the kind of intellectual activity we have in mind. Nor did I mention
Pakistan-your country of birth-despite its great potential, because,
unfortunately, there are a lot of difficulties there right now. One may
also mention places like Bosnia, where there are strong

intellectuals very much along our line of thinking, but they are
somewhat disconnected from the rest of the Muslim world.

**Iqbal:** Good. If there is a possibility of one place, one center,
that is all one needs at this stage, to begin the work, and once people
see the fruit...

**Nasr:** That is right. And then there is a question of quality, and
this brings me back to a point which I had had mentioned before: we need
to remain very small at the beginning; one cannot mass-produce good
scholars and thinkers.

**Iqbal:** Indeed! On another note, but speaking of the influence of a
small number of people, there is a long history of the study of Islam in
the West. It has gone through several stages. At present, we have a
mixture of neo-Orientalism and academic discourse as well as a new
generation of Muslims entering the field. Some of these are your
students; others have studied with other scholars, and they are now
taking up positions. Now, the question is, what kind of discourse will
this new generation forge in the academy? What I mean is the following:
when one reads your work, one immediately recognizes the fragrance of
īmān. You write in an academic style, but you do not sprinkle your text
with the academic jargon or the hesitancy one finds so often (“maybe”,
“perhaps”, “it is plausible”, and so forth). Instead, one knows
immediately that this text comes from the pen of one firmly rooted in
Islamic tradition. Let me ask parenthetically something I have always
wanted to ask: given that the academy has its own dictates, how did you
manage to maintain your uncompromising stand, your own unique style? I
was fascinated by this when I first read your works in the 1970s. More
broadly, though, this academic discourse on Islam has a history of its
own; and Muslim scholars who arrived in the West from the former
colonies came with massive colonial baggage… Most of them yielded to the
dictates of the academy and wrote in the same vein as their non-Muslim
mentors and teachers. But now, we have a new generation, mostly children
who grew up on the West, entering the academy. What advice can you give
them to forge a genuine and authentic discourse on Islam?

**Nasr:** This is a very important question; let me respond as best as I
can. Although I don’t want to speak about myself, I am unfortunately
involved in this, so I have to. When I shifted from the sciences to the
humanities, from studying physics and mathematics at MIT to the field
of*Islamic sciences* and philosophy at Harvard, I studied with several
major Western scholars, including the greatest classical Orientalist of
the English language, Sir Hamilton Gibb, who had great appreciation for
our religion. At that time, there were three kinds of writings on Islam:
first, texts written by non-Muslim Westerners, who studied Islam from
either the Marxist or secular-humanist point of view, or some other
vintage; second, texts originally written by Muslims in Arabic or
Persian and then translated into English or French-for example, the
works of the late Sayyid Qutb; and third, works by Westernized Muslims,
people with Muslim names but who had little to do with Islam itself as a
religion. It was in this context that I finished my PhD. I was the first
Muslim-astaghfiruʾLlāh-who was highly educated at the best universities
of the West and who yet entirely rejected the modernist, Orientalist
approaches to Islam. It is in this context that, at the age of

twenty-four, even before I finished my PhD dissertation (which later was
published as*An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines* [SUNY
Press, 1994 (1963)]), I wrote my first book. I concentrated on Islamic
science and philosophy. In the field of philosophy, for example, along
with Corbin, we changed the entire intellectual scene by producing
first-rate scholarly texts written from the Islamic perspective. Despite
great opposition, not only by Western scholars but also by secularized
Muslims including Arab nationalists, I fought single-handedly…
eventually, there were enough books and articles that the notion of
Islamic science became firmly established.

One thing I want to emphasize, related to this: one must be very careful
when writing, especially if trying to carve a new path; no one should be
able to criticize you for not putting a diacritical under “z” when
necessary, or other such things…

**Iqbal:** Yes. All the mechanics of it-

**Nasr:** Yes, one must carefully proofread one’s work. I know so many
Muslim writers who know a lot of things and who have a lot to say, but
no Western scholar takes them seriously because they are “sloppy” in
their presentation. My first three books were published by Harvard
University Press, which was an achievement,*al-ḥamdu liʾLlāh* , not only
for me as a Muslim but also on its own terms. These books did extremely
well outside of America as well, and now they are being read in places
as far apart as Pakistan, Nigeria, and Malaysia. At that time, I was the
only Muslim scholar living in the West who had the courage to write from
this perspective, but now, thank God, there are many Muslim scholars
appearing on the world scene.

**Iqbal:** Finally, if you were to map out the development of Islamic
studies in the Western university system, what would you consider its
milestones?

**Nasr:** First of all, it was the singular matter of being able, both
in the classroom and in publication, to present Islam as a revealed
religion, as Muslims believe it to be and not like, say, Michael Cook,
who studied Islam as a historical accident that just happened to emerge
in Arabia. Let me give you an example. There is a great difference among
the Jewish, Protestant, and Catholic scholars in their interpretation of
Judaism and Christianity, but a truly rooted Jewish scholar can be
distinguished from one who studies Judaism from the outside; and the
same is true for Christianity. Of course, one cannot preach religion at
an American university, but at the same time one has to remain within
the fold of that religion in order to present it authentically. This is
a separate and ongoing debate within departments of religious studies,
into which I cannot go here, but for my part I am very opposed to the
secular approaches to the teaching of religion-it is like saying that a
music teacher has to be musically deaf. Obviously, when teaching at an
American or European university, one cannot teach as if one were at
al-Azhar; but nevertheless, one can present Islam as a revelation. If
students want to understand the meaning of revelation, that is a
separate issue; one cannot dictate to them a particular understanding.
Second, there must be an in-depth critique of Orientalist and social
scientific scholarship concerning Islam, to which I have also been
contributing for the last fifty years. The

achievement and impact of Edward Said in this regard is truly
remarkable, although his Orientalism does not directly deal with the
study of Islam as such. Third, Islamic scholars must thoroughly know not
only their own tradition, but also what Western scholars have written on
the subject. This means not only the English but also the German,
French, and other-language scholarship. One must be able to present a
critique of that scholarship based on knowledge; no one is going to take
a Muslim scholar seriously if his or her scholarship lacks this aspect.
This requires linguistic competence as well: Arabic, Persian, English,
German, and French are absolutely essential, and at least one other
Islamic language such as Turkish or Urdu if that scholar is concerned
with the Ottoman world or Muslim India. A test of a good Muslim scholar
is that he should be able to give a respectable lecture at al-Azhar and
likewise at a major Western university.

The Western academic scene is changing rapidly. Just in the last few
years, there has emerged a new generation of Muslim scholars in Western
universities. These younger scholars, some of whom I know and have been
honoured to teach, are finding tenured positions and are going to change
the entire academic scene. Even fifty years ago, there were few Jewish
scholars teaching Judaism at major American universities; yet now almost
everywhere they hold high academic positions and most Jewish studies
positions are held by Jewish scholars themselves. This is quite
admirable. Muslim parents should not push their children solely to
become doctors, engineers, and lawyers, but should encourage them also
to enter the field of Islamic studies. Thank you.


