Section 9: Hypocrites refuse to accept the Messenger's judgement
================================================================

Hypocrites' leaning to Satan -the Messenger's judgement shall be
accepted-Reward for the obedience to Allah and the Messenger.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 60
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُواْ بِمَا
أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَن
يَتَحَاكَمُواْ إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُواْ أَن يَكْفُرُواْ بِهِ
وَيُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَن يُضِلَّهُمْ ضَلاَلاً بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60.** ***"Have you not seen those who think they believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They intend to
resort in the judgement of Taghut (false deities) while they have been
ordered to reject him, and Satan intends to mislead them far astray."***

It happened that there arose a dispute between a hypocritical Muslim and
a Jew. They decided to refer to the arbitrator.

The Jew elected the Prophet (S) as the arbitrator for trustworthiness
and justice he (S) had, but the hypocrite agreed with Ka'b-ibn-'Ashraf
(one of the distinguished Jews) as his arbitrator, because the hypocrite
knew that he could tend the attitude of Ka'b towards his benefit by
giving him some gifts. This verse is for the bleme of that manner.

***"Have you not seen those who think they believe in what has been
revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They intend to resort
in the judgement of Taghut (false deities) while they have been ordered
to reject him, and Satan intends to mislead them far astray."***

As for the definition of 'the false deities', Imam -Sadiq (as) says:

*'false deity is he who does not judge rightfully, decides against the
command of Allah, and his order is obeyed."* [^1]

In the previous verse, *Allah* and the Apostle were introduced as the
place of resorts of discords, but in this verse, the blame is upon those
who refer to false deities as the place of resorts of their own
discords.

Thus, in that verse the virtuous cite of resort has been introduced,
while in this verse the impious one has been pointed out. So, true
believers do not even think of going to false deities since agreement
with /Taghut/ ***'false deities'*** is prohibited.

***"... they have been ordered to reject him..."***

For removing the interior discords, going to non-Muslims is forbidden
for Muslims.

***"... They intend to resort to the judgement of taghut (false
deities)..."***

Through a verse (No.35) in the current Surah, formerly the Qur'an
pointed out that: for a family discord an arbitrator from the family of
the wife and another one from the family of the husband should judge.

***"... Then appoint a judge from his people and a judge from her people
..."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 61
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْاْ إِلَى مَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ وَإِلَى
الرَّسُولِ رَأَيْتَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَنكَ صُدُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**61.** ***"And when it is said to them: 'Come to what Allah has
revealed and to the Messenger,' you will see the hypocrites barring
(people) to you with utter aversion."***

The reference of hypocrites to false deities and asking judgement from
(non-Muslim) foreigners is not a casual happening. But, it is the
quality and spiritual specification of hypocrites that they oppose the
heavenly leaders and reject the path of truth.

***"And when it is said: 'Come to what Allah has revealed and to the
Messenger,' you will see the hypocrites barring (people) to you with
utter aversion."***

### Explanations

1. The hypocrites do not surrender to the law of *Allah* and the command
of the Prophet (S). But, in the meanwhile, we must invite them to the
truth.

2. The hypocrites are not sensitive to the heartily faith of people to
*Allah.* Their main worriment is the crowd of people gathered around the
heavenly Messenger.

***"... you will see the hypocrites barring (people) to you with utter
aversion."***

3. The blameworthy plot of the hypocrites is separating people from the
Prophet (S)*.*

However, in another occurrence, the Qur'an indicates that barring the
path of the Prophet (S) is, in fact, barring the path of *Allah,* and
denying the Messenger of *Allah* (S) is the denial of the signs of
*Allah.* In another verse, it says:

***".. but surely they do not call you a liar, but the unjust deny the
signs of Allah."*** [^2]

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 62
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ
ثُمَّ جَآؤُوكَ يَحْلِفُونَ بِاللّهِ إِنْ أَرَدْنَا إِلاَّ إِحْسَانًا
وَتَوْفِيقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**62.** ***"But how will it be, when some disaster befalls them on
account of what their (own) hands have forwarded, then they come to you
swearing by Allah (saying): 'We intended naught but kindness and concord
'?"***

The justification of the hypocrites for referring the judgment to the
false deities, as they said, was that their final aim was to make peace.

So, if they had gone to the Prophet (S) for judgment and he judged for
the benefit of one party, naturally the other party would have become
displeased from the Messenger of *Allah* (S) and would have raised a
tumult noisily, which was not appropriate with the position of the holy
Prophet (S).

Therefore, to avoid this matter and to protect the honour, rank, and
amiability of the Prophet (S), they did not take the conflict to him.

### Explanations

1. The hypocritical Muslims refer to the divine leaders only when they
encounter a difficulty and feel danger.

***"...they come to you..**.."*

2. The opponents usually justify their wrong actions.

***"...*** ***We intended naught but kindness ..."***

3. The hypocrites apply the swearing to *Allah* as a cover over their
own goals.

***"... swearing by Allah ..."***

4. Among the deeds of the hypocrites is: showing a feature of
benevolence, kindness and claiming the motto of peacefulness and
exchanging agreements.

***"....kindness and concord?"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 63
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُ اللّهُ مَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ فَأَعْرِضْ
عَنْهُمْ وَعِظْهُمْ وَقُل لَّهُمْ فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ قَوْلاً بَلِيغًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**63.** ***"Those are they of whom Allah knows what is in their hearts,
therefore turn away from them, and admonish them and speak to them
concerning themselves effectual words."***

The effort of the hypocrites is useless, because Allah knows both their
interiors and their evil intentions, and manifests them at an
appropriate time.

***"Those are they of whom Allah knows what is in their hearts ..."***

Also, the apology of the hypocrites is not done truthfully; otherwise
they would not issue the command of rejection.

***"... Allah knows what is in their hearts, therefore turn away from
them ..."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 64
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن رَّسُولٍ إِلاَّ لِيُطَاعَ بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ وَلَوْ
أَنَّهُمْ إِذ ظَّلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ جَآؤُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُواْ اللّهَ
وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُواْ اللّهَ تَوَّابًا رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**64.** ***"And We did not send any Messenger save that he should be
obeyed, by Allah's leave, and had they, when they were unjust to
themselves, come to you and sought forgiveness of Allah and the
Messenger ( also) had asked forgiveness for them, they would certainly
have found Allah forgiving, Merciful. "***

Through the previous verses, the Qur'an has seriously condemned
referring to the tyrannical arbitrators. Yet, as an emphasis in this
verse, it says:

***"And We did not send any Messenger save that he should be obeyed, by
Allah's leave, ..."***

The reason of it is that those Apostles have been both the Messenger of
*Allah* and the chief in the divine government. Therefore, people have
been enjoined to obey them from the point of stating the ordinances of
*Allah,* and the manner of practicing them both. They should not suffice
only to a mere claim of faith.

Then, in the continuation of the verse, it has opened the door of return
to the sinners and those who have referred to the false deities, or in
some way or other, have committed a fault or faults, where it says:

***"... and had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you
and sought forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger (also) had asked
forgiveness for them, they would certainly have found Allah forgiving,
Merciful. "***

The current discussed part of the verse points to this fact that the
fruit of the obedience of *Allah* and His Apostle (S) returns to
yourselves, as well as the result of your disobedience, which is a kind
of injustice, that returns to you, too, because it disturbs the material
affairs of your life and, also from the spiritual point of view, it
causes your retrogression.

By the way, this verse is an answer to those who imagine referring to
the Prophet or Imam is a kind of polytheism, because this verse clearly
denotes that coming to the Prophet (S) and setting him as an intercessor
before *Allah,* in order to seek forgiveness from Him for the sinners,
is effective and causes their repentance to be accepted and the grace of
*Allah* to be showered.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 65
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ وَرَبِّكَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىَ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لاَ يَجِدُواْ فِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِّمَّا
قَضَيْتَ وَيُسَلِّمُواْ تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65.** ***"But no, by your Lord! They do not believe (in reality) until
they make you the judge regarding the disagreement between them, then
they find within themselves no dislike of which you decide and submit
with full submission."***

### Occasion of Revelation

There was a dispute between Zubayr-ibn-'Awam (one of the Emigrants) and
another Muslim from the Helpers upon the irrigation of a
palm-plantation. Since the Upper part of the garden belonged to Zubayr,
the Prophet (S) judged that he should irrigate it first.

The other man, the Helper, became worried from the Prophet's judgement
(S) and told him: "As Zubayr is your cousin, you judged in his benefit."
As soon as he uttered that expression, the face of the Prophet (S)
paled, and the above verse was revealed.

Surprising! They themselves elected the Prophet (S) as an arbitrator,
but they refused his judgement.

Imam -Sadiq (as) in a tradition said:

*"If some people worship Allah by establishing prayer, performing Hajj
pilgrimage, paying alms, and so on to adore Him, but they doubt about
the deeds of the Messenger of Allah (S), they are not, indeed,
believers."*

Then he (as) recited this verse.

***"But no, by your Lord! They do not believe (in reality) until they
make you the judge regarding the disagreement between them, then they
find within themselves no dislike of which you decide and submit with
lull submission."***

However, the signs of a true believer are three:

A) Instead of referring to the false deities, he takes the judgement to
the Prophet (S).

B) He should not have any suspicion to the judgement of the Messenger of
*Allah* (S).

***"... they find within themselves no dislike ..."***

C) He ought to accept the command of the Prophet (S) ardently and
surrender to it.

By the way, judgement is from among the ranks of messenger ship and
master ship. And, personal attitude against the sacred Qur'anic text is
forbidden, because this manner is the sign of faithlessness, (regarding
to the occasion of revelation).

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 66
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّا كَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ أَنِ اقْتُلُواْ أَنفُسَكُمْ أَوِ
اخْرُجُواْ مِن دِيَارِكُم مَّا فَعَلُوهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلٌ مِّنْهُمْ
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ فَعَلُواْ مَا يُوعَظُونَ بِهِ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَّهُمْ
وَأَشَدَّ تَثْبِيتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**66.** ***"And if We had decreed for them (saying): (Kill yourselves or
go forth from your dwellings', they would not have done it except a few
of them; and if they had done what they were admonished, it would have
certainly been better for them and more efficacious for strengthening
(their faith).***

Here, in order to complete the previous discussion about those who
sometimes felt inconvenience for the just judgements of the Prophet (S),
the verse points to some laborious duties of the former nations, such as
the Jews whom, after idol-worshipping and calf-worshipping, were
ordained to kill each other as an atonement of that great sin, or to go
out of their beloved homes.

But, this group are not ordained a heavy and grave duty. If they were
also enjoined to do hard duties, how could they tolerate?

These people who do not submit the judgement of the Prophet (S) upon the
irrigation of a palm-plantation, how can they fulfil other trials? So,
it says:

***"And if We had decreed for them (saying): (Kill yourselves or go
forth from your dwellings, they would not have done it except a few of
them; ..."***

Then, it points to two advantages that result from the fulfilment of the
commands of *Allah,* saying:

***"...and if they had done what they were admonished, it would have
certainly been better for them and more efficacious for strengthening
(their faith).***

Here, the commands and ordinances of *Allah* have been rendered into
admonishments and advices. This shows that these ordinances are not any
things that benefit the Commander *(Allah),* but they are some advices
that benefit us ourselves.

It is interesting that the verse implies that the further a person paves
the path of obedience of *Allah (s.w.t.),* the more his perseverance and
steadfastness promotes. In fact, the obedience of the command of *Allah
is* a kind of spiritual practice for human beings.

Surah An-Nisa', Verses 67 - 68
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذاً لَّآتَيْنَاهُم مِّن لَّدُنَّـا أَجْراً عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ صِرَاطًا مُّسْتَقِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**67.** ***"And then We would certainly have given them from Our Own
accord a great reward."***

**68.** ***" And We would certainly have guided them in the straight
path."***

In these two verses, two other advantages of obeying and submitting to
*Allah are* stated. In addition to the advantages mentioned in the
previous verses, the first verse points to the third gain of this
obedience. It says:

***"And then We would certainly have given them from Our Own accord a
great reward."***

And the second verse points to the fourth result of obeying and
submitting to *Allah when* it says:

***"And We would certainly have guided them in the straight path."***

The objective meaning of the term 'guidance', mentioned in this verse,
is some additional graces which are bestowed upon these eligible persons
from the side of *Allah in* the form of a secondary guidance and as a
particular reward.

Surah An-Nisa', Verses 69 - 70
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُطِعِ اللّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ
اللّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِّنَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالصِّدِّيقِينَ وَالشُّهَدَاء
وَالصَّالِحِينَ وَحَسُنَ أُولَـئِكَ رَفِيقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ الْفَضْلُ مِنَ اللّهِ وَكَفَى بِاللّهِ عَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**69.** ***"And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, these are with
those upon whom Allah has bestowed favours, of the prophets, and the
truthful, and the martyrs, and the righteous; and excellent are these as
companions."***

**70.** ***"This is the grace from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as the
Knower."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Upon the revelation of this verse, it has been cited that: once one of
the companions of the Prophet (S), who was named Nuban, and who had a
fairly intensive affection to the Messenger of *Allah (S),* came to him
while he was very distressed.

The Messenger of *Allah* (S) asked him about his disturbance and he
answered that he reviewed the thought in his mind on that day that if he
would be admitted into Paradise on the Day of Judgement, he would surely
not be in the position of the Prophet (S) therein.

And, if he would not be admitted into Paradise, his circumstances were
evident. Therefore, in either of the cases he might be deprived from
being at the presence of him (S). That was why he was distressed.

Then, these two verses were revealed and gave glad tidings to such
people implying that the obedient persons will be the companions of the
prophets and the chosen ones in Heaven. Then the Prophet (S) said:

***"By Allah, the faiths of a Muslim will not he completed except that
the one loves*** **me** ***better than himself; his parents and all his
relatives, and that he he*** ***submitted to my words."***

### Companions in Heaven

In the previous holy verses, the privileges of the obedient to the
command of *Allah (s.w.t.)* were enumerated. To complete them, this holy
verse says:

***"And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favours ..."***

As it was mentioned in the commentary of Surah Al-Hamd, This bounty
reaches to those who constantly pave the Straight Path and go astray
naught.

Then, to explain this phrase, it points to the following four groups,
and says:

***"... of the prophets, and the truthful, and the martyrs, and the
righteous; ..."***

1. The prophets and the special messengers of Allah are those who take
the first step for the guidance, leadership and invitation of people to
the Straight Path.

2. The truthful are those who both tell the truth in their speech and
prove it by their own true and sincere deeds. They practically show that
they are not only some bare claimers of Faith, but they truly do believe
in the commands of *Allah.*

In Islamic authentic literature, the whole immaculate Imams (as) and
Fatima Zahra (as) are introduced as the best samples of ***'the
truthful'.***

3. The martyrs are those slain in the path of divine goal and belief, or
those distinguished persons who will be witnesses to the deeds of human
beings on the Day of Judgement.

4. The Righteous are the distinguished eligible persons who have gained
some prominent ranks by performing some positive, productive and useful
deeds and also by obeying the commands of the prophets.

At the end of the verse, it remarks:

***"... and excellent are these as companions."***

It is clearly understood from the above verse that having good
companions and valuable friends is so great and important that even in
the Hereafter, to complete the Heavenly bounties, this great favour will
be granted to' the obedient', too.

To express the importance of this great advantage (viz. the
companionship of the Chosens), it says:

***"This is the grace from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as the
Knower."***

However, being with prophets and the truthful is a grace from Allah to
those who obey Him.

*Allah* is cognizant to the states of the obedient and disobedient
people, as well as to the circumstances of the hypocrites and sincere
believers. He knows those who are eligible for the friendship of the
prophets, the truthful and so on, the same as the states of those who
are not eligible, because He is aware of even the treachery of the eyes.

[^1]: Al-Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 387

[^2]: Surah Al-'An'am, No.6, Verse 33.


