Section 10: Believers
=====================

Believers enjoined to be always on their guard -Those Who sell this
world's life for the life

Hereafter -Reward for those Who endeavour in the way of the Lord.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 71
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ خُذُواْ حِذْرَكُمْ فَانفِرُواْ ثُبَاتٍ
أَوِ انفِرُواْ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**71.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Take your precaution (keep weapon
with yourselves), then either advance in parties or march off all
together. "***

In the previous verse, the subject was upon the obedience of Allah, the
leadership of the immaculate ones, and sovereignty of the Prophet (S).
In this verse, the words imply of being careful of the necessity of
power, intelligence and a martial preparation for the Islamic community
and for the divine leadership.

The Arabic word /hi\`zr/ means: 'being alert', 'being on the lookout',
and 'the means of defence'. The Qur'anic term /\`subat/ is the plural
form of the term /\`subat/ which means: ' separate parts of forces',
(including of groups of quick attacking fighters who cause the enemy to
become confused so that they cannot think what to do).

### Explanations

1. Muslims should be always prepared and alert. They should be cognizant
of the plans, number of forces, the sort of weapons, spirit, and
internal and external co-operations of the enemy. Thus they should
design their affairs and act accordingly.

2. Muslims must be trained in military courses.

***"O' you who have Faith! Take your precautions (keep weapons with
yourselves) ..."***

3. Muslims should be mobilized.

***"… or march off all together."***

4. Muslims have to utilize the different styles of challenging with
enemy.

***"... Then either advance in parties or march off all together."***

5. Muslims must protect the bounds of their country.

Acting upon the involving message of this verse, is the secret of honour
and glory, while neglecting it is the mystery of the fall and failure of
Muslims.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 72
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِنكُمْ لَمَن لَّيُبَطِّئَنَّ فَإِنْ أَصَابَتْكُم مُّصِيبَةٌ
قَالَ قَدْ أَنْعَمَ اللّهُ عَلَيَّ إِذْ لَمْ أَكُن مَّعَهُمْ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**72.** ***"And verily some of you there are that loiter; if then a
misfortune befalls you he says: 'Allah has blessed me in this that I was
not present with them'."***

Following to the general command of Holy Struggle and trial against
enemy, which was stated in the previous verse, in this holy verse, the
Qur'an has pointed to some hypocrites and intends to say that these
figures and such features, who are among you, vigorously try not to take
part in the rows of strivers who struggle in the way of Allah, It says:

***"And verily some of you there are that loiter; …"***

But when the strivers return from the battle-field, or when the news of
war reaches them that they have suffered a failure or martyrdom, these
hypocrites will happily say: what a great bounty Allah has given them
that they (hypocrites) did not accompanied them (the strivers) to
witness such heart-rending events! It says:

***"…if them a misfortune befalls you, he says: Allah has blessed me in
this that I was not present with them'."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 73
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ أَصَابَكُمْ فَضْلٌ مِّنَ الله لَيَقُولَنَّ كَأَن لَّمْ تَكُن
بَيْنَكُمْ وَبَيْنَهُ مَوَدَّةٌ يَا لَيتَنِي كُنتُ مَعَهُمْ فَأَفُوزَ
فَوْزًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**73.** ***"And if some grace from Allah befalls you, he would certainly
say - as if there had not been any friendship between you and him - 'I
wish I were with them, So that I had achieved a great achievement!' "***

As soon as the hypocrites are informed that the believers have gained
the victory, and naturally have obtained some booties, they regret and,
like some strangers, as if there have been no connection between them
and the believers sorrowfully say:

***"….'I wish I were with them, So that I had achieved a great
achievement!' "***

It is clear that the person who counts martyrdom in the way of *Allah* a
kind of misfortune, and considers the lack of martyrdom a divine bounty,
in his view, the victory and great felicity is not anything save
physical triumph and the spoils of war.

***"And if some grace from Allah befalls you, he would certainly, say -
as if there had not been any friendship between you and him -***

***'I wish I were with them, so that I had achieved a great
achievement!' "***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse74
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيُقَاتِلْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ الَّذِينَ يَشْرُونَ الْحَيَاةَ
الدُّنْيَا بِالآخِرَةِ وَمَن يُقَاتِلْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَيُقْتَلْ
أَو يَغْلِبْ فَسَوْفَ نُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**74.** ***" So let those fight in the way of Allah who sell the life of
this world for the Hereafter , and whoever fights in the way of Allah,
then be he slain or be he victorious, We shall grant him a great
reward."***

Believers must be prepared for Holy Struggle. In this verse, as well as
in a few following verses, the true Muslim believers have logically and
excitingly been invited to struggle in the way of *Allah.*

At first, it implies that only those fight in the way of *Allah who* are
ready to sell the life of this material world for the eternal life in
the Hereafter. That is, only those persons can be counted among the true
strivers that are ready for such a bargain. It says:

***"So let those fight in the way of Allah who sell the life of this
world for the Hereafter ..."***

Then, at the end of the verse, it remarks that the fate of such strivers
is quite clear. They either become martyr, or they defeat the enemy for
the sake of Allah and gain the victory. In both cases, they will be
given a great reward by Allah. The verse says:

***"... and whoever fights in the way of Allah, then be he slain or be
he victorious, We shall grant him a great reward."***

It is certain that such soldiers, with such a spiritual state, have no
failure in their minds, because in both cases they know themselves
victorious. Even the non-Muslim scholars, who have discussed about the
quick triumphs of Muslims at the time of the Prophet (S), and their
victories after that, have considered this doctrine as one of the
effective factors in the progression of Muslims.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 75
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لَكُمْ لاَ تُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَالْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ
مِنَ الرِّجَالِ وَالنِّسَاء وَالْوِلْدَانِ الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ
رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْ هَـذِهِ الْقَرْيَةِ الظَّالِمِ أَهْلُهَا
وَاجْعَل لَّنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ وَلِيًّا وَاجْعَل لَّنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ
نَصِيرً }
  </p>
</blockquote>

**75.** ***"And what has happened to you that you should not fight in
the way of Allah and for the weak among men, women and children who say:
'Our Lord! Take us out of this town whose people are oppressors, and
appoint for us from You guardian, and appoint for us from you
helper!"***

### Seeking Assistance through Human Affections

In the previous verse the believers have been invited to Holy Struggle.
The verse has emphasized on the faith in *Allah;* and the Day of
Resurrection, with the reasoning of gain and loss But this verse invites
them towards Holy Struggle basing on stimulating the humanities.

It inquires why do you not struggle in the way of *Allah;* and for the
oppressed and defend less men, women and children who are captured in
the grips of tyrants? Do your humanities let you to be silent and watch
these pathetic scenes? It says:

***"And what has happened to you that you should not fight in the way of
Allah and for the weak among men, women and children ..."***

Then, to stir the affections of the believers it points to the very
oppressed ones and says

***".. who say: 'Our Lord! Take us out of this town whose people are
oppressors...."***

They also ask their Lord to send a guardian from His side to support
them; and again they ask Him to appoint a helper from Himself for them.

The verse continues saying:

***" and appoint for us from You guardian, and appoint for us from You
helper!"***

The above-mentioned holy verse, indeed, is a hint to the fact that
*Allah (s.w.t.)* has answered to their invocation and He has trusted
***'you'*** with this great human duty. Then ***'you'*** are the
***'guardian'*** and the ***'helper'*** who have been appointed from the
side of *Allah (s.w.t.)* for supporting and saving them.

It should be noted that according to some Islamic narrations, the
immaculate Imams have said:

*"We are the same oppressed that people should raise for our
government."* [^1]

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 76
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَالَّذِينَ
كَفَرُواْ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ الطَّاغُوتِ فَقَاتِلُواْ أَوْلِيَاء
الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّ كَيْدَ الشَّيْطَانِ كَانَ ضَعِيفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**76.** ***"Those who believe fight in the way of Allah, and those who
disbelieve fight in the way of Taghut (Satan). Fight, therefore,
(against) Satans patrons. Satan's plot is certainly weak."***

In this holy verse, in order to encourage the strivers to struggle
against the enemy, and also to specify the vows and goals of the
strivers, it says such:

***"Those who believe fight in the way of Allah, and those who
disbelieve fight in the way of Taghut (Satan)..."***

That is, in any case, the life is not free from struggling, but, some
people struggle alongside the path of the truth and some others
alongside the path of untruth and Satan.

Following to that, the verse continues saying:

***"... Fight, therefore, (against) Satan's patrons..."***

False deities, and the disobedient and unjust forces, though outwardly
seem great and powerful, they are inwardly weak and feeble. So, do not
fear of their arranged and qualified apparent, because they are hollow
from inside, and:

***"... 'Satan's plot is certainly weak."***

It is so, because their plots are founded on the Satanic forces. .

[^1]: At-Tafsir-us-Safi, Vol. 1, P. 371, & Tafsir-ul-Burhan, Vol. 1,
394.


