Section 11: The Hypocrites' Attitude towards the Believers
==========================================================

The refusal of hypocrites to fight -their secret plans -their
propagating falsehood -The Apostle enjoined to fight even
single -handed -to depend upon Allah - To ponder over the teachings of
the Holy Qur'an.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 77
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ قِيلَ لَهُمْ كُفُّواْ أَيْدِيَكُمْ
وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ فَلَمَّا كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْقِتَالُ إِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ يَخْشَوْنَ النَّاسَ كَخَشْيَةِ
اللّهِ أَوْ أَشَدَّ خَشْيَةً وَقَالُواْ رَبَّنَا لِمَ كَتَبْتَ
عَلَيْنَا الْقِتَالَ لَوْلا أَخَّرْتَنَا إِلَى أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ قُلْ
مَتَاعُ الدَّنْيَا قَلِيلٌ وَالآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِّمَنِ اتَّقَى وَلاَ
تُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**77.** ***"Have you not seen those to whom it was said: 'Withhold your
hand (from war ), and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate,' but when
fighting was prescribed for them, a group of them were so afraid of men
as (it should be) the fear of Allah, or (even) with a greater fear, and
they said: 'Our Lord! Why have You ordained fighting for us? Wherefore
did You not grant us a delay to a near end?' Say: 'The capital of this
world is scant and the Hereafter will be better for anyone who keeps
from evil; and you will not be wronged (even to the extent of) the husk
of a date-stone '."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It is narrated from Ibn-' Abbas that at the advent of Islam, when
Muslims were living in Mecca and they were under the harsh pressure of
the pagans there, some of them went to the Prophet (S) and said that
they had been dear and honoured before Islam but they lost that glory
and honesty, besides the hurt and injury they bore from the enemies.

They asked him to allow them to fight against the disbelievers to regain
their glory and honour. That day, the Prophet (S) answered them that he
was not commissioned to fight then.

But, later, when the command of fight was issued, some of those ardent
figures knowingly tarried to participate in the battle-field. Then the
verse was revealed in order to encourage the believers and also to blame
those careless and neglectful persons.

### Those Who only Talk!

Here, in this verse, the Qur'an implies that: indeed it is wonderful
that some people, in an inappropriate situation but with a surprising
state once ardently asked permission to go to Holy struggle when they
were commanded to restrain then and to pay to self-improvement
establishing prayer, strengthening their forces, and paying alms; After
that when the circumstances became fitting and the command of Holy
struggle was revealed, horror and terrible fear filled their whole
entity, and they began to protest against that command. It says:

***"Have you not seen those to whom it was said: 'Withhold your hand
(from war), and establish prayer and pay the poor - rate, , but when
fighting was prescribed for them, a group of them were so afraid of men
as (it should be) the fear of Allah, or (even) with a greater
fear...."***

In their protest, they clearly said that why Allah revealed the command
of Holy struggle so soon. It would be better He delayed it for a length
of time, or that duty would be put upon the coming dynasties. It says:

***"... and they said: 'Our Lord! Why have You ordained fighting for us?
Wherefore did You not grant us a delay to a near end? '..."***

The Qur'an delivers two answers to these persons. The first answer lies
in the content of the sentence saying:

***"…a group of them fear men as (it should be) the fear of Allah, or
(even) with a greater fear,…"***

That is, instead of being afraid of the Mighty and the Omnipotent Allah,
they fear of the feeble and incapable human beings. They are in horror
from such a creature more than that they fear from Allah!

For the second answer it denotes that such people should be told that
supposing that without participating in the Holy struggle, they could
live calmly for a few days but, at last, this worthless life will end
while the eternal life in Hereafter is more valuable for the pious ones,
in particular that they will be given their reward completely and they
will be wronged naught. It says:

***"… Say: ' The capital of this world is scant and the Hereafter will
be better for anyone who keeps from evil; and you will not be wronged
(even to the extent of) the husk of a date-stone',"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 78
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيْنَمَا تَكُونُواْ يُدْرِككُّمُ الْمَوْتُ وَلَوْ كُنتُمْ فِي بُرُوجٍ
مُّشَيَّدَةٍ وَإِن تُصِبْهُمْ حَسَنَةٌ يَقُولُواْ هَـذِهِ مِنْ عِندِ
اللّهِ وَإِن تُصِبْهُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ يَقُولُواْ هَـذِهِ مِنْ عِندِكَ قُلْ
كُلًّ مِّنْ عِندِ اللّهِ فَمَا لِهَـؤُلاء الْقَوْمِ لاَ يَكَادُونَ
يَفْقَهُونَ حَدِيثًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**78.** ***"Wherever you be, death will overtake you, even though you be
in strong towers. Yet, if something fine befalls them, they say: 'This
is from Allah', but if an ill befalls them, they say: 'This is from
you'. Say: 'Everything is from Allah'. But what is the matter with such
people that it is nigh to perceive no word "***

This verse is an encouragement unto the Holy Struggle and not being
afraid of death in the battle-field. It is also an answer to the ill
omens of the hypocrites that, instead of considering and recognizing the
matters well, they hold *Allah* responsible for the distresses and
failures.

By the way, the manner of defaming the leader is the style of
hypocrites. Therefore, it is not right that, by relieving themselves of
responsibilities, they justify the faults and hold others responsible
for their own sins.

It should be realized that victories and failures, death and life,
pleasant and unpleasant affairs, all in all, are in the circle of the
wise providence of *Allah.*

***"...'Everything comes from Allah'..."***

Thus, regarding the death being certain and decisive so that wherever we
may be it will happen. Then why would we escape from Holy struggle?

***"Wherever you be, death will overtake you, even though you be in
strong towers. Yet, if something fine befalls them they say: This is
from Allah', but if an ill befalls them, they say: 'This is from you.'
Say: 'Everything is from Allah '. But what is the matter with such
people that it is nigh to perceive no word?"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 79
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا أَصَابَكَ مِنْ حَسَنَةٍ فَمِنَ اللّهِ وَمَا أَصَابَكَ مِن
سَيِّئَةٍ فَمِن نَّفْسِكَ وَأَرْسَلْنَاكَ لِلنَّاسِ رَسُولاً وَكَفَى
بِاللّهِ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**79.** ***"Whatever of good befalls you, it is from Allah, and whatever
of ill befalls you, it is from yourself; and We have sent you as a
Messenger unto mankind; and Allah is sufficient (as) a witness
(thereof).***

From the point of the Divine theology, everything is the creature of
*Allah:*

***"Allah is the Creator of every thing..."***[^1]

And *Allah* has created every thing good and beautiful as the Qur'an
says:

***"Who made good everything that He has created...."*** [^2]

What relates to *Allah,* in this regard, is creation, which is not
separate from goodness. Therefore, our distresses and inflictions are,
firstly, because of the lack of those virtues that are not created by
Allah; and, secondly, whatever causes our deprivation from the divine
bounties, are the personal actions or the actions of the society.

However, all the virtues of a person are from Allah, while his defects
and faults are from his own self.

***"Whatever of good befalls you, it is from Allah, and whatever of ill
befalls you, it is from yourself; and We have sent you as a Messenger
unto mankind; and Allah is sufficient (as) a witness (thereof)."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 80
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّنْ يُطِعِ الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللّهَ وَمَن تَوَلَّى فَمَا
أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**80.** ***"Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah, and whoever
turns away -We have not sent you to be a watcher over them."***

### Practice of the Prophet is Just like the Revelation of Allah

In this verse, the situation of the Prophet (S) before people, and
people's good deeds and evil deeds, has been stated. At first, it says
that whoever obeys the Prophet (S) has obeyed *Allah.* Thus, the
obedience of *Allah* cannot be separate from the command of the Prophet
(S), because he (S) takes no step against the commands of *Allah.*

***"Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah...."***

Then, addressing the Prophet (S), the verse adds that if some people
disobey you and oppose your instructions, you are not responsible for
their deeds, and, from this point of view, you have no duty to force
them to stop any wrong doing. Your duty is to deliver propagation of the
message of Islam, to enjoin right and forbid wrong, and to guide the
misguided persons. It says:

***"... and whoever turns away -We have not sent you to be a watcher
over them."***

It should be noted that this verse is one of the clearest verses of the
Qur'an which is the proof upon the reasoning of the rightfulness of the
practice of the Prophet (S) and the acceptance of his traditions.

Then when we see that, according to the famous tradition of
***Thaqalayn*** (two weighty things), the Prophet (S) has explicitly
counted the traditions of Ahlul-Bayt some true evidences and proofs, we
result from it that the obedience of the command of Ahlul-Bayt, too, is
not separate from the obedience of the command of *Allah.*

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 81
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ طَاعَةٌ فَإِذَا بَرَزُواْ مِنْ عِندِكَ بَيَّتَ طَآئِفَةٌ
مِّنْهُمْ غَيْرَ الَّذِي تَقُولُ وَاللّهُ يَكْتُبُ مَا يُبَيِّتُونَ
فَأَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللّهِ وَكَفَى بِاللّهِ وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**81.** ***"And they express: 'Obedience', but when they go out from
your presence, a group of them spend the night in deciding other than
what you say; and Allah writes down what they decide*** ***by night.
Therefore, turn aside from them and trust in Allah; and Allah is
sufficient as a protector."***

In this verse, the Qur'an has pointed to the situation of some
hypocrites, or a group of people whose faith is weak. It says that when
they come beside the Prophet (S) and are in the row of Muslims, they
harmonize with others, and express that they obey the command of the
holy Prophet (S) and that they are most willingly ready to follow the
Messenger of *Allah.*

***"And they express: ' Obedience '...."***

But when people go out from the presence of the Prophet (S), those h the
persons whose faith is weak neglect their promises and, in their night
meetings, they make some decisions against the words of the holy Prophet
(S); but *Allah (s.w.t.)* records what they say in such meetings. It
says:

***"... but when they go out from your presence, a group of them spend
the night in deciding other than what you say; and Allah writes down ,
what they decide by night..."***

Yet, *Allah commands* His Messenger to turn aside from them with no fear
from their plots. He is ordered not to rely on them in his affairs but
to trust only in *Allah,* the Lord, Who is the best assisting helper and
the Protector.

***"…Therefore, turn aside from them and trust in Allah; and Allah is
sufficient as a protector."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 82
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلاَ يَتَدَبَّرُونَ الْقُرْآنَ وَلَوْ كَانَ مِنْ عِندِ غَيْرِ
اللّهِ لَوَجَدُواْ فِيهِ اخْتِلاَفًا كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**82.** ***"Do they not ponder on the Qur'an? And if it were from other
than Allah, they would surely find therein much discrepancy."***

Among the accusations that they brought a charge against the Prophet (S)
was that they said someone else had taught the Holy Qur'an to him,
***"... only a mortal teaches him..."*** [^3]. This verse is an answer
to them.

The lack of contemplation in the Qur'an results to the locking of the
hearts. In another verse it says:

***"Do they not then reflect on the Qur'an? Nay, on the hearts there are
locks."*** [^4]

It is customary that, during a long time, there happen some changes,
improvements, and contradictions in the ordinary statements and written
materials. But this Qur'an was revealed during twenty three years, and
was conveyed by the tongue of an illiterate person.

It was stated in different conditions of peace and war, stranger hood
and fame, strength and weakness, and in various circumstances of times,
without any doctrinal differences or any contradiction. This proves that
it is the Word of *Allah,* not taught by a mortal.

Therefore, the Qur'an is the ever remaining miracle of the Prophet (S)
which itself is an evidence unto his prophet hood.

***"Do they not ponder on the Qur'an?***

***And if it were from other than Allah, they would surely find therein
much discrepancy."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 83
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِّنَ الأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُواْ بِهِ
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَى أُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لاَتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**83.** ***"And when there comes unto them news of security or fear,
they spread it abroad; whereas had they referred it to the Messenger and
to those who hold command among them, those of them who investigate
matters would have known it (the truth); and were it not for the grace
of Allah upon you and His mercy, you would certainly have followed
Satan, except a few."***

Spreading private news and also rumours have always been injurious to
Muslims. Diffusion of secret news usually originates from these motives:
simple-mindedness, vengeance, infliction, being subject to the will of
others, greed in materials, gaudiness, expression of information, etc.

For the comprehensiveness that Islam has, it has referred to this
subject and, in this verse; it blames the divulgence of military
secrets. It considers narrating the information of victory or failure
before offering them to the leaders as the cases of ***'false pride'***
and ***'inappropriate fear from the fanciful enemy'.***

Had the warnings and the graces of *Allah* not existed, the Muslims
would have fallen in this Satanic path (the divulgence of secrets).

Therefore, spreading gossips is one of the weapons of the hypocrites.
However, the news of the battle-field and military secrets must reach a
central office and, after being recognized and evaluated, some
convenient part of them may be spread. Hence, spreading military news
and refraining from referring to the divine leaders, is a kind of
obedience from Satan.

Of course, the military and political affairs, together with leading the
security news and social secrets, should be controlled under an
administrations hip that consists of an independent judgement and
deduction. This matter is among the deities of the rank of leadership.
That is why there is a close connection between master ship and Islamic
jurisprudence.

***"And when there comes unto them news of security or fear, they spread
it abroad;***

***whereas had they referred it to the Messenger and to those who hold
command among them, those of them who investigate matters would have
known it (the truth); and were it not for the grace of Allah upon you
and His mercy, you would certainly have followed Satan, except a few.
"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 84
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَاتِلْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ لاَ تُكَلَّفُ إِلاَّ نَفْسَكَ وَحَرِّضِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَسَى اللّهُ أَن يَكُفَّ بَأْسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ
وَاللّهُ أَشَدُّ بَأْسًا وَأَشَدُّ تَنكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**84.** ***"So, fight in the way of Allah; you are charged only with
yourself, and encourage the believers may be Allah will restrain the
might of those who disbelieve. Verily Allah is the strongest in might
and the severest in punishment."***

When the pagans won the Battle of 'Uhud, Abu-Sufyan proudly said that he
would encounter the Muslims again at Badri-Suqra (a market used to be
held in the month Zilqa'dah at a land called Badr). Before the appointed
time, the holy Prophet (S) invited people for the Holy struggle.

There came seventy strivers, but no conflict happened and Muslims
returned to Medina safely. Therefore, a leader should move in front of
others when there is a danger. So, if it happens that the Muslims pay no
attention to the call of the oppressed, the leader should act by
himself.

***"So, fight in the way of Allah; ..."***

The command unto the Prophet (S) enjoining that even when he is alone he
should fight against the enemy, is 'a single commandment '.

*"Encourage the believers maybe Allah will restrain the might of those
who disbelieve. Verily Allah is the strongest in might and the severest
in punishment."*

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 85
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّن يَشْفَعْ شَفَاعَةً حَسَنَةً يَكُن لَّهُ نَصِيبٌ مِّنْهَا وَمَن
يَشْفَعْ شَفَاعَةً سَيِّئَةً يَكُن لَّهُ كِفْلٌ مِّنْهَا وَكَانَ
اللّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُّقِيتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. "Whoever intercedes with a good intercession shall have a share
there from and whoever intercedes with an evil intercession shall share
in its burden; and Allah keeps control over all things."***

The Arabic term / muqit / means the one who gives the sustenance of
another person and who is the protector of that one's life. In general,
the word is applied in the sense of 'protector and accountant'.

In the previous verse the meaning was that everyone is responsible for
his own deed. But, here, in this verse, it is stated that the function
of invitation and acting as an intermediary in a good deed gains a
portion of reward or retribution.

Therefore, advice, reconciliation, teaching, encouraging to the Holy
struggle, and assisting in a good deed are the extensions of 'a good
intercession'. On the other side, backbiting, slander, hindering a good
affair, accusation sedition, to frighten someone from battle-field,
temptation and plots are the extensions of an evil intercession.

***"Whoever intercedes with a good intercession shall have a share there
from and whoever intercedes with an evil intercession shall share in its
burden....."***

Some Islamic literature indicates that supplications for the benefit of
others, enjoining to good, leading someone or even hinting him to a good
action totally are the extensions of 'a good intercession'.[^5]

In intercessions, we should be careful of *Allah.*

***"... and Allah keeps control over all things."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 86
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حُيِّيْتُم بِتَحِيَّةٍ فَحَيُّواْ بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا أَوْ
رُدُّوهَا إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ حَسِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**86*****. "And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a
better one than it, or (at least) return it. Verily Allah takes account
of all things."***

The objective meaning of the Qur'anic word / tahiyyat/ is greeting or
any other welcoming done by anyone who desires the life, health, and
pleasure of other party, whether by speech or by action. And, the
respond of a present should be given better than it, even if the present
is a greeting and then responding to it.

***"And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better one
than it, or (at least) return it..."***

In the educational system of Islam, greeting is not only expected from a
younger or lower person to an older or higher one. In this system,
*Allah,* the Prophet, (S) and the angels greet, too.

1. The example of the greeting of *Allah* is:

***"Peace and salutation to Nuh among the nations."***

 (Surah As-Saffat, No.37, verse 79).

2. The example of the greeting of the Prophet (S) is:

***"And when those who believe in Our Signs come to you, say: 'Peace be
on you,'..."***

 (Surah Al-'An'am, No.6, verse 54)

3. The example of the greeting of the angels is:

***"Those, whom the angels cause to die in a good state, saying: 'Peace
be on you...'."***

(Surah An-Nahl, No.16, verse 32).

Once it happened that a maid offered Imam Hassan (as) a bundle of
flowers. In respond to it, Imam Hassan (as) emancipated her. Then, when
he was asked about it, he recited the above verse.

In Islam (Islamic custom), greeting to others has been encouraged,
whether we know them or not. So, the person who restrains to greet is
counted a miser. The Prophet (S) used to greet everyone he met, even the
children.

In order that people know that the manner of greetings and their
answers, and the superiorities and equalities that they have and in
whatever stage they may be, are not concealed to *Allah,* the holy verse
says:

***"... Verily Allah takes account of all things."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 87
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ لا إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ لَيَجْمَعَنَّكُمْ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ وَمَنْ أَصْدَقُ مِنَ اللّهِ حَدِيثًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**87.** ***"Allah, there is no god but He. He will certainly gather you
all together on the Day of Resurrection. There*** **is** ***no doubt in
it; and who*** **is** ***more true in word than Allah?***

Either of Unity and Resurrection relates to each other.

***"Allah, there is no god but He. He will certainly gather you all
together on the Day of Resurrection..."***

The Day of Resurrection is a day of gathering for all to be taken
account of. Therefore, we should try alongside His path, and we must
worship Him alone.

There is no doubt in the Hereafter after those many evidences for
Resurrection. (Such as: 'Divine Justice, Wisdom, the signs of
resurrection in the nature and its new life in the spring after the
concerning death in the winter.) In this regard, it says:

***"….There is no doubt in it …"***

Then, in the conclusion of the verse, to emphasize the subject, it says:

***"... and who is more true in word than Allah?"***

[^1]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 62

[^2]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 7

[^3]: Surah An-Nahl, No.16, verse 103

[^4]: Surah Muhammad, No.47, verse 24.

[^5]: Tafsir us-Safi, vol. 1 p. 440.


