Section 14: Believers remaining with the enemy
==============================================

Too weak to fly to their homes – those who fly to their homes not to
fear strait ness

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 97
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَوَفَّاهُمُ الْمَلآئِكَةُ ظَالِمِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ
قَالُواْ فِيمَ كُنتُمْ قَالُواْ كُنَّا مُسْتَضْعَفِينَ فِي الأَرْضِ
قَالْوَاْ أَلَمْ تَكُنْ أَرْضُ اللّهِ وَاسِعَةً فَتُهَاجِرُواْ فِيهَا
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَسَاءتْ مَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**97.** ***"Verily (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while
they are unjust to their own selves, they (the angels) will ask: 'In
what state were you?' They will reply: 'We were oppressed in the land'.
(The angels) will say: 'Was not Allah's land vast so that you could have
migrated therein?' So these (are those) whose abide is Hell, and an evil
destination it is! "***

Before the occurrence of the Battle of Badr, the pagans of Mecca called
the citizens of Mecca to fight against the Muslims. They ordered that
all men should participate in the war.

They threatened people that the houses of those who might offend the
issue would be ruined and their property could be confiscated. Some of
the Muslims, who were still living in Mecca and had not immigrated to
Medina, for the fear of their lives, accompanied the pagans in the war
against the Muslims in the Battle of Badr, where they were killed.

The verse was revealed and counted guilty those who did not migrate and
stayed in the environment of infidelity. The verse blamed them because
they had wronged against themselves. Thus, it is obligatory to migrate
from the centre of infidelity, and staying there to be a multitude of
the soldiers of disbelievers, is unlawful.

If you can change the circumstances of the environment, do it, else you
should migrate from there in order not to be called to account, because
justification of faults will not be accepted.

***"...We were oppressed ..."***

We should know that the principle is the goal and belief, not the life
and the house. Or, in other words, we must be careful that theism is the
principle, not patriotism.

By the way, according to the Islamic literature, an oppressed person is
he who cannot recognize the path of responsibility and the difference
between right and wrong. [^1]

Some Islamic traditions denote that he who migrates a distance, even as
long as a span, in order to protect the religion, will be admitted to
Heaven and will be companion of the holy Prophet (S) and Abraham (as).
[^2]

***"Verily (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their own selves, they (the angels) will ask: 'In what state
were you?' They will reply: 'We were oppressed in the land'.*** ***(The
angels) will say: 'Was not Allah's land vast so that you could have
migrated therein?' So these (are those) whose abide is Hell, and an evil
destination it is! "***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 98
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ الْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ وَالنِّسَاء وَالْوِلْدَانِ
لاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ حِيلَةً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**98.** ***"Except the feeble among the men, women, and children, who
neither have in their power the means nor do they know any way."***

Those who know the truth and are able to move around and change the
environment are not among the oppressed. These persons have not any
excuse for the abandonment of emigration.

Then, those who have neither any device to ward off infidelity nor any
way toward the right, are the oppressed nor such people have no
religious oblation. (A tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as), cited in
Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1, p.454.)

However, the real apologies are accepted, but seeking excuses are not.

***"Except the feeble among the men, women, and children, who neither
have in their power the means nor do they know any way."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 99
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأُوْلَـئِكَ عَسَى اللّهُ أَن يَعْفُوَ عَنْهُمْ وَكَانَ اللّهُ
عَفُوًّا غَفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**99. "*****So, perhaps, Allah will pardon them and Allah is Pardoning,
Forgiving."***

In this verse, the Qur'an implies that these people may receive the
forgiveness of *Allah,* because He *(s.w.t.)* has always been pardoning
and forgiving the servants.

**"*****So, perhaps, Allah will pardon them and Allah is Pardoning,
Forgiving."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 100
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُهَاجِرْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ يَجِدْ فِي الأَرْضِ مُرَاغَمًا
كَثِيراً وَسَعَةً وَمَن يَخْرُجْ مِن بَيْتِهِ مُهَاجِرًا إِلَى اللّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلى
اللّهِ وَكَانَ اللّهُ غَفُورًا رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**100.** ***"And whoever migrates in Allah's way, finds much refuge and
abundance in the earth, and whoever goes forth from his house migrating
unto Allah and His Messenger and death overtakes him, his reward is
indeed with Allah and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It happened that one of the Muslims, who was living in Mecca, became
sick. He asked to be taken out of Mecca in order to be counted as
emigrants. As soon as he was taken out of the city, he died in the way.
Then, this verse was revealed.

### Emigration, an Islamic Constructive Instruction

Following the discussion about emigration and those who, as a result of
some shortcoming in doing the duty of emigration, yield to any kind of a
basement and humiliation, in this verse, the words are earnestly stated
upon the quality of emigration.

The subject of emigration has been discussed from two points of view. At
first, it has pointed to the good results and effects of emigration in
the life of godly people in this world. It says that those who emigrate
in the vast land of *Allah (s.w.t.),* in the way of *Allah (s.w.t.),*
and for the sake of *Allah (s.w.t.),* will find many secure and
bountiful sites. The verse says:

***"And whoever migrates in Allah's way, finds much refuge and abundance
in the earth…"***

Then, it pays to the spiritual aspect of emigration; and points to this
fact that if some ones get out of their houses and leave their home with
the intention of emigration towards *Allah (s.w.t.),* and His Apostle,
and die before reaching their destination, their reward is with *Allah
(s.w.t.),* and He, the Forgiving, the Merciful, will forgive their
faults.

***"... and whoever goes forth from his house migrating unto Allah and
His Messenger and death overtakes him, his reward is indeed with Allah
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

Thus, the emigrants are victorious in both cases.

It is interesting that emigration, not for self protection but for
preserving Islam, is an origin of date for Muslims. It forms the
foundation of our political, social and propagative events totally. And,
in any time and any place, if the same conditions come forth, Muslims
are ordained to emigrate.

[^1]: Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1, p. 153.

[^2]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn. vol. 1, p. 541.


