Section 17: Secret counsels of the Hypocrites
=============================================

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 113
-------------------------

Endeavours of the Hypocrites to destroy the Muslims - secret plots of
the Hypocrites- Plots against the Apostle doomed to failure

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ عَلَيْكَ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لَهَمَّت طَّآئِفَةٌ
مُّنْهُمْ أَن يُضِلُّوكَ وَمَا يُضِلُّونَ إِلاُّ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَمَا
يَضُرُّونَكَ مِن شَيْءٍ وَأَنزَلَ اللّهُ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَعَلَّمَكَ مَا لَمْ تَكُنْ تَعْلَمُ وَكَانَ فَضْلُ
اللّهِ عَلَيْكَ عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**113.** ***"And had it not been Allah's grace on you and His Mercy, a
party of them had certainly resolved to lead you astray, but they do not
lead astray but their own selves, and they shall not harm you at all.
And Allah has revealed to you the Book and the Wisdom, and He has taught
you what you did not know, and great is Allah's grace on you."***

In some preceding verses, (verse 105), a part of the event of the tribe
called Bani-Abiraq was explained. Now, in this verse, another part of
that event is referred to. The verse says:

***"And had it not been Allah's grace on you and His Mercy, a party of
them had certainly resolved to lead you astray...."***

By accusing an innocent person and then involving the Prophet (S) in
this event, they wanted both to defame the social and spiritual
personality of the Prophet (S), and to fulfil their own evil intentions
upon an innocent Muslim. But, the Lord, who is the protector of His
Messenger, obliterated their plans totally.

Then, the Qur'an says:

***"... but they do not lead astray but their own selves and they shall
not harm you at all..."***

Finally, the Qur'an states the reason of immunity of the Prophet (S)
from fault, such:

***"... And Allah has revealed to you the Book and the Wisdom, and He
has taught you what you did not know....."***

And, it concludes the verse by saying:

***"...and great if Allah's grace on you."***

In the above-mentioned sentence, one of the basic reasons of the subject
of inerrancy is shortly pointed out. It implies that *Allah* has taught
the Prophet (S) some knowledge and science that he is saved from any
fault and mistake, because knowledge and sciences, especially the
knowledge of hidden things and unknown secrets, (in final stage) are the
causes of light and inerrancy.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 114
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ خَيْرَ فِي كَثِيرٍ مِّن نَّجْوَاهُمْ إِلاَّ مَنْ أَمَرَ
بِصَدَقَةٍ أَوْ مَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ إِصْلاَحٍ بَيْنَ النَّاسِ وَمَن
يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ ابْتَغَاء مَرْضَاتِ اللّهِ فَسَوْفَ نُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا
عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114.** ***"There is no good in most of their secret conferences,
except for him who enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation between
people; and whoever does this, seeking Allah's pleasure, We will give
him a great reward."***

In the former verses, there was a hint to the mischievous hidden nightly
meetings of some hypocrites or the like of them. In this holy verse, the
subject is discussed more detailed under the title of 'secret
conference'.

The Arabic term /najwa/ 'conspiring whisper', does not mean only: 'the
secret whispered words'. It includes any secret and hidden meetings,
too.

The holy verse denotes that: there is no goodness in their most private
meetings which such people hold secretly, and they are based on some
evil plans. It says:

***"There is no good in most of their secret conferences....."***

Then, in order that it might not be thought that any conspiring and
whisper, or secret meeting, is blameworthy and prohibited, a few
instances are mentioned at the end of this very verse in the form of
exceptions. It says:

***"... Except for him who enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation
between people......"***

If such conspiring may not be for pretence or dealing hypocrisy but for
the purpose of obtaining the pleasure of *Allah,* the Lord will assign a
great recompense for them. The verse says:

***"...and whoever does this, seeking Allah's pleasure, We will give him
a great reward."***

In principle, conspiring and secret whispering, or holding hidden
meetings have been introduced in the Qur'an as' Satanic work '. Surah
Mujadelah No. 58, verse 10 says:

***"Secret counsels are only (the work) of Satan..."***

Essentially, if secret conspiring is performed at the presence of a
crowd, it may raise the suspicion of men. It can even sometimes create
mistrust between friends. That is why it is better not to apply this
manner except for the necessary aspects. The philosophy of this
ordinance in the Qur'an may also be the very fact.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 115
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُشَاقِقِ الرَّسُولَ مِن بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ الْهُدَى
وَيَتَّبِعْ غَيْرَ سَبِيلِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ نُوَلِّهِ مَا تَوَلَّى
وَنُصْلِهِ جَهَنَّمَ وَسَاءتْ مَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115.** ***"And whoever opposes the Messenger after the guidance has
become manifest to him, and follows other than the way of the believers,
him We shall turn over to what he has turned to, and We shall expose him
to Hell, and an evil destination it is!"***

The Arabic term /musaqqah/ means that you put yourself one side and the
holy Prophet (S) another side and begin hindering the affairs, and
showing hostility by intentional opposition.

Therefore, after the truth being manifest to a person, it is obligatory
for the one to obey the Messenger of *Allah,* and, evidently, opposing
him (S) is unlawful.

***"And whoever opposes the Messenger after the guidance has become
manifest to him.... "***

However, the Lord does not punish anyone by taking him into Hell without
completing the argument.

***"... after the guidance has become manifest to him....."***

Thus, the result of opposing the Messenger of *Allah* (S) and the
Islamic Ummah is to assume the master ship of other than *Allah* and
falling down into Hell. It says:

***"... and follows other than the way of the believers, him We shall
turn over to what he has turned to....."***

That is, the person follows a way other than the religion of the
believing people. In such a case, *Allah (s.w.t.)* will leave that
person to the idols which he relies on and imagines as his shelter and
his support in all circumstances.

And, as a recompense of choosing aberration and leaving off the way of
guidance, he will be put in Hell to taste his retribution, and it is an
evil destination. It says:

***"... and We shall expose him to Hell, and an evil destination it
is!"***


