Section 20: Equity to everyone -The Jewish Hypocrisy Condemned
==============================================================

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 135
-------------------------

Firmness in equity, fair play and faith enjoined, coveting for worldly
goods; forsaking truth is due to weakness in faith.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ كُونُواْ قَوَّامِينَ بِالْقِسْطِ
شُهَدَاء لِلّهِ وَلَوْ عَلَى أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوِ الْوَالِدَيْنِ
وَالأَقْرَبِينَ إِن يَكُنْ غَنِيًّا أَوْ فَقَيرًا فَاللّهُ أَوْلَى
بِهِمَا فَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ الْهَوَى أَن تَعْدِلُواْ وَإِن تَلْوُواْ
أَوْ تُعْرِضُواْ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**135.** ***" O' you who have Faith! be maintainers of justice (and)
witnesses for Allah's sake, though it be against your own selves or
(your) parents or near relatives; whether the one be rich or poor, Allah
is closer to them both, Therefore do not follow any passion so that you
can deal justly; and if you swerve or decline (the right), then verily
Allah is aware of what you do."***

### Social Justice

Following the instructions that were pointed out through previous verses
about the execution of justice upon orphans and wives, here in this
verse, the statement is upon a basic principle and a general law. It is
about the execution of justice in all aspects and without any exception.
It says:

***"O' you who have Faith! be maintainers of justice …."***

That is, you should accomplish justice so that you might not have the
least inclination toward any side.

Then, to emphasize the matter, the verse refers to the subject of
bearing witness. It recommends upon affairs concerning the witnesses, in
particular, and that you should put aside all circumspections and bear
witness rightfully for the sake of *Allah,* even if it is against you or
your parents or your near relatives. It says:

***"… (and) witnesses for Allah's sake, though it be against your own
selves or (your) parents or near relatives;***

It can be understood from this holy phrase that it is possible for
relatives to bear witness for or against each other when they observe
the principles of justice.

Then, it points to other factors of perversion from the principle of
justice. It implies that neither the wealth of the rich nor the emotions
arisen from the poverty of the poor should hinder to bear witness
rightfully.

It is because *Allah* is more aware of the condition of the person
against whom the rightful attestation is performed whether the one is
rich or poor. Therefore, neither the possessors of wealth and force can
damage the rightful witnesses when there is the support of *Allah,* nor
the poor remain hungry when justice is executed. The verse says:

***"…whether the one be rich or poor, Allah is closer to them both…."***

Again, to emphasize on the matter, it instructs us not to follow our
desires, because, in that case, there come forth some barriers for
executing justice.

***"…Therefore do not follow any passion so that you can deal
justly…"***

This sentence clearly leads us to the fact that the origin of
transgressions and cruelties is carnal desires. Thus, if a group of
people be not the followers of carnal desires, injustice and cruelty may
not be found among them.

For the importance that there lies in the execution of justice, it
emphasizes again on this commandment. It indicates that if you hinder
the right from reaching the rightful person, or pervert the right, or
turn aside from the right when it becomes clear to you, *Allah* is well
aware of what you do. It says:

***"… and if you swerve or decline (the right), then verily Allah is
aware of what you do."***

The above verse makes completely manifest the extraordinary attention of
Islam to the subject of social justice in whatever form and in whatever
case it may be. The application of different emphasis mentioned in these
sentences shows how much Islam is sensitive for this important social
subject among humankind.

But, unfortunately, there is a long distance between the action of
Muslims and this excellent Islamic commandment! This very fact, of
course, is one of the secrets of their retardation.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 136
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ آمِنُواْ بِاللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ
وَالْكِتَابِ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ وَالْكِتَابِ الَّذِيَ
أَنزَلَ مِن قَبْلُ وَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِاللّهِ وَمَلاَئِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ
وَرُسُلِهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ ضَلاَلاً بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**136.** ***"O' you who have Faith believe in Allah and His Messenger
and the Book which He has sent down unto His Messenger, and the Book (S)
which He has sent down a foretime; and whoever disbelieves in Allah and
His angels and His Messengers and the Last Day, has indeed gone astray
into far error."***

The meaning of the verse may be such: O' you who have faith! Go a step
further; or, be firm in your faith forever.

A believer should elevate himself to a higher degree of faith every day,
since there are degrees in faith.

***"O' you who have Faith! Believe..."***

In this regard, **Surah Muhammad, No.47, verse 17** says:

***"And those who avail of the guidance, He adds unto them
guidance..."***

And, **Surah Al-Fath No.48 verse 4** says:

***"... that they might add further faith to their faith…."***

However, disbelief, in some heavenly Books and some prophets is the same
as disbelief in all.

***"... Believe in Allah and His Messenger and the Book which He has
sent down unto His Messenger, and the Book(S) which He has sent down a
foretime; and whoever, disbelieves in Allah and His angels and His
Messengers and the Last Day, has indeed gone astray into far error. "***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 137
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ ثُمَّ كَفَرُواْ ثُمَّ آمَنُواْ ثُمَّ
كَفَرُواْ ثُمَّ ازْدَادُواْ كُفْرًا لَّمْ يَكُنِ اللّهُ لِيَغْفِرَ
لَهُمْ وَلاَ لِيَهْدِيَهُمْ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**137.** ***"Verily those who believed, then disbelieved, again
believed, and again disbelieved, then increased in (their) disbelief,
Allah will not forgive them, nor will He guide them to the (right)
way."***

Formerly a verse similar in meaning to this holy verse was detailed,
saying that the repentance of such persons is not accepted and they are
the real misguided ones. Also, **Surah 'Ale-Imran, No.3 Verse 90** in
this field says:

***"Verily those who disbelieve after their belief, then increase in
infidelity; their repentance will never be accepted; and these are they
who are astray."***

There are some people who change their features every day. This is
either for the lack of research in Truth and religion, or it is a plot
in order to weaken the belief of the believers. **Surah 'Ale-Imran, No.3
Verse 72** also manifests this plan by stating that they believed at the
opening of (the day, and disbelieved at the end of it, with the purpose
that they might weaken the Muslims in their Faith.

The clear example of the content of this verse is the persons such as
Shabth-ibn-Rib'i whose instability can be, illustrated as follows:

He became Muslim but, after the death of the Prophet (S), he
disbelieved. After that, he repented and joined to the adherents of Ali
(as). Later, he changed to be the commander of Kharijites. Again he
repented and went on to be as an adherent of Imam Hassan (as) and Imam
Husayn (as).

He wrote an invitation letter to Imam Husayn (as) but he showed his
disloyalty to Muslim-ibn-' Aghil in Kufa (an-ancient city, in
Mesopotamia). He accepted to be the commander of Yazid's troop in
Karbala, and built a mosque in Kufa as a sign of gratitude for the slain
of Imam Husayn (as). The verse says:

***"Verily those who believed, then disbelieved, again believed, and
again disbelieved, then increased in (their) disbelief, Allah will not
forgive them, nor will He guide them to the (right) way."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 138
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَشِّرِ الْمُنَافِقِينَ بِأَنَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**138.** ***"Announce to the hypocrites that they shall have a painful
chastisement."***

When the Qur'anic word / bisarat / *'*glad tidings' is used for
punishment, it is either as a mockery due to their baseless vain
thoughts, or for the sake that the Arabic term / bisarat / which is
originally derived from the Arabic word / busr / in the sense of 'face',
has a vast meaning. It concludes any news that affects on the face and
usually makes it happy or sad.

The verse says:

***"Announce to the hypocrites that they shall have a painful
chastisement."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 139
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَتَّخِذُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاء مِن دُونِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَيَبْتَغُونَ عِندَهُمُ الْعِزَّةَ فَإِنَّ العِزَّةَ
لِلّهِ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**139.** ***"(Hypocrites are) those who take the disbelievers for
(their) friends instead of the believers -do they seek glory in them? -
Then, verily, all glory belongs to Allah."***

In this holy verse, the hypocrites are characterized as follows:

***"(Hypocrites are) those who take the disbelievers for (their) friends
instead of the believers…."***

Then the Qur'an inquires what their purpose is from this choice. Do they
really want to obtain a credit and honour for themselves by making
friends with them? They should know that honour and glory totally
belongs to *Allah,* because glory always originates from 'knowledge' and
'power'. Therefore, those whose knowledge and power is little are not in
a position that they can be the origin of glory.

***"...do they seek glory in them? -Then, verily, all glory belongs to
Allah."***

This verse warns all the Muslims not to seek for the disbelievers' glory
in all aspects of life, irrespective of: economical glory, cultural
glory, political glory, and the like of them, in making friends with the
enemies of Islam.

Whenever their interest requires, they immediately leave out their own
most intimate allies and refer to their own affairs, so that as if they
have never been acquainted with each other. The present era is a clear
witness to this fact.

(So, in the foreign policy, we must not seek our glory in attachment
with pagans.) We recite in Munajat-Sha'baniyyah:

*"O' Lord! my abundance and my deficiency is in Your hand, not in the
hand of other than You".*

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 140
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ أَنْ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللّهِ يُكَفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلاَ تَقْعُدُواْ مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّى يَخُوضُواْ فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِّثْلُهُمْ
إِنَّ اللّهَ جَامِعُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْكَافِرِينَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ
جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**140.** ***"And He has already revealed to you in the Book that when
you hear the revelations of Allah being disbelieved and made mock of, do
not sit with them until they engage in some other discourse, otherwise
you would be like them. Verily Allah will gather the hypocrites and the
disbelievers all together in Hell."***

**Surah Al-'An'am*****,*** **No.6, verse 68** contains a similar meaning
to that of this holy verse. It addresses the Messenger of *Allah* (S)
and says:

***"And when you see those who enter into false discourses about Our
Signs, withdraw from them until they enter into a discourse other than
that... "***

In that verse, the addressee is the Prophet (S), while in the
above-mentioned verse, the Qur'an addresses people in general.

### Explanations

1. A person should not usually be inattentive when confronting the false
discourses of others, (since, being silent or inattentive where a sin is
being committed, is sinful.)

***"...do not sit with them until they engage in some other discourse
..."***

2. "You may either alter the evil environment, or come out of it."

***"….do not sit with them…"***

3. It is not enough to abandon committing sin only; but we should cause
the performance of sin to be stopped totally. Mere being straight is not
enough; the perversion of others should be hindered of, too.

4. It is not allowed to be silent in front of sin under the pretext of
freedom of speech, negligence, good morals, easy circumstances,
courtesy, civility; shame, and so on.

5. The person who is content with the sin of others has a share of that
sin.

***"...otherwise you would be like them…"***

6. To be silent in front of the idle talks of the infidels is a kind of
hypocrisy.

7. Companionships of this world result the companionship of the next
world.

***"… Verily Allah will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers all
together in Hell."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 141
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَتَرَبَّصُونَ بِكُمْ فَإِن كَانَ لَكُمْ فَتْحٌ مِّنَ اللّهِ
قَالُواْ أَلَمْ نَكُن مَّعَكُمْ وَإِن كَانَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ نَصِيبٌ
قَالُواْ أَلَمْ نَسْتَحْوِذْ عَلَيْكُمْ وَنَمْنَعْكُم مِّنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ فَاللّهُ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَلَن
يَجْعَلَ اللّهُ لِلْكَافِرِينَ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**141. "*****(The hypocrites are) those who wait and watch about you;
then if there be a victory for you from Allah, they say: 'Were we not
with you?*****'** ***But if the disbelievers get a share, they tell
(them): 'Did we not help you win, and held off the believers from
you*****?'** ***Therefore, Allah shall judge*** ***between you on the
Day of Judgement, and Allah will by no means give the disbelievers a
way*** **(of** ***success) against the believers.*****"**

### The Qualities of Hypocrites

This verse and some verses after that point to some other qualities of
the hypocrites and their incoherent thoughts. The verse describes the
hypocrites as those who always want to make profit from any incident.

If you gain the victory, they quickly show themselves in the row of the
believers and say whether they were not with you, and their worthy aids
were not helpful in your victory. Therefore, they claim to have a share
in its all spiritual and material incomes. The verse says:

***"(The hypocrites are) those who wait and watch about you; then if
there be a victory for you from Allah, they say: 'Were we not with you?
..."***

But, if the enemies of Islam obtain a part of this victory, the
hypocrites immediately approach them and express their consent to them
about that victory. They say that it was they who encouraged them to
combat with Muslims without showing any sign of resignation; therefore
they have a share in that victory. The verse says:

***"... But if the disbelievers get a share, they tell (them): 'Did we
not help you win, and held off the believers from you?'….."***

Thus, this group of hypocrites, by their own particular misusing
opportunities, sometimes come toward the believers and sometimes
approach the disbelievers, and spend their lives in double-dealing.

Yet, the Qur'an manifests their fate with stating a short phrase. It
implies that finally there will come a day that the curtains will be
removed, the masks will be taken off and their real ugly faces will be
seen. Yet, it is true when it says:

***"...Therefore, Allah shall judge between you on the Day of Judgement
..."***

And, in order that the true believers should not be afraid of them, at
the end of the verse it adds:

***"...and Allah will by no means give the disbelievers a way (of
success) against the believers."***

This part of the verse means that the disbelievers not only from the
point of logic but also from the point of political, martial, cultural,
and economical aspects will not really overcome the believers.

So, if we see their victory with our own eyes in different fields
against Muslims, it is for the reason that many of Muslims are not true
believers.

They have neither the unity nor Islamic brotherhood among them, nor the
knowledge and necessary awareness which Islam has counted necessary for
all from birthday until the moment of death. Then, when they are like
that, consequently, they have remained like this.


