Section 22: Violation of the Covenant by the Jews
=================================================

Jews Violating the Covenant – Their accusing Jesus and his mother Mary –
The truth concerning the Crucifixion of Jesus

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 153
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُكَ أَهْلُ الْكِتَابِ أَن تُنَزِّلَ عَلَيْهِمْ كِتَابًا مِّنَ
السَّمَاء فَقَدْ سَأَلُواْ مُوسَى أَكْبَرَ مِن ذَلِكَ فَقَالُواْ
أَرِنَا اللّهِ جَهْرَةً فَأَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّاعِقَةُ بِظُلْمِهِمْ ثُمَّ
اتَّخَذُواْ الْعِجْلَ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءتْهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ
فَعَفَوْنَا عَن ذَلِكَ وَآتَيْنَا مُوسَى سُلْطَانًا مُّبِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**153.** ***"The People of the Book will ask you to bring down for them
a Book from heaven; and indeed they asked Moses for greater than that,
for they said: 'Show us Allah vividly'. So the lightning seized them on
account of their injustice. Then they took the Calf (for a god) after
the clear signs had come to them; yet We pardoned that; and We gave
Moses a clear authority."***

The demand of the Jews from the Prophet of Islam (S) was that the
Qur'an, like the Torah , should be sent down together, too. But, that
demand was nothing save a mere pretext. In Surah Al-'An'am, concerning
the matter, *Allah* says:

***"And if We had sent to you a writing on a paper, then they had
touched it with their hands, certainly those who disbelieve would have
said: 'This is nothing but clear enchantment'."*** [^1]

The Qur'an, in the above verse, says:

***"The People of the Book will ask you to bring down for them a Book
from heaven…..."***

The Children of Israel were not seeking for the Truth, otherwise, why
did they become the worshippers of the Calf after they had got those
abundant miracles?

***"...Then they took the Calf (for a god) after the clear signs had
come to them….."***

Therefore, the continuation of this very verse, in order to console the
Prophet, tells him (S) not to be worried about the disbelievers when
they do not believe, since there had also been some obstinate persons
against all former prophets.

***"...and indeed they asked Moses for greater than that, for they said:
'Show us Allah vividly'. ..."***

When we become acquainted with the difficulties that other people are
involved in, it can sometimes be a remedy over our own pains.

However, it should be noted that rejection of the Truth and aberration
in thought brings forth the Wrath of *Allah* even in this very world.

***"... So the lightning seized them on account of their
injustice....."***

Yet, the prophets had always been supported by *Allah.*

***"...and We gave Moses a clear authority."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 154
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَا فَوْقَهُمُ الطُّورَ بِمِيثَاقِهِمْ وَقُلْنَا لَهُمُ
ادْخُلُواْ الْبَابَ سُجَّدًا وَقُلْنَا لَهُمْ لاَ تَعْدُواْ فِي
السَّبْتِ وَأَخَذْنَا مِنْهُم مِّيثَاقًا غَلِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**154.** ***"And We raised the (Sinai) Mount above them at (the taking
of) their covenant and We said to them: 'Enter the door prostrating',
and We said to them: 'Do not transgress the Sabbath!' and We took from
them a firm covenant."***

The verse implies that the Children of Israel, the Jews, did not awaken
from the sleep of negligence and did not come down from the mount of
pride and obstinacy. It was for that reason that *Allah* raised the
Sinai Mount above them, and in the meanwhile, He took covenant from
them.

***"And We raised the (Sinai) Mount above them at (the taking of) their
covenant…"***

The holy verse implies that *Allah (s.w.t.)* told them to enter the door
of Jerusalem in the state of prostration and humility as a sign of
repentance from their sins.

*Allah* also decreed emphatically for them not to work on Saturday and
not to transgress, (and not to use the sea-fish that the hunting of
which was prohibited for them). *Allah (s. w.t.)* took serious covenant
for all of these things from them. But they fulfilled none of those
confirmed promises.

***"...and We said to .them: 'Enter the door prostrating', and We said
to them: 'Do not transgress the Sabbath!' and We took from them a firm
covenant."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 155
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا نَقْضِهِم مِّيثَاقَهُمْ وَكُفْرِهِم بَآيَاتِ اللّهِ
وَقَتْلِهِمُ الأَنْبِيَاء بِغَيْرِ حَقًّ وَقَوْلِهِمْ قُلُوبُنَا
غُلْفٌ بَلْ طَبَعَ اللّهُ عَلَيْهَا بِكُفْرِهِمْ فَلاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**155.** ***"So, for their breaking their covenant and their disbelief
in the Signs of Allah and their slaying the prophets wrongfully and
their saying: 'Our hearts are covered', nay! but Allah sealed them for
their disbelief, so they do not believe save a few. "***

In this verse, the Qur'an points to some other parts of the wrong doings
of the Children of Israel, and also those committing offences and
hostilities that the Jews performed against the prophets of *Allah.*

At first, it refers to the breach of promise and disbelief of a group of
them, by whom the slaughter of many prophets occurred. It says:

***"So, for their breaking their covenant ..."***

Following to this breach of promise, they rejected the Signs of *Allah*
and paved the way of opposition.

***".....and their disbelief in the Signs of Allah ..."***

They did not suffice only to this wrong-doing, but also they set their
hands to another great crime. They killed the leaders and the guides of
the way of Truth, viz. the prophets. They slew the prophets without
having any reason for their action.

***".....and their slaying the prophets wrongfully ..."***

They were so insolent in committing offences that they mocked the
statements of the prophets and they used to explicitly say to them that
their hearts were locked so that they hindered them to hear and accept
the invitation of the prophets.

***".....and their saying 'Our hearts are covered'; ..."***

Here, the Qur'an adds a sense that their hearts are sealed totally and
no truth penetrates into them, but the reason of that situation is their
own infidelity and disbelief. That is why they do not believe in truth,
except a small group of them who avoid these kinds of obstinacies and
that they pave the path of truth. It says:

***"... nay! but Allah sealed them for their disbelief, So they do not
believe save a few. "***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 156
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِكُفْرِهِمْ وَقَوْلِهِمْ عَلَى مَرْيَمَ بُهْتَانًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**156.** ***"And because of their disbelief and their speaking against
Mary a grievous calumny."***

The question of calumny against Mary is also referred to in **Surah
Maryam No.19, verse 27.**

The calumny of fornication unto Mary was not only a sin but it was also
a calumny of bastardy to Jesus (as) and his incompetence for guidance
and leadership. This very sin was the reason of their disbelief unto
Jesus (as).

Therefore, calumny is counted in the same row with infidelity, and,
consequently, a grievous calumny deserves a grievous chastisement.

***"And because of their disbelief and their speaking against Mary a
grievous calumny"***

However, in an immoral society, there may sometimes happen that the most
disgraceful calumnies be attributed to the most immaculate persons.

Surah An-Nisa', Verses 157 - 158
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوْلِهِمْ إِنَّا قَتَلْنَا الْمَسِيحَ عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ رَسُولَ
اللّهِ وَمَا قَتَلُوهُ وَمَا صَلَبُوهُ وَلَـكِن شُبِّهَ لَهُمْ وَإِنَّ
الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُواْ فِيهِ لَفِي شَكٍّ مِّنْهُ مَا لَهُم بِهِ مِنْ
عِلْمٍ إِلاَّ اتِّبَاعَ الظَّنِّ وَمَا قَتَلُوهُ يَقِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَل رَّفَعَهُ اللّهُ إِلَيْهِ وَكَانَ اللّهُ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**157.** ***"And because of their saying (in boast): 'Verily we slew
Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, Allah's Messenger; 'but they did not slay
him nor did they crucify him, but it appeared to them (a likeness of
that); and indeed those who differ therein are only in doubt about it,
they have no knowledge respecting it, but only follow a conjecture, and,
certainly, they did not slay him."***

**158.** ***"But Allah took him up unto Himself; and Allah is the
Mighty, the Wise."***

They (the Children of Israel) were even proud of slaying Jesus, and they
said that they themselves slew Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of
*Allah.* The verse says:

***"And because of their saying (in boast): 'Verily we slew Messiah,
Jesus, son of Mary, Allah's Messenger…..."***

Perhaps, the sense of '*Allah's* Messenger' that they said about Jesus
(as) was said mockingly in order to scorn him, while they were not true
in their claim. The verse continues saying:

***"... but they did not slay him nor did they crucify him, but it
appeared to them (a likeness of that)…"***

Then, the Qur'an, as an emphasis on the matter, says:

***"....and, certainly, they did not slay him."***

Then, the Qur'an, as a separate verse, continues saying:

***"But Allah took him up unto Himself ..."***

The reason that the Qur'an has emphasized particularly on the subject
that Jesus (as) has not been crucified, is for the purpose of perfectly
nullifying the superstitious belief of ransom and making ummah
(community) free from sin by payment, so that the Christians find rescue
in the pledge of their own good deeds not in seeking refuge to the
Cross.

We are absolutely certain that both the birth and departure of Jesus
from this world occurred abnormally. He (as) was taken up to be a
provision for future.

***"... and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 159
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ
مَوْتِهِ وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**159.** ***"And there is not anyone of the People of the Book but
surely believes in him (Jesus) before his death, and on the Day of
Resurrection, he will be a witness over them."***

There are two probabilities in commenting on this verse, each of which
is considerable for, some views.

1. The verse says:

***"And there is not anyone of the People of the Book but surely
believes in him (Jesus) before his death......"***

The above-mentioned time is when a person is going to die and his
connection with the world becomes weak while it becomes more serious
with the world after death. The curtains will be removed from before his
eyes and he will see many things of the reality.

It is at this time that his inward eye of seeing the truth will see
Jesus (as) and he will surrender before him (as).Those who denied him
will believe in him, and those who considered him God, will recognize
their error. But it is too late and this belief is of no vail for them.
Then, it is better for them to believe just now, when belief is useful
for them.

2. The purpose of the verse is that all the People of the Book will
believe in Jesus (as) before death. The Jews will accept him for his
messenger ship, and the Christians will leave out the god ship of Jesus.

This circumstance will happen, according to the Islamic literature, when
Jesus (as) comes down from heaven at the time of the reappearance of
Hadrat Mahdi (may *Allah* hasten his glad advent) and establishes prayer
at the back of him.

The Jews and Christians will see him and will believe both in him (as)
and Imam Mahdi (May *Allah* hasten his glad advent). So, it is clear
that, at this time, Jesus, whose religion relate to the former times has
to follow the present creed, i.e. Islam, the executor of which is Mahdi
(May *Allah* hasten his glad advent).

Basing on the recorded Islamic traditions, at the time of Mahdi's
rightful government, the security will be so much so that wolf and
sheep, lion and cow, and other savage animals will graze in the same
pasture. The security of life, wealth and honour will be found in the
world thoroughly. There will be no cruelty and transgression anywhere,
and justice will cover the whole world of existence.

However, at the end of the verse, it says:

***"... and on the Day of Resurrection, he will be a witness over
them."***

The objective meaning of the 'witness of Jesus against them' is that he
(as) will bear witness that he has preached the messenger ship but he
has never invited them to his own divinity and god ship. On the
contrary, he has invited them to the Divinity of *Allah.* [^2]

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 160
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِظُلْمٍ مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُواْ حَرَّمْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ طَيِّبَاتٍ
أُحِلَّتْ لَهُمْ وَبِصَدِّهِمْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**160.** ***"And for the injustice from those of the Jews We did forbid
them those good things which had been made lawful for them (before), and
for their much hindering (people) from the path of Allah."***

Perhaps, the objective meaning of the good things that became forbidden
for them is the same things which are mentioned in **Surah Al-'An'am.
No.5. verse 146**. It says:

***"And to those who were Jews We made unlawful every animal having
claws, and of oxen and sheep "....***

This very prohibition is also found in the present Torah. (Leviticus,
Chapter 11)

### Explanations

Injustice is the preparation for deprivation from bounties.

Sometimes, some economical deprivations and material straitened
circumstances are signs for the wrath and retribution of *Allah.*

***"And for the injustice from those of the Jews We did forbid them
those good things which had been made lawful for them (before)..."***

Hindering people from the path of *Allah,* in any form it may be,
(including: distortion, concealment, innovation, corruption, and
deviation), is the cause of deprivation.

***"…and for their much hindering (people) from the path of Allah"***

In fact, the main punishments will be given in Hereafter, yet the
worldly retributions are for awareness. They are as penalty for the evil
doers and as trial for the good doers.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 161
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَخْذِهِمُ الرِّبَا وَقَدْ نُهُواْ عَنْهُ وَأَكْلِهِمْ أَمْوَالَ
النَّاسِ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا
أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**161.** ***"And (for) their taking usury when indeed they were
forbidden from it, and (for) their devouring the property of people
unrightfully, and We prepared for the disbelievers from among them a
painful chastisement."***

The prohibition of usury is also mentioned in the present Torah
(Deuteronomy, Chapter 23, and No. 19 & 20):

19. Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury
of victuals, usury of anything that is lent upon usury:

20. Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother
thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all that thou set test thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

Usury seems to be the source of profit and the factor of happiness, but
it is the cause of deprivations and punishments.

All heavenly religions are sensitive, and have words, due to the
material and financial connections between human-beings and also due to
their gains and expenditures.

As long as injustice, usury, and living on unlawful money have not set a
person in the course of infidelity, it is easy for him to return to the
right path, otherwise the sins may become the cause of infidelity, and
infidels are involved in punishment.

***"And (for) their taking usury when indeed they were forbidden from
it, and (for) their devouring the property of people unrightfully, and
We prepared for the disbelievers from among them a painful
chastisement."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 162
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّـكِنِ الرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ مِنْهُمْ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيكَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلِكَ
وَالْمُقِيمِينَ الصَّلاَةَ وَالْمُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أُوْلَـئِكَ سَنُؤْتِيهِمْ أَجْرًا
عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**162.** ***"But those firmly rooted in knowledge among them and the
believers believe in what has been revealed to you and what has been
revealed (to the messengers) before you, and the establishers of prayer
and the givers of poor-rate, and the believers in Allah and the Last
Day. Upon these We shall give a great reward."***

In this verse, a great fact is referred to, on which the Holy Qur'an has
repeatedly emphasized. This fact is that the reproach and reprimanding
of the Qur'an upon the Jews has never had an aspect of racial or tribal
combat.

Islam reproaches no race as a 'race', but it blames and reprimands the
filthy and deluded persons. That is why this verse separates the
believers and virtuous ones from among the Jews as an exception and
admires them when it gives them the glad tidings of a great reward. The
Qur'an says:

***"But those firmly rooted in knowledge among them and the believers
believe in what has been revealed to you and what has been revealed (to
the messengers) before you, and the establishers of prayer and the
givers of poor-rate, and the believers in Allah and the Last Day. Upon
these We shall give a great reward."***

The proof for this meaning is the fact that at the time of the advent of
the Prophet of Islam (S), when some of the prominent people of the Jews
saw the reasons of his rightfulness, embraced Islam and defended it
heartily. These persons were respected by the Prophet of Islam (S) and
other Muslim members.

[^1]: Surah, Al- 'An'am, No.6, verse 7

[^2]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 572


