Section 23: The Qur'an testified in the previous heavenly Books
===============================================================

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 163
-------------------------

Heavenly Books were revealed to the previous messengers - The
disbelievers -The truth about the personality of Jesus

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ كَمَا أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى نُوحٍ
وَالنَّبِيِّينَ مِن بَعْدِهِ وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ
وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالأَسْبَاطِ وَعِيسَى
وَأَيُّوبَ وَيُونُسَ وَهَارُونَ وَسُلَيْمَانَ وَآتَيْنَا دَاوُودَ
زَبُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**163.** ***"Verily We revealed to you as We revealed to Noah and the
prophets after him, and We (also) revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and
Isac and Jacob and the Tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron,
and Solomon, and We gave David the Psalms."***

The names of twenty-five prophets of *Allah* have been mentioned, in the
Qur'an. Eleven names of these prophets are referred to in the verse
under discussion, and the rest of them are: 'Adam, Andreas, Hud, -Salih,
Lot, Yusuf (Joseph), Shu'aib (Jethro), Thilkafl, Moses, Elyas (Elija),
Yasa' (Elisha), Zakaria (Zachariah), Yahya (John), and 'Uzair (Ezra).

Some Islamic recorded traditions denote that whatever had been revealed
to the former prophets (as) were revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S), too.
[^1]

The Qur'anic term /'asbat/ is a title for those prophets who are the
children of Ya'qub (Jacob).

The word /zabur/ in philology means 'book', but, as a technical term, it
is used for David's Book. Psalms of David can be found in the Books of
the Old Testament. This book contains 150 Chapters, each of which is a
Psalm. (p.p. 606 to 681 of the Holy Bible). Here is the verse:

***"Verily We revealed to you as We revealed to Noah and the prophets
after him, and We (also) revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isac and
Jacob and the Tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonoh and Aaron, and
Solomon, and We gave David the Psalms."***

*Allah* sent down revelations to all prophets one after another. But
here, in this regard, before mentioning the names of some other
prophets, *Allah* says:

***"We revealed to you.”***

This precedence may be for the superiority of the holy Prophet's rank. .

### Explanations

1. In the history of man, revelation and Messenger ship has been an
unalterable process and rule.

2. In revelation both aim, and style, and the generality of the content,
and the origin of them, wholly is the same; and that origin is *Allah.*

***"Verily We revealed ..."***

3. The divine revelations unto the prophets have repeatedly occurred in
the history. Yet, why do the opponents of prophet hood not accept the
Prophet of Islam (S) and do differ between him and other prophets?
**(**Such people are certainly astray).

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 164
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرُسُلاً قَدْ قَصَصْنَاهُمْ عَلَيْكَ مِن قَبْلُ وَرُسُلاً لَّمْ
نَقْصُصْهُمْ عَلَيْكَ وَكَلَّمَ اللّهُ مُوسَى تَكْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**164.** ***"And earlier (there were) messengers We have already told
you of, and messengers We have not told you of; and Allah spoke directly
unto Moses a (peculiar) speech."***

Suras Hud (No.11) and Al-'Anbiya (No.21), comparing other Suras of the
Qur'an, are more inclusive in stating the stories of the prophets. In
regard to learning good qualities, acquainting oneself with the history
of the lives of prophets is so useful for men that *Allah (s.w.t.)* has
paid to it, too. It says:

***"....messengers We have already told you of....."***

The history of prophets, of course, is more abundant than what has been
mentioned in the Qur'an. Neither the length of the life of a person is
enough to listen to the whole history, nor is listening to the whole
history necessary.

But listening to it should be as much as to take example and to take
lesson from it. This very thing shows that the Qur'an is a Book of
guidance and teaching, not a Book for telling stories.

***"... and messengers We have not told you of ..."***

However, the styles of receiving revelations are different, inspiration
in heart, or sending down the angel, or revealing from behind the
(curtain), and all prophets had been the addressee of *Allah (s.w.t.),*
but among them only Moses (as)*,* as his epithet, was entitled
/kalim-ul-lah/ ' The Interlocutor of *Allah*'.

***"... and Allah spoke directly unto Moses a (peculiar) speech."***

This title was given to Moses (as) maybe for the reason that it was
necessary for him to communicate repeatedly with *Allah* in order to
struggle and work hard against Pharaoh, or against obstinacy and
stubbornness of the Children of Israel.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 165
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُّسُلاً مُّبَشِّرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ لِئَلاَّ يَكُونَ لِلنَّاسِ عَلَى
اللّهِ حُجَّةٌ بَعْدَ الرُّسُلِ وَكَانَ اللّهُ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**165.** ***"(We sent) messengers as givers of glad tidings and as
warners, so that people might have no argument against Allah after the
(invitations of) the messengers, and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

This verse expresses the words of prophets' invitation and the method of
their effort, together with the purpose of the mission of prophets to
prophet hood.

The method of the work of prophets is based on two pivots: 'glad
tidings' and 'warning'.

***"(We sent) messengers as givers of glad tidings and as warners, so
that people might have no argument against Allah after the (invitations
of) the messengers, and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

The philosophy of the mission of prophets is *Allah's '*completing the
argument' for humankind so that they cannot say that they had not any
leader or guide.

It is necessary to mention that from the point of personal epithets,
background of life, social, political, genealogical, and physical
situation, and also from the point of having miracles, clear statements,
and being aided by hidden helps, prophets should be in a state that no
one be able to object any things of theirs.

And, since '*Allah* is the Mighty, the Wise', none has any proof against
Him, as the Qur'an states:

***"Say: ' Then Allah's is the conclusive argument;'..."*** [^2]

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 166
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّـكِنِ اللّهُ يَشْهَدُ بِمَا أَنزَلَ إِلَيْكَ أَنزَلَهُ بِعِلْمِهِ
وَالْمَلآئِكَةُ يَشْهَدُونَ وَكَفَى بِاللّهِ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**166.** ***"But Allah bears witness to what He has sent down to you
that He has sent it down with His knowledge, and the angels (also) bear
witness; and Allah is Sufficient as witness."***

This very fact that the high standard of knowledge of the Qur'an has
been delivered by an illiterate person in an environment full of
ignorance and enmity, and that it changed the state of people from
dispersion to unity, from avarice to donation, from paganism to theism,
from ignorance to knowledge, and from descent to spiritual ascent so
that they reached to the condition of formation of 'the Islamic Ummah',
is an evidence for *Allah's* grace *(s.w.t.)* toward the holy Prophet
(S) and for His favour to his religion.

That is why the best shelter and the source of hope in all prophets has
been the support and aid of *Allah.*

***"But Allah bears witness to what He has sent down to you ..."***

By the way, the origin of revelation is the infinite knowledge of
*Allah.* So, with the advance of science, every day some parts of the
Qur'anic wisdom will be manifested.

***"...that He has sent it down with His knowledge. ..."***

It should be regarded that if there are some obstinate sinful persons in
some corners of the world who seek pretexts, in spite of that, there are
all the pure knowledgeable angels in the world of existence who bear
witness alongside the Holiness of *Allah.* It says:

***"... and the angels (also) bear witness; and Allah is Sufficient as
witness."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verses 167 - 169
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَصَدُّواْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ قَدْ ضَلُّواْ
ضَلاَلاً بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ وَظَلَمُواْ لَمْ يَكُنِ اللّهُ لِيَغْفِرَ
لَهُمْ وَلاَ لِيَهْدِيَهُمْ طَرِيقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ طَرِيقَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا وَكَانَ ذَلِكَ
عَلَى اللّهِ يَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**167.** ***"Verily, those who disbelieve and hinder (people) from the
way of Allah, have gone astray far away (from felicity)."***

**168.** ***"Verily, those who disbelieve and act unjustly, it is not
for Allah to forgive them, nor will He guide them to a way."***

**169*****. "Except the way to Hell, to abide therein forever and that
(retribution) is easy for Allah."***

In the first verse of the above verses, the phrase ***'have gone astray
far away (from felicity)'*** denotes to the intensive stray of the
disbelievers. Infidelity is an aberration, and hindering others from
Faith is another one!

Disbelief is a deviation, while a disbeliever considering oneself
rightful, is a deviation greater than that. Disbelief in a person is
injustice to his own self, while hindering others from the right path is
injustice unto generation, in the history.

***"Verily, those who disbelieve and hinder (people) from the way of
Allah, have gone astray far away (from felicity)."***

The objective meaning of the phrase 'act unjustly', mentioned in verse
No.168, may be in the same sense of hindering others to be guided. Which
injustice, in comparison, can be higher than the mental, cultural, and
creedal injustice?

***"Verily, those who disbelieve and act unjustly, it is not for Allah
to forgive them, nor will He guide them to a way."***

The most painful chastisement and the most disgraceful senses have been
appointed against those pagans who hinder the message of truth to reach
the ears of the truth-seekers by different kinds of propagations,
accusations and Intimidations.

The lack of forgiveness, the lack of guidance, to be counted among those
who abide in Hell forever and the like of them is the fruit of the
indecency of their deeds.

***"Except the way to Hell, to abide therein forever and that
(retribution) is easy for Allah"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 170
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَاءكُمُ الرَّسُولُ بِالْحَقِّ مِن
رَّبِّكُمْ فَآمِنُواْ خَيْرًا لَّكُمْ وَإِن تَكْفُرُواْ فَإِنَّ
لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَكَانَ اللّهُ عَلِيمًا
حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**170.** ***"O' mankind! the Messenger has came to you with the truth
from your Lord; then believe (in him), it is good for you And if you
disbelieve, still, to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the
earth, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

The invitation of Islam is an invitation to all humankind throughout the
world. The verse says:

***"O' mankind!...."***

The means of the spread of this invitation, and the weapon of the
prophets for the aim, has been its rightfulness.

***"... with the truth from your Lord...."***

Before the advent of the holy Prophet (S), the People of the Book, and
even the pagans, were waiting for a prophet to come.

When the same prophet came, they should believe in him and they would
know that believing in him is beneficial for the people themselves. So,
they might not hold Islam under obligation for their belief in it, but
*Allah* has conferred a favour upon them for that He has guided them.

***"...then believe (in him), it is good for you…."***

Neither the disbelief of people incurs a loss to *Allah,* nor does their
belief bring a gain for Him.

***".. And if you disbelieve, still, to Allah belongs whatever is in the
heavens and the earth…."***

*Allah* knows that the felicity of people lies in following the path of
prophets, and His Wisdom requires sending prophets.

***"... and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 171
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لاَ تَغْلُواْ فِي دِينِكُمْ وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ
عَلَى اللّهِ إِلاَّ الْحَقِّ إِنَّمَا الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ
رَسُولُ اللّهِ وَكَلِمَتُهُ أَلْقَاهَا إِلَى مَرْيَمَ وَرُوحٌ مِّنْهُ
فَآمِنُواْ بِاللّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ ثَلاَثَةٌ انتَهُواْ
خَيْرًا لَّكُمْ إِنَّمَا اللّهُ إِلَـهٌ وَاحِدٌ سُبْحَانَهُ أَن
يَكُونَ لَهُ وَلَدٌ لَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَات وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ
وَكَفَى بِاللّهِ وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**171.** ***"O' People of the Book! do not exaggerate in your religion,
and do not say upon Allah save the truth. The Messiah, Jesus son of
Mary, was only a messenger of Allah, and His Word that He cast unto Mary
and a Spirit from Him. So believe in Allah and His messengers, and do
not say (Allah is) a Trinity. Desist! it is good for you; verily Allah
is only one God. Far be it from His*** ***Glory that there be for Him a
son; to Him belongs whatever is in heavens and whatever is in the earth;
and Allah is sufficient as a Protector."***

Adapting to the contents of the previous verses which were about the
People of the Book and pagans, in this verse the Qur'an has pointed to
one of the most important deviations of the society of the Christians,
i.e. trinity or believing in three foldness ( the father, the son, and
the Holy Spirit). In a short and reasonable sentence, it tells them to
avoid this great aberration.

At first, it warns them that:

***"O' People of the Book! do not exaggerate in your religion, and do
not say upon Allah save the truth. ..."***

The subject of exaggeration about the religious leaders has been one of
the most important origins of deviation in heavenly religions. For this
reason, Islam has treated with a severe strictness against Extremists,
'Qalat'. So, in Islamic jurisprudence, Qalat have been introduced as the
worst infidels.

Then the verse hints to some points where each of which is as a reason
for the nullification of trinity, and divinity of Jesus (as)*.* They are
as follows:

1. Jesus (as) was but a son of Mary:

***"... The Messiah, Jesus son of Mary....."***

This phrase indicates that Jesus, similar to every other human being,
was in the womb of his mother, and passed the foetal course. Like any
other members of men, he was born, sucked milk and grew up in the bosom
of his mother.

In other words, all the human qualities existed in him (as). How can
such a person, who is object to the laws of nature and the changes of
the world of matter, be a God without beginning and without end.

2. Jesus was the messenger of *Allah* and he was sent by Him. This rank
does not fit with his divinity:

***"...was only a messenger of Allah....."***

3. Jesus was the 'word' of *Allah* that He cast unto Mary. This meaning
is for hinting to the fact that Jesus was a creature of *Allah.* In the
same manner that 'words' are His creatures, all the things of the world
of creation are creatures of *Allah,* too.

4. Jesus is a 'spirit' that has been created by *Allah (s.w.t.).* This
expression that has been mentioned in the Qur'an for the creation of
'Adam or, in another sense for the creation of humankind, points to that
spirit which *Allah* created and set in the selves of human beings, in
general, and in Jesus and prophets, in particular.

***"…and a Spirit from Him…"***

Next to stating this meaning, the Qur'an says:

***"... So believe in Allah and His messengers, and do not say (Allah
is) a Trinity. Desist! it is good for you....."***

Here, the Qur'an emphasizes on the unity of *Allah* once more and says:

***"... verily Allah is only One God. ..."***

This phrase means that you believe in oneness of God, and yet in the
meantime, you accept trinity. But if *Allah* had a child, the child
would be like Him, and, in this case, oneness of God is meaningless.

How can *Allah* have a child while He is far from being in need of the
deficiency of wife and child, and from the deficiency of body and of
being a body?

***"... Far be it from His Glory that there be for Him a son....."***

Besides that, He is the possessor of what is in the heavens and the
earth. They are all His creatures and He is the Creator of them all.
And, Muses (as) is one of these creatures.

***"...to Him belongs whatever is in heavens and whatever is in the
earth....."***

How can an exceptional case be assumed for Him? Can a slave and a
creature be both the child and the creator of his possessor! *Allah* not
only is the Creator and the Possessor of them but also is a controller,
protector, sustainer, and guardian of them. And, He is sufficient to
direct and guard them.

***"...and Allah is sufficient as a protector."***

Basically, how is the Lord in need of a child, the One Who is without
beginning and without end, and Who is in charge of the guardianship of
all creatures from beginning to the end? Is He like us, the mortals, to
demand a child in order to substitute that child after His death?

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 572

[^2]: Surah Al-'An'am, No 6, verse 149


