Section 1: General Discipline
=============================

Fulfilment of covenants -Obligations relating to Pilgrimage -Regulations
regarding food -Perfection of the Faith -Islam chosen to be the
Religion - Dealings with the non-Muslims.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 1
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَوْفُواْ بِالْعُقُودِ أُحِلَّتْ لَكُم
بَهِيمَةُ الأَنْعَامِ إِلاَّ مَا يُتْلَى عَلَيْكُمْ غَيْرَ مُحِلِّي
الصَّيْدِ وَأَنتُمْ حُرُمٌ إِنَّ اللّهَ يَحْكُمُ مَا يُرِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah The Beneficent The Merciful***

**1.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Fulfil the contracts (made by you or
people). The four-footed animals are lawful to you (for food) except
those which will be recited unto you, pilgrim garb,*** ***and while you
are in deem not game permitted to be hunted. Verily Allah decrees
whatever He intends."***

Muslims should earnestly fulfil any covenant and every kind o contract
that they have made. These covenants are irrespective of the recorded
contracts and the oral contracts, whether they are political,
economical, social, and both with authorative and weak people, friend or
enemy.

The Holy Qur'an enjoins Muslims that the contracts with pagans should be
fulfilled, too. **Surah At- Taubah, No.9. verse 4** says:

***"... so fulfil their contract ...".***

According to a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as), recorded in Al-Kafi, vol.
1, p. 162 even the fulfilment of agreements with the sinners is
necessary.

These covenants may be with *Allah (s.w.t.)* (like vows and promises),
or with people who can be an individual or a group, young or old. The
contracts may be with the countries in neighbourhood, or those of
international formation.

However, as in the same manner that breach of promise and iniquity is
the secret of deprivations,[^1] fulfilling the promises is the cause of
gains and enjoyments.

And it ought to be noted that the heavenly Books are also *Allah's*
covenants to which should we be loyal and fulfil them entirely. The Old
Testament (the Torah), the New Testament (the Evangel) and the Present
Testament (the Qur'an) all are referred to in the Islamic literature. In
a tradition, Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*"Al-Qur'an is the covenant of Allah unto His people…."* [^2]

However, faith is the basis of fulfilling the promises and vows. The
holy Prophet Muhammad (S) said:

*"There is no religion for the person who does not fulfil his promise."*

If the agreements and promises be not kept, the basis of the society and
common confidence will fail, and, at that line, disorder comes forth.

***"O' you who have Faith! fulfil the contracts (made by you or people).
..."***

Then, following the ordinance of fulfilling the promise, which involves
the entire ordinances and divine covenants, the Qur'an states a number
of Islamic ordinances. At first, it refers to the meat of some animals
that can be lawful. It says:

***"...The four-footed animals are lawful to you (for food) ..."***

But, in this ordinance, it has excepted the meat of two animals to be
lawful. It says:

***"...except those which will be recited unto you, and while you are in
pilgrim garb, deem not game permitted to be hunted. ..."***

And *Allah* is wilful to decree whatever ordinance He pleases, since He
is Omniscient and 'Omni competent. This means that He decrees whatever
ordinance which is good for the servants, and His Wisdom requires it.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 2
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تُحِلُّواْ شَعَآئِرَ اللّهِ وَلاَ
الشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَلاَ الْهَدْيَ وَلاَ الْقَلآئِدَ وَلا آمِّينَ
الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلاً مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَرِضْوَانًا
وَإِذَا حَلَلْتُمْ فَاصْطَادُواْ وَلاَ يَجْرِمَنَّكُمْ شَنَآنُ قَوْمٍ
أَن صَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ أَن تَعْتَدُواْ
وَتَعَاوَنُواْ عَلَى الْبرِّ وَالتَّقْوَى وَلاَ تَعَاوَنُواْ عَلَى
الإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ إِنَّ اللّهَ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**2.** ***"O' you who have Faith! do not profane Allah's Monuments, nor
the sacred month, nor the offering, nor the sacrificial animals with
garlands, nor those going to the Sacred House seeking the grace and
pleasure of their Lord. And when you are free from the pilgrim garb (and
acts of Umrah), then (you can) hunt. And let not hatred of a people
(once) hindered you from the sacred Mosque move you to commit
aggression. And cooperate in righteousness and piety, but do not***
***cooperate in sin and transgression; and be in awe of Allah (for),
verily, Allah is severe in penalty."***

### Eight Divine Ordinances in a Verse

In this verse, several Islamic magnificent ordinances, among the latest
ordinances that were revealed to the Prophet (S), are referred to. All
of these ordinances, or most of them, are related to Hajj pilgrimage and
visiting the Sacred House:

1. At first it addresses the believers and enjoins them not to violate
the sanctity of the symbols of *Allah* and not to consider their
prohibition as lawful. It says:

***"O'you who have Faith! do not profane Allah's Monuments....."***

2. Keep the sanctity of the sacred months and refrain from fighting in
these sacred months.

***"...nor the sacred month....."***

3. Do not consider lawful the offering and the sacrificial animals which
you bring for Hajj, whether they are with garlands or without garlands,
and let them reach the place of sacrifice and then they can be
sacrificed there.

4. All the pilgrims to the Sacred House should be enjoyed a complete
freedom in the rites of this Islamic great duty. In this work, there is
not any privilege between nations, individuals, races, and languages.

Therefore, you must not bring into trouble those who set out for
visiting the Sacred House and seeking the grace and pleasure of *Allah,*
or even for obtaining some commercial gains, whether they are friends or
enemies of yours. When they are simply Muslims and are called as
pilgrims of the Sacred House, they are in immunity.

5. The prohibition of hunting, in Hajj performances, is limited to the
time of wearing pilgrim garment. Thus, when you come out of pilgrim
garment while performing the rites of Hajj or Umrah, hunting is allowed
for you.

***"... And when you are free from the pilgrim garb (and acts of Umrah),
then (you can) hunt...."***

6. If in the course of Hudaybiyyah pagans hindered you from going into
the Sacred House and did not allow you to perform the concerning sacred
rites of the Pilgrimage, this happening should not cause you to renew
the old hostilities after they becoming Muslims, and hinder them from
going into the Sacred House.

***"... And let not hatred of a people (once) hindered you from the
sacred Mosque move you to commit aggression. ..."***

A general law can be extracted from this statement. This law is that
never should Muslims be malicious and revenge the incidents that
happened in old times.

Then, in order to complete the former discussion, the holy verse
continues saying:

***"..And cooperate in righteousness and piety, but do not cooperate in
sin and transgression....."***

The Arabic term /birr/ has a vast meaning, including: having faith in:
*Allah,* Resurrection, prophets, heavenly Books, and angels. The word
also means: helping the deprive in the society, fulfilling the contracts
properly, being patient in affairs, and helping in righteousness.

For example, if the act of studying and learning is a work of
righteousness, its facilities, such as: building schools, libraries,
laboratories, providing books, vehicles, training teachers, encouraging
both teachers and students, etc, all are the examples of 'helping in
righteousness'.

There are many traditions in Islamic literature in which we have been
instructed to helping in goodness and assisting the oppressed and the
deprived, and we have also been prohibited from assisting the
oppressors. Here, we mention only a few of them as a blessing:

Helping a Muslim believer, in comparison, is better than performing one
month recommendable fast and spiritual retreat. (Wasa'il-ush- Shi'ah,
vol. 11, p. 345)

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*"Whoever steps forth for helping others, has the reward equal to a
striver in the Holy War."* (Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 8, p. 586)

He (as) also said:

*"And whoever assists a transgressor, he himself is as a transgressor."*
(Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 11, p. 345)

We have also been enjoined even not to help a transgressor in building a
mosque. (Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol 12 p. 130)

We ought not to sell grapes to the maker of wine, not to give weapon to
a tyrant, not to allow a plotter to act, not to give vehicles to Taghuto
to Mecca, not to tell the secrets to the persons with little capacity,
and not to smile to a sinner.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 3
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُرِّمَتْ عَلَيْكُمُ الْمَيْتَةُ وَالْدَّمُ وَلَحْمُ الْخِنْزِيرِ
وَمَا أُهِلَّ لِغَيْرِ اللّهِ بِهِ وَالْمُنْخَنِقَةُ وَالْمَوْقُوذَةُ
وَالْمُتَرَدِّيَةُ وَالنَّطِيحَةُ وَمَا أَكَلَ السَّبُعُ إِلاَّ مَا
ذَكَّيْتُمْ وَمَا ذُبِحَ عَلَى النُّصُبِ وَأَن تَسْتَقْسِمُواْ
بِالأَزْلاَمِ ذَلِكُمْ فِسْقٌ الْيَوْمَ يَئِسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِن
دِينِكُمْ فَلاَ تَخْشَوْهُمْ وَاخْشَوْنِ الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ
دِينَكُمْ وَأَتْمَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعْمَتِي وَرَضِيتُ لَكُمُ
الإِسْلاَمَ دِينًا فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ فِي مَخْمَصَةٍ غَيْرَ مُتَجَانِفٍ
لِّإِثْمٍ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**3.** ***"Forbidden to you (for food) are carrion, blood, the flesh of
swine, what has been (slaughtered) in the name of any other than that of
Allah, and the beast strangled, beaten to death, killed by a fall, the
gored to death by a horn, and that which a wild beast has begun to eat,
(all are unlawful), except what you slaughter (in accordance with the
prescribed law). And (also forbidden is to you) what has been
slaughtered before idols, or that you divide by the arrows; (all) that
is ungodliness. Today those who disbelieve have despaired of your
religion, so do not dread them but dread Me. Today have I perfected your
religion for you, and completed My favour on you, and I have chosen for
you Islam as a religion. But, whoever is helplessly forced*** ***by
hunger, without inclining to sin, (can enjoy the forbidden food), then
verily Allah is forgiving, Merciful."***

At the beginning of this Surah, there was a statement which pointed out
to the meat of the beast being lawful for eating, except what would be
said thereafter. This verse, in fact, is the explanation upon the same
exceptions. Here, there are eleven things which have been ordained to be
prohibited.

At first, it says:

***"Forbidden to you (for food) are carrion, bloods, the flesh of swine,
what has been (slaughtered) in the name of any other than that of Allah,
the beast strangled....."***

The meat of this kind of beast is forbidden to be eaten, whether the
action is done spontaneously, or by the beast, or by a person.

It had been customary at the Age of Ignorance that sometimes the animal
was put between two sticks or two branches of a tree, and then it was
pressed thereby so much so that it died. After that, the meat of such
animal was consumed by them. It is also forbidden in Islam to eat the
meat of the animals which are tortured, or beaten to death, or die
because of a disease.

***"... beaten to death, killed by a fall, the gored to death by a horn
..."***

It is cited in At-Tafsir-ul-Qurtubi that it was a custom among some
Arabs that, for the sake of idols, they would beat a few sorts of
animals until they died. They considered that action a kind of worship.

The verse also continues saying:

***"...and that which a wild beast has begun to eat, (all are unlawful)
..."***

Then, following the prohibition of the aforementioned items, the Qur'an
implies: if, before that those animals die, they can be taken and
slaughtered in accordance with the Islamic laws, and sufficient blood
comes out of their bodies, they will be lawful. The verse says:

***"...except what you slaughter (in accordance with the prescribed
law). ..."***

At the Age of Ignorance, some idol worshippers had settled some pieces
of stone around Ka'bah which had had no special form or shape. They
called them /nusub/ and they sacrificed animals before them and poured
some blood of the sacrificial animal over the idols.

The only distinguished difference between these stones and idols was
that idols had a special shape and face, but /nusub/ had not. In the
verse under discussion, Islam has forbidden eating the meat of such
animals, and says the animals which are slaughtered on the idols or
before them are all forbidden for you to eat.

***"….And (also forbidden is to you) what has been slaughtered before
idols…"***

It is clear, of course, that the prohibition of this kind of meal has a
moral and spiritual aspect, not a bodily and material one,

Another kind of animal which the verse points out as unlawful, are those
which are killed and divided in the form of lottery, The action was in
this manner that: ten persons among themselves laid a bet and bought an
animal to kill, Then they put ten arrow shafts in a bag, on seven of
them was written 'gainer', while on the rest was written' loser'.

They took those shafts out of the bag as the manner of lottery one after
another by the name of the ten people. Those for whose names the seven
'gainers' came out, had a share of meat without paying anything; but
those three persons, for whose names the three 'losers' were given, had
to pay one- third of the price of the animal without having a share of
its meat.

These arrow shafts were called /'azlam/. Islam prohibited eating such
meat. It was not for the reason that the meat itself was unlawful, but
for the reason that it had a form of gambling and lottery. So, it says:

***"….or that you divide by the arrows…"***

It is evident that the prohibition of gambling, and the like of it, is
not allocated to the meat of animals, but when it is done on a thing, it
is forbidden, because it is a place where all unexpected social harms
and superstitions can be assembled.

Then, finally, in order to emphasize more on the prohibition of all
these deeds, it says:

***"….. (all) that is ungodliness…"***

### Moderation in the Usage of Meat

From the totality of the above discussions, as well as other Islamic
literature, it is understood that the style of Islam in consuming kinds
of meat, like its other commandments, is a perfectly moderate style.

That is, neither it is like the people of the Age of Ignorance, who
consumed the meat of lizard, carrion, blood, and the like of them or
like many people of the West who, today, do not remanciate eating even
the meat of crabs and some worms, nor it is like some Hindus, who
believe that eating meat is absolutely forbidden.

Thus, Islam ordains that the meat of those animals which contains pure
nutriment and is not hatred, to be lawful (halal), and, by giving some
conditions for the usage of some kinds of meat, has rejected the styles
of excess and defect.

Next to the statement of the above-mentioned ordinances, there are also
two expressive phrases mentioned in the verse under discussion. At
first, it says:

***"... Today those who disbelieve have despaired of your religion, so
do not dread them but dread Me. ..."***

Then, it continues saying:

***"... Today have I perfected your religion for you, and completed My
favour on you, and I have chosen for you Islam as a religion. ..."***

Which day is the day of the perfection of religion? What is the purpose
of the word' today' which has been repeated in the couple of above
sentences?

The answer to the first question is: "The Day of Ghadeer Khumm." This
fact has been cited by Shi'ite commentators in their books, in the case
that many traditions referred to by the scholars of both great sects of
Islam.

Sunnites and Shi'ites confirm it, and it completely fits with the
contents of the verse. That day was the day when the Prophet of Islam
(S) formally assigned Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) as his successor.

It was on that day that Islam reached its final perfection and pagans
sank deep inside the waves of their despair. They expected Islam to be
subsistent in person and, by diminishing the Prophet (S), the
circumstances would change to the former state, so that Islam could
gradually vanish.

But when they observed that a man was elected as the successor of the
Prophet and people paid allegiance to him who, next to the Prophet (S),
was peerless among Muslims from the point of knowledge, virtue, power,
and justice, despair and hopelessness, due to the future of Islam,
surrounded them, and they found that it was a fixed and permanent
religion.

An interesting point, which must be paid attention to here, is that the
Qur'an in **Surah An-Nur No.24, verse 55** says:

***"Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them and that He will certainly,
after their fear, give them security in exchange…."***

In this verse, *Allah* says that He will establish for them on the earth
the religion which He has chosen for them.

Regarding the fact that Surah An-Nur has been revealed before Surah
Al-Ma'idah, and noting that the sentence ***"and chosen for you Islam as
a religion,"*** which has been revealed in the verse under discussion
upon the master ship of Ali (as), we deduce that Islam will be firmly
established and grounded on the earth when it be combined with
***'mastership',*** because this is the very Islam that *Allah* has
chosen and has promised those who believe to establish it firmly on the
earth.

In other more clear words, Islam will be a world-wide religion in the
case that it be not separated from the subject of love of Ahlul-Bayt
/wilayah/ (the loyalty or allegiance to the Imams).

Another matter that can be deduced from the combination of Surah An-Nur,
verse 55 with the verse under discussion is that: in the former verse
three promises have been given to the believers. The first is that they
be made rulers in the earth. The second is security and peace for the
worshippers of the Lord; and the third is the establishment of a
religion that *Allah* has chosen.

Those three promises were actually done on the day of Ghadeer Khumm
(18th Zul-Hijjah) when the verse:

***"... Today have I perfected your religion for you ..."***

was revealed, because the perfect complete example of a believing person
with good deed meant Ali (as), the one who was assigned as the successor
of the Prophet (S). It was then that with the meaning of:

***"Today those who disbelieve have despaired of your religion ..."***

Muslims were set in a relative security and peace; and also with the
meaning of ***'...and chosen for you Islam as religion',*** the chosen
religion of the Lord was established among Muslims." [^3]

At the end of the verse, it has returned again to the discussion of the
sorts of prohibited meat and expresses the ordinance of the case of
exigency. It says:

***"... But, whoever is helplessly forced by hunger, without inclining
to sin, (can enjoy the forbidden food), then verily Allah is forgiving,
Merciful."***

### Explanations

1. The firmness of the religious school depends on a correct leadership.
So, with its existence, all the infidels became hopeless at that time.

2. If the leader of the day of Ghadeer (and wilayah) exists in the
society, Muslims must not have any fear.

3. The most important window of the hope of infidels was the departure
of the Muslims' leader (S). By the assignment of Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(as) for the leadership, that window was closed. However, the religion
without having a leader is not complete.

4. The infidels, without the leader of Ghadeer, have many hopes and with
that leader being appointed, they become hopeless. Then all infidels are
on one side and 'Ali-ibn-' Abi-Talib is on another side.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 4
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ مَاذَا أُحِلَّ لَهُمْ قُلْ أُحِلَّ لَكُمُ الطَّيِّبَاتُ
وَمَا عَلَّمْتُم مِّنَ الْجَوَارِحِ مُكَلِّبِينَ تُعَلِّمُونَهُنَّ
مِمَّا عَلَّمَكُمُ اللّهُ فَكُلُواْ مِمَّا أَمْسَكْنَ عَلَيْكُمْ
وَاذْكُرُواْ اسْمَ اللّهِ عَلَيْهِ وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ إِنَّ اللّهَ
سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. "(O' Muhammad!) they ask you what has been made lawful for them.
Say: 'Good things have been made lawful for you; and such hunting
creatures as you teach, training them as hounds, and teaching them of
what Allah has taught you, then eat what they seize for you and mention
Allah's Name over it. And be in awe of Allah; verily Allah is swift in
reckoning."***

### Occasion of Revelation

There are several occasions of revelation mentioned upon this verse, the
most appropriate of which is as follows:

Two companions of the holy Prophet (S) by the names of Zayd-ul-Khayr and
'Uday-ibn-Hatam, once went to him (S) and said that they were among a
group who used to hunt with falcons and hunting-dogs.

Those hunting-dogs would take the animals whose meat was lawful (for
eating). Some of the animals would be fetched alive and killed by them,
but some others would be killed by the hunting-dogs, before they had
opportunities to kill them according to the Islamic law.

They asked that while they knew that the meat of carrion was unlawful
for them to eat, what their duty was to do. Then, the verse was revealed
and answered them.

### A Lawful Hunting

Following the commandments stated in the previous couple of verses upon
the lawful and unlawful sorts of meat, another part of that subject is
referred to in this verse, and, as an answer to their question, the
Divine revelation says:

***"(O' Muhammad!) they ask you what has been made lawful for them. Say:
'Good things have been made lawful for you…."***

This means that what Islam has ordained as unlawful are among malignant
and impure things. Thus, never the Divine law prohibits a pure animal
which has naturally been created for the usage and utility of human
beings.

Then, the verse refers to the hunting when it says:

***"…..and such hunting creatures as you teach, training them as hounds,
and teaching them of what Allah has taught you...."***

Therefore, the animals that hunting-dogs bring for you should be killed
according to the law of Islam when they are alive. But, if the hunts die
before the dogs can reach them, they are lawful (halal), although they
are not slaughtered.

At the end of the verse, it points to two other circumstances of the
conditions of such hunt being lawful, saying:

***"….then eat what they seize for you…"***

Thus, if the hunting-dogs have accustomed themselves to eat a portion of
their own hunt and leave another portion, such hunt is not lawful. In
fact, such a dog has neither been trained, nor what it leaves can be as
an aspect of the Qur'anic word /'alaykum/ (for you), for the dog has
hunted the animal for itself.

The second condition is:

***"…and mention Allah's Name over it...."***

Then, in conclusion, in order that all these godly commandments be
observed, it says:

***".... And be in awe of Allah; verily Allah is swift in reckoning."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 5
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ أُحِلَّ لَكُمُ الطَّيِّبَاتُ وَطَعَامُ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ
الْكِتَابَ حِلٌّ لَّكُمْ وَطَعَامُكُمْ حِلُّ لَّهُمْ وَالْمُحْصَنَاتُ
مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَالْمُحْصَنَاتُ مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ
الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ إِذَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
مُحْصِنِينَ غَيْرَ مُسَافِحِينَ وَلاَ مُتَّخِذِي أَخْدَانٍ وَمَن
يَكْفُرْ بِالإِيمَانِ فَقَدْ حَبِطَ عَمَلُهُ وَهُوَ فِي الآخِرَةِ مِنَ
الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**5.** ***"Today (all) good things have been made lawful for you, and
(also) the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you,
and your food is lawful for them. And (so are) the chaste women from the
believers and the chaste women from those who have been given the Book
before you (are lawful for you) when you give them their dowries taking
them in marriage, not fornicating, nor taking them for paramours in
secret. And whoever denies the faith, his work indeed is vain, and he
will be of the losers in the Hereafter."***

### Consuming Food of the People of the Book and marrying them

In this verse, which is the supplementary of the former verses, the
Qur'an says:

***"Today (all) good things have been made lawful for you, and (also)
the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you, and
your food is lawful for them....."***

The objective meaning of the phrase: ***"...the food of those who have
been given the Book..."*** is something other than the meat of animals
slaughtered by them.

It is narrated in a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) who, on commenting
this verse, said:

*"The purpose of 'the food of those who have been given the Book' is
cereals and fruits, not their slaughtered (animals), since they do not
recite the Name of Allah when they slaughter (them)."*

### Marrying with Non-Muslim Women

After referring the lawfulness of the food of the People of the Book,
this verse speaks about the marriage of the immaculate women from among,
Muslims and the People of the Book. It says:

***"... And (so are) the chaste women from the believers and the chaste
women from those who have been given the Book before you (are lawful for
you) when you give them their dowries taking them in marriage ..."***

Then the verse adds the statement:

***"...taking (them) in marriage, not fornicating, nor taking them for
paramours in secret...."***

In fact, this part of the verse decreases also some restrictions which
had existed before upon the marriage of Muslims with non-Muslims, and,
thereby, it authorizes their marriage with the women of the People of
the Book under some conditions. More details about this subject should
be studied in the Islamic jurisprudent books.

This fact should also be said that in this world of today that many of
customs of the Age of Ignorance have been revived in different forms,
this sort of thought has also come into being that: there is no
objection for single men or women to take paramours. It has appeared not
only in a hidden form, similar to that manner that existed in
pre-Islamic era of Ignorance, but also manifestly.

The world of today, from the point of sexual libertinism, indeed, has
gone beyond what had existed in the Age of Ignorance.

At that time, they considered only taking paramours in secret
permissible, while these recent people know its manifest form
unobjective, too, so that, with ultimate impudence, they re even proud
of it.

This shameful custom, which can be counted a manifest obscene act, is
one of the inauspicious presents which has been brought from West to
East and has proved to be the origin of many misfortunes and crimes.

In view of the fact that the above-mentioned facilities upon association
with the People of the Book and marrying their women may be misused by
some persons and, they, knowingly or unknowingly, may be driven towards
them, at the end, the verse warns the Muslims, saying:

***"... And whoever denies the faith, his work indeed is vain, and he
will be of the losers in the Hereafter."***

This statement implies that these facilities, besides bringing some
relief into your life, should work as a cause of influence and
development of Islam among foreigners. It should not cause, of course,
that you may be influenced by it and leave your own religion. If it
happens, your chastisement will be very hard and heavy.

[^1]: The reference is Surah An-Nisa’', No.4, verse 160, and Surah
Al-An'am, No.6, verse 146

[^2]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 144; & vol. 69, p. 198

[^3]: Inside the verse of prohibition sorts of forbidden meat of carrion
were mentioned in order that they be protected from the perversion of
opponents. Just like a person who puts his jewels inside other ordinary
goods to be protected from being taken away.


