Section 3: The Covenants with the Jews and the Christians
=========================================================

The covenants with the Jews -The covenants with the Christians - The
actual position of Jesus

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَبَعَثْنَا مِنهُمُ
اثْنَيْ عَشَرَ نَقِيبًا وَقَالَ اللّهُ إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ لَئِنْ
أَقَمْتُمُ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتَيْتُمُ الزَّكَاةَ وَآمَنتُم بِرُسُلِي
وَعَزَّرْتُمُوهُمْ وَأَقْرَضْتُمُ اللّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا
لَّأُكَفِّرَنَّ عَنكُمْ سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَلأُدْخِلَنَّكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ
تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ فَمَن كَفَرَ بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ مِنكُمْ
فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاء السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**12.** ***"And certainly Allah made a covenant with the Children of
Israel, and We raised among them twelve chiftains, and Allah said:
'Verily I am with you, if you keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and
believe in My messengers and assist them and lend Allah a kindly loan, I
will most certainly cover your evil deeds and I will certainly cause you
to enter Gardens beneath which rivers flow; but whoever among you
disbelieves after that, has indeed strayed from the right path."***

The chiefs of the Israelites were twelve persons. The ministers of Moses
(as) and the custodians of the twelve tribes were from among them. It is
narrated from the Messenger of *Allah* (S) who, in a tradition, said:

*"The vicegerents after me are twelve. They the Israelites"*[^1].

The attempt of the opponents of Ahlul-Bayt (as) is in vain when they try
to adapt this figure to Orthodox Caliphs, Umayyid Caliphs, and the
Caliphs of Abbasids, though it adapts to neither of them.

There are, of course, many traditions recorded which denote that the
Prophet himself (S) mentioned the names of these twelve persons.
According to his statement recorded in a tradition[^2] the first of them
is Ali-ibn-Abi talib and their last one is Hadrat Mahdi (May *Allah*
hasten his auspicious advent).

The Arabic phrase: /'azzartumuhum/ is derived from the word /'azzara/
which means: 'to assist with honour'. Therefore, the Arabic term
/ta'zir/ refers to a kind of assistance to the sinner in abandoning the
crime. That is why those Islamic punishments have the function of
education rather than vengeance.

The Qur'anic phrase /sawa'-us-sabil/ means the middle way that swerving
from which is going towards aberration and fall.

### Explanations

1. *Allah* is with us when we observe some conditions including:
prayers, poor-rate, belief in Truth, assisting prophets, and giving
charity. So, if we leave them, the Grace of *Allah* will be ceased.

2. Prayer, poor-rate, and charity have existed in all the Divine
religions. However, performing obligations alone is not enough, but
following the totality of obligatory and recommended deeds, without
approaching the prohibited things, is effective.

3. Prayer, poor-rate, and charity are meaningful when they are
accompanied with leadership and master ship -with the acceptance of
master ship of the whole prophets, not a part of them.

4. There is no room for the sinners in Heaven. Purification is first,
and then being admitted to enter into it.

5. The only way to the forgiveness of *Allah,* is Faith and righteous
deeds.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 13
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا نَقْضِهِم مِّيثَاقَهُمْ لَعنَّاهُمْ وَجَعَلْنَا قُلُوبَهُمْ
قَاسِيَةً يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ وَنَسُواْ حَظًّا
مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُواْ بِهِ وَلاَ تَزَالُ تَطَّلِعُ عَلَىَ خَآئِنَةٍ
مِّنْهُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنْهُمُ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاصْفَحْ إِنَّ
اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**13.** ***"So, for their breaking their covenant, We cursed them and
made their hearts hard. They alter the words (of Allah) from their
places and they have neglected a part of what they were admonished with,
and you shall always discover treachery in them save a few of them. Yet
forgive them, and overlook (their misdeeds); verily Allah loves the
good-doers."***

In the first verse of this Surah, the fulfilment of contracts was
referred to. In the previous verse, the covenant of *Allah (s.w.t.)*
with the Israelites, and the heedlessness of those people unto the
Divine covenant, was pointed out.

In the current verse, the effects of breaching promise are stated.
Therefore, this Surah has been entitled 'the covenant' too. However, the
contents of the verses, as a whole, also warn about a great breach of
promise.

Breach of promise causes deprivation from *Allah's* grace.[^3] It is
also an origin of the appearance of hard-heartedness in persons.

The Israelites have always been treacherous. They used to pervert the
religion of *Allah,* therefore, they encountered with punishment. The
verse says:

***"So, for their breaking their covenant, We cursed them and made their
hearts hard. They alter the words (of Allah) from their places and they
have neglected a part of what they were admonished with, and you shall
always discover treachery in them save a few of them. Yet forgive them
and overlook (their misdeeds); verily Allah loves the good-doers."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 14
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّا نَصَارَى أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَهُمْ
فَنَسُواْ حَظًّا مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُواْ بِهِ فَأَغْرَيْنَا بَيْنَهُمُ
الْعَدَاوَةَ وَالْبَغْضَاء إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ وَسَوْفَ
يُنَبِّئُهُمُ اللّهُ بِمَا كَانُواْ يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**14.** ***"And of those who say: 'We are Christians' We did take their
covenant, but they (also like Israelites) have neglected a part of what
they were admonished with. Therefore We have stirred up among them
enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection; and soon Allah will
inform them of what they have been doing."***

In the previous verse, the words were about the breach of promise among
the Children of Israel. Now, in this verse, the statement is upon the
breach of promise among the Christians. That verse introduced almost all
the Israelites as breachers of promise, (except a few of them). But, in
this verse, from the beginning, it separates a part of the Christians as
breachers of promise when it says:

***"….of those who say: 'We are Christians' …"***

This shows that the number of the deluded people among the Jews is
larger than those among the Christians.

***"And of those who say: 'We are Christians' We did take their
covenant, but they (also like Israelites) have neglected a part of what
they were admonished with. Therefore We have stirred up among them
enmity and hatred till the Day of Resurrection; and soon Allah will
inform them of what they have been doing."***

### Explanation

The Qur'anic term /nasara/ (Christians), mentioned in this holy verse,
is the plural form of the word /nasrani/, and, therein, the Christians
are entitled /nasara/ since the helpers and companions of Jesus (as)
used to say:

***"...We are helpers (in the cause) of Allah. ..."***[^4]

Therefore, we must take an example by the bitter results emerged from
breach of promise that other people had suffered. The verse indicates
that *Allah* took covenant from the Christians, but since they neglected
it they encountered the infliction of Ahzab.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 15
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ قَدْ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولُنَا يُبَيِّنُ لَكُمْ
كَثِيراً مِّمَّا كُنتُمْ تُخْفُونَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَيَعْفُو عَن
كَثِيرٍ قَدْ جَاءكُم مِّنَ اللّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**15.** ***"O' People of the Book! Indeed Our Messenger has come to you,
expounding to you much of what you have been hiding of the Book, and
overlooking much. Indeed there has come to you, from Allah, a Light and
a clear Book."***

Islam is a world-wide religion which invites the followers of all
religions to the Truth and to itself. Islam is the simplest and the most
conceivable religion among all religions.

Hence, do take care not to be despair of guiding and inviting people
towards the Truth, and do invite the People of the Book too, though they
are breachers of promise. The manifestation of the concealed matters is
a sign of knowledge of hidden things, and it is also one of the ways of
knowing the holy prophet.

***"O' People of the Book! Indeed Our Messenger has come to you
expounding to you much of what you have been hiding of the Book, and
overlooking much. ..."***

However, the world of humanity with the absence of the Qur'an is surely
dark.

***"...Indeed there has come to you, from Allah, a Light and a clear
Book."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 16
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَهْدِي بِهِ اللّهُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَهُ سُبُلَ السَّلاَمِ
وَيُخْرِجُهُم مِّنِ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِهِ
وَيَهْدِيهِمْ إِلَى صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**16.** ***"With it Allah guides whoever follows His pleasure into the
ways of safety, and He brings them out of darkness towards the Light by
His Will, and guides them to a right path."***

The Arabic term /salam/ (peace) is one of the Names of God (His
Attributes). In this regard, the Holy Qur'an says:

***"He is Allah, there is no god save He; the king, the Holy, the
Peace..."***[^5]

Paradise has also been called 'Dar-us-Salam' (the house of peace). So,
guiding towards the ways of peace and safety can be rendered into 'the
way of *Allah (s.w.t.)* and Paradise'. The person who wants to reach
these two, should go via /subul-as-salam/, 'the ways of safety', which
is specific to the followers of 'Truth'.

The concept of /salam/ (peace, safety) includes the peace of individuals
and society, family members and off springs, thought and soul, and,
even, the peace of honour.

Only those people are guidable who try to obtain the pleasure of *Allah
(s.w.t.).* Then, those who try to gain the ranks and the wealth of this
fleeting world, and also follow their low desires and do revenge, are
not guidable.

Certainly, all the ways toward safety and prosperity are found in
gaining the pleasure of *Allah.* So, whoever tries to please other than
Him, is in aberration.

However, all the various secondary ways towards the Truth, lead to the
main unity. 'The ways of safety, end to the Straight Way. Hence, all
those who, by performing different good accomplishments, in variety of
conditions, try to gain the pleasure of *Allah (s.w.t.),* reach to one
single proper way.

***"With it Allah guides whoever follows His pleasure into the ways of
safety, and He brings them out of darkness towards the Light by His Will
and guides them to a right path."***

However, the Qur'an is the best remedy and it can save its followers
from any darkness - the darkness of dubious things, lusts,
superstitions, crimes, agitations, and so on.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 17
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَآلُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ هُوَ الْمَسِيحُ ابْنُ
مَرْيَمَ قُلْ فَمَن يَمْلِكُ مِنَ اللّهِ شَيْئًا إِنْ أَرَادَ أَن
يُهْلِكَ الْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ وَمَن فِي الأَرْضِ
جَمِيعًا وَلِلّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا
يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاء وَاللّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**17.** ***"Indeed, they have disbelieved who said: 'Verily Allah is the
Messiah, son of Mary '. Say: 'Who can hold anything against Allah, if He
intends to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and
everyone, on the earth? And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens
and the*** ***earth .and whatever is between them two. He creates what
He pleases; and Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

Christians have some groundless claims about *Allah* to which the Qur'an
hints:

1. Trinity (the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost). The Qur'an says:

***"... do not say (Allah is) a Trinity ..."***[^6]

2. The Lord of creation, one of the three gods (the Father) whom the
Qur'an rejects:

***"...who say: " .Verily Allah is the third of the three, '..."***[^7]

3. Saying that God, Jesus and the Ghost are the same, upon which, this
verse is a rejection.

The Qur'anic phrase:

***"....He creates what He pleases; ..."***

mentioned in the above verse, refers to the creation of Jesus (as)
without a father, and the creation of Adam without parents.

Islam disagrees infidelity, idolatry, and superstition in whatever
ideology they may be.

If Jesus is God, then how was he slain (as you believe), and did the
cross become the sign of oppression? God is an Essence that cannot be
attempted against.

***"Indeed, they have disbelieved who said: 'Verily Allah is the
Messiah, son of Mary '. Say: 'Who can hold anything against Allah, if He
intends to destroy the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and
everyone, on the earth? And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens
and the earth .and whatever is between them two. He creates what He
pleases; and Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 18
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ وَالنَّصَارَى نَحْنُ أَبْنَاء اللّهِ
وَأَحِبَّاؤُهُ قُلْ فَلِمَ يُعَذِّبُكُم بِذُنُوبِكُم بَلْ أَنتُم
بَشَرٌ مِّمَّنْ خَلَقَ يَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاء وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاء
وَلِلّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَإِلَيْهِ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**18.** ***"And the Jews and the Christians say: 'We are the sons of
Allah and His beloved ones.' Say: ' Why does He then punish you for your
sins?' Nay, you are mortals of those He has created. He forgives whom He
pleases, and punishes whom He pleases. And to Allah belongs the dominion
of the heavens and the earth (and whatever is between them two, and unto
Him is the ultimate return (of all)."***

It is cited in the commentary of the Qur'an by Fakhr-i-Razi that some of
the Jews said: *"We are the sons of Allah and his beloved"* when the
Messenger of Allah invited them to embrace Islam. [^8]

The Jews and the Christians did not consider themselves the real sons of
God, but they imagined a kind of formal adoption for themselves. The
Arabic phrase /abna'-ul-lah/ (the sons of *Allah)* is an implicit,
declaration of their undue expectation and extravagance in ambitions.

This fact should also be mentioned that in Islam racial superiority,
privilege demanding, knowing right only themselves and their own party,
and applying 'relationship instead of regulations' totally are
forbidden.

Another fact is that neither any person nor a nation nor a race should
absolutely be assured of the forgiveness of *Allah,* nor despaired of
His favour. But, the bold Jews, with those crimes they committed, in
spite of having those abundant Divine signs, still knew themselves the
specific friends of *Allah.*

Slaying prophets, concealing the glad tidings upon the advent of the
Prophet of Islam (S), breach of promises, perverting the heavenly Books,
being afraid of entering the city, worshipping the Calf, seeking for
excuses, gluttonies, and being impatient regarding the uniformity of
their food (Manna and Salwa) are some examples of their crimes.

Also, for the wrath of *Allah* upon them, there are some examples of
divine retribution such as moving the mount from its place, being
wandered for forty years, transformation and humiliation. The verse
says:

***"And the Jews and the Christians say: 'We are the sons of Allah and
His beloved ones.'***

***Say: ' Why does He then punish you for your sins?' Nay, you are
mortals of those He has created. He forgives whom He pleases, and
punishes whom He pleases. And to Allah belongs the dominion of the
heavens and the earth (and whatever is between them two, and unto Him is
the ultimate return (of all)."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 19
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ قَدْ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولُنَا يُبَيِّنُ لَكُمْ عَلَى
فَتْرَةٍ مِّنَ الرُّسُلِ أَن تَقُولُواْ مَا جَاءنَا مِن بَشِيرٍ وَلاَ
نَذِيرٍ فَقَدْ جَاءكُم بَشِيرٌ وَنَذِيرٌ وَاللّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**19.** ***"O' People of the Book! Indeed or Messenger has come to you
to explain (things) to you after a cessation of the (mission of the)
messengers, lest you say: There did not come unto us any giver of glad
tidings nor any warner '; but, indeed, there has come to you a giver of
glad tidings and a warner; and Allah is All-Powerful over all
things."***

The intermission between the time of Hadrat Messiah (Jesus Christ) (as)
and the advent of Prophet Muhammad (S) lasted about six hundred years.
During the time when there exists not an appointed Divine prophet, the
globe is not empty of *Allah's* Authority, because the prophets'
successors have always existed.

As the words of Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) indicates, the earth never
lacks godly authority whether he has power, or not, because the way of
*Allah* should not be concealed for those who want to pave it[^9].

Hence, the existence of the time of intermission between coming one
prophet after the former does not mean that people are left alone to
themselves.

***"O' People of the Book! Indeed Our Messenger has come to you to
explain (things) to you after a cessation of the (mission of the)
messengers, lest you say: 'there did not come unto us any giver of glad
tidings nor any warner'; but, indeed, there has come to you a giver of
glad tidings and a warner; and Allah is All-Powerful over all
things."***

By the way, the intermissions, whether they are long or short, are
certainly useful in the system of divine educational arrangements. There
are several examples of this meaning in the length of the history of
prophets.

For instance; the separation of Moses (as) from people, the spiritual
retirement of prophets, the cease of revelation unto the Prophet
Muhammad (S), and minor occultation and major occultation are some
distinguished references for the idea.

[^1]: Musnd Imam Ahmad-ibn-Hunbal, vol. 1, p. 398 and many other books

[^2]: Yanabi'-ul-Mawaddah. p. 117

[^3]: Surah At-Taubah, No.9, verse 77 denotes that breach of promise
consequences to hypocrisy.

[^4]: Surah As-Saff, No. 61, verse 14

[^5]: Surah Al-Hashr, No.59, verse 23

[^6]: Surah An-Nisa’', No.4, verse 171

[^7]: Surah Al-Ma'idah, No. 5, verse 73

[^8]: This claim is also mentioned in the Book of John, one of the books
of the New Testament, Chapter 8, and No.41

[^9]: Nahjul-Balagha, saying No.147


