Section 5: Jews warned against their wicked plots
=================================================

Cain's aggression -The Israelites warned -Punishment for those who war
on the Apostle (Muhammad).

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 27
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ إِذْ قَرَّبَا
قُرْبَانًا فَتُقُبِّلَ مِن أَحَدِهِمَا وَلَمْ يُتَقَبَّلْ مِنَ الآخَرِ
قَالَ لَأَقْتُلَنَّكَ قَالَ إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللّهُ مِنَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27.** ***"(O' Prophet!) Recite to them the truth of the story of the
two sons of Adam when they offered each a sacrifice, hut it was accepted
from one of them and was not accepted from the other, (The one) said: 'I
shall certainly slay you,' (The other) said: 'verily Allah accepts only
from the pious ones."***

The objective meaning of 'reciting the truth', maybe, is an indication
to the idea that the explanation of this event has been distorted in the
Torah and it has been combined with superstitions; hence, what is stated
in the Qur'an is the 'truth'.

***"(O' Prophet!) Recite to them the truth of the story of the two sons
of Adam, when they offered each a sacrifice, hut it was accepted from
one of them and was not accepted from the other, (The one) said: 'I
shall certainly slay you.'…"***

In Islamic literature and in the Torah, (Genesis, Chapter 4, No.3
to12),[^1] it is recorded that Abel was a shepherd and he offered his
best lamb as the sacrificial animal. But, Cain who was a farmer brought
the worst part of his agricultural product to sacrifice. The Qur'an also
says:

***"You will never attain righteousness unless you spend out of what you
love..."*** [^2]

Therefore, the main principle is striving to draw near to *Allah,* no to
simply sacrifice. Whatever the sacrificial thing may be, the criterion o
the acceptance of deeds is piety.

***"…'verily Allah accepts only from the pious ones '."***

Also, we must know that the expansion of envy stretches forth up to
slaying one's brother; so, we must avoid this quality.

***".... (The one) said: I shall certainly slay you,'... "***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 28
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئِن بَسَطتَ إِلَيَّ يَدَكَ لِتَقْتُلَنِي مَا أَنَاْ بِبَاسِطٍ يَدِيَ
إِلَيْكَ لَأَقْتُلَكَ إِنِّي أَخَافُ اللّهَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**28.** ***"1f you stretch out your hand toward me to slay me, I am not
one to stretch out my hand toward you to slay you. Verily, I fear Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds."***

When confronting a jealous person, you ought to speak with him in a
calmly manner, so that you can extinguish the fire of jealousy in him
with the calmness of your speech. Thus, one of the ways of 'forbidding
from doing evil' is that you assure the evil-doer that you will not
transgress him in any way.

Abel did not intend to commit homicide. This does not mean that he might
not defend himself either, (since submitting to a murderer's will do not
adapt to piety).

***"1f you stretch out your hand toward me to slay me, I am not one to
stretch out my hand toward you to slay you. ..."***

By the way, refraining from murder because of the awe of *Allah
(s.w.t.)* is a value, not because of disability and weakness. However,
piety and God-fearing is the restraining factor from committing sin and
transgression in the most sensitive circumstances.

***"... Verily, I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verses 29 - 30
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي أُرِيدُ أَن تَبُوءَ بِإِثْمِي وَإِثْمِكَ فَتَكُونَ مِنْ
أَصْحَابِ النَّارِ وَذَلِكَ جَزَاء الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَطَوَّعَتْ لَهُ نَفْسُهُ قَتْلَ أَخِيهِ فَقَتَلَهُ فَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ
الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**29.** ***"Verily I desire that you should bear my sin and your (own)
sin, and so you would be of the inmates of the (Hell) Fire, and this is
the recompense of the unjust."***

**30.** ***"Then his soul (through temptation of envy) facilitated to
him the murder of his brother. So he murdered him, and thus became one
of the losers."***

Abel did not want to carry the burden of another person's sins; hence he
did not take action on slaying his brother and shedding blood. Besides,
he put the burden of his own sins on the killer's shoulder.

Imam Baqir (as) in a tradition said: "Whoever kills a believer
intentionally, *Allah* records all the sins upon the killer and make the
slain free from them; and this is *Allah's* word:

***"Verily I desire that you should bear my sin and your (own) sin, and
so you would be of the inmates of the (Hell) Fire, and this is the
recompense of the unjust."***

This verse does not mean, of course, that silence before a tyrant with
the hope that he carries the responsibility of our sins is proper.

One of the styles of 'forbidding from doing evil' is attracting the
attention of a transgressor to the fact that besides the retribution of
his own cruelties, he should suffer the burden of the sins of the
oppressed, too, and his punishment will be added.

However, the pure nature of man dislikes homicide, but the despotic soul
makes a parade of this action and persuades him to murder.

***"Then his soul (through temptation of envy) facilitated to him the
murder of his brother. So he murdered him, and thus became one of the
losers."***

Thus, we ought to know that the faith in Resurrection has been a part of
the fundamental creed of human beings on the earth, and the very faith
keeps a person from homicide and other crimes.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 31
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَعَثَ اللّهُ غُرَابًا يَبْحَثُ فِي الأَرْضِ لِيُرِيَهُ كَيْفَ
يُوَارِي سَوْءةَ أَخِيهِ قَالَ يَا وَيْلَتَا أَعَجَزْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ
مِثْلَ هَـذَا الْغُرَابِ فَأُوَارِيَ سَوْءةَ أَخِي فَأَصْبَحَ مِنَ
النَّادِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**31.** ***"Then Allah sent a raven digging up the ground to show him
(the murderer) how he should cover the dead body of his brother. He
said: 'Woe unto me! Am I unable to be like this raven and cover the
corpse of my brother?' So he became one of the remorseful."***

It is narrated in a tradition that Imam Sadiq (as) said that when Cain
killed his brother, he left him in the desert, because he did not know
what to do. Soon after that the sawage rushed toward the corpse of Abel.

At that time, as the Qur'an says, *Allah* sent a raven to dig up the
land and, by hiding the dead body of another raven, or by concealing a
part of its own prey, (as it is the habit of a raven) showed Cain how to
hide the corpse of his brother in the ground.

The verse says:

***"Then Allah sent a raven digging up the ground to show him (the
murderer) how he should cover the dead body of his brother. ..."***

Next to that statement, the Qur'an adds that at that moment Cain became
worried of his own negligence and cried:

***"... 'Woe unto me! Am I unable to be like this raven and cover the
corpse of my brother?'..."***

Yet, finally he felt sorry about what he had done, but that regret was
not a reference for his repentance from the sin.

***"...So he became one of the remorseful."***

The Prophet of Islam (S) is narrated that he has said:

*"No blood of a person is shed unjustly unless there is a portion of its
responsibility upon (Cain) the son of Adam who was the first homicide as
a custom."* [^3]

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 32
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ أَجْلِ ذَلِكَ كَتَبْنَا عَلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ أَنَّهُ مَن
قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الأَرْضِ فَكَأَنَّمَا
قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا وَمَنْ أَحْيَاهَا فَكَأَنَّمَا أَحْيَا
النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا وَلَقَدْ جَاءتْهُمْ رُسُلُنَا بِالبَيِّنَاتِ ثُمَّ
إِنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنْهُم بَعْدَ ذَلِكَ فِي الأَرْضِ لَمُسْرِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**32.** ***"For this reason We decreed upon the Children of Israel that
whoever slays a human being for other than manslaughter or mischief in
the earth, it is as he had slain mankind as a whole;*** ***and whoever
saves a life (from death), it is as if he had saved mankind as a whole.
And certainly Our messengers came to them with clear evidences; then
verily, even after that, many of them became prodigals in the earth."***

### The Oneness of Human Beings

Next to the statement of the story of the Children of Adam, there has
been mentioned a general conclusion in this holy verse which fits with
humanities. At first, it says:

***"For this reason We decreed upon the Children of Israel that whoever
slays a human being for other than manslaughter or mischief in the
earth, it is as he had slain mankind as a whole; ..."***

How is it that slaying a human being is equal to slaying all human
beings and saving a person is equal to saving all human beings? To
answer this question, it is only possible to say that in this verse, the
Qur'an has referred to a social and training fact.

The person, who slays an innocent human being, has such a preparation,
in fact, to kill some other innocent persons, too. This person is,
indeed, a homicide whose prey is innocent human beings. And, we know
that there is no difference between the innocent persons from this point
of view.

On the other hand, the person who, because of having the quality of
philanthropy and human emotions, saves another person from death has
such a preparation to perform this sympathetic action unto any other
human beings.

So, regarding the fact that the Qur'an has applied the phrase:
/fa-ka-'anna-ma/ (it is as it), it seems that although the life and
death of a person is not equal to the life and death of a society, it
has a likeness to it.

Again, it can be said that in potency, there is a capability in any
person to bring a great society, or a new generation, into existence.
Hence, annihilating a human being sometimes results to the effacement
and murder of a generation.

It is worthy to note that once someone asked Imam Sadiq (as) about the
commentary of this verse when he (as) answered: "The purpose of the
words: 'to slay' and 'to save from death', which have been referred to
in the verse, is saving from a fire accident, a whirlpool, and the like.

Then he (as) kept silent and after that he added: "A greater
interpretation of this verse is that a person invites another one to the
path of right or wrong and the one accepts that invitation."

At the end of the verse, the Qur'an hints to the manner of breaking law
among the Children of Israel. It says:

***"... And certainly our messengers came to them with clear evidences;
then verily, even after that, many of them became prodigals in the
earth."***

The Arabic term /'israf/ has a vast scope of meaning in lexicon which
envelops any transgression and exceeding the limits. Yet, it is often
used for remittals, expenditures and expenses.

### Explanations

1. The members of human beings originate from a common truth and have a
single soul, so that they are similar to the limbs of a body. Therefore,
slaying a person is the same as killing all humankind.

2. The act of evaluating deeds relates to the motives and aims. Slaying
a person with the intention of transgression, is putting a society into
death; while killing under the title of retaliation is counted as the
life of the society.

3. The death and life of a person is sometimes effective in the death
and life of a society. Similarly, sometimes the individual murders
prepare the ground for some massacres.

4. The sign of a living society is helping the needy and saving the
souls or lives.

5. Suicide, and even abortion, is one of the examples of 'homicide',
which is unlawful.

6. Transgressing against the rights of an individual is a threat to the
security of the society.

7. The managers of the professions like physicians, nurses,
fire-extinguishers, reinforces, makers of medicine, etc, whose job is
securing the lives of human beings, should know the position and value
of their own profession.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 33
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا جَزَاء الَّذِينَ يُحَارِبُونَ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَسْعَوْنَ
فِي الأَرْضِ فَسَادًا أَن يُقَتَّلُواْ أَوْ يُصَلَّبُواْ أَوْ
تُقَطَّعَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُم مِّنْ خِلافٍ أَوْ يُنفَوْاْ مِنَ
الأَرْضِ ذَلِكَ لَهُمْ خِزْيٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَلَهُمْ فِي الآخِرَةِ
عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**33.** ***"The only recompense of those who make war against Allah and
His messenger, and strive to make mischief in the land, is that they
should be killed or crucified, or their hands and their feet be cut off
from opposite side or they be banished from (their) land. This is
degradation for them in the world, and in the Hereafter, they will have
a grievous chastisement."***

Upon the occasion of revelation of this verse, it is cited that a group
of pagans came into Medina and then they became Muslim.

They were tired and sick; therefore, the Prophet (S) ordered that they
would be taken in a good climate region outside Medina where they were
permitted to enjoy the milk of the alms-tax camels therein.

When they gained their health, they took the Muslim shepherds, who were
living thereabout, and cut off their hands and feet, blinded their eyes,
and plundered the camels. They left out Islam, too.

The Messenger of *Allah* (S) ordered that they would be captured and be
treated with the same manner as they had done upon the shepherds. Then,
in this circumstance the above-mentioned verse was revealed.

These retributions, which are mentioned in the verse under discussion,
are counted 'rights of *Allah*' and they are not forgivable and
changeable. (Atyab-ul-Bayan)[^4]

However, in order to improve the society, not only admonishment and,
guidance are necessary, but weapon and severe revolutionary treatment
are needed. (The words in the previous verse were some educational
messages and warnings unto the murderer. Now, in this verse, the
statement is upon the punishment of the one who fights against *Allah*
and makes mischief.)

The notable point here is that fighting against the servants of *Allah,*
the same as fighting against *Allah.* So, the one who stands against
people, is like that he has stood against *Allah.*

Therefore, there have been decreed several kinds of punishment for lose
who disturb the security of the society. These punishments are:
execution, banishment, cutting off the hand and the foot, and to hang
such wicked persons.

In the meantime, Islamic punishments are accompanied with justice. Since
corruptions and the qualifications of the mischief -makers are
different; the retributions are not the same, either. If the mischief
has been committed tragically, its punishment is slaughter.

But, if it is superficial, its retribution is banishment. Concerning
such punishments, this fact is understood from the Islamic traditions
that the retribution of homicide is execution; the retribution of
terrorizing is banishment, the retribution of larceny is cutting off the
hand and the foot; the retribution of murder and robbery (with arm) is
cutting off the hand and the foot and being hanged. (At- Tafsir-u-Safi)

Also, it is cited in Usul-i-Kafi that one of the meanings of the phrase
**'*****be banished from their land'*** (mentioned in the verse) is
throwing such a person in the sea. (Al-Kafi, vol. 7, p. 267)

### Explanations

1. The responsibility of the government and rulers is to protect the
security of the society in cities, villages, roads, and so on.

2. Those opponents of the master ship of the Messenger of *Allah*(S)
whose intention is destruction and who fight against the godly system,
should be dispersed.

3. Those who rise against the Muslims leader, or against the Islamic
government, are among ***'those who make war against Allah'.*** (At-
Tafsir fi-Zilal-il-Qur'an)

4. Imam Rida (as) said: "The length of the time of banishment for the
mischief-maker is one year. The place of banishment should be announced
to people in order that they break their communication with the banished
person, and stop bargaining, holding familiar intercourse, and marriage
with him." (Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn)

5. According to a verse of the Qur'an,[^5] a usurer is also counted
among ***'those who make war against Allah',*** since such a person
disturbs the economic security in the society.

Also, as some Islamic traditions indicate, disgracing a Muslim believer
is considered as fighting against *Allah.* [^6]

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 34
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ تَابُواْ مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَقْدِرُواْ عَلَيْهِمْ
فَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**34.** ***"Except those who repent before you have power over them. So
know you that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

The repentance of a mischief-maker and a person who fights against the
command of *Allah (s.w.t.)* deserves only the retribution of threat and
terrorizing, not the retribution of murder and theft. That is,
repentance is effective in' the right of *Allah*' not in 'the right of
people', because the right of people depends on the content of the
possessor (S) of the right. Thus, the account of the person who fights
against the command of *Allah* (muharib) is different from that of a
murderer and thief.

In the meantime, the gate of repentance is open to everyone. Yet, that
repentance is worthy when it is done before capturing the criminal and
confronting the court. It should also be done consciously and wilfully,
without any compulsion. (Also, repentance for other sins is accepted
before death).[^7]

However, the Divine punishment has the aspect of training and improving
upon the individuals and the society, not as revenge. Therefore, the
repentance of a sinner is efficacious. The verse says:

***"Except those who repent before you have power over them. So know you
that Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

[^1]: 3. And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of
the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD. 4. And Abel, he also
brought of the first lings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the
LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering. 5. But unto Cain and to
his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his
countenance fell. 6. And the LORD said, Cain, Why art thou wroth? And
why is thy countenance fallen? 7. If thou doest well, shall thou not be
accepted? And if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door and unto
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. 8. And Cain
talked with Abel his brother; and it came to pass, when they were in the
field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew him. 9. And
the LORD said unto Cain. Where is' Abel thy brother? And he said, I know
not; Am I my brother's keeper? 10. And He said. What hast thou done? The
voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto Me from the ground. 11. And now
art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive
thy brother's blood from thy hand; 12. When thou tillest the ground, it
shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a
vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.

[^2]: Surah 'Ale-'Imran, No.3, verse 92

[^3]: Musnad Ahmad Hanbal, recorded in Tafsir-i-fi-Zalal, vol. 2, p. 703

[^4]: It is cited in Al-Mizan that the choice of one retribution out of
these four retributions is up to the leader of Muslims. So, even when
the possessors of the blood of the slain remit, one of the retributions
must be executed.

[^5]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No: 2, verse 219

[^6]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 5, p. 283

[^7]: The Qur'an, Surah An-Nisa’', No.4, verse 18


