Section 6: Penal Regulations against Offenders
==============================================

To seek means to approach Allah -To strive in the way of Allah -
Hypocrisy of the Jews.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 35
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَابْتَغُواْ إِلَيهِ
الْوَسِيلَةَ وَجَاهِدُواْ فِي سَبِيلِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**35.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Be in awe of Allah, and seek the
means (of nearness) to Him; and strive hard in His way, that you may be
prosperous."***

Imam Amir-ul-mu'mineen Ali (as) has said that the best means by which
seekers of nearness to *Allah,* seek nearness, is the faith in *Allah*
and His Messenger, striving in His way, (to believe) in the expression
of Divine purification, the establishment of performance of Hajj
(pilgrimage) of the House (i.e. Ka'bah) and' Umrah ' (lesser
pilgrimage), regard for kinsfolk, almsgiving secretly and openly, and
extending benefits (to people). [^1]

Therefore, in order to reach felicity, we must both stop committing sins
and perform kinds of worship.

In the meantime, doing goodness are wholly the means toward felicity, if
we ourselves do not waste them through our own sins.

However, Ahlul-Bayt (as) are the very firm cord and means of nearness to
*Allah (s.w.t.).*

In Islamic literature, narrated from the Immaculate ones (as)*,* the
term /wasilah/ (means), mentioned in this verse, has been rendered into
Imam (as) (At-Tafsir-u-Safi). In this regard, it is also cited in some
traditions: "They are the firm cord and the means to *Allah (s.w.t).*"
(At- Tafsir-u-Safi)

Supplication is a subject about which there has been cited in the books
of many Sunnite scholars, such as: Sawa'iq, by Ibn- Hajar;
Sunan-i-Bihaqi; Sahih-i-Darami; and also in Wafa'-ul-Wafa, vol. 3, p.
1371. Surah An-Nisa’', No.4, verse 64, Surah Yusuf, No.12, verse 97, and
Surah At-Taubah, No.9, verse 114 can be taken as some authentic
references for supplication, too.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verses 36 - 37
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَوْ أَنَّ لَهُم مَّا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ لِيَفْتَدُواْ بِهِ مِنْ عَذَابِ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ
مَا تُقُبِّلَ مِنْهُمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُرِيدُونَ أَن يَخْرُجُواْ مِنَ النَّارِ وَمَا هُم بِخَارِجِينَ
مِنْهَا وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُّقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**36.** ***"Certainly those who disbelieve, if they had what is in the
earth all together and the like of it with it, to ransom themselves with
it from the punishment of the Day of Resurrection, it shall not be
accepted from them, and for them there will be a painful
chastisement."***  
**37.** ***"They would desire to get out from the Fire but they shall
not get out of it, and for them there is a permanent chastisement."***

To pursue the subject matter of the previous verse in which the
believers are enjoined upon piety, holy struggle, and preparing the
means, this verse, as the statement of reason for that commandment,
points to the fate of unbelieving and filthy persons when it says:

***"Certainly those who disbelieve, if they had what is in the earth all
together and the like of it with it, to ransom themselves with it from
the punishment of the Day of Resurrection, it shall not be accepted from
them, and for them there will be a painful chastisement."***

The only possible way to delivery is through Faith, piety, struggle, and
good deeds.

Then, in the second verse (verse 37), the perpetuity of this retribution
is referred to. It says:

***"They would desire to get out from the Fire but they shall not get
out of it, and for them there is a permanent chastisement."***

However, in the Hereafter, all the ways of deliverance are shut to the
unbelievers. They enjoy neither the grace of *Allah,* since it is
specific to the pious ones, nor the intercession, because it relates
only to those with whom *Allah is* pleased. There is no death therein
for the disbelievers. They are permanently alive in the Fire of Hell,
and their request for death is not accepted.

The person who does not come out from darkness of ignorance and ,
infidelity in this world, where he has so many clear reasoning and
guidance, will not come out of Hell in the Hereafter.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 38
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّارِقُ وَالسَّارِقَةُ فَاقْطَعُواْ أَيْدِيَهُمَا جَزَاء بِمَا
كَسَبَا نَكَالاً مِّنَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**38.** ***"As for the thief, both male and female, cut off their hands
as a recompense for what they have earned. It is an exemplary punishment
from Allah; and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

In this verse, at first, the Qur'an refers to the male thief and then to
the female thief. But in Surah An-Nur, verse 2, where the ordinance of
fornication has been stated, at first, the Qur'an refers to the
'adulteress' and then to the 'adulterer'.

The reason of it may be the fact that the function of man in theft is
more effective than that of a woman, and in fornication the function of
the woman is more effective.

***"As for the thief, both male and female, cut off their hands as a
recompense for what they have earned. It is an exemplary punishment from
Allah; and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise."***

About one thousand years ago, it happened that the Late Sayyid Murtada
'Alam-ul-Huda, a well-known Muslim scholar, once was asked why the hand,
which deserves five hundred 'mithghal' (a weight equivalent to 5 grams)
gold as 'compensation for an injury', should be cut off because of the
theft of one fourth 'mithghal' gold.

He answered: "Trustworthiness promotes the value of the hand, and
treachery decreases its value."

According to some Islamic traditions, the standard of cutting off the
hand, for this compensation, is four fingers, so that the thumb and palm
should be left safe. The amount of finance for which the hand of a thief
must be cut off is at least equivalent to the price of one fourth
mithghal gold.

That wealth should have been kept in a protected place, not in a common
place like an inn, a public bath, a mosque and the like. The wealth
ought to be given back to its owner, too, after the execution of the
legal decision. Also, the thief should be aware of the law of cutting
off the hand.

Otherwise, his/her hand will not be cut off. Again, the hand of a thief
will not be cut off if the thief steals the wealth of his/her partner,
or steals some food stuff under necessity in the years of scarcity, and
the like.

Similarly, the hand of a thief will not be cut off when the theft is
done by a father from his child's property, a slave from his master's
wealth, a mad and a person not arrived at puberty, or the one who had
thought he had the right of taking the property. There are, of course,
some other retribution in all these conditions wherein the hand will not
be cut off.

The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition said that the worst kind of larceny
is stealing from prayer and performing its bowing and prostration
imperfect.[^2] In the statements of some Islamic saints, it has also
been protested why it happens that some Muslims commit larceny in the
holy phrase: /bismillah.-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/ when they recite Surah
Al-Hamd.

Cutting off the hand is for the first stage of theft. For the second
time, the left leg will be cut off. For the third time, the retribution
is life imprisonment, and annihilation is for the fourth time. [^3]

### Explanations

1. To cut off the hand is the only heavy withholding compensation and
retribution of theft.

2. In executing *Allah's* bounds, we must not be affected by sympathy
and kind feelings.

3. Besides cutting off the hand, the thief is responsible for the
property, too.

4. The execution of these ordinances needs: rule, force, system, and
organizations. Thus, Islam is a religion of government and policy.

5. Poverty is not all excuse or permission for larceny. Islam, before
cutting off the hand, emphasizes on the importance and necessity of job
and running the lives of the poor by the way of Muslim public treasury,
near relatives, loan without interest, cooperation, and the like. [^4]

6. The Divine retributions are not counted as revenge, but they are to
be as withholding.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 39
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن تَابَ مِن بَعْدِ ظُلْمِهِ وَأَصْلَحَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ يَتُوبُ
عَلَيْهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**39.** ***"But whoever repents after his inequity and makes amend (his
evil deeds), then surely Allah turns to him (mercifully), verily Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful."***

In Islam, punishments are set beside guidance, godly training, and
invitation. Through previous verse, the retribution of a thief was
stated. Here, in this verse, there exists the invitation to repentance
unto *Allah,* forgiving, and the improvement of one's own vices, which
causes that *Allah* returns His grace and mercy to the servant.

For the wrong-doers the gate of returning and improvement is always
open. This gate is the very repentance. It should also be regarded that
repentance is not only an inner regret, but it must be accompanied with
the amends of the past corruptions.

If a thief repents (before being captured and being sent to the court)
and gives back the property, he will be forgiven both in the world and
the Hereafter. But, when it is after that he is captured, the religious
punishment will be fulfilled and the function of repentance is only for
the Hereafter.

The verse says:

***"But whoever repents after his inequity and makes amend (his evil
deeds), then surely Allah turns to him (mercifully), verily Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 40
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللّهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ
يُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاء وَيَغْفِرُ لِمَن يَشَاء وَاللّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**40.** ***"Do you not know that to Allah belongs the Dominion of the
heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He pleases and forgives whom He
pleases, and verily Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

*Allah is* not in need of the repentance of servants, because all the
existence belongs to Him. So, the sinners and the corrupters should know
that there is no way for them to flee, and they ought to return to
*Allah.*

***"Do you not know that to Allah belongs the Dominion of the heavens
and the earth? He punishes whom He pleases and forgives whom He pleases,
and verily Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 41
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ لاَ يَحْزُنكَ الَّذِينَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي
الْكُفْرِ مِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَلَمْ
تُؤْمِن قُلُوبُهُمْ وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ هِادُواْ سَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ
سَمَّاعُونَ لِقَوْمٍ آخَرِينَ لَمْ يَأْتُوكَ يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ
مِن بَعْدِ مَوَاضِعِهِ يَقُولُونَ إِنْ أُوتِيتُمْ هَـذَا فَخُذُوهُ
وَإِن لَّمْ تُؤْتَوْهُ فَاحْذَرُواْ وَمَن يُرِدِ اللّهُ فِتْنَتَهُ
فَلَن تَمْلِكَ لَهُ مِنَ اللّهِ شَيْئًا أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَمْ
يُرِدِ اللّهُ أَن يُطَهِّرَ قُلُوبَهُمْ لَهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا خِزْيٌ
وَلَهُمْ فِي الآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**41. "O'** ***Messenger! Let not those who hasten in infidelity grieve
you, from among those who (hypocritically) say with their mouths:***
**'*****We believe',*** ***but their hearts do not believe, and from
among those of the Jews who listen for (the sake of) lying, listen (with
a spy manner) for other people who have not come to you. They distort
the (heavenly) words from their places, saying: 'If you are given this,
take it, and if you are not given this, beware! (be aloof)*** **';**
***and whomever Allah desires to punish, you cannot avail him anything
with Allah. Those are they whose hearts Allah does not desire to purify;
there is a degradation for them in the world, and in the Hereafter, they
will have a grievous chastisement."***

### Prophets Are Sympathetic unto the Misguided

The hypocrites and the Jews pursue the same goal. Their goal is the
perversion of religion (Islam). Disbelievers have always some secret
agents of influence and spies amongst Muslims. Therefore, religious
preachers ought not to consider all their audience as well-intentioned
listeners.

In the meantime, the hypocrites not only have the worldly misfortunes
(including: to hear lies, to spy, to pervert the facts, to claim faith
for benefits), but also the great punishment of the Hereafter waits for
them.

However, we must submit to the Truth and commandments of *Allah*
entirely; and do not accept only the religious legislations that
correspond to our desires.

The verse says:

**"O'** ***Messenger! Let not those who hasten in infidelity grieve you,
from among those who (hypocritically) say with their mouths:***
**'*****We believe',*** ***but their hearts do not believe, and from
among those of the Jews who listen for (the sake of) lying, listen (with
a spy manner) for other people who have not come to you. They distort
the (heavenly) words from their places, saying: 'If you are given this,
take it, and if you are not given this, beware! (be aloof)*** **';**
***and whomever Allah desires to punish, you cannot avail him anything
with Allah. Those are they whose hearts Allah does not desire to purify;
there is a degradation for them in the world, and in the Hereafter, they
will have a grievous chastisement."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 42
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ أَكَّالُونَ لِلسُّحْتِ فَإِن جَآؤُوكَ فَاحْكُم
بَيْنَهُم أَوْ أَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ وَإِن تُعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ فَلَن
يَضُرُّوكَ شَيْئًا وَإِنْ حَكَمْتَ فَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْقِسْطِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**42.** ***"(They are) listeners to (any) lie, and devour the unlawful;
therefore, if they come to you, judge between them or turn away from
them; and if you turn away from them, they will harm you nothing; and if
you judge, judge between them with equity; verily Allah loves the
just."***

Some of the Jews, who had committed adultery, came to the Prophet (S) to
judge. They hoped to escape from the retribution of stoning, which
exists in the religion of the Jews,[^5] while the Islamic law for the
adulterer is stoning, too. When they saw that the ordinance of Islam was
the same as it was in their own religion, they did not accept it.

The Arabic term /suht/, used in this verse, according to the Islamic
traditions, means: 'bribery and the gifts given for the fulfilment of an
affair. It also means: 'destruction' or 'the thing which causes
destruction'.

The verse says:

***"(They are) listeners to (any) lie, and devour the unlawful;
therefore, if they come to you, judge between them or turn away from
them; and if you turn away from them, they will harm you nothing; and if
you judge, judge between them with equity; verily Allah loves the
just."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 43
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَيْفَ يُحَكِّمُونَكَ وَعِندَهُمُ التَّوْرَاةُ فِيهَا حُكْمُ اللّهِ
ثُمَّ يَتَوَلَّوْنَ مِن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَمَا أُوْلَـئِكَ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**43.** ***"And how do they (the Jews) make you a judge, while with them
is the Torah, wherein is Allah's judgement? Yet they turn away after
that, and those are not believers."***

Again, this verse follows the subject of the Jews seeking judgement from
the Prophet (S), which was referred to in the previous verse. It
surprisingly says:

***"And how do they (the Jews) make you a judge, while with them is the
Torah, where in Allah's judgement? ..."***

It should be noted that the aforementioned decree (i.e. the decree of
stoning the man and the woman who have committed adultery) is found in
the present Torah, Deuteronoms, Chapter 22, No 21-26.

The verse continues saying:

***"...Yet they turn away after that, and those are not believers."***

[^1]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 110

[^2]: Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 84, p. 257; & Musnad-Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, vol.
3, p. 56

[^3]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 3, p.192

[^4]: Fi-Zalal-il-Qur'an, vol. 2, p. 716

[^5]: The Torah, Deuteronomy, Chapter 22, No.21-26


