Section 7: Relation of the Quran to the previous heavenly Books
===============================================================

Evidence from Torah - The Evangel and its evidence – The Qur'an's
confirming the previous heavenly books – Now the Qur'an to be followed

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 44
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُواْ لِلَّذِينَ هَادُواْ
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُواْ مِن كِتَابِ
اللّهِ وَكَانُواْ عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاء فَلاَ تَخْشَوُاْ النَّاسَ
وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلاً وَمَن لَّمْ
يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**44.** ***"Verily We have sent down the Torah, wherein is guidance and
light, by which the prophets, who submitted themselves (to Us), judged
for those who were Jews, and (so did) the rabbis and the scholars (of
divinity of the Jews) in accordance with what they were entrusted with
the Book of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof. Therefore, do not
dread the people, and dread*** ***(opposing) Me; and do not sell My
Signs for a little price. And whoever does not judge by what Allah has
sent down; those are they that are the infidels."***

Separate from confessing upon the falsification of the Torah and the
Bible, the originality of the heavenly Books should be admired and
glorified.

It is true that the Torah was revealed to Moses (as) and the Evangel was
revealed to Jesus (as)*,* yet they have been accepted by all the
prophets and the saints after them. They wholly practiced according to
the ordinances of those Books.

Thus, prophets have no commandment from their ownselves, save that they
are surrended to the commandment of *Allah.* Then, when the prophets are
surrended to the commandment of *Allah,* why should we not?

Islam is the religion of all. The prophets of the Israelites have been
qualified with 'submission' not with Judaism and Christianity.

And, in general, the scholars of every nation are responsible for the
execution of the commandments of the Lord among people. Therefore,
guardianship of the jurisconsult has evidences in all religions.

***"... by which the prophets who submitted themselves (to Us) judged
..."***

### Explanation

The Qur'anic word /rabbani/ is derived from /rabban/ which means:
'trainer'. As some other philologists have rendered, the person
qualified with /rabbani/ is someone who has adjoined 'the Lord of the
worlds' and does not rest with other than Him. Such a person has become
godly and has assumed the responsibility of people.

The Arabic term /hibr/ means: 'the effect of a good action', since
scholars are the source of benevolence in the society, they are called
/hibr/ the plural of which is /ahbar/.

***"Verily We have sent down the Torah, wherein is guidance and light,
by which the prophets, who submitted themselves (to Us), judged for
those who were Jews, and (so did) the rabbis and the scholars (of
divinity of the Jews) in accordance with what they were entrusted with
the Book of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof Therefore, do not
dread the people, and dread (opposing) Me; and do not sell My Signs for
a little price. And whoever does not judge by what Allah has sent down;
those are they that are the infidels."***

It is narrated from Imam Ali (as) who has said: "I am the trainer of
this community". Imam Sadiq (as) also said: "Rabbaniun are the very
Imams from Ahlul-Bayt."

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 45
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهَا أَنَّ النَّفْسَ بِالنَّفْسِ وَالْعَيْنَ
بِالْعَيْنِ وَالأَنفَ بِالأَنفِ وَالأُذُنَ بِالأُذُنِ وَالسِّنَّ
بِالسِّنِّ وَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ فَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ
لَّهُ وَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**45.** ***"And We prescribed for them in it that: a life is for a life,
an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a
tooth, and for wounds (there shall be) retaliation. But whoever remits
it, it shall be an expiation (of his sins) for him; and whoever does not
judge by what Allah has sent down, those are they that are the
unjust."***

### Retaliation and Remittal

This verse explains another part of the ordinances concerning crimes and
the bounds of *Allah* in the Torah. It denotes that *Allah has* assigned
the law of retaliation in the Torah so that if a person intentionally
murders an innocent one, the owners of blood can retaliate instead and
execute the murderer.

***"And We prescribed for them in it that: a life is for a life....."***

If a person injures another one's eye and destroys it, the injured can
also destroy the person's eye:

***"...an eye or an eye ..."***

He is also permitted to cut his nose instead of his own nose:

***"....a nose or a nose ..."***

Instead of cutting an ear, the one can cut one ear of his:

***"...an ear or an ear ..."***

And, if a person breaks the tooth of another person, he can break the
criminal's tooth, too. It says:

***"…a tooth for a tooth…"***

In general, every person who injures or wounds another person, it can be
retaliated:

***"…and for wounds (there shall be) retaliation. ..."***

Therefore, the ordinance of retaliation should be done justly and
without considering any difference from the point of race, social level,
tribe, and personality.

But, in order that nobody imagines that *Allah has* decreed the law of
retaliation as a compulsory rigid duty, immediately next to this
ordinance, it adds:

***"….But whoever remits it, it shall be an expiation (of his sins) for
him…"***

That is, as much as he has remitted in that regard, *Allah will* remit
out of his sins for him.

And, at the end of the verse, it says:

***".... and whoever does not judge by what Allah has sent down, those
are they that are the unjust."***

What an unjust is greater than that we be entangled with some false
affections and feelings, and dispense with the murderer absolutely by
the excuse that a blood should not be washed out by a blood!

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 46
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَفَّيْنَا عَلَى آثَارِهِم بِعَيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا
بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَآتَيْنَاهُ الإِنجِيلَ فِيهِ هُدًى
وَنُورٌ وَمُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَهُدًى
وَمَوْعِظَةً لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**46.** ***"And following them We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming
that which was before him of the Torah , and We gave him the Evangel in
which was guidance and light, and confirming what was before it of the
Torah, and a guidance and an admonition for the pious ones. "***

Following the verses concerning the Torah, this verse refers to the
condition of the Evangel. It denotes that next to the former prophets,
*Allah sent* Jesus. He (as) confessed the rightfulness and legitimacy of
the Torah. The signs of Jesus (as) were completely adapted to those
which were given in the Torah. It says

***"And following them We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming that which
was before him of the Torah...."***

Then, it adds:

***"... and We gave him the Evangel in which was guidance and
light...."***

The acceptance of these two Books as 'light' by the Qur'an, is an
indication to the original Torah and the original Evangel.

The verse emphasizes once more on this fact that not only Jesus, the son
of Mary, confirmed the Torah, but also the Evangel, the heavenly Books,
is a confirmation to the Torah. It says:

***"...and confirming what was before it of the Torah....."***

Then, the holy Qur'an concludes the verse thus:

***"...and guidance and an admonition for the pious ones"***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 47
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَحْكُمْ أَهْلُ الإِنجِيلِ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فِيهِ وَمَن لَّمْ
يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**47.** ***"So the people of the Evangel should judge by what Allah has
sent down in it, and those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down,
those are they that are the evil-doers."***

### Those Who Do not Judge on the Divine Law

After referring to the revelation of Evangel in the former verses, in
this verse the Qur'an says:

***"So the people of the Evangel should judge by what Allah has sent
down in it...."***

The objective meaning of this statement is that: after the revelation of
Evangel to Jesus (as), *Allah* ordered the followers of it to act
accordingly and judge by what He had sent down in it.

Then, at the end of the verse, it emphasizes again and says:

***"... and those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, those
are they that are the evil-doers."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 48
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا بَيْنَ
يَدَيْهِ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَمُهَيْمِنًا عَلَيْهِ فَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُم
بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءهُمْ عَمَّا جَاءكَ مِنَ
الْحَقِّ لِكُلٍّ جَعَلْنَا مِنكُمْ شِرْعَةً وَمِنْهَاجًا وَلَوْ شَاء
اللّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَـكِن لِّيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا
آتَاكُم فَاسْتَبِقُوا الخَيْرَاتِ إِلَى الله مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعًا
فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**48.** ***"And We have sent down unto you the Book with the truth,
confirming that which was before it of the Book and as a guardian over
it. Therefore judge between them by what Allah has sent down and do not
follow their vain desires against the truth that has come to you; for
every one of you We appointed a law and a (clear) way. And if Allah had
pleased, He would have made you (all) a single community, but He might
try you in what He has given you. Therefore strive you excelling one
another in virtuous deeds; unto Allah is the return of you all, and then
He shall inform you of that in which you used to differ."***

After pointing to the Books of the former prophets, there is an
indication in this verse to the situation of the Qur'an, the signs of
which adapt to what has been recorded in the former heavenly Books. At
first, it says:

***"And We have sent down unto you the Book with the truth, confirming
that which was before it of the Book and as a guardian over it. ..."***

Fundamentally, all the heavenly Books are paralleled in principles, and
their pursue is the same goal, i.e. training and improving the human
race.

Then it commands that since it is such,

***"...Therefore judge between them by what Allah has sent down...."***

Next to that, it adds not to follow those who intend to adapt the Divine
ordinances to their own desires. It says:

***"...and do not follow their, vain desires against the truth that has
come to you…"***

To complete this discussion, it says:

***"...for every one of you We appointed a law and a (clear) way...."***

Then, it continues saying about the power of *Allah (s.w.t.)* and that
He might try you in order that your different talents be trained. The
holy verse says:

***"... And if Allah had pleased, He would have made you (all) a single
community, but He might try you in what He has given you. ..."***

Finally, the Qur'an addresses all the nations and races and invites them
all that instead of spending their powers and capacities in conflicts
and discords, they should pay to doing good. It says:

***"...Therefore strive you excelling one another in virtuous
deeds....."***

Then, it points to the reason of that righteous work, and says:

***"... unto Allah is the return of you all, and then He shall inform
you of that in which you used to differ."***

### Explanation

The Arabic term /Sir'ah/ means: 'law, a way which leads to water'; and
the meaning of the term /minhaj/ is: 'a clear way'. Ibn-Abbas has said
that: /Sir'ah/ means: 'the ordinances that have come in the Qur'an, but
/minhaj/ is that which has come in the practice of the Prophet (S).
(Mufradat Raqib)

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 49
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ احْكُم بَيْنَهُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعْ
أَهْوَاءهُمْ وَاحْذَرْهُمْ أَن يَفْتِنُوكَ عَن بَعْضِ مَا أَنزَلَ
اللّهُ إِلَيْكَ فَإِن تَوَلَّوْاْ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللّهُ
أَن يُصِيبَهُم بِبَعْضِ ذُنُوبِهِمْ وَإِنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنَ النَّاسِ
لَفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**49.** ***"So judge between them by what Allah has sent down, and do
not follow their vain desires, and beware of them lest they beguile you
from part of what Allah has sent down to you. But if*** ***they turn
back, then know that Allah desires to afflict them for some of their
sins, and surely, many of the people are evil-doers."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It has been narrated from Ibn-Abbas that a group of the great men of the
Jews once plotted and decided to go to the Prophet Muhammad (S) with the
hope that they might be able to change him from his creed.

With this planning they came to the Prophet (S) and said: "We are the
wealthy and the learned men of the Jews. If we follow you, other Jewish
people also will imitate us. But, there is a conflict between us and
another group (about a murder or something else).

If you judge in this conflict for our benefit, we will believe in you."
The Prophet (S) refrained from such a judgement (which was not just),
and the above verse was revealed.

In this verse, *Allah emphasizes* again on the judgement of His
Messenger and says:

***"So judge between them by what Allah has sent down, and do not follow
their vain desires....."***

Then, He warns the Prophet (S) about their plot by saying:

***"...and beware of them lest they beguile you from part of what Allah
has sent down to you….."***

Then, the statement continues saying:

***"... But if they turn back, then know that Allah desires to afflict
them for some of their sins....."***

(Finally, at the end of the verse, it implies that if they persist so
much on the falsehood, he must not be worried, because:

***"...and surely, many of the people are evil-doers."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 50
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَحُكْمَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَبْغُونَ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللّهِ
حُكْمًا لِّقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**50.** ***"Is it then the judgement of (the era of) ignorance that they
are seeking? And who is better than Allah in judgement for a people of
assured faith?"***

The best law is the one whose legislator is qualified with the following
conditions:

1. To be aware of all the secrets of the world of existence and those of
man, both for the present and future.

2. The Legislator should have no aim of gaining profits.

3. He should not have any fault of any kind, whether intentional or
unintentional.

4. He might not be afraid of any power.

These conditions are gathered in *Allah.* ***And, who is better than
Allah to judge?***

That is why those who, having the Divine laws available for them, refer
to the laws made by human beings pave the path of paganism and
infidelity.

Therefore, any law of man, which contrasts the law of *Allah,* is
considered as the law of pagans. The reason is that these laws of man
have been legislated on the basis of vain desires, fears, avarices,
ignorance, mistakes, and imaginations.

We must also know that ignorance does not belong to only a period.
Whenever people separate from the law of *Allah,* that time is the
period of ignorance.

May *Allah* protect us all from aberration.

***"Is it then the judgement of (the era of) ignorance that they are
seeking? And who is better than Allah in judgement for a people of
assured faith?"***


