Section 9: Mockers
==================

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 57
--------------------------

The Mockers and their fault-finding -Hypocrisy and the mischief of the
Jews - The Jews and the Christians enjoined to act up to their own Holy
Books.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَتَّخِذُواْ الَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُواْ
دِينَكُمْ هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا مِّنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ مِن
قَبْلِكُمْ وَالْكُفَّارَ أَوْلِيَاء وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ إِن كُنتُم
مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57.** ***"O' you who have Faith! do not take those who take your
religion in mockery and play, from among those who were given the Book
before you and the infidels as guardians; and be in awe of Allah if you
are believers."***

The worldly retribution of the act of mockery and sacrilege unto the
religion of *Allah* and profanity is rupture of relations. Mocking the
religion is a job of disbelievers. So, the condition of having Faith is
having the religious zeal and dissociating from the vicious.

Never be afraid of the rupture of relation with pagans, the profaners of
the religion. If you have Faith, be in awe of *Allah.*

***"O' you who have Faith! do not take those who take your religion in
mockery and play, from among those who were given the Book before you
and the infidels as guardians; and be in awe of Allah if you are
believers."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 58
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا نَادَيْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلاَةِ اتَّخَذُوهَا هُزُوًا وَلَعِبًا
ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لاَّ يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58.** ***"And when you call to prayer they take it in mockery and
play. That is because they are a people who do not apply reason."***

Following the previous discussion upon the prohibition of friendship
with the hypocrites and a party of the People of the Book who mock the
commandments of Islam, this verse points to one of their deeds as an
evidence. It implies that when the prayer call is recited and the
Muslims are called to prayer, the hypocrites and some of the People of
the Book mock it. Here is the verse:

***"And when you call to prayer they take it in mockery and
play....."***

This Fact should be noted that 'prayer' is the feature and the sample of
the religion. Thus, here, taking prayer in mockery means taking the
feature of the religion in mockery. Hence, the prayer call should be
recited so that the crowd of Muslims gather and prayer be established
quite openly.

In Islamic society, prayer call must be recited loudly and be preached,
but it should not be troublesome; of course.

In conclusion, this point is clear that the style of the wise is that
they face the affairs logically while the imprudent, those who have not
reason, are the makers of mockery. The verse says:

***"...That is because they are a people who do not apply reason."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 59
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ هَلْ تَنقِمُونَ مِنَّا إِلاَّ أَنْ آمَنَّا
بِاللّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلُ وَأَنَّ
أَكْثَرَكُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**59.** ***"Say: 'O' People of the Book! Do you find faults with us (for
any reason) except that we have believed in Allah and in what has been
sent down to us, and in what was sent down before (the Quran), and that,
certainly, most of you are evil-doers'."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Upon the Occasion of Revelation of the above verse and the verse after
that, it has been narrated from Ibn-Abbas that a group of the Jewish
people came to the Prophet (S) and asked him to describe his creeds for
them.

Then, the holy Prophet (S) said: "I believe in Allah and in what have
been revealed to Abraham, Ismael, Issac, Jacob, Moses, Jesus, and all
Divine Prophets, and I separate none of them from the others."

They said: "We do not know Jesus and do not accept him as a prophet."
Then they added that they knew no religion worse than their religion
(the Prophet's religion). It was at that time that this holy verse was
revealed and answered them.

In this verse, *Allah (s.w.t.)* orders Prophet Muhammad (S) to ask the
People of the Book why they found faults with them and criticized them
for any reason, save that they had believed in *Allah (s.w.t.)* and
submitted to what was sent down to them and to the prophets before them.

The verse says:

***"Say: ' O' People of the Book! Do you find faults with us (for any
reason) except that we have believed in Allah and in what has been sent
down to us, and in what was sent down before (the Quran) ..."***

At the end of the verse, there finds a sentence which in fact, is the
clarification of the previous sentence. It, from the tongue of Muslims
and addressing the People of the Book, denotes that if you object us
upon the pure theism and sincere submission we have unto all the
heavenly Books, it is because most of you are evil-doers and have
polluted with sins.

Thus, since you yourselves are polluted and deluded, then whoever are
purified and pave the right path, in your point of view, their manner is
blemish.

***"...and that certainly, most of you are evil-doers"***

**Note:**

1. Denial of the right and annoying the followers of the right is
ungodliness.

2. When encountering the severities of the enemies do not forfeit
justice and fairness. Yet, do not consider all of those hostile enemies
as equally evil-doers.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 60
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ أُنَبِّئُكُم بِشَرٍّ مِّن ذَلِكَ مَثُوبَةً عِندَ اللّهِ مَن
لَّعَنَهُ اللّهُ وَغَضِبَ عَلَيْهِ وَجَعَلَ مِنْهُمُ الْقِرَدَةَ
وَالْخَنَازِيرَ وَعَبَدَ الطَّاغُوتَ أُوْلَـئِكَ شَرٌّ مَّكَاناً
وَأَضَلُّ عَن سَوَاء السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60.** ***"Say: 'Shall I inform you of (him who is) worse than that in
retribution with Allah?(Worse are those) whom Allah has cursed and
brought His wrath upon, and He turned some of whom into apes and swine,
and worshippers of Taghut (false deity). They are worse in place (with
Allah) and far more astray from the (right) path."***  
   
 In this holy verse, some perverted creeds and some wrong deeds of the
People of the Book, resulted to the inflictions they were faced with,
are compared with the situation of the true Muslim believers, in order
to make ( clear which of these two groups deserve to be blamed and
criticized.

This is, indeed, a logical answer which is used for the stubborn and
fanatic persons to become mindful. In this comparison, it addresses the
Prophet (S) to tell them whether the person who believes in *Allah* and
the heavenly Books deserves to be criticized and blamed, or the wrong
actions of those whose retribution of their deed is worse than that with
*Allah.* The verse says:

***"Say: 'Shall I inform you of (him who is) worse than that in
retribution with Allah?.."***

Then, it explains this subject when it says:

***"…(Worse are those) whom Allah has cursed and brought His wrath upon,
and He turned some of whom into apes a swine, and worshippers of Taghut
(false deity). They are worse in place (with Allah) and far more astray
from the (right) path."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 61
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَآؤُوكُمْ قَالُوَاْ آمَنَّا وَقَد دَّخَلُواْ بِالْكُفْرِ
وَهُمْ قَدْ خَرَجُواْ بِهِ وَاللّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا كَانُواْ
يَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**61.** ***"And when they come to you, they say: 'We believe '; while
certainly they have entered in with infidelity, and certainly they have
gone out with it; and Allah knows best what they were hiding."***

In order to complete the discussion about the hypocrites among the
People of the Book, in this verse it makes their inner hypocrisy
manifest and announces it to the Muslims as such:

***"And when they come to you, they say: 'We believe '; while certainly
they have entered in with infidelity, and certainly they have gone out
with it....."***

And, at the end of the verse, it warns them that in spite of all these
concealments, *Allah is* aware of what they hide. It says:

***"....and Allah knows best what they were hiding."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 62
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَى كَثِيراً مِّنْهُمْ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الإِثْمِ وَالْعُدْوَانِ
وَأَكْلِهِمُ السُّحْتَ لَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**62.** ***"And you will see many of them striving with one another to
hasten in sin and transgression and their devouring the unlawful.
Verily, evil is what they have been doing."***

In the previous verse, the words were about their infidel spirit; and,
here, the statement is about their ethical, social, and economical
corruptions.

In this verse, the Qur'an refers to some other signs of their hypocrisy.
As a part of the signs, it says:

***"And you will see many of them striving with one another to hasten in
sin and transgression and their devouring the unlawful. ..."***

That is, they so act in the way of sin and cruelty that as if they go
forward unto some honourable goals, and without any shame or modesty,
they try to precede one another.

Therefore, preceding in corruption is found in the feature of the
society of infidelity and hypocrisy. But, the feature o-f the Islamic
society is precedence in good deeds.

Similarly, the main goals and ideal of the hypocrites is: lust, wealth,
might, usury, bribery, enmity, and sinfulness.

Worse than that manner is that, they openly show their committing sin
and being involved in it.

And, at the end of the verse, in order to emphasize on the indecency
condition of their deeds and that they continue to perform them, the
holy Qur'an says:

***"...Verily, evil is what they have been doing."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 63
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلاَ يَنْهَاهُمُ الرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالأَحْبَارُ عَن قَوْلِهِمُ
الإِثْمَ وَأَكْلِهِمُ السُّحْتَ لَبِئْسَ مَا كَانُواْ يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**63.** ***"Why do not the learned men and the doctors of law prohibit
them (the people) from uttering sinful words and devouring the unlawful?
Verily evil is what they have been working."***

Then, in this holy verse, the attack is targeted at the learned men of
such societies who, by their own silence, encourage them to committing
sin; It says:

***"Why do not the learned men and the doctors of law prohibit them (the
people) from uttering sinful words and devouring the unlawful? ..."***

That is, in order to improve an immoral society, the knowledgeable men
among them must change their incorrect thoughts and creeds. Thus, the
verse shows the style of improving an immoral society to the learned
people that they must begin with mental revolution.

And, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an has blamed the indifferent
scholars who remain silent and those who abandon 'enjoining right' and
'forbidding wrong' in the same level that it has blamed the evil-doers,
where it says:

***" ...Verily evil is what they have been working."***

Thus, it becomes clear that the fate of those who do not perform the
great duty of 'enjoining right and forbidding wrong', especially when
they are among scholars and learned ones, is equivalent with the fate of
the sinners. They have indeed, a share of their crime.

Ibn-Abbas, the famous commentator, has been narrated from that he used
to say: "This verse is the most intensive verse which scorns and blames
the undutiful and indifferent scholars."

It is evident that this command does not pertain exclusively to the
silent scholars of the Jews and the Christians. It encompasses all the
mental leaders and scholars who sit silent at the time that people
become polluted with committing sin and go forward in the path of
injustice and corruption, because the law of *Allah* is the same for all
human beings.

In a tradition from Imam Ali (as), mentioned in Sermon No.192, we recite
that he has said:

*" ...because Allah, the Glorified, did not curse the past age except
for that they had left off enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong.
In fact, Allah cursed the foolish for committing sins and the wise
because they gave up refraining others from evils. ..."*

In other words, this part of the sermon means that former nations were
destroyed for their committing sins and that their wise men did not
forbid people from evils. At this time the misfortunes and divine
retributions came down over them.

Then, O' people! Beware to do 'enjoining right and forbidding wrong' so
that you may not have a similar fate of theirs, either.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 64
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ يَدُ اللّهِ مَغْلُولَةٌ غُلَّتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَلُعِنُواْ بِمَا قَالُواْ بَلْ يَدَاهُ مَبْسُوطَتَانِ يُنفِقُ كَيْفَ
يَشَاء وَلَيَزِيدَنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنْهُم مَّا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن
رَّبِّكَ طُغْيَانًا وَكُفْرًا وَأَلْقَيْنَا بَيْنَهُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاء إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ كُلَّمَا أَوْقَدُواْ نَارًا
لِّلْحَرْبِ أَطْفَأَهَا اللّهُ وَيَسْعَوْنَ فِي الأَرْضِ فَسَادًا
وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**64.** ***"And the Jews have said: The hand of Allah is tied up! and
cursed be they for what they have said. Nay, both His hands (of Power)
are (always) spread out. He bestows as He pleases. And what has been
sent down to you from your Lord will certainly increase many of them in
insolence and infidelity; and We have cast enmity and hatred between
them till the Day of Resurrection. Every time they kindle a fire for
war*****,** ***Allah extinguishes it. They strive to make mischief in
the land; and Allah does not love the mischief makers.***

One of the clear examples of the vain statements and sinful words of the
Jews, which were generally referred to in the previous verse, has been
pointed out in this verse.

Its explanation is that history shows that once the Jews were living in
a very powerful state. They were ruling over a vast part of the
inhabited world of that era, of which the time of David and Solomon, son
of David, can be mentioned as an example. In the time after that, too,
their authority continued to be exposed with some changes, of course.

But, with the advent of Islam, the light of the star of their power
declined especially in Mecca and Medina.

The Prophet's fights against the Jewish tribes known as Bani-Nadir,
Bani-Ghurah, and the Jews of Kheybar caused them to become very weak. At
this time, considering their past glory, authority and power, some of
them mockingly said that *Allah's* hand was tied up with chains and
would not give them anything.

Since the rest of them (those Jewish people) were content with, them,
too; the Qur'an has attributed this qualification to all of them, by
saying:

***"And the Jews have said: (The hand of Allah is tied up! ..."***

In answer to them, and in order to blame and reproach such a wrong
belief, at first, *Allah* says:

***"...Be their hands tied up! and cursed be they for what they have
said....."***

Then, to nullify this unjust opinion, the Qur'an says:

***"....Nay, both His hands (of Power) are (always) spread out. He
bestows as He pleases. ..."***

*Allah* is neither forced in His affairs, nor is He obliged to the
natural phenomena or the momentum of time; but His Will is above
everything and effective in all affairs.

Then, it implies that even these verses, that make the secret of their
statements and opinions manifest, instead of having a positive effect on
them and turning them back from the wrong path, cause many of them to
become rather stubborn and also to increase their rebelliousness and
faithlessness. The verse says:

***"...And what has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly
increase many of them in insolence and infidelity....."***

But, for these unjust statements and opinions, that they utter and the
obstinacy that they have in the way of disobedience and disbelief,
*Allah* has assigned a heavy chastisement for them in this world. He
*(s.w.t.)* in this verse says:

***"...and We have cast enmity and hatred between them till the Day of
Resurrection. ..."***

And, by the last part of the verse, the Qur'an points to the struggles
and efforts of the Jews for kindling the flames of war. It also points
to the struggles and efforts of the Jews for kindling the flames of war.
It also points to the grace of Allah in protecting and rescuing the
Muslims from these annihilating flames, where it says:

***"….Every time they kindle a fire for war*****,** ***Allah
extinguishes it…"***

And, in fact, this divine incident is one of miraculous aspects of the
life of the Prophet (S).

Then, the Qur'an continues saying:

***"...They strive to make mischief in the land; and Allah does not love
the mischief makers."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 65
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ آمَنُواْ وَاتَّقَوْاْ لَكَفَّرْنَا
عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ وَلأدْخَلْنَاهُمْ جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65.** ***"And if the People of the Book had believed and kept from
evil, We would certainly have remitted their sins and We would certainly
have made them enter Gardens of Bless."***

The Qur'an follows, here, the former criticisms upon the manner and
style of the People of the Book. In this verse and the verse next to it
as the training principles require, and in order to bring back the
mischievous People of the Book to the straight path and admiring that
minority of them who did not cooperate with them in their evil deeds,
the Qur'an, at first, says:

***"And if the People of the Book had believed and kept from evil, We
would certainly have remitted their sins ..."***

They not only will be forgiven of their sins but also will be admitted
into gardens of Paradise which are the centre of kinds of blessings. The
Holy Qur'an says:

***"...and We would certainly have made them enter Gardens of
Bless."!***

This meaning refers to the spiritual bounties found in the Hereafter.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 66
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ أَقَامُواْ التَّوْرَاةَ وَالإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ
إِلَيهِم مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ لأكَلُواْ مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِن تَحْتِ
أَرْجُلِهِم مِّنْهُمْ أُمَّةٌ مُّقْتَصِدَةٌ وَكَثِيرٌ مِّنْهُمْ سَاء
مَا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**66.** ***"And if they had kept Up the Torah and the Evangel and what
was sent down to them from their Lord, they would certainly have had (of
the bounties) from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them
there are people who are moderate, but (as for) many of them, evil is
what they do."***

If the followers of heavenly Books other than the Holy Qur'an had
submitted to the Qur'an, and had not imagined that surrendering to the
Qur'an is the submission of the Children of Israel to Arabs, and had
realized that the prophets' principles of teachings are all alike, and
that having faith in what was revealed after the Torah and Evangel is a
promotion to the higher class of belief not negating the former
instructions, then, besides enjoying of the concerning merits in
Hereafter, they would have received varieties of bounties in this very
world, too.

In the preceding holy verse, the function of Faith in the spiritual
felicity of the other life was referred to, but here, in the verse under
discussion, its function in the worldly prosperity and economic welfare
has been stated. The verse says:

***"And if they had kept up the Torah and the Evangel and what was sent
down to them from their Lord, they would certainly have had (of the
bounties) from above them and from beneath their feet. ..."***

In the previous verse, the words were about the belief of the Jews
saying that: ***"The hand of Allah is tied up",*** while, here, the
verse points out that they should refer to the heavenly Books and then
judge whether the hand of *Allah* is tied up or not.

The reason that their glory and might changed into disgrace and
degradation as retribution, was for that they turned their backs to the
heavenly instructions, not for the restraint of *Allah (s.w.t.).*

***"....Among them there are people who are moderate, but (as for) many
of them, evil is what they do."***


