Section 10: The Christian Deviation from the Truth
==================================================

Truth to be proclaimed at all cost -The people of the Gospel do not act
up to it - The errors which the Christians commit

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 67
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ
وَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلْ فَمَا بَلَّغْتَ رِسَالَتَهُ وَاللّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ
مِنَ النَّاسِ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**67.** ***"O' Messenger! convey what has been sent down to you from
your Lord; and if you do not, then you have not conveyed His message (at
all); and Allah will protect you from the (vice of) people, verily Allah
does not guide the unbelieving ones. "***

### Appointment of the Successor as the Final Point of Prophetic Mission

In this verse, only the Prophet (S) is addressed. It states but his
duty. The text of the verse begins with "O' Messenger!" and continues
explicitly and emphatically commending him such:

***"...convey what has been sent down to you from your Lord...."***

Then, for a further emphasis it warns him that if he refrains doing
that, (that never might he refrain), he has not conveyed His message to
people at all. The verse says:

***"...and if you do not, then you have not conveyed His message (at
all); ..."***

After that, the revelation consoles the Prophet (S), as if he was
anxious and worried about a particular incident, and tells him not to be
afraid of people for performing this duty. It says:

***"....and Allah will protect you from the (vice of) people ..."***

And, at the end of the verse, as a threat and punishment unto those who
reject or deny this peculiar message and pertinaciously blaspheme it,
the verse says:

***"...Verily Allah does not guide the unbelieving ones."***

Truly, what an important subject there existed in the latest months of
the Prophet's life that in the above-mentioned verse the lack of its
conveyance has been counted equivalent with the lack of messenger ship
wholly.

In different books of the scholars of both Sunnite and Shi'ah schools of
thought, there are many authentic traditions recorded to say that the
above-mentioned verse has been revealed at Ghadeer Khumm about the
appointment of the successor for the Prophet (S) and the future fate of
Islam and Muslims.[^1]

### Ghadeer Khumm in Brief

In the last year of the Prophet's life the rites of Hajjat-ul- Wida'
were very gloriously performed at the presence of the Prophet (S).

In this journey, not only the inhabitants of Medina accompanied the holy
Prophet (S), but also Muslims of different parts of Arabia took part in
the pilgrimage with the Prophet (S) to gain a great historical honour
and credit.

The sun of Arabia was showering heat as fire over Mounts and valleys.
But the sweetness of this spiritual journey made everything easy for the
pilgrims of Mecca. It was nearly noon. The land of Juhfeh and behind it
the hot dry deserts of Ghadeer Khumm were showing themselves from a
distance.

It was on Thursday in the tenth A.H. (anno Hijira), just eight days
after the Day of Sacrifice. Suddenly the Prophet (S) ordered halt to the
marching caravan.

The Prophet's Muazzin invited people to noon prayer with a loud voice of
'Allahu-Akbar '. People became ready for prayer while the weather was so
hot that men had to put one side of their shoulder-mantles on the ground
under their feet and another side of it over their heads when
establishing prayer.

When the noon prayer was established, people were going to go
immediately into their small tents which they were carrying with them to
shelter therein. But the Prophet (S) informed them that everybody should
attend to hearken a new Divine message. Then he announced that message
through a full described sermon.

Those people who were standing in a distance from the Prophet (S) to
listen to his lecture could not see him from behind the crowd.

Therefore, a pulpit was prepared from the seats used at the back of the
camels. The holy Prophet (S) mounting the pulpit praised Allah and
sought protection from Him. Then he addressed the huge crowd of people
and said:

*"Soon I am going to depart from among you by accepting the invitation
of Allah. I am responsible, and you are responsible, too. How do you
bear witness about me? "*

The audience shouted saying:

*"We bear witness that certainly you have conveyed (the mission of
messenger ship), advised (the circumstance of benevolence) and strived
(to guide us). May, then, Allah reward you goodness."*

Then he (S) questioned:

*"Do you not bear witness to Unity of Allah, my messenger ship, the
rightfulness of the Day of Resurrection, and raising the dead on that
Day?"*

The crowd answered: *"Yes, We confess."* The Prophet (S) said: *"O'
Lord! Be witness."* Again, he (S) said: *"O' people! Do you hear me?
..."* The audience answered positively, and then a silence dominated
throughout the desert, so that there was, heard nothing but the sound of
the wind.

The Prophet (S) said:

*"Now, look how do you treat with these two weighty and worthy things
that I leave among you?"*

A voice from among the crowd asked the Prophet (S) what those two worthy
things were.

The Prophet (S) immediately said:

"*The first is 'the Greater Weight*'*, the Qur'an, whose one end is in
Allah's hand and another end is in your hand. Never abandon it lest you
might get astray! The second worthy thing is my progeny, my Ahlul-Bayt.
And verily Allah, the Subtle, the Aware, informed me that never, never,
will these* *too get separated from each other until they meet me at
Heaven. Do not anticipate them both, because you, will be perished; and
be not behind-hand of those two, for you will be perished, too."*

At that time, people saw that the Prophet (S) was looking round as if he
was looking for someone. As soon as he saw Ali (as), he leaned over and
took his hand and raised it up so high that the whiteness of their
arm-pits appeared.

The entire crowd saw him (as) and recognized him that he is the very
ever-victorious officer of Islam. Here, the Prophet's voice became
louder and more audible when he said:

*"O' people! who is superior (or the Master) among the people to the
believers more than their own selves? "*

They said: "*Allah* and the Prophet (S) know better."

The Prophet (S) said:

*"Allah is my master, and I am the master over the believers, and I am
superior to them more than their own selves (my decision is superior to
their decision)."*

Then he (S) added:

*"To whomever I am the Maula (the master) this Ali is his Maula (the
master)."*

And he repeated this statement three times, or, as some narrators of the
traditions have cited, he repeated it four times.

After stating this commandment, he looked up towards heaven and prayed,
saying:

*"O' Allah! Be You a friend to him who is a friend to him (Ali) and (Be
You) as enemy to him who is enemy to him (i.e. Ali)."*

Then he (S) said to the audience:

*"Beware that all of you who are present should communicate this news to
those who are absent."*

The Prophet's sermon was completed while sweat was showering from the
faces of the Prophet (S), Ali (as) and all people there because of the
heat. Before separating the rows of the pilgrims, Ruh-ul-'Amin (Gabriel)
came down and revealed this holy verse to the Prophet (S):

***"...This day have I perfected your religion for you and have I
completed My bounties on you and am pleased your religion to be Islam.
..."*** [^2]

The Prophet *(p.b.u.h.)* said: "*Allah* is the Greatest! *Allah* is the
Greatest upon the perfection of religion and completion of favour, and
the Lord became pleased with my messenger ship and Ali's mastership
after me."

At this time there arose a sound of pleasure and uproar amongst people,
and they congratulated this position to Ali (as). Two people, out of
those famous ones in the gathering who felicitated Ali (as), were
Abu-Bakr and 'Umar.

It was at the presence of the crowd when they one after another uttered
in their Arabic tongue: "Bakhkhin bakhkhin laka yabna Abi-Talib. Asbahta
wa amsayta Moulaee wa Maula kulle Mu'minin wa Mu'minah , (Hurrah,
Hurrah, O' son of Abu-Talib! You have now become my Maula (master) and
the Maula (master) of every believing man and believing woman.)

This report is a brief explanation of the Ghadeer Khumm which has been
recorded in the scholars' books of both Sunnie and Shi'ites.

### An Explanation

All of the Shi'ite commentators basing on Ahlul-Bayt's traditions, and
also as some Sunnite commentators, like Fakhr-i-Razi and the author of
Almanar have cited that this verse is related to the mastership
(wilayah) of Ali-ibn Abi-Talib and the event in Ghadeer Khumm.

The style of the tone and address of the verse distinguishes this holy
verse from the verses before and after it. It is only in this verse
throughout the Qur'an that the holy Prophet (S) has been threatened due
to the concealment of message.

It announces that if he does not convey that message, it is as if what
he has conveyed during all the years of his messenger ship will be
reduced to nothing. Therefore, it must be noted what an important
message it is which has been stated there and in that manner.

It is a message that, from the point of significance, is equivalent with
all the Divine messages of the whole period of his prophet hood and
messenger ship. That message is the master ship, Imamate, and leadership
of Ali-ibn-Abi- Talib (as) from the side of *Allah.*

O' Lord! accept us and our children among the true followers of Imam Ali
(as) and his progeny (as), and cause us all to be mustered with them on
the day of Resurrection.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 68
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لَسْتُمْ عَلَى شَيْءٍ حَتَّىَ تُقِيمُواْ
التَّوْرَاةَ وَالإِنجِيلَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُم مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ
وَلَيَزِيدَنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنْهُم مَّا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِن رَّبِّكَ
طُغْيَانًا وَكُفْرًا فَلاَ تَأْسَ عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**68.** ***"Say: 'O' People of the Book you follow naught (no true
religion) till you keep up the Torah and the Evangel and what has been
sent down unto you from your Lord; and surely that which has been sent
down to you from your Lord (the Qur'an} shall increase many of them in
insolence and infidelity. So do not grieve for the unbelieving ones."***

It is necessary to believe in all the heavenly Books, and a mere claim
of belief is not sufficient. Practice and establishment of action for
Faith is indispensable. Thus, the person who does not practise his Faith
has no religion.

The personality and value of individuals is estimated by the level of
their action on the religious duties.

Infidelity and obstinacy of persons do not harm the Islamic system and
ideology, but they themselves incur its harm. *Allah is* the protector
of the religion.

***"Say: ' O' People of the Book you follow naught (no true religion}
till you keep up the Torah and the Evangel and what has been sent down
unto you from your Lord; and surely that which has been sent down to you
from your Lord (the Qur'an) shall increase many of them in insolence and
infidelity. So do not grieve for the unbelieving ones."***

It is evident, of course that the content meaning of this verse is not
allocated to the Jews. If the Muslims suffice only to the claim of
Islam, too, and do not establish the prophets' principles of training
and their own heavenly Book in particular, they will have neither any
rank nor value with *Allah* nor in their own personal and social life.
So, they will always be helpless, inferior and defeated.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 69
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَالَّذِينَ هَادُواْ وَالصَّابِؤُونَ
وَالنَّصَارَى مَنْ آمَنَ بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وعَمِلَ صَالِحًا
فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**69.** ***"Verily those who believed, and those of the Jews and the
Sabians and the Christians, whoever believed in Allah and the Last Day,
and worked righteousness - no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they
grieve."***

The verse relates to the Faith and the deeds of the followers of those
religions mentioned in the verse at their own concerning times.

Then, with the advent of a new religion, they should believe in the new
Divine law, else the appointment of the successive prophets seems
useless. Then, either of the Jews, the Christians, and others should
believe in Islam like Muslims and act righteously. It is in that case
that they will have neither fear nor any grief.

***"Verily those who believed, and those of the Jews and the Sabians and
the Christians, whoever believed in Allah and the Last Day, and worked
righteousness - no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve."***

All the heavenly religions prove that the criterion of felicity is both
'Faith and righteous deed', not the bare claims and names or slogans.
Thus, Faith is not separate from action; and tranquillity and security
are found due to them both.

### Explanation: What is the Objective Meaning of the Sabians?

Some commentators have said that they are a group of people whose
religion has been taken from those of the Jews and Christians. Some
others have said that they believe in Noah (as) and do not believe in
all prophets after him.

But, as Imam Rida (as) has said, the Sabians are some formerly
worshippers who repented and believed in both 'The Origin and the End',
and did righteous deeds, too.[^3]

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 70
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَرْسَلْنَا إِلَيْهِمْ
رُسُلاً كُلَّمَا جَاءهُمْ رَسُولٌ بِمَا لاَ تَهْوَى أَنْفُسُهُمْ
فَرِيقًا كَذَّبُواْ وَفَرِيقًا يَقْتُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**70.** ***"Certainly We look a covenant from the Children of Israel and
We sent messengers to them. Whenever there came to them a messenger with
what their souls did not desire, some of them they would deny and some
(of them) they would slay."***

In Surah Al-Baqarah No.2 and at the beginning of this current Surah,
Al-Ma'idah, there is a hint to the firm covenant that *Allah* has taken
from the Children of Israel. In the above verse, too, this covenant is
referred to again.

It implies that *Allah* took covenant from the Children of Israel to do
according to what He sent down. And, He appointed some messengers for
them to guide them and to demand the fulfilment of this covenant from
them. It says:

***"Certainly We took a covenant from the Children of Israel and We sent
messengers to them. ..."***

Then the verse continues implying that they not only did not do upon
this covenant but also whenever a messenger brought a Divine commandment
to them which contrasted their wishes and low desires, they committed
the worst and the strongest struggle against him. They denied some of
these prophets, while they killed those prophets whose influence they
could not hinder. It says:

***"... Whenever there came to them a messenger with what their souls
did not desire, some of them they would deny and some (of them) they
would slay."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 71
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَسِبُواْ أَلاَّ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ فَعَمُواْ وَصَمُّواْ ثُمَّ تَابَ
اللّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ ثُمَّ عَمُواْ وَصَمُّواْ كَثِيرٌ مِّنْهُمْ وَاللّهُ
بَصِيرٌ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**71.** ***"And they (the Jews) imagined that there would be no
affliction, so they became blind and deaf (unto the Truth); then Allah
turned to them mercifully; but again many of them became blind and deaf;
and Allah sees what they do."***

In this verse, the vain pride of the Jews is referred to, with those
plenty treacheries and violence that they had. The verse says:

***"And they (the Jews) imagined that there would be no affliction
..."***

As this meaning gas been pointed out in other verses, the Jews
considered themselves a superior face, and they remarked that they were
the Children of *Allah.* Finally, this dangerous pride and
self-admiration, like a curtain, covered them over their eyes and ears.

So, as a result of it, they became blind for seeing the signs of *Allah*
and, as a deaf, they did not hear the words of right. The verse says:

***"... so they became blind and deaf (unto the Truth)....."***

But, when they saw some samples of the punishments of *Allah,* and felt
the evil fate of their own deeds they regretted. They, then, repented,
because they realized that the divine threats were serious and that they
were not a superior race. It was at that circumstance that *Allah*
accepted their repentance. It says:

***"...then Allah turned to them mercifully....."***

But this recognition and regretful ness did not last long. They again
began to be disobedient, violent, obstinate and heedless to the right
and justice.

Therefore, the curtains of negligence, which is the result of committing
sins, were put over their eyes and ears, so that they became blind again
for seeing the signs of truth and deaf again for hearing the words of
truth. This status enveloped many of them.

***"...but again many of them became blind and deaf...."***

And, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an, in a short but expressive
phrase, implies that never *Allah is* heedless of their deeds and He
sees all the things that they do. It says:

***"... and Allah sees what they do."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 72
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ هُوَ الْمَسِيحُ ابْنُ
مَرْيَمَ وَقَالَ الْمَسِيحُ يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اعْبُدُواْ اللّهَ
رَبِّي وَرَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ مَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللّهِ فَقَدْ حَرَّمَ اللّهُ
عَلَيهِ الْجَنَّةَ وَمَأْوَاهُ النَّارُ وَمَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ
أَنصَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**72.** ***"Certainly they are infidels who say: 'Verily Allah, He is
the Messiah, son of Mary;' and the Messiah (himself) said: 'O' Children
of lsrael! worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Verily whoever
associates anything with Allah, then Allah has forbidden to him the
Paradise and his abode is the Fire, and there shall be no helpers for
the unjust'."***

Following the discussions upon the aberrations of the Jews, which were
delivered in the former verses, in this verse and the verses next to it,
the words are about the deviations of the Christians. At first, it
begins with the greatest swerve of Christianity, i.e. God ship of the
Messiah, Jesus Christ. It says:

***"Certainly they are infidels who say: 'Verily Allah, He is the
Messiah, son of Mary;'..."***

They say so while Jesus (as) himself vividly told the Children of Israel
to worship *Allah,* their Lord. The verse says:

***"... and the Messiah (himself) said: 'O' Children of Israel! worship
Allah, my Lord and your Lord...."***

Also, for an emphasis on this subject, and in order to prevent any
ambiguity and fault, the words of Jesus continue adding:

***"... Verily whoever associates anything with Allah, then Allah has
forbidden to him the Paradise and his abode is the Fire...."***

And again, for a further emphasis and confirming this fact that
polytheism and extremism is a kind of manifest wrongdoing, they were
told such:

***"...and there shall be no helpers for the unjust '."***

What is found in the above-mentioned verse regarding the Messiah (as)
persisting on the theme of theism[^4] is a subject matter which also,
adapts to the existing sources of Christianity.[^5] This very matter is
counted among the evidences for the significance of the Qur'an.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 73
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ كَفَرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ ثَالِثُ ثَلاَثَةٍ وَمَا
مِنْ إِلَـهٍ إِلاَّ إِلَـهٌ وَاحِدٌ وَإِن لَّمْ يَنتَهُواْ عَمَّا
يَقُولُونَ لَيَمَسَّنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ مِنْهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**73.** ***"Certainly they disbelieve who say: 'Verily Allah is the
third of the three,' while there is no god save the One God; and if they
desist not from what they say, a painful chastisement shall befall those
among them who disbelieve."***

This fact should be noted that what was referred to in the previous
verse was the subject of extremism and unity with *Allah.* But, in this
verse, the Qur'an points to the plurality of gods from the view point of
the Christians, viz. three foldness in Divine Unity. It says:

***"Certainly they disbelieve who say: 'Verily Allah is the third of the
three,'... "***

In answer to them the Qur'an decisively says:

***"... while there is no god save the One God; ..."***

Then, the Qur'an, with a strong and severe tone, emphatically warns
them:

***"... and if they desist not from what they say, a painful
chastisement shall befall those among them who disbelieve."***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 74
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلاَ يَتُوبُونَ إِلَى اللّهِ وَيَسْتَغْفِرُونَهُ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**74.** ***"Will they not then turn to Allah and ask forgiveness of Him?
And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

This holy verse contains significance to the fact that perverted beliefs
should be repented of.

The deviated persons from the straight path should be invited to the
right path through the statement of the divine forgiveness and mercy. It
can be done by saying that *Allah* both forgives and bestows His mercy
on the servants.

The verse says:

***"Will they not then turn to Allah and ask forgiveness of Him? And
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. "***

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 75
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا الْمَسِيحُ ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ إِلاَّ رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ
الرُّسُلُ وَأُمُّهُ صِدِّيقَةٌ كَانَا يَأْكُلاَنِ الطَّعَامَ انظُرْ
كَيْفَ نُبَيِّنُ لَهُمُ الآيَاتِ ثُمَّ انظُرْ أَنَّى يُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**75.** ***"The Messiah, son of Mary, is but a messenger (that)
messengers (the like of whom) has passed away before him, and his mother
was a truthful woman; they both used to eat food. See how We make the
Signs clear for them (people), and see how they are turned away (from
the truth)."***

*Allah* introduces three reasons in this verse which prove that Messiah
(as) is not God.

1. He (as) has been born and he (as) is son of Mary.

2. There have been some prophets like him, too, and he is not matchless.

***"The Messiah, son of Mary, is but a messenger (that) messengers (the
like of whom) have passed away before him....."***

3. Like anybody else, he is in need of food and other necessities, and
he gains his strength from food. Therefore he does not possess an
absolute power to be God. Whoever needs food cannot be the creator of
the food.

These are clear statements of the holy Qur'an that people understand.
However, having some privileges, such as miracles and exceptions, do not
prove divinity for a person. Other prophets worked miracles, too, Or,
Adam had not parents, either.

***".... and his mother was a truthful woman; they both-used to eat
food. ..."***

*Allah (s.w.t.)* is neither material, nor born, nor necessitous, and He
has no place.

***"... See how We make the Signs clear for them (people), and see how
they are turned away (from the truth)."***

By the way, Mary is one of God's saints. The Qur'an honours women and
counts Mary 'a truthful woman'. In another verse of the Qur'an, it is
said that Mary testified *Allah's* word and she was of the obedient
ones:

***" ...and she testified the truth of the words of her Lord, and His
Scriptures and she was of the obedient ones."*** [^6]

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 76
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللّهِ مَا لاَ يَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا
وَلاَ نَفْعًا وَاللّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**76.** ***"Say: 'Do you worship besides Allah that which possesses for
you neither harm nor profit? And Allah -He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing."***

To complete the former reasoning about Jesus, the Qur'an in this verse
remarks to the Christians that they knew that the Messiah was fully in
need of what a human being needs. He was not even the possessor of his
own harm and his own profit, then how could he be the possessor of their
harm and profit? It says:

***"Say: 'Do you worship besides Allah that which possesses for you
neither harm nor profit..."***

That was why Jesus was captured many times by his enemies, or that his
friends were involved in some inflictions. So, had not been the Grace of
*Allah,* he (as) could have done nothing.

And, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an warns them not to imagine that
*Allah* does not hear their vain words, or He is not aware of their
inside, because He is both Hearing and Knowing.

The verse says:

***"... And Allah -He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing."!***

### Explanations

1. For realizing that the path of polytheism is invalid, refer to your
own human intellect and sensibility.

2. Except *Allah,* other gods are incapable even of hearing and knowing
your necessities; much less of supplying them.

Surah Al-Ma'idah, Verse 77
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لاَ تَغْلُواْ فِي دِينِكُمْ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ
وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ أَهْوَاء قَوْمٍ قَدْ ضَلُّواْ مِن قَبْلُ
وَأَضَلُّواْ كَثِيراً وَضَلُّواْ عَن سَوَاء السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**77.** ***"Say: ' O' People of the Book! Do not exaggerate in your
religion other than the truth, and do not follow the vain desires of the
people who had gone astray a foretime, and led many astray, and went
astray from the right path."***

In this verse following the manifestation of the fault of the people of
the Book in the field of exaggeration about Divine prophets, the holy
Prophet (S) is commanded to invite them, with clear reasoning that they
formally return from this way. The verse says:

***"Say: 'O' People of the Book! Do not exaggerate in your religion
other than the truth...."***

The exaggeration of the Christians is clear, of course, but the
exaggeration of the Jews, who are also involved in those whom the Qur'an
addresses to by the phrase: ***"O' People of the Book! "*** is probably
a hint to the statement they said about prophet Ezra (as) and considered
him the son of *Allah.*

And, since the origin of exaggeration is often following the vain
desires of the misguided ones, to complete this meaning, the verse
continues saying:

***"...and do not follow the vain desires of the people who had gone
astray a foretime, and led many astray, and went astray from the right
path."***

This phrase points to the fact that this meaning is recorded in the
history of the Christianity, too. The idea of trinity and exaggeration
about Jesus (as) was not mainly found among them in the early centuries
of the Christianity.

When the Indian Idolaters, and the like: joined the religion of Christ,
they added something from the remaining belief of the former, creed,
viz. trinity and polytheism, to the Christianity.

[^1]: Some of these books, compiled by both main sects of Islams are as
follows: A) 1. Sunan-i-Ibn-Majih, vol. 1, p. 55, 2. Al-Fada'il, by
'Ahmad-Ibn-Hanbal (handwritten) 3. Khasa'is-un-Nisa'i p.21 4.
Al-Kanawal-'Asma', byDulabi, vol. 2, p.61 5. Mushkil-ul-'Athar, by
Tahawi, vol. 2, p. 307 6. Al-'Ighd-ul-Farid vol 3 p94 7. Al-'Isti'ab vol
2 p. 460 8. Tarikh-i-Baghdad vol. 7 p.377 9. Mustadrak-ul-Hakim vol. 3
p. 110 10. Tarikh-i-Damishgh, vol. 2, p. 166 11. Tafsir-ul-Hafiz, by
Ibn-Kathir, vol. 2, p. 14 B) 1. At-Tara'if, by Ibn-Tawus, p. 140 2.
Managhib, by Ibn-Shahr'ashub, vol. 29, p.228 3. The Book of
Salim-Ibn-Ghays, p. 111 4. 'Ikmal-ud-Din, by Ash-Shaykh-'us-Sadugh, vol.
1, p. 274 5. Ihtijaj, by Tabarsi, p. 663 6. Bihar-ul-'Anwar, vol. 37, p.
181, tradition 68 7. 'Ighbal-ul-'Ighbal, p. 663 8. Raudatul-wa'izin,
vol. 1, p. 89 9. 'Al-Yaghin, p. 343 10. Al-' Adad-il-Ghawiyyah, p. 169
11. 'At-Tahsin p. 578 12. As '- Sirat-ul-Mustaghim, vol. 1, p. 301 13.
'Al-Qadir, by Al-'Allamat-ul-'Amini 14. 'Abaghat-ul-'Anwar, by
Al-'Allamah Mir-'Himid Hussayn Al-Lakhunuy (India) 15. 'Ihghagh-ul-Hagh,
by Ghadi Nurullah, At-Tusturi; & tens of other books.

[^2]: The Qur'an Surah Al-Ma'idah, No 5, verse 3

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Atyab-ul-Bayan

[^4]: Mark, Chapter 12, No.29, indicates Jesus invites people to theism
and says: "... O Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord."

[^5]: Matthew, Chapter 6, No.24 is also like that. It speaks about one
God.

[^6]: Surah Al- Tahrim, No 66, verse 12


