Surah An-Nisa', Chapter 4, Section 4
====================================

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 24
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُحْصَنَاتُ مِنَ النِّسَاء إِلاَّ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ
كِتَابَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَأُحِلَّ لَكُم مَّا وَرَاء ذَلِكُمْ أَن
تَبْتَغُواْ بِأَمْوَالِكُم مُّحْصِنِينَ غَيْرَ مُسَافِحِينَ فَمَا
اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً وَلاَ
جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا تَرَاضَيْتُم بِهِ مِن بَعْدِ الْفَرِيضَةِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**24.** ***"And all married women (are forbidden unto you to marry)
except those whom your right hands possess (by Allah's decree in the
battle against infidels). It is a written legislation of Allah unto you;
and lawful for you are (all women) besides those that you may seek
(them) by means of your wealth (as dower) taking them into marriage and
not committing fornication. Then as to those of whom you seek content
(by temporary marriage), give them their dowries as a duty; and there is
no blame on you in whatever you mutually agree after the duty. Verily
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

For non-Muslims, captivity is counted as divorce. It is like the Faith
of a woman that when her husband continues his infidelity and the woman
has embraced Islam; the very belief separates her from her husband.

To take in marriage a woman who has husband is unlawful from the point
of Islam. The woman may be from any nation and with any religion.

But captivity is like divorce, and a captive woman should observe a
waiting term for one month (one menstruation) from the time she is
captured, and if she is in pregnancy period, she must wait until she is
delivered of her child. Thus, during this period, no conjugal connection
is admissible with her.

This matrimonial device, as a permanent or contemporary spouse, is
better than the device of returning her to the infidels or leaving her
alone with no guardian.

***"And all married women (are forbidden unto you to marry) except those
whom your right hands possess (by Allah's decree in the battle against
infidels). It is a written legislation of Allah unto you; and lawful for
you are (all women) besides those that you may seek (them) by means of
your wealth (as dower) taking them into marriage and not committing
fornication. ..." ,***

According to several traditions narrated from the holy Imams of
Ahlul-Bayt (as), and also according to many commentary books recorded by
the scholars of the Sunnis, this phrase of the verse refers to temporary
marriage where the above-mentioned holy verse says:

***"...Then as to those of Whom you seek content (by marriage), give
them their dowries as a duty. And there is no blame on you in whatever
you mutually agree after the duty. Verily Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 25
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن لَّمْ يَسْتَطِعْ مِنكُمْ طَوْلاً أَن يَنكِحَ الْمُحْصَنَاتِ
الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ فَمِن مِّا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُم مِّن فَتَيَاتِكُمُ
الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَاللّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِإِيمَانِكُمْ بَعْضُكُم مِّن بَعْضٍ
فَانكِحُوهُنَّ بِإِذْنِ أَهْلِهِنَّ وَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ مُحْصَنَاتٍ غَيْرَ مُسَافِحَاتٍ وَلاَ مُتَّخِذَاتِ
أَخْدَانٍ فَإِذَا أُحْصِنَّ فَإِنْ أَتَيْنَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ فَعَلَيْهِنَّ
نِصْفُ مَا عَلَى الْمُحْصَنَاتِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِيَ
الْعَنَتَ مِنْكُمْ وَأَن تَصْبِرُواْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ
رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**25.** ***"And whoever among you is not able to financially afford to
marry free believing women, then (let him marry) of those (slaves or
captives) whom your right hands possess from among your believing
maidens; and Allah better knows your faith; you are (sprung) one from
the other, so marry them with the permission of their masters, and give
them their dowries in fairness, they being chaste, not committing
lewdness, nor taking paramours. And if when they are married they commit
lewdness, their punishment is half that for free women. This (kind of
marriage) is for those among you who fear falling into evil. But to have
patience would be better for you, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

Following the statements about marriage, this verse expresses the
conditions of marrying she slaves whose dowries and expenses are usually
lighter and easier. At first it says:

***"And whoever among you is not able to financially afford to marry
free believing women, then (let him marry) of those (slaves or captives)
whom your right hands possess from among your believing maidens....."***

Then it adds that for recognizing their Faith, you are commissioned to
hear their apparent expressions, and as for their innate thoughts and
hidden secrets, it is so that Allah knows well of your faith.

***"...and Allah better knows your faith.... "***

And, in view of the fact that some men were not so willing to marry the
slave maidens, in this verse the Qur'an remarks that all of you have
come into being from only one couple, therefore, you must not dislike
marrying them. It says:

***"...you are (sprung) one from the other...."***

Then, the Qur'an points to one of the conditions of this marriage. It is
the permission of the concerning master, while without that permission
the marriage is invalid. It says:

***"...so marry them with the permission of their masters...."***

Next to this statement, it says:

***"…and give them their dowries in fairness...."***

It is understood from this sentence that an appropriate and worthy dowry
should be assigned for them, and it must be given to them. It is also
understood that their slaves can possess some wealth when they have
lawfully obtained it.

One of the other conditions that this marriage has is that these maidens
should be taken from among those who are chaste, not from among those
who commit manifest lewdness.

***"... they being chaste, not committing lewdness, not taking
paramours….."***

In agreement with the ordinances stated upon marriage with slave maidens
and supporting their rights, the holy verse continues the words about
their punishment when they divert from the path of piety and chastity.
It says:

***"...And if when they are married they commit lewdness, their
punishment is half that for free women....."***

This part of the holy verse means that they must be beaten only fifty
stripes.

Then, it adds that this kind of marriage with such slave maidens is for
those who are severely involved in the pressure of the sexual instinct
and are not capable to marry free women.

Therefore, it is not admissible for men other than them.

***"...This (kind of marriage) is for those among you who fear falling
into evil...."***

But, next to that, it says that being patient and avoiding such sort of
marriage, from the point of some ethical and social interests, is of
your gain as far as you are able to restrain yourself and you do not
fall into committing sin.

***"...But to have patience would be better for you...."***

At the end of the verse, it remarks that upon what you have done before
this, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. It says:

***"...and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***


