Section 6: Disagreement and reconciliation between husband and wife
===================================================================

Superiority of men over women -Wife's perverseness and desertion to
effect - Duty to Allah inculcates all the other duties -Niggardliness
and hypocrisy condemned,

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 34
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاء بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللّهُ بَعْضَهُمْ
عَلَى بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنفَقُواْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ فَالصَّالِحَاتُ
قَانِتَاتٌ حَافِظَاتٌ لِّلْغَيْبِ بِمَا حَفِظَ اللّهُ وَاللاَّتِي
تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَاهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِي الْمَضَاجِعِ
وَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ فَإِنْ أَطَعْنَكُمْ فَلاَ تَبْغُواْ عَلَيْهِنَّ
سَبِيلاً إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيًّا كَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**34.** ***"Men have authority over women because Allah has made some of
them to excel others and because they spend out of their property (for
the support of women). Therefore, the good women are obedient, guarding
the unseen as Allah has guarded. And (as to) those (women) on whose***
***part you fear desertion, admonish them, and avoid them in beds and
beat them; then if they obey you, do not seek a way against them; verily
Allah is Ever-High, Ever-Great."***

### Guardianship in the System of a Family

A family is a small unit of the society, similar to a large assembly of
people; a family must have a single proper leader. The reason is that a
leadership upon a family accomplished by several of men and women in
common is of no vail. In this form of leadership, either of husband or
wife must be the chief of the family and the other should be his/her
assistant and under his/her governance.

Here, by this verse, the Qur'an clearly announces that the guardianship
of the family must be given to the man of the family. It says:

***"Men have authority over women ..."***

Of course, the purpose of this statement is not a sense of casting
transgression, inequity and aggression; but the aim is producing a
single, fairly regular leadership regarding to the necessary
consultations and responsibilities.

The second section of the verse is divided into two parts. In the first
part it denotes that this guardianship is for some superiorities that,
(for the sake of regularity of the society), *Allah* has assigned for
some people comparing some others. It says:

***"...because Allah has made some of them to excel others ..."***

And, in the second part of the statement it implies that this
guardianship is for the sake of the responsibilities that men undertake
along the side of financial payments due to women and family members. It
says:

***"...and because they spend out of their property (for the support of
women) ..."***

Then, it adds that: with respect to the duties women undertake at home,
they are divided into two groups:

The first group are those pious women who, because of the rights *Allah*
has set for them, are humble and protect the secrets and rights of their
husband when the husband is absent:

***"...therefore, the good women are obedient, guarding the unseen as
Allah has guarded ..."***

That is, always, and at the absence of their husbands in particular,
they commit no treachery whether from the point of property, or honour,
or protecting the family secrets, and the credit and personality of
their husbands.

They also truly follow their duties and responsibilities to fulfil them
well. The second group are the women who usually refuse to do their
duties. Thus, the signs of disagreement and discord are seen in them.

Confronting such women, men have some duties which they must follow step
by step. At the first stage, it says:

***"...And (as to) those (women) on whose part you fear desertion,
admonish them ..."***

For the second stage, it says:

***"…and avoid them in beds..."***

And, in the third stage, when the discord, disobedience, and the state
of heedlessness toward the duties and responsibilities, the limits are
transgressed, and the wife severely continues stubbornness and law
breaking, so that neither admonishment nor separation from bed, nor
heedlessness of man unto her, has any effect and avail, there remains no
way save harshness. So, it says:

***"...and beat them ..."***

It is certain, of course, that if one of these stages affects positively
and the woman starts doing her duties, the man has no right to hurt her
under any pretext. That is why, immediately after stating this phrase,
the Qur'an continue saying:

***"...then if they obey you, do not seek a way against them...."***

At the end of the verse, it warns men again that they should not abuse
their position of guardianship in the family. They ought to think of
*Allah Whose* Power is above all powers. It says:

***"...verily Allah is Ever-High, Ever-Great."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 35
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُواْ حَكَمًا مِّنْ
أَهْلِهِ وَحَكَمًا مِّنْ أَهْلِهَا إِن يُرِيدَا إِصْلاَحًا يُوَفِّقِ
اللّهُ بَيْنَهُمَا إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**35.** ***"And if you fear a breach between the couple, then appoint a
judge from his people and a judge from her people. If they both desire
agreement, Allah will effect harmony between them; Verily Allah is
Knowing, All-Aware."***

### The Family Peace Court

In this holy verse, the Qur'an refers to the discord which happens
between a couple, it says:

***"And if you fear a breach between the couple, then appoint a judge
from his people and a judge from her people. ..."***

Then, it continues saying:

***"... If they both desire agreement, Allah will affect harmony between
them....."***

And, in order to warn the concerning arbitrators to employ good
intention in the course, it concludes the verse with this sense that
Allah is aware of their intentions. It says:

***"...Verily Allah is Knowing, All-Aware."***

The 'family peace court', which has been referred to in this verse, is
one of the distinguished works of Islam. This kind of peace-court,
compared with ordinary courts, has some privileges that cannot be found
in other courts. A few of these privileges are as follows:

1. In family environment the treatments cannot be dry and performed
legally according to the spiritless court regulations. Hence, the Qur'an
instructs that the arbitrators of this court must be of those who have
kinship with the couple and are able to move their sentiments along the
path of reconciliation.

2. In ordinary courts the two sides of the conflict have to divulge the
secrets they have in order to defend themselves. Here, it is certain
that if either of woman or man manifests their conjugal secrets for some
strangers, they may hurt the feelings of each other so violently that if
they be returned home forcefully, there will not exist any sign of their
previous sincerity and lay between them.

3. In ordinary courts, judges are often inattentive in the course of
dispute, while in the family peace-court, the arbitrators usually do
their best to settle peace and sincerity between those two spouses and
try to return them home.

4. Moreover, such a family court has none of the problems and heavy
expenditures for the couple that the ordinary courts have.


