Section 8: Leaning to injustice and evil to be avoided
======================================================

Jews preferring the idolaters to Muslims -Abraham's seed
blessed -Recompense for disbelief and faith -Obedience to Allah, the
Apostle Muhammad and those vested with the authority.

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 51
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ نَصِيبًا مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْجِبْتِ وَالطَّاغُوتِ وَيَقُولُونَ لِلَّذِينَ
كَفَرُواْ هَؤُلاء أَهْدَى مِنَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**51.** ***"Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the
Book? They believe in Jibt (idol) and Taghut (false deities) and they
say about the infidels: 'These are better guided on the way than those
who have believed (in Islam)'."***

After that the fight of 'Uhud ended, a group of the Jews went to Mecca
in order that they ally with the pagans there against the Muslims.
Having the aim to please and assure the pagans the Jews prostrated
before the pagans' idols. They said that their idolatry was better than
the faith of Muslims in Islam and Muhammad (S).

***"Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the Book? They
believe in Jibt (idol) and Taghut (false deities) and they say about the
infidels: 'These are better guided on the way than those who have
believed (in Islam)'."***

The Arabic term 'Jibt', which is applied for the idol of magician, has
occurred only once in the Qur'an; while the term Taghut, which is
derived from the sense of 'disobedience', has occurred eight times
therein.

Perhaps, the objective meaning of these two terms mentioned in the verse
is the very two idols before which the Jews prostrated. Or, may be, the
purpose of 'Jibt' is the idol, but the purpose of 'Taghut' is the idol
worshippers and the advocators of idolatry.

### Explanations

1. The enemies of Islam, in order to work against Muslims, sometimes
ignore their own conviction. (The Jews prostrated before idols for the
pleasure of the pagans against the Muslims.)

2. The mood of obstinacy and enmity changes the way of judgement, and
causes the truth to be concealed.

***"... they say about the infidels: 'These are better guided…"***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 52
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ لَعَنَهُمُ اللّهُ وَمَن يَلْعَنِ اللّهُ فَلَن
تَجِدَ لَهُ نَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**52.** ***"These are they whom Allah has cursed, and whomever Allah
curses, then you will not find any helper for him."***

The inauspicious alliances of the opponents of the truth will never gain
their expected results, (As it was seen in the alliance of the parties
of infidels, Idolaters, and the Jews due to the plotting against Islam
when the Jews went into Mecca and prostrated before idols, and when they
judged unjustly and allied against Islam. They gained, then, nothing
through opposing the Will of *Allah.*)

***"…then you will not find any helper for him."***

However, whoever is cursed by *Allah,* will always be wretched.

***"These are they whom Allah has cursed, and whomever Allah curses,
then you will not find any helper for him."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 53
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ لَهُمْ نَصِيبٌ مِّنَ الْمُلْكِ فَإِذًا لاَّ يُؤْتُونَ النَّاسَ
نَقِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**53.** ***"Or have they a share in the kingdom? Then in that case, they
do not give even a speck to anybody!"***

By the commentaries of the previous couple of verses, it was said that
the Jews, to attract the attention of the idol-worshippers of Mecca,
testified that the idolatry of the Quraysh was better than the theistic
practice of the Muslims.

Even they themselves fell prostration before the idols. In this verse,
as well as the next one, this fact has been pointed out that their
judgement was worthless and invalid. Each of these two verses contains a
considerable proof.

In this verse the Qur'an inquires whether the Jews had any share in the
government that they let themselves judge like that. And, yet, if they
had such an authority, they would not give people any right when they
might keep everything for themselves exclusively.

**"*****Or have they a share in the kingdom? Then in that case, they do
not*** **give** ***even a speck to anybody!*** **"**

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 54
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
فَقَدْ آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَآتَيْنَاهُم مُّلْكًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**54.** ***"Or, do they (the Jews) envy people for that which Allah has
given them of His grace? But indeed We have given to Abraham's children
the Book, and the Wisdom and We have given them a grand kingdom."***

In the former verses, the words were about the niggardliness of the
Jews, and here, in this verse, their envy is dealt with. Envy, of
course, is worse than niggardliness, because a miser simply does not
remit his own property, but an envious person is inconvenient of the
favour of another person, either.

The word /an-nas/ 'people', mentioned in this verse, as Tafsir-us-Safi
indicates, refers to the Prophet (S) and his progeny. [^1]

Thus, the verse says that the Jews envied them for that which *Allah*
had given them out of His Grace. Then, through such judgements, they
wished to quench the fire of their envy.

***"Or, do they (the Jews) envy people for that which Allah has given
them of His grace. ..."***

Then the Qur'an says: why do you wonder and envy that the Prophet of
Islam (S), chosen from the family of Bani-Hashim, has been given such a
rank? It is in the case that *Allah* has also given the progeny of
Abraham (from whose family are the Jews) the Book and the wisdom and He
has bestowed the prophets of the Children of Israel the authority of a
great kingdom.

***"... But indeed We have given to Abraham's children the Book and the
Wisdom and We have given them a grand kingdom."***

But, unfortunately you, the degenerate people, lost those worthy
spiritual and physical capitals because of your own wickedness and
hard-heartedness.

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) denotes that he (as) was asked
about this verse and he (as) answered:

***"We are those whom have been jealous of by, the enemies ..."***

The physical and spiritual damages of envy, irrespective of personal and
social ones, are extraordinarily abundant. They have been mentioned in
the traditions of the leaders of Islam. Including them, it is narrated
from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*"Envy and malevolence are from the darkness of the heart and blind
heartedness, which in turn originate from the denial of the bounties of
Allah upon human beings. These two, (blind-heartedness and denial of the
bounties of Allah) are two wings of disbelief which causes the
annihilation of man."*

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 55
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ آمَنَ بِهِ وَمِنْهُم مَّن صَدَّ عَنْهُ وَكَفَى
بِجَهَنَّمَ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**55.** ***"So, of them were (some) who believed in it and of them were
(some) who barred from it, and sufficient (to punish them) is the
Blazing Fire (of Hell)."***

This verse is both a soothing for the Prophet (S) and a solace for the
Muslims, so that they would not be tired and despaired of the
faithlessness of people. In the length of history, the circumstances
have always been such, and all the prophets had been faced with the
unfaithfulness of some groups of people.

***"So, of them were (some) who believed in it, and of them were (some)
who barred from it, and sufficient (to punish them) is the Blazing Fire
(of Hell)."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 56
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا سَوْفَ نُصْلِيهِمْ نَارًا
كُلَّمَا نَضِجَتْ جُلُودُهُمْ بَدَّلْنَاهُمْ جُلُودًا غَيْرَهَا
لِيَذُوقُواْ الْعَذَابَ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَزِيزًا حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**56.** ***"Verily those who disbelieved in Our Signs, soon We will cast
them into Fire so oft as their skins shall be burnt We will change them
for other skins, that they may taste the torment. Surely Allah is the
Mighty, the Wise.".***

Since the infidels were constantly obstinate, they should be retributed
constantly with their new skins.

Once, Ibn-i-Abil-'Uja', who was one of the opponents of the religion,
asked Imam Sadiq (as) what the fault of the new skin was.

Imam (as) said: "The new skin is from the remaining of the burnt of the
very first skin. It is like a sun-dried brick which breaks into pieces
and will be made of it mud and a new sun-dried brick again."

### Explanations

1. The punishment of the disbelievers is permanent.

***"...We will change them for other skins ..."***

2. The punishment, because of its continuation, will never become
ordinary for the disbelievers.

3. The new skin is for tasting a severe chastisement; (since, in
burning, the utmost pain is felt in the skin, and when the fire reaches
the bone its pain seems less than before).

4. The Resurrection will be bodily, because the punishment will be upon
the skin and the change that it will have. .

***"Verily those who disbelieved in Our Signs, soon We will cast them
into Fire so oft as their skins shall be burnt We will change them for
other skins, that they may taste the torment. Surely Allah is the
Mighty, the Wise."***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 57
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ سَنُدْخِلُهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ
تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا لَّهُمْ
فِيهَا أَزْوَاجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَنُدْخِلُهُمْ ظِـلاًّ ظَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57.** ***"And (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, We will
admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow -therein shall they
abide forever; for them are pure companions - and We will make them
enter a dense shade."***

In this verse, the holy Qur'an promises those believers who have a good
Faith and do good deeds that surely they will live soon in gardens of
Heaven, where under its trees some rivers flow. Their life therein will
be forever.

Besides that, in Paradise, they will have the pure spouses who will be
the source of calmness and tranquillity for both their bodies and souls.
They will be pure from the point of menstruation blood, all meanness,
and pollutions. They will live under some eternal shades that, unlike to
the inconstant shades of this world, are permanent, wherein neither hot
wind nor bitter cold enters.

***"And (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, We will admit them
into gardens beneath which rivers flow -therein they will abide forever;
for them are pure companions - and We will make them enter a dense
shade.***

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 58
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَن تُؤدُّواْ الأَمَانَاتِ إِلَى أَهْلِهَا
وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُم بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَن تَحْكُمُواْ بِالْعَدْلِ إِنَّ
اللّهَ نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُم بِهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ سَمِيعًا بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58.** ***"Verily Allah commands you that you restore deposits to their
owners, and when you judge between people, you judge with justice;
verily good is the admonition Allah gives you; verily Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Seeing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

This verse was revealed at the time when the holy Prophet (S), being
completely victorious, arrived in Mecca. The Messenger of *Allah* (S)
called for 'Uthman-ibn- Talhah, the key holder of the Ka'bah, and took
the key from him in order to clear out the Ka'bah from the existence of
the idols.

After the fulfilment of that aim, 'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle, asked the
Prophet (S) to give the key of the Ka'bah to him.

The rank of key-holding of the Sacred-House, in fact, was a
distinguished and honourable rank among Arabs. But, contrary to that,
after clearing out the Ka'bah from the filth of the existence of the
idols, the Prophet (S) closed the door of the House and delivered the
key to 'Uthman-ibn- Talhah while he (S) was reciting the verse under
discussion.

### Deposit and Justice in Islam

This holy verse, from which a general and common ordinance is
understood, explicitly says:

***"Verily Allah commands you that you restore deposits to their owners
..."***

In the second part of the verse, it points to another important subject.
It is the proposition of observing justice in government. The verse,
conveying the command of Allah, says:

***"... and when you judge between people, you judge with justice;
..."***

Then, to lay emphasis on these two commands, it says:

**"*****...verily good is the admonition Allah gives you;*** **..."**

Again, the verse emphasizes and says that Allah is watching you in any
state you are, and He both hears your words and sees what you do. It
says:

***"... verily Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing."***

It is evident that the term' deposit' has a vast meaning. It includes
any physical and spiritual capitals. Therefore, according to the clear
meaning of this verse, every Muslim is enjoined not to be treacherous in
any deposit and unto any person, whether the owner of the deposit is
Muslim or non-Muslim. This ordinance is, in fact, one of the principles
of the declaration of the rights of human kind in Islam '.

Even the scientists of a society are the depositaries. They are charged
with a duty not to conceal the facts. Our children are also the deposits
of *Allah* with us.

We must not neglect training and educating them. Beyond than that, our
existence and whatever power *Allah (s.w.t.)* has given us are the
deposits of *Allah,* and we should try to protect them carefully.

A tradition narrated from Imam -Sadiq (as) about the importance of
**'*****deposit*****'** indicates that once he (as) told one of his
companions***:***

*"If the murderer of Hadrat Ali (as) trusted me a deposit, or wanted me
to advise him, or consulted me, and I accepted that from him, certainly
I would be honest in the deposition."* [^2]

In many Islamic traditions, the purpose of the term 'deposit', mentioned
in the current verse, has been introduced the leadership of the society,
the men of which are Ahlul-Bayt (as). This is the clear extension of
practising this verse. [^3]

Surah An-Nisa', Verse 59
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ فَإِن تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ
فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِن كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ
وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**59.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and
those charged with authority among you. Then, if you quarrel about
anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger, if you believe in Allah
and the Last Day. This is better and very good in the end."***

This verse, together with a few verses next to it, discuss about one of
the most important matters of Islam, that is, the subject of leadership.
They determine the true source of imitation of Muslims for the different
social and religious affairs that they may have.

At first, it commands those who have faith, saying:

***"O' you who have Faith! Obey Allah…"***

It is obvious that, for a believing person, all obedience must be led to
the obedience of *Allah.* Then, any form of leadership must originate
from His pure Essence and be adopted to His command, because it is He
Who is the Ruler and the genetic Owner of the world of existence, and
every sovereignty and ownership should be under His command.

For the second stage it, says:

***"... and obey the Messenger ..,"***

Obey the Prophet who is immaculate and never speaks out of desire [^4],
an Apostle appointed from the side of *Allah* amongst people, whose word
is the word of *Allah,* and whose rank and position have been bestowed
to him by *Allah.*

And, for the third stage, it says:

***"... and those charged with authority among you..."***

Obey such ones who are from the inside of the Islamic society and
protect both the divine religion and worldly affairs of people.

After that, it says:

***"... Then, if you quarrel about anything, refer it to Allah and the
Messenger, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. This is better and
very good in the end."***

### Who are 'Those Charged with Authority'?

All the Shi'ite commentators have the same attitude on this matter that
the purpose of the phrase /'ulil-'amr/ mentioned in this verse, is the
immaculate Imams to whom the physical and spiritual leadership of the
Islamic society, consisting of all affairs of life, have been given from
the side of *Allah* and His Apostle (S), and it does not conclude any
other than them.

This meaning is said according to the contents of 33 authentic
traditions cited in At-Tafsir-ul Burhan, vol. l, pp. 381-386 (second
edition).

Of course, under some conditions, the obedience of those who are
appointed to a rank and charge a position in the society is necessary.
This obedience is not for that they themselves are 'those charged with
authority', but for that they are agents of 'those charged with
authority'.

### Explanations

1. Absolute obedience from the Messenger of *Allah* and 'those charged
with authority' is a token for inerrancy of those magnanimous ones.
Thus, any denotation expansion which is stated for 'those charged with
authority' is not valid, if the one is not infallible.

2. The repetition of the word /'ati'u/ 'obey' is the secret of the kind
of orders. The holy Prophet (S) sometimes stated the ordinances of
*Allah,* and sometimes gave the governmental commands, since he had both
offices of 'prophecy' and government. [^5]

3. The name of 'those charged with authority' is mentioned next to the
names of *Allah* and the Apostle, accompanied with an absolute
obedience. This is a sign to show that the one in charge of Islamic
government should be qualified with a high saintliness.

Based on many traditions, as was mentioned in the commentary of the
verse, the purpose of the phrase 'those charged with authority' is
Ahlul-Bayt (as).

4. People ought to accept the Islamic system and support its godly
leaders by their words and deeds.

***"... Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those charged with
authority among you ..."***

5. In obedience, hierarchical order should be observed, that is *Allah,*
the Messenger, and those charged with authority.

6. One of the ways of: acknowledgement is comparison with opposites and
contraries.

7. When speaking of mischief-makers, the extravagant, the misguided, the
ignorant, the tyrants and so on, the Qur'an's command is: ***"Do not
yield..."*** and ***"Do not follow ..."*** The conclusion is that the
aspects of the word /'ati'u/ 'obey' must be those whose obedience have
not been prohibited of.

8. To obey false deities is forbidden.

9. If all groups assume the Qur'an and the practice of the Prophet (S)
as reliable testimonies, discords will be removed and unity will govern.

10. A complete religion must have a solution for discords. The Qur'an
says:

***"...refer it to Allah and the Messenger ..."***

11. Those who are opponent to the orders of *Allah,* the Messenger, and
'those charged with authority' should doubt in their own religion, if
they want to believe in truth.

***"…if you believe…"***

12. Farsightedness and being careful of the interests of long future,
time is the standard of value.

***"... This is better and very good in the end."***

[^1]: At-Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1, p. 425

[^2]: Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1, p. 427

[^3]: Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 380 (second edition) narrates 15
traditions upon this meaning.

[^4]: Surah An-Najm, No. 53, Verse 3.

[^5]: Allah addresses the Prophet (S) in the Qur'an both for the rank of
statement (Surah An-Nahl, No.16, Verse 44) and 'for the rank of
government (Surah An-Nisa’', No.4, Verse 105).


