Q90: One Has Never Paid Khums
=============================

Ahmad has not paid Khums since becoming Shi 'a because he thought that
he was not subject to khums as he still owed his father some $4000
dollars.

A: It is a misunderstanding. Ahmad should at once fix a financial year
for himself. In this case, it is advisable that he should fix at the end
of his year on the date he became Shi'a. Then whatever was left on that
day from his domestic expenses in cash or kind, he should give its
khumus.

But now that day has passed, therefore he should end his year as soon
as he gets this letter's directives, and see what is left in grocery and
cash - even 5 ounce salt or one pound rice; and take its khumus out.

As for the debt, it does not exempt one from khumus. Let us say, Ahmad
owes his father 4000 dollars and the father has put no pressure on him
to pay it at once. Before the end of year, Ahmad estimates that his
savings would be about 1000 dollars, and before the end of the year he
pays an amount of 1000 dollars as part payment of the loan to the
father. Then he does not have to pay any khumus at the end of the year
because he has got no saving.

But if he delays the payment and the end of the year arrives, then he
will have to pay 200 dollars as khumus before he can use the remaining
800 dollars for any thing.

Q. 91: Accounting of Khumus on a certain saving:

Since May 1993 Ahmad started saving for his Hajj expenses. He would
have saved enough for his Hajj expenses by February 1995. Need Ahmad pay
khumus on his Hajj expenses which amount to $ 6950 dollars before he
leaves for Mecca in May, 1995?

A: Keeping in view the above explanations if Ahmad decides, on receipt
of this letter, that his financial year will begin on 1st May every
year, for example, and end on 30th April, then he will have to pay
khumus on the money saved between May, 93 and April 94; but the saving
between May 94 and April 95 will not be liable to khumus if he purchases
his ticket and other necessary things before 30th April, 95, because it
will be counted as the expenses of the year.

All this is a general explanation. You read carefully the book, khumus,
of my son and then you may decide for yourself. If you feel any
difficulty you may write again

**Q. 92: IS MUT'AH LEGALIZED PROSTITUTION?**

In 'the Sunday Times' of May 12th 91, an article had appeared that a
few Iranian women are against the Mut 'ah Marriage. They say that this
is legalized prostitution. Please clear this matter for me. How can we
answer these allegations?

A: Is not the "marriage" (in all its forms) just a legalized
fornication? Don't they understand that all conditions which are
necessary for a Permanent Marriage are necessary in Mut'ah (Temporary)
Marriage too. Even the term, Permanent Marriage is misleading, because
in Islam no marriage is "permanent". The husband can terminate the
marriage by the simple device of Talaq. So where is the "permanency"?

A Sheri'ah which recognizes Talaq, cannot ridicule Mut'ah, because
"Marriage +Divorce = Mut'ah."

In fact, some times mut'ah is more merciful to the woman concerned than
the so-called "permanent marriage". Suppose a man is on a journey and
needs a wife. If he is a Sunni he will perform "permanent marriage"; and
the wife will be under the impression that she has married for lifetime.
But the husband knows it is only a temporary arrangement. So when time
comes for him to return to his place, he divorces her and leaves her in
the lurch.

There is another question worthy of attention: If the husband had the
intention from the beginning to give her divorce, was the permanent
nikah valid? But if he is a Shi'a, he will tell her from the beginning
that he wants to marry her only for a limited period - let us say 6
months. Thus if the woman's status and conditions agree with the
proposal, she will accept it; otherwise she is at liberty to reject the
proposal.

Everyone will agree that the second alternative is more honest, more
straight-forward and more in keeping with the woman's dignity.

**Q. 93: GHUSL JANABAT AND CONDOM:**

If a man uses a condom during sexual intercourse with his wife, is she
obligated to take Ghusal Janabat? A: Yes, undoubtedly.

**Q. 94: IS IT TRUE THAT A CERTAIN SUNNI SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE
PERMITS HOMOSEXUAL ACT WITH YOUNG MEN/BOYS?**

A: Imam Abu Hanifah has said: whoever commits sodomy with his slave man
or his employee and penetrates, there is no had (punishment) for him.
(See Hashiyah of Sharh al-Wiqayah by Allamah Chalapi, kitabul Hudud,, p.
212; also see Imam al-Ghizali's al- Mankhul, Damascus, p. 502)

The same is the fatwa of Imam Malik. And Imam Shafi'i has said that
there is no clear order in the Qur'an about it, but according to Qiyas
(analogy) it is halal (lawful).

**Q. 95: POLYGAMY AND POLYANDRY:**

If a women cannot satisfy the desires of a man he can marry once again
or enter a contract of Mut 'ah. But if a man cannot satisfy his wife
what can she do? Is it that men have more stronger desire than women?

A: Man has been allowed to marry four wives at one time. There is no
question whether the present wife can satisfy his sexual urge or not.
Therefore, your question is based on a wrong presumption.

**Q. 96: DIVORCE UNDER PRESSURE**

Some people took me by force to an 'Alim, and pressurised me to divorce
my wife; although I did not wish to divorce her, but they compelled me
and I signed the divorce paper. I kept the paper for two weeks without
informing my wife and then tore it up. The question is: Is that divorce
valid? Is my wife divorced from me?

A: As a general rule, divorce under duress or compulsion is invalid. In
the case quoted above, even if it were a valid divorce, the husband's
behaviour in living with the wife and tearing the divorce paper
constitutes revocation of divorce and the wife continues legally married
to the husband.

**Q. 97: IS ABORTION ALLOWED AFTER RAPE?**

If I live in a town, city or village and some unbelievers raped my wife
or daughter and impregnated her is it haram to get abortion for her. How
would I go about this issue?

A: The punishment in Islam for raping a woman (i.e. having sexual
intercourse with a woman other than his wife, without her genuine
consent) is death; it makes no difference whether the culprit was a
Muslim or Kafir. However, the sentence can be given only by a duly
appointed Qadi of Shari'ah, who will look at all the evidence and then
decide the case.

As for woman, it will be a sin and crime on her part to abort the
foetus. The child will be affiliated to the mother and will be
legitimate on her side. The mother and child will enjoy their mutual
rights including the right of inheritance from each other.

The fact is that in Islam a child born out of wedlock is considered
illegitimate and is not affiliated to either of the physical parents.
But there are cases where it is considered a legitimate child as, for
example, when at the time of its conception both parties were under the
impression of being lawfully married, and then it transpired that it was
not so; such a child is affiliated to both parents.

Also in some cases it is considered legitimate on the part of one
physical parent, to whom it is affiliated, and illegitimate on the part
of the other with whom it has no relationship, as for example in the
case mentioned in the question.

**Q. 98: ON ATHEIST**

According to the Imams (A.S) and the Prophet (S.A. W) what is my
responsibility concerning (zanadiqah) atheists? Do I exile him from
Muslim land or send him back to Allah by sword?

A: No, sir. You are not to take the law into your hands. As for this
particular matter, you should remember that there were a lot of atheists
under the Muslims' rule all over Asia, Africa and Europe, but they were
not banished or killed.

**Q. 99: JIHAD IN SUPPORT OF OPPRESSED MUSLIMS:**

I 'm aware that Jihad is haram in the absence of the Imam (A.S), except
in defence of life and property. What if Mu 'minun live in a country and
the leaders have killed Mu 'minun in large number in another country?
What should I do? Just sit and watch? Or should I prepare to fight
"Fi-Sabilillah " to protect and help my brothers in that different
country and strike a severe blow to unbelievers?

A: You should try to help your Muslim brothers morally, financially,
and (if possible.) in person, in their countries where they are being
attacked. But not in other places.


