Q90: One Has Never Paid Khums
=============================

Q.100: Freedom Of Choice VS.Death Penalty For Apostate:

How does one reconcile the freedom to choose a religion (2:256) and the
death decree for a person who chooses to abandon Islam?

A: Suppose you are a foreigner living in the U.K. with a right to apply
for its citizenship. Nobody can compel you to use that right and acquire
the said citizenship; you have "the freedom to choose it". But once you
apply for and get the citizenship you are bound to obey its rules and
keep its interests at your heart.

Then if after some time you are caught plotting against the state and
found guilty of treason and rebellion, what penalty awaits you? It is
death. How will you reconcile the initial "freedom of choice" with that
ultimate "denial of right of life"?

For your information, such plottings had started in the life of the
Prophet (S.A.W) himself. Allah says in the Qur'an:

"And a party of the people of the Book say: show belief in that which
has been revealed to those who believe, in the early part of the day,
and declare disbelief at the end of it; perhaps they (i.e. Muslims) go
back on their religion." (3:72).

So you see what bad effect apostasy of even one man can have on the
whole Muslim Ummah. It demoralizes the Muslims; and disturbs their
cohesion and discipline. It is unmitigated "fasadfil ard", and needs
tough handling to stem the rot in the beginning.

**Q. 101: IS BETTING ON HORSES ETC. ALLOWED?**

Imam Khomeini (R.A) gave a Fatwa on betting, and said that it was
Halal, particularity on horses and camel racing. Is it Halal to receive
money on winning?

A: You have been given wrong information. The fact is that in Islam
competitions of horse- riding and archery are allowed. Also it is
permitted to make a condition that the loser will give so much prize to
the winner; and /or that a third party will pay a reward/prize to the
winner. But betting on who will win or lose in strictly forbidden.

And detailed rules for regulating this competition or race are found in
all books of Fiqh from the early days of Islam. It is not only a fatwa
on Ayatullah Khumayni (R. A).

Now what it has got to do with present days' horse racing in the
western countries which is pure gambling, and is diametrically opposed
to that Islamic way of racing and archery which develops martial arts,
and trains youths for fighting in the way of Allah?

Based on the same principle, in modem times, archery rules may probably
be applied to competition of marksmanship with fire-arms; and the rules
of horse-riding may cover competition in manoeuvring the tanks,
warplanes etc. But you will have to ask your mujtahid for a definite
ruling on these modern systems of warfare.

**Q. 102: PLAYING CHESS?**

Is playing chess haram? If Yes, then why?

A: It is Haram because it is declared to be Haram (by name) in a lot of
ahadith. Q. 103: Octopus and Shrimp:

Is a Muslim permitted to eat meat of an octopus or shrimp or oyster. A:
Octopus and oyster are Haram. Shrimp is Halal.

**Q. 104.FISH DIED IN NET**

There is a fish in Pemba waters which remains moving throughout its
life-span. If it stops for any reason, it dies instantly. The fishermen
throw or fix their nets in the water at night and take out the haul near
dawn. Among other fishes they find also the above mentioned fish which
is already dead. (It dies as soon as it is stopped by the net.) Is that
fish lawful to eat?

A: If the said fish has scales, then, according to the late Ayatullah
as-Sayud Al-Khoui (R. A), it is Halal (lawful to eat). See his
TawzihulMasa77, 1409 A.H., Qum, Mas 'alah no.

2624, pp. 472-73

**Q. 105: FISH WITHOUT SCALE:**

I have been asked to explain why it is haram to consume all kind of
fish having no scales including shellfish in our madhhab while Allah
Ta'ala says in the Qur'an: "Say: I do not find in that which has been
revealed to me anything forbidden for an eater to eat of EXCEPT that it
be what has died of itself or blood poured forth, or flesh of swine -for
that surely is unclean - or that which is a transgression, other than
(the name of)Allah having been invoked on it;.................."
(Qur'an,6:146)

Also He Says: "Lawful to you is the game of the sea and its food,a
provision for you and the travellers" (Qur'an, 5:97)

Add to it Qur'an, 5:87 and 6:120 which tell us not to forbid the good
things made lawful by Allah. Please assist me by quoting Ahadith from
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) and the infallible Imams (A.S). Is there a
scientific explanation as well?

A: There are many ahadith to this effect, some of which are quoted
here:-

1. Muhammad ibn Muslim narrates from Abu Ja'far (A.S), inter alia, in a
hadith: "I said to him: May Allah have mercy on you, we are offered fish
which have no scale". He said: 'Eat the fish which has scale, and do not
eat that which has no scale.'"

This hadith from the 5th Imam (A.S) is narrated by al-Kulayni in
al-kafi (al-Furu', Vol.2, p. 144) and by ash-Shaykh at-Tusi in Tahadhibu
'l-ahkam, vol.2, p. 339; and is copied here from Wasa 'ilu 'sh-Shi 'ah
vol. 16, p. 329.

2. Hammad ibn 'Uthman says: "I said to Abu' Abdillah (A.S): 'May I be
your ransom! Which of the fish is (allowed) to be eaten? He said: 'That
which has scale.

This hadith from the 6th Imam (A.S) is given in all the books mentioned
above, plus as-Saduq's Man la yahduruhu 'l-faqih, vol. 1, p. 10

3. 'Abdullah ibn Sinan narrates from Abu 'Abdillah (A.S) that he said:
"'Ali (A.S) used to ride the mule of the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W) in
Kufa, then pass through the fish- market and tell them 'do not eat, nor
sell the fish that has no scale.'" (The same references as in No. I plus
al-Mahasiny.477)

For your information, during the Veitnam War, the Pentagon had sent a
clear order to its troops not to eat the fish without scale, as it was
very injurious to health. I had copied that order in our magazine, the
Light, (Dar-es-Salaam), You will be interested to read the following
order given by Allah to the Prophet Musa (A.S) "These shall ye eat of
all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scale in the seas,
and in the rivers, them shall ye eat.

And all mat have no fins and scales in the seas and in the rivers, of
all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the
waters, they shall be abomination unto you. They shall be even an
abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have
their carcasses in abomination. Whatever hath no fin nor scales in the
waters, that shall be an abomination unto you."

(Leviticus, ch. 11, vs. 9-12)

"These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have fins
and scales shall ye eat: and whatsoever hath no fins and scales ye may
not eat; it is unclean unto you." (Deuteronomy, ch. 14, vs. 9-10)

So you see it was haram even in the Law of Nabii Musa (A.S), and
consequently in the religion of Nabii 'Isa (A.S) although St. Paul
corrupted the Christianity and abrogated the Law.

By the way, you have emphasized the word EXCEPT in the verse 6:146,
which says: "Say: I do not find in that which has been revealed to me
anything forbidden for an eater to eat of except that it be what has
died of itself, or blood poured forth, or flesh of swive -for that
surely is unclean - or that which is a transgression, other than (the
name of) Allah having been invoked on it."

O.K. Then what will you say about the lard (fat of pig) which the
Christians generally use in place of cooking oil? Or about the flesh of
dog?

**Q. 106: BURNING A MUSLIM DEAD BODY?**

Is it Halal to burn a dead Muslim if he wrote it in his/her will that
he/she wanted to be burned?

A: Certainly NOT. A will which goes against the rules of shari'ah is
not valid in Islam.

**Q. 107: QUR'ANIC INJUNCTION AND PUNISHMENT BY BURNING:**

I remember reading somewhere that when the Prophet (S.A. W) saw the
mutilated body of his uncle, Hamza, he made a vow to burn 30 or
something Quraishites in retaliation. Then this verse came: And if you
punish them, punish as you were afflicted; but if you be patient,
certainly it will be best for the patient ones (16:126); telling him not
to burn, only Allah is to torture His servants with fire.

But I read in Tawzihul Masa 'il of al-Marhoom as-Sayyid al-Khou'i
(R.A), article 2797, that if an adult and sane person commits sodomy
with another adult and sane person, both of them would be killed. And
the religious head can kill them with sword or 'burn him alive'. Can you
please explain why this contradiction.

A: First, about the verse: The Sunni tafseer ad-Durru 'l-manthur says:
Ibnu '1-Mundhir, at- Tabarani, Ibn Marduwayh and al-Bayhaqi (in his
ad-Dala 'it) have narrated from Ibn 'Abbas that he said: "When Hamzah
was killed and mutilated, the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W) said: 'If I
vanquished Quraish, I would mutilate seventy people from among them.'
Then Allah sent down this verse, and the Messenger of Allah (S.A.W)
said: 'We would rather be patient, and also forbade mutilation.

A nearly similar hadith is narrated in the Shi'a Tafseer of al-
'Ayyashi, from Imam Ja'far as- Sadiq (A.S).

I cannot understand where did you hear the story of "vowing to burn"
the Quraish. Anyhow, this verse has nothing to do with the punishments
imposed by the Shari'ah of Islam. Forget about burning; is not
amputation of the four fingers of a thief mutilation? Will you say that
a hakimu'sh-shar' should not cut the thief's hand (i.e. 4 fingers),
because this verse was revealed against mutilation? (In fact, it does
not say any thing against mutilation. It only says that if the Prophet
(S.A.W) desired retaliation, he could mutilate only one Kafir, not
more.)

Sodomy is one of the most contemptible crimes in the eyes of Islam. Its
sin is much graver than fornication. There are in all, five punishments
for the guilty of this crime (in the case mentioned by you): killing by
swords, burning alive, throwing down from a high mountain or building
with hands and feet tied, knocking down a wall over him, and stoning him
to death. (If he is killed by sword, the Qadi has an option also to burn
down his corpse.) From these most harsh punishments you may realize the
grave nature of this crime.

**Q. 108: TAFSIR OF A QUR'ANIC VERSE:**

Sura 33:34: Can you give me the correct interpolation of "Wadhkurna ma
yutla fi buyutikuinna min ayatillahi wa hikmah"? Is it telling
Ahlu'l-Bayt (A.S) to teach, or is it according to the Sunni authorities
giving the Prophet's wives order to teach the Message? It speaks plainly
but I need the correct interpretation.

A: It means neither. "Wadhkurna" means "and remember". No dictionary,
no mufassir (exegete), Sunni or Shi'a, has ever said that it means to
teach. The verse of purity before it is a parenthesis, and this next
sentence is addressed to the wives of the Prophet (S.A.W), telling them
to "keep in mind what is recited in your houses of the communications of
Allah and the wisdom."

It puts emphasis to the orders which have preceded it to obey Allah, do
good deeds, be pious, stay in their houses, keep up prayer, give Zakah
and obey Allah and the Messenger. It tells them to be good Muslims and
that's all.

**Q. 109: TAFSIR OF VERSE 24:3.**

Allah Ta'ala says in the Qur'an: "The fornicator does not marry any but
a fornicatress or idolatress; and (as for) the fornicatress, none
marries her but a fornicator or an idolater; and it is forbidden to the
believers." (Qur'an, 24:3). Does it mean that Allah orders fornicating
women to marry fornicating men or idolaters? Also, is marriage of a
chaste man with a fornicatress unlawful and void?

A: It is not an order but a statement showing their condition. This
reality has also been explained more clearly in the verse 26 of the same
chapter where Allah says:- "Unclean things are for unclean ones and
unclean ones are for unclean things; and the good things are for good
ones and the good ones are for good things. "

The verse in question was revealed concerning a particular situation in
Medina. As-Suyuti in his ad-Durru 'l-manthur, quotes numerous traditions
to the effect that when the Muhajirun came to Mecca, they found the life
there very hard, what with the dearness of things and their own
unemployment.

There were many women among the Jews and also some among the Ansar who
were professional prostitutes and they used to raise a particular type
of flag on their houses to advertise their "trade". They were minting
money.

Some Muhajirun thought of a plan to marry those prostitutes in order
that they could share in those women's wealth, "and when our condition
improves, we shall leave them." They accordingly asked permission of the
Holy Prophet (S. A. W), and Allah revealed this verse in their reply.

It is clear that the verse is restricted to that situation and it has
forbidden the Muhajirun to carry out their plan.

On the other hand, the words, "it is forbidden to the believers', may
be taken to mean, "it is undesirable for the believers." In that case
the verse will have a general and unabrogated meaning and will be
applicable even now.


