Q1. How To Deal With Atheist and / Or Agnostic?
===============================================

What is the best way to convince an atheist who claims that there is no
God, or an agnostic who says that man's only recognition can be of the
phenomenal world, and that man does not and cannot know anything about a
spiritual existence, either of God or man or of any after-death state?
How can we convince him about Islam?

How would you reply to someone who after hearing the arguments says,
"Nobody really knows if this is all true! Nobody knows if there is a
life hereafter"?

A: The best and safest course for such people will be to believe in a
Creator and in the Day of Judgement. The following tradition of Imam
Ja'far Sadiq (A.S) shows the reason Why?

Ibn Abil 'Awja' and Ibn Muqaffa' were sitting in Masjidul Haram at the
time of pilgrimage, with some of their fellow atheists. (They pretended
to be Muslims just to save their skins; but were always openly arguing
against the belief in God).

Ibn Muqaffa' said, pointing towards the space around the Ka'bah: "Do
you see this mob? None among them could be called a human being except
that old man (i.e., Imam Ja'far Sadiq A.S). As for the others, they are
nothing but catties and animals."

Ibn Abil 'Awja' asked him as to how could he say such a thing.

Ibn Muqaffa' said: Because I have found with him (such virtues and
knowledge) which I did not find anywhere else. Ibn Abil 'Awja' said: Now
it is necessary to test whether what you say is true.

Ibn Muqaffa' tried to dissuade him. But Ibn Abil 'Awja' went to the
Imam (A.S). He came back after sometime and said: "O Ibn Muqaffa'! He is
not just a human being. If there were in this world a spiritual thing
which became a body if he wished so, and turned into a spirit if he
wanted to, then it is he."

Ibn Muqaffa' said: How come?

Ibn Abil 'Awja' said: I sat near him. When all others went away, he
started talking (without my asking anything) and said:

"If the fact is as they believe and He is as they (i.e. the pilgrims)
say, then they would be saved and you would be in trouble. And if the
fact is as you (atheists) say, and not as they say, then you and they
both would be equal (and no harm would come to either group.)" I said:
"May Allah have mercy on you, what is that which they say and what is
that which we say? My belief and their belief is but one."

Imam (A.S) said: "How could your belief and their belief be the same?
They say that there is to be resurrection, and reward and punishment;
and they believe that there is a God." (And you do not believe it.)

Imam (A.S) meant that if there was in reality no God and no Day of
Judgement, as Ibn Abil 'Awja' said then the believers and non-believers
both will be in the same condition after death. Both will perish for
ever and nobody will suffer for his belief or disbelief.

On the other hand, if their Is a God and a Day of Judgement, as the
believers say, then after death the believers will be saved and will be
blessed, while the atheists and non-believers will have to suffer.
Therefore, it is the dictate of wisdom to have Faith and Belief in God
and Day of Judgement, to save oneself from the possibility of disgrace
and eternal punishment.

**Q2: My teacher (A Christian) says:**

My teacher (a Christian) said to me that if what the Qur 'an says about
man (that he was created of clay) is true, then why do we not find any
trace of dust or clay in the human body? He was referring to the verse,
And certainly We created man of clay... (Qur'an, 15:26). Please
enlighten me, so that I may reply to him.

A: Well, water is made of oxygen and hydrogen. Why do we not see these
gases in water? Of course when water "disintegrates" then each of its
components goes its separate way, and then can be "seen". Likewise, when
man's body disintegrates after death, most of it turns into dust, thus
proving that it was made of dust or clay.

If your teacher is really a Christian, then he must have read the
following statements in the beginning of the Bible:

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul."
(Genesis, 2:7).

(God said to Adam) ".... till thou return unto the ground; for out of
it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return."
(Genesis, 3:19)

I think he must have heard the last sentence hundreds of times spoken
by Christian priests during funeral services.

**Q3: Allah and Khuda:**

Why we call Allah as 'Khuda' while in His 99 names there is no 'Khuda'.
Then how can we say 'Khuda'?

A: The 99 names are in Arabic language. Other languages have got their
own words to refer to Allah. "Khuda" is a Persian word, also used in
Urdu and some other languages. Q4: To Overcome Depression:

At times I am driven to despair. I have generally been depressed, since
I rarely get what I aspire for.

A: I think the last phrase is the clue to your problem. Remember that
nobody can ever get all that he aspires for. Human ambition always
remains high. Man's aspirations are limitless while the provisions of
this world are limited.

Naturally it results in dissatisfaction for most of the people. Its
cure is found in the sayings of our Imams who have given us this advice:
"In material things, do not look at those who are above you; rather look
at those who are below you; while in spiritual things, you should look
at those who are higher than you."

When you will look at those who are less fortunate than you, you will
sincerely be grateful to Allah that He has given you so much more than
many of your fellow human beings. And when you will look at those who
have attained a higher spiritual status, you will be inspired to reach
nearer to them. Contentment with what Allah has given you is the key to
satisfaction, the cure of depression and the only way to overcome
worldly worries.

Then next step will be to remember Allah Ta'ala in all conditions. In
comfort and discomfort, in affluence and poverty, in health and
sickness. Allah says in the Qur'an: "Those who believe and whose hearts
are set at rest by the remembrance of Allah; now surely by Allah's
remembrance are the hearts set at rest." (Qur'an, Sura 13, Verse 28).

**Q5: Shi'a Belief About Qur 'an:**

A person suggested that Shi'as are doing "Taqiyah" when denying
"Tahrif" in Qur 'an. Perhaps you wouldn t mind "leaking" the
"inside-secret".

A: I will advise you to get a copy of my Urdu book, Itmam-e-Hujjat,
from Maulana Ahmad Ali Abidi (or from Najafi House) and read the first
chapter which is on Tahreef. Also my English booklet, The Qur'an: Its
Protection from Alteration, (published by Ahlul Bayt Assembly of North
America, P.O.Box 76568, Super Centre Postal Outlet, Markham, Ontario,
Canada L3R ON5) will prove very helpful.

From these two sources you will find that the Sunnis themselves narrate
traditions of Tahreef in their Sihah Sitta and other books. They also
believe that "Whatever is narrated in Sahih Bukhari and Sahih Muslim is
100% correct and it is Wajib to believe in it."

Also, you will see that many traditions in these two books mention some
verses and surahs which were lost after the Prophet (S.A.W). Then you
will learn that the Sunnis try to explain such traditions by saying that
those verses and Surahs are mansukhut-tilawah, i.e. their reciting was
abrogated (while the law contained in some of them continues.)

The very serious question arises that if those Surahs and verses were
lost or eaten up by a goat after the death of the Prophet (S.A.W), then
how and by whom were they abrogated? Did there come any prophet after
the Prophet of Islam (S.A.W)?

While we, on our part, are not bound to accept any tradition (written
in any book) as "Sahih". We put every hadith to tough tests, then either
accept it or reject it on its merits. As for Taqiyah, please study my
booklet on this subject; you will find it useful and interesting.

**Q6: The Beacon of the Qur an:**

I quote here the following sentences of Hazrat Ali (A.S), from
"Guidance from Qur 'an" (p. 35): ".... For all of you there is a beacon
(in the Qur 'an), try to be guided by it. Islam has its aim for each of
you to aspire and to attain it... " The question is: How can one find
this beacon in the Qur'an, so that one can try to be guided by it?

A: The Qur'an was revealed as the guidance for man. It guides one in
matters of faith; it shows the way to reach nearer to Allah through
sincere belief and worship of Allah; it helps him build noble character
through its unparalleled ethical teachings. And all these aspects have
briefly been described in this very book, "Guidance from Qur'an".

**Q7: The Aim of Creation:**

Referring to the same quotation, how can one locate this seemingly
particular aim, because to attain an objective one must know and
understand it and then aim at it? A: Study those verses which describe
the purpose of creation, then you will be able to proceed towards it.
For example:

1. And I have not created the jinn and the human beings except that
they should worship Me. (Qur 'an,51:56)

2. Surely we have created man from a small drop of intermingled
life-germ, in order that we test him; so we have made him hearing,
seeing." (76:2). (Then it goes on describing the chastisement of the
disbelievers and the blessings reserved for the righteous.)

3. And the greatest bliss reserved for man is "the pleasure of Allah",
that the righteous would be pleased with Allah and Allah would be
pleased with them, and they would become nearer to Him. As He says: O
tranquilled soul, return to your Lord, well- pleased with Him,
well-pleasing to Him; so enter among My servants and enter into My
garden. " (89:27-30).

**Q.8: BEGGING FROM ALLAH:**

Hazrat Ali (A.S) further says in the same hadith that "One should not
make the Qur 'an an instrument of beggary in society". By nature a human
being is certainly in need of many things. What could the sentence mean,
because we are supposed to beg Him for our reasonable wants?

A: You have not read the full sentence which goes on like this "do not
make Qur'an an instrument of beggary in society because it teaches you
how to seek help from God." Clearly the Imam forbids begging from people
and advises man to address all his needs to Allah. What objection or
ambiguity is there in this teaching?

**Q. 9: Meaning of the Tablet and the Pen:**

Do Shi'as believe that Tablet (lawh) and Pen (Qalam) are two angels?

A: This is what Shaykh Saduq (R.A) has written in his book, al-I
'tiqadat.


