Q. 20: Selection of an a 'lam
=============================

How is an 'Alim declared to be an A 'lam? Who are the present
Maraji -e-Taqleed and who is the most learned of them?

A: There are probably hundreds, if not thousands, of eye specialists in
your city, Bombay.

Yet if one asks a knowledgeable friend where one should go for a
complicated case, the friend will name only 3 or 4 doctors. Who elected
them to become top-most eye- specialists? You will say: They were not
elected; but their intelligence, knowledge, experience and continuous
study have brought them to the fore-front. The same is the case with
mujtahids.

At present, Ayatullah al-'Uzma Muhammad Fazil Lankarani (Qum) and
Ayatullah al-'Uzma Sayyid 'Ali Sistani (Najaf) are considered to be
A'lam. This word in Shi'a terminology means, one who has got top-most
expertise in deriving the rules of shari'ah from its approved sources.

**Q. 21: Mothers of 'AwN AND Muhammad:**

Who was the mother of 'Awn and Muhammad (sons of 'Abdullah ibn Jafar)
who were martyred at Karbala? Their ages?

A: 'Awn's mother was Hazrat Zainab (daughter of Amirul Mu'mineen 'Ali
A.S); and Muhammad's mother was Khawsa' (from the tribe of Wa'il).
First, Muhammad went to the battle-field, fought and killed ten
warriors; finally he was slain by 'Amir ibn Nahshal. Then 'Awn went
forth and killed 3 riders and eighteen foot. He was slain by 'Abdullah
Ibn Battah at-Ta'i.

It is difficult to say how old they were in Karbala However, the age
given for them in the marthiyas (i.e. 9 and 10 years) is definitely
incorrect. They could not be so young. See Bihar-ul-anwar, vol. 45 for
more details.

**Q. 22: Children of Amru'l-Mu'mineen:**

How many children Amir 'l-mu 'mineen 'Ali (A.S) had got? Were there
more than one Zaynab and Umm Kulthum?

A: There are various reports about the number of his children, varying
from 25 to 35. 3 sons were named Muhammad (the eldest of them was Hazrat
Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyah); 2 sons were named 'Abbas (the eldest of them
was the standard-bearer in Karbala). There were two Zaynabs, two Umm
Kulthums and two Ruqayyahs.

The eldest Zaynab and Umm Kulthum were the daughters of Bibi Fatimah
(A.S); Zaynab (the younger) was the daughter of Umm Sa'id, and the
younger Umm Kulthum's mother was a slave-girl.

For more details see Biharul anwar vol. Manaqib of Ibn Shahr Ashob and
other relevant books.

**Q. 23: False claimants of Prophet hood:**

How many false claimants of Prophethood and Imamate (Mahdaviyat) have
appeared yet?

A: It is difficult to get at their exact number. However, there have
appeared scores of false prophets and Mahdis.

**Q. 24: Where is Imam Husayn's head buried?**

A: Got your cable on 18th July, and sent the following reply the same
day.

Hassanali, SG IMGI Georgetown, Guyana, In Karbala in same grave, Letter
follows Saeed Akhtar.
When Yazid released the family of Imam Husain (A.S) from prison, Imam
Zaynul Abidin (A.S) took from him the head of Imam Husayn (A.S) and
brought it to Karbala where he buried it with the body in the same grave
Although there are some reports mentioning Damascus, Medina, and even
Egypt as the place where the holy head is buried, but they are not
authentic, and our scholars do not accept them.

**Q. 25: WHEN DID ISLAM REACH ZANZIBAR?**

When was Islam first introduced to Tanzania -particularly to the
Islands of Zanzibar and Pemba? A: According to oral traditions, which
have been recorded by the westerners, it may safely be said that Islam
reached here by end of the first or beginning of the 2nd century of
hijrah.

**Q. 26: About Bilal Muslim Mission:**

When was Bilal Muslim Mission established and who were its founding
fathers? A: Bilal Muslim Mission was established in December, 1964. Many
dedicated Muslims shared the honour of establishing it.

Important among them were Haji Ali Muhammad Jaffer Sheriff, Mulla
Asghrali M. M. Jaffer, Haji Mohsin A.M Jaffer, Haji Muhammadali Meghji
(from Kenya) and Haji Hassanali M. Ladak, Haji Hussain Nasser Walji,
Haji Fidahussein Abdullah Hameer, Haji Ahmed Hussein Sheriff and the
present writer (from Tanzania).

**Q. 27: Islamic Activities in Tanzania:**

What kind of Islamic activities are going on in the mainland of
Tanzania?

A: I confine my reply to my Mission's activities only.

(a) (a)We publish two bi-monthly magazines in English and Swahili
languages.

(b) We publish religious books in the English and Swahili languages. So
far about 80 books and booklets have come out.

(c) We run an Institute of Higher Islamic Studies in Dar es Salaam.

(d) We run scores of Qur'anic schools for smaller boys and girls.

(e) We conduct 3 types of Correspondence Courses in English and Swahili
which are benefiting the Muslims throughout the world.

(f) We have established a charitable public dispensary.

(g) We regularly hold free Eye-Camps in villages and small towns.

**Q. 28: Islamic Cure for Aids:**

A friend says that Islam is the religion till the Day of Judgement and
the solution of every thing till then. So what is the Islamic cure for
AIDS?

A: Islam, as a religion, contains every thing which is required for
spiritual upliftment of humanity. It is not a hand-book for medical
profession or mathematics. It gives rules and regulations which govern
everyone including the doctors and mathematicians. But it does not teach
the doctors how to treat cough and malaria, or the accountants how to
multiply or subtract.

However, as these rules and regulations oblige a person to live a clean
and moral sexual life, it prevents one from getting infected with AIDS.
Here the saying, "Prevention is better than cure" proves true.

And the Prophet (S.A.W) had given prior warning to those who would
indulge in unlawful sexual intercourse, when he said, inter alia, in a
hadith: "When fornication spreads, it will surely bring such new
diseases to the people which their forefathers had not known."

**Q. 29: Root cause of Children 's indicipline**

The children are disobedient and even insulting to their teachers,
elders and parents. Is this due to general human-right awareness, or
level of intelligence having generally gone up amongst the younger
folks?

Or are parents so naive and / or less informed than the children? For
example, when we studied psychology 30 years ago the definition of
Psychology was that it was a study of mind. Nowadays the definition of
Psychology is the scientific study of the processes of the mind and the
behaviour of the body, both positive and empirical.

A: I think the basic problem is not of human-rights awareness or
enhancement of intelligence level etc. Certainly these are contributing
factors; but I think the basic trouble lies somewhere else. The Muslim
society in your City is built on materialism. Showiness, pride,
extravaganza, rat-race for worldly gains, all these combined together
are tearing the moral fabric to shreds.

Wealth is the alpha and omega of their ideal - whether it comes from
lawful means or unlawful ones, makes no difference. And the haram money,
entering through food into their blood system, first dims the spiritual
light in the heart and finally darkens it completely. It affects the
relationship of elders with the younger generation in many ways:-

(a) The children are deprived of moral guidance and training from their
early age.

(b) They see their elders indulging in all types of un ethical dealings
in their offices and businesses.

(c) In this way, the children are given practical training of keeping
the religion and moral values confined to the compounds of mosques,
husainiyas and, to a certain extent, homes.

(d) The children thus develop a dual personality; and the elders lose
respect in their eyes, and even if at times they are told by these
elders to behave in moral ways, the words sound to them hollow and
hypocritical.

As the parents and elders have forfeited their moral authority, is it
strange that the children are behaving in the way you have mentioned.

You know the U.S.A. better than I do, and also about the moral decay of
its black community. But I am reading since last many years in the
official reports of many government departments that the blacks who have
embraced Islam, have turned their localities into law-abiding,
well-disciplined areas, free of drugs and crimes. And this
acknowledgement comes from those who have declared Islam as their enemy
No. 1.

It clearly proves that Islam - if accepted sincerely - can transform a
totally rotten society into a healthy, dynamic force, vibrating with
moral rectitude and spiritual sublimity. Even those prisoners who have
become Muslims, have been transformed into model ones. Why can't we, the
born Shi'as and Muslims, achieve the same result with our Islam?


