Q. 30: Love Letters
===================

Our children accept that boys and girls should not freely mingle; yet
they assert that if keeping within the bounds of shari 'ah they wrote to
each other and communicated their feelings, what is wrong with that??!!
In other words love letters do not matter! Can you please look into the
same and with your wealth of ahadith etc. can we give them some
beneficial advice on this issue?

A. Before deciding whether there is anything wrong in love letters or
not, let us ask them how these "feelings" began in the first place. Was
it not because they had been looking at each other with lustful eyes?
These youths must know that there is hijab of eyes as well as of the
dress. Allah Subhanahu wa Ta 'ala says:

"Say unto the believer men that they cast down their gaze and guard
their private parts; that is purer for them. Verily Allah is well-Aware
of what you do. And say unto the believing women that they cast down
their gaze and guard their private parts, and their display not their
zinat…."(Qur'an, 24:30-31).

The believer men must cast down their gaze and believer women must cast
down their gaze. None is allowed to look at the opposite sex, unless he
or she is within the prohibited degree (mahram). As the man is required
to struggle for earning the livelihood, he is not told to hide his body
(except to a certain extent). Still he is obliged to cast down his gaze;
and not to look at a Ghair Mahram woman.

Woman can easily keep herself covered and hidden because her sphere of
activity is her home; therefore, she was told to cover her entire body,
as well as cast down her gaze and not to look at a Ghair Mahram man.

There are many ahadith which say that:-

"Glance is a poisoned arrow from the arrows of Shaitan".

"Beware of glance because it sows lust in the heart of the glancer, and
enough is it for a mischief."

Another hadith says that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said:

"Whoever fills his eyes looking at a women unlawfully, Allah will raise
him on the day of resurrection with nails of fire driven in (his eyes),
until judgement is given concerning the whole mankind; then he will be
ordered to be driven into the Fire."

Numerous Ahadith declare that the glance after the 1st glance is an
arrow of Shaitan; and is Haram. Our boys and girls should ponder on
these verses and traditions, in order to realize that wearing hijab or
scarf is not a licence to look freely at the opposite sex. So, before
getting such feelings for each other, they have already crossed the
limit of shari'ah. It is this phenomenon about which the mujtahidin have
said that it is definitely wajib for a woman to cover her face and palms
if there is a possibility of someone looking at her with lustful eyes.
This is fatwa, (not Ihtyat) and all the mujtahidin are unanimous in this
matter.

Now comes the second step, and that is "talking to each other" Verbally
or in writing. A few authentic ahadith from the Ma'sumeen (A.S)

1. When women wanted to enter into the fold of Islam, the Prophet
(S.A.W) Used to make it a condition of bay 'ah that "they should not
talk with any man except their mahram." (Da'a'imu'l-Islam).

2. 'Ali (A.S) said that the Prophet (S.A.W) had prohibited that a woman
should talk to anyone (other than her husband or her mahram) more than
Five words it becomes necessary. (Man La Yahduruhu 'l-Faqih;
Da'a'imu'l-lslam)

3. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (A.S) said: Talking with women is among the
traps of the Shaitan. (Da 'a 'imu 'l-Islam).

4. 'Ali (A.S) said: "Verily there are five things which follow (other)
five things, and these five must throw (the culprit) into the Fire:....
and whoever indulges in joking with young girls and boys, will fall into
fornication; and the fornicator is bound to enter the
Fire.(Mustadrak).

Talking or joking aside, Islam seriously discourages men to do salaam
to women. There are several ahadith in Al-Kafi, Man la yahduruhu
'l-faqih and other books which say that it is makruh for men to do
salaam to women, more so if they are young.

Looking at this matter in the light of our present day social and
family environment, this business of love-letters may create real
problems, if the parents or guardians of the boy or the girl, when
approached by them to agree to, and bless their marriage, refuse to do
so. The scenarios that may follow this refusal are easy to imagine, but
none of them is pleasant.

**Q. 31: Non-alcoholic beer!!**

The sale of non-alcoholic beer is in fashion here. And when one of my
friends visited one such store, he was told he could get alcoholic one
too but from the inside of the store! So the objection may not be for
the sale of non-alcoholic but the step two of inducing the customer to
taste the alcoholic as well!

A: It is the same hypocrisy about which I have written somewhere else
and it has come from Mecca and Medina, so it has the sanction of the
Wahhabi Islam!! May we ask those Khalids, Fahds and Ben Baz's, why was
it necessary to use the name "beer" for a non- alcoholic drink? Was it
not to make the name, beer, familiar to the Muslims? And once they have
taken the first step, it should not take them long to go further ahead
and take the second and then the third steps.

It is narrated by Ibn Majah (one of the Sihah Sittah) that the Prophet
said: "There will be some groups of my Ummah who will drink liquor and
call it by some other name."

**Q. 32: Selling Liquor in obedience of parents:**

Zayd's father has a grocery shop which also sells alcoholic drinks.
Zayd feels guilty about this and knows pretty well that it is haram and
the income is haram also. He has tried to convince his father but to no
avail.

He then decided to pull out of the business, but then the father and
mother said that they were not pleased with him, and the mother said
that she would not waive her milk-right and that the very God they are
disobeying by selling liquor has said that you must obey parents! I
tried to reason with Zayd that obedience of parents is only in
compliance of God's command and not to disobey Him; but he is either not
convinced or cannot decide due to parental emotional pressure.

A: Obedience to parents is wajib to a certain extent, no doubt. But
parents do not have this right independently by their own authority. It
is bestowed on them by Allah. Quite obviously Allah's order super cedes
all others' orders. As I have mentioned in my book, Family Life of
Islam:

"The Almighty Allah is above all rulers and superiors: therefore, His
commandments can never be superceded by any other rule, regulation or
order. But the superiority of parents is derived from the superiority of
Allah; their authority is based upon the command of Allah. Therefore, if
ever they give any order which is against the Law of Allah, it must be
ignored and disobeyed." Allah says in the Qur'an:

"And we enjoined on man (to be good) to his parents:…….And if they
strive to make you join with Me things of which you have no knowledge,
obey them not; yet bear them company in this life with fairness" (Surah
Luqman, vs. 14-15)

The same order is repeated in verse 8 of Surah'Al-'Ankabut.

If one commits a sin or crime following an order of his superiors or
elders, it does not absolve him from responsibility of that crime. Even
the worldly powers do not accept the plea, "I committed this crime
because my parents, or elders or superiors had ordered me to do so." The
Nuremburg trials of the Nazis testify to this principle.

As for Islam, there is the laid down principle that, "A creature is not
to be obeyed in disobedience of the Creator." (Nahjul -balagha) Numerous
traditions to this effect are found in Shi'a and Sunni collections of
Ahadith. Biharu 7 Anwar has a whole chapter in which so many traditions
of this meaning have been collected.

A similar plea was offered by Shimr for murdering Imam Husain (A.S). He
was praying to Allah for forgiveness. Someone said to him: "How can
Allah forgive you when you had participated in murdering the son of the
Messenger of Allah?" Shimr said: "Woe unto you! What could we do? These
our ulul-amr ordered us to do a work and we obeyed them; had we
disobeyed them we would have been in a worse position than this" Will
Allah accept this excuse of Shimr?

Remember, on the Day of Judgement no relative, be he a father or a son,
can take the burden of any sin of his relative on his own shoulders. In
fact, the relatives will purposefully avoid each other. Allah says:

"The day on which a man shall fly from his brother and his mother and
his spouse and his son; every man of them shall on that day have an
affair of his own which will occupy him." (Surah 'Abas, verses 34-37)

Not only that. On seeing the chastisement of the hell, the juniors will
curse the elders and the elders will refuse to accept any responsibility
of their followers' sins and crime. But this reciprocal cursing will not
be of any use to any group. See for example the following verses:

"And they shall say: O our Lord! Surely we obeyed our leaders and our
elders, so they led us astray from the path; O our Lord! Give them a
double punishment and curse them with a great curse." (Surah al-Ahzab,
vs. 67-68)

"When those who were followed (e.g. the parents in your question) shall
renounce those who followed (e.g. the son) and they see the chastisement
and their ties are cut asunder.

And those who (had) followed shall say: O were therefore us a return
(to the world), then we would renounce them as they have renounced us.
Thus will Allah show them their deeds to be intense regret to them, and
they shall not come fourth from the fire." (Surah al- Baqarah, vs.
166-167).

As for the mother's threat not to waive her milk-right, it is just a
balderdash. A woman has a right to demand from her husband wages for
breast-feeding his child, and the husband has a right to appoint some
other woman for this purpose, if the mother's demand is higher than the
prevalent rates.

Therefore, if the mother has any milk-right, it is on her husband, and
not on the child. (You will find some such statements in poetries, but
it is just poetic licence. It has no legal standing.)

I pray to Allah to guide the parents as well as the son to the right
path, and make them Muslims in reality.

**Q. 33: Marriage with Sister-in-law?**

Zaid's sister-in-law (wife's sister) is divorced and staying with him
and his wife. Islamic rule is that he cannot marry his wife's sister
unless due to some reasons. His problem is that his wife's sister is in
love with him and this was brought to his attention by his wife, who
does not object even if laid wishes to marry her.

Zaid is getting more inclined towards her; but at the same time, he
does not wish to commit any sin. Can he marry her or do mut 'ah marriage
with her?

A: I was shocked to receive the above letter. Marrying two sisters at
one time is absolutely haram (unlawful). There is no question of there
being or not being a "reason". It is forbidden in the Qur'an and is not
lawful in any circumstances in any sect of Islam.

Now one may appreciate why Islam forbids a woman to come with open face
before her brother-in-law, and why a man is forbidden to look at his
sister-in-law's open face. If people remain within the boundaries of
Shari'ah, such fitnah and mischief will never occur.

I most sincerely advise Zaid to at once turn this woman out of his
house, who is not averse to breaking the home of her own sister. For
God's sake, terminate all contacts with her. May Allah give Zaid tawfeeq
to follow Islam and not to be tempted by the Satan. It is Satan who is
using his sister-in-law as a trap to ensnare him.


**Q. 34: Music At Jama 'at's Musafirkhana**

The caretaker in our Musafirkhana gets a nominal salary plus free
accommodation including water and electricity. He has a video/TV of his
own. However, he sometimes watches Indian film programmes in which there
is music and other obscene scenes which are against our Shari 'ah. It
has also come to our notice that guests go to his room to view such
programmes.

Although this is a personal and private affair as claimed by him, but
such un-Islamic activities are held wiihin the precincts of our
Musafirkhana which is run according to Shari 'ah. Also electricity bill
is paid from the revenue of our Musafirkhana. Please give your guidance
on this issue.

A: Let us suppose somebody openly uses the Musafirkhana premises for
drinking liquor and giving it to other Mu'mineen. What will be your
reaction if, on being told not to do so, he replies that it was his
"personal and private affair"?

In fact it is not a personal and private affair because the sin is
committed openly. If someone openly neglects prayer, then it is not his
personal and private affair, and it becomes wajib on everyone whose
words would be effective to advise, exhort (and, if possible, compel)
him to pray. To order good and forbid evil is wajib on every person.

It is regardless of the fact that the said sin is committed in
Jama'at's premises. The Jama'at has a right and a duty to make sure that
its properties are not used for anti-Islamic activities.

Add to this the fact that electricity is provided by the Jama'at. So in
a way the Jama'at is helping in it.

And finally, when he turns his room into a cinema-hall, then it becomes
"Fasad fil ard" (spreading fasad, evil, mischief, in the world), which
is another major sin and also a capital crime in Sheri'ah. May Allah
give him light to see the reality.

**Q. 35: 'Aq of parents:**

Can a child who has been disowned ('AQ) by his father during the
latter's lifetime inherit from his deceased father's estate?

A: Certainly. There are only 3 situations in which an heir is debarred
from inheritance:

1. If the said heir has killed the deceased;

2. If he is Kafir or

3. a slave.

Also a child of Li'an is excluded from the estate of his mother's
ex-husband. There appears to be a widespread misconception in Indian
society about this business of making 'Aq. 'Uquq means "to be
disobedient, disrespectful, undutiful." If a child is disobedient, he
will be written by the angels as a disobedient child, even if a parent
does not say so even once; and if he is not disobedient, then in the
eyes of God he is "not 'Aq" even if his parents declare so with drum
beats.

In any case, this is a matter concerned with a child's felicity or
otherwise in Akherah; it has no effect on his right of inheritance. Of
course, if one makes a will debarring any heir from inheritance, and
that heir gives his/her assent to it, it will be enforced because of the
heir's voluntary assent and acceptance.

**Q. 36: A CHILD OF MUT"AH MARRIAGE:**

Is a child born from Mut'ah marriage entitled to inheritance from his
father or mother upon his/ her death?

A: Certainly. A legitimate offspring inherits both parents, whether he
is born in the so-called "permanent marriage", or in mut'ah marriage, or
from a slave girl.

**Q. 37: EXECUTOR OF WILL:**

If a single trustee is appointed to execute the will by the deceased
and he refuses to act, who is entitled to appoint a replacement?

A: The question is confusing. Probably you mean an executor of the
will, and not a trustee of a waqf. In our shari'ah, wasiyyat is of two
kinds: (1) Tamlikiyah, which involves property or money matters, and (2)
'Ahdiyah, which conlerns other matters, like where he should be buried
and things like that.

The former requires acceptance by the executor, but not the latter. Of
course, there is a lot of detail involved which cannot be given here.
However, if the appointed executor refuses the appointment, the mujtahid
has the authority to appoint someone in his place. If the executor does
not reject, but is lethargic in discharging his duties, or feels
difficulty in acting alone, the mujtahid may appoint someone to assist
him or to supervise his work

**Q38: VALIDITY OF A CERTAIN WILL:**

A deceased has mentioned in his will that a certain person should not
be allowed to attend his funeral. Is the will in order? What if the said
will is made against the eldest son? Who should then be asked about
arrangements of funeral etc.?

A: A person certainly has a right to do such a wasiyyat. So far as its
implementation is concerned, it is easy in places where funeral
arrangements are made and controlled by the family. But in societies
like the Khoja Community, where every thing is done by the Jama'at, and
the funeral time is announced publicly, one has to choose the lesser
evil.

I mean, the heirs have to decide whether informing the person concerned
would cause (or increase) fitnah and friction or not. Avoiding friction
is always more preferable. As for the permission of the eldest son (in
the situation mentioned in the question), the mu'mineen may ask him
together with the other heirs. It will be more in conformity with
Ihtiyat.

**Q. 39: ABOUT SUSPICION AND ACCUSATION:**

What does Holy Qur 'an and Hadith say on: (a) Accusation, (b) suspicion
and (c) Tuhmat, i.e to accuse /suspect someone of doing wrong without
any proof at all. A: Suspicion: "To suspect someone of doing wrong
without any proof." It is "haram ". Allah Ta'ala says:

"O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin; and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it; and fear Allah, surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful".
(Qur'an, 49:12)

The Ma'sumeen (A.S) have said that if you find your mu'min brother
doing or saying something which can be interpreted in seventy ways,
sixty nine of which are bad and only one is good, you should give it
that one good meaning, and ignore the other bad interpretations.

Accusation: If it is untrue then it is called Tuhmat, which is even
worse than ghibat (backbiting) which has been so severely condemned in
the above-mentioned ayat In one particular case (i.e. slandering a
married mu'minah lady of adultery without producing four witnesses) it
is also a crime for which the slanderer is punished with eighty lashes
If the accusation is true, then it is called ghibat, the gravity of
which has been mentioned above. But in some cases it is allowed, as for
example,

when giving evidence before a Qadi of Shari'ah, informing a guardian of
misdeeds of his ward (when the intention is the reform of that ward) or
giving advice to someone, if asked for some important matters: Let us
say, when someone sends matrimonial message for a girl and the girl's
guardian asks you about that person's suitability. Details may be seen
in Minhaju's-Saliheen (Vol. 1) of Ayatullah al-Khoui.


