Q. 60: How the Prophet (s.a. W) Used To Pray?
=============================================

How did the Holy Prophet (S.A. W) used to pray in sajdah, Quiyam,
etc.?

A: As we the Shi as do. Our method of prayer comes from our Imams who
had inherited it from the Prophet (S. A.W).

**Q. 61: Should Salaam in prayer be said loudly or in WHISPER?**

When I'm in Salah, during Salaam at the end of prayer do I say it
quietly or loudly? A: In dawn prayer it is said loudly; in other four
prayers, in whisper. The custom is that you recite the salaam in the
same voice which you used for the last rak'ah of that prayer. Also the
dhikr of ruku' and sajdah, should be recited in the same voice as used
before ruku'.

**Q. 62: This refers to your reply to my earlier question**

That dhikr of Ruku' and Sajdah etc. in each rak 'ah should be recited
either loudly or in whisper according to the voice used before ruku'.
Now, should I say salam (at the end of salah) loudly and then the
ma'moom repeats it, or I just keep them totally silent in all prayers?

A: Your previous question did not mention congregational prayers. What
I had written was about furada (individual) salah. In congregational
prayer, the Imam should recite dhikr of ruku' and sajdah, as well as
tashahhud and salaam in normal loud voice. (He should not "shout").

**Q. 63: PRAYING BEHIND A WOMAN:**

If in a community no male Muslim has learnt about Islam, and there is a
Muslim lady well- versed in Qur 'an etc., can she lead the males in
prayers?

A: She may lead a congregational prayer of the ladies only; but if even
a single man stands behind her, she can not be the Imam of that
prayer.

**Q. 64: Praying in a Sunni mosque:**

I go to a Sunni mosque for praying. The Imam does not hate the Shi 'as.
Can I pray behind him? And how?

A: There is no objection if the Imam does not show any hatred towards
the Shi'as. When you want to pray behind a Sunni Imam, you must recite
Surah al-Fatiha and the other surah in the first and the second rak 'ahs
in whisper.

**Q. 65: Why 3-time prayers?**

The difference in time: why do Sunnis pray 5 times separately and the
Shi 'as 3 times? A: You have used wrong wording in the question. The
prayers of' Asr and 'Isha are not prayed simultaneously with Dhuhr and
Maghrib respectively. They are prayed after Dhuhr and Maghrib. Thus we
do not pray "3 times"; this also is "5 times".

You should have asked: Why do we pray 'Asr and 'Isha soon after Dhuhr
and Maghrib? The fact is that even the Sunni books record that the
Prophet (S.A.W) some times prayed 'Asr soon after Dhuhr and 'Isha soon
after Maghrib, in order to give his Ummah some latitude in this mater.
However, it is more rewarding to pray each prayer in its fadhilat time.
For description of Fadhilat times, read "Elements of Islamic Studies".

**Q. 66: PERFUME IN PRAYER**

Can we use perfumes in prayers? If i put perfume and then go to the
mosque, am I allowed to pray with it?

A: Yes. Using perfume for prayers is highly recommended and brings more
reward.

**Q. 67: THE FIRST MOSQUE BUILT:**

Which was the first mosque built by the Holy Prophet (S.A.W)?

A: The mosque of Quba, a few kilometres outside Medina, where the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W) had stayed for more than 14 days waiting for 'Ali (A.S)
and Ahlul Bayt. He built there the mosque which is extolled in the
Qur'an as the "mosque founded on piety (taqwa) from the very first day".
(Qur'an, 9:108).

**Q. 68: RECITING SHAHADATAIN IN FUNERAL PROCESSION:**

In this part of the world when the Muslims carry a dead-body for
burial, they loudly recite the Shahadatayn. Some people say that it is
not allowed because it is an innovation. What is the truth?

A: It is true that it is an innovation. But it is wrong to say that
every thing started after the Prophet (S.A.W) is unlawful. One should
see whether a particular "innovation" is good or bad; whether it
conforms to the demands and nature of Islam or not, and then should
decide accordingly. In this case, Reciting La Ilaha Illallah, Muhammadun
Rasulullah, is not bad at any time. Why should it be considered unlawful
in a funeral procession?

**Q. 69: WHEN AND BY WHOM WAS THE SYSTEM OF WASHING THE FEET IN WUDHU
INTRODUCED?**

At what stage of Islamic history and by whom, the form of Wudhu
(especially washing the feet) was changed?

A: It appears from some Sunni writings that it was changed by 'Umar.
The famous Sunni scholar, Shah Waliullah Muhaddith Dehlavi (the father
of Shah 'Abdul 'Aziz Muhaddith Dehlavi) has written in Izalatul
'l-Khifa' (vol.2, p. 84): There are many masa'il concerning which
conflicting traditions have been narrated, and Hazrat ('Umar) Farooq
found practical adjustment (for them),and the mujtahids follow the same
practice, like................ the mas 'alah of washing the feet (in
Wudhu) and the mas 'alah of mut'ah."

The Sunni traditions mention the names of some of the companions and
tabi'in who did not follow the system prescribed by 'Umar. The list
includes not only 'Ali (A.S), 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas, Anas ibn Malik, but
'Abdullah ibn 'Umar also, apart from 'Ikrimah, A'mash and Sha'bi.
(Tafseer Ad-Durru'l-Manthur, vol. 2, p.263). But obviously the Sunni
mujtahidin could not leave the Sunnat of 'Umar.


