Q70: Reciting Surah Without Bismillah in Sunnah Prayers
=======================================================

In sunnah prayers, can we recite the sura without Bismillah? For
example, whenwe recite Surah Qul Huwallah seven times in the prayer of
the Night of Destiny? A: No. Bismillah is a part of every Sura (except
Surah 9). If you drop it, you have not recited Qul Huwallah
completely.

**Q71: DROPPING BISMILLAH IN QUR'AN KHWANI:**

Can we drop Bismillah in Qur'an Khwani, especially when time is short?
A: It is a must in the beginning of the Surahs (except the 9th Surah) as
mentioned above. For other parts it is not necessary, although highly
emphasized. If time is short, you may recite it, even in whisper, just
before your turn to recite Qur'an comes.

**Q. 72: FOLDING ARMS IN PRAYERS?**

By whom and in which period of Islamic history was the folding of arms
in prayers introduced?

A: It appears from some reports that when Iranian prisoners were
brought before 'Umar, they stood before him with folded hands. On being
asked the reason, they said that it was their custom to stand before the
elders with folded hands. 'Umar said: Then we too should do the same
when we stand before Allah in prayers. That was the beginning.

But as I will explain later, the idea was not accepted in Medina there
are some pointers which show that it had caught up in the early days of
Mu'awiyah's governorship in Damascus. When Anas ibn Malik, a companion
of the Prophet (S. A. W), went to Syria, he wept and said: "I do not see
here anything which I used to see in the days of the Prophet (S.A.W),
except this prayer, and that too is disfigured." (Sahih al-Bukhari).

Then there are these four Imams of the Sunnis. Look at their fatwas
concerning this matter; and you will see the truth yourself.

1. Imam Malik ibn Anas (died 179) lived in Medina.He orders his
followers (the Malikiyah) to keep their hands open, saying that it is
the way the people of Medina pray, and they must have learnt it from the
Prophet (S.A.W).

2. Imam Abu Hanifah (died 150 A.H) and Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal (died 241
A.H.) lived in Iraq and they ordered their followers to keep the hands
folded.

3. Imam Shafi'i (died 204 A.H.) was born in Mecca, studied in Medina
and then shifted to Iraq and finally to Egypt. He gives his followers
choice of folding the hands or keeping them open.

Have you noted the connection between their places of residence and
their fatwas? The man who lived in Medina kept the hands open; those who
lived far from Medina folded their hands and the one who lived in both
places allows both customs. It make us believe that the custom of
folding the hands in prayer was invented far from the city of the
Prophet (S. A. W).

**Q.73: SAYING 'AMEN' IN PRAYER:**

I notice that we the Shi'a do not say "AMEN" after al-Fatiha. As you
know, I was previously a Sunni. Now what I want to know is: Did one of
the first 3 Caliphs introduce this system? Or did this bid'ah come in
Islam from the Ummayads or Abbasids?

A: It is not definitely known when this custom was started and by whom.
But there are traditions from the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (A.S) which say
that saying "Amen" after Surah al- Fatihah in prayer is bid'ah. One such
tradition from Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (A.S) says:

"When you are (praying) behind an Imam and he finishes Surah al-Fatihah
and completes it, you should say, "Alhamdu-Lillahi Rabbil 'Alameen", and
do not say "Amen". (Al-Kafi and Tahdhibu 'l-ahkam). It indicates that
saying "Amen" had become established by that time, i.e. in Umayyad
period.

By the way, the Sunni book, "Naylu 'l-awtar " quotes Imam Malik (the
leader of the Malikis) as saying that the Imam should not say "Ameen" in
those prayers which are recited loudly.

**Q. 74: KADHALIKAALLAHU RABBI**

We say, Kadhalikallahu Rabbi, (Even so is Allah, our Lord), after Surah
Qul Huwallah, in prayer. Is it correct? This sentence is not in the Qur
'an.

A: According to ahadith, it is mustahabb to say it after surah Qul
Huwallah, whether in prayer and at other Occasions. Likewise, it is
mustahabb to say, "La bi shayin min 'alayika Rabbi ukadhdhib" (None of
your bounties do I reject, O my Lord!) after every Fa bi ayyi'alayi
Rabbikuma tukadhdhiban (Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you
deny?) in Surah ar-Rahman. These are not parts of the Qur'an; they are
included in the etiquette of the recital of Qur'an.

**Q. 75: SAJDAH ON WOOLEN CARPETS**

The Iranian clergymen urge the Shi'as to offer their prayers on the
woollen carpets of the Masjid un Nabi and to prostrate on the same
without using muhr, for the sake of Islamic unity. Is it valid?

A: It is OK if done because of Taqiyah. However, I have seen a lot of
Shi'as from Qateef and Bahrain using small mats (made of palm leaves or
other such reeds) for prayer even inside the masjid of the Prophet
(S.A.W), and obviously nobody can object to it.

**Q. 76: TURNING HEAD RIGHT AND LEFT IN PRAYER:**

We the Shi 'as don't turn our heads at the end of Salah, like the
Sunnis do, when they supposedly salute the angels by saying "As-Salamu
'Alaykum Warahmatullahi wa Barakatuh" turning their heads to the right,
then to the left. How did that system come into the Salah?

A: In fact it is a Sunnah of the Prophet (S.A.W) to turn fractionally
one's glance (not the head) first to the right and then to the left at
the time of salaam. But the Sunnis have exaggerated it to such an extent
that they turn their faces completely to the sides. It appears from some
unconfirmed reports that it was started during the first Khalifa's
time.

One fails to understand how this custom conforms with the 'niyyat'
(intention) of praying "with my face towards holy Ka'bah". They do this
niyyat and then twice turn their faces away from the Ka'bah. Does that
niyyat remain valid? Likewise, they do niyyat to fast from before dawn
to after sunset; and then break their fast without making sure that the
sun has really set. Does that fast remain valid?

**Q. 77: ON SALAAM AND TASHAHUD**

Some times I get into a discussion about how we the Shi'as say 'alayhi
's-salaam after mentioning 'Ali and the Imams. I know its in Sahih
Bukhari from what I have read, but where is it in Shi'a books?
Fakhruddin ar-Razis Commentary on how to salute the Prophet says: "The
companions came to al-Nabi (S.A. W) and said: "How do we salute you?

O, Messenger of Allah (S.A. W)? "; and he said: "Say: O Allah, venerate
Muhammad and the aal of Muhammad like Thou didst venerate Ibrahim and
the aal of Ibrahim: O Allah, bless Muhammad and the aal of Muhammad like
Thou didst bless Ibrahim and the aal of Ibrahim in the world; surely
Thou Art praised and magnified " And when you give salam on me don't
just stop there implying that Ahlul Bayt (A.S) should be included. Then
a Sunni scholar said: "Why don't the Shi'a say this Tashahhud when they
include Ahlul' l-Bayt (A.S) in Salawat on Muhammad Can you explain,
please!

A: We surely include Ahlu'l-Bayt (A.S) in the Salawat. Our prayer is
based on the prayer as shown and taught to us by the Prophet and his
Ahlu'l-Bayt (Peace of Allah be on him and them all). If a statement or
sentence is correct it does not mean that it should be made a part of
prayer.

For example, it is a fact that Muhammad (S.A.W) is the Wali of God, and
His chosen and beloved friend. But what do we say in the Tashahhud? "I
bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and Messenger." That's all. No
other attribute or adjective is used. After that comes the "Salawat" and
only that sentence is used which is prescribed for this purpose here,
and which is taught to us by the Ahlu'1-Bayt (A.S).

**Q. 78: CORRECT PRONOUCIATION OF SALAWAAT**

Some people say in Salawat: Allahumma Salli 'ala Muhammad wa 'ah
Muhammad. Is it correct?

A: The correct way according to Arabic grammar is, Allahumma Salli 'ala
Muhammadin wa 'ali Muhammad.

**Q. 79: HOW ADHAN WAS INSTITUED?**

According to Sunni Tarikh the adhan was instituted by one of the
companions hearing it in a dream... so it is said that the Prophet told
Bilal ibn Raba (R.A) to go on the top of the Masjid-un-Nabi and say
Adhan. It sounds as if Adhan was something the Muslims made up at the
spur of the moment.

A: There are so many traditions in the Sunni books, all contradicting
each other: there are so many companions mentioned in various stories
that one is bound to think that each narrator had his own axe to grind -
wanted to promote his own favourite companion.

Adhan is an 'ibadah (act of worship); how can an 'ibadah be instituted
through people's consultation? Our traditions say that when the Holy
Prophet (S. A.W) ascended to heaven in Mi'raj, Jibra'il said adhan and
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) led the angels in prayer. But it will be wrong
to infer from this tradition that adhan was started in Mecca.

It was not. It was started after hijrah in Medina, but its basis was
that adhan of Jibra'il during the Mi 'raj. Among Sunni Muhaddithin,
at-Tabarani has narrated from Ibn 'Umar a hadith similar to what I have
just narrated from our books; also Ibn Marduwayh has narrated from
'A'ishah from the Prophet a similar hadith.

Masjid-un-Nabi in those days was thatched with date-fronds. (Minarets
were not invented for mosques in the early days of Islam. It is a later
innovation.) So, Bilal ibn Rabah (not Raba) (R.A) could not get on the
top of the Mosque of the Prophet (S.A.W).


