Section 4
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 40
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اذْكُرُواْ نِعْمَتِيَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَوْفُواْ بِعَهْدِي أُوفِ بِعَهْدِكُمْ وَإِيَّايَ
فَارْهَبُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**40.** ***"O' Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I
blessed you, and fulfil My covenant and I shall fulfil your covenant,
and have awe of none but Me."***

### The Remembrance of the Favours of Allah

In the previous verses we learnt about the commission of Adam's
vicegerency on the earth, the respectful treatment of the angels towards
him, Iblis's reaction of pride, and the negligence of his covenant with
*Allah,* and, consequently, his removal from the Garden and, thereafter,
his penitence.

Through these events, this fundamental principle was made clear that: in
this world, there are two opposite forces, i.e. right and wrong, or just
and unjust, which are always at odds with each other.

He who, following the temptations of Satan, chooses the wrong path gets
farther and farther away from felicity and salvation and involves
himself in toil and pain, the fruit of which is remorse and regret.

But those who, heedless of the Satanic temptations and those of vicious
fellows, choose the path of obedience of *Allah* will live a happy life,
free from spiritual pain and grief.

There is a close similarity between the story of Adam (as) and that of
the Israelites when they were rescued from the clutches of Pharaoh
before their vicegerency on the earth, and, after that, their negligence
of their solemn promise to *Allah* which caused them to be involved in
pain and misery.

Their fate not only resembles that of Adam's, but it can also be
considered as a subdivision of that general principle. Hence, in the
above verse and several verses after that, *Allah* refers to some
different aspects of the lives of the Children of Israel and their
lamentable end to complete with them the educative lesson which He
started with the story of Adam's fate.

He addresses the Israelites and says:

***"O' Children of Israel, remember My blessing wherewith I blessed you,
and fulfil My covenant and I shall fulfil your covenant, and have awe of
none but Me."***

Those three instructions (the remembrance of the great blessings of
*Allah,* being loyal to His covenant, to be in awe of only Him) are,
indeed, the basis of all Divine programs.

The remembrance of the blessings of the Lord leads Man to the knowledge
of *Allah,* and provokes a sense of gratitude in him. Then, believing
that those bounties are not given unconditionally and He has taken a
covenant for them makes man aware of his duties and responsibilities.

After this, not having awe of anybody or any power in the way of
performing the Divine duties, causes Man to remove all the barriers and
obstructions from his way and fulfil faithfully his responsibilities and
promises, for, having awe of this and that, is one of the greatest
obstacles on this way, especially in the case of the Israelites who were
under the control of Pharaonic governments and, consequently, fear had
become a part of their lives.

### Explanations

#### Jews in Medina

It is interesting that, according to what historians of the Qur'an have
cited, Surah Al-Baqarah is the first Surah that was revealed in Medina.
This Surah talks mostly about Jews, because they were the most dominate
group of the 'People of the Book' there.

Before the advent of the Prophet of Islam (S), as their own religious
books indicated, they were waiting for such an advent, and used to give
its glad tidings to others. They were also in a very good economic
condition at that time and, on the whole, they had a deep influence on
the social affairs of Medina.

But, with the advent of Islam, many of them not only did not accept the
invitation of Islam, but stood, hiddenly and openly, against it, because
Islam hindered them from their unlawful interests and did not let them
continue their evil social projects. Now, after the passing of more than
fourteen centuries, this same hostility is still alive and active
against Islam.

It was at that time when the above verse and the verses after that were
sent down which blamed them intensively and, by mentioning the sensitive
aspects of their historical background, moved them so violently that
those Jews, who had the least sense of justice and truth-seeking, awoke
and accepted Islam. Besides that, this admonishment was a comprehensive
lesson for all the Muslim believers, too.

In the discussions of the verses that will come later, we shall talk
about some of the outstanding circumstances of these people such as
their rescue from the grips of Pharaoh, the cleaving asunder of the sea
and the drowning of Pharaoh and his horsemen, the appointing place of
Moses (as) on Mount Sinai (Toor), the calf (of gold) worshipped by the
Israelites when Moses (as) was not among them which caused them to
receive the instruction of the bloody repentance and, thereafter, the
special bounties of *Allah* were sent down for them, and some other
events similar to these, each of which contains a lesson or lessons to
be learnt by all.

#### The Jews' Twelve Covenants with Allah

As it is understood from the verses of the Holy Qur'an, the covenant
mentioned in the above verse is the very covenant of worshipping
*Allah*; to treat parents, kindred, orphans, and the needy with
kindness; to have fair behaviour with people, to attend and be steadfast
in ritual prayers; to pay alms; to avoid doing grievous wrongs, and to
avoid shedding blood.

The witness of this statement is **Surah Al-Baqarah. No. 2 verses 83 and
84:**

***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel
(instructing): ‘You shall not worship any but Allah; and A (you shall
do) good to (your) parents, and to the near of kin and to the orphans,
and the needy, and speak kind words to people, keep up the prayer, and
pay the poor-rates (zakat)’. Then you turned away, except a few of you,
and you backslide (even now)."***

***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with you: 'You shall not shed
your blood, nor expel one another from your dwellings', then you
confirmed it while you bore witness."***

These two verses, in fact, refer to the ten different covenants that
*Allah* had taken from the Jews. When we consider, and add, the two
other covenants of **Surah Al-Maidah. No 5. Verse 12,** which advises
them to believe in the Divine prophets and help them respectfully, the
fact is made clear that they had given numerous covenants to *Allah* for
those great Divine blessings; and they had been promised by *Allah* to
be settled in the Gardens of Heaven under whose trees and castles
streams flow, if they would have kept their promises, thus:

***"Allah did aforetime take a Covenant from the Children of Israel...
and Allah said:'I am with you: if ye (but) establish regular Prayers,
practice regular Charity, believe in My apostles, honour and assist
them... And admit you to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath..."***

But, unfortunately, in spite of the long expectations of the Jews based
upon the prophecies in their sacred scriptures, they, finally, observed
none of those promises and they continued their most vehement and the
most torturous opposition and persecution against Islam and Muslims not
only at the advent of Islam but they have also been continuing it until
the present time.

The fruit of their evil actions was that they became vagrant, and this
condition will always be seen in their lives till the time when they
will be destroyed. If we see that, with the support of this or that,
they flourish in their authorative existence for a short length of time,
it cannot be counted a real reason for their final victory.

We know it well that one day the true followers of Islam, free from any
tribal or racial adherences and only under the light of the Holy Qur'an,
will rise and put an end to all these vanities.

#### Allah will fulfil His Covenant, too!

The bounties of *Allah* have never been given unconditionally and every
blessing is accompanied by a responsibility or responsibilities.

A tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (as) says that the objective meaning of
the phrase: 'I shall fulfil your covenant', mentioned in this verse, is
that *Allah* will fulfil His covenant in admitting them into Heaven.
[^1]

It is not surprising that, in this tradition, the belief in the
mastership of Hazrat Ali (as) is mentioned as a part of this covenant,
because one of the items of the covenant of the Children of Israel was
the acceptance of the prophecy of the Divine Apostles and the assisting
of them.

And it is evident that the acceptance of their vicegerents is also a
part of the acceptance of that leadership and mastership, which should
be established at any time appropriate with that age. At the time of
Moses (as), it was he who held that position; and at the time of Hazrat
Muhammad (S), he did, and thereafter Hazrat Ali (as) continued it.

By the way, the phrase: ***“...and have awe of none but Me",***
referring to an awe of His punishment because of their disobedience of
His command, is an emphasis on this subject that, in fulfilling their
covenant with *Allah,* they should fear of no one and no circumstance.

#### Why are Jews Called the Children of Israel?

'Israel' was one of the titles of Jacob, Yosuf's (Joseph) father. Both
the well-known commentators 'Tabarsi' in his book: 'Majma'ul-Bayan '
(vol. 1, p. 92), and 'Shaykh-ut- Ta'ifah' the Late Toosi in his book
entitled: 'at- Tibyan Fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an' (vol. 1, p. 180) have
expressed:

***"Israel is the same as Jacob, the son of Issac (Ishaq) the son of
Abraham (as)...".***

These two great commentators believe that the word / isra'il / is a
combination of the term 'Isr', / 'abd /, with the meaning of 'servant'
and' 'il ' with the meaning of *'Allah'.* Then, the word means 'the
servant of *Allah';* and it is a 'Hebraic' word.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 41-43
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآمِنُواْ بِمَا أَنزَلْتُ مُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ وَلاَ تَكُونُواْ
أَوَّلَ كَافِرٍ بِهِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِآيَاتِي ثَمَناً قَلِيلاً
وَإِيَّايَ فَاتَّقُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَلْبِسُواْ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَتَكْتُمُواْ الْحَقَّ
وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ وَارْكَعُواْ مَعَ
الرَّاكِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**41.** ***"And believe in what I have revealed (the Qur'an), confirming
that (Scripture) which is with you, and be not the first to reject Faith
therein, and sell not My Signs for a miserable price; and be in awe of
none but Me."***  
**42*****. "And confound not the truth with falsehood, nor conceal the
truth while you know (it)."***  
**43.** ***"And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates (zakat), and
bow down in prayer with those who bow down (in congregation)."***

The Lord commands the Jews that they should believe in His revelation,
the Qur'an, and accept it because the acceptance of the Qur'an is just
the same as the acceptance of the Turah:

***"And believe in what I have revealed (the Qur'an) confirming that
(Scripture) which is with you..."***

This statement indicates that the Turah, in which they believe, itself
has pointed out the glad tidings of the advent of the promised Prophet,
Hazrat Muhammad *(S),* and the revelation of the Holy Qur'an. Thus, the
requisite belief in the content of the Turah is belief in the Qur'an.

***"...and be not the first to reject Faith therein..."***

The verse addresses the Jews and says that those people, who are of the
"People of the Book" and among whom there are scholars and learned men
who believe in God and have accepted the Divine prophets, should not be
the first group to reject the Qur'an and deny its rightfulness. When
their scholars do not accept the truth, many others also follow them and
reject it.

***"...and sell not My Signs for a miserable price..."***

Some authentic narrations denote that many of the scholars and Rabbis of
the Jews used to sell the verses and some features of Hadrat Muhammad,
the promised Prophet (S)*,* mentioned in the Scripture of old, the
Turah, to some of the rich Jews at that time and perverted the verses of
the Turah in exchange for taking money from them.

Here, *Allah* scorns them and forbids them from doing this abominable
action and directs them not to corrupt the Scripture for that little sum
of money. The money they used to take was, of course, a large sum, but,
in comparison with what they committed, it was very little.

*Allah's* signs are worth more than all their paltry considerations, and
changing and perverting those Divine Signs is a very great sin so that
gold and silver, howsoever much they may be, or even high social
positions, seems naught in comparison with it. So, He says:

**“...*****and be in awe of none but Me."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***"And confound not the truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth
while you know (it)."***

This verse provides another emphasis on the above meaning. The Jewish
scholars are told, here, not to mix up the truth with falsehood by
perverting the verses of the Turah and hiding its revelations about the
Prophet of Islam (S), when they are supposed to make them manifest,
because they recognize them and, in connection to this, know the
difference between right and wrong very well.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***"And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates (zakat), and bow down
in prayer with those who bow down (in congregation)."***

In Islam, next to the belief in *Allah,* His Messenger, and the
Resurrection, prayer and alms (zakat) are the two essential pillars of
Faith without which the establishment and endurance of Faith is
impossible.

Prayer and poor-rates, as well as observing their proper times, are
strictly and repeatedly emphasized in the concerning verses of the Holy
Qur'an and Islamic traditions and narrations. The excellence and
importance of prayers are briefly pointed out in commenting on verse 3,
the current Surah on pages 80-83 in this volume.

### Explanation

Islam, as a religion, has revealed information with the perfection
necessary to train mankind and to discipline the human race and to
enable them to raise themselves from the depths of material degradation
to the unlimited elevation of spiritual glory in order to qualify each -
individual as an adherent, as much as he or she personally desires, to
rise towards the divinity in store for every sincere seeker of it.

The curbing of the physical desires of a human being is sure to have the
natural consequence of sublimating it by the resulting moral effect on
the mind which can gradually put it well on the way to receiving the
enlightenment of the higher meanings of life. A certain degree of piety
and devotion is essential for a human being to be initiated into the
realm of spiritual bliss.

All the previous religions, particularly the creed of the Jews and the
Christians, were limited to some extreme systems of optional ascetic
hermitage of extremes which did not agree with the natural demands of
the social life of the people.

The imposition of such extremes, with the freedom to do it or not, could
help only a few to follow the order, discarding completely their worthy
life but the bulk of the people had sunk deep into hypocritical
observances and practices.

Islam, as a practical and fully regulated religion, bases its foundation
first on humbling the ego of man by making him conscious about his
relation to his Creator and thus making him yield to the Lord, his God,
in complete submission to Him by worshipping in a way suiting his humble
position.

By this, Islam brings man in the presence of his Lord. The first
cardinal doctrine or ordinance of Islam is 'salat' or, 'prayers' which
develops in a human being the appropriate feeling in relation to God and
puts the individual in direct contact with the great qualities of the
Absolute Divinity.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 44
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَأْمُرُونَ النَّاسَ بِالْبِرِّ وَتَنسَوْنَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ
تَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**44.** ***"Do you enjoin righteousness upon people while you forget
your own selves (to practice it)? And you read the Scripture? Have you
then no sense? "***

This verse is apparently addressing and scorning the scholars of the
Jews who, before the Divine invitation of Hadrat Muhammad (S),
recommended people to embrace Islam. They enjoined them to pay charity
and favour each other, but they did not do these good deeds themselves.
They did not accept Islam in order to continue their mastership, nor pay
charity lest they might become poor.

But, the verse, in fact, addresses and admonishes all those who
habitually recommend others to piety and neglect their own souls.

***"Do you enjoin righteousness upon people while you forget your own
selves (to practice it)?..."***

It is not logical that a person enjoins his fellow men to help others
and work righteousness but,'he himself does not observe it. That is why,
at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...And you read the Scripture? Have you then no sense? "***

It inquires how you do not understand that you should enjoin
righteousness on yourselves first and do accordingly to be as an
example, and then expect others to obey you and receive your
recommendation, with their whole hearts.

Experience has proved that words which are uttered only by the tongue,
as simple statements, physically strike the ears and perish. But
reasonable speech that arises from the soul and reality settles in souls
firmly and affects hearts deeply.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 45-46
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَعِينُواْ بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلاَةِ وَإِنَّهَا لَكَبِيرَةٌ إِلاَّ
عَلَى الْخَاشِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُم مُّلاَقُوا رَبِّهِمْ وَأَنَّهُمْ
إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**45.** ***"And seek you help (from Allah) through patience and prayer;
and most surely it is a hard thing, save upon the humble,"***  
**46.** ***"Those who bear in mind the certainty that they will meet
their Lord and that verily unto Him shall they return."***

To enable Man to overcome his latent low desires and to clean his mind
from the love of position and rank, the *Qur’an* says:

***"And seek you help (from Allah) through patience and prayer; and most
surely it is a hard thing, save upon the humble,"***

### How to Overcome Difficulties

To overcome difficulties and solve problems demands two fundamental
principles. The first principle is a strong inner will, and the second
one is a firm outward refuge. These two principles are referred to in
the above verse as 'patience' and 'prayer'.

Patience, here, has been rendered into' fasting' and' perseverance'
during difficulties while prayer is a connection with *Allah* and a
means of communication with this Helpful Refuge.

About the term / sabr / ' patience', one of the books [^2] says that it
is a natural phenomenon well-known to every enlightened one that bodily
mortification is to some extent necessary in disciplining the human ego
accommodated in the physical framework, to lighten it by liberating it
from the clutches of the desires and passions of the material world
otherwise it would sink deeply into its own devious personal interest.

This is essential to elevate it unto the heights of the spiritual
realms. A religion merely consisting of some mere formal rituals and the
offering of chanting or the recitation of some verbal prayers or charms
without the demand on the individual for the practical control of the
animal-self in him can hardly be worth anything.

The truth endowed or the spiritual strength one gets through overcoming
his selfish passions, is by itself a very vast subject to be dealt with
in the brief notes meant to explain the particular aspects of the
wordings of the Divine verses here.

However, an Islamic tradition says that Imam al-Sadiq (as) was once
asked about the meaning of the word / sabr / 'patience', mentioned in
this verse, when he said: *"Patience means fasting."* [^3]

Again, commenting on this verse, the leading commentators have cited
that whenever any difficulty confronted the Prophet of Islam (S), he
used to resort to' fasting' and 'prayers' to be helped with. [^4]Also,
Hazrat Ali (as) did the same.[^5]

It is also narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (as) who has said:

*"It does not matter that when one of you is involved in a grief out of
the grieves of the world, you would make ablution and enter a mosque.
Then, you would recite a prayer and offer a petition therein to Allah,
because I know He has commanded: ‘And seek you help (from Allah) through
patience and prayer'."* [^6]

Yes, verily prayer connects Man to an everlasting Power, to *Allah,* for
Whom all the hard problems and complicated difficulties are easy. This
very feeling causes man to be calm, powerful, and steadfast against
misadventures.

And with prayer, -what else can ever be imaginably more effective or
successful than any individual in his helplessness approaching the
All-Merciful, Almighty through prayers for help ?

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the verse following the above one, the Holy Qur'an introduces the
humble ones, thus:

**"*****Those who bear in mind the certainty that they will meet their
Lord and that verily unto Him shall they return."***

So, it is narrated from Amir-ul Mu'mineen Ali (as) who has said that one
of the characteristics of the humble ones who are the same as the
believers is knowledge and certainty about their meeting with *Allah*
which will take place in the Hereafter. [^7]

### What is 'Meeting with Allah'?

The idea of 'meeting with *Allah* ' has been mentioned repeatedly in the
Qur'an where it totally means 'Presence in the Hereafter'. It is obvious
that the purpose of 'meeting with the Lord' is not a physical meeting
like the meeting of people with each other face to face.

We also know that *Allah* is not a bodily substance to have colour or
place, or to be seen with the eyes. Then, as some commentators have
said, the purpose of the phrase may be the observation of the effects of
His Power in the scene of the Hereafter, such as: His bounties, rewards,
and punishments.

Or, it means an esoteric intuition in the heart or soul, because,
sometimes, Man reaches a point that he sees the Lord in front of him by
his heart's eye, and in that case no doubt will continue for him.

This state may come to being for some people in this world as a result
of piety, worship, and purification of the carnal soul. The following
explanation, cited in Nahjul Balagha, attests to the idea:

One of the companions of Amir-ul Mu'mineen Ali (as), Di'lib al-Yamani,
who was a learned man, once asked him (as) whether Ali (as) had seen
*Allah,* his Lord, when he (as) replied:

*"Do I worship the One Whom I have not seen?"*

Then the man asked him to explain it more and Ali (as) added:

*"Eyes do not see Him face to face, but hearts (souls) perceive Him
through the (light of) realities of Faith..."* [^8]

However, in the Hereafter, all human beings will attain this esoteric
intuition, since, therein, the effects of the Glory and Power of *Allah*
will be so manifested that none can deny them, and all will have a
decisive Faith in everything.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 47-48
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اذْكُرُواْ نِعْمَتِيَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَنِّي فَضَّلْتُكُمْ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً لاَّ تَجْزِي نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْسٍ شَيْئاً وَلاَ
يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا شَفَاعَةٌ وَلاَ يُؤْخَذُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**47.** ***"O*****'** ***Children of Israel, call to mind My favour
which I bestowed on you, and that I made you excel the nations (of that
time)."***  
***48. "And guard yourselves against a day when no one in the least
shall avail another, nor shall intercession be accepted from anyone, nor
shall any ransom be taken from anyone, nor shall they be helped (from
outside)."***

### The Vain Imaginations of the Jews

In these verses, again, the Lord addresses the Children of Israel and
reminds them of His bounties bestowed on them, thus:

***"O' Children of Israel, call to mind My favours which I bestowed on
you..."***

These bounties were numerous consisting of Faith, Divine Guidance and
their rescue from the grips of pharaohs which led them to regaining
their splendour and independence.

Then, among these bounties He has pointed out the bounty of their being
made to excel the nations of their time which in itself is a combination
of different bounties. He continues and says:

***“...and that I made you excel the nations (of that time)."***

Some may think that the objective meaning of the phrase, ***"I made you
excel the nations ",*** is that He has made them excel the nations all
over the world and forever.

But, regarding other verses, the Qur'an makes it clear that the
application of the address 'you' is meant for those immediately present
at that time and in their own locality, because in another occurrence
the Qur'an, addressing Muslims, says:

***"You are the best of peoples, evolved for mankind, "*** **(Surah
Ale-Imran. No. 3. verse 110).**

Another verse about the Israelites says: **"*****And We made a people,
considered weak (and of no account), inheritors of lands in both East
and West…*****", (Surah Al-A'raf No.7. verse 137).** It is obvious that
the Children of Israel did not inherit the world entirely at that time.

So, it means that they inherited the east and the west of their own
region, Therefore, their preference to other nations means preference to
the other nations in their environment at that time.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The Qur'an rejects the vain considerations of the Jews, They thought
that, on the Day of Judgment, their forefathers and ancestors, who were
prophets of *Allah* would make intercession for them; or they imagined
that on that Day those prophets could give ransom for their sins the
same as some of their people employ bribery in this world, The Qur'an
says:

***"And guard yourselves against a day when no one in the least shall
avail another ",***

***"Nor shall intercession be accepted from anyone", "nor shall any
ransom be taken from anyone," "nor shall they be helped (from
outside)"***

In brief, the 'Judge' on that Day is He Who accepts, from the servants,
only pure good actions done with true belief, as the Qur'an says about
it:

***"The Day when on neither wealth nor sons will avail," " But only he
(will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart"*** **(Surah Shu'ara
No.26. verses 88 & 89).**

The verse under discussion, in fact, is a hint to this reality that, in
this world, saving a sinful person from punishment by applying all
possible means is an ordinary custom. Sometimes someone undertakes the
payment of another person's compensation and pays it.

If this way fails, intercession may be resorted to and some respectable
personalities who have power and influence may be brought forward to
intercede for him. If intercession does not avail either, the person
tries to save himself by paying for the fine. And, if this, too,
provides no results, he asks his friends and fellow men to help him
somehow, so that he can escape from the grips of punishment.

There are different ways of fleeing from punishment in this world, but
the Qur'an says that the chastisements in the Hereafter are completely
different from those in this world and none of these behaviours are
acceptable there. The only way of rescue is to refuge under the shade of
Faith and righteousness, and to ask help from *Allah,* the Merciful.

### Supplication

*O'Lord, the Creator, the Cherisher! We humbly ask You to guide us so
that, at the end, You will be pleased with us and we can be prosperous.*

### Intercession in the Qur'an and Traditions

The term / safa'at / ' intercession', with all its derivations, has
occurred about thirty times in the Qur'an. This status shows the depth
of the importance of the matter.

Undoubtedly, the punishments of the Lord, whether in this world or in
the next, are not for revenging at all, but they are, in fact, to
warrant the obedience of the Divine ordinances and, consequently, the
development and progress of men. Therefore, everything that weakens this
security should be avoided in order that people would be less likely to
commit sin and vice.

On the other hand, the way of repentance and return to righteousness and
improvement should not be completely closed to the sinners. They must
have the opportunity and possibility of improving themselves which
results in piety and returning to the path of *Allah.*

Thus, intercession means that, on the Day of Judgement, prophets,
saints, and some special righteous ones will intercede with Allah's
permission for those who have not cut their tie of Faith with *Allah*
and preserved their spiritual relationship with Him and His Messengers.

In other words, intercession, in its proper meaning, exists for the
preserving of this equilibrium. It is a means for the sinners and the
wrong-doers to return from their present way to the path of obedience
and servitude.

We may emphasize that the doctrine of intercession is quite natural,
reasonable and logical. It is a natural, just, and merciful
classification of souls according to the natural affinity and the bonds
of love and sincere attachment which existed between the individual and
the faithful servants of *Allah,* viz. the holy Prophet (S) and the holy
Ahlul Bayt (as) whose purity of spirit, flawlessness of conduct and
character, selfless services and matchless sacrifices for the cause of
truth, are universal factors and whose goodliness is unreservedly
acknowledged by the Muslims and even by the non-Muslims as well.

However, as it was mentioned before, there are numerous verses in the
Qur'an concerning 'intercession'. To understand these verses completely
and correctly, all of them should be studied carefully and considered as
a whole to follow the unity of purpose they are meant for.

It is absolutely wrong that for proving our claim we take only one verse
from amongst the numerous verses on intercession and neglect the others.
The errors that have come into being upon the subject of intercession,
as well as upon some other rational subjects, are the effect of such
wrong and imperfect investigations.

This method, in which we take a single verse and refuse or neglect other
verses that can be elucidative and frames of reference for that
particular verse, is far from the right manner of researching.

Then, firstly, besides all the other arguments of the various
expositions on the validity of intercession based upon the other verses
of the Qur'an, as was mentioned formerly, and with further assurance by
the traditions of the holy Prophet (S), it is a natural and logical
conclusion, beyond all doubt, that on the Day of Judgement intercession
cannot be but an undeniable fact.

That is, *Allah* regard for His holy and faithful servants is accepted
as a natural and logical necessary factor. Secondly, it is certain that
the Holy Qur'an in many places, some of which are mentioned below,
asserts the effectiveness of intercession under some conditions, on the
Day of Judgement, when those authorized by the Lord shall have the right
to do it.

The Qur'an says:

**"On** ***that Day shall no intercession avail except for those for
whom permission has been granted by (Allah) Most Gracious and whose word
is acceptable to Him*** **", (Surah Taha, No.20. Verse 109).**

**"*****No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for those for
whom He has granted permission...",*** **(Surah Saba, No.34. Verse
23).**

***"And those whom they invoke besides Allah have no power of
intercession; -only he who bears witness to the Truth, and they know
(him)",*** **(Surah Az-Zukhraf, No.43. Verse 86).**

For further elucidation on the doctrine of intercession some of the
verses which can also be referred to are: 26: 100, 2: 123 & 255, 74: 48,
21: 28, and 19: 87.

In the authentic literature of Muslims, both the Sunnite and Shi'ah
schools, through some Islamic narrations, there are many implications to
the existence of 'intercession' in the Hearafter which are presented as
explanatory statements for the aforementioned verses on intercession.

Some of these books are: Bihar-al-Anwar, Majma'-ul-Bayan,
Tafsir-i-Almizan, At-Tibyan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, Al-Burhan fi
Tafsir-il-Qur'an, Al-Khisal by Shaykh al-Saduq, Usul al-Kafi,
Sunan-i-Ibn-Majah, Musnad-i-Ahmad, Muwatta-i-Malik, Sunan-i-Tirmizi,
Sunan-i-Darmi, Sahih-i-Muslim, Sahih-i-Bukhari,…

Out of the many traditions and narrations cited in the above mentioned
books, a few of them have been chosen here:

1. The holy Prophet (S) has said:

*"I will be the first one who intercedes and the first one whose
intercession will be accepted (by Allah)."* [^9]

2. Hadrat Ali (as) said:

*"...We will intercede and those who love (and follow) us will do so,
too..."* [^10]

3. The holy Prophet (S) also said:

*"...I have been bestowed on (five privileges: the first is),
'intercession' which I have kept for my followers (Ummah). Intercession
is (permitted) for the one who associates no partner with Allah..."*
[^11]

4. Again, the Messenger of *Allah* (S) has said:

*"...The most prosperous people by my intercession on the Day of
Judgement will be those who have sincerely said from their deep hearts
(souls): there is no god except Allah (i.e. sincerely believe in
Allah)."* [^12]

5. The holy Prophet (S) has also said:

*"My intercession is for all (true) Muslims."* [^13]

6. Firdous-ud-Diylami, Abuhurayrah, narrates from the holy Prophet (S)
who has said:

*"The intercessors (in the Hereafter) are five: the Qur'an,
relationships, trust, your Messenger, and the people of the house (Ahlul
Bayt) of your prophet."* [^14]

7. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is narrated to have said:

*"There is none of (the people of) ancient times and (those of) the
later times but needs Muhammad's intercession (S) on the Day of
Judgement."* [^15]

8. In Usul al-Kafi, it is also cited that Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said in
a tradition:

*"He who wishes to enjoy of intercession by the intercessors with Allah,
should try to gain His pleasure."* [^16]

We hope that *Allah,* the Merciful, may bestow the success of obedience
and servitude on His path upon all of us and may He save us from any err
and sin in our deeds. May He deprive us not of the intercession of the
holy Prophet (S) and Ahlul Bayt (as) on the Day of Reckoning. Amin, O'
Lord of the Worlds!

[^1]: Nur-uth- Thaqalayn, vol, 1, p 73

[^2]: The Holy Qur'an, with English Translation of the Arabic Text and ,
p. 98

[^3]: Al-Burhan Fi Tafsiril Qur'an, vol. 1, p. 14 & Tafsir-as-Safi: vol.
1, p. 111

[^4]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 99

[^5]: Ibid, p. 100

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 480

[^7]: Atyabul-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 21

[^8]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 179

[^9]: Sunan-i- Tirmizi vol. 5, p. 24 & Sunan-i-Darmi; vol. 1, p. 26 & 27

[^10]: Al-Khisal by Saduq, p. 624

[^11]: Musnad-i-Ahmad, vol. 1, p. 301 & Sunan-i-Nisai vol. 1, p. 172

[^12]: Sahih-al-Bukhari, vol. 1, p. 36

[^13]: Sunan-i-Ibn-Majah, vol. 2, p. 1444, tradition 4317

[^14]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 43

[^15]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 38, tradition 16

[^16]: Usul al-Kafi; vol. 8, p. 11 & Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 53


