Section 6
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 57
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَظَلَّلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ الْغَمَامَ وَأَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ الْمَنَّ
وَالسَّلْوَى كُلُواْ مِن طَيِّبَاتِ مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ وَمَا ظَلَمُونَا
وَلَـكِن كَانُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57*****. "And We outspread the clouds to shade you, and We sent down
'manna' and 'quail' upon you, (saying): Eat of the good things We have
provided for you’.***  
***(But they rebelled); to Us they did no harm, but they were putting
themselves to destruction."***

### Abundant Bounties!

As it is understood from **Surah AL-Maidah, verses 20 to 22,** when the
Children of Israel were saved from the hostility of the Pharaoh and his
army, *Allah* commanded them to move toward the Holy Land of Jerusalem
and enter in it.

But the Israelites did not obey the command saying:

***"...in this land are a people of exceeding strength: never shall we
enter it until they leave it: if (once) they leave then shall we enter
",*** **(the Holy Qur'an 5: 22).**

Those rebellious people's disobedience did not stop there. They even
told Moses (as):

***"...Go thou, and thy Lord, and fight ye two, while we sit here (and
watch) ",*** **(SurahAl- Maidah No. 5. verse 24).**

Moses became very displeased with their words and told the story of his
grievance to the Lord. Finally, it was appointed that the Children of
Israel wander through the desert (of Sinai) in distraction for forty
years.

A group of those people regretted their wrong action and returned to the
Lord repenting of that sin. Then, He bestowed His bounties on them
again, a part of which is referred to in the verse under discussion,
where it says:

**"*****And We outspread the clouds to shade you,...*****"**

It is obvious how happy a wandering passenger, who has been walking
under the hot sun in the desert that he has to pass through without any
shelter from morning till evening, is when he receives the welcome shade
of clouds!

True, it is probable that shady clouds sometimes appear in the sky of
the deserts, but the verse clearly declares that the event was not an
ordinary thing that occurred for the Children of Israel. It was the
favour of *Allah* that often showered upon them and they enjoyed it.

At the same time, during that long span of time, the passengers in that
hot dry desert needed food and sustenance. That problem was also solved
for them by the Merciful Creator, as the verse continues saying:

***"..And we sent down 'manna' and 'quail' upon you,..."***

***"...(saying): ‘Eat of the good things We have provided for
you.'..."***

In order that you may enjoy of the pure delicious nutritious sustenance
and not disobey Him. Yet, they were not thankful to Him.

***"...(But they rebelled); to Us they did no harm, but they were
putting themselves to destruction."***

The terms 'manna' and 'salwa' are differently interpreted by different
philologists and commentators. However, the fact is: 'manna', and
'salwa' refer to the heavenly provisions the Israelites were provided
with, without any strain or burden on their part.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 58-59
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا ادْخُلُواْ هَـذِهِ الْقَرْيَةَ فَكُلُواْ مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
شِئْتُمْ رَغَداً وَادْخُلُواْ الْبَابَ سُجَّداً وَقُولُواْ حِطَّةٌ
نَّغْفِرْ لَكُمْ خَطَايَاكُمْ وَسَنَزِيدُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَدَّلَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ قَوْلاً غَيْرَ الَّذِي قِيلَ لَهُمْ
فَأَنزَلْنَا عَلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ رِجْزاً مِّنَ السَّمَاء بِمَا
كَانُواْ يَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58*****. "And (remember) when We said, 'Enter this city (Jerusalem)
and eat of the plentiful therein, wherever you desire, and enter the
gate with humility and ask forgiveness,***  
***We shall forgive you your sins, and give more (the portion of) those
who do good’."***  
**59.** ***"But those who were unjust substituted a saying other than
that which had been spoken unto them, so We sent down upon those who
were unjust a torment from heaven for what they used to pervert."***

### The Israelites' Intensive Obstinacy

Here we are dealing with another aspect of the life of the Children of
Israel concerning their entrance in the Holy Land. It says:

**"*****And (remember) when We said:*** **'*****Enter this city
(Jerusalem)..."***

The term /qaryah / in our ordinary speaking usually means: ‘a village or
a town', but in the Qur'an it is applied for any place where people are
gathered to live in, whether it is a city, town, or village. The
meaning, here, is Jerusalem and the Holy Land.

Then it adds:

***"...and eat of the plentiful therein, wherever you desire..."***

***"...and enter the gate with humility and ask forgiveness..."***

***“...We shall forgive you your sins, and give more (the portion of)
those who do good"***

It should be noted that the term / hittah / philologically means: ‘a
putting down', and, here, it means: ‘a petition for the putting down of
a leavy burden of sin from them and asking *Allah* to forgive their
faults.'

The Lord commanded the Israelites to say that phrase with their whole
hearts and spirits for the purpose of asking, thereby, for the putting
down of their heavy burdens from them, because they needed to be put
down from them before entering the Holy Land.

And, they were promised that they would be forgiven their sins if they
did perform the command accordingly. Maybe, it is for the same reason
that one of the doors of Heaven is entitled ' Bab-ul-Hittah ' (the door
of forgiveness). Abu Hayyan Andulusi says that the objective meaning of
/bab/, here, is one of the doors of Jerusalem which is known as '
Bab-ul-Hittah'. [^1]

The verse finally proclaims that as for the doers of good, besides
forgiving their sins, there will be endowed some additional bounties and
rewards upon them, too. It says:

***"...and give more (the portion of) those who do good."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

However, *Allah* ordered them to express this phrase sincerely as a sign
of their repentance and request for forgiveness in order to show their
humility unto Him. The Lord promised them that He would forgive them
their sins if they followed through with the command. In that case, He
would also increase His favour and reward for the good doers among them
along with the forgiveness of their faults.

But, as we know and are acquainted with the stubbornness and obstinacy
of the Children of Israel, some of them even refused to utter the phrase
and mockingly they said another incongruous word (Hinta ) 'wheat'
instead of it. Then, the Qur'an says:

***"But those who were unjust substituted a saying other than that which
had been spoken unto them..."***

***"...so We sent down upon those who were unjust a torment from heaven
for what they used to pervert."***

Divine Punishment in some form or other awaits those who unwarrantedly
and unjustly change the word of *Allah* and His covenant, to something
other than the original presented to them.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 60
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ اسْتَسْقَى مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ فَقُلْنَا اضْرِب بِّعَصَاكَ
الْحَجَرَ فَانفَجَرَتْ مِنْهُ اثْنَتَا عَشْرَةَ عَيْناً قَدْ عَلِمَ
كُلُّ أُنَاسٍ مَّشْرَبَهُمْ كُلُواْ وَاشْرَبُواْ مِن رِّزْقِ اللَّهِ
وَلاَ تَعْثَوْاْ فِي الأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60.** ***"And (remember) when Moses sought water for his people, so We
said: 'Strike the rock with your staff.' Then there gushed forth from it
twelve springs. Each (group of) people knew their*** ***(respective)
drinking-place. 'Eat and drink of Allah's provision, and commit you not
evil in the earth, doing corruption'."***

### The Miracle of Water Gushing Forth in the Desert!

Again in this verse, *Allah* has pointed out one of the important
favours bestowed upon the Children of Israel, saying:

***"And (remember) when Moses sought water for his people..."***

When Moses (as) prayed for water, *Allah* accepted his plea as the
Qur'an says:

***"...so We said: 'Strike the rock with your staff.'..."***

***“...Then there gushed forth from it twelve springs..."***

Each of those springs flowed for a definite tribe so that among all of
the tribes of Israelites:

***“...Each (group of) people knew their (respective) drinking
place..."***

There are a variety of ideas about what kind of stone that rock was and
how Moses (as) was supposed to strike that rock, and in what form the
flow of water appeared from it. What the Qur'an says is not more than
that Moses (as) struck the rock with his staff and then twelve springs
gushed forth there from.

This incident is referred to in Exod 17: 1-6, with the only difference
being that the number of twelve springs that gushed forth from the rock
is not mentioned. However, the Lord, on one hand, sent ' Manna' and
'Salwa' (quails) for them, and, on the other hand, provided them enough
water, easily available, and told them:

***"...'Eat and drink of Allah's provision, and commit you not evil in
the earth, doing corruption'."***

In fact, the Lord advises them, as a showing of gratitude for these
great bounties, that at least they should lay stubbornness and obstinacy
aside and stop hurting prophets (as).

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 61
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْتُمْ يَا مُوسَى لَن نَّصْبِرَ عَلَىَ طَعَامٍ وَاحِدٍ
فَادْعُ لَنَا رَبَّكَ يُخْرِجْ لَنَا مِمَّا تُنبِتُ الأَرْضُ مِن
بَقْلِهَا وَقِثَّآئِهَا وَفُومِهَا وَعَدَسِهَا وَبَصَلِهَا قَالَ
أَتَسْتَبْدِلُونَ الَّذِي هُوَ أَدْنَى بِالَّذِي هُوَ خَيْرٌ
اهْبِطُواْ مِصْراً فَإِنَّ لَكُم مَّا سَأَلْتُمْ وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ
الذِّلَّةُ وَالْمَسْكَنَةُ وَبَآؤُوْاْ بِغَضَبٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ
بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ
النَّبِيِّينَ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ ذَلِكَ بِمَا عَصَواْ وَّكَانُواْ
يَعْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**61.** ***"And (remember) when you said: ‘O' Moses! never can we
(always) endure one sort of food, so beseech your Lord for us, to
produce for us of what the earth groweth, -its pot-herbs, and cucumbers,
garlic, lentils, and onions’. He (Moses) said: 'Would you have in
exchange what is worse for what is better? Enter a city, thus you shall
get that which you demanded! , Abasement and humiliation were stamped
upon them and they incurred wrath from Allah; that was because they went
on rejecting Allah's Signs and slaying the prophets unjustly. That was
because they disobeyed, and went on transgressing."***

### Demanding a Variety of Food

To continue the description mentioned in the former verses about the
different bounties *Allah* bestowed on the Children of Israel, here in
the verse under discussion, the unthankfulness and ingratitude of the
Israelites for those great favours is illustrated.

The verse indicates how obstinate they were, so much so that perhaps no
people can be found in the history of the human race similar to them
from the point of being ungrateful for Divine favours.

At first it says:

***"And (remember) when you said: ‘O' Moses! never can we (always)
endure one sort of food,..."***

***"...so beseech your Lord for us, to produce for us of what the earth
groweth,- its pot-herbs, and cucumbers, garlic, lentils and
onions'..."***

But in reply to them:

***"He (Moses) said: ‘Would you have in exchange what is worse for what
is better?.."***

Now that it is so:

***“...Enter a city, thus you shall get that which you demanded!’..."***

Then, the Qur'an adds that:

***“...Abasement and humiliation were stamped upon them, and they
incurred wrath from Allah..."***

***"...that was because they went on rejecting Allah's Signs and slaying
the prophets unjustly..."***

***"...That was because they disobeyed, and went on transgressing."***

### Why were the Israelites Stamped with Abasement and Humiliation?

As the above verse indicates, they incurred humiliation and wretchedness
because of two things: the first was because they went on disobeying the
orders of *Allah* and straying from the path of monotheism to that of
infidelity.

The second factor was that they used to kill the righteous and apostles
of *Allah.* This hard-heartedness and heedlessness of the Divine laws
and even against most human laws that even today clearly continues among
the Jews might be the cause of that humiliation and abasement.

Right now, as we are writing these lines, the territory of Lebanon is
being invaded savagely by this hard-hearted tribe where thousands of men
and women, among whom are innocent, old persons, infant babies, hospital
patients and the like, are unjustly and tyrannically being slain in a
pitiable way.

Their bodies are lying lifelessly on the ground in wait of burial. We
are sure that this tribe will certainly have to pay the penalty for
their cruelty in the future.

[^1]: At-Tafsir-ul-Kashif, vol. 1, p. 109


