Section 9
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 75-77
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَتَطْمَعُونَ أَن يُؤْمِنُواْ لَكُمْ وَقَدْ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ
يَسْمَعُونَ كَلاَمَ اللّهِ ثُمَّ يُحَرِّفُونَهُ مِن بَعْدِ مَا
عَقَلُوهُ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا لَقُواْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا وَإِذَا خَلاَ
بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىَ بَعْضٍ قَالُواْ أَتُحَدِّثُونَهُم بِمَا فَتَحَ
اللّهُ عَلَيْكُمْ لِيُحَآجُّوكُم بِهِ عِندَ رَبِّكُمْ أَفَلاَ
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلاَ يَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا
يُعْلِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**75** ***"Do you then hope that they would believe in you (in Faith),-
and a party among them indeed used to hear the Word of Allah, then
perverted it after they had understood it, and they know (this) ? "***  
**76.** ***"And when they meet those who have Faith, they say: 'We
believe', but when they are alone with one another, they say:, Do you
speak to them of what Allah has revealed to you, that they may thereby
dispute with you about this before your Lord ? Have you then no sense? '
"***   
**77.** ***"What! Do they not know that Allah knows what they hide and
what they make known? "***

### Occasion of Revelation

Upon the occasion of the revelation of these first two verses, some of
the commentators have narrated from Imam Baqir (as) who has said: "A
group of the Jews, who had not enmity with the truth, when they met the
Muslims they would tell them of what had been mentioned in the Turah
about the specialties of Prophet Muhammad (S).

The leaders of the Jews understood the matter and told them to avoid
informing Muslims of what was cited in the Turah about the epithets of
Prophet Muhammad (S) lest they would argue with the Jews about it before
their Lord. Then this verse was revealed." [^1]

### A Futile Expectation!

As noted from these verses, the Qur'an has discontinued the story of the
Israelites and, with an instructive conclusion, has turned to the Muslim
believers, saying:

***"Do you then hope that they would believe in you (in Faith), and a
party among them indeed used to hear the Word of Allah, then perverted
it after they had understood it, and they know (this)?"***

Therefore, when you see that they reject the inspiring words of the
Qur'an and the miracles of the holy Prophet of Islam (S), you should not
be annoyed. They are the children of the same people who, as the elected
members of the tribe, went to Mount Sinai, heard the words of *Allah,*
and understood His instructions, but when they returned they altered
them.

It is perceived from the phrase: ‘***and a party among them
indeed...",*** that not all of them but a party, who probably formed the
majority of them, were of those who perverted Allah's Words.

It is cited in 'Asbab-un-Nuzul ' that when some of the Jews returned
from Mount Sinai, they told their people: ***"We heard that Allah
ordered Moses,' whenever you can do My instructions do them, but when
you cannot, leave them ",*** and this was the first perversion.

However, at the advent of the Prophet of Islam (S), it was expected that
the Jews would accept this religion before others embraced it, because
they were the followers of the Book, whereas the pagans were not.
Besides that, they had learnt the epithets of the Prophet of Islam (S)
from their own books.

But the Holy Qur'an says that, considering their previous bad
reputation, your hope is of no avail. The reason is that some deviated
characteristics which dominated the spirits of this group caused them to
separate from truth, though it was well within the realm of their
ability to embrace it.

The next verse uncovers another bitter fact about this deceitful
hypocritical group. It says:

***"And when they meet those who have Faith, they say: 'We
believe'..."***

***“...but when they are alone with one another, they say:***

***'Do you speak to them of what Allah has revealed to you….'"***

***“...that they may thereby dispute with you about this before your
Lord ? Have you then no sense? ' "***

In commenting on this very verse, this probability also exists that the
initial words of the verse are about the hypocritical Jews who pretended
to be believers in the presence of the Muslims but in their absence they
denied it. They even scorned those pure-hearted Jews who had conveyed
the secrets of the Turah to the Muslims.

At any rate, this is a confirmation to what was said in the previous
verse that a group with such attributes governing their spirits should
not be expected to become faithful.

The phrase: / fatahallahu 'alaykum /***' what Allah has revealed to
you'*** may mean: ‘the Divine command which was in the authority of the
Children of Israel’. Or, the phrase may refer to the idea that *Allah*
had opened the doors of the divine secrets and the prophecies about the
coming religion unto them.

It is noteworthy that this verse clearly shows that the Faith of this
hypocritical group in *Allah* was so weak and hollow that they
considered Him as an ordinary person and imagined that if they could
conceal a fact from the Muslims, it would be concealed from *Allah,*
too.

Then, in the next verse, it frankly says:

***"What! Do they not know that Allah knows what they hide and what they
make known? "***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 78-79
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمْ أُمِّيُّونَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ أَمَانِيَّ
وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَظُنُّونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ يَكْتُبُونَ الْكِتَابَ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ ثُمَّ
يَقُولُونَ هَـذَا مِنْ عِندِ اللّهِ لِيَشْتَرُواْ بِهِ ثَمَناً
قَلِيلاً فَوَيْلٌ لَّهُم مِّمَّا كَتَبَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَوَيْلٌ لَّهُمْ
مِّمَّا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**78*****. "And there are among them illiterates, who know not the Book,
but only fancies and mere conjectures."***  
**79.** ***" So, woe to those who write the Book with their hands and
then say: , This is from Allah, so that they may sell it for a little
price, so, woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them
for what they earn."***

### Occasion of Revelation

A group of the learned men of the Jews altered the epithets of the holy
Prophet (S) mentioned in the Turah. This perversion was contrived to
protect their social positions and benefits which they used to obtain
from their common people over the years.

When the Prophet of Islam (S) announced his mission and they recognized
his epithets coincided with what was mentioned in the Turah, they were
afraid that their profits would be endangered if the fact became
evident. Therefore, they wrote some epithets completely different from
what was actually cited in the Turah.

The ordinary Jews, who had heard the true epithets of the Prophet of
Islam (S), more or less, asked their scholars frequently whether this
Prophet was the same promised prophet whose advent they had given them
glad tidings of. Then the Jewish savants and scholars decided to recite
some perverted verses from the Turah to them in order to make them
content thereby.

#### The Jewish Learned Men's Plots of Oppression Against the Laymen

Following the previous description about the vicious deeds of the Jews,
these verses divide them into two definite groups: the laymen and the
deceitful learned men. A few of the Jewish scholars, of course, accepted
the truth and believed in Islam and joined the community of Muslims. It
says:

***"And there are among them illiterates, who know not the Book, but
only fancies and mere conjectures."***

The phrase / ummiyun / 'the illiterates' is the plural form of the term
/ ummi / which, here, means an illiterate person who remains the same in
his native endowments as he was when he was born without any external
education or training from anyone whosoever; and this state is
ordinarily known as illiteracy.

Or, this case also occurs because some mothers, because of their naive
motherly love for their children, ignorantly do not let their children
separate from them and go to schools to study.

The term / amaniyy / is the plural form of / amniyyah / 'conjecture',
and, here, it may refer to the privileges, vain desires, wishful
thinking and mere conjectures of the Jews that they considered for
themselves.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The second group was the Jewish priests and savants who often altered
the facts for their own benefit, as the Qur'an says:

***"So, woe to those who write the Book with their hands and then say:
'This is from Allah..."***

***“...so that they may sell it for a little price..."***

***“...so, woe to them for what their hands have written..."***

***“...and woe to them for what they earn..."***

From the last meanings of the verse, it is well understood that they had
used impious means and had come up with an incorrect conclusion.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 80-82
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ لَن تَمَسَّنَا النَّارُ إِلاَّ أَيَّاماً مَّعْدُودَةً قُلْ
أَتَّخَذْتُمْ عِندَ اللّهِ عَهْدًا فَلَن يُخْلِفَ اللّهُ عَهْدَهُ أَمْ
تَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَى مَن كَسَبَ سَيِّئَةً وَأَحَاطَتْ بِهِ خَطِيـئَتُهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**80.** ***"And they said: ‘The Fire shall not touch us but for a few
days’. Say: ‘Have you taken such a promise from Allah, .for He never
fails in His promise? Or do you speak against Allah what you do not
know? ' "***   
**81.** ***"Yea! Whoever earns evil and is encompassed by his
sins, -these are the inhabitants of the Fire, therein shall they abide
forever."***  
**82.** ***"And those who have Faith and do deeds of righteousness -they
are the inhabitants of Paradise, therein shall they abide forever."***

The Qur'an, here, points to one of the false statements of the Jews of
which they were proud and that very pride was the origin of part of
their deviation. Thus the Qur'an responds to it:

***"And they said: ‘The Fire shall not touch us but for a few days… '
"***

***“...Say: ‘Have you taken such a promise from Allah, for He never
fails in His promise? Or do you speak against Allah what you do not
know?"***

One of the most obvious reasons for the stubbornness and egoism of this
group is their belief in the' preference of the Jewish race over all
other races, and that they are different from other nations, and that
their sinners will have to tolerate the Fire only for a few days as
'their punishment and, therefore, Paradise will be theirs exclusively
forever.

This claim of privileges is not logical in any aspect, because, before
*Allah,* there is no difference between the members of the human race
from the point of rewards or punishments for their deeds.

Can they support the expectation to their claim of being exceptional
among nations and therefore receiving special treatment regarding the
general law of penalties by describing something they have done to
deserve it?

However, the above verse with a logical statement refuses their vain
imaginations and denotes that their claims depict one of these two
conditions: they should either have taken a particular promise from
*Allah* on the matter -that they have not -or, they tell lies and
calumniate against Him.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The next verse expresses a common and universal law which is logical
from any point of view. It says:

***"Yea! whoever earn evil and is encompassed by his sins, -these are
the inhabitants of the Fire, therein shall they abide forever."***

This is a general rule for the sinners belonging to any sect, nation, in
any locality, and at any time.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

There is also a universal, general law for the pious believers, which
the next verse announces:

***"And those who have Faith and do deeds of righteousness -they are the
inhabitants of Paradise, therein shall they abide forever."***

### Explanation: Earning Sin

The Arabic term /kasb/ and / iktisab/ both mean: 'to earn or gain
something willingly and consciously'.

Earnings are received in return for something done to profit one's self.
This is quite different from merely falling into evil. It is to
selfishly seek one's own gain that is evil.

One sin leads to another sin and thus the conscience of the individual
gradually becomes deadened until sinning becomes natural and normal for
that person and he is totally abandoned to evil and attempts to justify
his actions and to deny that he deserves eternal punishment.

The law of cause and effect works in its natural order in the case of
evil as in the case of virtue. Those who devote themselves wholly to
evil, must naturally find themselves beset on every side by the
consequent evil effects of the causative evil factors wrought by the
individual.

But those who struggle against evil, however long it may take for them
to overcome it, the inclination towards the evil, cannot be considered
equivalent to those who are out to earn evil.

Those who struggle to overcome evil hate and detest it and the
individual's earnest and sincere effort to overcome evil, naturally ends
in the triumph of good in the human nature. With this endeavour of good
against evil, the natural consequence of the struggle strengthens the
nobility in the individual's personality.

But, purposefully yeilding to evil with a selfish motive -for any
selfish gains, gradually erects a fortress of evil for the individual so
that the access of good becomes more and more difficult and ultimately
renders the individual's approach to any goodness as impossible.

As the individual is totally lost, for all times, to evil, he convicts
himself to the perpetual consequences of the evil all around him
forever.

These kinds of people are those who are referred to, later, in **Surah
2: 86** which says:

***"Those are they who have bought the life of this world at the price
of the Hereafter, -for them the punishment shall not be lightened, nor
shall they be helped."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 83-86
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ لاَ تَعْبُدُونَ إِلاَّ
اللّهَ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ إِحْسَاناً وَذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى
وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَقُولُواْ لِلنَّاسِ حُسْناً وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ
وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ ثُمَّ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً مِّنكُمْ
وَأَنتُم مِّعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَكُمْ لاَ تَسْفِكُونَ دِمَاءكُمْ وَلاَ
تُخْرِجُونَ أَنفُسَكُم مِّن دِيَارِكُمْ ثُمَّ أَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَنتُمْ
تَشْهَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَنتُمْ هَـؤُلاء تَقْتُلُونَ أَنفُسَكُمْ وَتُخْرِجُونَ فَرِيقاً
مِّنكُم مِّن دِيَارِهِمْ تَظَاهَرُونَ عَلَيْهِم بِالإِثْمِ
وَالْعُدْوَانِ وَإِن يَأتُوكُمْ أُسَارَى تُفَادُوهُمْ وَهُوَ مُحَرَّمٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ إِخْرَاجُهُمْ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَابِ
وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ فَمَا جَزَاء مَن يَفْعَلُ ذَلِكَ مِنكُمْ إِلاَّ
خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ
إِلَى أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ وَمَا اللّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا بِالآَخِرَةِ
فَلاَ يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابُ وَلاَ هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**83.** ***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of
Israel (instructing): 'You shall not worship any but Allah; and (you
shall do) good to (your) parents, and to the near of kin and to the
orphans, and the needy, and speak kind words to people, keep up the
prayer, and pay the poor-rates (zakat)’. Then you turned away, except a
few of you, and you backslide (even now)."***

**84.** ***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with you: 'You shall
not shed your blood, nor expel one another from your dwellings " then
you confirmed it while you bore witness***

**85.** ***"Yet you kill one another and expel a group of your people
from their dwellings, helping others against them in sin and enmity, and
if they come to you as captives, you ransom them -yet their very
expulsion was forbidden for you. Do you then believe in part of the
Book, and disbelieve in (another) part? What shall be the recompense of
those of you who do that, but disgrace, in the life of this world, and
on the Day of Resurrection to be consigned to the most terrible
punishment? And Allah is not heedless of what you do."***

**86.** ***"Those are they who have bought the life of this world at the
price of the Hereafter, - for them the punishment shall not be
lightened, nor shall they be helped."***

### The Breachers of the Covenant!

In a few of the verses mentioned before, the covenant of the Children of
Israel was hinted at, but no details were given about it. Through the
verses under discussion, *Allah* reminds them of some of the items of
this covenant.

Most of these items -or all of them - should be counted as the
fundamental principles and permanent laws of the Divine religions,
because this same covenant and these instructions, in some form or
other, are comprehensively found in every religion.

In these verses, the Qur'an severely scorns and blames the Jews because
they broke their covenant, and threatens them with disgrace in the life
of this world and the most grievous punishment in the Hereafter.

This covenant, that the Children of Israel were witnesses of and
confessed to, contains the following items:

1. Monotheism and worshipping *Allah,* as the verse says:

***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel
(instructing): 'You shall not worship any but Allah..."***  
 2. ***“...and (you shall do) good to (your) parents..."***  
 3. ***“...and to the near of kin and to the orphans, and the
needy..."***  
 4. ***“...and speak kind words to people..."***   
*5.* ***“...keep up the prayer..."***   
 6. ***“...and pay the poor-rates (zakat).'..."***  
***“...Then you turned away, except a few of you, and you backslide
(even now)."***  
 7. ***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with you: 'You shall not
shed your blood..."***   
*8.* ***“...nor expel one another from your dwellings..."***  
 9. ***“...then you confirmed it while you bore witness." (This item of
the covenant is perceived from the sentence: "Do you then believe in
part of the Book, and disbelieve in (another) part?")***

But you disregarded many of these aspects of your covenant with *Allah.*

***"Yet you kill one another and expel a group of your people from their
dwellings,.."***

***"…helping others against them in sin and enmity…"***

All of these deeds you did are a breach of the covenant you had taken
with *Allah.*

***"…and if they come to you as captives, you ransom them-..."***

***"…Yet their very expulsion was forbidden for you,"***

It is surprising that you, in paying ransom, and setting your captives
free, comply with the ordinances of the Turah and the Divine Covenant:

***"…Do you then believe in part of the Book, and disbelieve in
(another) part?..."***

***"…What shall be the recompense of those of you who do that, but
disgrace, in the life of this world..."***

***"….and on the Day of Resurrection to be consigned to the most
terrible punishment?..."***

***"…And Allah is not heedless of what you do,"***

Then, He, the Just, will take all of them into account and will judge
upon you according to your deeds in the Divine Court of Justice.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The last of the verses under discussion, in fact, states their main
motive for doing these contradictory actions, It says:

***"Those are they who have bought the life of this world at the price
of the Hereafter, -.."***

For this reason:

***"….for them the punishment shall not be lightened, nor shall they be
helped, "***

### Explanation: The Best Strategy for the Survival of Nations

These verses have been revealed about the Children of Israel, but they
contain a series of universal laws for the whole human race throughout
the world. These laws consist of some advice for those nations who wish
to survive and to exist successfully, as well as the secrets of failure
and destruction.

From the view point of the Qur'an, nations will be happy and able to
continue living when the individuals of that nation, avoiding sins,
attach themselves to the greatest Power and rely on that Everlasting
Source for help in all conditions.

It is obvious that this Origin can be none but *Allah,* the Exalted.
Therefore, they should obey *Allah* and bow only to Him, i.e. being
sincere unto Him alone in obedience.

If nations follow this law, they will be afraid of none. Genuine
sincerity and perfect intentions of a believer in the way of *Allah,* do
not tolerate the yielding of himself, in any regard, to anything or
anybody else other than the One and Only True God, *Allah.*

For it will mean the individual's surrender to his self which is nothing
more than surrender to Satan which is the equivalent of worshipping him.

As it was already pointed out, the means of salvation, i.e. for a nation
to survive and endure successfully, is firm adherence of its members to
the Divine Covenant and their faithful and loyal attachment to the
divinely commissioned guides.

It is obvious that misdeeds or sins weaken faith, adherence, and the
love of goodness, and the excess of it may result in the total severance
of the Holy connection, and in the individuals becoming totally lost in
the darkness of infidelity, hence eternal punishment and no salvation in
either this world or the coming world will be the result for such a
nation.

These verses of the Holy Qur'an, if studied properly and judged
dispassionately almost suffice to illustrate what is meant by the
religion Islam and what kind of life Islam invites its believers, or all
nations to live. And if the members of nations act upon these
commandments, I how peaceful, pleasant, and enjoyable will be the life
here on earth.

These are on one side, but on the other side, the secret of the failure
and defeat of nations, which finally leads to their destruction and
abolishment, lies in the existence of hate and enmity between them and
between the members inside each nation, i.e. being heedless to the above
mentioned commandments.

Such a nation will soon perish because of disregarding *Allah's*
covenant by not relying on Him, by not respecting and helping their
parents, family members, kindreds, neighbours, and all fellow men, by
shedding blood and by not observing the rights of others by expelling
them out of their houses or lands in order to occupy their properties:

***“...You shall not shed your blood, nor expel one another from your
dwellings,…"***

And, finally, one of the factors of the destruction of nations is unjust
discrimination in the execution of laws, i.e. when they observe those
laws which protect their personal profits but neglect what is beneficial
for the society.

***"…Do you then believe in part of the Book, and disbelieve in
(another) part?…"***

And these are some of the causes of either the development or failure of
nations from the viewpoint of the Qur'an.

[^1]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 142


