Section 10
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 87-88
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ وَقَفَّيْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِ
بِالرُّسُلِ وَآتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَأَيَّدْنَاهُ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ أَفَكُلَّمَا جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ بِمَا
لاَ تَهْوَى أَنفُسُكُمُ اسْتَكْبَرْتُمْ فَفَرِيقاً كَذَّبْتُمْ
وَفَرِيقاً تَقْتُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ بَل لَّعَنَهُمُ اللَّه بِكُفْرِهِمْ
فَقَلِيلاً مَّا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**87.** ***"And We gave Moses the Book, and after him sent Messengers in
succession; and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear Signs, and confirmed
him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that whensoever (thereafter) there came
to you a Messenger, with what your selves desire not, you became
arrogant? - Some you denied, and others you slay."***  
**88.** ***"And they said: Our hearts are covered’. Nay! Allah has
cursed them for their disbelief. Little is that which they believe."***

### Their Covered Hearts

In these verses, again, the Children of Israel are addressed. Yet the
concepts and criteria mentioned in them are universal and apply to all.

At first, it says:

***"And We gave Moses the Book..."***

***“...and after him sent Messengers in succession..."***

There came Messengers such as David, Solomon, Joshua, Zacharia and John.

***“...and We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear Signs, and confirmed him
with the Holy Spirit..."***

***"...Is it that whensoever (thereafter) there came to you a Messenger,
with what your selves desire not, you became arrogant?"***

This domination of desire on you was so intense that from among those
prophets:

***“...Some you denied, and others you slay."***

This verse makes a fact clear that the Divine apostles, when
communicating their prophecies, on the path of *Allah,* were heedless of
the oppositions of the materialists. And, it must be so, because a
correct sincere leadership is not anything save that.

If prophets tend to follow the unconditioned desires of people and adapt
themselves to people's selfish inclinations, they will be the followers
of the misled, rather than being a divine leader for the followers of
the path of truth.

***"And they said: 'Our hearts are covered.'... "***

***“...Nay! Allah has cursed them for their disbelief..."***

And it is for the same reason that: “...*Little is that which they
believe."*

The above sentence may be about the Jews who either rejected the
prophets (S) or killed them. It is also probable that it refers to the
Jews who were con temporary with the holy Prophet (S) and used to
inflexibly oppose him with obstinacy and enmity.

However, it states the fact that Man, following his desires, may reach a
point that he be cursed by *Allah* and be deprived of His Mercy. It is
in this case that his heart is enclosed in a covering so tight that the
truth can rarely penetrate into it.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 89-90
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَاءهُمْ كِتَابٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللّهِ مُصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَهُمْ
وَكَانُواْ مِن قَبْلُ يَسْتَفْتِحُونَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ
فَلَمَّا جَاءهُم مَّا عَرَفُواْ كَفَرُواْ بِهِ فَلَعْنَةُ اللَّه عَلَى
الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِئْسَمَا اشْتَرَوْاْ بِهِ أَنفُسَهُمْ أَن يَكْفُرُواْ بِمَا أنَزَلَ
اللّهُ بَغْياً أَن يُنَزِّلُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ عَلَى مَن يَشَاء مِنْ
عِبَادِهِ فَبَآؤُواْ بِغَضَبٍ عَلَى غَضَبٍ وَلِلْكَافِرِينَ عَذَابٌ
مُّهِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**89.** ***"When there came to them a Book from Allah, confirming what
was with them -and, from before, they had been praying for victory over
those who rejected the Truth -when there came to them that which they
recognized (to be Truth), they disbelieved in it. So Allah's curse is on
the disbelievers."***

**90.** ***"Evil is the thing they have sold themselves for, denying in
what Allah has sent down, out of envy that Allah should send down of His
grace on whomever He wills of His servants, and they have incurred Wrath
upon Wrath, and for the disbelievers awaits a humiliating
punishment."***

### A Religious Adherent & an Infidel!

The words in these verses are again about the Jews and their lives. They
formerly had an ardent love and were desirous for the advent of Islam
and Prophet Muhammad (S) for which they had settled in Medina waiting to
see the signs of the new Prophet (S) about which they had studied in
their heavenly Book, the Turah.

From before, they usually gave each other the happy tidings of the
advent of such a Prophet (S) and they hoped that his appearance would
help them to be able to defeat their enemies. But when they received a
Book from Allah, the Qur'an, which contained the same message that the
Jews had had with them, in the Turah, they rejected it.

***"When there came to them a Book from Allah, confirming what was with
them -and, from before, they had been praying for victory over those who
rejected the Truth -when there came to them that which they recognized
(to be Truth), they disbelieved in it..."***

***“...So Allah's curse is on the disbelievers."***

Yet, it sometimes happens that a person eagerly pursues a certain fact,
but when he reaches it and finds it opposite to his personal interests,
he, being affected by his low desires, refuses it and abandons it, or
even sometimes he stands against it.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In fact, the Jews have willingly acquired defeat. Those people who, with
the purpose of accepting and following the promised Prophet (S) had
emigrated from their own homes and, with many difficulties, had settled
in Medina in order to attain their goal, ultimately joined the camp of
the pagans and hostile disbelievers. Therefore, the Qur'an says:

***"Evil is the thing they have sold themselves for....."***

***“...denying what Allah has sent down, out of envy that Allah should
send down of His grace on whomever He wills of His servants,..."***

It seemed they expected that the promised prophet (S) would be one from
among the Children of Israel. They were displeased of the Qur'an having
been sent down to someone else. Then they, surrendering themselves to
infidelity and disbelief in the Truth, showed their envy to the holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). Therefore, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...and they have incurred Wrath upon Wrath, and for the disbelievers
await a humiliating punishment."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 91-93
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ آمِنُواْ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ قَالُواْ نُؤْمِنُ
بِمَا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَيَكْفُرونَ بِمَا وَرَاءهُ وَهُوَ الْحَقُّ
مُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا مَعَهُمْ قُلْ فَلِمَ تَقْتُلُونَ أَنبِيَاء اللّهِ
مِن قَبْلُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جَاءكُم مُّوسَى بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ ثُمَّ اتَّخَذْتُمُ الْعِجْلَ
مِن بَعْدِهِ وَأَنتُمْ ظَالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَكُمْ وَرَفَعْنَا فَوْقَكُمُ الطُّورَ خُذُواْ
مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ وَاسْمَعُواْ قَالُواْ سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا
وَأُشْرِبُواْ فِي قُلُوبِهِمُ الْعِجْلَ بِكُفْرِهِمْ قُلْ بِئْسَمَا
يَأْمُرُكُمْ بِهِ إِيمَانُكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**91.** ***"When it is said to them: Believe in what Allah has sent down
" they said: We believe (only) in what was sent down to us (before)’.
But they disbelieve in what is beyond that, while it is the Truth
confirming what is with them. Say: Why then were you slaying the
Prophets of Allah in former times, if you were (indeed) faithful?' "***

***92. "And, also, Moses came to you with clear signs; yet you took to
worship of the Calf after him (in his absence) and you were (willful)
wrongdoers."***

**93.** ***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with you, and raised
the Mount, above you, (saying): Hold you fast that which We have given
you with the strength, and hear (Our commandments)’. They said: We hear
and disobey '; and they were made to imbibe (the love of) the Calf into
their hearts because of their disbelief. Say: Evil is what your faith
bids you if you be, indeed, faithful’."***

### Racial Bigotries of the Jews

In commenting on the previous verses, it was said that the Jews
tolerated a lot of trouble and toil on the path of reaching the Prophet
(S) that the Turah had promised, but when he (S) came, they did not
believe in him, because of envy, or for the reason that this prophet (S)
was not from the Children of Israel, or because their personal interests
were in danger.

Now, through the verses under discussion, the Qur'an refers to the
racial bigotries of the Jews by which they are known throughout the
world. It says:

***"When it is said to them: 'Believe in what Allah has sent down " they
said: 'We believe (only) in what was sent down to us (before)’. But they
disbelieve in what is beyond that..."***

The Jews believed neither in the Evangel (Ingu) nor in the Qur'an, but
they paid attention only to the racial aspects and their personal
benefits.

The Jews said that they believed in what had been revealed to, them,
i.e. to the Israeli prophets (as) and they would not believe in anything
revealed to a non-Israeli prophet (i.e. the holy Prophet Mohammad (S)).

The reply to this arrogance is given in this verse saying that that
which has been sent down to the holy Prophet (S) is truth verifying that
which is in the Book with them, referring to their prophecy proclaimed
in Duet. 18: 15-18. And, now, the Qur'an says:

***“...while it is the Truth confirming what is with them..."***

Then, the Holy Quran uncovers their falsehood and says that their excuse
for their disbelief is that Prophet Muhammad (S) is not from among them:

***"...Say: ‘Why then were you slaying the Prophets of Allah in former
times, If you were (indeed) faithful?' "***

If they truly believed in the Turah, the Divine Book in which murder is
considered a major sin, they would not slay the great prophets of
*Allah.*

Furthermore, this statement that they say: ***"We believe (only) in what
was sent down to us (before)",*** is a clear deviation from the path of
Monotheism, or, in other words, it is, in itself, blasphemy. This is a
kind of arrogance and selfishness whether it be in the form of a
personal issue or racial one.

The purpose of Monotheism is to eradicate these disgraceful habits from
the unity of human beings so that they accept *Allah's* commandments
merely because they are issued from that Origin.

In other words, if the acceptance of the Divine instructions is only on
the condition that they be sent down to us, it is, in fact, disbelief,
rather than 'belief', or it is infidelity rather than 'faithfulness' in
Islam. The acceptance of such instructions is not at all true evidence
of Faith.

It is worthy to note that when the above verse says: ***"When it is said
to them: 'Believe in what Allah has sent down,’ "*** it refers neither
to Muhammad (S) nor to Moses (as) nor to Jesus (as). It merely says:

***"Believe in what Allah has sent down."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

To make their falsehood clearer, in the next verse, the Quran provides
further evidence against them. It says:

***"And, also, Moses came to you with clear signs; yet you took to
worship of the Calf after him (in his absence) and you were (willful)
wrongdoers."***

The Qur'an tells the Jews that if you are true and you believe in your
prophet, why did you worship the Calf after those clear signs and that
monotheistic evidence? What kind of faith is it that when Moses (as)
goes to the Mount, in his absence, it escapes from your hearts and
immediately infidelity is substituted therein; or the Calf takes the
place of Monotheism?

Yes, with this wrong action, you committed an injustice both to
yourselves and your society, and to your coming generations.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the subsequent verse, the Holy Qur'an cites another example proving
the meagerness of their claim. It refers to the covenant of Mount Sinai
and says:

***"And (remember) when We made a covenant with you, and raised the
Mount, above you, (saying):***

***'Hold you fast that which We have given you with the strength, and
hear (Our commandments) " They said: We hear and disobey '; …"***

***"…and they were made to imbibe (the love of) the Calf into their
hearts because of their disbelief…."***

Yes, blasphemy and mammonism, whose symbol was the love of the golden
Samaritan Calf, had influenced their hearts and took root throughout
their souls. That was why they forgot their Lord.

Strange! What sort of Faith is it that condones both the slaying of
prophets and the worshipping of the Calf, but neglects the observance of
firm Divine Covenants?

Yes,

***"….Say: 'Evil is what your faith bids you if you be, indeed,
faithful'"***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 94-101
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كَانَتْ لَكُمُ الدَّارُ الآَخِرَةُ عِندَ اللّهِ خَالِصَةً
مِّن دُونِ النَّاسِ فَتَمَنَّوُاْ الْمَوْتَ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَن يَتَمَنَّوْهُ أَبَدًا بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَاللّهُ
عَلِيمٌ بِالظَّالِمينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَتَجِدَنَّهُمْ أَحْرَصَ النَّاسِ عَلَى حَيَاةٍ وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ
أَشْرَكُواْ يَوَدُّ أَحَدُهُمْ لَوْ يُعَمَّرُ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ وَمَا هُوَ
بِمُزَحْزِحِهِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ أَن يُعَمَّرَ وَاللّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّجِبْرِيلَ فَإِنَّهُ نَزَّلَهُ عَلَى
قَلْبِكَ بِإِذْنِ اللّهِ مُصَدِّقاً لِّمَا بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَهُدًى
وَبُشْرَى لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ عَدُوًّا لِّلّهِ وَمَلآئِكَتِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَجِبْرِيلَ
وَمِيكَالَ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ عَدُوٌّ لِّلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ آيَاتٍ بَيِّنَاتٍ وَمَا يَكْفُرُ بِهَا
إِلاَّ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَكُلَّمَا عَاهَدُواْ عَهْداً نَّبَذَهُ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُم بَلْ
أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَاءهُمْ رَسُولٌ مِّنْ عِندِ اللّهِ مُصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَهُمْ
نَبَذَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ كِتَابَ اللّهِ
وَرَاء ظُهُورِهِمْ كَأَنَّهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**94*****. "Say: ‘If the Last Abode with Allah is yours exclusively and
not for other people, then long for death - if you are truthful’."***  
**95*****. "But never will they long for death, because of what their
hands have sent forth; for Allah who knows the unjust."***

**96*****. "Indeed, you will find them the greediest of people for life,
even more than those who associate partners (to Allah); each one of them
is covetous to live (even) a thousand years, yet the prolongation of his
life shall not remove him further away from the punishment. Allah sees
what they do. "***  
**97.** ***"Say (O' Muhammad): ‘Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel, who
brought down (the Qur'an) upon your heart by Allah's leave, confirming
what was before it, and a guidance and glad tidings for the believers '
; "***

**98.** ***"And whoever is an enemy to Allah, His angels, His
Messengers, Gabriel and Michael (should know that) Allah is surely an
enemy to the infidels."***  
**99.** ***"Verily, We have sent down to you clear Signs, and none
denies them except the transgressors."***  
**100*****. "What! Whenever they made a covenant, a group of them cast
it aside? Nay, most of them do not (truly) believe. "***  
**101.** ***"And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah,
confirming what was with them, a part of them who were given the Book
cast the Book of Allah behind their backs, as though they knew (it) not!
"***

***"Say: ‘If the Last Abode with Allah is yours exclusively and not for
other people, then long for death - if you are truthful’."***

From the former verses, it was understood that the Jews claimed that
they would not be touched by the Fire but for a few days when they
worshipped the Calf, saying: ***"The Fire shall not touch us but for a
few days".***

Also, when they were told to believe in *Allah's* revelation they
replied that they would believe only in their Book, the Turah: ***"We
believe (only) in what was sent down to us (before)."*** They imagined
that they were the only people who would be qualified for salvation and
felicity, while other nations would be punished and receive eternal
destruction in the Hereafter.

Then, to cancel this kind of idea and to verify that the case is not as
they considered, it is told them:

***"…then long for death – if you are truthful…"***

The Messenger of Allah is commanded to tell them that if the abode of
the Hereafter and the blessings of Heaven are exclusively theirs, they
must strive to reach such bliss and invoke for death in order to get rid
of the disasters and miseries of this world. It is in this situation
that they would attain eternal happiness which they falsely think
belongs to them alone.

And in another occurrence, as a protest to them, the Qur'an says:

***"… If you think that you are friends to Allah, to the exclusion of
(other) men, then invoke your desire for death if you are truthful!"***
(**Surah Al-Jumu'ah. No.62. verse 6).**

Yes, a sincere friend desires to be with his friend, someone in love
wishes to see one's love, and a seeker of a particular thing is anxious
and desirous to obtain that which one is seeking.

Worldly affairs and materialism often stand as a curtain or barrier
between *Allah* and His servants. They usually do not let one approach
Him and be acquainted with his / her Creator deservingly. Therefore, the
true sincerity towards Him is the desire of death.

Then, here, to unvail the falsehood of the statement of the Jews,
*Allah* announces that if they truly believe that the future abode with
*Allah* is exclusively theirs and think that only they are those who are
the favoured people of *Allah,* not any other people, they must invoke
death with their tongues, hearts, and actions to reach Him without any
natural barrier.

***"Indeed, you will find them the greediest of people for life, even
more than those who associate partners (to Allah)..."***

But they never invoke death because they are the greediest of all people
for the life of this world. They love the long life of this world even
much more than pagans and idolators.

***“...each one of them is covetous to live (even) a thousand
years,..."***

Besides their hideous deeds and that they do not seek death in order to
meet the Lord, each of them would like to live one thousand years.

The figure **(*****one thousand years)*** metaphorically refers to the
idea that they wish to live a long life. This is evidence to their lie
and they know that neither the Last Abode with *Allah* is theirs, nor
are they the friends of *Allah.*

They arrogantly state these things, based on bigotry, in order to tell
the Muslims that both the Jews and their ancestral religion are right,
and Muslims are wrong and their religion is untrue. Then *Allah,* by
this clear evidence, made their falsehood manifest by stating that the
friends of *Allah* are those who are desirous of death to attain their
goal.

***“...yet the prolongation of his life shall not remove him further
away from the punishment..."***

***“...Allah sees what they do..."***

That is, the Jews will never long for death, then how can they desire a
long life when it does not save them from the punishment?

Yet, they are the greediest people for the low life of this world which
can be a barrier obstructing entrance into the everlasting felicity of
the life in the coming world.

Furthermore, the members of this group having belief in the Hereafter
and the life after death are greedier for the life of this world than
pagans and blasphemers, who wrongly believe that Man will be destroyed
and perish after death.

***"Say (O' Muhammad): (Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel..."***

The commentators believe that, as 'Abdullah-ibn-Abbas cites, the
occasion of revelation of this verse was as follows:

One of the scholars of the Jews by the name of Ibn--Suriya, with a group
of Jewish people from Fadak, was attending the holy Prophet (S) when he
put forth some questions to test his gift of prophecy. Thereby being
convinced that Muhammad (S) was a true prophet of Allah, he asked as to
which of Allah's angels had conveyed the Divine messages to him, and he
(S) answered that Gabriel had.

The Jew said he would not believe, as Gabriel was the enemy of his
people and he is the angel of punishment, annoyance, displeasure,
indignation, and execution; while Michael was not, and if Michael would
have been the one who came down to the Prophet (S), then they would
believe in him (S). So, Allah (s.w.t.) sent down this verse and told the
holy Prophet (S) to say that he who is the enemy of Gabriel, is the
enemy of the one:

***“...who brought down (the Qur'an) upon your heart by Allah's
leave..."***

***“...confirming what was before it, and a guidance and glad tidings
for the believers…"***

Thus, the Qur'an attests to the rightfulness of all the heavenly Books
such as the Turah, the Evangil, Psalms of David, the Written Sheets
(Scriptures), and what *Allah* had sent to other prophets (as).

The word / hudan / 'a guidance' here, may refer to the guidance of the
Qur'an for all of the believing members of the Jinn and humans. The
guidance is apportioned to the believers perhaps for the reason that it
is only the believers who are benefited by the Qur'an, so therefore, the
glad tidings are given to them.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Now, this verse reiterates the subject matter of the previous verse but
with more emphasis and accompanied with a threat. It says:

***"And whoever is an enemy to Allah, His angels, His Messengers,
Gabriel and Michael (should know that) Allah is surely an enemy to the
infidels."***

This statement is an indication to the meaning that these instances are
not separable. The Essence of *Allah,* angels, all His Messengers,
Gabriel and Michael or any other angels, from this point of view, are
all the same and to have enmity with one of them is, in fact, having
enmity with the others.

In other words, *Allah's* ordinances, which are helpful on the path to
development of the human race, have been revealed from His Origin unto
prophets (S) by means of angels.

And if there be any difference between their missions, it is a
difference of the division of responsibilities, not a contrast in
missions. They are all alongside the path of the same goal. So, being an
enemy against one of them is showing enmity against *Allah.*

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Upon the occasion of revelation of verse 99, there is a narration from
Ibn-Abbas who said:

"*lbn-Suriya, a Jewish scholar, told the Prophet (S): ‘O Muhammad, you
have not brought anything for us that we understand it, and also the
Lord has not sent a clear sign to you so that we follow you thereby’.
Then, Allah sent down this verse which was a frank vivid answer to that
statement.* [^1]

### None Denies Divine Signs Save the Transgressors!

Through this verse, the Qur'an points to the fact that *Allah* has given
the Prophet of Islam (S) enough evidence and sufficient Signs all of
which are so clear that nobody can deny them. Hence, those who deny
them, indeed, have recognized the rightfulness of his invitation, but,
because of their special evil intentions, they oppose it.

***"Verily, We have sent down to you clear Signs, and none denies them
except the transgressors."***

Contemplation over the verses of the Qur'an makes the way clear for any
pure-hearted truth-seeker. By reciting these verses, the reality and
truthfulness of the invitation of the Prophet of Islam (S), as well as
the greatness of the Qur'an, can be understood.

But, only those can understand this meaning that their hearts have not
been darkened as a result of committing sin. Thus, it is not surprising
that transgressors and those who have stained themselves with sins by
disobeying the commands of *Allah,* never believe in Islam.

***"What! Whenever they made a covenant, a group of them cast it aside?
Nay, most of them do not (truly) believe."***

With reference to the previous verses, this verse is also a protest
against the Jews as to why some of these people neglect and breach their
covenant that they make with *Allah.* They not only break their covenant
but also have no faith at all. It may refer to this idea that if they
believed in *Allah* and His prophets (as), they would never break their
covenant or never fail in their promise.

***"And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah, confirming what
was with them,..."***

The purpose of the term' Messenger', here, may be the Last Prophet (S),
or it may refer to all those prophets (as) who came after Moses (as),
because, according to the previous verses, the Qur'an protests against
the Jews for rejecting all of the great prophets after Moses (as).

These prophets (as), with their Divine commissions, abrogated Moses'
religion whereas, in the meantime, they confirmed the rightfulness of
what the Jews had in their hands -the Turah -yet, some of them (the
Jews) put the Book *of Allah* behind their backs:

***“...a part of them who were given the Book cast the Book of Allah
behind their backs,..."***

Some of the learned men of the Jews put the Book of *Allah,* the Turah,
which attested to the prophethood of the Last Messenger of *Allah,*
Prophet Muhammad (S), ***"behind their backs"*** and, by neglecting his
specific description which was recorded in the Turah, they abandoned it
totally:

***“...as though they knew (it) not!"***

[^1]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol, 1, p. 168


