Section 12
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 106-107
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا نَنسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ أَوْ نُنسِهَا نَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِّنْهَا أَوْ
مِثْلِهَا أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللّهَ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللّهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ
وَمَا لَكُم مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ مِن وَلِيٍّ وَلاَ نَصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**106.** ***"Whatever We abrogate of a verse or cause it to beforgotten,
We bring a better or the like of it. Do you not know that Allah has
power over all things? "***

**107.** ***"Do you not know that to Allah belongs the dominion of the
heavens and the earth and that, besides Allah, you have neither guardian
nor helper?"***

### Purpose of Abrogation

The central meaning of these verses is again the Jewish evil propaganda
against the Muslims.

The Jews occasionally said that the true religion was the religion of
the Jews and the real Qiblah was the direction that they used for their
prayers. The evidence supporting their idea was that the Prophet of
Islam (S) used to pray toward their Qiblah (Jerusalem).

But when the command for changing the Qiblah from Jerusalem to the
Ka'bah came down and, according to verse 144 from this very Surah,
Muslims had to pray toward the direction of Mecca (Ka'bah), this pretext
was taken away from the Jews.

Therefore, they tried to assert a new pretext and said that if the first
Qiblah was right, then what was the second instruction for? And, if the
second instruction was correct, then the Muslims' previous religious
actions performed towards Jerusalem would be considered invalid.

The Qur'an replies to their objections through these verses and,
thereby, enlightens the hearts of the believers. It says:

***"Whatever We abrogate of a verse or cause it to beforgotten, We bring
a better or the like of it.*****"**

And it is easy for Allah, of course:

***"…Do you not know that Allah has power over all things?"***

***"Do you not know that to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens
and the earth and that, besides Allah, you have neither guardian nor
helper?"***

***"Do you not know that to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens
and the earth…"***

*Allah* has the right to change His ordinances in any form He pleases
and He is the most knowledgeable of all as to the welfare of His
servants.

***“...and that, besides Allah, you have neither guardian nor
helper?"***

In fact, the first part of this verse denotes the absolute sovereignty
of *Allah* in religious ordinances and that He is able to recognize and
has the required knowledge to decide what is good for His creatures.
Then, believers should not hearken to the vain words of some
self-centered fellows who have doubt in the abrogations of the Divine
Ordinances.

And the second part of the verse is a warning to those who choose refuge
and support in other than *Allah,* because there is no real support in
the world save *Allah.*

It should also be noted that the term / nasx / 'abrogation' in philology
means: 'to abolish, destroy', and from the point of view of religion it
means: 'to nullify a rule and substitute another in its place'. The
detailed explanation about this subject will be discussed later.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 108
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ تُرِيدُونَ أَن تَسْأَلُواْ رَسُولَكُمْ كَمَا سُئِلَ مُوسَى مِن
قَبْلُ وَمَن يَتَبَدَّلِ الْكُفْرَ بِالإِيمَانِ فَقَدْ ضَلَّ سَوَاء
السَّبِيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**108.** ***"Or do you desire to question your Messenger (Muhammad) as
Moses was questioned aforetime? And he who exchanges Faith for
infidelity, he has surely strayed from the right way."***

### Occasion of Revelation

In the books you may find some apparently different occasions of
revelation for this verse, but their conclusions are nearly the same. A
few of them are as follows:

One of the occasions of revelation upon the above verse has been
narrated by Ibn Abbas. It is stated that once Wahab-ibn-Zayd and
Rafi'-ibn-Harmalah came to the holy Prophet (S) and asked him to bring a
letter from Allah for them to read and then they might believe. Or, it
happened that he (S) was asked to make some streams appear and flow for
them so that they might follow him.

Some other commentators have said that a group of Arabs wanted from the
Prophet of Islam (S) the same things that the Jews wanted from Moses
(as). They asked him to show the Lord clearly so that they could see Him
with their own eyes and then they would believe.

As a response to them for their demand, the above verse was revealed.

### Some Futile Pretexts

The addressees, in this verse, are some Muslims whose Faith was feeble,
or the pagans. The Jews are not mentioned directly in this verse but, as
we will explain later, it is not far removed from the story of the Jews.

It was, perhaps, after the event of the change of the Qiblah that some
of Muslims and pagans, affected by the temptations of the Jews,
requested some vain and futile demands from the holy Prophet (S), the
examples of which were cited in the above. *Allah,* the Almighty,
forbade them to ask such questions. The Qur'an says:

***"Or do you desire to question your Messenger (Muhammad) as Moses was
questioned aforetime?..."***

But you have decided, indeed, to evade believing by the acceptance of
these vain pretexts.

In view of the fact that this action is a way of exchanging Faith for
blasphemy, at the end of the verse it adds:

***“...And he who exchanges Faith for infidelity, he has surely strayed
from the right way."***

It should be noted that Islam has never prevented people from asking
scientific or logical questions, as well as asking the Prophet (S) to
perform miracles in order to prove the Divine rightfulness of his
prophecy, because the means of gaining understanding and Faith are the
same.

But there were some people who asked some futile questions and demanded
some irrational pretexts in order to shirk the invitation of the holy
Prophet (S).

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 109-110
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَّ كَثِيرٌ مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَوْ يَرُدُّونَكُم مِّن بَعْدِ
إِيمَانِكُمْ كُفَّاراً حَسَدًا مِّنْ عِندِ أَنفُسِهِم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا
تَبَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الْحَقُّ فَاعْفُواْ وَاصْفَحُواْ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَ
اللّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتُواْ الزَّكَاةَ وَمَا تُقَدِّمُواْ
لأَنفُسِكُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِندَ اللّهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**109.** ***"Many of the people of the (earlier) Book wish they could
turn you back to be infidel, after you have believed, out of their own
envy, even after the truth was manifest to them. (Nevertheless) forgive
and overlook till Allah brings about His command, truly Allah has power
over all things."***  
**110.** ***"And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates; whatever
good you shall forward for yourselves, you shall find it with Allah;
surely Allah sees what you do."***

### Envy and Obstinacy

There were many members of the People of the Book, especially those of
the Jews, who not only disbelieved in Islam but they also urged the
believers to abandon their Faith. Their motive, for this action, was
nothing but envy.

Through the above mentioned verses, the Qur'an addresses this matter by
saying:

***"Many of the people of the (earlier) Book wish they could turn you
back to be infidel, after you have believed, out of their own envy, even
after the truth was manifest to them..."***

Here, the Qur'an bids the believers to forgive them their evil
endeavours aiming at the destruction of Faith until *Allah* sends His
command:

***“...(Nevertheless) forgive and overlook till Allah brings about His
command, truly Allah has power over all things."***

This is, in fact, a tactical instruction given to Muslims that they
should stand firm before the intense pressure of the enemies; and in
this particular circumstance utilize the weapon of forgiveness while
they focus their abilities upon constructing themselves and their
Islamic society, and wait for the command of *Allah.*

As a great many of the commentators have said, the purpose of 'the
command of *Allah*' here, is 'the command for the Holy War' which at
that time had not been revealed yet.

The reason for the delay may have been that their conditions were not
completely appropriate for that command. That was why, according to many
of the commentators, the idea in this verse was changed by the
subsequent verses regarding 'the Holy War', which will be referred to
later.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The verse following the above one bids the believers to perform two
great constructive commands. One of them is about 'prayer' which
establishes a firm relationship between the servant and his Lord. The
second is alms-giving, which is the secret of cohesiveness among the
members of societies. These two are necessary for defeating enemies. It
says:

***"And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates..."***

By these two deeds you may strengthen both your spirit and body. Then,
it adds that you should not think that the good deeds you do and the
material wealth you pay as poor-rates in the way of *Allah* will be lost
totally. It is not so, but:

***“...whatever good you shall forward for yourselves, you shall find it
with Allah..." “...surely Allah sees what you do."***

Thus, He definitely knows which deeds you have done for His sake and
which ones for the sake of other than Him.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 111-112
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ لَن يَدْخُلَ الْجَنَّةَ إِلاَّ مَن كَانَ هُوداً أَوْ
نَصَارَى تِلْكَ أَمَانِيُّهُمْ قُلْ هَاتُواْ بُرْهَانَكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَى مَنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ لِلّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَلَهُ أَجْرُهُ
عِندَ رَبِّهِ وَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**111.** ***"And they said: 'None shall enter Paradise except one who is
a Jew or a Christian.' Such are their fancies. Say: 'Bring your proof,
if you are truthful’. "***  
**112.** ***"Yes! Whoever submits himself entirely to Allah, and he is a
doer of good, his reward is with his Lord; no fear shall be upon them,
nor shall they grieve."***

In the above verses, the Qur'an has referred to one of the other vain,
inappropriate statements of a group of the Jews and the Christians, and
then, it has responded to them with a knockdown answer. It is as thus:

***"And they said: ‘None shall enter Paradise except one who is a Jew or
a Christian'…"***

In reply to them, at first, it says:

***"...Such are their fancies....",*** and they will never reach such
wishes. Then, addressing the Prophet (S) it says:

***“...Say: 'Bring your proof, if you are truthful'. "***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Every claim needs its own proof for verification. When the fact became
clear that they had not any proof for their claim and that their
insistence that Paradise was exclusively theirs, which was merely a bare
desire of theirs, the essential basic criterion for entering Paradise
was given, as a general law in this verse, as it says:

***"Yes! Whoever submits himself entirely to Allah, and he is a doer of
good,***

***his reward is with his Lord..."***

Therefore,

***"...no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve."***

In short, the fact is that entering Paradise, the reward of Allah, and
attaining felicity and salvation in the coming eternal life is exclusive
to no tribe or particular race, but these merits belong to the ones who
have the following two attributes:

The first attribute is that the person should submit himself wholly to
the commands of *Allah,* and obey all of His commandments without
considering any difference between this ordinance or that one.

It should not be so that he accepts those commandments that are
compatible with what he considers his benefit and puts aside those that
are opposite to that which he desires. Yes, such ones are entirely
submitted to *Allah's* Will.

The second attribute is that the effect of Faith is illustrated in their
deeds in the form of good actions. These people are good to all human
beings in all of their affairs.

By this statement, in fact, the Qur'an, as a general rule, nullifies the
inappropriate racial bigotries, and absolutely dismisses true salvation
and happiness from the confinement of a special tribe. To sum it up, the
verse distinguishes Faith and good deeds as criterion for true felicity.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 113
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ لَيْسَتِ النَّصَارَى عَلَىَ شَيْءٍ وَقَالَتِ
النَّصَارَى لَيْسَتِ الْيَهُودُ عَلَى شَيْءٍ وَهُمْ يَتْلُونَ
الْكِتَابَ كَذَلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ مِثْلَ قَوْلِهِمْ
فَاللّهُ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُواْ فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**113.** ***"The Jews said: 'The Christians rest on naught', and the
Christians said: 'The Jews rest on naught'; yet they (both) recite the
(same) Book. Even so, similar to their sayings, spoke those who know
not. Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgement in what they
differ."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Some of the commentators have narrated from Ibn Abbas that when a group
of Christians who were from Najran were attending a gathering of the
Prophet's (S), some of the Jewish scholars were there, too.

These two groups began disputing with each other before the Prophet (S).
Rafi'-ibn-Harmalah, one of the Jews, turned to the Christians and said
that their religion was based on naught. Thus, he was rejecting the
prophethood of Jesus (as) and his Divine Book.

Then, a man from among the Christians from Najran, too, replied to him
with a similar expression and said that the religion of the Jews was
based on naught. Thus, he also rejected both the prophethood of Moses
(as) and the Turah. It was at that time that the above verse was
revealed and reproached both groups for their fabricated statements.
[^1]

### Exclusivity, the Fruit of Ignorance

In the previous verse, we became acquainted with a portion of the
rootless claims of a group of the Jews and the Christians. The verse
under discussion indicates that when a proof less claim comes forth, it
results in exclusivity and then leads to contradiction.

***"The Jews said: 'The Christians rest on naught ', and Christians
said: 'The Jews rest on naught'..."***

The phrase: ‘rest on naught' may mean that they have no rank and honour
with *Allah;* or their belief is not a thing worthwhile.

Then, to complete the above idea, it adds:

***"...yet they (both) recite the (same) Book..."***

That is, with the Divine Book that they have in their hands which can
guide them toward the right path concerning these problems, it is
surprising that they say such words which originate from nowhere except
prejudice and enmity.

Then the Qur'an continues saying:

***"...Even so, similar to their sayings, spoke those who know not."***

(Although these are the People of the Book and those are pagans or
idolaters.)

This verse introduces ignorance as the origin of bigotry and prejudice,
because ignorant people are always shut in their own worlds and do not
accept other than that which they know. They seriously believe only in
the Faith that they have been acquainted with from their early
childhood, even if it is false or superstitious. Therefore, they put
aside everything other than that which they believe.

At the end of the verse, it says:

***"...Allah will judge between them on the Day of Judgment in what they
differ."***

It is in the Hereafter where the facts will be entirely evident and the
proof and references of all things will become perfectly manifest. None
will be able to deny what is right and, thus, there will remain no
dispute. Yes, one of the special characteristics of the Resurrection Day
is that all disagreements will come to an end.

By the way, the above verse reminds Muslims that although the followers
of these religions have stood against them and rejected Islam,
therefore, they need not be worried because the Jews and Christians do
not verify even themselves. Each of them nullifies the other and, in
principle, ignorance is the origin of bigotry and bigotry is the source
of exclusivity.

[^1]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 188, & Tafsir Ghartabi and Tafsir
Almanar


