Section 13
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 114
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن مَّنَعَ مَسَاجِدَ اللّهِ أَن يُذْكَرَ فِيهَا
اسْمُهُ وَسَعَى فِي خَرَابِهَا أُوْلَـئِكَ مَا كَانَ لَهُمْ أَن
يَدْخُلُوهَا إِلاَّ خَآئِفِينَ لهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا خِزْيٌ وَلَهُمْ
فِي الآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114.** ***"And who if more unjust than he who prevents the mosques of
Allah of His Name being remembered therein and strives for their ruin?
Such (people) might never enter them, save in fear. For them if disgrace
in this world, and in the Hereafter a great punishment."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It has been narrated from Ibn Abbas, cited in the book
'Asb-ab-un-Nuzul', that this verse was revealed about Fatlus-ur-Rumi, a
Roman, and his friends. They fought against the Children of Israel and
burnt the Turah. In that war, Jewish children were made captives, and
Jerusalem was ruined and filled with corpses. [^1]

The Late Tabarsi, a great commentator, narrates from Ibn Abbas, in his
book 'Majma'ul-Bayan' that this strives for the destruction of Jerusalem
was continued until when that Holy Land was conquered by Muslims... [^2]

A tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (as) says that this verse was revealed
about the Quraysh when they prevented the holy Prophet (S) from entering
Mecca and the Ka'bah. [^3]

Also, a third occasion of revelation is cited for this verse. It says
the verse is referring to the sites in Mecca where Muslims used to pray
at, which pagans destroyed totally after the emigration of the Prophet
(S) from that City. [^4]

There is no discrepancy in saying that all three of these occasions of
revelation refer to their own individual incidents. Therefore, each of
them illustrates one of the dimensions of the subject.

### The Most Unjust Ones!

When dealing with the occasions of revelation of the above mentioned
verse, it is understood that the words are about all three groups: the
Jews, the Christians and the pagans, while the words in the previous
verses were mostly about the Jews and sometimes about the Christians.

At any rate, the Jews, creating mischief about the Qiblah, tried to
return the direction of the prayers of Muslims toward Jerusalem in order
to appear to have, by that manner, a kind of superiority in the eyes of
the community of Muslims and also weaken the luster and elegance of the
Sacred Mosque and the Ka'bah. [^5]

The pagans of Mecca, having prevented the holy Prophet (S) and Muslims
from visiting and pilgrimaging to the Sacred House, the Ka'bah,
practically stepped forth toward the desolation of this Holy Structure.

The Christians, too, having conquered Jerusalem and having performed
actions which gave rise to what was said to be the occasion of
revelation of this verse, as narrated by Ibn Abbas, tried to ruin it.

The Qur'an, warning these three groups and all others who pave a similar
way, says:

***"And who is more unjust than he who prevents the mosques of Allah of
His Name being remembered therein and strives for their ruin?....."***

Thus, the Qur'an considers this prevention unjust and introduces
contrivers of it as the most unjust people. Indeed, what greater
'unjust' could be committed than that they strive to ruin the
Monotheistic centers and prevent people from remembering the Name of
their Providence, whose consequence would be the spread of polytheism
and corruption in the society!

Then, the verse continues saying:

***“...Such (people) might never enter them, save in fear..."***

That is, Muslims and monotheists of the world should stand so firm
against these transgressors that their hands be curtailed from these
sacred sites so that none of them can freely and without fear enters
therein.

In commenting on the above verse, a possible meaning is that these kind
of unjust people with these kind of actions will never truly is succeed
in taking these Holy shrines and places of worship under their own
control.

The final circumstance will be such that they will not be able to enter
them save in fear. They will be subject to just the same fate and
fortune that the pagans of Mecca had regarding the Sacred Mosque.

Finally, through the concluding words of the verse and with a shocking
statement, the Qur'an has referred to the penalty of those transgressors
both in the present world and the coming world. It says:

***“...For them is disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter a great
punishment. "***

And this is the end of those who want to separate servants from their
Providence.

### Explanation: Mosques and the Ways of their Desolation

There is no doubt that the above verse has a vast meaning which is not
confined to a particular time or place. The verse, from this point of
view, is like other verses of the Qur'an which have been revealed in
relation to a specific condition or circumstance referred to as the
occasion of revelation, but their ordinances are valid in all ages.

Therefore, anyone or any group who strive in any form to ruin the
mosques of *Allah,* or prevent the Name of *Allah* from being remembered
and adored therein, will be faced with the same disgrace and great
punishment which have been pointed out in this verse.

It is also necessary to pay attention to this fact that the prevention
of worshippers from entering into the Sacred Mosque and the barring of
the remembrance of the Name of *Allah* and His adoration along with
striving for ruining it, does not only refer to the mosque being
destroyed by shovel and pick, but involves any actions that cause
mosques to be ruined or seem dull and lusterless.

As it will be explained when commenting on **Surah Al-Taubah, No.9,
verse 18**, the purpose of the Qur'anic phrase /ya'muru masajid /,
mentioned in the verse, according to the clear meanings of some Islamic
narrations and traditions, is not merely 'to build or to mend the
mosques'.

Attending these holy shrines and remembering the Name of *Allah* and
adoring Him therein not only is a means of maintaining them but also is
counted as their most important form of maintenance.

Therefore, in the opposite case, whatever causes people to neglect the
remembrance of the Name of *Allah* and keeps them apart from the
mosques, is a very grand injustice.

### Supplication

*O*' *Lord! Guard us from, and against, any deviation and corruption!*

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 115
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلّهِ الْمَشْرِقُ وَالْمَغْرِبُ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّواْ فَثَمَّ
وَجْهُ اللّهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115.** ***"And to Allah belong the East and the West, wherever you
turn, there is the Presence of Allah. Surely Allah is All-Embracing,
All-Knowing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

There are different narrations cited on the cause of the occasion of
revelation of this verse.

Ibn Abbas says that this verse concerns the change of the Qiblah. When
Muslims' Qiblah was changed from Jerusalem to the Ka'bah, the Jews tried
to reject it by objecting to the Muslims and demanding of them how the
Qiblah could, be changed. This verse was revealed and replied to their
objection that the East and the West of the world belong to *Allah.*
[^6]

Another tradition indicates that this verse has been revealed regarding
'the recommended prayers'. It refers to this meaning that one can pray
his supererogatory prayers in any direction that his mount moves
towards, even if he is facing opposite to the Qiblah. [^7]

Some others have narrated from Jabir who said that the Prophet (S) once
sent some of the Muslims to fight in a war. When the dark of night fell
and they wanted to pray their night prayer they could not confirm the
correct direction of the Qiblah.

Then, every one used an approximate direction towards the Qiblah and
offered his prayers. At the break of dawn they found out that they had
prayed towards a direction other than the Qiblah. They informed the holy
Prophet (S) about it and the above verse was revealed declaring that
their prayers were all correct in such a condition. [^8]

(This religious creed, of course, has some conditions that should be
studied in jurisprudent books.)

It is realistic that all of the above occasions of revelation are
correct for this verse. That is, the verse refers to the idea of the
change of the Qiblah as well as reciting the supererogatory prayer when
riding on a mount, and the obligatory prayers performed when the correct
direction of the Qiblah is not recognizable.

Besides, no verse, in principle, is allocated exclusively to its
occasion of revelation, but its content should be considered as a
general ordinance; and, sometimes, what a great number of different
ordinances can be derived from it.

Allah, the Omnipresent
----------------------

The previous verse was about the oppressors who prevented worship in the
mosques of *Allah,* and strived for the destruction of them. The verse
under discussion is a continuation of the same idea. It says:

***"And to Allah belong the East and the West, wherever you turn, there
is the Presence of Allah..."***

It is not such that if they prevent you from entering the mosques of
*Allah* and attending the monotheistic centers, the path of adoring
*Allah* would be entirely closed to you. The East and the West of the
world belong to Him. Whithersoever you turn, He is there.

Also, the change of the Qiblah, which was ordained because of some
particular circumstances, has not the least effect on our worship. Can
any place be found where *Allah* is not there. In principle, *Allah* has
no limited place. (A further explanation can be studied on page 322).

That is why at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...Surely Allah is All-Embracing, All-Knowing."***

The point noteworthy here is that the East and the West mentioned in the
verse should not be taken as confined to the directions where the sun
rises or sets, as they are only relative expressions. The emphasis on
the East and the West may be because the first directions that man is
able to recognize are these two directions, and the other directions can
be figured out by determining them.

The Qur'an, concerning these directions, also says: ***"And We made a
people, considered weak (and of no account), inheritors in both East and
West,"*** **(Surah A'raf. No.7. verse 137).**

Philosophy of the Qiblah
------------------------

The first question that arises here is that if ***' wherever we turn,
there is the Presence of Allah',*** then why is it necessary that we
observe the direction of the Qiblah?

As we will explain later, observing the Qiblah does not mean to confine
the Presence of *Allah* to a particular direction. Since man is a
creature dependent on material and concrete thought, he should pray
towards whatever direction the commandment has mandated. All should pray
towards a single direction in order to unite all Muslims in single rows,
and to avoid dispersion and disorder.

Imagine how disgraceful it would be if every individual prayed toward a
separate direction or in dispersive rows.

By the way, the direction which is appointed as the Qiblah (the
direction towards the Ka'bah) is a holy place and it is the most ancient
sacred site of monotheism whose consideration evokes monotheistic
remembrance.

The phrase / wajhullah / does not mean ' the face of *Allah',* as some
have rendered, but it means, here, 'the Unity or Presence of *Allah’.*

As it was stated before, in the occasion of revelation, and many Islamic
narrations attest to, this verse has been taken as the basic reference
to certify the validity of the prayers offered by those who would pray
toward a direction other than the direction of the Ka'bah by mistake or
because of lack of the capability of verification.

This very verse is also referred to for the validity of reciting prayers
when riding on a moving mount. (For more details concerning this
subject, refer to the jurisprudential books 'Was-a'il-ush-Shi'ah',
Kit-ab-us-Sal-at' and, Abw-ab-ul-Qiblah'.)

Here, we attract your attention to three authentic traditions about the
term / wajhullah/ and its meaning:

1. It is cited in the book 'Al-Tauhid ' from Salman Farsi, through a
tradition known as Jathliq, who asked Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) some
questions which were comprehensively replied to. One of them was that he
asked him (as) which direction his Lord's presence was.

Hadrat Ali (as) told Ibn Abbas to have some firewood fetched for him.
The firewood was brought and was kindled. When the fire was flaming,
Hadrat Ali (as) asked the man which direction the face of the fire was,
and the Christian answered that its face was on every side.

Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) said:

*"This fire which is a material is not recognized by its face, then
Allah, its Creator, is not like that. To Allah belong the East and the
West, wherever you turn, there is the Presence of Allah.'..."* [^9]

2. Again, keeping in mind that the commands given by the Holy Messenger
(S) are those that he has received from Allah, it is narrated from
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) who said that the manifestation of Allah
(s.w.t.) is Ahlul Bayt (as) who are the guides and Imams for people
whose obedience to them has been enjoined by Him the same as it has been
enjoined to Him and His Messenger (S).

That is, the only way to the cognizance of / wajhullah / 'the Presence
of Allah' and the Divine Majesty is through Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), who are
His witnesses. [^10] That is, haply, why they (Imams) have said**:**

*"It is through us that people know Allah, and through us (with our
guidance) they worship Allah."* [^11]

3. Tariq-ibn-Shahab has narrated in a tradition from Hadrat
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) who said:

*"O! Imam is the Word of Allah, the Proof of Allah, the Presence of
Allah, the Light of Allah..."* [^12]

There are some other expressive narrations on the subject cited in
Biharul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. 228, which can be referred to, too.

[^1]: Asbab-un-Nuzul, p. 22, Arabic version

[^2]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 189

[^3]: lbid

[^4]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 189 & Almizan, the of the verse.

[^5]: Tafsir Fakhr-i-Razi, vol. 4, p. 9

[^6]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 191

[^7]: Manhaj-us- Sadiqin, vol. 1, p. 348, & Abulfutuh-Razi; vol. 1, p.
302

[^8]: Tafsir-ut- Tibyan, vol. 1, p. 424 & Tafsir Nimunah, vol. 1, p. 413

[^9]: Bihar-ul-Anwar vol. 25, p. 168

[^10]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 93, p. l18, & Al-Ihtijaj by Tabarsi

[^11]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 102, Tradition 1

[^12]: Bihar-ul-Anwar vol. 25, p. 168


