Section 15
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 124
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ قَالَ
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لاَ
يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**124.** ***"And (remember) when his Lord tested Abraham with words (of
command) which he fulfilled. He said: ‘Verily, I have appointed you an
Imam (leader) for mankind.' (Abraham) pleaded: 'And of my offspring (as
well)? , He, (Allah) said: 'My covenant does not include the
unjust’."***

### Imamat, the Climax of Abraham's (as) Honour

From this verse on, the topics of discussion are Abraham (as), the
honourable prophet of *Allah* and the hero of Monotheism, the structure
of the Ka'bah, the sacred site of worship, and the importance of this
great monotheistic center. These subjects are referred to in the next
eighteen verses. Three main ideas were the objectives of these verses:

The first aim was that they might provide people with the necessary
preparation for the change of the direction of the Qiblah and to inform
Muslims that the Ka'bah is a legacy of Abraham (as), the idol-breaker.
If pagans and idol-worshippers used it as an idol temple, it was only
temporarily and it did not decrease the glorious high rank of the Ka'bah
at all.

The second goal was to address the problem of the Jews and Christians
who were claiming to be the heirs of Abraham (as) and his religion.
These verses, reflecting back on the numerous former verses about the
Jews, clarify how very unfamiliar they were with the creed of Abraham
(as).

The third purpose was that Arab pagans believed in a special incessant
ancestral link between them and Abraham (as). They, too, had to be made
to understand that their belief systems and codes of behavior had no
similarity with that of Abraham (as), the iconoclastic prophet.

In this verse, at first, it says:

***"And (remember) when his Lord tested Abraham with words (of command)
which he fulfilled..."***

Yes, this verse speaks about the important occurrences in Abraham's
life, i.e. his great tests and how he passed them successfully, which
illustrates his high rank and superior personality and manifests the
worthiness of his being.

When Abraham (as) passed these trials successfully, *Allah* saw fit to
give him a gift as a prize. Therefore, addressing him:

***"...He said: "Verily, I have appointed you an Imam (leader) for
mankind.'..."***

In order that this Divine gift would continue in his seed, and
prophethood and 'Imamat' would not come to an end with his death:

**“...*****(Abraham) pleaded: ‘And of my offspring?’.*****.."**

The answer to this question was:

***"...He (Allah) said: ‘My covenant does not include the unjust’."***

That is, I accepted your plea, but only for those of your offspring who
are doers of righteous deeds and are pure and sinless i.e. those who are
worthy of this rank.

### Explanation: What does 'words' mean?

Studying the verses of the Qur'an and noting the great and important
deeds that Abraham (as) fulfilled and, hence, being appointed to the
position of Imamat by *Allah,* leads us to the conclusion that the term
/ kalim-at / meaning 'words', or the Divine commandments by which
Abraham (as) was tried, were not those of the usual sort.

It clearly indicates that the tests were not connected with matters of
ordinary reasoning or faith.

They can never be considered ordinary tests. The purpose of the 'words'
was a series of heavy, hard, laborious, grave duties which were given to
Abraham, the sincere pure prophet (as), and he was the only one who had
the qualifications to successfully complete them. Some of those
commandments were such is the followings:

One trial was concerning the steadfastness of his faith in *Allah.*
Abraham (as) was commanded through a vision in a dream to slay his on
Ishmael. When he awoke, he unhesitatingly acted as he was bidden, (37:
105-108).

This indicates that Abraham (as) already knew that he was *Allah's*
prophet and what he saw in the vision was no other than *Allah's*
command. With such a certainty in his mind, he was willing to do, by
*Allah's* command, something that no other loving or sensible father
possibly could slay his own son.

In another incident, *by Allah's* command, he took and left his wife and
his infant son to an area of dry land, where no food and water or any
inhabitants could be found.

He also stood against the idol-worshippers of Babylon and very bravely
defended Monotheism in his historical trial after he had broken their
idols. He miraculously held firm in faith and patience when he was
thrown into the midst of fire.

Recalcitrating, he emigrated from the land of idol-worshippers, and went
to a faraway region in order to proclaim his prophecy.

He did many things similar to those mentioned above and each of those
trials was, indeed, heavy and difficult for a man to undertake, but he,
with the power of Faith, was able to perform them successfully thereby
proving himself worthy of the position of 'Imamat', Divine leadership.

### Eligibility for Imamat

Precisely speaking, it is understood from the above mentioned verse that
the position and rank of Imamat which was bestowed upon Abraham (as),
only after successfully enduring those frequent difficult trials, was
above and beyond the rank of prophethood.

The primary sense of meaning of the term / imam / is that of being
foremost, but it also has other different meanings including:

A) Leadership in the worldly social affairs of people, (as the Sunnite
school of thought believes).

B) Authority over the religious affairs of people in this world (as some
others of them have interpreted).

C) Responsibility of bringing religious duties into action, whether it
is through the establishment of government in its vast meaning or
performing the commandments and ordinances of *Allah,* and the execution
of social justice along with the training of souls, both outwardly and
inwardly.

The rank of Imamat is higher than the rank of prophethood, because
prophethood and messengership is only a matter of receiving some
commandments from *Allah* and preaching them as glad tidings and
warnings.

All of these are true in the case of Imamat, in addition to practicing
the Divine ordinances and training the souls of individuals, outwardly
and inwardly. (It is clear, of course, that many of the prophets had had
the rank of Imamat, too.)

Imamat, in fact, is the position of presenting the aims of religion
practically, and guidance is 'attaining the ideal' not merely ' showing
the way’.

Besides that, Imamat includes 'Divine Guidance', too. It means the
innate quality of the Imam's spiritual influence and the attracting glow
of his pureness encompassing, deeply touching, and truly affecting the
realm of receptive people's hearts which results in their spiritual
guidance.

From this point of view, an Imam is just like the sun that, with its
life-giving light, fosters and gives vitality to all living creatures.
The function of an Imam in spiritual aspects is the same as the physical
function of the sun.

The Holy Qur'an says:

***"He it is Who sends blessings on you, as do His angels, that He may
bring you out from the depths of Darkness into Light: and He is Full of
Mercy to the Believers ",*** **( Surah Al-Ahzab. No. 33 verse 43).**

It is well understood from this verse that the special mercies of
*Allah* and the hidden aid given by His angels can lead the believers
and those who trust in Him to come out from 'darkness' into 'light’.

This is also true about an Imam. The innate authority of an Imam and the
great prophets (as) who had also possessed the rank of Imamat as well as
their vicegerents, had a deep effect on receptive individuals by which
they could train them and therefore bring them from the depths of
ignorance and error into the light of guidance.

There is no doubt that the purpose of Imamat in this verse is the third
meaning, because it is understood from many of the verses of the Qur'an
that the concept of 'guidance' lies within the meaning of Imamat, as
**Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32. verse 24** says:

***"And We appointed, from among them, leaders, giving guidance under
Our Command, so long as they persevered with patience and continued to
have Faith in Our Signs."***

This guidance does not mean merely 'showing the way', because, in
principle, Abraham (as) had the rank of prophethood and Messengership
for giving guidance in the sense of' showing the way' before becoming an
Imam.

However, the Qur'an clearly attests to this fact that Imamat was
bestowed on Abraham (as) when he persevered with patience in tolerating
the difficulties which he encountered as he paved the path of certitude
alongside his Faith, and passed his various great tests successfully.
This rank was above and beyond the rank of guidance with the meaning of
preaching glad tidings and warning people.

Therefore, guidance within the concept of Imamat is nothing save
'attaining the ideal', cherishing the soul of religion and bringing
forth training programmes for the individuals who are prepared to grasp
them.

This meaning is cited in an expressive tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (as)
which says:

*"Verily, Allah, the Blessed, the Sublime, took Abraham (as) as His
slave before He took him as a prophet. And verily Allah took him as His
prophet before He took him as a messenger.*

*And Allah took him as His messenger before He made him a confident
(khalil). Allah took him as a confident before He appointed him as an
Imam. When He had brought all these things together in him: He (Allah)
said: 'Verily, I have appointed you an Imam (leader) for mankind'."*

The Imam (as) continued: *"Since this was something very great in the
eyes of Abraham, he said: 'And of my offspring (as well)?'He (Allah)
said: 'My covenant does not include the unjust’. "*

The Imam (as) concluded: "*A stupid person cannot be the Imam of the
pious."* [^1] This means that only those seed of Abraham (as) who were
pure and infallible were worthy of being Imam.

### Prophethood, Messengership, Imamat and their Differences

As it is understood from the verses of the Qur'an and various ideas
existing in traditions and Islamic literature, those who were
commissioned by *Allah* had different ranks.

A. Prophethood means the ability to receive revelation from *Allah.*
Then, a prophet is one on whom the Divine revelation comes down and
whatever he receives by revelation he delivers to people.

B. Messengership means to preach the Divine revelation, to spread the
ordinances of *Allah,* and to train the souls and minds of individuals
through education and acknowledgement.

Therefore, a Messenger is he who is commissioned, by effort and
endeavour and utilizing any acceptable and proper means available to
him, to invite people unto *Allah* and His commandments in order to
elicit an ideological, convictional, educational and mental
transformation in them.

C. Imamat, means to guide and lead people. In fact, an Imam is he who
tries to execute, actually, *Allah*'s ordinances by acquiring the power
necessary to organize a godly government; and if he is not able to
organize a formal government, he does his best in carrying out the
ordinances of *Allah,* both personally and socially.

In other words, an Imam is commissioned to execute *Allah's*
commandments and assure their performance, while a Messenger is
commissioned to preach those commandments. Again, in other words,
Messenger shows the path but an Imam, besides his other heavy
responsibilities which were pointed out before, paves the path for
'attaining the ideal’.

Let it not remain unsaid that it is clear that many of the prophets,
like the Prophet of Islam (S), were possessors of all three ranks. They
had Divine revelation bestowed upon them. They preached the commandments
of *Allah* and endeavoured in organizing godly governments for executing
His ordinances, while they were training the souls of people according
to their own religions.

In brief, Imamat is the essence of leadership in all aspects: materially
and spiritually, physically and theologically, apparently and hiddenly.
Imam is the chief of government as well as the leader of the society, a
guide in religious affairs, and a teacher of ethics to train people both
inwardly and outwardly.

It is the Imam who, with his mysterious spiritual strength, guides
receptive persons forward along the path of inner development, instructs
the ignorant ones with his ability and knowledge, and, by means of his
government or other executive resources enforces the principles of
Justice.

### Imamat, the Climactical Rank of Abraham (as)

In defining the reality of Imamat, it was made clear that a person may
become a prophet or a Messenger while he has not been appointed as an
Imam. This position demands special eligibility in all aspects.

It is the same position that Abraham (as) attained after successfully
passing many difficult tests and proving his genuine worthiness; this
being the last step of his development to qualify for that rank.

Some may imagine that the qualifications of an Imam is only that a
person ' be worthy and a model’. They do not consider the fact that this
condition existed in Abraham from the very beginning of his prophethood.

Furthermore, not only Abraham, but also all prophets and Messengers, had
had this epithet from the onset of their calling. It is for this reason
that a prophet should be sinless since his deeds are considered as
models.

Therefore, Abraham (as), who was a prophet and Messenger of *Allah,* was
gifted the rank of Imamat by *Allah* after he passed his trials
successfully and proved that he was worthy of it.

### Who is Unjust?

The objective meaning of the Arabic word ' the unjust, mentioned in this
verse: **"*****My covenant does not include the unjust"*** is not only '
being unjust to others’.

But the term 'unjust' (in contrast with the philosophical meaning of '
justice ' which means to set everything in its own proper place), here,
is used with its broad sense of meaning. Thus, committing an 'unjust'
act means that 'a person, an action, or a thing has been arranged in a
situation which is not appropriate’.

Since the position of Imamat and the outward and inward leadership of
people is an extraordinarily splendid position with many
responsibilities, the committing of the slightest sin or disobedience
disqualifies a person from attaining this rank.

So, in the traditions of Ahlul Bayt (as) we see that, for proving the
vicegerency of Hadrat Ali (as) immediately after the holy Prophet (S),
they have quoted this very verse as justification, indicating that
others had been idol-worshippers before Islam, in the age of ignorance,
and the only person who did not prostrate before an idol, besides
Prophet Muhammad (S), even for a moment was Ali ibn Abi Talib (as).

What unjust act is greater than that a person performs idol-worshipping!
Did Luqman not tell his son:

"***O my son? Join not in worship (others) with Allah: for false worship
is indeed the highest wrong-doing"?*** **(Surah Luqman No. 31, verse
13).**

Hisham-ibn-Salim, as an example, narrates from Imam al-Sadiq (as) who
said:

*"Surely, Abraham was a prophet but he was not an Imam until when Allah
said: 'Verily, I have appointed you an Imam (leader) for mankind’.*

*Abraham pleaded: 'And of my offspring (as well)? 'He (Allah) answered:
'My covenant does not include the unjust’. Those who have worshipped an
idol, they will not be an Imam (leader)."* [^2]

In another tradition, 'Abdillah-ibn-Mas'ud narrates from the holy
Prophet (S) who said:

*"Allah told Abraham: 'I do not give you My covenant (of lmamat) for the
unjust of your children.' Abraham said: 'Who are these unjust whom Your
covenant does not include of my offspring? , Allah said: 'Whoever
prostrated before an idol, leaving Me, I will never make him an Imam "
and he is not worthy of being an Imam..."* [^3]

### An Imam, by Allah's Commission

It is also understood from the current verse that an Imam (a sinless
comprehensive leader of people) should be appointed by *Allah.* The
reason is that: firstly, Imamat is a kind of covenant from *Allah* and
it is evident that such a person should be ordained by Him, the One Who
is the Maker of the covenant.

Secondly, the persons who have even tainted their lives with iniquity,
even as small as a dark spot, whether it is against themselves or
against others, or if there is a sign of idol-worshipping even for a
short period of time in their lives, they are not eligible for Imamat.
They should be perfectly sinless throughout their whole lives in order
to become an Imam.

It is *Allah* who knows the hearts and minds of men and has given us
criteria by which to evaluate them. This point will be discussed more
comprehensively at a later time.

If we want to recognize the vicegerent of the Prophet (S), according to
the above criterion, there would not be anyone save Amir-ul-Mu'mineen
Ali (as).

It is noteworthy that the writer of Al-Manar narrates from Abu-Hanifah
that he believed the government of the time was exclusively suitable for
the Alawites. That was why he approved rebellion against their ruling
government (which was headed by Mansor of the Abbasides).

And it was also for the same reason that he did not agree, himself, to
be in charge of the position of Supreme Court Judge in the government of
the Abbasides.

Then, the writer of Al-Manar adds that the four kalifs of the Sunnite
school of thought all did not agree with the governments of their time,
whom they did not approve as worthy chiefs of the Muslims, because the
governors were some cruel unjust ones. [^4]

It is ironical that, in our time, some of the Sunnite scholars approve
and support the tyrannical governments whose relations with the enemies
of Islam are certain and definite, and their mischief and unjust acts
are clear to all. But, this is insignificant compared to the fact that,
they also consider them / 'ulul'amr / ' political and religious chieves'
and / wajib ul 'ita'ah / 'necessary to be obeyed’.

### Two Questions

This fact should also be noted that the concept of Imamat does not
necessarily mean that an Imam forcedly leads all people to the Truth;
but it means that people having their own free will, together with their
potential for receptiveness and their eligibility, can take advantage of
and use the Imam's quality of effectiveness in outward and inward
leadership in order to be guided.

It is just like we stated earlier, that the sun has been created to
furnish light, heat and energy for all living creatures which have the
potential to receive these bounties and are capable of development.

Another question that may be proposed is that according to the above it
seems that every Imam previously must have been a prophet or a Messenger
and then be appointed as an Imam, whereas the sinless vicegerents of the
holy Prophet (S) were not in such a position.

As an answer, we say that it is not necessary that the Imam, himself, be
previously a prophet or a Messenger and then reach that position.

When his predecessor had the rank of prophethood, Messengership and
Imamat, (such as the Prophet of Islam (S)), the eligible vicegerent can
continue executing the duties of Imamat as an Imam. This situation
occurs when a new Messenger is not needed, like after the Prophet of
Islam (S), who is the seal of the prophets.

In other words, if the process of receiving Divine revelation and
communicating all the ordinance have been formerly performed and, only
the stage of their execution remains, the true successors of the prophet
can continue the prophet's line of execution, and it does not
necessitate that he, himself, be a prophet or a Messenger.

### The Distinguished Personality of Abraham (as)

Abraham's (as) name is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an in 69 occurrences
which are gathered in 25 Suras. In these verses, this great prophet
(as), whose worthy epithets are mentioned therein, is highly praised and
appreciated by *Allah* from all aspects. He was a prototype, an example,
of a complete human being.

The supremeness of his knowledge about *Allah,* his clear logical
statements against idol-worshippers, his intense efforts and endeavours
in challenging with the tyrants of his time, his dedication and
forbearance in obeying the commands of *Allah,* and his unique
perseverance against the storms of adventures and grievous trials, are
all good examples for Muslims, and those who pave the path towards
Allah*,* to take and follow in their lives as their models.

As the Qur'an says about Abraham (as), he was of the elect and good,
[^5] in the ranks of the Righteous, [^6] a model, [^7] a man of truth,
[^8] most tender-hearted, and forbearing. [^9] Furthermore, he was
incomparably, brave and extraordinarily generous as well.

*Allah* Willing, we will offer a more detailed explanation concerning
this matter later when commenting on some of the verses of **Surah
Ibrahim, No.14**, especially the last part of the Surah.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 125
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ جَعَلْنَا الْبَيْتَ مَثَابَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَمْناً
وَاتَّخِذُواْ مِن مَّقَامِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ مُصَلًّى وَعَهِدْنَا إِلَى
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ أَن طَهِّرَا بَيْتِيَ لِلطَّائِفِينَ
وَالْعَاكِفِينَ وَالرُّكَّعِ السُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**125.** ***"And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka'bah in Mecca)
a resort and a secure sanctuary for the people, (saying): 'Take to
yourselves Abraham's Station for a place of prayer’. And We enjoined
Abraham and Ismail (saying): 'Sanctify My House for those who go around
it, for those who abide in it and pay devotion, and to those who bow
down and prostrate themselves'… "***

### The Magnificence of the Ka'bah

After explaining the high rank of Abraham (as) stated in the previous
verse, the Qur'an, in this verse, directs attention towards the
magnificence of the House, the Ka'bah in Mecca, which was built by
Abraham and his son (as). It says:

***"And (remember) when We made the House (the Ka'bah in Mecca) a resort
and a secure sanctuary for the people..."***

Since the term / maθabah / originally based on / θaub /*,* means 'a
place to which people return' or 'a place where people assemble', and
the Ka'bah has been a center where monotheists gather every year, then,
by this assembly, believers, not only bodily but also spiritually,
return to Divine Unity and to their intrinsic nature.

So, that may be why the term / maθabah / (a resort, an abode, a house)
has been used for this Sacred House.

And, since a man's house is the continuous returning site of its
inhabitants who, after having completed their affairs, can experience
rest and tranquility therein, there lies this sense of resting and
tranquility in the meaning of the term / maθabah /*.*

This emphasizes the concept of its next word / amnan / *'* secure
sanctuary' especially with the word 'people', which indicates that this
secure center is a common refuge for all people of the world.

This is, in fact, the acceptance by *Allah* of one of the requests that
Abraham (as) sought. (We will discuss this subject on page 300.)

Then, it adds:

***“...(saying): ‘Take to yourselves Abraham's Station for a place of
prayer.'..."***

The opinions of the commentators are divided as to what, Abraham's
Station' is. Some of them have said that the whole Hajj is Abraham's
Station. Some others have rendered it to */* 'arafah */'* the Mount of
Recognition', / mas'arul haram / *'* Sacred Monument', and / jamarat /
'lapidations'; while others believe that the entire sacred premises of
Mecca is considered the 'Station’.

But, as many Islamic narrations denote, and many of the commentators
have said, too, the verse apparently refers to the very standing-place
of Abraham which is located close to the Ka'bah where pilgrims offer
their circumambulatory prayer after performing their ritual
circumambulation of the Ka'bah. Thus, the purpose of the term / musalla
/*,* mentioned in the verse, is ' the place of prayer', too.

Then, it refers to the covenant that He made with Abraham (as) and
Ismail (as) about the purification of the Ka'bah, where it says:

**“...*****And We enjoined Abraham and Ismail (saying):***

**'*****Sanctify My House for those who go around it, for those***

***who abide in it and pay devotion,***

***and to those who bow down and prostrate themselves’.*** **"**

What is the meaning of sanctification here? Some have said that the
meaning of sanctification here is purification from the existence of
idols.

Some others have said that the purpose is purification from outward dirt
like blood and the contents of animals' stomachs which people sacrificed
therein, because there were some ignorant persons who thoughtlessly did
such deeds as leaving these remains behind.

Furthermore, some believe that sanctification, here, means ' purity of
intent' when building this House of Monotheism.  
 There is no reason for us to confine the meaning of sanctification
here. Its purpose is purification of this 'House of Monotheism' from any
dirt, physically and spiritually.

It is for this reason that in some traditions we read that this verse
has been rendered into sanctification from pagans and in some others
into washing and purifying the body from dirt.

### Explanation: The Secure Refuge, its Social and Educational Effects

According to the above verse, 'the House of Ka'bah' has been chosen and
proclaimed as 'a secure refuge' by *Allah.* We know that there are
resolute rules in Islam instructing every believer to avoid any quarrel,
war, fight and bloodshed within the limits of this Holy land, Mecca.

It is so that not only the members of humankind, regardless of
nationality, race, gender, group, or condition, should be safe and
secure there, but also animals and birds are protected there, in that
nobody is allowed to hurt them.

In this world, where fighting and wars are always within the overall
scene, the existence of such a peaceful center can function as a special
helpful fortress within which the problems of many nations can be
solved.

The security of this region lets different peoples, with all their
differences and enmities that they may have, gather together therein,
sitting, speaking, and solving their difficulties. Thus, one of the most
important problems which usually exist, initiating face to face oral
communications about dismissing or decreasing enmities between nations,
can be solved.

It frequently happens that the two sides of a conflict or the opposing
governments in the world are willing to put an end to their antagonism
and have parley for this purpose, but they cannot find a secure and
respectable place wherein both sides can feel free to speak therein
peacefully and securely. This case has been anticipated in Islam, and
Mecca is introduced as such a center.

Now that most of the Muslims of the world are unfortunately involved in
some hostile conflicts, they can make use of this sacred secure land,
and, under its banner of holiness and special spirituality which
enlightens the hearts, begin speaking with each other to solve their
problems.

### Why the 'House ' of Ka'bah?

In the above verse, the Ka'bah is referred to by the Lord as 'My House',
while it is clear that neither is *Allah* bodily substance nor does He
need a House. The purpose, here, is to honour and glorify the Ka'bah by
stating its honour and lofty status, and, therefore, it is called /
baytullah / 'the House of *Allah*'.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 126
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ اجْعَلْ هَـَذَا بَلَدًا آمِنًا
وَارْزُقْ أَهْلَهُ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ مَنْ آمَنَ مِنْهُم بِاللّهِ
وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ قَالَ وَمَن كَفَرَ فَأُمَتِّعُهُ قَلِيلاً ثُمَّ
أَضْطَرُّهُ إِلَى عَذَابِ النَّارِ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**126.** ***"And (remember) when Abraham said: ‘My Lord, make this a
secure City and provide its people with fruits such of them that believe
in Allah and the Last Day.' He said: 'And whoever disbelieves, I shall
let him enjoy himself for a little while, then I shall drive him to the
Punishment of Fire -and an evil destination it is! ' "***

### Abraham's (as) Petition to Allah!

In this verse Abraham (as) asks *Allah* two great requests in favour of
the inhabitants of this Holy land, one of which was referred to in the
previous verse. The Qur'an says:

***"And (remember) when Abraham said: ‘My Lord, make this a secure
City..."***

As it was pointed out in the previous verse, *Allah* accepted this
invocation from Abraham (as) and set this Holy land as a secure center,
both outward and inward security.

His second petition was thus:

***"...and provide its people with fruits such of them that believe in
Allah and the Last Day.'..."***

It is interesting that Abraham (as) requested 'security' first, and then
he asked for material gifts which itself is a reference to the fact that
a safe and sound economic status is not possible unless there exists
security in a town or country.

The opinions are divided amongst the commentators as to the meaning of
the term 'fruits' here. On the whole, it seems that the word has a vast
meaning, so broad that it includes any material bounty whether it is
fruits or other nutritious substances, as well as spiritual bounties.

Concerning the meaning of this term in the above verse, Imam al-Sadiq
(as) in a tradition has said: *"It is the fruits of hearts."* [^10] This
indicates that *Allah* attracts the attention and affection of human
beings to the people of this Holy land.

This is also noteworthy, that Abraham (as) invocates this petition only
for the believers in *Allah,* the only True God, and the Last Day,
because he might have realized from the statement: ***"My covenant does
not include the unjust,"*** cited in the former verse, the fact that
some groups of his future offspring would follow the path of polytheism
and injustice; then, to show reverence in a courteous manner, here, he
did not include them in his petition.

However, *Allah's* answer to this invocation of Abraham (as) was:

***“...He said: 'And whoever disbelieves, I shall let him enjoy himself
for a little while..."***

***"...then I shall drive him to the Punishment of Fire - and an evil
destination it is !"***

This is, in fact, the same ' General Mercy ' of *Allah* by which His
unlimited bounties are available to all creatures so that good doers and
evildoers equally enjoy from His vast bountiful Table in this world, but
in the next world, where His ' Specific Mercy ' comes forth, wrongdoers
will have no share of it and also they will have no way to rescue
themselves.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 127-129
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَرْفَعُ إِبْرَاهِيمُ الْقَوَاعِدَ مِنَ الْبَيْتِ
وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ رَبَّنَا تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً
مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ وَأَرِنَا مَنَاسِكَنَا وَتُبْ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّكَ
أَنتَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَابْعَثْ فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً مِّنْهُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ
آيَاتِكَ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ
إِنَّكَ أَنتَ العَزِيزُ الحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**127.** ***"And (remember) when Abraham and Ismail raised up the
foundations of the House; (saying): ‘Our Lord,! Accept (this service)
from us; for surely You are All-Hearing, Ali-Knowing'.",***

**128.** ***" 'Our Lord, make us submissive (Muslims) to You, and of our
progeny an Ummah (a nation) submissive to You, and show us our ways of
worship, and turn to us (mercifully); for surely You are the
Oft-Returning, the Most Merciful’."***

**129.** ***" 'Our Lord, send amongst them an Apostle of their own who
shall recite unto them Your revelations, teach them the Book and the
Wisdom, and purify them; for surely You are Almighty, All-Wise’."***

### The Structure of the House of Ka'bah

It is clearly understood from the numerous verses of the Qur'an, the
Islamic traditions, and some historical records that the House of Ka'bah
had been founded before Abraham (as) and that it had been established at
the time of Adam (as).

**Surah Ibrahim. No. 14 verse 37** quoting from the tongue of Abraham
*(as),* says:

***"Our Lord! Surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive (of fruit) near Your Sacred House..."***

This verse confirms that when Abraham (as) with his wife and his infant
son Ismail arrived at the Holy land of Mecca, there was no sign of the
Ka'bah seen therein, but he was guided there by Divine inspiration.

Another verse says:

***"The first House (of worship) appointed for men was that at Bakka:
full of blessing..."*** **(Surah 'ALe-Imran. No. 3 verse 96).**

It is certain that the worshipping of *Allah* and the structure of the
center of adoration did not begin from the time of Abraham (as). It had
started before that and was established at the time of Adam (as).

The idea mentioned in the verse under discussion indicates the same
meaning, too. It says:

***"And (remember) when Abraham and Ismail raised up the foundations of
the House; (saying): 'Our Lord, accept (this service) from us; for
surely You are All-Hearing, All-Knowing'"***

This statement refers to the concept that the foundations of the Ka'bah
had existed from before, and Abraham (as) and Ismail (as) raised them
up.

Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) in one of his sermons known as Qasi'ah
also says:

*"Do you not see that Allah, the Glorified, has tried all the people
among those who came before, beginning with Adam, up to the last ones in
this world with stones... He made those stones into His Sacred House...
Then He commanded Adam and his sons to turn their attention towards
it…"* [^11]

In short, the verses of the Qur’an and the Islamic narrations confirm
this historical fact that the House of Ka'bah was originally built by
Adam (as). Then during the Flood at the time of Noah, it fell down.
Then, later, it was rebuilt by the hands of Abraham (as) with the aid of
his son Ismail (as).

The second of the above two verses attests to the fact that Abraham (as)
and his son Ismail (as) sought from *Allah* five important invocations.

These prayers, which were offered when they were busy building the
Ka'bah, are so exact and consistent with all the necessities of material
and spiritual life, that they can lead man to the recognition of the
magnificence of the souls of these two great Apostles of *Allah.*

At first, Abraham (as) prays:

***"'Our Lord, make us submissive (Muslims) to You..."***

Then he invocates:

***"...and of our progeny an Ummah (a nation) submissive to You..."***

He continues saying: ***“...and show us our ways of worship..."*** (So
that we can adore You in a way worthy of Your Highness).

After that, he (as) seeks *Allah* for repentance, thus:

***“...and turn to us (mercifully); for surely You are the
Oft-Returning, the Most Merciful’. "***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The fifth invocation, which was sought from *Allah* at the time of
constructing the Holy Ka'bah by Abraham and Ismail (as), is this:

***" 'Our Lord, send amongst them an Apostle of their own..."***

***“...who shall recite unto them Your revelations, teach them the Book
and the Wisdom, and purify them..."***

***"...for surely You are Almighty, All-Wise."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 130-132
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَرْغَبُ عَن مِّلَّةِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِلاَّ مَن سَفِهَ نَفْسَهُ
وَلَقَدِ اصْطَفَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَإِنَّهُ فِي الآخِرَةِ لَمِنَ
الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لَهُ رَبُّهُ أَسْلِمْ قَالَ أَسْلَمْتُ لِرَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّى بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ يَا بَنِيَّ إِنَّ
اللّهَ اصْطَفَى لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلاَ تَمُوتُنَّ إَلاَّ وَأَنتُم
مُّسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**130.** ***"And who turns away from Abraham's creed but he who makes a
fool of himself ? Indeed, We chose him in this world, and in the
Hereafter surely he shall be among the righteous."***

**131*****. "When his Lord said to him, ' Submit', he said, ' I have
submitted to the Lord of all worlds'."***

**132*****. "And this did Abraham bequeath to his sons, and (so did)
Jacob, 'My children, Allah has chosen for you the Faith, therefore die
not unless you are Muslims’."***

### Abraham (as), a Human Prototype

In the former verses, Abraham's personality was partly introduced. Some
of his services and quite a few of his comprehensive invocations, which
included material and spiritual aspects, were discussed.

From the totality of these words, it is concluded that this great
Apostle can be a good model for all the truth-seekers throughout the
world, and his school of thought can be an instruction guideline for all
human beings.

Based on this very matter, in the first verse of the above verses, it
says:

***"And who turns away from Abraham's creed but he who makes a fool of
himself!..."***

Is this not foolishness that one forsakes such a pure brilliant creed
and goes astray along the misleading paths of polytheism, blasphemy, and
corruption? This is a religion which is appropriate for and coinciding
with the soul and nature of man. It is a process that parallels wisdom
and logic. This creed is beneficial for man both in the present world
and the next world.

Then, it adds:

***"...Indeed, We chose him in this world, and in the Hereafter surely
he will be among the righteous…"***

Yes, Abraham (as) is chosen by *Allah,* and he is among the ranks of the
righteous and that is why he should be chosen as a model.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The next verse, as an emphasis, refers to one of the other outstanding
qualities which is, in fact, the origin of the rest of his qualities.

***"When his Lord said to him, ' Submit', he said,***

***' I have submitted to the Lord of all worlds'."***

Yes, it is when Abraham (as), that pure true believer and
self-sacrificer, hearkens to the call of his innate nature that the Lord
enjoins him' Submit', and he submits himself totally to His command.
Abraham (as) sees that the stars, the moon, and the sun, all in all,
have precise settings.

Then he, with his mind and perception finds out that they are subject to
the regulations of creation. Therefore, he proclaims that none of them
can be his Lord, and he says:

***"For me, I have set my face firmly and truly, towards Him Who created
the heavens and the earth, and never shall give partners to God."***
**(Surah Al-An'am No. 6, verse 79)**

In fact, the first step to attaining worthiness for a person is through
purity and sincerity, and it was owing to this same quality in Abraham
(as) that he was able to submit exclusively to the command of *Allah,*
therefore He was pleased with him and chose him, and for this same
reason He selected him to introduce His religion.

The entirety of Abraham's (as) deeds, throughout his life, from
beginning up to the end, were unique. One of his expressions of faith
was through his challenge with idol worshippers and star worshippers.

Another was when, while in the midst of fire, he showed such strength of
faith that his hostile enemy, Nimrod, was so affected by him that he
unwillingly said: If a person wants to take a god, he should take one
similar to the God of Abraham (as). [^12]

Also, bringing his wife and suckling son to that hot dry land, i.e. the
Holy land, building the House of Ka'bah, and taking his beloved son into
the place of sacrifice, each was an example of the resoluteness of his
manner.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Abraham's (as) bequest to his children at the last moments of his life
was also a model, as the last verse of the verses under discussion says:

***"And this did Abraham bequeath to his sons, and (so did) Jacob..."***

Each of them told their sons:

***“...'My children, Allah has chosen for you the Faith, therefore die
not unless you are Muslims'."***

It seems that the Qur'an by stating the bequest of Abraham (as) intends
to reiterate the fact that you human beings are not only responsible for
your children while they are with you but you are responsible for their
futures, too. When you are on your deathbed, do not think of only your
financial affairs and that of your children after your death; you had
better think about their spiritual life, too.

Not only did Abraham (as) bequeath such a testament, but also his
grandson, Jacob (as), imitated Abraham's same manner and at the last
moments of his life enjoined his children to attain the secret of
victory, success and happiness via this short phrase:

***'Submit to the Lord of the worlds'.***

The mentioning of Jacob from among all prophets, here in this verse, is
perhaps with the aim of telling the Jews and Christians, who each in
their own way used to join themselves to Jacob, that the blasphemic
creeds which they followed and the lack of pure submission in the Truth
that they showed by their actions, did not coincide with the manner of
the one whom they joined themselves to.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi: vol. 1, chapter 2 concerning the degrees of the
prophets (Nabiy), the Messengers (Rasul), and the Imams (as), p. 133

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi: vol. 1, chapter: prophets and Messenger, Tradition
1.

[^3]: Al-Amali; by Shaykh Tusi: published in 1414, pg 379

[^4]: Al-Manar, vol. 1, pp. 457-458

[^5]: Surah Sad, No.38, verse 47

[^6]: Surah Nahl, No.16, verse 122

[^7]: Ibid. verse 120

[^8]: Surah Maryam, No.19, verse 41

[^9]: Surah Al-Taubah, No.9, verse 114

[^10]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 12, pp. 86 & 100

[^11]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 192

[^12]: Al-Kafi: vol. 8, p. 368, narration 559


