Section 16
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 133-134
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَاء إِذْ حَضَرَ يَعْقُوبَ الْمَوْتُ إِذْ قَالَ
لِبَنِيهِ مَا تَعْبُدُونَ مِن بَعْدِي قَالُواْ نَعْبُدُ إِلَـهَكَ
وَإِلَـهَ آبَائِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ إِلَـهًا
وَاحِدًا وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ أُمَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَلَكُم مَّا كَسَبْتُمْ
وَلاَ تُسْأَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**133.** ***"Nay, were you witnesses when death approached Jacob? When
he said to his sons: 'What will you worship after me? ' They said: ‘We
will worship your God and the God of your forefathers Abraham, Ismail
and Isaac, the One (true) God (alone) and to Him we do submit'…"***

**134.** ***"That is a nation that has passed away; theirs is that,
which they have earned, and yours is what you have earned; you shall not
be questioned for what they had been doing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

A group of the Jews believed that when Jacob (as) was on his deathbed,
he enjoined on his children the same religion which the Jews currently
believe in (with all its corruption of the scriptures). For the
nullification of their belief, *Allah* sent down this verse. [^1]

### Everyone is Responsible for his Own Deem

As it is also understood from the apparent meaning of the verse, there
were some rejecters of Islam who falsely charged Jacob (as), the prophet
of *Allah,* regarding this matter. (The matter was mentioned in the
description of the occasion of revelation.)

To reject this false claim, the Qur'an says:

***"Nay, were you witnesses when death approached Jacob?.."***

Were you there when he frankly questioned his children the way he did?
Yes, that which you (Jews) charge Jacob (as) with is not true.

The factual account which occurred was that:

***"…When he said to his sons: 'what will you worship after me?'…."***

***"...They said: ‘We will worship your God and the God of your
forefathers Abraham, Ismail and Isaac, the One (true) God (alone) and to
Him we do submit’.***

"Yes, he did not enjoin them with anything but to believe in monotheism
and to submit to the command of *Allah,* which is the root of submission
to all the Divine ordinances.

It can be deduced from this verse that when Jacob was on his deathbed, a
feeling of anxiety and worry existed in him about the future of his
children. Finally he expressed his anxiety and asked his sons what they
would worship after him.

He especially asked ' what (thing) ' and he did not ask ' whom ',
because there were some idol-worshippers in the locale who used to
prostrate before some particular ' things’. Jacob wanted to know whether
there was any tendency towards those beliefs in the depths of their
hearts. But when he heard his children's answer, he found, again, his
peace of mind.

This is also noteworthy that Ismail (as) was not Jacob's father or
forefather, but he was Jacob's uncle, whereas in the verse under
discussion, the term / aba' / which is the plural of the word / 'ab /
(father) has been applied.

This makes it clear that, in the Arabic language, this word was
sometimes used for 'uncle’. Hence, we say that if this word has been
used regarding 'Azar in the Qur'an, it does not negate the fact that
'Azar was Abraham's uncle, not his father.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The last of the above verses mentioned is an answer to one of the
delusions of the Jews. They emphasized very much on their ancestors and
the honour and glory they ascribed themselves in relation to *Allah.*
They imagined that even when they tainted themselves with sin, they
could be rescued under the comforting shade of such ancestors. Then, the
Qur'an says:

***"That is a nation that has passed away;***

***theirs is that which they have earned, and yours is what you have
earned..."***

And, in the same way that they are not responsible for your deeds, also,

***“...you shall not be questioned for what they had been doing."***

Therefore, instead of expending all your energy trying to prove that
you, by right of ancestry, deserve the honour and high position that
your pure ancestors enjoyed, you should try to improve your own Faith
and deeds.

The addressees in this verse are apparently the Jews and 'the People of
the Book', but it is evident that this statement is not specifically
referring to them alone, in that this basic principle pertains to us
Muslims, too.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 135-137
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُواْ كُونُواْ هُودًا أَوْ نَصَارَى تَهْتَدُواْ قُلْ بَلْ مِلَّةَ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُولُواْ آمَنَّا بِاللّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَى
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالأسْبَاطِ وَمَا
أُوتِيَ مُوسَى وَعِيسَى وَمَا أُوتِيَ النَّبِيُّونَ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ لاَ
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ آمَنُواْ بِمِثْلِ مَا آمَنتُم بِهِ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَواْ وَّإِن
تَوَلَّوْاْ فَإِنَّمَا هُمْ فِي شِقَاقٍ فَسَيَكْفِيكَهُمُ اللّهُ
وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**135.** ***"And they said: 'Be Jews or Christians, you shall be guided
aright'. Say: 'Nay! Rather the creed of Abraham, the upright; and he was
not of those who associate partners to Allah'..."***

**136.** ***"Say: 'We have believed in Allah and that which has been
sent down to us, and (in) what was sent down to Abraham, Ismail, Isaac,
Jacob and the tribes; and (in) that which was given to Moses and Jesus
and (in) that which was given to all prophet from their Lord. We make no
distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit'..."***

**137.** ***"If then they believe in what you believe, they indeed are
guided (aright); but if they turn away, then they are clearly in schism;
Allah will suffice you against them; He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

Upon the occasion of revelation of these verses it is narrated from Ibn
Abbas that some of the Jewish scholars and some Christians from Najran
were disputing with the Muslims. Each of these two groups considered
their own creed more superior than the other's regarding the Truth, then
they negated each other.

The Jews said that their prophet, Moses (as), was superior and their
Book, the Turah, was the best. The Christians, on the other hand, had
the same claim. They said Jesus (as) was the best guide and the Evangel
was the best among the heavenly Books.

Even though they could not settle their own disputes between themselves,
the followers of both creeds invited the Muslims to their own religion.
The above verses were revealed and answered them both. [^2]

### Only Our Creed is True!

Egoism and self-conceit usually cause one to think that Truth is
exclusively his own and therefore, he considers others wrong. This very
person, consequently, tries to divert others to his own way of seeing
things, as the Qur'an through the first verse of the above verses says:

***"And they said: 'Be Jews or: Christians, you shall be guided
aright'..."***

Tell them that distorted religions can never be the source of guidance,
but:

***“...Say: 'Nay! Rather the creed of Abraham, the upright; and he was
not of those who associate partners to Allah’. "***

The true believers in pure Faith are those who follow the pure
Monotheistic creed, i.e. the Monotheism which has never been tainted
with any form of polytheism. The most important basic principle for
recognizing the pure religion from the corrupted ones is by keeping in
mind this very perfect creed of Monotheism.

Islam instructs us not to make distinction between the divine prophets
and to respect their religions totally because the fundamental
principles of all Divine religions are entirely the same. Moses (as) and
Jesus (as) reinstituted the pure (hanif) doctrine of Abraham (as), which
is to live and die with faith in the One True God.

They believed in the non-polytheistic creed of Abraham (as), the pure
Monotheist, although their religions were later contaminated with
polytheism by their ignorant followers. The Jews, though they taught
Unity, went after false gods, and the Christians invented the trinity or
borrowed it from pagans.

(Of course, if they search for the pureness of truth, they will realize
that there is no difference between what their prophets preached and
what was brought forth by Islam and that they, in performing their
duties today, should follow the divine creed of Islam which has come
down from the direction of *Allah* for this Age).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Concerning the statements of the Muslims' opponents, the next verse
enjoins the followers of Islam thus:

***"Say: ‘We have believed in Allah and that which has been sent down to
us, and (in) what was sent down to Abraham, lsmail, Isaac, Jacob and the
tribes; and (in) that which was given to Moses and Jesus and (in) that
which was given to all prophets from their Lord..."***

***“...We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him do we
submit’."***

Self-conceit and tribal or racial prejudices should never lie at the
root of our accepting some of the prophets and rejecting the others.
They were all Divine teachers who spent their lives training and guiding
people in different eras of time. Their aim was only to guide human
beings towards pure Unity, Truth, and Justice, although each of them had
some particular duties and special qualifications related to their own
specific periods of time.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then it adds:

***"If then they believe in what you believe, they indeed are guided
(aright)..."***

***“...but if they turn away, then they are clearly in schism..."***

If they do not mix their racial and tribal problems, and the likes of
them, with the religion, and formally accept all the prophets, they are
also guided, otherwise they have put away the truth and followed the
wrong.

The term / siqaq / originally means 'cleft, conflict, and fight' and,
here, it has been rendered into ' blasphemy', and sometimes into
'misleading', or 'separation from Truth and tending to falsehood', all
of which, in fact, basically point back to the same fact.

Some of the commentators have cited that when the former verse was
revealed whereby Jesus (as) was mentioned in a row with some other
prophets, some of the Christians said that they did not agree with that
statement because Jesus (as) was not like other prophets; he was the son
of God. The last verse of the above verses was sent down [^3] and warned
them that they were misguided and they were in schism.

However, at the end of the verse, it encourages the Muslims not to be
afraid of the plots of enemies; saying:

***“...Allah will suffice you against them; He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing."***

### Explanation: The Oneness of the Prophets' Invitation

In several occasions, the Holy Qur'an points out that there is no
difference between the prophets of *Allah* because all of them had
received the revelation from one single Source and pursued one goal.

Therefore, the Qur'an enjoins the Muslims to respect all of the Divine
prophets equally. But, as it was stated before, this exhortation does
not conflict with the idea that every new religion sent down from
*Allah* abrogates the former religions and Islam is the last religion in
the world.

Of course, no religion on earth, except Islam, has ever demanded of its
adherents to believe equally in the truthfulness and flawless godliness,
sinless purity of conduct and character of the other apostles of *Allah*
and in the other sacred scripts as the revealed Word of *Allah.*

This command in Islam was given because the Divine Apostles were like
some teachers and everyone of them instructed the human race as one
class. It is evident that when the period and the course of one class
finishes, the trainees will be promoted to another teacher, to a class
of a higher degree.

Therefore, all nations are to fulfill the requirements given by the last
prophet of their times, which is the last stage of the development of
the religion in their period of time. This statement will never contrast
the rightfulness of the invitations of other prophets.

### Who were ' Asbat '?

The term / sebt / originally means: ‘stretching, or expanding of
something easily’. A tree is sometimes called ' sabat ' because its
branches expand freely. The leading lexicologists expressly declare that
/ sebt / the plural of which is / asbat / include sons' children and
daughters' children. [^4]

The meaning of the term */* asbat */,* here is the groups and tribes of
Israelites who came forth from Jacob's twelve sons, and, since there
were some prophets among them, in the above verse they are counted among
those upon whom the Divine verses have been sent down.

So, the objective meaning of the term, here, is the tribe of Israelites
or the tribes of Jacob's children who consisted of some prophets, not
all the children of Jacob. Some of those children were not entirely
eligible to be prophets because they committed sin in their dealings
with their own brother.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The Arabic term / hanif / is based on */* hanaf */* with the meaning
'orthodox, true', or 'inclined from misguidance to right opinion'. So,
those pure monotheists who turn away from polytheism and incline to this
basic principle are called ' Hanif’.

It is also for this reason that one of the meanings of / hanif / is '
true, straight’.

This explanation makes it clear that the meaning offered by the
commentators for the term / hanif / such as Hajj, the pilgrimage to the
Ka'bah, adhering to truth, following Abraham (as), and the pureness of
deeds, are all reflections of that inclusive meaning and each of them is
an example of it.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 138-141
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِبْغَةَ اللّهِ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللّهِ صِبْغَةً وَنَحْنُ لَهُ
عَابِدونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَتُحَآجُّونَنَا فِي اللّهِ وَهُوَ رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّكُمْ وَلَنَا
أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُخْلِصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ تَقُولُونَ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ
وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالأسْبَاطَ كَانُواْ هُودًا أَوْ نَصَارَى قُلْ أَأَنتُمْ
أَعْلَمُ أَمِ اللّهُ وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن كَتَمَ شَهَادَةً عِندَهُ
مِنَ اللّهِ وَمَا اللّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ أُمَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَلَكُم مَّا كَسَبْتُمْ
وَلاَ تُسْأَلُونَ عَمَّا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**138.** ***"(Receive) the baptism of Allah and who is better than Allah
in baptizing? And Him do we worship."***

**139.** ***"Say (to the Jews and Christians): Would you dispute with us
concerning Allah Who is our Lord and your Lord? For us are our deeds and
for you are your deeds: and we are sincere to Him’. "***

**140.** ***"Or do you claim that Abraham, Ismail, Isaac, Jacob, and the
tribes were Jews or Christians? Say: Who then knows best, you or Allah?
'Who is more unjust than he who conceals testimony received from Allah?
And Allah is not heedless of what you do. "***

**141.** ***"That is a nation that has passed away; theirs is that which
they have earned and yours is what you earned; you shall not be
questioned for what they had been doing."***

Following the invitation, in the former verses, to the adherents of all
religions to accept the Divine messages of all prophets, in the first
verse of this group of verses, it commands them all to:

***"(Receive) the baptism of Allah..."***

Which is the same as the purification by Faith and true monotheism
resulting in the manifestation of one true colour? Then, it adds:

***“...and who is better than Allah in baptizing? And Him do we
worship."***

Thus, the Qur'an commands that all racial, tribal and other separative
colours be put aside and that everyone take on (symbolically) the colour
of *Allah.*

Some commentators have recorded that it was a custom among the
Christians to baptize their new-born children in baptismal water which
was mixed with dye or a colour, signifying that the baptized person
received new colour in life. They said that this baptism, especially
with this particular colour, caused the person to be cleaned from the
original sin that he had inherited from Adam (as).

The Qur'an rejects this baseless logic and tells them that in order to
purify their souls and minds from any stain of sin instead of using
colours of rituals, superstitions and dispersiveness; they had better
accept the colour of truthfulness and godliness.

Truly, what a delicate and beautiful sentence it is! How nice it would
be if all people accepted the godly colour, i.e. the colour of unity,
purity and virtue! *viz*. the colour of colourlessness, the colour of
justice, equality, patience and perseverance.

Under the light of the colour of unity and sincerity, all conflicts and
fights can be put to an end and the main weed of polytheism and
dispersion might be rooted out.

This is, in fact, that very colourlessness, or in other words, pulling
away of all colours.  
 In several traditions, commenting on this verse, it is narrated from
Imam al-Sadiq (as) who has said that the objective meaning of /
sibqatallah / ' the baptism of *Allah* ' is the pure creed of Islam.
[^5]This idea is also a reference to what was said in the above.

Some of the Jews, and some others, occasionally disputed with the
Muslims claiming that all the prophets were chosen from among them and
their religion was the oldest of all religions, and their book was the
most ancient of Divine Books.

They said that if Muhammad (S) had really been a prophet, he would have
been appointed from among them. They sometimes said that their race was
superior to the Arab race, for the acceptance of creeds, and they were
more receptive to revelation than Arabs, because they had practically
been idol-worshippers while the Jews were not.

The Jews considered themselves the sons of God, the ones who claimed
Heaven exclusively theirs. The Qur'an refuses all of these false
imaginations. At first, it tells the Prophet (S):

**"*****Say (to the Jews and Christians):*** **'*****Would you dispute
with us concerning Allah Who is our Lord and your Lord?...*****"**

This Lord is not exclusively for one particular tribe or a certain race.
He is the Lord of all human beings and all creatures in the world of
existence.

Addressing them, it adds that they should also know that: there are no
privileges for anyone except for those attained by a person's good
deeds:

***“...For us are our deeds and for you are your deeds:..."***

But there is a difference between those deeds. We serve Him sincerely
and associate none with Him, (while most of you have polluted Unity with
polytheism):

***"…and we are sincere to Him…".***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The next verse replies to some other vain claims of theirs. It says:

***"Or do you claim that Abraham, Ismail, Isaac, Jacob, and the tribes
were Jews or Christians?.."***

***“...Say: 'Who then knows best, you or Allah?’..."***

*Allah* knows best of all that they were neither Jewish nor Christian.

You also know, whether you admit it or not, that many of those prophets
came in to this world before Moses (as) and Jesus (as), and if you do
not know it, then you have ignorantly charged them with such a belie
which in itself, is a great sin and an attempt at hiding the true fact.
Thus:

***“...Who is more unjust than he who conceals testimony received from
Allah?..."***

***“...And Allah is not heedless of what you do."***

What a wonder! When it happens that a person's mind is dominated by
obstinacy and prejudice, he denies even the well-known facts of history.

For instance, the Jews counted the prophets such as Abraham (as), Isaac
(as) and Jacob (as), who came into the world and passed away before
Moses and Jesus, as being from among the followers of Moses (as) and
Jesus (as).

They denied the above mentioned fact which is pertinent to the fate of
their people and defines their Faith and religion. It may be for this
very reason that the Qur'an introduces them as the most unjust.

There is no unjust action worse than that some persons intentionally
deny some facts in order to misguide people so that they wander
aimlessly in that misguidance.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the last of the verses under discussion, which is also the last verse
of the first part (out of the thirty parts) of the Holy Qur'an, the
Qur'an answers them in another style indicating that supposing all these
claims were correct, then, this is the answer:

***"That is a nation that has passed away; theirs is that which they
have earned..."***  
***"...and yours is what you earned; you shall not be questioned for
what they had been doing."***

In conclusion, a nation should rely upon its own deeds, not on its past
history. As a person should thrive on his own excellencies, not on those
of his ancestors.

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Abulfutuh-Razi, vol. 1, p. 339

[^2]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 216

[^3]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 218

[^4]: Arabic-English Lexicon, parl 4, p. 1294, by: E.W. Lane

[^5]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 132


