Section 18
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 148
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلٍّ وِجْهَةٌ هُوَ مُوَلِّيهَا فَاسْتَبِقُواْ الْخَيْرَاتِ أَيْنَ
مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**148.** ***"Everyone has a direction to which he turns, so hasten to
precede each other towards all that is good, Wherever you (may) be,
Allah will bring you altogether (unto Him); surely Allah is All-Powerful
over all things,"***

### Every Religion has a Qiblah

This verse is, in fact, an answer to the Jews who made a vast uproar
about the event of the change of Qiblah. It says:

***"Everyone has a direction to which he turns,…"***

There had been different directions of the Qiblah during the history of
prophets. The change of the direction of a Qiblah is not a strange
thing, because it is not like the principles of the religion which are
permanent, nor is it similar to Divine affairs which are impossible to
interfere in, Therefore, do not make such a big deal about the Qiblah,

***"…so hasten to precede each other towards all that is good …"***

Instead of spending all your time on talking about this minor subject,
you had better pay attention to doing good deeds and having pure
intentions which have a broad racing field where you can challenge to
precede each other, because the criterion of the value of your existence
is your pure good actions,

This meaning is just like what is stated in verse 177 of the current
Surah:

***"It is not righteousness that you turn your faces towards the East
and the West, but righteousness is that one should have faith in Allah,
the Last Day, the angels, the Book, and the Apostles…"***

If you want to examine Islam or Muslims, you can utilize this criterion
for analysis, not the problem of the change of the Qiblah.

Then, as warning to the objectors and encouraging the good-doers, it
says:  
***“...Wherever you (may) be, Allah will bring you altogether (unto
Him)..."*** in the Great Court of the Hereafter which is the final stage
of reward and punishment.

It is not such that some be busy doing righteous works and some others
do not do anything but destruction and spend their time spoiling others'
deeds and, yet, these two groups be treated equally without having any
reckoning or any recompense.

The idea may seem surprising for some people that how it is possible
that *Allah* gathers the particles of the scattered dusts of men
wherever they may be, and brings them into a new life, then, it
immediately says:

***“...surely Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

Indeed, the existence of this statement at the end of the verse is
evidence for the statement preceding it, which says:

***"Wherever you (may) be, Allah will bring you altogether (unto
Him)"***

### Explanation: The Day When Imam Mahdi's (as) Adherents Assemble

According to numerous traditions narrated from the holy Ahlul Bayt (as)
cited in Islamic literature, the expression: **"*****Wherever you (may)
be, Allah will bring you altogether (unto Him)*****"** has been rendered
into the adherents of Imam al-Mahdi, the twelfth Imam (as).

It is quoted in 'Rauqat-ul-Kafi' from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) who,
after mentioning this expression, said:

*"It means the adherents of Imam Gha'im (as) who consist of three
hundred and thirteen men.*

*By Allah, they are the objective meaning of the phrase /
ummat-ul-ma'dudah /. By Allah, they all will gather together at the same
time like the autumnal wind-driven broken clouds that become cumulus."*
[^1]

It is also narrated from Ali-ibn-Mosa-ar-Rida, the eighth Imam (as), who
has said: *"By Allah, when al-Mahdi (as) rises, Allah will gather all
our followers from all cities unto him."* [^2]

There is no doubt that this is one of the deep innate meanings of the
verse. Based on Islamic traditions, we know that there are layers upon
layers of meaning concerning the verses of the Qur'an.

One of them is the apparent meaning which is universal and general; and
others, which are the deeply hidden ones which none knows except the
Prophet (S), the sinless Imams (as), and those whom *Allah* wills.

In other words, these traditions refer to this very meaning that the
Creator, Who is able to gather the particles of the scattered dusts of
men from different parts of the world, can easily bring the adherents of
al-Mahdi (as) on one day and at one time together to strike the first
spark of the establishment of the revolution for the settlement of the
godly government in order to put an end to tyranny and transgression,
and establish Divine Justice among people throughout the world.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 149-150
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ حَيْثُ خَرَجْتَ فَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَإِنَّهُ لَلْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّكَ وَمَا اللّهُ بِغَافِلٍ عَمَّا
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ حَيْثُ خَرَجْتَ فَوَلِّ وَجْهَكَ شَطْرَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَحَيْثُ مَا كُنتُمْ فَوَلُّواْ وُجُوهَكُمْ شَطْرَهُ لِئَلاَّ يَكُونَ
لِلنَّاسِ عَلَيْكُمْ حُجَّةٌ إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُواْ مِنْهُمْ فَلاَ
تَخْشَوْهُمْ وَاخْشَوْنِي وَلأُتِمَّ نِعْمَتِي عَلَيْكُمْ
وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**149.** ***"And from whatever place you come forth, turn your face
towards the Sacred Mosque. Indeed, this is the truth from your Lord. And
Allah is not at all heedless of what you do."***

**150.** ***"And from whatever place you come forth, turn your face (in
prayer) towards the Sacred Mosque; and wherever you are, turn your faces
towards it, so that people shall have no dispute against you, save those
of them that are unjust. Have no awe of them, but stand in awe of Me;
and that I may Perfect My blessing upon you, and so that you might be
guided (aright)."***

In the previous verse where the direction of the Sacred Mosque is
referred to, it concerns Medina, the city where most Muslims inhabited
at that time. But, in the first of the above verses, the meaning is more
general and it says that from wherever you come forth and set out for
travelling, turn your face towards the Ka'bah in prayer.

***"And from whatever place you come forth, turn your face towards the
Sacred Mosque..."***

Here are some points and messages that can be noted:

1. In numerous verses of the Qur'an, the subject of the Qiblah and
turning towards it is repeated and emphasized. These repetitions are not
undue. Through every one of these verses, besides the proposition of the
Qiblah, a new point is propounded.

In the current Surah, [^3] after commissioning the Prophet (S) and the
Muslims to turn their faces towards the Qiblah, the Sacred Mosque, it
says: ***"...and those who have been given the (earlier) Book know well
that it is the truth from their Lord...",*** because they had learnt
from their religious books that the Prophet of Islam (S) would pray
towards two Qiblahs, so, ***“...We shall turn you (in prayer) to a
Qiblah that you shall be pleased with ",*** in order to fulfil the
prophecy which was given to the 'People of the Book' cited in their Book
which they were expecting.

Here, the subject is emphasized again, thus: ***"...Indeed, this is the
truth from your Lord..."***

In the next verse, there is another reason mentioned for these
reiterations which will be referred to in the following.

2. Whenever a new subject is proposed, the matter should necessarily be
reiterated to be renewed and settled in the minds and hearts of people.

It is narrated in a tradition that the first phrase in the prayer call
(i.e. Allahu-Akbar) is repeated four times in order that people be
prepared and receptive, but the phrases following that are repeated only
two times, because people's attention has already been attracted by the
proclamation of the call to prayer.

The Lord warns those who disobey His Command, saying: ***"...And Allah
is not at all heedless of what you do."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the second of the above verses, too, immediately after the ordinance
of turning the face towards the Sacred Mosque, the Lord says:

***"...so that people shall have no dispute against you..."***

As it was formerly pointed out, the' People of the Book' knew that the
Prophet of Islam (S) would pray towards two Qiblahs, so, if that had not
come to pass, they would have questioned or objected that the Prophet
(S) lacked the qualities mentioned in the earlier heavenly Books, or
they would have sneered and despised the Muslims accusing them that
they, who had not an independent Qiblah for their own, were the
followers of the Jewish Qiblah.

This objection was not, of course, only from the side of the Jews, but
the pagans also assisted them in their ridicules, criticizing: ‘Why does
not Muhammad respect the Ka'bah, the Holy House built by Abraham and
Ismail (as), exclusively for the prayer to God and does yield towards
the religious centre of the Jews?'

The hypocrites, too, were busy objecting to the change of the Qiblah.
They said that the Prophet (S) was not firm in his decision.

However, this verse, with emphasis and repetition, prepares the Muslims
for acceptance and perseverance. It informs them that those people who
accept proof and reasons will not object to you, but those who are wrong
doers and unjustly conceal the truth will not stop seeking pretexts.
***"...-so that people shall have no dispute against you, save those of
them that are unjust..."***

Therefore, you should neither give heed to them nor be afraid of them.
You should fear only *Allah.*

***"...Have no awe of them, but stand in awe of Me..."***

Another point which is noteworthy, here, is that the Qiblah is the
symbol of Monotheism. The Qiblah, the direction of prayer, is the emblem
of the Muslims. In Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 173, the Qiblah is referred to
as ' a clear sign, or a distinguishing flag’.

Idol worshippers and star worshippers, when worshipping, turned towards
idols or stars or the moon. Instead of those misguided directions, Islam
introduced the Ka'bah as the Qiblah for Muslims.

Thus turning towards the Sacred Mosque is considered a sign of being
mindful of the Lord. Some traditions indicate that the Prophet of Islam
(S) usually sat towards the direction of the Qiblah. We are even advised
by the Holy Ahlul Bayt (as) to lie, to sleep and to sit down towards
that direction. This action has been counted as a form of worship.

There are some special obligatory ordinances on observing the Qiblah
while performing certain ritual actions. For instance, slaughtering
animals to be used for food, burial of a Muslim corpse in the grave, and
establishing the obligatory prayers should be done towards the Qiblah.
Elimination of bodily wastes while facing or with one's back to the
Qiblah is unlawful.

In addition to what was said in the above, the Qiblah is the sign and
the factor of uniting Muslims. If we look from above the earth down at
the Muslims of the world, we see that they turn towards the Qiblah at
least five times a day with special regularity and in a particular
order.

Throughout history, the Ka'bah has been the center point of the godly
movements and revolutions, including that of Abraham (as), Prophet
Muhammad (S), up to Imam Husayn's (as); and in the future, Imam Mahdi
(May *Allah* hasten his advent) will start his blessed movement from the
site of the Ka'bah. Then, we conclude that:

1. The Ka'bah is the Qiblah of Muslims, all of whom, wherever they be,
are commissioned to turn towards it when they stand praying-

***"And from whatever place you come forth, turn your face towards the
Sacred Mosque. Indeed, this is the truth from your Lord. And Allah is
not at all heedless of what you do. "***

2. Muslims should avoid doing anything that causes their enemies to seek
pretext.

***"...so that people shall have no dispute against you..."***

3. Independence is a 'value' while tolerating flattery is a disgrace.

4. The change of the Qiblah is the fulfilment of the conditions and
qualities promised in the earlier Divine Books.

5. The change of the Qiblah was a factor to nullify the vain objections
and pretexts of the' People of the Book', pagans, and hypocrites.

6. It is not right to be silent when there is injustice: ***"...save
those of them that are unjust..."***

7. Foreign enemies cannot be the greatest danger for the Muslims, while
impiety and having no awe of *Allah* is the real danger.

8. Appointing an independent Qiblah for the Muslims was to prepare the
perfection of *Allah's* blessing upon them.

***"...and that I may Perfect my blessing upon you..."***

***"...and so that you might be guided (aright)..."***

9. Appointing an independent Qiblah for Muslims' prayers towards the
Sacred Mosque is a process for the guidance of believers.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 151-152
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِيكُمْ رَسُولاً مِّنكُمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ
آيَاتِنَا وَيُزَكِّيكُمْ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَيُعَلِّمُكُم مَّا لَمْ تَكُونُواْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ وَاشْكُرُواْ لِي وَلاَ تَكْفُرُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**151.** ***"Even as We have sent among you a Messenger of your own who
recites Our revelations to you that purifies you and teaches you the
Book and the Wisdom, and teaches you that which you did not know."***

**152.** ***"Therefore, remember Me, and I will remember you; and be
thankful to Me, and be you not ungrateful."***

The subject matter of the first verse is the Messengership of the
Prophet of Islam (S) which was in answer to the invocation of Abraham
(as) who had asked:

***"Our Lord, send amongst them an Apostle of their own who shall recite
unto them Your revelations,...",*** **(Surah Al-Baqarah, No.l, verse
129).**

Besides, that the Prophet of Islam (S) also repeatedly said:

***"I am (the fruit of) the very acceptance of my father's invocation,
Abraham (as)."*** [^4]

Thus, *Allah* sent a prophet to the people from among themselves who
were familiar with their demands, needs, and wishes. He used to
communicate with them through their own language, and he lived amongst
them.

***"Even as We have sent among you a Messenger of your own who recites
Our revelations to you that purifies you and teaches you the Book and
the Wisdom, and teaches you that which you did not know."***

Through the second verse, *Allah* has promoted the rank of Man by saying
that He and we remember each other.

***"Therefore, remember Me, and I will remember you..."***

The level and standard of knowledge and understanding of people is
different, so, *Allah* tells a group of servants: ***"...Remember
Allah's favour on you...",*** **(Surah Ale-Imran. No.3. verse
103)*****,*** while he addresses some others of them thus:
***“...remember Me...",*** as in the current verse.

The remembrance of *Allah* is a prerequisite to being thankful to Him,
hence, it has preceded the term thankfulness. This is an illustration of
the consideration of *Allah's* honour for Man as a reflection of His
Grace unto His servants.

On one end of this scale, there is Man with his ignorance, poverty,
mortality, and feebleness, while on the other end, there is *Allah,* the
All-Knowing, the All-Sufficient, the Eternal, and the All-Mighty Who
wants him to remember Him in order to show his gratitude for the great
blessings of the Qiblah and the Messenger of Islam, and He promises to
remember him, too.

This very remembrance is also a favour from *Allah* bestowed upon His
servants.

No doubt, if a person neglects *Allah* in life, He, of course, will be
heedless towards him, too.

***“...and be thankful to Me, and be you not ungrateful."***

### Explanation

Here, your attention is attracted to the following descriptions and
messages derived from the above verses:

1. The recitation of Divine revelations, the purification of receptive
souls, the instruction of the Book and Wisdom, and teaching of people
what they do not know, are among the duties of prophets.

2. That leader is successful who is from amongst the people themselves,
because he is acquainted with their problems and speaks the same
language as theirs.

***"...a Messenger of your own who recites Our revelation to you..."***

3. Human beings are not able to solve all their scientific problems by
themselves. That is why He did not say in the verse / malata'lamun /
'(He teaches you) what you do not know', but He said: / malamtakunu
ta'lamon / '(He teaches you) that which you did not know' in order to
remind us that if the prophets (as) had not existed, Man could never
have found the answers to many of his problems.

For example, he could not have found out what his future (the next
world) will be, or, he could not recognize which path was the true path
of felicity and salvation.

4. Prophets were not merely the teachers and leaders of ethics and
theology, but they were also the instructors of science. Without their
leadership in science, human knowledge would have remained undeveloped
in all fields.

***"...and teaches you that which you did not know."***

5. The remembrance of *Allah* is not only the cause for the Grace of
*Allah,* but with the remembrance of *Allah* the hearts will gain peace
and rest. **Surah Al-Ra'd. No.19 Verse18** says:

***"...Certainly! By Allah's remembrance are the hearts at rest."***

6. Establishing prayer is the best way to remember *Allah,* as in
**Surah. Taha No. 20** **Verse14,** *Allah* Himself says:

***"...keep up prayer for My remembrance..."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 153
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اسْتَعِينُواْ بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلاَةِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**153.** ***"O' you who have Faith! seek you help (from Allah) through
patience and prayer, verily Allah is with the patient ones (in the time
of adversity)."***

The phrase / ya'ayyuhallaŎna'amanu / ***"O'*** ***you who have
Faith!"*** addresses all those who have Faith entirely, foremost of whom
Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) and the rest of the immaculate Imams
are distinguished.

This idea is expressed in many Islamic narrations; for instance, it is
quoted from Ibn Abbas narrating from the holy Prophet (S) who said:

*"No revelation containing' O' you who have faith' was sent down except
that Ali is at its top and is its chief."* [^5]

Again, it is narrated from 'Akramah who narrates from Ibn-Abbas that has
said:

*"Allah has sent down no verse in the Qur'an consisting of 'O' you who
have faith' but Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) is the leader of it and the chief
of it".* [^6]

Of course, the more complete and the higher the degree of Faith is, the
content of the verse about it is clearer and more apparent.

(This phrase has also been discussed more comprehensively when
commenting on Surah No, 2 verse 104 on pages 250 and 251 in the current
volume.)

The phrase / wasta'inu / ***"seek you help from Allah"*** is a guiding
imperative phrase because at every moment and in all affairs a mortal is
in need of *Allah's* help, whether it is something which is inside his
free will, because he is not an absolutely independent subject, though
he is created free in will; or it is something which is outside of his
will.

Man is in complete need of Him *(s.w.t.)* and he should constantly
invocate for everything and seek help from the Lord. A person most
naturally and reasonably can be qualified for the special blessings from
God.

If this verse is to be taken as referring to the conquest of Mecca, even
then it holds good, if it means to say that the people must prove their
worthiness or value to the Truth in Islam by bearing the hardest trials
with constant prayers to the Lord; for prayer suggests the praying
individual's acknowledgment of God's Omnipotence and the individual's
confidence in God being the All-Merciful one, as the only One who can
grant the prayers of the sincere supplicants.

Real Faith can never be mere empty words. It must express or manifest
itself through patience or endurance in all that befalls the individual
to show his faithfulness to God, and the help from God must be sought
through prayers or supplications to the Lord.

The aid of *Allah* requires eligibility. This eligibility is confirmed
by two things:

The first is having ***patience*** in worldly hardships and perseverance
in bearing its bitter circumstances. And also having patience in
tolerating the hardship of performing Divine services, and obtaining
knowledge and good ethics, patience in withholding one's self from lusts
and the fleeting pleasure of committing sins and yielding to low
desires, is necessary. This bitterness of hardship, which is short in
time, finally results in a sweet fruit which lasts a long time.

Concerning the epithets of the true believers, Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(as) has said:

*"The short period of patience resulted in a long period of tranquility
for them."* [^7]

The term / sabr / ' patience ', in this verse, is rendered into
'fasting' and 'holy war’. The second thing is '*prayer'* which is the
highest means of turning towards and approaching *Allah* by which we may
seek help and aid from that Origin of favour and Grace.

Some commentators have rendered the term / salat / into 'supplication'
whose explanation demands a separate chapter.

Some others, based on some Islamic traditions, have interpreted it into
the 'obligatory prayers' and 'supererogatory prayers'.

For example: it is cited in Tafsir 'Ayyashi narrated from Fudayl from
Imam Baqir (as) who said:

*"O' Fudayl, convey our salam (regards) to our followers whom you visit
and tell them I say that I avail you aught (in keeping you far) from the
punishment of Allah save by piety.*

*Then, they must control their tongues and be careful of their hands.
They should be attentive to patience and prayer. Verily Allah is with
the patient ones."* [^8]

The first part of the verse has also occurred in verse 45, the
explanation of which can be referred to on pages 169 and 170.

The objective meaning of the phrase **"*****Allah is with the patient
ones"*** is that His help, assistance, guidance, success, favours, the
protection from pests, the perfection of intentions, as well as His
other blessings are showered upon the patient by Him.

Above all of the aforementioned bounties, there is the reward of *Allah*
granted to the patient believers in the Hereafter about whom He says:

***"Those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without
measure!"*** **(Surah Az-Zumar, No 39. verse 13).**

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 154
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ لِمَنْ يُقْتَلُ فِي سَبيلِ اللّهِ أَمْوَاتٌ بَلْ
أَحْيَاء وَلَكِن لاَّ تَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**154.** ***"And do not say of those who are slain in Allah's way: 'They
are dead.' Nay (they are) alive, but you perceive (it) not."***

The Qur'anic phrase ***' of those who are slain in Allah's way'***
refers to those who are slain (i.e. martyred) in the battles led by the
Prophet (S) or Imams (as) or one of their specific deputies, as well as
anyone who is martyred on the path of Islam and propagation of the
religion of *Allah.*

The content of the verse is inclusive of not only all who are slain in
the path of *Allah* such as: the immaculate Imams (as) their ministers,
Muslim scholars and believers, although the occasion of revelation of
the verse is reported that it was revealed about the Muslims who were
martyred in the battle of Badr, but also anyone other than them.

***"And do not say of those who are slain in Allah's way: 'They are
dead'..."***

The phenomenon of martyrdom is more clearly described in Surah Ale-Imran
No.3. Verses 169,170 which gives further information about the truth
that those who surrender or sacrifice their lives in the way of *Allah.*
(i.e. the martyrs) are alive receiving their sustenance from their Lord.

***"And reckon not those who are killed in Allah's way as dead; nay they
are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord;" "Rejoicing in
what Allah has given them out of His grace..."***

The term / sahid / 'martyred' used in many occurrences in the Qur'an
refers to this blissful state of realization.

Therefore, this stage of life, i.e. the life immediately after death,
i.e. the purgatory life, is not allocated to martyrs alone, though the
verse is about them, but it envelops all people because stating
something does not mean that the unstated, but applicable, instances are
not involved.

For example, when we say, this man is just', it does not mean that
justice belongs to him exclusively and there is not any other just
person; while there may be thousands of people who are just.

Thus, this verse, here, confirms the purgatorial life for the martyrs.
This life, the intermediate state, according to many verses of the
Qur'an and abundant Islamic traditions, exists for all believers and
nonbelievers both, with a distinction.

The soul of a believer, after departuring from its physical body, will
settle in a body similar to this one and will be sustained in that world
until when the Hereafter comes forth; while the soul of a nonbeliever,
during the time when passing this course, will be in torment, as the
Qur'an says:

***"(In falsehood will they be) until when death comes to one of them,
he says: ‘O' my Lord! send me back (to life), -" " In order that I may
work righteousness in the things I neglected. ' By no means! It is but a
word he says, -Before them is a partition till the Day they are raised
up."*** **(Surah Al-Mu'min No.23 verses 99 and 100*****)***

It is narrated from Yunus-ibn-Thibyan who said he was sitting with Imam
al-Sadiq (as) when he was explaining about the believers' souls and he
(as) said:

*"O' Yunus! When Allah gets the soul of a believer taken, He puts his
soul in a setting like his body that was in this world. So, they eat and
drink and when a comer enters he recognizes them in the same form as
they were in the world."* [^9]

Also, Abu-Basir narrates from Imam al-Sadiq (as) who, about the
believers' souls, said:

*"(They will be) in Heaven with the same features as their (worldly)
bodies were so that if you see him (one of them) you will surely
recognize him and say who he is."* [^10]

Then the Qur'an continues saying:

***"...Nay, (they are) alive..."***

Life is divided into four sorts: the plant-life, the animal-life, the
human-life, and the Faith-life.

Plant-life is the power of growth which is common among plants and
animals including human beings. The death of this particular life is
when that power stops. Animal-life is the power by which feeling and
conscious movement comes to being. Human beings and animals have this
life in common. It dies when this power ceases.

Human-life is the faculty of general reasoning and perceiving by which
Man is distinguished from animal. This phenomenon emerges because of
that abstract and rational soul which administrates this body.

Its death causes the interruption of this administration and breaking
off its connection with the body but there is no destruction for it and
it remains to return to the body again when the Resurrection occurs. So,
this purgatorial state exists not only for martyrs or Muslims, but for
the soul of every conscious being.

Faith-Life is the peace of mind, assurance of self, and clearness of
heart all of which come into existence for a believer through Faith and
knowing *Allah.*

It is in this state that he can live in rest and tranquility with joy
and pleasure because the toils, hardships, and miseries of this world
would not create any awe, worry, anxiety or instability for him. This
very condition originates from his reliance and belief in Providence,
Who gives only goodness.

This life is the same as the 'good life', about which the Lord says:

***"Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to
him will We give a new life, a life that is good and pure, and We will
bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions."***
**(Surah An- Nahl. No.16*****.*** **verse 97).**

And, the Qur'an also says:

***"O' you who have Faith! give your response to Allah and His Apostle,
when He calleth you to that which will give you life..."*** **(Surah
Al-Anfal, No 8, verse 24).**

It is said that the utterances in a language indicate meanings so that
letter and spirit correspond with each other. For example, the term
'light or lamp' is applied to any means which is used in darkness to get
brightness from. Then, whatever has this function, the application of
that term for it is correct, although the substance is different from
the point of material, form and other qualities.

Life is a general sense which is recognized by the appearance of the
effects which are expected from it. In this sense, the term' life' is
used for the Essence of *Allah,* too.

The example of this idea is recited in **Surah. Ale-Imran. No.3. verse
2,** which says: ***"Allah! there is no god but He, the living, the
Self-Subsisting, Eternal."*** That is, the Essence from Whom the effects
of knowledge and power are clear and manifest.

That is why some scholars said that *Allah's* life is His very Knowledge
and Power. Of course, the Essence of the Knower and the Mighty is alive.
Therefore, wherever the effects of this meaning exist, the application
of this utterance is correct, but it are not necessary that its kind and
its characteristics and properties, which are appropriate to those
particular situations, be the same everywhere and in all circumstances.

Hence, the life in Purgatory, from the point of quality for martyrs and
other people, is of the quality of the same world. It is for this reason
that the people of this world with their senses, the quality of the
nature of which is of the quality of this world, cannot perceive that
which is of the quality of the nature of that world.

***"…but you perceive it not."***

By the way, this verse clears the doubt of materialist and pagans who
believe that with death, man's life becomes extinct, i.e. there is no
life after death. Here, the Qur'an warns all, Muslim or non-Muslim, that
**man's life does not perish after death, but it does remain.**

So, with this in mind, we realize that there is nothing more valuable or
worthwhile than the time spent striving for the perfection of such a
life. May *Allah* help us all to follow His Ordinances that He so
graciously made available to us by way of the Qur'an in order that we
might experience success in this life and in the Hereafter-

[^1]: Raudat-ul-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 313, Tradition 478

[^2]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 231

[^3]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 144

[^4]: Al-Amili, by Shaykh Tusi, p. 379

[^5]: Tafsir-i-Furat-ul-Kufi; p. 49, Tradition 7

[^6]: Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 1, p. 167

[^7]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 68, p. 113, Tradition 48

[^8]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 232

[^9]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 236

[^10]: Ibid


