Surah Al-Fatihah, Chapter 1
===========================

**Surah Al-Fatihah**

**(The Opening)**

**No.1 (7 Verses)**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ للّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهدِنَــــا الصِّرَاطَ المُستَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنعَمتَ عَلَيهِمْ غَيرِ المَغضُوبِ عَلَيهِمْ وَلاَ
الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. "In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful."***  
***2. "(All) praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds."***  
***3. "The Beneficent, The Merciful."***  
***4. "Master of the Day of Judgement."***  
***5. "Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek
help."***  
***6. "Guide us (O' Lord) on the Straight Path."***  
***7. "The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed Thy bounties, not
(the path) of those inflicted with Thy wrath, nor (of those) gone
astray."***

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The Holy phrase ***'In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The
Merciful'*** / bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / is, in fact, mentioned
both at the onset of the Qur'an and at the beginning of every Surah,
except Surah 9, *(Surah Taubah -Repentance).* And, since the purpose *of
Allah's* Word, i.e. the whole Qur'an, is to guide people; as Surah
Al-Maidah, *No.* 5, verses 15-16 say:

***"...Indeed, there has come to you a light and a clear Book from
Allah", "With it Allah guideth him who follows His pleasure to the ways
of peace and safety..."***;

therefore, this guidance, being a grant and a fundamental principle,
begins with *Allah's* Holy Name.

This Surah, among all Suras of the Qur'an: has an extraordinary;
radiance which originates from the following merits:

### 1. The Tone of the Surah

This Surah, The Opening, in comparison with other Suras of the Qur'an
regarding its tone and melody, has a particular style which is, clearly
different and extraordinary.

The other Suras contain instructions from *Allah,* Who gives commands
and admonishments to His servants, but, in this Surah, His words are
uttered on behalf of the servants. In other words, in this Surah,
*Allah* has taught His servants how to supplicate and speak to Him,
simply and without a mediator.

### 2. Al-Fatihah, the Basis of the Qur'an

It is narrated that the holy Prophet (S) has said:

*"By the One, in Whose hand is my soul, Allah has not sent down a
similar Surah to this Surah (Al-Fatihah), neither in the Turah, nor in
the Gospel, nor in the Psalms, nor even in the Qur'an and it is
Umm-ul-Kitab";* [^1] which means that it is the basis and origin of all
excellence.

In fact, besides referring to the Resurrection, this Surah presents
facts concerning the Unity of the Divine Essence, Unity of Attributes,
Unity of Divine Acts, and Unity of Worship. It is the essence of the
whole meaning of the Qur'an.

It is narrated from Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) that:

*"All secrets of Allah are in Divine Books; and the contents of all
those Divine Books are comprised in the Qur'an; and what is found in the
Qur'an is condensed in Surah Al-Al-Fatihah, and what is in Al-Fatihah is
gathered in / bismillah /, and what is in /bismillah / is concentrated
in / b /, (the first letter of 'Bism-il-la ' )..."* [^2]

Based on the entirety of great commentators' statements, it is
understood that this tradition indicates clearly the importance of both
the Holy Qur'an and / bismillah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim */* in which science
and knowledge, from the beginning to the end, is comprised.

The interpreter and elucidator of these sciences is the holy Prophet
(S), and after him there are his true vicegerents including
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as)*.* [^3]

### 3. Al-Fatihah, Magnificent Honour of the Prophet (S)

Surah Al-Fatihah, more so than the other Suras in the Holy Qur'an, was
revealed to the holy Prophet (S) as a great bounty. It stands on a par
with the whole Qur'an. The seven verses in the Surah sum up the whole
Qur'an:

***"And We have bestowed upon thee the Seven Oft-repeated (verses) and
the Grand Qur'an",***[^4] **.**

This meaning is also referred to in a narration from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen
Ali (as) quoting the Prophet's (S) tradition who said:

"*Verily, Allah, the Exalted, has bestowed (His) favours on me
particularly for 'The Opening' (Al- Fatihah) and has positioned it on a
par with the whole Grand Qur'an, and surely Fatihat.-ul-Kitab (the
Opening of the Qur'an) is the dearest (item) in the treasures of the
'Arsh, (Throne of Heaven)".* [^5]

### 4. The Importance of its Recitation

The recitation of this Surah, because of its extreme importance, is
frequently emphasized in Islamic traditions and narrations.

As for its virtue, it is narrated from the holy Prophet (S) that:

*"The reward of any Muslim who recites the Surah 'Opening', is like that
of a person who has recited two thirds of the Qur'an, and so much reward
would he receive as if he has given every believing Muslim, man or
woman, a free will offering ".* [^6]

### 5. The Titles of the Surah

There are ten titles given to this Surah, as taken from Islamic
narrations and books, thus: *Fatihat-ul-Kitab, Umm-ul-Kitab,
Umm-ul-Qur'an, Sab'-ul-Mathani, Al-Wafiyah, Al-Kafiyah, Ash-Shafiyah,
Al-Asas, As-Salat, and Al-Hamd.* [^7]

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 1
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. In The Name of Allah, The*** ***Beneficent, The Merciful***

It is a custom among most people of the world to recite the name of one
of their great and very beloved personalities that the worthiness of
their work might be elevated. That is, they relate that work to that
personality from the very beginning of their endeavour.

Among all beings, the One Who is eternal is only *Allah,* and,
therefore, everything and every activity should begin with His Holy
Name.

It should be enveloped in His Light, and help should be always asked
only from Him. So, in the first verse of the Qur'an, we recite
***'Bism-illah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim',*** ***(In The Name of Allah, The
Beneficent, The Merciful).***

This action should not be done only with the tongue, but it should be
done truly and meaningfully, because this kind of connection with Him
sets work in the right direction and keeps it far from any deviation.

For this very reason, such a work will certainly be successful and
blessed. The holy Prophet (S), in a tradition, has said:

*"Any important work that begins without mentioning / bismillah /, will
remain in valid"* [^8]

After narrating this tradition, Hazrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) added:

*"For every action that a person wants to do, he / she should recite /
bismillah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / which means that he / she begins the
action with the Name of Allah, and every action that begins with the
Name of Allah is blessed. "* [^9]

On the excellence and importance of / bism-il-lah /, it is narrated from
Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (as), who has said thus:

*"(The holy phrase) 'Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' is closer to 'the
Exalted Name of Allah' than the pupil is to the white of the eye".*
[^10]

Again, Ibn-Abbas narrates from the holy Prophet (S) thus:

*"As soon as a teacher tells a child to say
'Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' and the child says it, Allah records
immunity (from fire) for the child, his or her parents and the
teacher".* [^11]

Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said:

*"No Holy Book ever came down from heaven but that it began with
'Bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' "*. [^12]

In 'Khisal' by Shaykh Sadduq it is cited that Imam Baqir (as) has said:

*"...When we begin an action, great or small, it is appropriate to
recite / bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / and that action may be blessed
".* [^13]

In short, the stability and permanence of an action is due to this very
relation to Allah.

The phrase / bism-il-lah / at the start of the Surah, teaches us to seek
the help of *Allah* from His pure perfect Essence when we begin any
action.

That is why *Allah,* the Exalted, in the first verses revealed to the
holy Prophet (S) instructed him to -initiating the proclamation of
Islam -perform this great task with the Name of *Allah*: ***"Proclaim
in*** ***the Name of your Lord**..."*[^14]**:** and the words of Noah
(as) to his followers, at the time of the Flood are:

***"So he said: Embark ye on the Ark, in the Name of Allah, whether it
moves or be at rest!..."***[^15]**.**

Again, Soloman's letter to the Queen of Sheba begins, thus:

***"It is from Soloman, and is (as follows): 'In The Name of Allah, The
Beneficent, The Merciful'"***[^16]**.**

Based on the same principle, all of the Suras of the Holy Qur'an,
**(except Surah At-Tauba, No.9)** begin with / bism-il-lah / [^17] in
order to pursue the essential aim of guiding man and leading him to
prosperity with success, far from getting a taste of defeat.

In any event, when we begin our work with reliance upon the Supreme
Power of *Allah,* Whose Power is above all power, we feel,
psychologically speaking, far more powerful; therefore, we may be more
confident.

We may try more, be more persevering, and more courageous in challenging
with difficulties, more hopeful, and, similarly, our intentions and the
essence of our actions may be more purified. At the time of beginning
any affair, reciting the Name of *Allah* is the secret to its success.

To whatever extent we further explain this verse, it will still be seen
insufficient, because, according to a narration, Hadrat Ali (as),
regarding the of the verse, talked to Ibn-Abbas from the beginning of a
night until the next morning, but it was only for the of / b /, the
first letter of / bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim /. [^18]

### Explanation: Is the Phrase 'Bism-il-Lah' a Part of Each Surah?

Almost all Islamic scholars unanimously hold the opinion that /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim/ is, as was stated before, a part of
Surah Al-Fatihah and, also, of the other Suras of the Qur'an (except
Surah At-Taubah, No.9).

In essence, the inclusion of / bism-il-lah / at the beginning of all
Suras of the Holy Qur'an, except the above mentioned one, is a vital
piece of evidence bearing witness to this very fact, and the belief is
so firm that no change has been made in the Qur'an and nothing has been
added to it since it was revealed to the Prophet of Islam (S).

Mu'awiyat-ibn- 'Ammar, one of the companions of Imam al-Sadiq (as), said
that he had asked the Imam whether he should say
/bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / at the beginning of Surah Al-Fatihah
when he stood for prayer, and he (as) replied: "*Yes"*. He had
questioned him (as), again, as to if he should recite / bism-il-lah /
when Surah Al-Fatihah ended and before reciting the next Surah. Then,
Imam al-Sadiq (as) again, answered: "*Yes* ". [^19]

Dar Qutni, a learned Muslim researcher, according to a sound document
narrates from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) that someone asked him (as):
*"What is As-Sab-al-Mathani (Seven Verses)?" "It is Surah Al-Hamd",* he
(as) answered. The man said: "*Surah Al-Hamd consists of six verses*".
He (as) replied: *" 'Bism-illah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim' is also one verse."*
[^20]

Moreover, Muslims have always preserved the practice of reciting /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / at the beginning of every Surah (except
(Surah 9) when reciting the Holy Qur'an and it has been proven, on
numerous accounts that the holy Prophet (S) used to recite it, too.

It has been said that Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) was asked to say
whether / bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim / was a part of Surah
Al-Fatihah. He (as) answered:

*"Yes, the Messenger of Allah used to recite it and considered it one
verse (of the verses) of the Surah, and he said that Fatihat-ul-Kitab
(The Opening) is the same as 'Sab-al-Mathani' (seven verses)."* [^21]

### Allah, the Most Inclusive Name of God

The term / ism / in the phrase / bism-il-lah /*,* as men of letters in
Arabic literature say, is originally derived from / sumuww / with the
meaning of 'height, elevation'.

The reason why any 'noun' is called by an' appellation' is that after
choosing to call a 'noun' by the particular given 'name' (ism), the
hidden meaning of the expression appears, and the sense of the 'name' is
elevated, therefore forsaking meaninglessness.

In the phrase / bism-il-lah /*,* the word *Allah* is the most complete
and comprehensive name among the Lord's many names. This is because each
of *Allah's* names, which are found in the Holy Qur'an, as well as in
other Islamic sources, truly reflects one particular aspect of *Allah's*
Attributes.

In other words, the only name that refers to all of His Attributes of
Glory and Beauty is *Allah.* That is why other names are often used as
modifiers for the word '*Allah*'.

For example, **"*****Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful", (Surah
Al-Baqarah,*** **No.2. verse 226)**, refers to *Allah's* forgiveness;
**"*****..Allah heareth and knoweth all things*****",** **(No. 2. verse
221)** shows His being well-acquainted with what is audible and what
comes to pass, respectively; **"*****And Allah sees well all that you
do",*** **(Surah Al-Hujurat. No.49. verse 18)** states that He has
information on each and every thing that is done by anyone; ***"Surely
Allah is He Who gives (all) sustenance, the Lord of Power, steadfast
(forever)"***, **(Surah Ath-Thariyat. No.51. verse 58)** points to His
giving sustenance to all creatures and, at the same time, discloses that
He is powerful and firm in His actions.

And, finally, **Surah Al-Hashr No. 59 verse 23, 24** reveals some other
Attributes of *Allah.* The terms 'Creator' and 'Evolver' are suggestive
of His creativeness and inventiveness, and 'Bestower of Forms' indicates
His giving shapes:

***"Allah is He, than Whom there is no other god; -the Sovereign, the
Holy One, the Source of Peace (and Perfection), the Guardian of Faith,
the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the
Supreme (in creating all creatures)... ." "He is Allah, the Creator, the
Evolver, the Bestower of Forms, to Him belong the Most Beautiful
Names..."***

Another piece of evidence which is a clear indication that this Name,
*Allah,* is all-inclusive is that the acceptance of Faith, in Islam, is
possible only by reciting the sentence: / la: ilaha illalah /
**"*****There is no god, but Allah*****";** and each of the other
phrases such as: 'All-Knowing', or 'Creator' or' Bestower of Sustenance'
and the like, alone, is not sufficient enough to proclaim as evidence of
Monotheism in Islam.

And, that is why in religions other than Islam, the God of Muslims is
referred, to as '*Allah*', because it is only Muslims who use '*Allah* '
to refer to, what they do worship.

### Allah's General and Specific Mercy

The words ***'ar-Rahman'*** (The Beneficent) and ***'ar-Rahim'*** (The
Merciful) are adjectives, both derived from ***'ar-Rahmah'*** (Mercy).
The former word, the Beneficent, as it is popularly recognized among
some commentators, refers to the General Mercy of *Allah* which is
bestowed upon all creatures; among them are the believers and the
disbelievers, good-doers and evildoers.

And, as we can see, the Divine bounties of life are distributed
everywhere and all human beings enjoy the endless merits therein. This
is their sustenance. They draw it out of the abundant blessings
encompassing the whole world of existence.

The word ***'ar-Rahim'*** (The Merciful) refers to that Specific Mercy
that is endowed upon the believing, obedient servants alone. The
believers, because of their true belief, good actions, and faithful
active obedience, deserve this special, exclusive mercy, of which the
disbelievers are deprived.

The particular fact ratifying this topic is that the word *Rahman* is
always used in the Qur'an with the meaning of an infinite form of mercy,
which is a sign of its generality, while the word *Rahim* is sometimes
used with the meaning of a finite form, which is a sign of its ,
specificity such as:

***“...And He is full of Mercy to the Believers",*** **(Surah Al-Ahzab.
No. 33 verse 43).**

And it is sometimes used in an infinite form such as in Surah
Al-Fatihah.

A narration from Imam al-Sadiq (as) says:

"*Allah is the God of all* things *and is Beneficent to all His
creatures, and He is Merciful, especially, to the believers."* [^22]

Therefore, at the moment that we initiate any action, when we begin with
the Name of Allah, we must seek His Mercy, General and Specific Mercy,
both.

It is interesting to note that this power, which has a broad concept,
much the same as gravitational pull, and has the ability to draw hearts
closer together, is the very Attribute of Mercy. This Attribute of Mercy
is the very means by which men can attain a close relationship with the
Creator, also.

That is why true believers, when reciting the holy verse /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim /, at the beginning of their affairs,
detach their hearts from everything else and rely only upon *Allah;,*
and seek help only from Him, because He is the only One Whose Mercy is
'All-Encompassing' and no creature is deprived of it.

Another fact that can also be understood from / bism-il-lah / is that
*Allah’s* acts are based on Mercy and, punishment has an exceptional
aspect which will not be fulfilled unless there are some exact, clear
reasons for it.

When we recite the supplication entitled, 'Jaushane Kabir’, Section 20
thus: **"*****O' Lord, Whose Mercy surpasses His Wrath...*****"** The
above point becomes clear.

Human beings should attach importance to mercy and affection and behave
accordingly in their daily lives and use violence and harshness only for
those times when it is clearly warranted.

We conclude this discussion with a tradition, rich in meaning, from the
holy Prophet (S)*,* who, when commenting on the many different kinds of
His All-Encompassing Mercy, said:

"*Verily, there are one hundred mercies belonging to Allah, from which,
He has sent down to the Earth only one and distributed that one among
His creatures. All the mercy and affection they have, issue from it. He,
the Merciful, withheld the other* 99 *for Himself to show mercy upon His
servants on the Day of Resurrection*". [^23]

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 2
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ للّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. "(All) praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds"***

### The World is full of His Mercy

After reciting the phrase ***/ bism-il-lah-ir-Rahman-ir-Rahim***
***/***, to begin the Surah, our first duty is to bring to mind the
Great Creator and Cherisher of the world of being, and His endless
bounties which have surrounded us thoroughly. In doing so, it is both
**‘*****a guide'*** for us to observe the existence of Providence and
**'*****a motive'*** for showing our servitude and worship to Him.

It is ***'a motive'*** because any man, after receiving a gift, wishes
to know its giver at once, in order to show his gratitude and
thankfulness to him. This quality is in man's innate disposition
prompting him to manifest his acknowledgment of Him.

This same quality in man, in discussing the theological motives of
**‘*****the necessity of expressing thankfulness to the Bestower’,***
according to what man's nature and rationale leads him to, is considered
one of those motives.

And it is ***'a guide'*** to knowing the Lord and His bounties, because
the best and the most direct way towards the acknowledgment of the
Origin is the study of the secrets of creation, especially, the
existence of the bounties of life as related to human beings.

Therefore, perhaps, it is for these two reasons that **Surah
Al-Fatihah,** alongside / bism-il-lah /, begins thus:

***"(All) praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds*** ***".***

Or, in other words, the verse ***"(All) praise is (only) Allah's, the
Lord of the Worlds"*** points to both the Unity of Divine Essence, and
the Unity of Divine Attributes and Acts.

Originally, qualifying *Allah (s.w.t.),* here, with the phrase /
rabb-il-'alamin / (the Lord of the Worlds) is, in fact, mentioning the
reason after stating the claim. It seems that someone has asked why all
praise is (only) *Allah's* and the response is that it is for the reason
that ***‘He is*** ***the Lord of the Worlds'.***

This is one of the characteristics of *Allah.* In another occurrence,
the Holy Qur'an says:

***"He Who has made everything which He has created most good...,"***
**(Surah As-Sajdah. No. 32 Verse 7).**

And again, in **Surah Hud No.11. Verse 6,** it says:

***"There is no moving creature on the earth but its sustenance depends
on Allah...*** ***"***

It is, also, clearly understood from the word /al-hamd /,
**‘*****praise’**,* used in this verse, that *Allah* has created all
these bounties and benefits, basically, by His Choice and His Will.

It is interesting to note that by stating the phrase, ‘*(All) praise is
(only) Allah's’,* it is not only helpful to use it for the commencement
of affairs, but, as the Qur'an teaches us, it is also used as a
conclusion, like in **Surah Yunus No.10. Verse** **10***,* about the
good-doers in Heaven, it says:

***"(This will be) their cry therein:*** ***'Glory to Thee, O God!' And
'peace' will be their greeting therein! And the close of their cry will
be: 'Surely, the Praise is Allah's, the Lord of the Worlds!*** ***'
".***

### Virtue of the Verse

Concerning the virtue of this Holy verse, there is a narration from Imam
al-Sadiq (as) which says that in a tradition from the Prophet (S)*,* he
has said:

*"When a believing servant says 'The Praise is (only) Allah's, the Lord
of the Worlds’,* *such a praise that befits Him and His Rank, the angels
are unable to record it. They will be asked by Allah why they did not
record the reward of the phrase which the believing servant stated.*

*Then, in response to their not recording the reward, they will ask how
it is that they could even understand and estimate the high standard of
saying such a phrase which contains the praise befitting and deserving
only to Him. Allah, the Exalted, will tell them that they should record
the phrase and it would be for Him to endow the servant with the reward
of the praise be fitting Him.* [^24]

The word / rabb / originally means ***'the owner of something who
proceeds to train and improve it'.***

This word is absolutely applied to *Allah,* alone, and if it is applied,
in Arabic, for other than Him, it is certainly used in a possessive
form, as */* rabb-ud-dar */* ***'the owner of the house’,*** or /
rabb-us-safinah / ***'the owner of the ship'**.* In any case, the word,
itself, conveys the meaning of ***‘training’**.*

There is another idea mentioned in Majma'-ul-Bayan that says: " / rabb /
means: ***'an important person whose orders are obeyed'.***" However, it
is probable that both meanings refer to the same origin.

The term / alamin / is the plural form of / alam / ***'the world'*** and
we cite it, here, with the meaning of 'a collection of different
creatures with common characteristics or a common time and place'.

For example, we say: the world of Man, the world of animals, and the
world of plants, or, we say: the world of the East and the world of the
West, or: the world of today and the world of yesterday. Therefore, when
/ alam /, which has a plural sense by itself, is used in a plural form,
it refers to the 'universe'.

The writer of the Al-Manar says that it is narrated from Imam al-Sadiq
(as) that he has said / alamin / means 'peoples', only. Then, the writer
adds that the term is used in the Qur’an with the same meaning; for
example:

***“...That it may be an admonition to all peoples",*** **(Surah
Al-Furqan, No.25. verse 1).** [^25]

It is true that the term / alamin / in many occurrences, in the Qur’an,
is used with the meaning of 'peoples', but, sometimes, it is also used
with a broader scope of meaning which envelops other creatures; for
instance:

***"Then Praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth,
Lord and Cherisher of all the worlds!", (Surah Al-Jathiyah. No. 45 verse
36).***

And, also, like:

***"Pharaoh said:*** ***'And what is the Lord and Cherisher of the
Worlds?’*** ***(Moses) said:*** ***'The Lord and Cherisher of the
heavens and the earth, and all between them...",*** **(Surah
Ash-Shu’ara, No.16. verses 23.24).**

It is interesting that in a narration from Hadrat Ali (as), Saduq has
cited in the book ' 'Uyun-ul-Akhbar', that he (as), commenting on the
verse, has said:

*"(The phrase) / rabb-il-alamin / refers to all creatures whether they
are inanimate or living".* [^26]

There is, of course, no contradiction between these traditions, because,
although the meaning of the term / alamin / is very vast, Man is , the
most significant being among all creatures of the world, so, he is
sometimes especially considered the central point of them, and other
creatures are dependent upon him and in his shadow. Therefore, when, in
the tradition of the Imam (as), the term is rendered into ‘peoples’, the
reason is that the main purpose of creation, in this great gathering of
beings, is Man.

This point is, also, interesting that some have introduced two forms of
/ alam / 'the world': 'the great world' ***(macrocosm)*** and 'the
lesser world' ***(microcosm)*** by which they refer to Man as 'the
lesser world', because the entity of a person alone is a collection of
different powers which govern 'the great world'.

In fact, 'man' is a sample of the whole world. So Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali
(as) in one of his poems, addressing Man, says:

*"You think that you are a small body, while (you should know that) you
contain 'the great world' (macrocosm) inside you."* [^27]

One of the factors that causes us to emphasize the vast meaning of /
alam / ***'the world',*** is that the term has occurred after the phrase
/al-hamd-u-lil-lah /, in which we devote all the praise to *Allah,*
only, and, then, we reason our statement with / rabb-il-alamin /
**'*****The Lord of the Worlds*****'**.

We say the praise is only *Allah’s* because all perfections, all
bounties and all blessings, in this world, belongs to Him, the Lord, the
Cherisher.

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 3
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. "The Beneficent, The Merciful."***

The meaning of / ar-rahman / ***'the Beneficent'*** and / ar-rahim /
***'the Merciful',*** together with their broad sense of meaning and the
difference between them, was explained at length while commenting on /
bism-il-lah /, the repetition of which is not required.

A point that should be added to the , here, regarding 'ar-Rahman' and
'ar-Rahim', is that these two attributes, which are the most significant
attributes of *Allah,* are repeated at least 30 times, every day, in our
(5) daily prayers; (twice in ***Surah Al Fatihah,*** and once in the
Surah we recite after it). In this way, we praise *Allah* sixty times as
being 'Merciful' each day.

This, indeed, is a lesson taught to all human beings more than anything
else that they should try to acquire this attribute, and practice it in
their daily lives and activities.

Moreover, it points to the fact that if we count ourselves among the
true, obedient servants of *Allah,* we should not follow or imitate the
manner in which tyrant slave owners use against their servants when
dealing with our servants.

The history of slavery indicates that the tyrant owners used to treat
their slaves in horrifyingly cruel ways.

For example, if a slave moved a little slow in performing services, he
would receive harsh punishments: i.e. be whipped, put in chains or
fetters, fastened to a mill-stone and forced to turn it, instructed to
work in mines, imprisoned in deep, dark, wet holes and, if his faults
were greater, he would be hanged.

Another reference in the history of slavery also shows that condemned
slaves were put in wild animal cages. If the slave succeeded in staying
alive, another animal would be let in on him.

These are some examples of the conduct of some owners with their slaves.
But, *Allah,* the Lord of the Worlds, has mentioned repeatedly, in the
Holy Qur'an, that *Allah* is Oft-Forgiving and Most Merciful to the
servants who are repentant of their disobedience to Him.

For example: **Surah** **Az-Zumar. No.39, verse 53** says:

***"Say:*** ***'O '*** ***My servants who have transgressed against
their souls! Despair not of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all
sins, for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful’*** ***".***

Therefore, the terms 'ar-Rahman' (the Beneficent) and 'ar-Rahim' (the
Merciful) used after the phrase / rabb-il- alamin / 'the Lord of the
Worlds' refer to the idea that, He, with the absolute Power He has, is
yet Merciful to all His creatures. This quality, which *Allah*
possesses, attracts His servants to Him and they eagerly say:
***'ar-Rahman-ir-Rahim',*** (the Beneficent, the Merciful).

It is here that one's attention is drawn to the fact that the behaviour
of *Allah,* the Exalted, toward His creatures is, by far, different from
that of masters toward their servants, in particular, during the
horrible period of slavery.

Therefore, ‘belief in *Allah* ' is the first of the five principles of
Islam.

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. "Master of the Day of Judgement."***

### ‘Faith in the Resurrection’, the Second Principle

In this verse, attention is paid to the second important principle in
Islam, i.e. Resurrection and the Hereafter when it says:

***"Master of the Day of Judgement."***

Thus, the focus of the idea of the Origin and End, which is the main
foundation of all ethical and social improvements in Man, reaches the
peak of perfection.

It is noteworthy, here, that the mastership of *Allah,* or His
Ownership, is pointed out, which illustrates His Sovereignty and
Domination over everything and everyone on that Day, when all human
beings will attend that Great Court for reckoning, before their real and
genuine Master.

They will see all their deeds and even their thoughts present without
there being aught less than the original or anything forgotten. They
will even have to accept their share of responsibility for any customs
for which they have merely been the founders of, not necessarily the
doers of them.

*Allah's* Ownership, on that Day, is not similar to our imaginary
ownership of that which belongs to us from the things of this world. His
Ownership, regarding the world of existence, is the real ownership.

It is the special dependence of creatures on the Lord and their being in
need of Him. If the flow of His blessings ceased even for a single
moment, it would cause them to perish altogether.

In other words, this ownership is the consequence of His Creatorship and
Divinity. He, Who creates beings, gives them life every moment and
cherishes them, protects them and guides them, is the real master of all
creatures. As a matter of fact, He is the only Ruler of all powers in
the world of existence.

There is no doubt that *Allah* is 'The Lord of the Worlds'. The question
to be raised here is this: 'Is not *Allah* the Absolute Owner of this
world? ‘versus our statement to this effect that 'He is the Master of
the Day of Judgement'.

The answer to this question lies in the fact that the '*Ownership of
Allah’,* though it comprises both worlds, enjoys further manifestation
in the Hereafter. This is because all material ties and imaginary
ownerships are cut off (in the Hereafter), and no one has anything of
his or her own on That Day.

Even intercession, if ever achieved, is by *Allah’s* command, as the
Qur'an says about the Reckoning Day:

***"The Day on which no soul shall have aught for (another) soul, and
the command That Day shall be (wholly) Allah's",*** **(Surah Al-Infitar,
No. 82*****.*** **verse 19).**

In other words, occasions arise, in this world, when one helps another
through his or her speech, money, power, advocates, plans, designs, and
so on. On That Day (the Hereafter), however, certainly not a single
trace of such affairs will exist.

Therefore, when people are asked: ***"Whose will be the Domination This
Day…?",*** they answer:

***“...that of Allah, the One, the Almighty!*** ***",*** **(Surah
Al-Mumin.** **No. 40, verse 16).**

This is also an answer to those who reject the idea that when *Allah* is
the Owner of everything why, then, He is called the ***'Master of the
Day of Judgement’.***

Man, with no belief in the Hereafter and the Day of Reckoning, would
have the potential to be the most immoral of beings, the biggest tyrant
committing the worst and the most hideous crimes, for, in his view,
there is not anyone to question or punish him if he is clever enough not
to get caught and, with such characteristics, sometimes, it would be so
terrible or impossible for other fellow-creatures to continue their
lives in this world.

Therefore, faith in life after death and the Day of Judgement, which is
an essential part of Islam, like prayer, is very helpful in controlling
men against committing sins.

Emphasizing the Ownership of *Allah* on the Day of Judgement has this
effect, too, that it stands against the disbelief of disbelievers in the
Hereafter. It is understood from the verses of the Holy Qur'an that
Faith in *Allah* has been a common belief even among disbelievers in the
Age of Ignorance.

**Surah Luqman, No.31. Verse 25** says about them: ***" If*** ***thou
ask them, who it is that created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly say:*** ***'Allah'...",*** while they did not accept the
speech of the Prophet (S) about the Resurrection:

*"The Unbelievers say (in ridicule): 'Shall we point to you a man that
will tell you, when ye are all scattered to* *pieces in disintegration,
that ye shall (then be raised) in a New creation?"*

***"Has he invented a falsehood against Allah, or has a spirit (seized)
him?..",*** **(Surah Saba No.34. Verse 7, 8).**

A tradition from Imam Sajjad (as) says:

*"When Ali-ibn-il-Husayn,* *(as)began reciting 'Master of the Day of
Judgement', he repeated it so* *many times that he was at the point of
losing his life* *".* [^28]

The phrase / yaum-id-din /*,* is repeated more than ten times in the
Qur'an, exclusively with the meaning of 'the Hereafter':

***"And what makes you know what the Day of Reckoning is?" "Again, what
makes you know what the Day of Reckoning is?" "The Day on which no soul
shall have aught for*** ***(another) soul, and the command that Day
shall be (wholly) Allah's*** ***",*** **(Surah Al-Infitar, No.82. Verses
17-19).**

The phrase / yaum-id-din / is used in the sense of 'the Day of
Judgement’, for 'That Day' is the day of rewards; and / din / in Arabic
philology means: ***'reward, recompense'**.* The most evident procedure
fulfilled in the Hereafter is the procedure of paying rewards or
inflicting punishments.

On That Day, the curtains will be removed and the deeds of all will be
reckoned, precisely, and everyone shall reap the fruit of his own
actions, be they good or evil.

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said in a tradition that the Day of Judgement is
‘*The Reckoning Day’.* [^29]

It is also noteworthy to mention that some commentators believe that
***'Resurrection'*** is called /yaum-ud-din / because on That Day,
everyone t is recompensed for his own religion, if he has followed it
accordingly.

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 5
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. "Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek
help."***

### Man in the Presence of Allah

Here, this verse is a start for a servant to plea and ask his needs from
*Allah.* In fact, from here on, the tone of the statements changes. The
former verses were the praise and attributes of *Allah,* and the
statement of Faith in His Pure Unity, consisting of a confession to the
belief in the Day of Resurrection.

But, from this verse on, it seems that the servant, with that firm
foundation of Belief in the knowledge of *Allah,* sees himself in front
of Him, the Pure Essence. He addresses Him and speaks, firstly, about
his own worship for Him and, then, about His help which he seeks from
Him. Thus he says:

**"*****Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) do we seek
help."***

In other words, when the concepts of the former verses settle in one's
soul, and his entire entity is enlightened with the Light of *Allah,*
the Cherisher of the Worlds, and when he recognizes His ***'General
Mercy’*** and ***‘Specific Mercy’,*** the individual transforms into a
complete person from the point of 'belief ' and 'Faith’.

The prime fruit of this deep belief in monotheism, for a person, in one
respect, is to be a pure true servant of *Allah,* free from any idol and
idolatry, far from tyrants and lusts; and, on the other hand, to seek
help only from His Pure Essence.

In fact, the former verses state the Unity of Essence and Attributes,
while, here, the statement is regarding the Unity of Worship and Unity
of Acts.

‘Unity of Worship' means that we acknowledge no person or thing worthy
of worship other than *Allah,* Whose commands alone do we obey and Whose
laws only do we follow, avoiding any kind of servitude and submission to
other than Him, the Pure Essence.

‘Unity of Acts’ means that we clearly recognize Him as the only real
'Author of Causes ' in the world. It does not mean that we would refuse
the world of 'cause' and be neglectful of searching for the causes of
things, but it means that we would believe that any effect from any
cause is under His command. It is He Who has given heat to fire, light
to the sun, and vivacity to water.

The outcome of this belief is that one relies on *Allah* alone, and
knows that all authority and power are His only. In his view, other than
Him is powerless, mortal and perishable.

*Allah* is the only Essence to be relied on and worshipped. It is only
He Who is deserving of man's reliance for everything.

This kind of thought and belief sets man apart from anyone or anything
else and joins him only to *Allah.* He obeys *Allah* even when he
pursues after 'the world of ways and means’, i.e. he sees the Power of
*Allah,* the Cause of causes, in control of the means.

This belief elevates the soul of man so high and the scope of his
thought so broad that it reaches eternity and becomes free from any
limited circumstances, in so far as, Hadrat Amir-ul-Mumineen, the Master
of the Virtuous, Ali (as), regarding *Allah,* says:

*"I worship you neither for the fear of the Fire (of Your Hell) nor for
the desire of Your Paradise, but I found You fit for worshipping and I
worshipped You."* [^30]

### Explanation- Allah: the Only Site of Reliance

According to the Arabic literature, when the object of the verb precedes
its subject, in that language, the meaning of exclusiveness is
understood, and, here, the word / iyyaka / **'*****Thou'*** has preceded
the words / na'bud / ***'we worship'*** and / nasta'in / **'*****we seek
help'*** which indicates exclusiveness in which its result is the very
Unity of Worship and Unity of Acts that were explained before.

Even in our own worship, we need His help for which we must ask Him. We
may be involved in self-conceit, deviation, hypocrisy and similar
things, which destroy our worshipping and servitude totally. Then, in
all affairs and activities, our full attention should be exclusively on
*Allah,* the Exalted.

In other words, this, in itself, is one of the stages of monotheism, a
high stage of it, which is rendered into 'monotheism in speculation'.
That is, one should always and in all circumstances, think of *Allah*
only.

He should rely exclusively on *Allah.* He should fear nothing but
*Allah;* and he should trust *Allah* only. He should see nothing save
*Allah;* he should want nothing save *Allah;* and he should love none
save *Allah.* As the Qur'an says: ***"Allah has not made for any man two
hearts in his (one) body...*** ***",*** **(Surah Al-Ahzab, No.33, verse
4)**

### The Social Aspect of Worship

The pronoun 'we', which is in the plural form, used in terms / na'bud /
**'*****we worship’*** and / nasta'in / **'*****we seek help’**,* and in
the next verses, shows that worship, especially prayer, is based on
'plural' and community.

The servant must consider himself among the community even when he is
standing in front of *Allah* for invocation, much less during his other
daily activities.

Thus, from the point of view of the Qur'an, any individualism,
solitariness, and the like are not accepted in Islam. Particularly, the
ritual prayer, from the prayer call: / hayya ‘alas- salat /
**'*****hasten to the prayer',*** which is an invitation to initiate
prayer, to Surah Al-Hamd at the beginning of the prayer, and the term /
assalamu alaykum.../ **‘*****peace be on you all...'*** at the end of
the prayer, all are statements of verification to the concept that this
worship basically has a social aspect; viz, it ought to be performed as
a congregational prayer.

It is true that the prayer performed individually is also accepted in
Islam, but personal worship is considered as the secondary degree.

### We Ask Allah for Help in Confronting Forces

We have to confront different forces in this world, both the forces in
nature and our innate, or inborn natural forces. To be able to challenge
with these destructive, misleading factors, we need to be helped.

Hence, we shelter under the protective umbrella of *Allah.* We get up
every morning and repeat the verse / 'iyyaka na'budu wa 'iyyaka nasta'in
/ ***(Thee (alone) do we worship and of Thee (only) we seek help)*** to
confess our servitude to *Allah* and to ask His Pure Essence help to
make us successful in this great challenge.

We do the same in the evening before we go to bed. We get up in the
morning with His remembrance, and we go to bed in the evening with His
remembrance, and each time we ask help from His Pure Essence.

What an excellent state this is for the person who is in this stage of
Faith! He never bows to any tyrant. He never loses himself for the
attraction of material gain, and as the Qur'an reveals about the Prophet
of Islam (S), saying:

***"...Truly, my prayer and my service of sacrifice, my life and my
death, are (all) for the Cherisher of the Worlds*** ***",*** **(Surah
Al-An’am** **No.6.** **Verse 162).**

Therefore, the recitation of this Holy Surah may provide the solution to
all problems in our lives. It has plenty of properties which can bring
us to safety. An example is from a narration cited by one of the
companions of the Prophet (S)*.*

He said that in one of the battles, he was with the Messenger of *Allah*
(S). When the fight became difficult, he (S) lifted his head and said:
***"O'*** ***Master of the Day of Judgement! Thee (alone) do we worship
and of Thee (only) we seek help".*** At that moment the army of enemies
was defeated and (many of them) were killed while the Prophet (S) and
Muslims won. [^31]

It is stated in another narration: *"When a difficulty arises for a
believing servant, and he recites this Holy verse, it will become easy
for him".* [^32]

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 6
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهدِنَــــا الصِّرَاطَ المُستَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. "Guide us (O' Lord) on the Straight Path."***

After confessing his obedience and servitude to *Allah,* reaching the
state of worship, and asking for help from Him, the first thing that the
servant seeks is His guidance to the **'*****Straight Path’,*** the path
of the righteous, the path of Justice, and the path of Faith and good
deeds.

So, he asks the Lord, Who has bestowed on him all of these bounties, to
give him the bounty of ‘guidance’, too.

Such a man, in the above stated condition, is a believing one who is
acquainted with the Lordship of his Lord, but it is possible, too, that
suddenly he would cease to receive this bounty because of some component
of wickedness, and, consequently, he would stray from the Right Path.

Therefore, he must ask his Lord, at least ten times a day, to protect
him from any kind of aberration.

Moreover, this **'Straight Path’,** which is the very Divine creed, has
some stages. All people are not on the same level of spiritual
preparedness necessary for attaining these stages. Whatever stages a
person attains, there are still some higher stages above them that a
believing servant might ask *Allah* to guide him to reach.

Here, a question arises: *"Why must we always ask Allah for guidance to
'the Straight Path’,* *as if we are being misguided?".*

Besides, supposing the statement is true about us, the ordinary
believers, but what about the holy Prophet and sinless Imams (as) who
were the examples of complete human beings? In answer to this question,
we may say:

Firstly, the fact is that Man is liable to deviate from the Right Path
with each step that he takes as he is walking along the path of
guidance. So, he should rely on *Allah* and ask Him to keep him firm on
the 'Straight Path'.

We must not forget that our existence, our being, and all the bounties
which always come to us, are from His Origin. To clarify the matter, we
cite a simple example:

All creatures, including human beings, (from one point of view) resemble
an electric lamp. We see that the light of a lamp, when it is on,
appears to be constant and monotonous. The reason is that the electrical
current flows constantly from a generator to the lamp.

The generator continuously produces some new electrical power, a part of
which reaches the lamp by some connective wires. Our being is similar to
the lamp. Although it appears as a sustained being, it is, in fact, a
continually renewed being that flows ceaselessly to us from the Original
Being, the Bountiful Creator.

Therefore, as the continually new being reaches us, we need constant new
guidance, too. It is natural that if something wrong or some barriers
manifest themselves in our spiritual connective wires with *Allah;* the
vices, injustice, wrong doings, etc., will disrupt our connection with
the Origin of guidance. At that moment, we may deviate from the'
Straight Path’.

We ask *Allah* that these barriers be removed and not obstruct our way
that we may remain steadfast along the 'Straight Path’.

Secondly, receiving 'guidance' is the same as travelling the path of
'development' along which man can gradually promote from lower degrees
to higher and higher ones.

We also know that the path of development is endless and continues
towards 'infinity'.  
 So, it is no wonder that even the prophets and sinless Imams (as) ask
*Allah* to guide them to the 'Straight Path’, because the Absolute
Perfection is *Allah* and all of us, without any exception, are on the
path of perfection, then it is acceptable that they, too, ask Him for
higher promotions.

Do we not often send greetings to the holy Prophet (S) by the special
formula of 'Salawat’? Does 'Salawat' not have the meaning of requesting
new blessings from *Allah* for Prophet Mohammad and his descendants (S)?

Is it not expressed in the Qur'an regarding the Prophet (S) who used to
say:

***"...O'*** ***my Lord! advance me in knowledge",*** **(Surah Taha,
No.20, verse 114)?**

Does the Holy Qur'an not say:

***"And Allah doth advance in guidance those who seek guidance...",***
**(Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 19)**?

And, again, does it not say:

***"But to those who receive guidance, He increases the (light of)
Guidance, and bestows on them their piety and restraint (from evil)***
***",*** **(Surah Muhammad, No.47, verse 17)?**

This explanation makes clear the answer to the question regarding the
benediction which we recite for the Prophet and the sinless Imams (as)
by which We beseech *Allah,* in fact, for a higher and better position
for them all (as).

Here are two traditions which make the above idea clearer:
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) commenting on the verse ***'Guide us (O'
Lord) on the Straight Path’***, says:

*"It means: '(O' Lord) continue bestowing Your blessings on us as You
did during the days passed by which we succeeded to obey You, so that we
can obey You in the .future of our lives, too’".* [^33]

Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said about the verse:

*"It means: '(O' Lord) show us the way which ends in Your love, leads us
to Your Paradise, and prevents us from following our destructive desires
or our own wrong and destroying decisions'"* [^34]

### What is the 'Straight Path'?

According to what is understood from the verses of the Holy Qur'an, the
'Straight Path' is the same as the 'Monotheistic Creed'; the religion of
Truth and the belief in the instructions of *Allah,* as **Surah
Al-An’am. No.6. verse 161** says:

***"Say:*** ***'Verily, my Lord hath guided me to a way that is
straight, -a religion of right, -the path (trod) by Abraham the true in
faith, and he*** ***(certainly) joined not gods with Allah'."***

Here, 'a religion of right' and 'the theistic path of Abraham (as) as
the true faith’, in which he called on no god but *Allah,* are
introduced as the 'Straight Path'. This shows the belief aspect.

But, Surah Yasin, No.36, verses 60 and 61 say:

***"Did I not enjoin on you, O'*** ***ye children of Adam, that ye
should not worship Satan; for that he is to you an enemy avowed?" "And
that ye should worship Me, (for that) this is the Straight Way?"***

These verses, here, point to the 'practical' aspects of the 'religion of
truth'. They urge us not to commit any Satanic deed or any wrong action.

Clinging to *Allah,* the Qur'an says, is the key to reaching the
'Straight Path':

***"...Whoever holds firmly to Allah will be shown a Way that is
straight",*** **(Surah Al-i-Imran. No.3. verse** **101).**

It is necessary to mention this point that the 'Straight Path' is always
only one way, not more than that, because the shortest distance between
two points is always only one straight line.

Therefore, when the Qur'an says that the 'Straight Path' is the very
true belief in the Divine religion with its moral and practical aspects;
it is because it is the shortest route to a spiritual connection with
*Allah.*

And it is also for this same reason that 'the religion of truth' is not
more than one:

***"The Religion before Allah is Islam (submission to His Will)...",***
**(Surah Al-i-Imran. No.6. verse 153).**

Later it will be made evident that 'Islam' has a vast meaning which
envelops all the monotheistic religions that were lawful at their own
times but were nullified by the new one. Thus, it clarifies that all
different commentaries that commentators have cited on the matter, i.e.
the 'Straight Path’, refer, indeed, to the same thing.

Islam, the Pure Unity, Qur'an, the Prophet, and his vicegerents (as),
are some explications that commentators have offered for the meaning of
the 'Straight Path'. All of the stated explications refer to the Divine
religion in the aspects of **‘*****Faith'*** and **‘*****practice'.***

Also all of the various narrations and traditions cited on the subject
in the Islamic sources, each of which points to a separate dimension of
the question, in substance, refer to one essence. Some examples are as
follows:

It is narrated from the holy Prophet (S) who has said:

*"The* ***'Straight Path'*** *is the path of prophets and they are those
on whom Allah hath bestowed His Grace".* [^35]

Here are three traditions from Imam al-Sadiq (as)*,* who, when
commenting on this verse, said:

*"It is the 'way' and the 'cognizance' of Imamate".* [^36]

Again, in another tradition, he (as) says:

*"By Allah, we (Ahlul Bayt) are the 'Straight Path'* *".* [^37]

Another tradition from the same Imam (as) says:

"*The' Straight Path' is Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as)*". [^38]

Ahmad-ibn-Mohammad-ibn-Ibrahim Al-Tha'labi, a Sunni scholar, has
narrated from Abu-Buraydah Al-Aslami, who was one of the companions of
the holy Prophet (S), that he said:

*"The 'Straight Path' is the path of Mohammad and his descendants* *".*
[^39]

This means that their path is based on the doctrine of Islam which
consists of the belief in: 'Oneness of *Allah',* 'Justice',
'Prophethood', 'Imamate', and the 'Hereafter'. There is no doubt that
the path of Ahlul Bayt (as) is the' Straight Path', and that adhering to
it causes prosperity and salvation, while pursuing other than that leads
to loss and injury.

Ibn-il-Maqazali has narrated from the holy Prophet (S) who has said:

"*The example of my household (Ahlul Bayt) is similar to the Ark of
Noah. He who embarked it was rescued (from drowning and destruction),
but, he who refused it drowned (and perished)* ". [^40]

Other traditions narrated from Ahlul Bayt (as) also confirm the concept.
In addition, the well-known tradition 'Thaqalayn ' from the holy Prophet
(S) is another good clear witness to the matter, too. It says:

*"I leave behind me amidst you two Great things; should you be attached
to these two, never, never shall you become astray: the 'Book' of Allah
(the Holy Qur'an) and my progeny, my 'Ahlul Bayt’."* [^41]

As was previously stated, it is certain that the holy Prophet (S),
Hadrat Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) and all of the other infallible Imams (as)
invited people to the theistic religion of *Allah,* an invitation to
Faith and practice in truth, which elevates Man to the climax of
ability, guidance, dignity, and human excellences.

By the way, it should not be neglected that there are two kinds of
guidance: ‘Divine Guidance ' and 'Religious Guidance’.

***‘Divine Guidance’*** is the human intelligence bestowed on a person
by *Allah,* which recognizes the difference between: good and bad, right
and wrong, gain and loss, felicity and wretchedness, virtue and vice,
and so on. It is, in fact, the inner messenger of a person.

***‘Religious Guidance'*** means that *Allah* sends prophets, Divine
Books and legislation to guide Man to all merits of this world and the
next, as well as making him aware of the injuries and damages of the two
worlds.

Of course, when Man is guided by the above guidance and acts
accordingly, he will be worthy of receiving the blessings of the next
world; this is made possible through the development of the soul by
acquiring knowledge, good habits, and commendable moral qualities in
which state he will certainly attain the happiness of this world and
that of the next, together with the infinite grace of *Allah.*

‘Intellect' is called a 'guide' in that it enlightens man as to what is
right and what is wrong. The Prophets (as), Imams (as), and scholars are
called 'Guides’, too, because they guide the human race to the salvation
and felicity in both worlds. But, really, *Allah* is the main Supreme
Guide, and these are the means appointed for the guidance of Man.

Surah Al-Fatiha, Verse 7
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنعَمتَ عَلَيهِمْ غَيرِ المَغضُوبِ عَلَيهِمْ وَلاَ
الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7.*** **"*****The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed Thy
bounties, not (the path) of those inflicted with Thy wrath, nor (of
those) gone astray."***

### Two Paths of Deviation

This verse is, indeed, a clear illustration of the 'Straight Path’,
which was dealt with in the previous verse.

It says that the person asks *Allah* to guide him onto the path of those
on whom He has blessed with many kinds of bounties; (such as the
blessings of guidance, success, the leadership of people of truth,
knowledge, good actions, holy wars and martyrdom); not those who
deserved His wrath because of their wrong doings, nor those who
neglected the right path and went astray.

***"The path of those upon whom Thou hast bestowed Thy bounties, not
(the path) of those inflicted with Your wrath nor (of those) gone
astray."***

In fact, we are not familiar with the method of guidance, so the Lord's
command, in this verse, is that we ask for the path of the prophets,
good doers and all of those to whom *Allah* has extended His bounties,
blessings and favours.

It also warns us that there are two deviated paths in front of us: the
path of those inflicted with His wrath, and the path of those gone
astray.

### Explanation

#### 1) Who are 'Those upon whom Allah has bestowed his bounties'?

Surah An-Nisa No.4, verse 69 has introduced these people, thus:

***"All who obey Allah and the Apostle are in the company of those on
whom is the Grace of Allah, -of the prophets (who teach), the Sincere
(lovers of Truth), the Witnesses (who testify), and the Righteous (who
do good): Ah! What a beautiful Fellowship!"***

As it demonstrates, this verse introduces the people on whom the
bounties and Mercy of *Allah* are bestowed. They are four groups; the
Prophets, the Sincere, the Witnesses, and the Righteous. These four
states may refer to an idea that: for the attainment of a sound,
progressive and faithful society, prophets and divine leaders should
form the foundation.

After the prophets are the sincere truthful missionaries and preachers
whose words attest to their actions by extend the prophets' missions
throughout their societies.

Following this period of the formation of these structural states,
naturally, some evil-minded individuals, who serve as barriers on the
path of truth, may appear in the way. There should be some others to
stand against them. In this struggle a few of these defenders of truth
may be gifted with martyrdom, whose blood would then water the tree of
**‘Theism'.**

The fruit of these struggles and devotions is yielded as 'the Righteous'
with whom the society can be pure, efficient, and abounding with
spirituality.

Therefore, in the Holy Surah Al-Fatihah (The Opening), we are encouraged
to repeatedly ask *Allah,* during the day and night, that we be led on
the path of these previously mentioned four groups, and, obviously at
each time, we must emphasize with sincere effort and endeavour, on one
of these four states more than the others in order to perform our duty
and mission well.

#### 2) Who are the Last Two Groups in this Verse?

The separation of these two groups from each other indicates that each
group has some defining characteristics.

To make distinction between these two groups, there are three
commentaries:

A) From the application of these two words in the Qur'an, it is so
understood that / maqdubi 'alayhim / ***'those inflicted with His
Wrath'*** are in a worse condition than /dallin / ***'those gone
astray'.***

 In other words, 'those gone astray' are the ordinary misguided and
/maqqubi 'alayhim/ 'those inflicted with 'His Wrath' are the misguided
who are obstinate or hypocritical. And, for these two very reasons, the
Curse and Wrath of *Allah* have been cited towards them in frequent
occurrences in the Qur'an. The followings are some instances:

***“...But such as open their breast to Unbelief, on them is Wrath from
Allah,...",*** **(Surah An-Nahl No.16. verse 106).**

***"And that He may punish the Hypocrites, men and women, and
Polytheists, men and women, who imagine an evil opinion of Allah. On
them is a round of Evil; the Wrath of Allah is on them. He has cursed
them and got Hell ready for them: and evil is it for a destination",***
**(Sur Al-Fath. No. 48, verse 6).**

However, this group, i.e. ***'those inflicted with His Wrath'*** were
those who, besides their unbelief, pursued the path of obstinacy and
enmity against *Allah,* and whenever they could, they even injured the
Divine leaders and prophets (S).

As **Surah Ale-Imran No.3, verse 112** says:

***"...They draw on themselves Wrath from Allah, and pitched over them
is (the tent of) destitution. This because they rejected the Signs of
Allah, and slew the Prophets in defiance of right; this because they
rebelled and transgressed beyond bounds".***

B) Some of the commentators believe that / dallin / ***'those gone
astray'*** refers to the misguided of the Christians; and / maqdubi
'alayhim / ***'those inflicted with His Wrath'*** refers to the
misguided of the Jews.

This idea was formed because of the particular responses that these two
groups showed in reply to the invitation to Islam. For, as the Qur'an
has clearly pointed out in different verses, the misguided Jews used to
show a special grudge and enmity against the invitation of Islam,
though, at the beginning, their scholars and learned men were the
bearers of the glad tidings of Islam.

Very soon, though, under the effect of deviation of thought, belief and
notion, and, also, because their financial gains were being endangered,
they became the most obstinate enemies of Islam and they did whatever
evil they could against the progression of lslam and Muslims.

(Even today, Zionism and Zionists hold the same position regarding the
manner in which they treat Islam and Muslims.)

Therefore, to render these people as 'those inflicted with His Wrath'
seems very correct.

But, the misguided of the Christians, who upon encountering with Islam
were not so grudging, but were misled because of their misperception of
the Divine religion and therefore refusing the Truth, were rendered into
/ dallin / ' those gone astray’.

They believed in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost instead of
clinging to true Monotheism, the worship of *Allah.* This is, in itself,
one of the greatest examples of 'astray' and 'aberration'.

In the Islamic traditions, too, / maqdubi 'alayhim / ' those inflicted
with His Wrath' are interpreted as the Jews, and / dallin / ' those gone
astray' as the misguided of the Christians. The foundation of this
interpretation is the same as was mentioned in the above.

C) It is also probable that / dallin / 'those gone astray' refers to
those who are misguided but do not insist on making others go astray,
while/ maqdubi 'alayhim / ' those inflicted with His Wrath' refer to
those who both 'go astray' and' lead others astray’. They try vigorously
to change others to become like themselves.

The references to this meaning are the verses that introduce the persons
who obstruct the way of guidance of others and are mentioned in the Holy
Qur'an as 'those who would hinder (men) from the Path of *Allah'.*

**Surah Ash-Shura, No. 42, verse 16** says:

***"But those who dispute concerning Allah after He has been
accepted, -futile is their dispute in the sight of their Lord: on them
is Wrath, and for them will be Penalty terrible".***

Other traditions have also been cited concerning the matter, including a
narration from Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as). It says:

*"Everyone who has disbelieved in Allah, on him is Wrath, and he is
astray from His path".* [^42]

In 'Ma'ani' a book of traditions, it is narrated from the Prophet (S)
who said:

*"Shi'ah (the followers) of Ali (as) are those on whom Allah has
bestowed the bounty of 'Wilayat' love of Ali ibn Abi Talib (as); His
Wrath is not on them, and they are not on the wrong path".* [^43]

Supplication
------------

*O'Lord! Count us not among 'those inflicted with Your Wrath' and 'those
gone astray', but consider us among true believers, the followers of the
school of Ahlul Bayt (as).*

*O' Lord! Guide us on the Straight Path in our every circumstance and in
all our affairs!*  
*O' Lord! We thank you for this Divine blessing and say: "Praise belongs
to Allah (alone) Who set us among those holding steadfast to the love of
Ali ibn Abi Talib and the other immaculate Imams (as)."*

[^1]: Majma-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 17

[^2]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 1, p. 28 & Masabih-ul-Anwar vol. 1, p. 435

[^3]: Manhajus Sadiqin, vol. 1, p. 90

[^4]: Surah Al-Hijr. No.15. verse 87

[^5]: Al-Burhan Fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. one, p. 21; & Atyab-ul-Bayan,
vol. 1, p. 83

[^6]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. one, p. 17.

[^7]: Rauh-ul-Jinan, Abul-Futuh Razi; , vol. one, p. 16

[^8]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 76, chapter 58, p. 305 (according to' Tafsir
Al-Bayan', vol. one, p. 461)

[^9]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 76, chapter 58

[^10]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 18

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Al-Mahasin by Barghi p. 40 & Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 92, p. 234

[^13]: Tafsir-us- Safi, vol. 1, p. 70 & Al-Mizan, vol. 1, p. 26 (Persian
version)

[^14]: Surah Al-Alaq No. 96. verse 1

[^15]: Surah Hud No. 11 verse 41

[^16]: Surah An- Naml No.27, verse 30

[^17]: The phrase / bism-il-lah / is used as a contraction of /
bism-il-lah-ir-rahman-ir-rahim /.

[^18]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 1, p. 28

[^19]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 312

[^20]: Al-Itqan, vol. 1, p. 136

[^21]: Atyab-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 92

[^22]: Kafi, Tauhid by Saduq, and Ma'ani-yul-Akhbar, (according to
Almizan ).

[^23]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 21

[^24]: Ma'ani-ul-Akhbar, p. 32, tradition 8; and Tafsir Furat-ul-Kufi;
vol. 1, p. 52

[^25]: Al-Manar , vol. 1, p. 51

[^26]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn , vol. 1, p. 17

[^27]: From the collection of Poems of Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali-ibn
Abitalib (as), p. 175

[^28]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn. , vol. 1, p. 19

[^29]: Majma'-ul-Bayan. vol. 1, p. 24; &, Manhaj-us-Sadiqin, vol. 1, p.
24

[^30]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 186

[^31]: Kanz-ul-'Ummal, vol. 4, p. 36 (taken from Tafsir-i-Baqawi, and
'Amal-ul-Youm wal-Laylah)

[^32]: Minhaj-us-Sadiqin, Comentary, vol. 1, p. 114

[^33]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 254; and. Tafsir us-Safi. vol. 1, p.
72

[^34]: Ma'ani-ul-Akhbar, p. 484

[^35]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 20, tradition 86

[^36]: Ibid, p. 21, tradition 88

[^37]: Ibid, tradition 89

[^38]: Ibid, tradition 94

[^39]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 24, p. 16 & Manhaj-us-Sadiqin, vol. 1, p.
116

[^40]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 124, tradition 50

[^41]: Ihqaq-ul-Haqq, vol. 9, pp. 309- 375

[^42]: Tafsir-us- Safi, vol. 1, p. 74

[^43]: Ma'ani-ul-Akhbar, p. 32, tradition 8; and, Tafsir Furat-ul-Kufi:
vol. 1, p. 52


