Section 1
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 1-5
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ هُدًى لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ وَيُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاةَ وَمِمَّا
رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن
قَبْلِكَ وَبِالآخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَـئِكَ عَلَى هُدًى مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***1. "'Alif 'A', Lam 'L', Mim 'M'."***  
***2. "This is the (True) Book wherein is no doubt, a guidance to the
pious ones,"***  
***3. "Who believe in the Unseen and keep up prayer and spend (in
charity) of what We have provided them."***  
***4. "And who believe in what has been revealed to you (Muhammad), and
what has been sent down (to other apostles) before you; and of the
Hereafter they are certain."***  
***5. "They are on (true) guidance from their Lord; and they are the
ones who are the successful."***

### The Abbreviated Letters of the Qur'an

At the beginning of 29 Suras of the Holy Qur'an, there are several
certain abbreviated letters, the Muqatta'at, which seem separate from
each other; i.e. they do not form an apparently meaningful word, but
wherever they occur, in the Qur'an, the Surah follows immediately with
some expressions about the Qur'an and its importance.

This in itself indicates that there is a relation between these letters
and the origin of the Qur'an. As an example, Surah An-Naml, No.27,
verses 1-2, say: **"'Ta. Sin. These are verses of the Qur'an, a** **Book
that makes (things) clear."** There are, also, many other examples,
similar to this one, in the Qur'an.

The abbreviated letters of the Holy Qur'an have always been considered
mysterious. In the words of scholars and commentators, the letters that
are prefixes to some Suras, such as ***'Alif 'A'*** ***Lam 'L', Mim
'M',*** and the like, are among the 'metaphorical expressions' of the
Qur'an.

They are secrets that none knows except the Prophet (S) and, after him,
his successors (as) who have left some traditions and narrations which
testify to this very matter:

1 Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) said:

"*Every book has all elite and the elite of this Book (The Qur'an) is
the 'abbreviated letters'."* [^1]

2. It is narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (as) who said:

***'Alif 'A' Lam 'L', Mim 'M',*** *are the letters among the (whole)
letters of the' Exalted Name' of Allah, which are separated and
scattered in the Qur'an and whenever the Prophet and the sinless Imams
(as) call Allah by that 'Exalted Name', their prayer will be accepted."*
[^2]

3. It is narrated from Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn (as), thus:

*"The Quraysh and the Jews refuted the Qur'an and said: 'It is mere
magic and he has made it by himself’. So, Allah said: ‘**'Alif, Lam,
Mim. This is the (True) Book...'**, i.e. 'O' Muhammad, this Book that is
sent down to you, is made up of the abbreviated letters and 'Alif Lam,
Mim are among them. They are the same as the letters of the alphabet
that you (people) use in your words. Bring similar to it if you are
genuine’."* [^3]

4. It is narrated from Ibn-Abbas and 'Akramah who have said that these
letters are the 'letters of oath', as well as 'the Name of *Allah',* by
which He *(s.w.t.)* has Sworn.

The reason why *Allah* has sworn by these letters is, perhaps, for their
importance and greatness through which the Glory and Highness of *Allah*
and the secrets of the world of creation are stated.

All sciences, from the beginning to the end, daily activities and
arrangements of affairs in societies and their communications throughout
the world, the development of industries, the trading and commercial
activity between people, their marriages, the social laws, regulations,
and the jurisprudence of the religions of human beings, all in all,
depend on the letters of the alphabet.

The transmission of ancient civilizations and cultures from old
generations to the later ones has been possible only through
transcribing and recording them essentially with the help of the bounty
of alphabets.

Even this very book, which is the statement of the Divine laws and the
description of the Qur'anic concepts, is being published and distributed
throughout the world in different languages including the English
language, because of the existence of the letters of the alphabet.
Furthermore, an oath is usually taken to an important and great subject.

These abbreviated letters have such an importance and greatness. Hence,
*Allah,* the Exalted, taking an oath to a letter of the alphabet, says:

**"*****Nun. By the Pen and by the (Record) which (men) write,"***
**(Surah Al-Qalam. No.68. verse 1).**

However, there are more than one hundred other traditions on the
abbreviated letters of the Qur'an cited by Muslim scholars in many
authentic and tradition books.

Another aspect is that some eminent men have said that these letters
refer to the idea that this heavenly Book, with such splendour and
reputation that it stirs wonder in the great speakers, both Arab and
non-Arab, and that has made the men of letters and all others unable to
challenge it, is composed of the sort of the very alphabetical letters
that are within the reach of everyone.

This fact shows that the Qur'an has not been produced by the mind of
Man, but it is an absolute revelation and, therefore, none can produce
the like of it.

Imam Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (as) is narrated to have said in a tradition:
"*Verily, Allah has sent down this Qur'an narrated by the very letters
that all Arabs apply ordinarily*". And, thus, *Allah,* Glory be to Him
and Highly Exalted is He, says:

**"*****Say, 'If the whole of mankind and Jinns were to gather together
to produce the like of this Qur'an, they could not produce the like
thereof, even if they backed up each other with help and support*** **",
(Surah Al-Isra', No. 17, verse 88).**

Following the abbreviated letters, the Surah, referring to the
importance of this heavenly Book, says:

**"*****This is the (True) Book wherein is*** **no** ***doubt...*****"**

This meaning may point to the idea that *Allah* promised His prophet (S)
to send down to him a Book for the guidance of men and now it was done.
For, it is a Book wherein is a source of guidance for all truth-seekers,
and, these believers, in fact, have no doubt in it.

The Qur'an says that there is no doubt in this Book, and this statement
is not a mere claim. It means that the content of the Qur'an has such a
style that it, in itself, attests to the authenticity of itself.

In other words, the signs of truthfulness, greatness, and firmness
together with the depth and synthesis of meanings, the sweetness and
elegancy of the words and its stylistic form found in the statements are
so evident that no doubt or temptation can interfere and every
truth-seeker reaches the limits of certitude.

It is interesting that over the course of time not only the freshness of
the Holy Qur'an does not decrease, but, with the progress of science and
the secrets of created things being uncovered, the facts of the Holy
Qur'an become more manifest.

As the international standards of development, science, and industry are
raised, the luminosity and resplendence of these verses become more
evident.

This is not only a claim but it is a reality that will be dealt with in
this very book, *Allah-*Willing.

### What is Guidance?

The term '*guidance'* is utilized in many occurrences in the Qur'an. In
all these cases the root meaning of the word refers to two main
guidances: Divine Guidance and Religious Guidance.

A) Divine Guidance is the guidance that exists in all creatures of the
world. (In other words, 'Divine Guidance' means the leadership of
*Allah* upon creatures under the regulation of creation governed by some
definite laws and secrets of the world of existence.)

There are some verses in the Holy Qur'an concerning the subject; like
the verse where the Qur'an reveals through Moses (as):

**“...*****Our Lord is He Who gave to each (created) thing its form and
nature, and further, gave (it) guidance*****", (Surah Taha No.20. verse
50).**

It can also be said that those who are in lack of Faith are
characterized in two groups. The members of the first group are those
who generally seek for the truth and hold enough piety in their souls so
that wherever they confront the truth they accept it.

The second group is some obstinate, fanatical, lustful people that not
only do not seek for the truth but wherever they find it, they try to
blowout its light.

It is certain that the Qur'an, or any other heavenly Book, has always
been beneficial for the first group, but the second group does not take
any advantage from it. Hence, the Qur'an says:

***"And We send down (stage by stage) of the Qur'an that which is
healing and a mercy unto the believers, but it adds not to the unjust
but perdition",*** **(Surah Al-Asra', No.17. verse 82*****).***

However, it is a fact that saline soil does not grow flowers such as
hyacinth though it rains a thousand times on it. But, if the land is
ploughed, fertilized and prepared for planting, the life-giving droplets
of rain will be useful for it.

The land of the self of man is similar to this parable. It should be
empty of obstinacy and enmity; otherwise, the seed of guidance will not
grow in it. So, *Allah* qualifies the Qur'an as:

***"(The Qur'an*** **is)** ***a guidance to the pious ones".***

B) 'Religious Guidance' is introduced by prophets and Divine Books. It
is through their teaching and training that man can progress on the path
of development. The references to this fact are found abundantly in the
Holy Qur'an, including the verse that says:

***"And We made them Leaders guiding (men) by Our Command...",***
**(Surah Al-Anbiya No.21. Verse 73)**.

### Why is Guidance Particular to the Pious Ones?

It is certain that the Qur'an was sent down for the guidance of all
human beings. So, the question is that why the guidance is introduced as
particular to the 'pious ones'.

The reason is that it is impossible for Man to take benefit from the
guidance of the Divine Books unless he attains some degrees of
submission and kindles the light of piety in his self.

### Piety in Lexicon and Religion

The term / taqwa /, philologically, is derived from / wiqayah / ***' to
protect from what harms’.*** *Allah,* the Exalted, says: **“...*****save
yourselves and your families from a fire...",*** **(Surah At- Tahrim.
No. 66. verse 6).** Then, piety, in this sense, is 'the protection of
oneself from what one fears'.

And, in religion, the pious are 'people who preserve their selves from
what harms them in the Hereafter’.

#### The Stages of Piety

There are some stages of piety. The first stage is to avoid and restrain
from committing sins and wrong doings; as it is narrated from the holy
Prophet (S) that none reaches (this stage of) piety unless he avoids
unlawful things. [^4]

In a tradition from the Prophet (S), deeds of people are divided into
three kinds:

1) Those that are clearly lawful, whose lawfulness is vividly apparent.
2) Those that are clearly unlawful, whose unlawfulness is certain. 3)
Some dubious things that are situated between these two. They are lawful
but resemble the unlawful. The person who avoids even the dubious things
will never approach the unlawful ones. [^5]

Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) is narrated to have said:

*"A pious person is he whose deeds would not include anything shameful
if they are put in a tray and displayed it around the world (to show
them) ".* [^6]

The second stage of piety is the full obedience to what is revealed to
the Prophet (S). Thus, piety consists of performing obligatory things
(Wajibat) and avoiding the unlawful things.

The third stage of piety is to rid the heart and soul of everything save
*Allah.* In this sense, a pious person is one who strains out from his
wishes, those that are not pleasing to *Allah,* and relies not on
individuals but on Him only; *viz,* he forsakes from hoping in every
other being and hopes only in Him; he focuses his view on observing the
Beauty and Glory of His Lordship.

This is real piety; so the Qur'an says:

**"*****O*** **'** ***you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to)
Allah with the care which is due to Him...",*** **(Surah Ale-Imran No 3.
verse 102).**

### The Effects of Piety on Man's Spirit and Body

Regarding the Faith and practices in Islam, the Qur'an, at the beginning
of this Surah, divides people into three different categories:  
 1. The pious ones (Muttaqin), who accept Islam in all aspects.

2. Unbelievers, who are in the exact opposite state as compared to the
first group. They confess their infidelity and do not refrain from
expressing hatred and acting hostilely against Islam.

3. The hypocrites, who portray contradictory features. They show
themselves Muslims when they are with Muslims, but they behave hostilely
towards Muslims when they are with the enemies of Islam. Their main
fundamental features are, in fact, the very infidelity of theirs, but
they simulate affection for Islam, too.

Undoubtedly, the harm of this group, for Islam, is greater than the
second group. Hence, the Qur'an, concerning them, is more severe.

This quality, of course, is found not only in Islam but also in all
ideological schools of the world. Their members are either faithful to
the doctrine of that school, or are clearly opposed to it, or they are
conservative hypocrites. Furthermore, this proposition does not refer
only to a specific time; it has always existed in all ages of the human
world.

### The Pious Ones, the First Group

The verses under discussion deal with the first group. These verses
explain the special characteristics of the pious ones from the point of
view of Faith and practice in five matters: Faith in the Unseen,
establishment of prayer, spending in charity from all of the divine
merits they possess, belief in the invitation of all prophets, and Faith
in the Resurrection Day.

#### 1. Faith in the Unseen

At first, the verse describes the pious ones as those: ***"Who believe
in the Unseen...".***

***'The world of the Unseen'*** and **'*****the world of the senses'***
are two concepts opposite each other. 'The world of the senses' is the
visible and physical world, while 'the world of the Unseen' is a world
beyond our senses.

Therefore, the term / qayb / is used 'for that which is concealed from
us'. The Qur'an says: ***"...the Knower of the unseen and the seen; He
is the Beneficent, the Merciful*****. (Surah Al-Hashr, No. 59, Verse
22).**

'Faith in the Unseen' is just the first characteristic that separates
the believers from unbelievers. Thus, the believers in heavenly
religions contrast with the deniers of God, revelation, and
Resurrection. It is for this very reason that 'Faith in the Unseen' has
been mentioned as the first characteristic of 'the pious ones'.

The believers have cleft the limits of the world of 'materiality' and
freed themselves from their restrictions. They have stepped into a quite
vast open world and, with this broad scope of view that they have
obtained, they have connected themselves with the realm of an
extraordinary, bigger, and greater world.

But, the contrary group insists on confining Man, as an animal, inside
the walls of the world of materialism. They call this retrogression,
which is a kind of life filled with lusts and excessive luxuries, an
advanced civilized life.

Comparing the concepts and doctrines of these two groups, we conclude
that the 'pious ones' believe in 'the Unseen', a world very much wider
and bigger than what can be seen or touched with the external senses in
the world of existence.

The Creator of this universe is Omniscient and Omnipotent, Who has
infinite Glory and Insight. He is Eternal and has no end. He has planned
the world in a good, regular, and precise design.

In the world of believing men, the spirit of Man has produced a great
distance between humans and animals. For them, death does not mean an
end. On the contrary, it is one of the stages of progression towards
man's development. Death is an opening to a broader and greater world.

Whereas, a materialist believes that the world of being is restricted to
what we can see. He says that natural science has proved that the rules
of nature are a chain of obligatory rules by which, without any designs
or special programs, this world has been fashioned.

They believe productive power of the world has no intellect even as
little as that of a child. And, Man is a part of nature, i.e., when he
dies everything ends. His corpse is decomposed in a few days and joins
with nature again as a natural component. They conclude that there is no
life after death for Man, and there is no difference between Man and
animal.

Are these two people with these two different methods of thinking
comparable with each other? Are their actions and behaviours in the
society the same?

The first one cannot ignore that which is right, just and benevolent,
and helping other fellow members. But the second does not see any reason
for any of these matters. He cares for only what is effective and
beneficial in his physical life at present or in the future.

That is why that, in the lives of truthful believing people, there is
purity, brotherhood, mutual understanding, and cooperation; while in the
lives governed by materialism, colonialism, exploitation, plunder and
murder are seen. Therefore, the Holy Qur'an, in the above mentioned
verses, considers **'*****Faith in the Unseen'*** the first stage of
piety.

Opinions are divided among the commentators as to whether Faith in the
Unseen, here, points to Faith in Monotheism, or to a vast meaning that
covers Faith in the world of revelation, Resurrection, angels and, in
general, what is beyond the external senses.

We already pointed out that Faith in 'the world of beyond the external
senses' is the first phase of separation of the believers from
unbelievers. This makes it clear that the term '*Unseen',* here,
contains the same vast meaning as the term that was pointed out.

Moreover, the application of the word in this verse is absolute and
unrestricted. There is nothing included in the verse that would confine
its meaning to a specific one.

In some traditions from Ahlul Bayt (as) [^7] *"* the term '*Unseen',* in
the verse under discussion, is rendered to the '12th Imam (as)*',* who,
as we believe, is alive right now but is concealed from the eyes of
people.

This idea does not contrast with what was said in the above, because it
is one of the aspects of '*Unseen',* too. And, in other words,
'*Unseen'* is something which is not possible to be seen or heard by our
external senses, such as sight or hearing or things outside the grasp of
our other senses.

The Existence of *Allah* is apparently hidden because of the limit of
our external senses. The Hereafter, the status of the next world, is
concealed from our eyes.

In this gloomy time in which we live, the presence of prophets and our
sinless Imams (as) are necessary for us, but, even our Expected Imam
(as) whom we need to be our guide out in front of us, whose light of
mastership, which would help us follow along this dim, murky, dangerous
road that lies before us upon which we must travel until we reach the
sound abode of ours, is absent from us.

Apparently, he is out of our reach. Though, he, the esteemed one (as),
is never heedless of his true followers and he is always aware of their
circumstances. (There will be a more comprehensive discussion concerning
the '12th Imam (as), later in the .)

This statement shows that at this time, which is the worst of the ages,
how high the position of the persons with complete Faith is! And, as it
is narrated, there is reason for the holy Prophet (S) to say about them:
*"How much I am eager to see my brothers (who will come to being) in
'the end of time'! ".* [^8]

We may consider that the Prophet (S)*,* with such high rank and glory,
has expressed his eagerness for seeing the true believers of this time,
and has introduced them as his 'brothers'.

#### 2. Relationship with Allah

Another specialty of the 'pious ones' mentioned in the Qur'an is their
prayers.

Prayer, which is the key to communion with *Allah,* holds the believers
in permanent and perpetual contact with that great Origin of Creation.
They have found the way to the world beyond this world, viz, the world
of the supernatural.

They bow only to *Allah* and submit only to the Great Creator of the
World of Being. That is why there is no place for submission or
surrender to any tyrants and oppressors in their agenda.

Such a human feels that he has been promoted to a situation higher than
that of all other creatures for that he has the honour of standing in
front of *Allah* and is worthy of speaking directly with Him. This
status is the greatest factor necessary for training.

The person who, with his whole heart and mind, stands in front of
*Allah,* at least five times a day and sincerely utters invocation, his
thoughts, his actions and his speech altogether will become divine. How
is it possible that a person like that could do anything against
*Allah's* pleasure?

##### The Excellence & Importance of Prayer

Prayer is the pillar of Faith, the means of attaining nearness to
*Allah,* the expression of obedience to Him, the thanksgiving for His
infinite Mercy, the imitation of the examples of the holy Prophet and
immaculate Imams (as), the strong link between a person and *Allah,* and
the constant means of seeking and receiving His Guidance and assistance
and avoiding errors and evil.

Prayer is the only way in which faith that lives in the heart, can be
made manifest in our actions, and can ensure admission to the realm of
everlasting happiness in our life in this world as well as the life in
the next world.

There are many verses in the Holy Qur'an and plenty of traditions in
Islamic literature on the importance and virtue of prayer. Intellectual
and religious considerations approve its excellence, too.

Here, we narrate the words of the Late Sahib Jawahir cited in
'Jawahir-ul-Kalam', vol. 7, page 1. The words and ideas are based on the
contents of the verses of the Qur'an and some authentic traditions:

"*Prayer is an action that prevents the performance of hideous indecent
deeds. This status causes the Fire of Hell to extinguish, and any pure
believer to be linked with Allah by which he can make, spiritually,
progress.*

*Just as the water of a stream washes away dirt from the body, prayer
washes away the sins of believers; and, its repetition five times a day
is similar to washing the body in that stream repeatedly. Allah told
Jesus (as) and other prophets (as) as well, to pray throughout their
lives* ".

"*However, prayer is the basis of Islam and it is the best deed and the
best subject (which is legislated by the religion). It is the standard
and criterion of other deeds of people. Thus, when a person has
performed the prayer completely, the reward of all other of his deeds is
complete, because all of his good deeds are accepted.*

*Therefore, prayer, comparing with other religious practices, even the
religion itself; is considered as a pillar similar to the central pole
of a tent. For this reason the first deed of a mortal, which will be
questioned about in the next life and will be discussed, is prayer'.*

*If prayer is accepted from a person, other (good) deeds of his lifetime
will be evaluated and accepted from him. But, if it is refused, his
other deeds will not be looked at and will be refused and returned to
him.*

*So, regarding this, it is not surprising if an abandoner of prayer is
called an* '*unbeliever’.* *Yes, it is certainly so when the reason of
its abandonment is especially for the scorning of the religion.* *Prayer
is something that Imam al-Sadiq (as)* *did not know anything better or
higher and more beloved than that with Allah.*

*Even, he* (as) *has said that these five daily canonical prayers are
obligatory. He, who establishes them and observes them at their proper
times, will meet Allah on the Judgment Day, and He holds a covenant
stating that because of this he will enter Paradise.*

*But, he who does not keep up these obligatory prayers and does not
observe them at their proper times, then, it will be up to Allah whether
to forgive him or to punish him. And, the obligatory prayer is better
than twenty Hajj-performances, each of which is better than a room full
of gold that would completely be paid as donation in the way of Allah.*

*Or, the obligatory prayer is better than one thousand
Hajj-performances, every one of them being better than the whole world
with all its contents. Verily, obedience to Allah is service to Him, on
the earth, and no service is comparable with prayer.*

*That was why the angels called Zachariah (as) while he was praying in
his sanctuary. When a person is preparing for saying prayer, the Divine
favours come down from heaven to him on the earth and some angels
surround him. An angel proclaims that if this prayerful believer knew
what existed in the prayer, he would never neglect it...*"

*"Hadrat Rida, the 8th holy Imam (as), wrote as an answer to the
problems of Muhammad-ibn-Sanan that the reason of (the importance of)
prayer is that it is the confession to the Lordship of Allah, Almighty
and Glorious, and lack of attributing partners to Him.*

*Prayer means to stand in* *front of the Almighty, Glory be to His
Majesty, in a manner of humility, abasement and wretch ness and to seek
forgiveness for the sins committed.*

*In prayer, a servant puts his head down on the soil several times a day
in order to glorify Allah, Almighty and Glorious, and to furnish His
remembrance all the time.*

*To stand in the presence of Allah in prayer, causes a believing person
to avoid evils and it hinders him from all kinds of sin and
corruption*." [^9]

#### 3. Relationship with People

Besides the constant communion with Allah, the pious ones have a close
and permanent relationship with people, the creatures of *Allah.* For
this very reason, the Holy Qur'an introduces their third characteristic
in this verse as thus:

***"(They) spend (in charity) of what We have provided them".***

It is noteworthy that the Qur'an does not say that 'They spend (in
charity) of what they have" but it says: ‘***of what We have provided
them'.*** In this manner, it generalizes the subject of 'charity' so
broadly that it includes all the material and spiritual gifts of
*Allah.*

Therefore, the pious ones are those who donate not only from their
material bounties but also from their spiritual gifts such as knowledge,
science, intellect, physical power, or social abilities, and, in short,
from all they have in their own possession. They donate from their own
capital to those who are in need of them, and, in the meantime, they do
not expect any recompense from them.

Another point is that the regulation of donation is a general regularity
in the world of creation and, also, in the bodily system of every living
creature. The heart of a man does not beat for itself alone but it
donates of whatever it has to all of the cells.

The brain and the lungs, as well as other organs of the body,
continually donate the vital results of their active functions. And,
generally speaking, social life with the lack of donation is
meaningless.

Sincere coherence with human beings is, in fact, coherence and
attachment to *Allah.* A person who is attached to *Allah,* and knows
that all bounties and sustenance proceed from Him, not from himself,
will not be displeased with giving charity but will be happy to donate
His gifts to His servants on His way, and, as a consequence, he gains
the physical and spiritual merits for doing it for himself.

(For the importance of charity and its effects, refer to later
explanations concerning **Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2 verses 261-274).**

At any rate, this kind of thinking purifies the soul of man from
miserliness and envy. It changes the world of 'struggle for existence'
to the world of 'humanity and civilization', a world in which everybody
bonds himself to sharing his bounties with all the needy in his
environment and, like the sun, gives light to his surroundings without
expecting any favor in return or recompense.

It is notable that on the meaning of the phrase: ***"(They) spend (in
charity) of what We have provided them",*** a tradition from Imam-Sadiq
(as) says:

*"It means that they share (and teach to those who need) the knowledge
and science Allah has taught them."* [^10]

It is obvious that this statement does not mean that donation is
specific to knowledge but, since when speaking about charity almost all
the attention is usually turned to monetary donations, Imam al-Sadiq
(as), by mentioning this kind of spiritual donation, wanted to clarify
the broadness of the meaning of 'donation'.

So therefore, this idea makes it very clear that the word 'charity',
referred to in the verse under discussion, is not restricted to the
'obligatory alms giving' (Zakat), but refers to alms in general,
irrespective of obligatory or recommended ones; therefore, it has a vast
meaning which includes any kind of help given gratuitously.

Another characteristic of the pious ones is belief in all of the
prophets and the Divine designs. The Qur'an says that they are those who
believe in what has been revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S) (i.e. the
Qur'an) and what has been sent down (to other apostles preceding him
like the Turah, the Evangel, the Psalms of David and the rest of the
Divine Books).

Therefore, not only they do not feel that there is any difference in the
basis of the invitation of prophets, but they know all prophets to be
similar truthful teachers and trainers who came, one after another, in
this great school of the world of human beings to persuade people to
pave the path of their development.

Further, the pious ones not only do not consider the Divine religions
the cause of dispersion and hypocrisy, but, regarding their fundamental
unity, recognize them as a means of relation and sincere communication
among nations.

Those who have this sort of concept and this point of view would cleanse
their souls and minds from the dirt of obstinacy, and believe in all
that the prophets of *Allah* have brought forth for the guidance and
development of the human race. They would respect all the ***'guides'***
of the path of ***'Monotheism’.***

Belief in the instructions of the prophets of the past (as), of course,
does not mean that they do not adapt their thoughts and deeds to the
religion of the last prophet (S), which is the last and completing link
of the series of religions. If they do anything other than that, they,
in fact, regress on their path towards development.

Faith in the Resurrection is an epithet which is mentioned as the last
quality in this series of qualities for the pious Ones. [^11] It says:

**“...*****and of the Hereafter they are certain*** **".**

In the phrase / wa bil 'axirati hum yuqinun / the word /yaqin / is the
state of conviction and certainty reached through accepting undoubtable
evidence or unquestionable proof in / muttaqin /. One of the epithets of
'the pious ones', / muttaqin /*,* is having an unshakably firm
conviction and certainty that the ultimate purpose of life here lies in
the realm beyond it, in the direction towards the Absolute.

They are sure that Man is not created uselessly and purposelessly. The
creation has defined a route for him which will never end with death,
for, if everything came to a completion in this world, all of these
statements and tremendous activities and movements in the universe would
certainly be in vain if it was meant only for a brief temporary life.

He accepts that the Absolute Justice of *Allah* is waiting for all
humankind and it is not so that our deeds in this world will be
disregarded without having any reckoning and compensation.

This belief provides him with ease and tranquility. The stresses
resulting from the fulfillment of responsibilities not only do not hurt
him, but on the contrary he receives them willingly. He stands firmly in
front of misfortunes.

He does not resign to any unjust matter. He is sure that even the
smallest action, good or evil will be compensated; and, after death, he
will be transferred to a more comprehensive world where no cruelty or
oppression exists. But he will meet the infinite favour and Mercy of
*Allah,* the Just.

Belief in the Hereafter means cleaving the binding walls of materialism
and reaching a happy realm, better and higher than that. The present
world is like a school wherein Man should best prepare himself for the
coming world. The present life is not the final goal but it is a
preparation for the next life which will be eternal.

The life in this world is also similar to the prenatal period of a
foetus in the mother's womb. This period is not the purpose of the
creation of man, of course, but it is an evolutional stage for the next
period of life. Yet, if this foetus does not finish its course safely
and without any defects or harm until the baby is born, it will not be
happy and prosperous in its next life.

Belief in the Hereafter brings a profound effect in the behaviour of
human beings. It gives them courage and bravery, because,
***'martyrdom'*** in the way of a Divine holy purpose, which is life's
climax of honour and pride in this world, is the most beloved thing to a
believing person. Since, to him, martyrdom is the beginning of an
eternal and everlasting life.

Belief in the Hereafter controls man against sins. In other words, our
sins have a reverse ratio with our Faith in *Allah* and the Hereafter.
The more that Faith is firm and decisive, the less the amount of sin is.
One reference is the words of *Allah* where He commands David (as):

**“...*****and do not follow desire, lest it should lead you astray from
the path of Allah:*** **(*****as for) those who go astray from the path
of Allah, they shall surely have a severe punishment because they forgot
the Day of Reckoning*****", (Surah Sad, No, 38, verse 26).**

Yes, this forgetfulness of the 'Day of Reckoning' in man is the origin
of the kinds of disobedience, cruelty, and corruption which are the
total source of grievous punishment.

The last verse in the verses under discussion refers to the fruit and
the destination of the pious ones who have acquired the above five
attributes. It says:

**"*****They are on (true) guidance from their Lord; and they are the
ones who are the successful."***

In fact, both their guidance and their successfulness are guaranteed by
*Allah.* So, it can be said that the only path towards felicity and
salvation is the path of this group who, with these five special
attributes, have received the guidance of *Allah.*

The reason for the restriction, / 'ula'ika / the pious ones only -, is
clear in that His guidance is always universal but only the people with
such characteristics who have chosen His narrow path, and none else, can
be benefited by it, and will be successful in their life-journey in this
world and the next.

It is worthy to note that the term / hidayat / 'guidance', as was stated
before, has a vast meaning including many kinds of guidance, all of
which originate from Him alone, such as: Divine Guidance, Religious
Guidance, and Natural Guidance. Some details about 'guidance' were
discussed when commenting on verse 6 from Surah Al-Fatihah. [^12].

Note:  
 By the way, imitating the style in Surah Al-Fatihah, these five
beginning verses of the Surah, which were mentioned as a group at first,
are exceptionally repeated again one by one both in Arabic and English
when commenting on each of them. The cause of this repetition was the
length of their descriptions. But from here on, only the English
translations and the descriptions will be mentioned.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 6-7
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ
تُنذِرْهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَتَمَ اللّهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهمْ وَعَلَى سَمْعِهِمْ وَعَلَى
أَبْصَارِهِمْ غِشَاوَةٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**6. "*****Surely, (as for) those who reject Faith, it is the same to
them whether you have warned them or have not warned them, they will not
believe."***

**7. "*****Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing,
and over their eyes is a covering, and there awaits them a great
punishment."***

### Disbelievers, the Second Group

The followers of this group are just the opposite of 'the pious ones'.
Their characteristics are concisely expressed in the above two verses.
In the first verse, it says:

**"*****Surely, (as for) those who reject Faith, it is the same to them
whether you have warned them or have not warned them, they will not
believe."***

The first group, i.e., the pious ones, in all aspects and with all of
their talents and faculties, are thoroughly ready to accept the truth
and follow it when they receive it.

But this group, i.e. disbelievers, insist on their aberration so
rigorously that they do not agree to show any inclination towards the
truth even when it becomes completely clear to them. The Qur'an, which
is a guide for the pious ones, is totally non-effective for this group.

It makes no difference to them whether you describe for them or not,
warn them or not, give good tidings to them or not. In principle, they
are not spiritually ready to follow the 'right path' or submit to it.

The second verse refers to the reason behind the existence of this
bigotry and stubbornness. It indicates that they have sunk into impiety,
infidelity, and enmity so deeply that they have lost their power of
distinction. It says:

**"*****Allah has set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing and
over their eyes is a covering,…*****"**

And for that reason, a great penalty is appropriate for them as the
consequence of their deeds, and they deserve it. As *Allah* warns:

**"…*****and there awaits them a great punishment..*****"**

Thus, the eyes by which the pious ones see the signs of *Allah,* the
ears through which they hear the words of right, and the hearts (and
minds) wherein they conceive realities, are of no avail to the second
group.

They have minds, eyes, and ears but, when it comes to realities, they
are not able to understand, to see, or to hear, indeed, because their
disgraceful actions, their stubbornness, and their enmity, like
curtains, have covered over these means of acknowledgement.

It is certain that man is worthy of being guided before he reaches this
state, even if he is rather astray. But when he loses his sense of
distinction, there will not be any way for him to attain felicity,
because he does not have the means of acknowledgement.

So, it is natural that 'the great punishment awaits him'. This case is
like the situation of a lazy student who, by his own mischoice, does not
strive to study hard enough and consequently becomes involved in the
torment of ignorance and lack of certification.

The important fact is that one should be careful of sins, and when he
commits one, he should repent soon and wipe it out with doing good
deeds, lest the sin will remain as a fast colour stain on his heart,
that which would seal the heart (with sin). The turning of the mind and
the heart from the 'real' towards the 'unreal', when it gets rigid is
termed in the Holy Qur'an as 'sealing'.

A tradition from Imam Baqir (as) says: "*There is not a believing
servant but there is a white bright site on his heart, When he commits a
sin, there appears a black dot in that site.*

*If he repents, the black dot will disappear, But if he continues
committing sins, that black dot enlarges until it covers the white
bright site completely, When this site is covered (with blackness) the
holder of this heart will never return back to doing good deeds.*

*This is the meaning of the words of Allah, Almighty and Glorious, when
He says:* ***Nay! Rather what they used to do has put rust upon their
hearts’.*****"** ***(Surah*** **Mutaffifin,** ***No 83.*** **verse 14)**
[^13]

### Infidelity and its Meaning

Philologically, the term / kufr / means 'to cover, to conceal'. In
religion it means: 'to deny the Grace or the Existence of *Allah,* His
prophet, the prophecies of the apostles, and the Resurrection'. He who
denies these principles of the religion, even only one of them,
according to the consensus of Muslims, is out of the Circle of Islam and
becomes counted among the disbelievers.

Anyhow, infidelity is ***'the corrupt tree'*** whose root is false
ideas, its trunk is immorality, its branches and leaves are sins and
vices, and its fruit is disgrace in this world and punishment in the
coming world.

But Faith is ***'the good tree'*** whose root is true conviction, its
trunk is fair virtues, its branches and leaves are good deeds, and its
fruit is the happiness and prosperity in this world and the next world
which, itself, is eternal salvation.

**Surah Ibrahim, No 14, verses 14-16** say: **"*****Have you not***
***considered how Allah sets forth a parable of a goodly word (being)
like a goodly tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven,*** **-"**

***"Yielding its fruit in every season by the leave of its Lord*** **?**
***And Allah sets forth parables for men that they may receive
admonition*****". "*****And the parable of an evil word is as an evil
tree pulled up from the surface of the earth, it has no
stability*****".**

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 8-16
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يَقُولُ آمَنَّا بِاللّهِ وَبِالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ
وَمَا هُم بِمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُخَادِعُونَ اللّهَ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَمَا يَخْدَعُونَ إِلاَّ
أَنفُسَهُم وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ فَزَادَهُمُ اللّهُ مَرَضاً وَلَهُم عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ لاَ تُفْسِدُواْ فِي الأَرْضِ قَالُواْ إِنَّمَا
نَحْنُ مُصْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ الْمُفْسِدُونَ وَلَـكِن لاَّ يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ آمِنُواْ كَمَا آمَنَ النَّاسُ قَالُواْ أَنُؤْمِنُ
كَمَا آمَنَ السُّفَهَاء أَلا إِنَّهُمْ هُمُ السُّفَهَاء وَلَـكِن لاَّ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا لَقُواْ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا وَإِذَا خَلَوْاْ
إِلَى شَيَاطِينِهِمْ قَالُواْ إِنَّا مَعَكْمْ إِنَّمَا نَحْنُ
مُسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ يَسْتَهْزِئُ بِهِمْ وَيَمُدُّهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرُوُاْ الضَّلاَلَةَ بِالْهُدَى فَمَا
رَبِحَت تِّجَارَتُهُمْ وَمَا كَانُواْ مُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**8.** ***"And of people there are some who say: 'We believe in Allah
and the Last Day', but they do not really believe."***

**9.** ***"They seek to deceive Allah and those who have Faith, but they
deceive none save themselves, and they are not aware."***

**10.** ***"In their hearts is a disease, so Allah has increased their
disease and there awaits them a painful punishment for that they were
lying."***

**11.** ***"And when it is said to them: 'Do not make corruption in the
earth', they say: 'Verily, we are only reformers'."***

**12.** ***"Indeed, they themselves are the corruptors, but they are not
aware."***

**13*****. "And when it is said to them: 'Believe as the people
believe', they say: 'Shall we believe as the fools believe?' Beware!
Truly, they themselves are the fools, but they do not know."***

**14.** ***"And when they meet those who believe, they say: 'We believe
(in what you believe)', but when they are alone with their evil ones,
they say: 'Verily, we are with you; we were only mocking'."***

**15.** ***"Allah shall pay them back for their mockery, and He leaves
them alone in their inordinacy, blindly wandering on."***

**16.** ***"These are they who have bought error (in exchange) for
guidance, hence their transaction yields them no profit, nor are they
guided (aright)."***

### Hypocrites, the Third Group

The above verses state a short but very expressive explanation on
'hypocrites' and their spiritual specialties and characteristics
illustrated by their actions.

Attention should be attracted to the fact that: In a special period of
its sensitive historical course, Islam was faced with a specific group
among the whole of the people, who neither had the courage to truly
accept the invitation of Islam, nor had the power and boldness to openly
oppose it.

This third group, whom the Qur'an calls, in Arabic terminology,
/munafiqun/ 'hypocrites', is also termed the two-faced ones. They
penetrate in the rows of true Muslim communities and become a great
danger for Islam and Muslims.

It is usually difficult for the faithful believers to recognize them,
because they appear in the society with the same manner as other Muslims
do. But the Qur'an yields some clear exact signs and specialties about
them which identify their hidden routines everywhere and in all
centuries. These particular qualifications can provide good criteria for
the real Muslims to recognize them.

At the beginning, it gives an illustration of hypocrisy itself, saying:

***"And of the people there are some who say: 'We believe in Allah and
the Last Day', but they do not really believe."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

They imagine this action of theirs as a kind of cleverness or, so to
speak an advantageous policy. Therefore:

***"They seek to deceive Allah and those who have Faith..."***

It is not such as they think:

***“...but they deceive none save themselves, and they are not
aware".***

Having deviated from the Straight Path, they spend their whole lives
misled. They apply their power and potentials in vanity where their gain
is nothing but failure, infamy, and a painful Divine penalty.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In the next verse, the Qur'an points to the fact that hypocrisy is,
indeed, a disease. A safe and sound person does not have two faces.
There is complete harmony ruling between his soul and his body, since
outward and inward, as well as body and spirit, are complementary to
each other.

If a person is a believing one, his entire being cries Faith and
indicates his conviction. And if he goes astray, his deviation is
revealed both outwardly and inwardly. This dissimilarity of spirit and
body possessed by the hypocrite is a new additional disease. It is a
sort of contradiction or duplicity or cleft that governs over the self
of a man. Then, it says:

***"In their hearts is a disease..."***

Hence, in the regularity of creation, everybody who chooses a path and
equips himself with the necessary means to pave it would go forth on
that very path. Or, in other words, the abundance of actions and
imaginations of a man on his chosen route would make the above idea much
more colourful and secure. Then, the verse continues saying:

***“...so Allah has increased their disease..."***

The investment of the hypocrite is 'lies'. They adjust the
contradictions found in their lives, as much as they can; each lie with
its own set of excuses. Therefore, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“...and there awaits them a painful punishment for that they were
lying ".***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then, the Qur'an refers to their specialties, the first of which is the
claim of being 'reformers', while they are, in fact, mischief-mongers,
saying:

***"And when it is said to them: 'Do not make corruption in the earth',
they say: 'Verily, we are only reformers’."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

***"Indeed, they themselves are the corruptors, but they are not
aware."***

Both their persistence on the path of hypocrisy and their accustomedness
to these hideous disgraceful agenda have caused them to think,
gradually, that their activities are useful and constructive.

And, as it was mentioned previously, when sin is in excess and treads
the limits, it seizes the sense of distinction, or even, it reverses the
man's distinction. In this state, impurity and impiety prevail as his
second nature.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Another specialty of this group is that they think themselves wise and
clever while they think the believers are some simple-minded and
credulous fools; as the Qur'an says:

***"And when it is said to them: 'Believe as the people believe', they
say: 'Shall we believe as the fools believe?'..."***

Thus, they accuse the truth-seeking, pure-hearted people of foolishness,
for that these people, observing the signs of reality and rightfulness
in the content of the invitation of the Prophet of Islam (S), have
humbly accepted it.

The hypocrites consider corruption, duplicity, and hypocrisy signs of
their cleverness and wisdom. Yes, in their logic, intellect has changed
its place with foolishness.

So, the Qur'an, answering them, says:

***“...Beware! Truly, they themselves are the fools, but they do not
know."***

Is this not, within itself, a kind of foolishness, that a person does
not specify his conviction, but changes colour according to whatever
group or class of ideology he joins, and assumes duplicity or even
multifarious ness? Is it not silly for a person to spend his faculties
and abilities in doing evil and making plots for destruction and, in the
meantime, to count himself among the wise?

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The third specialty is that they change colour everyday, and choose the
direction of every group they meet. As the Holy Qur'an says:

***"And when they meet those who believe, they say: 'We believe (in what
you believe)'...".***

They tell the believers that they follow the same school of thought as
theirs, that is, they have accepted Islam eagerly and there is no
difference between them.

***“...but when they are alone with their evil ones, they say: 'Verily,
we are with you..."***

They tell their fellow men that they are mocking the believers when
telling them that they have believed:

***“...we were only mocking…"***

They say to them that they are deceiving them and, actually, they are
supporters of their fellow men whom they have taken friend with and,
keep their secrets safe and hidden.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then, the Qur'an, with a beating and decisive tone says:

***"Allah shall pay them back for their mockery, and He leaves them
alone in their inordinacy, blindly wandering on."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The concluding verse, on this subject, expresses their final fate which
is a very grievous, inauspicious, and dark end, thus:

***"These are they who have bought error (in exchange) for guidance,
hence their transaction yields them no profit, nor are they guided
(aright)."***

For this very reason, their purchase not only is of no avail for them,
but also they have lost even their investment.

### Explanations

#### The Appearance of Hypocrisy and its Roots

When a revolution takes place in a society, particularly a revolution
like the Islamic Revolution which was founded on the virtues of Right
and Justice, the interests of an oppressive, tyrannical, and selfish,
group will be exposed and possibly placed in danger.

At first, this group mocks it, and then they apply the power of guns,
economic sanctions, and continuous social propagation in order to try to
subvert it.

But when the signs of triumph are made manifest for all of the forces
and authorities of the region, some of the opponents change their
practical style of opposition and apparently resign themselves, but, in
fact, they organize a hidden antagonistic group against the revolution.

These vicious individuals who are termed 'hypocrites', because of their
actual duplicity, are the most harmful enemies of the revolution,
because their position is not quite clear so that the revolutionists can
recognize them and avoid them.

They deceitfully imitate and join the faithful people and occupy some
social positions in the rows of the pure, truthful believers. They
sometimes attain the sensitive posts, even.

Until the time when the holy Prophet (S) emigrated from Mecca to Medina,
Muslims had not established a government. The prime essential basis of
the Islamic government was founded when the holy Prophet (S) arrived in
Medina. This process was made more manifest with the occurrence of the
triumph of Badr, *viz.*; a small but progressive government was formally
organized.

It was at that time that the profits of many authorities in Medina,
particularly that of the Jews, who were respected by Arabs, were being
threatened. The Jews were respected at that time, mostly because they
were of 'the People of the Book'. [^14]

They were fairly learned, and they were economically advanced. It was
they who, before the advent of the prophet of Islam (S) used to give the
good news of his coming.

There were others, too, who were aspiring for the leadership of the
people of Medina and were disappointed due to the migration of the
Messenger of *Allah.* The cruel, selfish chieves of Medina and their
plunderers adherents saw that people, even their relatives, were tending
to Islam and abundantly believing in the Prophet (S).

They, after resisting for a short time, understood that they could not
help but to accept Islam, though only outwardly.

They realized that if they had opposed and stood against the new
process, besides the damages of war and economic problems, they would
have faced the danger of destruction; particularly because the total
power of the Arab was his tribe, but their tribes had separated from
them for the most part.

For this reason, they had developed a grudge in their hearts against the
holy Prophet (S) and his mission. So, they secretly planned to subvert
Islam. Therefore, they selected a third way. They decided to accept the
Prophet (S) apparently, and to follow their own plots hiddenly. [^15]

In short, the appearance of hypocrisy in a society is usually the effect
of one of these two causes. The first is the triumph and power of the
existing revolutionary school of thought in the society. The second
cause is the spiritual weakness and the lack of nobility and courage
needed to challenge such a force.

#### The Necessity of Knowing the Hypocrite

Undoubtedly, hypocrisy and the hypocrite were not only particular to the
time of the Prophet (S); they are found in any society and at any time.
They should be recognized, of course, according to the defined criteria
that the Qur'an has introduced them with, in order to prevent their
probable damages or harms.

There are various characteristics mentioned about the hypocrite in the
former verses, as well as through Surah Al-Munafiqun No.63 and, also, in
numerous Islamic traditions. Here are a few of these characteristics:

1. Great public outbursts and high claims with lots of boasting, but
little action making their claims and actions unparalleled.

2. To swing to every side in any environment with any group; to speak
among any society with the ideas of that society's school of thought,
and to show themselves adherents in the society of true followers but,
in the meantime, to cooperate with the oppositional group.

3. To separate their affairs from those of the people and to form secret
hidden societies with specific plans.

4. Characterized by tricks, deceit, lies, flattery, breach of promises,
and treachery.

5. To act before others with self-aggrandizement and self.-conceit,
counting people silly, simple, and foolish, while knowing themselves
wise and clever.

In short, duplicity of personality, or contrast between internal and
external, which is the clear characteristic of the hypocrite, has
different effects on their personal and social behaviour, which can be
easily figured out by the keen observer.

How beautifully the Qur'an puts it when it says: ***"In their hearts is
a disease...".*** Which sickness can be worse than the sickness of
duplicity of outward and inward character? What disease is more painful
than the illness of self -aggrandizement or lack of courage for
challenging the things that we do not believe in?

However, the disease of hypocrisy, though it is hidden, is recognizable
by its different features. It is similar to heart disease which cannot
be concealed wholly; although it is unseen, its signs and symptoms can
be seen in one's face and limbs quite vividly.

Hypocrisy, in its specific meaning, is the condition of some faithless
persons who are apparently counted among Muslims, but their hearts are
actually pledged to infidelity. They are the most dangerous group, not
only for Islam but also for any revolutionary progressive school of
thought.

The hypocrites penetrate into the communities of Muslims and misuse any
chance or opportunity for hindering affairs. For this very hostile
position that they have, they are the object of serious attacks in the
Qur'an.

One complete Surah of the Qur'an is revealed about their circumstances
which is entitled **'*****Al-Munafiqun*****'**. They have also been
reproached and condemned very strongly in the narrations of Ahlul Bayt
(as).

To introduce the hypocrite, a tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (as) who has
narrated from the Prophet (S) says:

*"There are three specialties that when they are in a person, he/she is
a hypocrite even the one who observes the fast, practices prayers and
considers oneself a Muslim: he who is treacherous when he is trusted,
when he speaks he tells lies, and when he promises he fails it".* [^16]

Here, we attract your attention to the noble words of Imam
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) about the hypocrites. He says:

"*O*' *creatures of Allah! I advise you to fear, and I warn you against
the hypocrites. They themselves are misguided and they will misguide
you. They are lost in the labyrinth of sins and vices and will make you
lose your straight path in that tortuous maze. They change their colours
to suit their surroundings, and their words always have double
meanings.*

*To convert you to their views and to win your sympathies they will
resort to every sort of fraud and pretence, will adopt varieties of
artifices and pretexts and will apply all possible allurements and
deceptions. They always lie in ambush to seduce you. They pretend to be
sincere and honest but their hearts are full of hypocrisy and vileness.*

*Their movements are very subtle*. *To mislead you they work so artfully
and cunningly that you cannot easily find out their purpose. They poison
your minds without your knowing it, like a disease spreading inside your
body without your realizing the fact.*

*They behave as if they are ministering cures to your ailments. They
talk as if they really feel for your troubles, but the result of their
activities and their persuasions will affect you like an incurable
disease.*

*Happiness and prosperity of others make them jealous and unhappy. They
will do their worst to drag others into difficulties, reverses, and
troubles. They will exert themselves to convert hopes of others into
disappointments and despairs. And they have their victims in every walk
of life.*

*They know how to touch your heart and how to gain your ears. For your
every sorrow they have crocodile tears to shed and for every pain they
offer you a balm, ineffective or injurious. If they praise you, it is
with the hope of getting louder praises out of you.*

*If they want to get something out of you, they will pester you with
their demands. If they wish to slander anybody they will expose him
threadbare. If they pass judgments they always forsake equity and
justice* ". [^17]

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 17-20
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُهُمْ كَمَثَلِ الَّذِي اسْتَوْقَدَ نَاراً فَلَمَّا أَضَاءتْ مَا
حَوْلَهُ ذَهَبَ اللّهُ بِنُورِهِمْ وَتَرَكَهُمْ فِي ظُلُمَاتٍ لاَّ
يُبْصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُمٌّ بُكْمٌ عُمْيٌ فَهُمْ لاَ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَصَيِّبٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاء فِيهِ ظُلُمَاتٌ وَرَعْدٌ وَبَرْقٌ
يَجْعَلُونَ أَصْابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِم مِّنَ الصَّوَاعِقِ حَذَرَ
الْمَوْتِ واللّهُ مُحِيطٌ بِالْكافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكَادُ الْبَرْقُ يَخْطَفُ أَبْصَارَهُمْ كُلَّمَا أَضَاء لَهُم
مَّشَوْاْ فِيهِ وَإِذَا أَظْلَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ قَامُواْ وَلَوْ شَاء
اللّهُ لَذَهَبَ بِسَمْعِهِمْ وَأَبْصَارِهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّه عَلَى كُلِّ
شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**17.** ***"The likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled
afire, and when it lit all about him Allah took away their light, and
left them in darkness unseeing."***  
**18.** ***"(They are) deaf, dumb, blind -so they shall not return (to
the right path)."***  
**19.** ***"Or (their) likeness is as a rainstorm from heaven wherein is
darkness, thunder and lightning. They put their fingers in their ears
against the thunderclaps, fearful of death; thus Allah encompasses the
infidels."***  
**20.** ***"The lightning well-nigh snatches away their sight,
whensoever it gives them light, they walk therein, and when it darkens
over them they stand still. Had Allah willed, He would have taken away
their hearing and their sight. Truly, Allah is All-powerful over all
things."***

### Two Interesting Parables manifesting the Hypocrite

After stating the epithets and characteristics of the hypocrite, the
Holy Qur'an, in order to illustrate their condition, likens them to two
expressive parables:

1. In the first parable, the idea is that they are similar to a person
who kindles a fire (by dark night) - (to distinguish the right way from
the false way under its light and reach the destination). It says:

**"*****The likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled a
fire, and when it lit all about him Allah took away their light, and
left them in darkness unseeing".***

They think they can challenge against the darkness they are in with a
small little fire. But, it happens that suddenly a storm arrives, or a
heavy rain falls, or their fuel runs out and the fire dies in coldness;
so, they remain helpless, wandering in the terrible darkness.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then, it adds: ***"(They are) deaf, dumb, blind -so they shall not
return (to the right path)",*** because they no longer have the
essential necessary means of grasping the truth in their possession.

*Allah,* the Exalted, stating the status of the hypocrites and
unbelievers, informs His Messenger that they have totally lost their
human innate potentialities. They, abusing it, have destroyed the talent
which *Allah* has originally put in their created nature and they should
revive it in order for it to be used correctly.

They have entirely deprived themselves of the real function of the
divine faculties of sight, hearing, and speech. These sense organs are
practically left useless and ineffective.

2. In the second parable, the scene of their life is illustrated in
another way.

It is a dark fearful night, full of terror and danger. The rain is
heavily falling and lightning flashes in the corner of the horizon every
now and then. The horrible crashes of thunder seem to tear the eardrums.

A defenseless person, amazed at the situation in this vast dark
dangerous plain, gains no benefit. For this frightened person, whose
back is wet from the rain, there is neither a safe and secure shelter to
take refuge, nor does the darkness let him step forth towards his
destination.

The Holy Qur'an, in a short sentence, explains the situation of such a
wandering passenger, thus:

***"Or (their) likeness is as a rainstorm from heaven wherein is
darkness, thunder and lightning..."***

Then, it adds:

***“...They put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps,
fearful of death..."***

And, at the end of the verse, the Qur'an points to a fact that wherever
the disbelievers go, they are under the forceful control and watch of
*Allah.* It says:

***“...thus Allah encompasses the infidels."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In this situation lightning brightens the expanse of the sky again and
again.

**"*****The lightning well-nigh snatches away their sight,...*****"**

Whenever the lightning strikes and lightens the dark spread of the
desert, they walk a few steps under that light, but, immediately after
that, they find themselves in the same darkness they were in before:

***"...whensoever it gives them light, they walk therein, and when it
darkens over them they stand still...*****"**

Every moment, they feel the danger in front of them because there is
nothing in this desert, such as a mountain, a tree, or anything else for
them to seek refuge in order to protect themselves from the danger of
the flash of lightning and thunderbolt. At any moment they may be seized
by the lightning as its prey and be laid in ashes in a blink of an eye!

There is even the danger of the sound of thunder tearing their eardrums
and the sharp flash of lightning blinding their eyes. Yes, it is true:

***“...Had Allah willed, He would have taken away their hearing and
their sight. Truly, Allah is All-powerful over all things."***

At the time of the holy Prophet (S)*,* the quick spread of Islam, like
the lightning, dazzled their eyes, and the verses of the Qur'an, which
uncovered their secrets, surrounded them as quick as lightning. They
thought that another verse might come down, too, and remove the curtains
from some other secrets, so, they would become publicly more disgraced.

The Qur'an also points to this very meaning where it says:

**"*****The Hypocrites are afraid lest a Surah should be sent down about
them, showing them what is (really passing) in their hearts, say: 'Mock
you! But verily Allah will bring to light all that you fear (should be
revealed)'."*** **(Surah At-Taubah. No.9. verse 64).**

Again, the Qur'an, verifying that the hypocrites were always in terror
and fear that with their secrets being manifested, *Allah.* command
would come down for the Muslims to fight them, the worst interior enemy
of Islam, and destroy them, says:

***"Truly, if the Hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease,
and those who stir up sedition in the City, desist not, We shall
certainly stir thee up against them: then will they not be able to stay
in it as your neighbours for any length of time:" "They shall have a
curse on them: wherever they are found, they shall be seized and slain
(without mercy)."*** **(Surah AL-Ahzab No. 33. verse 60 & 61).**

In the Islamic literature, as was mentioned before, the traditions and
data narrated about the hypocrite are abundant. One of them is the
tradition that Imam al-Sadiq *(as)*quoted from his father and
grandfathers who, in turn, had narrated from the Messenger of *Allah*
(S) who, addressing Hazrat Ali ibn Abi Talib (as), said:

*"There are three sign for a believer: prayer, fasting, and alms. There
are also indications referring to a hypocrite: when he speaks he tells
lies, when he promises, he breaks them, and when he is entrusted with
(something), he proves himself to be dishonest"* [^18]

Again, Abdullah 'Umar narrates from the holy Prophet (S) that there are
four characteristics which are the signs of hypocrisy: lie in speech,
excuse in promise, wickedness in enmity, and dishonesty in deposit.
[^19]

[^1]: Tafsir-us-Safi; vol. 1, pg 78

[^2]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 1, pg 66

[^3]: Al-Burhan, vol. 1, pg. 54

[^4]: Makhzan-ul-' Irfan, vol. 1, p. 81

[^5]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 221

[^6]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 1, p. 82

[^7]: Nur-uth- Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 31

[^8]: Makhzan-ul-'Irfan, vol. 1, p. 99

[^9]: Jawahir-ul-Kalam, vol. 7, p. 1

[^10]: Majma'-ul-Bayan vol. 1, p. 39; and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p.
32

[^11]: True Faith is, indeed, accompanied with / yaquin / 'certainty'.
This status in a person may be defined from different scopes of view.
The most important one of them is 'certainty of knowledge', which has
been described as having three stages. More details are given on page
208, vol. 2, the current .

[^12]: For further explanation about 'guidance' review pages 55-61 in
this very book.

[^13]: Usul-i-Kafi: vol. 2, p. 209, Tradition 20

[^14]: For the meaning of 'the People of the Book' see p. 202.

[^15]: This example also happened in the Islamic Revolution of Iran
where they played the same role but, luckily, under the light of Allah's
Grace and through the awareness of this honourable nation, they failed.

[^16]: Safinatul-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 605

[^17]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 194 Arabic print, and No.199, p. 172
English version

[^18]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 53, Tradition 3.

[^19]: Musnad Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 198


