Section 2
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 21-22
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الأَرْضَ فِرَاشاً وَالسَّمَاء بِنَاء وَأَنزَلَ
مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الثَّمَرَاتِ رِزْقاً لَّكُمْ
فَلاَ تَجْعَلُواْ لِلّهِ أَندَاداً وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**21. "*****O' mankind! Worship your Lord Who created you, and those
before you, so that you may guard yourselves (against evil),"***

**22.** ***"Who has spread out the earth as a resting place for you, and
has made heaven as a canopy, and has sent down water from heaven,
wherewith He brings forth fruits for your sustenance; so do not set up
rivals with Allah while you know."***

### Do Worship Allah!

In the former verses, *Allah* describes the statuses of three groups of
people (the righteous, the disbelievers, and the hypocrites), by
explaining that the righteous are inside the circle of the Divine
Guidance and the *Qur'an* guides them; while the hearts of the
disbelievers are sealed with ignorance and, because of their own deeds,
their eyes are covered with negligence which has taken away their sense
of perception. And, the hypocrites are some ill-hearted people whose
evil actions increase their sickness.

In the verses under discussion, after that vivid comparison, the path of
felicity and salvation is specified as following the path of the first
group, the righteous:

**"*****O*****'** ***mankind! Worship your Lord Who created you, and
those before you, so that you may guard yourselves (against evil),"***

### What is Servitude and Worship?

The word 'servitude' in lexicon means: 'the condition of subjection,
submissiveness and obedience of a slave to a master'. Worship is the
utmost aspect of submissiveness to the One Who is at the highest degree
of virtue, kindness, benevolence, and magnanimity. That is why He has
distinctly commanded:

***"...That you worship none but Him,...*****"** **(Surah Al-Asra,
No.17. verse 23)**

The person who has a little understanding can apply his intellect to
know himself and his own Lord. When he recognizes himself, the one who
has been considered the noblest creature, he will know his own Lord and
Cherisher, too.

This is a popular tradition that the person who after knowing himself,
would know his Lord and Cherisher by that recognition. Then, as it is
said, the key to the recognition of *Allah* is the recognition of one's
self.

When he finds himself in his servitude and his Lord in His Divinity, he
understands that he should concentrate his obedience, humility,
submissiveness and servitude unto the One in Whose hand and Will is his
soul and entity; the One from Whom *(s.w.t.)* he takes sustenance
constantly.

If the emanation of existence from the Absolute Bountiful Origin ceased
from him even for a moment, he would be deprived of the bounty of
existence.

### Some Explanations

Regarding the above verses, there are some points, here, that should be
paid attention to:  
 1. The phrase / ya ayyu-han-nas / **'*****O*****'** ***mankind',***
which occurs twenty times in the Holy Qur'an, has a general and
collective meaning that envelops all human beings of any race, tribe, or
colour.

This clearly shows that the Holy Qur'an does not pertain exclusively to
a special group of people, but it invites every single person to its
invitation, in general. It persuades everybody to accept Monotheism and
refuse any idolatry and deviation from the path of theism.

2. To invoke the sense of people's thankfulness and to concentrate their
attention on the worshipping of *Allah,* it begins from the greatest
bounty, i.e., the bounty of the creation of all human beings.

It is a bounty that illustrates both the tower or *Allah* and His
Knowledge, in addition to His ***'General Mercy'*** and ***'Specific
Mercy',*** because in the creation of Man, the best creature in the
world of existence, the signs of His infinite Knowledge and Power,
together with His vastly distributed bounties, are clearly seen.

The reason that some do not bow before *Allah* and do not worship Him is
mostly because they do not contemplate their own creation and the
creation of those who came before them. They do not take into
consideration that it is not right to attribute this magnificent
creation to the blind and deaf causes of nature.

We cannot think of these accurate, reliable and incomparable bounties,
which are vividly seen in the body and the spirit of Man, from any
origin except *Allah,* Who is the source of all knowledge and power.

Therefore, the remembrance of these bounties is both a reason for
theology and a stimulus for thankfulness and worshipping, along the path
of *Allah.*

3. The fruit of this worshipping is piety and righteousness:

***"...so that you may guard yourselves (against evil),"***

Thus, our worshipping and prayers do not add anything to the Dignity and
Glory of *Allah,* just as the abandoning of them does not take anything
from His Greatness and Beauty. These kinds of practices are some
training classes to teach man piety, which is synonymous with having a
sense of responsibility, and, the standard of measuring one's
personality.

Finally, it is worship that causes man to attain the epithet of being
pious, -a good mood in the spirit of man, that comes into being as a
result of worship and servitude unto *Allah.*

4. The emphasis on the phrase: ***'Those before you'*** in the verse,
may refer to the idea that if you agree with the custom of your
ancestors that you should worship idols, *Allah* is the creator of both
you and your ancestors. He is the Master and the Cherisher of you and
your ancestors both. So, worshipping the idols, either done by you or by
your ancestors, is not anything but aberration.

### The Sky and the Earth are Bounties

In the next verse, it points to some other great bounties of *Allah*
that can serve to motivate men to be thankful. At first, it refers to
the creation of the Earth and its Creator:

**"*****Who has spread out the earth as a resting place for
you...*****"**

The earth is like a mount that carries you on its back. It continues
moving at a wonderful speed in space. It has different movements but you
feel no shaking at all. So the earth is one of *Allah's* great bounties.

Another bounty is the gravity of the earth which enables you to walk,
rest, build houses and to prepare gardens, fields, and all kinds of
vehicles, instruments, etc; for your usage. Have you ever thought that
if the gravity of Earth did not exist, because of its rotation, all of
us and all of our houses and furniture, or, in general, everything on
the globe would be immediately thrown floating into space?

The term / firas / *'a resting place'* not only has the meaning of rest
and tranquility, but also contains the concept of being pleasant and
warm with a moderate temperature.

It is interesting that, commenting on this verse, Ali ibn al-Husayn, the
fourth Imam of the Shi'ah school (as), has clearly explained this
meaning, thus:

*"Allah has arranged the earth adapted to your nature and appropriate
for your bodies. He made it neither very hot so that it roasts you, nor
very cold so that it freezes you. He made it neither too aromatic so
much so that its odor hurts your brains, nor too foul-smelling to cause
your death.*

*He planned it neither too soft so that you be drowned in it, like in
water, nor too rigid and stable to enable you to build houses and make
graves to bury the corpses of your men (which cause many disasters when
they remain unburied)... Yes, it is for this reason that He has spread
out the earth as a resting place for you'."* [^1]

The word / bana /, considering the term / alaykum/ 'above you', refers
to the meaning that the heaven is made up above you like a canopy. This
idea is mentioned in another place in the Holy Qur'an, saying:

***"And We have made the heaven as a canopy wellguarded...",*** **(Surah
Al-Anbiya', No. 21, verse 32)**

This statement may seem amazing to some of those who are acquainted with
the intrinsic structure of the heaven and earth from the point of modem
astronomy. They may ask where and how this canopy is.

Does this idea not call to mind the Ptolemaic Theory which indicated
that planets are set over each other in the sky like the layers of an
onion? The subject will be made clear when the following explanation is
considered.

The term / sama' / has been used in the Qur'an in different places whose
common meaning is something alongside the solution to the above problem.
One of those meanings is referred to in this verse.

It is the very atmosphere around the earth, that is, the thick aerial
distance with a mass of gases that has surrounded the globe whose
thickness, according to what specialists have said, is, roughly
speaking, hundreds of kilometers, though it is not distributed uniformly
in the vertical direction.

If we contemplate the essential and vital function of this mass of air,
generally called the atmosphere, which has enveloped the whole earth, we
will understand how this strong and stable canopy, or ceiling, is
effective in protecting the lives of human beings.

This special amount of air which, as a crystal ceiling, has surrounded
us, the inhabitants of the earth, is so strong and resisting that in
comparison with a steel dam several meters thick, it is stronger; while
it does not hinder the brilliant sunshine, which has a vital, life-
giving and pleasant ray, from reaching us.

If this ceiling were not over us, the earth would be continuously beaten
with showers of celestial meteorites, wherein human beings would have no
peace and calmness. But this several hundred kilometer thick airy
ceiling burns almost all the celestial meteorites before they reach the
surface of the earth, except a few of them which can sometimes pass
through it and fall somewhere on the ground to warn the earthly living
creatures as a ring of danger.

This small number of stones has never succeeded to destroy the security
of human lives yet; except on those occasions that *Allah* used them to
destroy previous generations for their evil deeds.

The atmosphere, a vast and complicated physical system, has a basic
environmental influence on plant, animal, and human life.

One of the references which shows that one of meanings of the Arabic
word / sama / as ***'the atmosphere of the earth',*** is a tradition
cited by the sixth Imam, Imam al-Sadiq (as) describing the colour of the
sky for one of his followers, Mufaddal.

He said:

"*O* *Mufaddal! Contemplate the colour of the sky which Allah has
created so that it seems blue, -a colour that is the most appropriate
for the eyes, and looking at it strengthens the vision."* [^2]

We all know today that the blue colour of the sky is nothing but the
reflection of sunlight on the intense thick air around the earth.
Therefore, the word / sama / 'sky', here, refers to the very 'atmosphere
of the earth'. [^3]

**Surah An-Nahl, No.16, verse 29** says:

***"Do they not look at the birds held poised in the midst of (the air
and) the sky?"***

Then it refers to rain, thus:

***"...and has sent down water from heaven..."**.*

But, what water! It is a life-giver, an essential producer of vital
energy, and the origin of all inhabited regions containing many material
blessings.

The phrase: ***"and has sent down water from heaven "***, confirms the
fact, once more, that /sama'/, here, means the atmosphere of the earth.
And we know that it is clouds that produce rain and clouds are the
formation of water vapor floating in the air, above the surface of the
earth.

Commenting on the bounty of rain coming down from the sky, Ali ibn
al-Husayn, Imam Sajjad (as), has cited an interesting narration which
says:

*"Allah has sent down rain from the sky to water the peaks of mountains,
and hills, ditches and, on the whole, all sites high or low (saturating
them completely).*

*He planned for it to rain continually and gently, with raindrops being
individual and separated from each other; sometimes in the form of
drizzles or mist like, and sometimes in the form of rainfall, in order
to let it go down in the soil and saturate it. He did not let it fall as
a flood which would wash away and destroy the lands, trees, fields and
fruits".* [^4]

Then, the Qur'an refers to the kinds of fruits and nutritious foods that
are produced because of rain and awarded to men as their sustenance. It
says:

***"…where with He brings forth fruits for your sustenance;…"***

This process of producing fruits is one of the most valuable proofs of
His Existence. On one hand, it indicates the vast extent of *Allah's*
Mercy unto all human creatures, and on the other hand, it specifies His
Power by which, from colourless water, He can create thousands of
colours in fruits and grains whose different properties are useful for
men, as well as other living creatures. Hence, immediately after that,
it adds:

***"…so do not set up rivals with Allah while you know".***

Verily, you know that these idols, or partners, which are the creations
of your own fancy, have neither created you nor given you sustenance nor
any of your bounties. Then, how do you go after those false gods? Do not
adopt any equals for *Allah* and be devoted to Him to translate His Will
into a practical life.

#### Explanation: Idolatry in Different Forms

It is necessary to note that the false gods are not exclusively wooden
or stone idols, or, for example, recognizing a man such as Jesus Christ
(as) as one of the trinity, but the concept has a broader scope of
meaning.

The false gods may be superstitions, self, or even some great or
glorious things like rank, position, art, poetry, science, or, kinds of
pride which can be the hidden forms of idolatry when they are set up as
rivals to *Allah*. So, in general, knowing anything save *Allah*,
effective in life is a kind of idolatry.

### A Detailed Scientific Meaning of Atmosphere

The Qur'anic term /sama'/ 'sky', wherefrom the rain, for example, comes
down, sometimes has the meaning of atmosphere, whose explanation
according to some encyclopedias is as follows:

The ***'atmosphere'*** is the mass of 'air' surrounding the earth to a
distance of several hundred kilometers. It appears insubstantial but in
reality it has enormous mass. It is not simply a formless mass of gases
which can be divided into several layers on the basis of meteorological
and electromagnetic considerations, but it consists, roughly, of three
major layers which differ widely in their characteristics. These layers
are: the troposphere, the stratosphere, and the ionosphere.

The troposphere is the layer of air that lies next to and immediately
above the earth's surface. The height of the troposphere varies from the
poles of the earth to the Equator, being about four or five miles at the
poles and about 10 miles at the Equator.

Stratosphere was the term formerly applied to the entire atmosphere
above the troposphere. Later it was found that the temperature did vary
significantly with the height and also that there existed various
stratifications.

Some scientists have introduced rather detailed terminology to describe
various layers of increasing, decreasing, and constant temperature in
the atmosphere and the Ozone layer. But here the distinction will be
made between two layers only: the ***'stratosphere'*** *extending*
upward from the tropopause to the ***ionosphere**,* and the ionosphere,
whose lowest ionized layer is found at a height of 35 to 40 miles.

The standard pressure of the atmosphere (760 millimeters) is very nearly
equal to 1000000 dynes per square centimeter and is often referred to as
the 'bar'. The 'millibar' is 1/1000 of this quantity, sanctioned by the
International Meteorological Conferences as the standard for the
expression of barometric pressure.

If the atmosphere were of uniform density at a standard pressure of 760
millimeters of mercury and at a temperature of 0°C, its height could
easily be calculated based on the weight of a cubic centimeter of air
being 0.0012928 grams.

The height of such a uniform atmosphere is 7.99 kilometers (4.97 miles),
and is known as the 'height of homogeneous atmosphere' conveniently
useful in certain physical computations.

The actual height of the atmosphere is somewhat difficult to determine
since it becomes very tenuous at great heights.

We may, however, infer its extent from three sources: (1) the duration
of twilight which depends upon scattered sunlight from high atmospheric
particles; (2) the height at which meteors become luminous; and (3)
observation of auroral streamers.

Twilight has been observed to exist until the sun is about 18° below the
horizon, which, at altitude of 45°, indicates the existence of
sufficient atmospheric particles to scatter sunlight at a height of over
60 kilometers (37 miles). Meteors have been observed to become luminous
as high as 300 kilometers (186 miles).

Auroral streamers have been seen to stretch upward to a height of 1100
kilometers (680 miles). It is very difficult to assign an upper limit to
the earth's atmosphere. Atmospheric gases in an exceedingly tenuous
condition probably extend hundreds if not thousands of miles above the
earth's surface.

(This piece is extracted, here, from the Encyclopedia Americana, vol. 2,
p. 508; and Encyclopedia International, vol. 2, p. 165).

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 23-24
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن لَّمْ تَفْعَلُواْ وَلَن تَفْعَلُواْ فَاتَّقُواْ النَّارَ الَّتِي
وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**23. "*****And if you are in doubt of what We have sent down to Our
(faithful) Servant (Muhammad), then bring forth one Surah the like
thereof, and call your witnesses other than Allah, if you are
truthful."***  
**24. "*****And if you do not do so, and you will never do it, then fear
the Fire whose fuel is People and Stones, prepared for the infidels."***

After *Allah (s.w.t.)* explains the state of the hypocrite and
disbelievers, and, through the creation of the heaven and the earth,
sending down rain and growing plants on the ground, proves the existence
of the Creator and Cherisher of the universe, He begins to validate the
rightfulness of the Holy Qur'an and the truthfulness of His Messenger.

In order to show everyone the miraculous ness of the Qur'an with clear
evidence, according to one's portion of wit and understanding, that the
Qur'an will be an argument for all, *Allah* confirms the prophet hood of
Prophet Muhammad (S) and the authenticity of the Holy Qur'an by
suggesting a challenge, a direct confrontation, not only to all the
contemporaries of the Prophet (S) but also to men in all ages.

**"*****And if you are in doubt of what We have sent down to Our
(faithful) Servant (Muhammad)..."***

It addresses all the rejectors, with a concrete test, saying that if you
imagine that the Qur'an, which has been sent down from Pure Holiness to
the chosen servant of *Allah* in the form of statements and with the
combination of ordinary alphabetical letters, is not from Him and it is
the word of a human, then since outwardly you are in the same state from
the point of being a human as the Prophet of Islam (S) is, you should be
able to produce a Surah like that of the Qur'an and call your own
witnesses that are like you, the disbelievers of the Qur'an.

You would compare your evidence with one of the Suras of the Qur'an,
even if it be a small one such as Surah Kauthar and the like. If those
two were similar in comparison in all their qualities, merits and
privileges, you could rightfully reject the legitimacy of the Qur'an.

The disbelievers and pagan Arabs, who were the masters of literature and
eloquence, refrained from accepting this challenge despite their pride
and haughtiness in eloquence and avoided the competition.

Therefore, inevitably, they turned the literary contest into a bloody
battle. Thus, getting killed was easier for them than being disgraced
and defeated in a literary contest. The Arab literature became helpless
and meagre against the challenge of the Qur'an.

Neither those who lived at the time of the Qur'an's revelation, nor the
people born in the centuries after that could bring anything like this
Holy Book, or could do anything against it, in spite of trying with
their utmost strength. They were thus forced to retreat after exerting
utmost efforts.

### Why is the Holy Qur'an a Miracle and How?

Being complete true revelation, the Qur'an is itself a miracle. As it is
authentically known and also was mentioned in the above, at the time of
the Qur'an's revelation the literary talent and eloquence of Arabs were
at their peak, yet the miraculous ness of the Qur'an is not confined to
its inimitable literary excellence and eloquence.

It stands on its own innumerous different merits some of which are
beyond the reach of the complete conception of the literary geniuses of
the Arab world. It has such a rhetorical capacity and linguistic
excellence that is able to express different views and knowledge in a
manner that is understood and appreciated by every rational human being
of any standard and accomplishment of all the ages.

Then everybody in any time, once provided with the opportunity to become
acquainted with the Holy Qur'an, which offers information by which all
of his/her arguments will be completed, he/she can find himself or
herself convinced by it.

Such extensive knowledge and such power of expression are beyond the
limitations of human ability. Even of the literate Arab people, as were
previously referred to, especially at the time of the Qur'an's
revelation when the literature of the Arabic language had reached its
climax, none dared to bring a Surah similar to even its shortest one.
**This very single point is the smallest miraculous aspect of the
Qur'an.**

There is no doubt that if the Qur'an were the word of a human and the
Prophet (S)*,* himself, who was known to the world as an illiterate one,
had produced it, they would bring many Qur'ans like it and would prove
that this is not the word of *Allah* revealed to him (S).

In that condition, the enemies of Islam would maintain their works which
would be available everywhere and in any ages so that they could publish
and distribute them, even now, to defame the one genuine Qur'an, but
there is none.

Apart from the inimitable literary excellence, the Holy Qur'an with its
other names such as *'Furqan'* and *'Tibyan'* referring to the abilities
it has, presents to the human world, definite prophecies fulfilled and
yet to be fulfilled, and long after.

It contains some facts about endowments in nature which the human
knowledge of science as it progresses will have to understand, for its
further advancement. The perfect ness of such nature naturally will be
the last word with regard to the ideas, religious and social laws,
sciences, and many, many other things that it contains and will remain
forever, until the Hereafter.

This universality of the truth expressed in the idea and beauty and the
attractive force of the language is so divine that, as we said before,
it is beyond the reach of the expressive power of any limited being. It
is in this regard that the Holy Qur'an claims to be not only the word of
*Allah,* inimitable, but the Final Word in respect to truth and
justice - the better or even the 1ike of it is impossible to be produced
by anyone.

However, it is true to say simply and shortly that the Holy Qur'an is a
miracle with respect to its contents which is the source of all
knowledge and science, as it itself says:

**"*****Say: If the sea were ink (wherewith to write out) for the words
of my Lord, the sea would surely be consumed before the words of my Lord
are exhausted, though We were to bring the like of that (sea) to add
thereto for its aid",*** **(Surah Al-Kahf, No.18. verse 109).**

Thus, this verse, by itself, is a vital piece of evidence regarding the
Correctness of the above said claim. [^5]

### Why do Prophets Need Miracles?

We know that the Divine mission of prophethood is a great rank endowed
upon some of the purified distingished members of the human race. Since
the purpose of prophethood is the comprehensive guidance ruling over the
body and spirit of individuals, and society, toward perfection and the
laying down of a legal system and social order for mankind, the
assumption of responsibility involved is necessarily heavy and taxing.

So, it requires great capacity and energy. *Allah,* therefore, bestows
the position of prophethood on those who have the ability and capacity
to receive and follow through the light of revelation. This unique
privilege and specialty of prophets is also shown in their miracles,
which all of them had.

And, to prevent some false, deceitful impostors from claiming the
position, it is necessary that, besides the revelation, the real ones
should have sufficient evidence to bear testimony to the truth of their
declaration and prove the claim that they are sent by *Allah.*

That is, a prophet should utter such words and exhibit such deeds which
could not be uttered or performed by any natural means within the power
of a finite being, such as: restoring the dead to life again,
communicating with animals and inanimate bodies, and the likes of them.
These supernatural events are termed as miracles.

The prophet who has a miracle should introduce it to people and invite
them to challenge with it. If they can produce none similar to that,
thus, by the means of his miracle, he proves the truthfulness of his
declaration.

### The Holy Qur'an, The Everlasting Miracle of the Prophet of Islam (S)!

Amongst the miracles issued by the Prophet of Islam (S), the *Qur’an* is
the best remaining evidence of his rightfulness. We know, of course,
that, according to what the leading scholars of Islam have said, he (S)
had about 4440 miracles. But the *Qur’an* is a Book beyond the thoughts
and mind of a mortal being. None has been able to bring one similar to
it yet. It is a great heavenly miracle.

The reason that amongst all the miracles of the Messenger of *Allah* (S)
the *Qur’an* has been chosen as the greatest remaining evidence of
legitimacy of the Prophet of Islam (S) is that it is a miracle which is
***'expressive', 'everlasting', 'world-wide',*** and ***'spiritual'.***

Each of the former prophets (as) had to accompany his miracle to prove
its inimitability when he used to invite his opponents for challenging
and bringing the like of it. In fact, his miracle or miracles could not
express themselves and it was the explanations of the prophet that would
complete them. This statement is also true for all the miracles of the
Prophet of Islam (S) except the Holy *Qur’an*.

The *Qur’an* is a clear miracle which need not be introduced. It invites
others to itself, demands the rejecters to challenge it while it defeats
them, condemns them and it always stands victorious. That is why it,
after passing centuries, viz., since the departure of the Prophet (S) up
to the present, has been continuing its invitation the same as it did
during his lifetime*.* It is both religion and miracle; law, and the
document of the law.

### The Holy Qur'an, Global and Eternal

The reputation of the Holy Qur'an cleft the bonds of time and distance
and influenced beyond them. The miracles of the prophets before the
Prophet of Islam (S), and even his own miracles save the *Qur’an*,
happened in a special period of time, at a definite place and for a
specific group of people.

For example: the utterances of the holy little child of Virgin Mary, and
raising the dead by Jesus (as) were done at some definite times and
places before the eyes of some particular people. And we know that
regarding the things that depend on time and place, the farther we move
away from them correlatively the weaker I they become. This is one of
the properties of affairs related to time.

But, the Holy Qur'an does not depend on time and place. Its brilliance
and authority that illuminated the darkness of Arabia fourteen centuries
ago continues unwaveringly to shine with its original splendor.

Besides that, the passing of time, the advancement of science and the
development of information have made it possible for us to understand it
and take its advantages even more than the nations of former ages did.

It is evident that what time and place cannot influence will continue to
be everywhere in the world for eternity. It is also clear that a
world-wide everlasting religion should have a world-wide everlasting
document of legitimacy in its possession. Then we can discuss the Holy
Qur'an:

• From the point of modern science;

• And the scientific explorations;

• And the rotation of the Earth;

• And reproduction in the plant kingdom;

• And general reproduction in all the particles of the world;

• And general gravity;

• And the surrendering of the Sun and the Moon;

• And the secrets of the creation of mountains;

• And the advent of the world;

• And the existence of life on other planets;

• And the winds, the pollinator of plants;

• And the question of the roundness of the Earth; [^6]

• And many other scientific facts and knowledge about the world can be
found in the Holy Qur'an, too.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 25
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِين آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ كُلَّمَا رُزِقُواْ مِنْهَا
مِن ثَمَرَةٍ رِّزْقاً قَالُواْ هَـذَا الَّذِي رُزِقْنَا مِن قَبْلُ
وَأُتُواْ بِهِ مُتَشَابِهاً وَلَهُمْ فِيهَا أَزْوَاجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ
وَهُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**25.** ***"And (O' Muhammad) give glad tidings to those who have Faith
and do good deeds that for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow.
Every time they are provided with fruits there from,*** ***they shall
say: This is what we were provided with before! and they shall be given
the like thereof, and there for them shall be spouses purified dwelling
therein forever. "***

### The Specialties of the Bounties in Heaven

In the aforementioned verse, the infidels and the rejecters of the
Qur'an were severely threatened with a grave chastisement. Now, in this
verse, to make the fact clear, by comparing the destinies of the two
contradictory groups, as the style of the Qur'an is, the destiny of the
true believers is referred to as the antithesis to the painful fate of
the disbelievers.

**First, it says:**

**"And** **(*****O*****'** ***Muhammad) give glad tidings to those who
have Faith and do good deeds that for them are gardens beneath which
rivers flow*****...**

We know that those gardens that have not a permanent source of water and
need to be occasionally irrigated are not so bountiful and pleasant
because of frequent difficulties concerning their up keeping. The
complete freshness is of those gardens which always have enough water
easily available and within their reach.

The water that belongs to them, making them self-sufficient, will never
end. Then drought and shortage of water will never threaten them. The
gardens of Heaven have such a condition. Then to point out the numerous
kinds of fruit in those gardens, it says:

***"...Every time they are provided with fruits there from, they shall
say: 'This is what we were provided with before!'..."***

The commentators have cited some rather different commentaries
concerning this statement:

Some of them have said that the objective meaning of this statement is
that these blessings are for the good deeds they did formerly in the
world. It was those deeds that were previously sent before them and the
path was paved for them in the Hereafter.

Some others have asserted that when the Heavenly fruits are brought for
them for the second time, they say that these fruits are the same as
they had before, but when they eat them they sense a new taste and a
fresh pleasure in them.

Or, for example, when we eat grapes and apples in this world, every time
we eat them or drink their juices they have basically the same tastes;
but the fruits in Heaven will have a different taste every time they
will be tasted, although they are apparently alike. This is one of the
privileges of that world being as if there is no monotony in it!

Some have also said that it means that when they see the fruits of
Heaven, they find them like the fruits in this world in order not to be
odd and curious for them, but when they eat them they sense the flavor
quite newly-tasting and excellent.

There is no controversy that the above statement refers to all these
meanings and even to some other interpretations beyond them, because the
words of the Qur'an sometimes bear several meanings.

Then it adds:

***"...and they shall be given the like thereof,.."***

"That is, from the point of beauty and wholesomeness, all of the various
Heavenly fruits are alike and they are at such a high standard that none
of them can be preferred over others. They are not like the fruits in
this world that some may be too ripe or aromatic while some others are,
for example, too green or tasteless.

The fruits in the gardens of Heaven, likening them with those of this
world, are all pleasantly fragrant, delicious, wholesome, and
beautifully interesting.

And finally, the last bounty, which is referred to in this verse, is
***'purified spouses',*** where it says:

***“...and there for them shall be spouses purified..."***

The spouses are purified and are free from all the dirt and taints,
bodily and spiritually, which they may have in this world.

One of the problems that man is confronted with, concerning the bounties
in this world, is that at the same time that he possesses a bounty he
thinks of its perdition and is worried about the time he is going to be
in lack of it.

For this very reason, the bounties in this world can never produce real
tranquility for him. But the bounties in Heaven are eternal. They have
no end and no perdition or discontinuation. They are full, complete,
soothing and calming. So, to confirm this meaning, at the end of the
verse, it says about the believers:

**“...*****dwelling therein forever.."***

### Occasion of Revelation

On the occasion of the revelation of this verse, the leading
commentators have narrated from Ibn-Abbas as saying: **"*****This verse
has been revealed on the virtue of Hadrat Ali-ibn Abitalib (as) and the
true believers",*** [^7] (since they have both 'Faith' and 'good
deeds').

### Explanations

#### 1. Faith and Deeds

In many of the verses in the Qur'an, 'Faith' and 'good deeds' are
mentioned to be so closely together that they seem to be inseparable.
True, it is so because Faith and practice are complementary to each
other.

If Faith influences the depths of man's soul, its radiance will
certainly reflect in his acts and cause his deeds to become 'good
deeds'. It is like a room wherein a bright light is kindled whose beams
radiate outside through all the doors and windows. The same is the
bright light of the lamp of Faith when it is glowing inside a man's
enlightened heart.

If this occurs, the light of that brilliant lamp of Faith radiates from
his eyes, ears, tongue, hands and feet.

**Surah At-Talaq, No. 65, verse 11** says:

***“...And those who believe in Allah and work righteousness, He will
admit to Gardens beneath which rivers .flow, to dwell therein for
ever..."***

Also, **Surah An-Nur, No.24 verse 55** says:

***"Allah has promised, to those among you who believe and work
righteous deeds, that He will, of a surety, grant them in the land,
inheritance (of power)..."***

Fundamentally, 'Faith' is as the root of a plant, and 'good deeds' are
its fruit. The existence of pleasant sweet fruit shows evidence to the
soundness of the root which causes that useful fruit to be produced.

Some unbelieving persons may occasionally do some good deeds but that
act will surely not be performed continuously. What is noble and certain
to bring forth good deeds is the Faith that has penetrated the depths of
man's soul and causes him/her to have a feeling of responsibility.

#### 2. The Purified Spouses

It is interesting that the only epithet that is mentioned in this verse
to qualify the Heavenly spouses is the attribute of 'purified'. This is
an indication to the idea that the first and the most important status
of a spouse is 'purity', and all good qualities other than that are
totally out shown by its radiance.

The well-known tradition that is narrated from the holy Prophet (S)
makes this fact even clearer. He has said: **"*****Avoid the green
plants grown over dunghill".*** The Messenger of *Allah* (S) was asked
what he meant by 'the green plants grown over dunghill', and he
answered:

***"It is the beautiful women who have grown up among filthy family
members."*** [^8]

The word /azw-aj / in the plural means mates -or wives -which in the
case of the female sex means husbands. This may mean the faithful wives
of the faithful husbands i.e., women who had been true and faithful
believers in the truth and who had been the wives of the men who were
also believers.

However, the women in Heaven, whether they are 'houri' (angels) or
'human creatures', are purified and clean both from the point of outward
dirt such as: blood, urine, feces, semen, menstruation, postpartal
bleeding, excessive menstruation, dirtiness, and the like; and from the
point of inward dirt such as: bad qualities of character, evil
dispositions like: rancour, grudges, envy, habitual frowning, and the
like of them; and also from the point of some hideous behaviours like:
adultery, fornication, and all kinds of similar vices.

They, having the total aspects and conditions of purification, are clean
from all sorts of corruption and possess purity in its entirety.

Sa'id-ibn-' Amir has narrated a tradition from the holy Prophet (S)
which says:

*"If one of the women of Heaven looks once towards the earth the whole
world will be full of perfume of musk and the radiance of her light will
prevail over the light of the sun and the moon".* [^9]

#### 3. The Material and Spiritual Blessings in Heaven

In many of the verses of the Qur'an the words are about the blessings of
Heaven, bounties such as: gardens beneath which rivers flow, castles,
purified spouses, numerous fruits, loyal and faithful companions, etc.

But, besides these bounties, some other excellent blessings are also
mentioned whose splendour and magnificence is impossible to be estimated
with the worldly criteria that we have.

For example, **Surah At-Taubah. No.9. verse 72** says:

***"Allah has promised to Believers, men and women, Gardens under which
rivers flow, to dwell therein, and beautiful mansions in Gardens of
everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the Good Pleasure of Allah:
that is the supreme felicity."***

And, in **Surah Al-Bayyinah No. 98 verse 8** after mentioning some
material blessings in Heaven, it says:

***"..Allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with
Him..."***

And truly, if a person reaches the position that he feels his Lord;
pleased with him and he is also pleased with Him, he will dismiss all
other pleasures. He will attach only to Him and will think of none else.
This is a spiritual pleasure that cannot be described with any words nor
in any language.

Finally, since the Resurrection has both 'spiritual' and 'physical'
aspects, the bounties in bliss have both of those aspects, too, in order
hat their comprehensiveness be established and everyone, according to
his/her worthiness and eligibility, will enjoy them.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 26
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يَسْتَحْيِي أَن يَضْرِبَ مَثَلاً مَّا بَعُوضَةً
فَمَا فَوْقَهَا فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ فَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهُ
الْحَقُّ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فَيَقُولُونَ
مَاذَا أَرَادَ اللَّهُ بِهَـذَا مَثَلاً يُضِلُّ بِهِ كَثِيراً
وَيَهْدِي بِهِ كَثِيراً وَمَا يُضِلُّ بِهِ إِلاَّ الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**26. "*****Allah does not disdain to set forth the parable even of a
gnat, or anything greater than that. As for those who have Faith, they
know that it is the truth from their Lord. And for those who reject
Faith, they ask*****:** ***'What does Allah mean by this
parable*****?'** ***Thereby He leads many astray and guides many, and He
leads none astray save the transgressors".***

The purpose of a parable is to make the meaning of an abstract idea more
clear and explicit with the help of a material thing in order to assist
the mind in catching the idea through consideration. The more man's
wisdom is dependent on his base understanding, the less vigorous
strength he has to conceive the spirit and reality of things when his
imagination interferes.

That is why that in the Divine Book and in the words of the wise and men
of letters, the essence of meanings are stated in the form of parables
to make complicated concepts plain, hence through a logical thing find a
way to the philosophical.

A 'gnat' is a small insect which is perceptible by the naked eye. Gnat
is mentioned in this verse, perhaps, to show that striking a similitude
between small things or beyond it is not inappropriate for the Glorious
Dignity of the Essence of *Allah,* but to confirm that the proportion of
His Sovereignty is the same over big or small, high or low and, in
general, all are encompassed by His Power and are benefited by His
endless Mercy and Grace.

Furthermore, if we observe carefully, we will see that all the
creatures, whether complex or simple, like a chain, are linked to one
another. They are so interrelated and perform their duties with such
surprising harmony and regularity that it is as if they have formed a
single unit to take part in a general service.

The term 'gnat', in this verse, may refer to the greatness and fairness
that is used in the creation of a gnat, this very small creature.

Concerning this meaning, there is a tradition from Imam al-Sadiq (as)
who said:

"*Verily, Allah (s.w.t.) has set forth a parable of a gnat because He
has created 'gnat', with that small size it has, consisting of all that
He has created in {an elephant' with that bigness it possesses, and He
has added two other limbs (for gnat) in order to stimulate (the
attention of) the believers to notice the delicacy and frailness of His
creation and His wonderful production.* " [^10]

In another occurrence in the Qur'an, He *(s.w.t.)* has said:

**"*****Do they not look at camels, how they are created*****?"**
**(Surah Al-Qashiyah. No. 88. verse 17).**

Upon the importance of the intriguing creation of living creatures,
Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) in one of his sermons has said: *"...How
could it be? Even if all the animals of the earth whether birds or
beasts, stabled cattle or pasturing ones, of different origins and
species, dull people and sagacious men –all jointly try to create (even)
'a gnat' they are not able to bring it into being and do not understand
what is the way to its creation.*

*Their wits are bewildered and wandering. Their powers fall short and
fail, and they return disappointed and tired, knowing that they are
defeated and admitting their inability to produce it, also realizing
that they are too weak (even) to destroy it..."* [^11]

The verse continues saying:

**“...*****As for those who have Faith, they know that it is the truth
from their Lord...*****"**

Those who have believed in Islam and accepted the Word of *Allah* know
that these miraculous statements are issued from the Origin of
revelation. They know quite well that these parables are vivid and
appropriate and are revealed from their Lord.

They conceive the fact in this way because their hearts are empty of
envy, grudges and pride and their souls are the site of the light of
illumination and knowledge.

***"...And for those who reject Faith, they ask: ‘What does Allah mean
by this parable?'..."***

Those who have disbelieved and covered the light of Faith with the
curtain of infidelity have ultimately blinded their own insight. They
have made their ears, which were able to hearken to the Divine Words,
deaf. They, ignorantly or mockingly, inquire that what was *Allah's* aim
by giving this for a similitude that He causes many to err by it and
many He leads aright.

In Tafsir-ut- Tibyan, vol. 1, page 19, Shaykh Tusi says: " It is like
that a speaker asks what Allah means by this parable that thereby some
may be led astray and some be guided. In answer to this question, Allah
says that none will be led astray save the transgressors; but the way is
open to the believers to reach the climax of understanding and
conception with knowledge and true Faith."

### Occasion of the Revelation

When the previous verses, i.e., the verses that say: **"*****The
likeness of them is as the likeness of a man who kindled afire..."***
**and"** ***Or (their) likeness is as a rainstorm from the
heaven...",*** **(2:17,19)** were revealed, the hypocrites said that
*Allah* is much exalted to bring forth these parables. So, to refuse
their guise and statements, it says:

**"*****Allah does not disdain to set forth the parable even of a gnat
or anything greater than that."***

### Explanation

Some commentators have cited their ideas about the verse under
discussion as follows:

The Arabic term / yudillu / means: 'misleading'. Wherever this word is
used in the Qur'an, relating to *Allah,* it means the withdrawal of His
Grace and allowing the individual to have the way of his own choice as a
punishment, consequent to the individual's rejecting the Divine Guidance
voluntarily offered to him.

The Holy Qur'an presents the justification to the frequent metaphorical
expressions in the form of parables, to stimulate the human mind and
heart. The result is obvious: that a healthy mind grasps the Truth
whereas the perverted mind increases its doubts as to what *Allah m*eant
by the parable. Thus the one and the same expression has two opposite
effects.

The right impression is 'guidance' / hidayat / which is assigned to' the
pious' /muttaqin/, and the wrong impression is /dalalat / 'going astray'
which is allotted to the wrong-doers, and pointed out in the next verse.

The two important characteristics of the wrong-doers are: the breach of
the Covenant of *Allah,* after it has been confirmed and /qata'a ma
amarallah / i.e., the severing of the relation or the connection with
what *Allah* has commanded man to establish, and doing things subversive
and harmful to the harmonious life on earth.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 27
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَنقُضُونَ عَهْدَ اللَّهِ مِن بَعْدِ مِيثَاقِهِ
وَيَقْطَعُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللَّهُ بِهِ أَن يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِي
الأَرْضِ أُولَـئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27.** ***"Those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation
and cut asunder what Allah has commanded to be joined, and they make
corruption on the Earth;*** **-** ***they are the losers".***

### The Real Losers!

In the aforementioned verse, the subject was partly based on the
wrong-doers and their mischievous deeds. In this verse, these people are
introduced clearly by three qualities:

Referring to the first quality it says:

***"Those who break the covenant of Allah after its confirmation..."***

Then, it refers to their second quality, saying:

***“...and cut asunder what Allah has commanded to be joined,..."***

Many of the commentators have pointed out that this verse refers
especially to the desertion of kinsfolk and breaking off ties of
relationship. But careful attention to the concept of the verse leads us
to a broader and more general meaning, in which the desertion of
kinsfolk is one of its examples.

The evidence that supports the above idea is that the verse indicates
that the makers of corruption cut the ties that *Allah* has commanded to
remain fixed and firm. These joining ties cover the union of kindred,
meeting of friends, social relationships, connections with the divine
leaders, and relation with *Allah.* Therefore, we should not confine the
meaning of the verse to a single idea alone.

In some Islamic narrations, however, the phrase: 'What *Allah* has
commanded to be joined' is rendered in connection with Amir-ul-
Mu'mineen Imam Ali (as) and the entire Ahlul Bayt, the immaculate, (as).

The third quality of the makers of corruption on the earth, which is
lastly referred to in this verse, is:

***"...and they make corruption on the Earth..."***

It is, of course, evident that they have neglected the path of *Allah*
and disobeyed Him. These disbelievers, who do not observe mercy even
towards their relatives, certainly treat others with cruelty.

They pursue their own pleasures and personal interests. It does not
matter to them where the society may be led. Their central aim is to
increase their profit and to obtain their desires. They do not care if
they must do any wrong or commit any offense to reach their goals. It is
obvious how destructive the result of this kind of thinking and acting
may be in the society.

The Qur'an, at the end of this verse, says:

***“...they are the losers."***

Truly, it is so. What a greater loss than this that a man spends his
entire physical and spiritual capital on the way to the destruction and
disaster of his own life!

What fate can they have save this dreadful one when some people step out
of the circle of obedience to *Allah's* Command to the extent of the
meaning of the term / fisq / ' mischief'?

Mischief, in Islam, is one the most abhored crimes, as the Qur'an says:
**"*****Mischief is more grievous than murder*** **", (2:217).** This is
one of the many indications that Islam stands for peace on earth and
never tolerates anything which disturbs it.

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 41

[^2]: Tauhid-i-Mufaddal (Theism), p. 1, (Persian version).

[^3]: Other meanings of the sky will be dealt with when discussing verse
29 of the current Surah. Explanation about the atmosphere, when
commenting on verse 22, is helpful, too.

[^4]: Nur-uth- Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 41

[^5]: O' dear respected reader of this book! Have you ever thought that
when more than two-thirds of the globe is covered with sea water and if
we consider it twice as much when we use it entirely as ink in order to
write out the science and secrets of the Qur'an, i.e. the word of Allah,
sooner would the doubled oceans of the globe be exhausted than would the
words of Allah, the science and secrets of the Qur'an? Then be careful
when considering how magnificent the Glorious Qur'an is !

[^6]: For details, refer to: 'The Holy Qur'an and the Last Prophet (S)',
pg 147, (Persian version)

[^7]: Tafsir-us-Safi: vol. 1, p. 89, & Tafsir-i-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 70

[^8]: Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 14, p. 19

[^9]: Manhaj-us-Sadiqeen, vol. 1, p. 199

[^10]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn- vol. 1, p. 46, Tradition 65

[^11]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 186


