Section 3
=========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 28-29
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَكُنتُمْ أَمْوَاتاً فَأَحْيَاكُمْ ثُمَّ
يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُم مَّا فِي الأَرْضِ جَمِيعاً ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى
إِلَى السَّمَاء فَسَوَّاهُنَّ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**28.** ***"How can you deny Allah and you were dead and He gave you
life, then He will cause you to die, then again restore you to life, and
unto Him you will be returned?" (Therefore, neither your life nor your
death is in your will; what you have is Allah's.)***  
**29.** ***"It is He Who created for you all that is in the earth; then
turned (His Will) to heaven and fashioned it into seven heavens, for He
is All-Knowing of all things."***

### The Mysterious Bounty of Life!

In these couple of verses, through a series of the Divine blessings and
some of the marvelous phenomena of creation, the Holy Qur'an attracts
man's attention to the Lord of the world and His Magnificent
Sovereignty. It very clearly completes the undisputable evidence set
forth for the acknowledgment of *Allah's* Omnipotence that was
previously cited in verses 21 and 22.

It must be remembered that the correct conception of *Allah* is the
basic need for proper faith. This faith serves as guidance from the main
generative source (*Allah*) for the whole system of religion.

The most practical method of acquiring this basic knowledge about the
existence of the Essence of *Allah* is to carefully observe and
thoughtfully reflect on the creation which is before our own eyes.

This is a point that nobody can deny or express any doubt about. This
method is repeatedly impressed and demanded in the Holy Qur'an. The
course adopted in the Holy Qur'an to educate man is the most scientific
and the most modern one, i.e. of proceeding from the concrete to the
abstract.

At first it inquires:

**"*****How can you deny Allah and you were dead and He gave you
life..."***

The Qur'an reminds all individuals that formerly they were inanimate
like the pieces of stone, wood, and the like of them. The water of life
had not been poured on you and the breeze of vitality had not blown
through the garden of your being to open the blossom of your lifetime in
the realm of your entity.

Now, you are gifted with the bounty of life and you are actually living.
Numerous organs and limbs, and various integral systems of sensing to
form conceptions are bestowed upon you. Who has given you this very
blessing of life and being? Did you yourself give it to your own self?

It is clear that every rational person will unhesitately confess that
this blessing is not from his own origin, but it has come from a
knowing, mighty source, the *One* Who knows all its secrets and its
complicated arrangements; and Who is able to design it totally. In this
case there will arise the question of why you deny the ***One Who*** has
granted you life.

Today, it has been proven by the scientists of the world that there is
not anything more complicated than the phenomenon of life. Man has
surprisingly gained a great deal of successful progress in the field of
science, in general, and experimental natural science, in particular,
but the secret of the riddle of life has not been uncovered yet.

This subject is so mysterious that it has remained inexplicable for
millions of learned individuals whose thoughts and efforts have been
left fruitless in conceiving it. Possibly, in the future, under the
light of further scientific development, man will gradually become more
acquainted with the secrets of life.

But the main question is: Can anybody ascribe such an extraordinarily
delicate and precise phenomenon, which is full of mysteries and is in
need of superior knowledge and power for itself, to the irrational
nature, which itself does not have 'life' from its own ?

That is why we say the phenomenon of life, in the world of nature, is
the greatest evidence for the affirmation of the existence of *Allah*
about which abundant books have been compiled. The Qur'an, in the above
verse, emphasizes on the very matter, too.

After the citation of this bounty, it refers to another vivid example,
i.e., the phenomenon of death. It says:

***"...then He will cause you to die..."***

Everybody usually sees that his relatives, kinsfolk, acquaintances,
companions, and friends die one after another, and their lifeless bodies
are buried in the soil.

This actual circumstance is also a station of contemplation: Who took
their beings from them? If their beings were theirs by themselves, they
would be eternal. When it is taken from them, it is further proof that
life is bestowed upon them by someone else.

True, the ' Bestower of life' is the' Bestower of death', as the Qur'an
says:

**"*****He Who created Death and Life, that He may try which of you is
best in deed...*****", (SurAl-Mulk, No. 67. verse No 2).**

The Qur'an, after providing these two clear statements as proof for the
Essence *of Allah* in order to make the soul of man disposed to grasp
other problems, refers to the subject of Resurrection and being restored
to life after death. It says:

***"...then again restore you to life..."***

This phenomenon of life after death, indeed, is not so surprising
because it is not unfamiliar and man has formerly seen the same
situation in nature.

Therefore, regarding the first statement, viz. 'the enlivening of the
inanimate', the acceptance of raising the dead after the decomposition
of the body, it is not so difficult, but it is easier than the first
time He created man; (although the easiness and hardness is meaningless
for the Essence Whose Power is infinite).

It is odd that there have been some people who have been doubtful about
man's life after death. They believe that the first life has originated
from some inanimate things.

It is interesting that the above verse has made everything, from the
beginning to the end, manifest before the eyes of man. In a short
argument, it has expressed the advent of life to its last point in this,
world, death, and then the Resurrection is illustrated for him.

The objective meaning of the phrase ***"Unto Him you will be
returned"*** is returning to *Allah's* blessings; that is, you will
return to the blessings of *Allah* in the Hereafter. The witness to this
meaning is **Surah Al-'An'am. No.6. Verse 36** which says:

**“...*****As to the dead,*** **Allah** ***will raise them up; then will
they be turned unto Him".***

The objective of ***"Unto Him you will be returned"*** may be a reality
more delicate and fragile than that. It is to say that: all creatures,
in the process of development, begin from the station of non-existence,
the zero point, and go forth towards 'infinite', which is the Pure
Essence of *Allah.*

Thus, the path of development does not end with death, but, in the
Hereafter, man will continue his life again, miserably, or prosperously
with a higher standard of living to pave the path of his further
development.

### Conclusion

The Arabic term / kuntum /, (the second person plural), applied in the
above verse, may address the human ego which was not as it is now as a
conscious entity. The previous state is termed as 'being dead', brought
into the present conscious state, by *Allah's* means of 'enlivening'.

The departure of the conscious self from the body is termed death
appointed by *Allah.* The state of the human cognitive self, after its
departure from the body, is termed as the 'enlivening' and from that
state proceeding to the other states, up to the Infinite point of the
return to *Allah.*

This shows that once our life begins; there is no reversion or
regression. It is the continuous process from one state to the next,
dying from the previous state and entering life into the succeeding one.
Be the succeeding state pleasant or painful, it is the evolutionary
consequence of the preceding state.

Also, this single verse alone denotes the continuous evolutionary
transformation and the transcendence of a conscious human entity up to
the communion with the Infinite, not in the sense of annihilation or the
absorption of the finite into the infinite, but in the sense of the
realization of the fact that nothing is real but the One, the Cause of
all causes: the Essence of *Allah,* the Exalted.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

After mentioning the blessing of life and pointing to the' Origin and
End', it refers to another Divine bounty from among the immense bounties
of *Allah.* It says:

***"It is He Who created for you all that is in the earth..."***

In this manner, it specifies the worthiness of the existence of man and
his high mastership over all beings in the earth. It is just this very
matter that clarifies for us that *Allah* has created Man for a very
worthy and magnificent affair.

It is so important, that everything in the world is created for him!
What is he created for? Yes, he is the most excellent being in the world
of existence and the worthiest of all. A partial explanation will also
be provided when commenting on verses 30-33 of the current Surah.

It is not this verse alone that defines the majestic position of Man but
there are also abundant verses in the Holy Qur'an that reveal the same
and introduce Man as the main goal of the whole world of creation; for
example:

***"And He has subjected to you, as from Him, all that is in the heavens
and on the earth:...",*** **(Surah -Al-Jathiyah. No. 45 verse 13).**

Some further instances from the verses of the Holy Qur'an are as
follows:

***"...Who hath made the ships subject to you,..."*** **(14: 32).**

***"...And the rivers (also) hath He made subject to you..."*** **( 14:
32).**

***"...And the Night and the Day hath He also made subject to you."***
**(14: 33).**

***"It is Allah Who has subjected the sea to you,...",*** **( 45: 12).**

***"And He hath made subject to you the sun and the moon,...",***
**(Surah Ebrahim. No.14. verse 33).**

On this subject, we will have some explanations later, too, when
commenting upon Surah Ar-Ra'd, No.13, verse 2, and Surah Ebrahim No.14,
verses 32 and 33.

Again, it turns to the concept of monotheism and says:

***"...then turned (His Will) to heaven and fashioned it into seven
heavens; for He is All-knowing of all things."***

### The Seven Firmaments

The word / sama /*,* as oppose to /*'* ard / 'the earth', in the lexicon
means: 'to be lofty, upward'. This is a collective meaning which
encompasses numerous concepts, in which some of the dimensions were
formerly mentioned. [^1]

But what is the objective meaning of the phrase 'seven heavens' here?
The Islamic scholars and the commentators of the Holy Qur'an have
offered different arguments on the subject, but the important idea,
which seems to be the most correct is that the purpose of 'seven
heavens' is its very actual meaning of 'seven firmaments'.

Yet, from the verses of the Qur'an, it is understood that the whole of
celestial bodies: planets and fixed stars that we can see, are totally
in the first heaven, and there are six other heavens that are not
visible to us and even our modem scientific equipment are not able to
show them. Therefore, there are, on the whole, seven firmaments which
make up the very 'seven heavens'. [^2]

The evidence to this statement is the words of the Qur'an where it says:

***"...And We adorned the lower heaven with lights'..."*** **(Surah
Al-Fussilat, No.41. Verse 12)**

In another occurrence it says:

***"We have indeed decked the lower heaven with beauty (in) the
stars..."*** **(Surah As-Saffat, No.37. Verse 6)**

These verses clearly indicate that what we see in the sky, which are
generally called stars, are completely located in the first heaven.
Beyond this heaven, there are six other heavens about whose details we
do not have any exact data at present.

The reason why we said that there are six other heavens which are
unknown to us yet, and science may realize them in the future, is that
human knowledge is still incomplete. The more developed it becomes, the
more new surprising facts about the creation it discovers.

For instance, the science of astronomy has now reached a point where
earthly telescopes are incompetent and satellites equipped with powerful
radars and specific means for the purpose, are utilized instead.

What the great astronomical observatories and the modern equipment with
the help of spacecrafts and scientific excavations have discovered, in
the Arc of Descent, is a distance as far as about one thousand million
(a billion) light years away from us wherein they have discovered
innumerable solar systems other than ours.

The astronomers themselves have confessed that this is just the
beginning of the way of the world, not the end of it, and the discovery
of further such systems is yet expected with the successful invention of
or the enhanced structure of stronger telescopes or more advanced means
of celestial excavations.

Therefore, there is no doubt that, in the future, with the further
progress in astronomy and science, other galaxies and firmaments, or the
like, might be discovered.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 30-33
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْفِكُ الدِّمَاء وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ
قَالَ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمَاء كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَضَهُمْ عَلَى
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ فَقَالَ أَنبِئُونِي بِأَسْمَاء هَـؤُلاء إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُواْ سُبْحَانَكَ لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَا إِلاَّ مَا عَلَّمْتَنَا إِنَّكَ
أَنتَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا آدَمُ أَنبِئْهُم بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ فَلَمَّا أَنبَأَهُمْ
بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَأَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَمَا كُنتُمْ
تَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**30. "*****When your Lord said to the angels: ‘I am appointing on the
earth a deputy', they said: ‘Will you place therein one who will make
mischief therein and shed blood, -while we celebrate Your Praise and
extol Your Holiness?' He said: surely I know what you know not'."***  
**31*****. "And He taught Adam all the names, then He presented them
before the angels, and said: 'Tell Me the names of these if you are
right'."***  
**32*****. " They said: ‘Glory be to You! of knowledge we have naught
save what you have taught us. Surely, you (alone) are the All-Knowing,
the All-Wise'."***  
**33*****. " He said: ‘O*****'** ***Adam, tell them their names'. And
when he had told them their names, He said: 'Did I not say unto you that
I surely know the unseen things of the heavens and the earth, and (that)
I know what you reveal and what you were hiding*****?"**

### Man, Allah's Deputy on Earth!

Through the previous verses we have understood that *Allah* has created
all the endowments on the earth for Man, whereas in these verses the
leadership and vicegerency of Man is formally proclaimed. Thus, here,
Man's spiritual rank and worthiness of all these merits, are exposed.

In these verses, which begin from verse No.30 and end with verse 39, the
creation of Adam (the first human) is referred to and the following
three fundamental subjects are set forth:

1. *Allah* informs the angels about man's vicegerency on the earth and
their questioning of Him.

2. Angels are commanded to prostrate before the first human, Adam. This
situation is referred to in numerous verses in the Holy Qur'an
concerning different circumstances.

3. The illustration of the situation of Adam and his life in Heaven and
the events causing him to be sent out from Heaven, and then, his
repentance and the order that he and his children were to live on the
earth, are pointed out.

The verses under discussion speak about the first stage. It was His
Will, so He created a being on the earth to be His vicegerent. The
attributes of this deputy would be a reflection from the rays of *Allah*
Attributes, and his position somehow higher than that of the angels.

It was His Will that the earth and all its endowments, i.e. forces,
treasures, mines, and all its potentials be subjected to the will of
such a human being.

Such a being must have a vast share of wisdom, intelligence, conception
and a special capacity so that he can undertake the leadership and
mastership of the earthly beings.

Therefore, in the first verse, it says:

**"*****When your Lord said to the angels:***

**'I** ***am appointing on the earth a deputy*** **'..."**

According to what the leading Islamic scholars and learned men, and
experts in , have said, the objective meaning of 'khalifah' (deputy) is
the divine vicegerent on the earth, because the question which the
angels asked later, - saying that the human race may make mischief and
shed blood on the earth while they (the angels) celebrate His Praise,-
reinforces this very meaning, that *Allah* vicegerency on the earth is
incompatible with these deeds.

Also, teaching the names to Adam, whose explanation you will read in the
following verses, is good evidence supporting this claim. Again, the
angels' humility and veneration before Adam is another witness to this
idea.

However, *Allah* was pleased to create a being above all the creatures
of the universe, the best creation, appropriate for being a Divine
vicegerent, *Allah's* Deputy on the Earth.

Commenting on these verses, Imam al-Sadiq (as) in a tradition has
referred to the same meaning and said that the angels, after recognizing
the position of Adam, realized that he and his children deserved to be
the deputies of *Allah* on the earth and serve as His guidance among
peoples. [^3]

Then, in the current verse, the angels put forth a question, in order to
understand the reality and not to protest, as it says:

***"...they said: 'Will You place therein one who will make mischief
therein and shed blood,"***

***"...'while we celebrate Your Praise and extol Your
Holiness?'...*****"**

But, here in this verse, *'Allah's* answer to them is a complicated
reply whose details will be given in later verses.

***"...He said:*** **'*****Assuredly I know what you know not*** **'"**

As it is realized from their words, the angels had comprehended that
this human was not a docile one: he makes mischief, sheds blood, does
wrong, etc. But how did they know it?

It is sometimes said that *Allah* had previously told the angels the
future of Man in brief, while some others have cited that maybe the
angels had comprehended the idea themselves from the term / fil'ard /
(on the earth).

They knew that Man would be created from soil; and, because of the
complexity of 'matter', naturally it is the center of conflict and
difficulties. For, this limited world of matter cannot satiate the
avaricious nature of human beings, even if the whole world were given to
a single one, he would not be satisfied.

This status can sometimes be the main cause of mischief and bloodshed
particularly when there is not enough sense of responsibility.

Some of the other commentators believe that the predication of the
angels resulted from the fact that Adam was not the first human creature
on the earth, but, before him, there had also been some other humans who
had lived on the earth and had committed corruption and shed blood. This
bad record caused the angels' suspicion about Adam and his descendants.

These three commentaries are not so contradictory to one another; viz,
they, comprehensively, may have caused the attention of the angels to be
attracted towards this subject.

And, incidentally, this fact that they expressed was never denied by
their Lord in His answer to them, but, besides this fact, He pointed out
that there were some other more important facts about man and his
capabilities that the angels did not know.

They thought that if the purpose were only for worshipping and
servitude, they would be the best examples, because they were always
praising Him and were the most appropriate ones for being the
vicegerents!

They did not consider that when lusts, wrath and various desires have no
chance to influence on their behaviours and selves, their worshipping is
different from the servitude and worshipping of Man whose lusts and
desires have surrounded him and Satan's temptations attack him from
every side.

What a long distance there is between the obedience of this feeble being
and the adoration of those holy and pure angels!

They did not know that in the seed of Adam there would come such great
prophets as Mohammad (S), Abraham (as), Noah (as), Moses (as), Jesus
(as), and some Imams as the twelve sinless Imams (Ahlul Bayt) (as) in
addition to many pious believers, martyrs, and a great many men and
women who lovingly donated the whole of their properties in the way of
*Allah.*

There would be some off springs of Adam whose one hour of contemplation
is equal to years of worshipping of the angels.

It is noteworthy that the angels emphasized on three aspects about their
characteristics: / tasbih / (glorification), / hamd / (praise, eulogy)
and / taqdis / (sanctification). Undoubtedly, both the first and the
second mean: celebrating His Praises and knowing Him and His Glory
absolutely pure and perfect, free from any impurity or imperfection or
from anything derogatory.

But what is the main objective meaning of / taqdis / 'sanctification'?
Some have considered it as the purification of *Allah* from any
imperfection which is, in fact, an emphasis again on the very meaning of
/ tasbih / 'glorification'.

Some others believe that the term / taqdis / is derived from the root /
quds / which means: 'to purify the earth from the wicked and
corruptors', or 'to purify oneself from anything bad, evil and immoral
in order to clarify the soul and body for the sake of *Allah’.*

They have considered the term / laka / (for you) in the phrase /
nuqaddisu-laka /, we extol Your Holiness (for you)', as its witness. The
angels did not say: 'we extol You', but they meant to say: 'we purify
ourselves and assist those who obey You, for You, or towards You'.

In fact, they wanted to say: if the purpose is obedience and servitude,
they are obedient; and if it is worship, they are always busy doing it;
and if the purpose is the purification of themselves or throughout the
expanse of the earth, they are doing that too. But this matter-made
human is both immoral, himself, and makes mischief on the earth.

To clarify the facts completely for the angels. He set them on trial in
order that they themselves might confess that there was a great
difference between them and Adam.

### Angels on Trial

Adam, being given effective faculties by Divine favour, had an
extraordinary receptive potential for the facts of the world of being,
and as the Qur'an says:

***" And He taught Adam all the names,..."***

The commentators, from the point of view of their various styles of ,
have delivered different ideas on the phrase 'teaching names', but it is
certain that its aim is not that of teaching some insignificant words or
meaningless 'names', because this could not be counted an honour for
Adam. The aim is teaching the nature of these names and the concepts and
the things that they refer to.

Of course, this acknowledgement of the nature and the facts of the world
of creation and the secrets of the world of being with its different
properties in different creatures was a great honour for Adam.

It is narrated in a tradition that Imam al-Sadiq (as) was asked about
the meaning of this verse and he (as) said:

*" The purpose (of names) is: lands, mountains, valleys, riverbeds (and
on the whole, all things). Then he looked at the rug under him and said
that even that rug was among the things He taught Adam."* [^4]

Therefore 'teaching names' has not been something like teaching words
but it refers to the philosophy and secrets of the properties and
qualities of things. He taught Adam this knowledge in order that he
could use the merits and advantages of this world alongside the path of
his development towards perfection.

He *(s.w.t.)* also taught him the capacity of language learning and the
skill of writing with its proper application to be able to nominate
objects and whenever he needs them, instead of showing them, he merely
calls their names.

This is a very great bounty of the Lord bestowed on man. We can
comprehend the importance of this subject when we observe that what
modern science and human beings have is under the shade of the existence
of language and writing.

All the scientific and cultural, historical ancient records have been
kept and preserved as treasures in man's written collections generation
after generation. If he could not use language and pen, it would be
impossible for him to convey the knowledge and experimental data from
old generations to the recent nations and the coming ones.

***"...then He presented them before the angels, and said: 'Tell Me the
names of these if you are right'."***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

But the angels, who were in lack of such knowledge, failed in that trial
and could, not pass the divine examination successfully. So, their
response to Him was such:

**"*****They said: ‘Glory be to You! Of knowledge we have naught save
what You have taught us...*****"**

***"...Surely, You (alone) are the All-Knowing, the All-Wise".***

They said that they did not know anything regarding this matter and
their question was simply because of their lack of knowledge. They were
unaware of the capacity and wonderful power of Adam (as), his God-given
endowment.

It was a great privilege to him above the angels. They accepted that
Adam (as) really deserved to be the vicegerent of *Allah* on the earth
and in the world of all beings, where without him, the whole creation
would remain incomplete.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then, it was Adam's turn, by the command of *Allah* and in the presence
of angels to speak and explain the names and secrets of beings in His
creation along with the insight to the knowledge of the realities or the
latent properties or the hidden native endowments in each of them.

***"He said: ‘O Adam, tell them their names’..."***

***"...And when he had told them their names, He said: 'Did I not say
unto you that I surely know the unseen things of heavens and the earth,
and (that) I know what you reveal and what you were hiding ?' "***

*Allah,* having the knowledge of all the hidden things of the heavens
and the earth, knew also what the angels did hide in their imaginations,
which was that they deemed themselves more deserving of the high office
of being the Deputy of *Allah* among His creation. This belief of the
angels made them inquire into the Divine Will about Adam's being the
vicegerent.

But when Adam (as) spoke and the angels observed that surprising glory
in him, they respected Adam for the vast knowledge and immense
information and worthiness that radiated from him. Thus, it was made
clear for them that it was only Adam (as) who was apt enough to be His
deputy on the Earth.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 34-36
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ اسْجُدُواْ لآدَمَ فَسَجَدُواْ إِلاَّ
إِبْلِيسَ أَبَى وَاسْتَكْبَرَ وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْنَا يَا آدَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنتَ وَزَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَكُلاَ
مِنْهَا رَغَداً حَيْثُ شِئْتُمَا وَلاَ تَقْرَبَا هَـذِهِ الشَّجَرَةَ
فَتَكُونَا مِنَ الْظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَزَلَّهُمَا الشَّيْطَانُ عَنْهَا فَأَخْرَجَهُمَا مِمَّا كَانَا
فِيهِ وَقُلْنَا اهْبِطُواْ بَعْضُكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ عَدُوٌّ وَلَكُمْ فِي
الأَرْضِ مُسْتَقَرٌّ وَمَتَاعٌ إِلَى حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**34.** ***"And when We said to the angels: ‘Prostrate yourselves before
Adam.' They all prostrated themselves except Iblis; he refused and was
full of pride, and so he became one of the infidels."***  
**35.** ***"And We said: ‘O' Adam, dwell you and your spouse in the
Garden and eat of the plentiful therein (both of you) wherever you
desire, but do not approach this tree, lest you become one of the
unjust'."***  
**36.** ***"But Satan caused them to fall there from, and brought them
out from the state (of felicity) in which they had been. And We said:
‘Get down all of you, and be enemies one of another, and for you on the
earth will be your dwelling place and your means of livelihood for a
time'."***

### Adam in the Garden

In the former statements, the high rank and glory of Man was discussed.
Now, in these verses, another aspect of the subject is dealt with. At
first, to call upon our minds, the Qur'an says:

***"And when We said to the angels: Prostrate yourselves before Adam.,
They all prostrated themselves except lblis; he refused and was full of
pride,..."***

Yes, he was proud and it was for this very pride that he became one of
the unbelievers:

***"...and so he became one of the infidels…"***

It should be noted that the above verse is the most valid piece of
evidence and a vivid witness to the magnificence and nobility of Man
whom, after his being created, all the angels were commissioned to make
obeisance and pay homage to, and bow before that splendid creation.

He was really appropriate for the position of being the divine deputy
and His vicegerent on the earth. This one, who had such a high glorious
rank, that was apt to bring up, from his seed, some refined and
respectful children, some of whom would be prophets, was worthy of such
obeisance and honour.

You may consider the position of an ordinary learned person who knows
some definite formulas in a branch of science, and think of how
immensely we respect him. Then, the position of Adam with all of his
glory and vast knowledge about the world of being is obvious.

### Explanations

#### Why did Iblis Disobey?

We know that 'satan' is a common noun that envelops both the first Satan
and all other satans. But, ' Iblis ' is a proper noun which refers to
the same one that tempted Adam (as).

According to the verses of the Qur'an, Iblis was not of the same nature
as the angels, but he was from a different genus i.e. of the Jinn, of
the nature of matter, who had been assembled among the angels. One of
the verses wherein Iblis is spoken of as a Jinn is as follows:

***"And when said We unto the angels: 'Prostrate ye unto Adam ': then
they (all) prostrated but Iblis, he was of Jinn...",*** **(Surah Kahf.
No.18. Verse 50).**

His motive in this disobedience was pride and a special bigotry which
had dominated his behaviour. He imagined that he was superior to Adam
(as) and he should not have been ordered to prostrate himself before him
(as). He thought Adam should prostrate before him. The explanation of
this idea will be discussed later, in comments referring to **Surah
Al-A'raf. No.7. Verse12.**

The cause of his blasphemy was also that he considered the wise command
of *Allah* rather inappropriate. He not only disobeyed practically, but
also protested theoretically. Thus, his pride and self-conceit annulled
a life-time of his worshipping and rendered it worthless! Beware; pride
has many effects of 'this kind'!

The phrase: ***"...so he became one of the infidels"*** shows that
before this command, too, he had changed his path from the path of
angels and obeying the command of *Allah,* and had had ideas resulting
from pride in mind.

Perhaps, he had told himself that if the order of obeisance were given
to him, he would certainly never obey it. The phrase: ***"...what you
conceal"***, in verse 33, may hint to this meaning. This idea is also
referred to in a tradition from Imam Hassan 'Askari, the eleventh Imam
(as), cited in Tafsir-ul-Qummi. [^5]

#### Was the Prostration for Allah or for Adam?

There is no doubt that / sajdah / or a formulated prostration with the
purpose of worshipping is deserved by none *but Allah* alone and the
meaning of 'Unity of Worship' means the same: that we worship and make
obeisance to none else other than *Allah,* or it will be 'shirk', (i.e.
associating the object with *Allah).*

Therefore, it is beyond doubt that the infallible beings like the angels
prostrated themselves for *Allah,* but it was for the creation of such a
splendid being, Adam, that they obeyed Him by prostrating. Or, if they
prostrated for Adam, their prostration was a kind of 'obeisance' not an
act of worshipping.

In the book' 'Uyun-ul-Akhbar' by Shaykh al-Saduq, it is cited that Imam
Ali ibn Musa ar-Rida (as) said:

"*The angels' prostration was for the adoration of worshipping Allah, on
one side, and for the obeisance and respect of Adam* (as)*, on the other
side, because we (Ahlul Bayt) were in his seed."* [^6]

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

However, after that episode with Iblis and the trial of the angels, Adam
was ordered that he and his spouse ought to abide in Paradise:

**"*****And We said: ‘O*****'** ***Adam, dwell you and your spouse in
the Garden and eat of the plentiful therein (both of you) wherever you
desire, but do not approach this tree, lest you become one of the
unjust*****'."**

It is understood from the verses of the Holy Qur'an that Adam (as) was
created to live on the earth, this very terrestrial globe, but, at the
beginning He had temporarily placed him (and his wife) in a beautiful
and prosperous Garden, bountiful with blessings and free from any
trouble and incommodity.

This arrangement occurred, maybe, because Adam was not acquainted with
the process of living on the earth. It was difficult for him to tolerate
immediately all the troubles therein.

Therefore, at first, he was to obtain some more information about the
kind of life to expect on the earth, and hence, it stood to reason that
he should remain for a length of time in the Garden and learn the
necessary skills there in order to find out that life on earth is
accompanied with accepting some responsibilities and performing some
duties whose accomplishments would bring his felicity, development and
continuity of blessings, whereas, their refusal would cause him to be
involved with pain and hardship.

Also, he must know that although he has been created free, this freedom
is limited. He cannot do whatever he wishes, but he must do without some
of the things existing in this world for his own good.

And again, he need know that it is not so that if he does a wrong or an
err all the doors of felicity and happiness will be closed to him. He
can return and repent and promise not to do anything against the order
of *Allah,* and in such a case, when his repentance is accepted, he will
return to the divine blessings.

Adam (as) had to remain in that environment to gain some experience in
order to be able to recognize his friend and his enemy, to learn how to
live on the earth. Yes, there were a series of skills which were
necessary for him to learn before stepping onto the earth.

Those were the things that both Adam (as) and his children needed for
their future lives. Hence, the one who was created to be the vicegerent
of *Allah* on the earth might stay in the Garden, perhaps, so that some
instructions could be given to him for his information and practical
use.

The following enlightening paragraph cited in Almizan upon the idea may
also be mentioned here.

"It should not be overlooked that even when *Allah* pardoned them (the
couple) after their repentance, He did not return them to the
Garden -they were sent down to the earth to live therein.

If their eating of the tree, the coveting of their private parts and the
life of this world were not a confirmed divine plan, and an irrevocable
predetermined decree, they would have been returned to their place in
the Garden as soon as they were forgiven for their mistake.

In short, it was the divine plan that they should spend some time in the
Garden to get them prepared for the life in this world; and their
removal from the Garden, according to the causal relation decreed by
*Allah,* was caused by their eating from the forbidden tree and becoming
aware of their nakedness, and this happened because they listened to the
whispering of Satan." [^7]

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Adam found himself in a position that it was best for him to follow the
instruction of *Allah* about restraining from eating of the forbidden
tree. The whisperer, Satan, had sworn to be busy whispering and making
Adam (as) and his children stray.

As some other verses of the Qur'an indicate, Satan assured Adam (as)
that if he and his wife ate from that tree they would become angels and
would live in the Garden forever. Satan even swore to them both that he
was their sincere adviser:

***"...Most surely I am a sincere adviser to you",*** **(Surah Al-A'raf.
No.7. verse 21).**

**"*****But Satan caused them to fall there from, and brought them out
from the state (of felicity) in which they had been...*****"**

Yes, they were removed from the Garden where they had been in ease and
tranquility, far from any pain and trouble. This event took place as the
direct result of the effect of Satan's deceit.

Then the Qur'an says: ***"...And We said: "Get down all of you, and be
enemies one of another...".*** In this enmity, Satan was on one side,
and Adam (as) and his wife were on the other side.

***"...and for you on the earth will be your dwelling place and your
means of livelihood for a time'."***

It was at this time that Adam (as) realized that he had really done
injustice to himself, because he was removed from the Garden for his
submission to the whispers of Satan, and was to sojourn in a place full
of pain, toil, and trouble.

True that Adam (as) was a prophet and was immaculate, but, as we will
discuss later, if a prophet commits an err; *Allah* will react severely
towards him as if an ordinary person had committed it. It is the same
for the ordinary people when they commit sins.

#### The Heavy Forfeit Paid by Adam

The Late Allamah Tabatabaie pointed out his point of view about this
subject concerning Adam (as) and his spouse as follows:

"The injustice or wrong that they had done was against their own selves;
it was neither a sin (as this term is used in the Shari'ah) nor an
injustice against *Al1ah.* It shows that the prohibition was in the
nature of advice, pointing out to them what was good for their own
comfort; it did not have the force of an ordained law.

Adam and his wife did wrong to themselves, because their disregard for
that divine advice caused their removal from the Garden.

When a man commits a sin (i.e. offence, from the Shari'ah point of
view), he is given a punishment. Then if he repents and his repentance
is accepted, the punishment is completely removed, and he is returned to
his previous position as though he had not committed the sin at all.

If Adam (as) and his wife were guilty of such a sin, they should have
been returned to their place in the Garden soon after their repentance
was accepted. But it was not done. It clearly shows that the prohibition
did not have the force of an ordained law; it was only advice.

Even so, neglecting it had its natural effect on both of them and they
had to leave the Garden. But this removal from the Garden was not a
punishment for any sin or crime; it was the natural consequence of the
wrong they had done against their own selves." [^8]

For a more detailed explanation about the subject, an expressive
narration from Hazrat Rida, the eighth Imam (as), mentioned in
'Uyun-ul-'Akhbar, p. 108 & 109 which is also referred to in
Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 11, pp. 78 & 104, can be studied, as well as
another one on p. 156 from Imam Baqir (as). Muhammad Jawad Muqniyyah, in
his well-known: At Tafsir-ul-Kashif, vol. 1, pp. 84-86 has also cited
some considerable details upon the matter. All of these references can
surely be helpful in clarification of the meaning.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verses 37-39
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَلَقَّى آدَمُ مِن رَّبِّهِ كَلِمَاتٍ فَتَابَ عَلَيْهِ إِنَّهُ هُوَ
التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا اهْبِطُواْ مِنْهَا جَمِيعاً فَإِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُم مِّنِّي
هُدًى فَمَن تَبِعَ هُدَايَ فَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرواْ وَكَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا أُولَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**37.** ***"Then Adam received (certain) words from his Lord. And He
turned towards him (mercifully). Truly He is Oft-Pardoning, the Most
Merciful."***  
***38. "We said: ‘Get you down from it, all together; until there shall
come to you a guidance from Me, for whoever follows My guidance, no fear
shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve’."***  
**39.** ***"But those who reject Faith and deny Our Signs, they are the
inhabitants of the Fire, dwelling therein forever."***

### Adam's Return to Allah

After the temptation of Iblis and the removal of Adam from the Garden,
Adam realized that he had truly done injustice to himself when he was
removed from that quiet environment full of bounties as a result of the
temptation of Iblis and was placed on the earth, a grievous environment
full of toil and pain. At this time, Adam thought of compensation for
his mistake and earnestly attended to the Lord with his whole heart and
soul, but with a great deal of regret and penitence.

At the same time, the Mercy of *Allah* was bestowed on him with 'some
effective words' by the means of which Adam repented and He accepted his
repentance mercifully; as the Qur'an says:

***"Then Adam received (certain) words from his Lord..."***

***“...And He turned towards him (mercifully)..."***

It did happen because:

***"...Truly He is Oft-Pardoning, the Most Merciful."***

The term / taubah / originally means: ‘to return’. In the statements of
the Qur'an, it means: 'to return from sin'. This meaning is applied when
it refers to a sinful person. But, sometimes, the term is used when
concerning *Allah.*

In this case, it means 'to return to His Mercy'; that is, the mercy
which a person was deprived of because of committing sin. When a sinful
one returns to the path of obedience and worship, He returns that Mercy
to him/her, too. That is why the Lord is attributed as 'Oft-Returning',
too.

By the way, it should be noted that the Arabic word / taubah /, which is
generally understood as 'repentance', does not imply the mere utterance
of any verbal prayers. It demands a real and active change in the
behavior as well as the active attitude of the individual towards the
purity of his/her life.

It demands a moral conversion with a strong and definite determination
on the part of the repenting individual, never again to return to the
mistake or the wrong that had been committed before.

In other words, the term / taubah / 'repentance' is a word commonly used
both for *Allah* and His servants. When it is used for the servants of
*Allah,* it means that 'they have returned to their Lord', because any
sinner, in fact, has abandoned his Lord, and when the servant repents,
he/she returns to Him.

When servants fail to obey their Lord, it seems that they cause Him,
also, to turn away from them. When *Allah* is attributed with / taubah
/, it means that He returns His Mercy and Favour to them.

It is true that Adam, indeed, did not do any unlawful thing against the
Lord, but that very mistake was counted a. ***'a comparative wrong'***
regarding him. Adam (as) immediately felt his condition and returned to
his Lord. He repented by the means of the 'words' he received, and his
repentance was accepted. But what the nature of the 'words' was will be
discussed separately under the title of' Explanation’.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Anyhow, Adam's repentance was accepted but not abstaining from the use
of the fruit of the prohibited tree which had a potential innate effect
ultimately resulted in the form of his settlement on the earth. This
consequence remained unchanged for the couple, as the above verses say:

***"We said: ‘Get you down from it, all together; until there shall come
to you a guidance from Me, for whoever follows My guidance, no fear
shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve'. "***

***"But those who reject Faith and deny Our Signs, they are the
inhabitants of the Fire, dwelling therein forever."***

### Explanation: The ' Words' Adam (as) Learnt from the Lord

Commentators have cited different ideas commenting on the quality and
the meaning of the ***'words'*** that *Allah* taught Adam (as).

Mere common sense suggests that what was bestowed upon Adam by the
All-Knowing, All-Merciful Lord could not have been anything of an
ordinary prayer. It must have been something very special or
extraordinary which the All-Merciful Himself bestowed upon him by means
of which Adam (as) or anyone could unfailingly invoke the Mercy of the
Lord after having displeased Him.

It is popularly accepted that the 'words' were the same words and
meanings revealed in **Surah Al-'A'raf. No.7. Verse 23** thus:

***"They said: ‘Our Lord! We have wronged our own souls: if Thou forgive
us not and bestow not upon us Thy Mercy, we shall certainly be
lost’."***

A group of commentators have said that the purpose of the 'words' might
have been this invocation:

*"O' Lord! There is no deity but You! Glory be to You, and Yours is the
Praise! O' my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul! Do Thou then forgive
me! For Thou art the Best of those who forgive". Or, "...And have mercy
upon me: for Thou art the Best of those who show mercy!" Or "...And turn
unto me (in Mercy); for Thou art verily the Oft-Returning, Most
Merciful!"*

This idea has been cited in a tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as),
the fifth Imam. [^9]

Some phrases similar to the above ones have occurred in the Qur'an. For
example, Jonah (Yunus) (as), asking *Allah* to forgive him, says:
***"...Glory to Thee: I was indeed wrong!"*** **(Surah Al-.Anbiya.
No.21. verse 87).** And, about Moses (as), the Qur'an says:

***"He prayed: ‘O' my Lord! I have indeed wronged my soul! Do Thou then
forgive me! 'So (Allah) forgave him..."*** **(Surah Al-Qasas No.28.
verse 16).**

Many Islamic traditions narrated from Ahlul Bayt (as), such as
Tafsir-i-Durrul-Manthur, denote that the objective meaning of the
'words' taught to Adam (as) by Allah was the holy names of the Holy
Five; viz: the holy Prophet Muhammad (S), his cousin and son-in-law
Hazrat Ali, his daughter Fatimah, and his sons (i.e. grandsons) Hassan
and Husayn (as). Adam (as) relied on these 'words' and asked Him to
forgive him. Then, *Allah* accepted it and forgave him.

These three commentaries do not contradict one another since the
entirity of the *'words'* might have been taught to Adam (as) in order
that, through their (the 'words') reality, depth, and innate nature, he
could obtained a pure perfect spiritual change in his heart and soul
totally so that *Allah* would shower him with His Grace and Guidance.

[^1]: For the word / Sama'/ in the sense of 'atmosphere', look at the on
verse 22, Surah Baqarah, this vol., pp. 113-114

[^2]: An imaginary, approximately similar meaning to this idea is seen
in Milton, Pardise Lost, iii 56, 481. The same imagery will be found in
Dante.

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Almizan, vol. 1, p. 121

[^4]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 76

[^5]: Tafsir Almizan, vol. 1, p. 126

[^6]: Nur-uth- Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 58; & Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. II, p.
139

[^7]: Almizan, vol. 1, p. 181 (English version)

[^8]: Almizan, vol. 1, pp. 185-186 (English version)

[^9]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 89


