34
==

Chapter Thirty-four: Rajat (The Return)
=======================================

<p dir="rtl">
سَعْدٌ عَنِ ابْنِ عِيسَى وَ ابْنِ أَبِي الْخَطَّابِ عَنِ الْبَزَنْطِيِّ
عَنْ حَمَّادِ بْنِ عُثْمَانَ عَنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُسْلِمٍ قَالَ سَمِعْتُ
حُمْرَانَ بْنَ أَعْيَنَ وَ أَبَا الْخَطَّابِ يُحَدِّثَانِ جَمِيعاً
قَبْلَ أَنْ يُحْدِثَ أَبُو الْخَطَّابِ مَا أَحْدَثَ أَنَّهُمَا سَمِعَا
أَبَا عَبْدِ اللَّهِ ع يَقُولُ أَوَّلُ مَنْ تَنْشَقُّ الْأَرْضُ عَنْهُ
وَ يَرْجِعُ إِلَى الدُّنْيَا الْحُسَيْنُ بْنُ عَلِيٍّ ع وَ إِنَّ
الرَّجْعَةَ لَيْسَتْ بِعَامَّةٍ وَ هِيَ خَاصَّةٌ لَا يَرْجِعُ إِلَّا
مَنْ مَحَضَ الْإِيمَانَ مَحْضاً أَوْ مَحَضَ الشِّرْكَ مَحْضاً
</p>

**1-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa and
Ibne Abil Khattab, they from Bazanti and he from Hammad bin Uthman from
Muhammad bin Muslim that he heard Humran bin Ayyan and Abul Khattab say:
We heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“The first for whom the grave will split open and who would come back to
the world in Rajat, will be Imam Husain (a.s.) and Rajat will not be
there for some: only the pure believers and absolute polytheists will
have Rajat.”

**2-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through these chains, it is narrated
from Hammad from Bukair bin Ayyan that he said:

I heard from a pious personality, in whose veracity I have no doubt,
that is Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) will return to
the world once more.”

**3-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through these chains, it is narrated
from Hammad from Fudhayl from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:

“Mention Abu Bakr and Umar as ‘*Jibt* and*Taghoot* ’ (irreligious and
rebellious) and don’t talk of Rajat among the people. If someone tells
you that you had faith in this previously, tell them that you don’t make
such a claim now; because the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) even made people
happy by giving them a hundred thousand dirhams each. So will you not
please them at least verbally?”

**4-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through the same chain of narrators, it
is narrated from Hammad from Zurarah that he said:

I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about some important
matters like Rajat; and he said:

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ كَذَّبُواْ بِمَا لَمْ يُحِيطُواْ بِعِلْمِهِ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ
تَأْوِيلُهُ
</p>

***“Nay, they reject that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and the final sequel of it has not yet come to them…” (Surah Yunus
10:39)***

Then Imam (a.s.) said: “Time has not arrived for the matters you are
inquiring about.”

**5-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Yazid and
Ibne Abil Khattab and Yaqtini and Ibrahim bin Muhammad; they have
narrated from Ibne Abi Umair from Ibne Uzuniyya from Muhammad bin Tayyar

from His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said
regarding the saying of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party…”
(Surah Naml 27:83)***

“…each of the believers, if he has been slain, he will be sent back to
the world and then he will die; or if he has died, he will be returned
to the world and slain.”

**6-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Ahwazi from Hammad bin Isa from Husain bin Mukhtar from Abi Basir that
he said:

Once Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said to me: “Do the Iraqis
deny Rajat?”

“Yes,” I replied.

He asked: “Have they not read this verse of Quran (above-mentioned)?”

**7-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Bazanti from Husain bin Umar bin Yazid from Umar bin Aban Ibne Bukair
from Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see (that during the time of Rajat) Humran bin Ayyan and
Maisar bin Abdul Aziz are amazing the people through their sword fight.”

**8-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Abdullah bin Mughira from a person from Jabir bin Yazid
that he said:

“Once His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was asked
about the following words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَئِن قُتِلْتُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أَوْ مُتُّمْ
</p>

***“And if you are slain in the way of Allah or you die…” (Surah Aale
Imran 3:157)***

He said: O Jabir, do you know what the ‘way of Allah’ is?

I said: “By Allah, no, we only know that which we have heard from you.”

He said: “Slain in the way of Allah is ‘in the way of Ali (a.s.) and his
descendants’. One who is killed in their love, has in fact been slain in
the way of Allah. And whoever believes in this verse will have slaying
as well as death; thus one who is slain will come back to the world till
death comes to him and one who died in their love will come back to the
world so that he might be slain.”

Similar tradition is reported by Ibne Mughira as well.

**9-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Muhammad bin Sinan from Ibne Muskan from Fayd bin Abi Shaibah that he
said:

“I heard Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) reciting the following
verse and saying that:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ أَأَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِي قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ وَأَنَاْ
مَعَكُم مِّنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom - then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I (too) am of
the bearers of witness with you.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

In this verse, ‘you must believe in him’ means that all prophets will
have faith the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and ‘and you must aid him’ means
that those prophets will help Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.).

Would those prophets help Amirul Momineen (a.s.)? I asked.

He said: Yes, by Allah, from Prophet Adam (a.s.) to Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) all the prophets that the Almighty Allah has sent, He will
send them to this world once more so that they may do Jihad with the
infidels in the company of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”

**10-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Ammar bin Masruq from Munakhkhal
bin Jamil from Jabir bin Yazid from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said with regard to the following verse:

يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ {1} قُمْ فَأَنذِرْ {2}

***“O you who are clothed! Arise and warn…” (Surah Muddaththir
74:1-2)***

…that Muddaththir implied Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and ‘Arise and
warn…’ means his rising in the period of Rajat in which he will arise to
warn the people and the saying of the Almighty Allah:

إِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ {35} نَذِيرًا لِّلْبَشَرِ

***“Surely it (hell) is one of the gravest (misfortunes) A warning to
mortals…” (Surah Muddaththir 74:35-36)***

That is the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is the warner to the people during
the period of Rajat.

Also the saying of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلَّا كَافَّةً لِّلنَّاسِ بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا
</p>

***“And We have not sent you but to all the men as a bearer of good news
and as a warner…” (Surah Saba 34:28)***

This is also applicable to the period of Rajat.

**11-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through the same chains of narrators,
it is narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said: Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) used to say:

“Muddaththir will be there during the period of Rajat.

Someone asked: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), is there a second life before
Qiyamat? And then death after that?

He replied: Yes, by Allah, during the period of Rajat there would be
more disbelief.”

**12-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Abil Khattab
from Musa bin Sadan from Abdul bin Qasim Hadhrami from Abdul Karim bin
Amr Khathami that he heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنظِرْنِي إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ {36} قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ
مِنَ الْمُنظَرِينَ {37} إِلَى يَومِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ {38}

***“He said: My Lord! then respite me till the time when they are
raised. He said: So surely you are of the respited ones. Till the period
of the time made known.” (Surah Hijr 15:36-38)***

Thus when the appointed time will arrive, Iblis will appear with all his
followers who have followed from the time of the creation of Adam (a.s.)
till that time. And this will be last battle, which would be fought
between Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Iblis.

I asked: “Would there be battles prior to this also?”

He replied: “Yes, there had been and there would be battles between good
and evil during the period of every Imam.”

And when the appointed time will arrive, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will
march forward with his companions and Iblis will come with his
companions and this battle will be fought at Rauha near Kufa, which is
situated on the banks of Euphrates and it will be such a severe fight
that since the creation of the earth, no such fighting has taken place.

Thus as if I can see that the companions of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will
be forced to move back a hundred steps and can also see that some of the
companions will back so much that they would enter the Euphrates.

The most powerful God will send armies of angels from the clouds and the
command of Allah will reach to completion. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) will be at the front carrying a spear of Noor. When Iblis
will see him, he will turn back and flee. Seeing him flee, his army men
will ask: Why are you running away, you are about to gain victory?

He will reply: You don’t see what I see! I am scared of Allah, the Lord
of the worlds.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) will step forward and spear his back
killing him. Then all his supporters will also perish. At that time only
the monotheists will remain and there will be no sign of polytheism.

Then Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will rule for forty-four thousand years. And
during that time each of the Shia of Imam Ali (a.s.) will get a thousand
sons each. At that time ‘Jannatan’ and ‘Madhamatan’, two luxurious
gardens will appear near Kufa Masjid and its surroundings.

**13-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through the same chains, it is
narrated from Abdullah bin Qasim from Husain bin Ahmad Minqari from
Yunus bin Zabyan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Before Judgment Day, Imam Husain (a.s.) will perform the accounting of
the people; on Judgment Day the only thing remaining will be the sending
of people to Paradise or Hell.”

**14-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ayyub bin Nuh
and Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah etc. from Abbas bin Aamir from Saeed from
Dawood bin Rashid, from Humran from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that he said:

“The first to do Rajat will be Imam Husain (a.s.) and he will rule for
such along time that his brows will sag upon his eyes.”

It is mentioned in*Muntakhabul Basair* that Saad has narrated a similar
report from Ibne Isa and Ibne Abdul Jabbar and Ahmad bin Hasan bin
Fadhdhal from Hasan bin Fadhdhal from Abul Mughra from Dawood bin
Rashid.

The same report is narrated from Saad bin Ibne Isa from Ahwazi and
Muhammad Barqi from Nazar from Yahya bin Halabi from Mualla from Mualla
bin Khunais from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he narrated the same
tradition from Saad and Ibne Isa and Umar bin Abdul Aziz, Jamil bin
Darraj, Mualla bin Khunais and Zaid bin Shahham from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.).

**15-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ahmad bin
Muhammad Sayyari from Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Qubaisa from his father
from a man of his from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said regarding the following words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ هُمْ عَلَى النَّارِ يُفْتَنُونَ
</p>

***“(It is) the day on which they shall be tried at the fire.” (Surah
Zariyat 51:13)***

During the period of Rajat, people will be heated like gold is heated in
the fire till the reality of everyone becomes clear.”

**16-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Yaqtini from
Qasim from his grandfather, Hasan from Abu Ibrahim Imam Musa Kazim
(a.s.) that he said:

“Some of those who have passed away from the world, will come back to
the world and seek revenge from themselves and all those who have been
harassed will take revenge and whoever is killed will take revenge from
his killer. And for this purpose, his enemies will be brought into the
world so that revenge might be taken from them. And after this
retaliation they will live for thirty months and after that all of them
will die on a single night having achieved satisfaction whereas their
enemies will be subjected to the worst punishment of Hell. After that
they will obtain their rights from the court of the Almighty Allah.”

**17-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** From the same chains, it is narrated
from Hasan bin Rashid from Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Husain that he
said:

“Once I was in the company of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) with my father
and they were conversing when my father asked: What opinion do you have
about Rajat?

Imam (a.s.) replied: I only say that which Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
says:

هِيَ زَجْرَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ {13} فَإِذَا هُم بِالسَّاهِرَةِ {14}

***“But it shall be only a single cry. When lo! they shall be wakeful.”
(Surah Naziyat 79:13-14)***

My father asked: What is the meaning of these words of the Almighty
Allah?

He replied: They will take revenge from them and the rest of the people
will neither be sleeping nor death will occur to them.”

**18-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from a group of our
narrators from Ibne Abu Uthman and Ibne bin Ishaq from Muhammad bin

Sulaiman Dailami from his father that once he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) about the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِذْ جَعَلَ فِيكُمْ أَنبِيَاء وَجَعَلَكُم مُّلُوكًا
</p>

***“…when He raised prophets among you and made you kings…” (Surah
Maidah 5:2)***

And the Imam (a.s.) said: Prophets means the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), Prophet Ibrahim and Prophet Ismail and his descendants; and
kings imply the Holy Imams (a.s.).

The narrator says: I asked: But what kingdom do you possess?

He replied: Rulership of Paradise and kingdom of the period of Rajat.”

**19-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is narrated from Saad from Ibne Isa
from Ahwazi and Muhammad Barqi from Nazar from Yahya Halabi from Mualla
Abu Uthman from Mualla bin Khunais that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said to me:

“The first to do Rajat will be Imam Husain (a.s.) and he will rule for
such a long time that his brows will sag upon his eyes.

Then Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said with regard to the saying of the
Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

He said: Your Prophet will be returned to you.”

**20-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is mentioned in*Kitabul Wahida*
from Muhammad bin Hasan bin Abdullah Atrush from Ja’far bin Muhammad
Bajali from Barqi from Ibne Abu Najran from Asim bin Hamid from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
<p dir="rtl">
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ
</p>
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) says: Indeed the Almighty Allah is One and Unique
and He is alone in His oneness. Then a word came out from the lips of
His power and it became an effulgence from which He created Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and me and my descendants.

Then another word emerged from the lips of power and it became a soul
and the Almighty Allah kept that soul in that effulgence and transferred
it to our bodies. Therefore we are Ruhullah and Kalimatullah and the
Almighty Allah has made us as His decisive proof on His creatures. Then
we all remained in a green shade, whereas neither there was sun nor
moon. Neither day nor night and neither anyone to witness this. We
continued to worship the Almighty Allah and praise and glorify Him and
it is before the creation

of all creatures. The Almighty Allah took covenant from the prophets to
believe in us and to help us. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
<p dir="rtl">
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ
</p>
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

That is all of them will believe in Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and help his
successor.

And indeed the Almighty Allah took covenant from me that each of us will
help and assist each other and thus I did Jihad in the support of
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), killed his enemies and fulfilled the
covenant that the Almighty Allah had taken from me but the prophets and
messengers did not render any help to me. It is so because the Almighty
Allah had captured their souls; but they will help me in the future and
my kingdom will stretch from east to the west. And from Prophet Adam
(a.s.) to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) will be made alive again by the
Almighty Allah and they will be sent back to the world and fight with
the sword.

O surprise! And how should I not be astonished about the people whom
Allah would enliven, group by group, reciting: ‘Here I am’ and harkening
to the call of the Divine caller they would roam the lanes of Kufa. So
that they may strike off the heads of infidels and oppressors from the
first and the last. So much so that the Almighty Allah will fulfill the
promise He made in the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا
</p>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me…” (Surah Nur 24:55)***

That is without fearing anyone they should worship Me. During that time
Taqayyah will not be needed.

And for me there is one Karra after the other and one Rajat after the
other and I am the master of the Karrat and Rajaat. I am the master of
the awe and the one with power; I am the one who will take revenge again
and again. I am the owner of a strange ruler and I am the horn of iron
and I am the servant of Allah and the brother of His Messenger.

I am the trusted one of Allah and his treasurer. I am the owner of
divine secrets. I am His curtain. I am the face of Allah. I am the path
of Allah. I am the Balance of God. I am the gatherer of the creatures. I
am that word of

Allah through which He will gather that which is dispersed and disperse
that which is gathered.

I am the beautiful names of Allah and its supreme example. I am the
great sign of Allah. I am the distributor of Paradise and Hell. I will
admit the inmates of Paradise to Paradise. I will perform the marriage
of the folks of Paradise and subject the inmates of Hell to
chastisement. All the creatures will come back to us. I am the center to
which everything will revert. I will perform the accounting of all the
creatures. I am the possessor of many faces. I am the Muezzin of Araaf.
I am the one who is visible in the sun. I am Dabbatul Ardh. I am the
distributor of hellfire and Paradise. I am the owner of Araaf.

I am the chief of believers, leader of the pious and sign of the
foremost, tongue of the truth tellers and seal of the successors and the
heir of the prophets and Caliph of the Lord of the worlds. I am the
straight path of my Lord. In the tent of Allah I am the decisive proof
of Allah for all who are in the earth and sky and whatever is between
them.

I am the one through whom the Almighty Allah exhausted His proof on you
in the initial stage of your creation. On Judgment Day, I am the witness
upon you. I am the one who is bestowed with the complete knowledge of
future happenings and lineage. I possess the heritage of all the
prophets.

I am the owner of the staff and Misam[^11] I am the one all the clouds,
lightning and thunder, darkness and light, wind and mountains, sea and
stars, sun and moon have been given under my control. I am the horn of
iron. I am the discriminator (Farooq) of this Ummah. I am the guide. The
knowledge of the Almighty Allah that is bestowed to me and the secrets
and mysteries that the Almighty Allah has delegated to Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) through me and I am aware of the count of everything. I am
the one that my Lord has taught me His name, His word, His wisdom, His
knowledge and His understanding.

O people, ask me whatever you like before you are deprived of me. O
Allah, I make You my witness on these people, and there is no power
except that which is bestowed by Allah and all praise is for Allah.”

**21-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Salih bin Mitham that
he once asked His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about
the verse of:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
</p>

***“…and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:83)***

He said: “It will come to pass when Imam Ali (a.s.) will say that I am
the most deserving for this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ بَلَى وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا وَلـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ لِيُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ كَاذِبِينَ
</p>

***“And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths:
Allah will not raise up him who dies. Yea! it is a promise binding on
Him, quite true, but most people do not know. So that He might make
manifest to***

***them that about which they differ, and that those who disbelieve
might know that they were liars.” (Surah Nahl 16:38-39)***

**22-** ***Amali Saduq:*** Ibne Walid has narrated from Saffar from Ibne
Isa from Ali bin Hakam from Aamir bin Maqil from Abu Hamza Thumali from
His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“O Abu Hamza, do not demote the position on which the Almighty Allah has
placed Imam Ali (a.s.) and do not exalt him more than his exalted
position. It is sufficient for the honor of Imam Ali (a.s.) that he will
fight with the enemies of Allah during the time of Rajat and will
perform the marriage of the folks of Paradise.”

A similar report is narrated in*Basairud Darajat* from Ibne Isa.

In*Muntakhabul Basair* also, there is a similar report quoted from
Maqil.

**23-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ibne Abi Umair
from Ibne Muskan from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Yes, by Allah, from Prophet Adam (a.s.) to Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.)
all the prophets that the Almighty Allah has sent, He will send them to
this world once again so that they may do Jihad with the infidels in the
company of Amirul Momineen (a.s.). That is the meaning of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ
</p>

***“…you must believe in him, and you must aid him…” (Surah Aale Imran
3:871)***

That is you must believe in the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and aid Amirul
Momineen (a.s.).”

**24-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Regarding the following verse, it is
mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim* that:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ
</p>
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَهِيدًا
</p>

***“And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death, and on the day of resurrection, he
(Isa) shall be a witness against them.” (Surah Nisa 4:159)***

It is mentioned that when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) will return
to the world in Rajat all will bring faith in him.

Also Shahr bin Haushab has narrated that once Hajjaj told him: “There is
a verse of Quran, which has troubled me.”

I said: “O chief, which verse is it?”

He said: “The Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِن مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ
</p>

***“And there is not one of the followers of the Book but most certainly
believes in this before his death…” (Surah Nisa 4:159)***

And by Allah, I command the slaying of Jews and Christians just to see
how they bring faith; but I don’t see any movement on their lips.”

I said: “May the Almighty Allah bless the chief, this is not the
interpretation of this verse.”

“Then what is it?” he asked.

I said: His Eminence, Isa (a.s.) will come back to the earth before
Qiyamat and all the people of the book, whether they be Jews or
non-Jews, will start believing in him and he will pray behind Imam Mahdi
(a.s.).

Hajjaj said: “Woe upon you, how do you interpret it in this way?”

I said: “This interpretation was explained to me by Muhammad bin Ali bin
Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).”

“By Allah, you have brought this water from a clear and potable spring,”
he said.

**25-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ كَذَّبُواْ بِمَا لَمْ يُحِيطُواْ بِعِلْمِهِ وَلَمَّا يَأْتِهِمْ
تَأْوِيلُهُ
</p>

***“Nay, they reject that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and the final sequel of it has not yet come to them…” (Surah Yunus
10:39)***

That is it is mentioned in this verse that they have received its Tawil.

<p dir="rtl">
كَذَلِكَ كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ
</p>

***“…even thus did those before them reject (the truth)…” (Surah Yunus
10:39)***

The Imam said: This verse was revealed about Rajat, which the people
deny. Then he said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِنهُم مَّن يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ وَمِنْهُم مَّن لاَّ يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ وَرَبُّكَ
أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُفْسِدِينَ
</p>

***“And of them is he who believes in it, and of them is he who does not
believe in it, and your Lord best knows the mischief-makers.” (Surah
Yunus 10:40)***

**26-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ أَنَّ لِكُلِّ نَفْسٍ ظَلَمَتْ
</p>

***“And if every soul that has done injustice…” (Surah Yunus 10:54)***

That is whoever trespassed on the rights of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) has in
fact committed oppression.

<p dir="rtl">
مَا فِي الأَرْضِ لاَفْتَدَتْ بِهِ
</p>

***“…had all that is in the earth, it would offer it for ransom…” (Surah
Yunus 10:54)***

That is if they possessed all the treasures of the world, they will be
prepared to give it all as a ransom at that time (in the period of
Rajat).”

**27-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about the words of the Almighty
Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا…
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party…”
(Surah Naml 27:83)***

He (a.s.) said: what do they about this verse?

The narrator says: It will occur on Judgment Day.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Would on Judgment Day the Almighty Allah
will raise one group and leave the rest? (It is impossible!)

This would, in fact happen during the time of Rajat and the following
verse is with regard to Qiyamat:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

**28-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Ahmad bin Idris has narrated from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Umar bin Abdul Aziz from Ibrahim bin Mastiz from Muawiyah
bin Ammar that he said:

“I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the following
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنكًا
</p>

***“…his shall be a straitened life…” (Surah Taha 20:124)***

Imam (a.s.) said: By Allah, this verse is about Nawasib.[^12]

I said: “May I be sacrificed on you, I see that they live in great
comfort till the time of their death?”

He replied: “By Allah, during the time of Rajat, their condition will be
such that they will survive on feces.

Saad had narrated a similar report from Ahmad bin Muhammad.

**29-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ibne Abu Umair
from Ibne Sinan from Abu Basir and Muhammad bin Muslim from Abu Abdullah
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
regarding the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَرَامٌ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا أَنَّهُمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ
</p>

***“And it is binding on a town which We destroy that they shall not
return.” (Surah Anbiya 21:95)***

Both the Imams (a.s.) said: Every habitation that the Almighty Allah
destroyed through chastisement will not be returned to the earth during
the time of Rajat. This verse is the greatest proof of Rajat, because no
Muslim denies that all the people will do Rajat and would be enlivened
in Qiyamat whether they die through divine chastisement or not. And in
this verse, ‘they shall not return’ implies the time of Rajat, because
in Qiyamat all the condemned ones will be enlivened to be sent to Hell.

**30-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Ubayy has narrated from Ibne Abu Umair from
Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Once the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
while the latter was asleep in the mosque; he had made a heap of sand
and rested his head on it. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) shook his leg and
said: “O*Daabbatullaah!* Get up!” A companion who witnessed this asked,
“O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)! Shall we address each other with this
name?” He replied, “No, by Allah it is restricted only for him (Ali) and
he is the*Daabba* that Allah has mentioned in His book…”

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: O Ali, in the last period
of time the Almighty Allah will bring you out in the best form and you
will be having a seal with which you will mark your enemies.

A person asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): “But the Sunni say that in this
verse the word of ‘talk to them, implies injuring?”

Imam (a.s.) replied: May Allah send them to Hell, it is not like that,
it means talking and this statement of the Almighty Allah is an evidence
for Rajat:

وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ {83} حَتَّى إِذَا جَاؤُوا قَالَ
أَكَذَّبْتُم بِآيَاتِي وَلَمْ تُحِيطُوا بِهَا عِلْمًا أَمَّاذَا كُنتُمْ
تَعْمَلُونَ

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups. Until when they come, He will say: Did you reject My
communications while you had no comprehensive knowledge of them? Or what
was it that you did?” (Surah Naml 27:83-84)***

Then he said: In this verse, ‘communications’ imply Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.). That person asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.): But the Sunni are of the view that

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party…”***

…implies gathering on Judgment Day.

Imam (a.s.) said: Would the Almighty Allah gather only one group from
every community on Judgment Day and leave the rest? It is not so. On the
contrary it is about the time of Rajat.

The following verse is with regard to Judgment Day:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

Through another chains of narrators, it is narrated from Mufaddal that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party…”***

Every believer who had been slain will be revived and sent to the world
again and then die after completing his tenure on the earth. Also Rajat
will be for only those who are pure believers and pure infidels.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: A man asked Ammar bin Yasir, “O Aba
Yaqzaan, there is a verse in the book of Allah that has destroyed my
heart and has put me into doubt. Ammar said: “Which verse is that?” That
man said: “It is when the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

“What*Daabba* is it?” Ammar said: “I swear by Allah, I will not sit, eat
or drink anything till I show it to you.”

Then taking that man with him he went to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). His
Eminence was partaking dates and butter. He said to Ammar: “Come
forward, O Aba Yaqzaan!” Ammar sat down and began to share in the
eatables. That man was surprised and when Ammar arose, he exclaimed:
Glory be to God! O Aba Yaqzaan! You had vowed that you would not eat,
drink or sleep till you showed me that*(Daabbatul Ardh)!* Ammar said:
“If you ponder upon it, you would understand that I have showed him to
you.”

**31-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سَيُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ فَتَعْرِفُونَهَا
</p>

***“…He will show you His signs so that you shall recognize them…”
(Surah Naml 27:93)***

In this verse ‘signs’ implies Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and all the Holy
Imams (a.s.).

When they do Rajat, their enemies will recognize them and the following
statement of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) also supports this contention that:
No sign of the Almighty Allah is greater than me.

When these holy beings will do Rajat in the world their enemies will
recognize them.

**32-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the following verse:

طسم {1} تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ {2}

***“Ta sin Mim. These are the verses of the Book that makes (things)
clear.” (Surah Qasas 28:1-2)***

After that the Almighty Allah addressed His Prophet and said:

نَتْلُوا عَلَيْكَ مِن نَّبَإِ مُوسَى وَفِرْعَوْنَ بِالْحَقِّ لِقَوْمٍ
يُؤْمِنُونَ {3} إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَجَعَلَ أَهْلَهَا
شِيَعًا يَسْتَضْعِفُ طَائِفَةً مِّنْهُمْ يُذَبِّحُ أَبْنَاءهُمْ
وَيَسْتَحْيِي نِسَاءهُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ {4} وَنُرِيدُ
أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ
أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ {5} وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ فِي
الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ {6}

***“We recite to you from the account of Musa and Firon with truth for
people who believe. Surely Firon exalted himself in the land and made
its people into parties, weakening one party from among them; he
slaughtered their sons and let their women live; surely he was one of
the mischief makers. And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who
were deemed weak in the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make
them the heirs, And to grant them power in the land, and to make Firon
and***

***Haman and their hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas
28:1-2)***

In these verses, the Almighty Allah has informed His Prophet about what
Prophet Musa (a.s.) had to suffer at the hands of Firon so that his Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) may have patience on whatever they have to bear at the hands
of the Ummah.

After exhorting patience the Almighty Allah has also given him glad
tidings that: After that We send our favor on your Ahle Bayt (a.s.) that
We will make them our caliphs on the earth and appoint them as Imams on
your Ummah and send those Imams along with their enemies to the world so
that they make take revenge from them. Thus He says under this topic:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
</p>
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs, and to
grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas 28:5-6)***

That is on behalf of Aale Muhammad (a.s.), We will show the punishment
to Firon and Haman and their cohorts; that is to those who have wrought
oppressions on Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and usurped their rights.

If this verse had been about Firon and Prophet Musa (a.s.) the following
words would have been used:

We will show the scene of punishment to Firon and Haman and to both
their groups and instead of the phrase of ‘from them’ it would have been
‘from him (Musa)’. And in the beginning of this verse, it is mentioned:

We have intended that We should favor and make as Imams those who are
deemed weak on the earth.

This shows that the address is to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and
the promise that the Almighty Allah has given is about the future (and
promise is from the future and not for the past).

And the Imams will be from his progeny only. The Almighty Allah has by
of example mentioned the incident of Prophet Musa (a.s.) and Bani
Israel. And Firon and Haman and their groups denote the enemies of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.).

Then he said: When Firon slaughtered Bani Israel and oppressed them, the
Almighty Allah made Prophet Musa (a.s.) victorious on him and destroyed
him.

In the same way the rights of the Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) were usurped by their enemies and they were killed; so
the Almighty Allah will send them back to the earth along with their
enemies to enable them to eliminate their enemies.

Just as the Almighty Allah has compared the enemies of Aale Muhammad
(a.s.) to Firon and Haman; in the same way Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has
described his enemies and said:

O people, the first to rebel against the command of the Almighty Allah
on the earth was Unaq bin Adam. The Almighty Allah had given her twenty
fingers having long big nails and she was so heavy that she could sit
only in

a sixty yard space. But when she disobeyed the divine commands, the
Almighty Allah sent upon her lions as big as elephants and wolves as big
as camels and vultures as big as donkeys. All of them tore her into
pieces. This occurred in the early period of creation.

Then the Almighty Allah destroyed Firon and Haman; split the earth for
Qaroon. It is a simile of those enemies who usurped the rights of Amirul
Momineen (a.s.).

Then Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said from the pulpit under the above
mentioned example:

And I also had a right which was usurped by someone else which was in no
way lawful. Neither I made him a partner in my rights. (in any case
their salvation is not possible in the light of this Shariat and this
book. If another book and another Prophet comes with a new Shariat, it
may be possible). But neither any prophet is to come after Muhammad nor
any book or Shariat. Therefore how their repentance be accepted? They
are at this time in purgatory and they have been deceived by their
desires. They were playing tricks with the Almighty Allah but the
Almighty Allah will send them to Hell.

For Imam Qaim (a.s.) also the example of Prophet Musa (a.s.) applies
with regard to his going into hiding and avoiding, like Musa (a.s.) has
gone into hiding for fear. So much so that the Almighty Allah will
permit him to reappear and he will demand his rights and eliminate his
enemies as the Almighty Allah says:

أُذِنَ لِلَّذِينَ يُقَاتَلُونَ بِأَنَّهُمْ ظُلِمُوا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ
عَلَى نَصْرِهِمْ لَقَدِيرٌ {39} الَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِن دِيَارِهِمْ
بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ

***“Permission (to fight) is given to those upon whom war is made
because they are oppressed, and most surely Allah is well able to assist
them. Those who have been expelled from their homes without a just
cause…” (Surah Hajj 22:39-40)***

And the Almighty Allah has mentioned the example of Imam Husain Ibne Ali
(a.s.) in the story of Bani Israel. Thus Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) once
told Minhal: O Minhal, we Ahle Bayt (a.s.) live in this Ummah just like
Bani Israel were living in the domination of Firon. (they used to kill
their children and leave their women alive). In the same way, these
people kill our children (and men) and leave our women alive.

**33-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Ubayy has narrated from Nazar from Yahya
Halabi from Abdul Hamid Tati from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Imam Zainul
Abideen (a.s.) regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

That the Imam said: Your Prophet (s.a.w.s.) will come back to you (do
Rajat).

**34-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
that with regard to the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَى دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ
</p>

***“And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer
chastisement before the greater chastisement that haply they may turn.”
(Surah Sajdah 32:21)***

The Imam said: “‘The nearer chastisement’ means punishment with the
sword during the time of Rajat and words of the Almighty Allah ‘haply
they may turn’ denote that during the time of Rajat, they will be sent
back in order to be punished.”

**35- Tafsir Qummi:** It is mentioned in Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim that:

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِذَا نَزَلَ بِسَاحَتِهِمْ فَسَاء صَبَاحُ الْمُنذَرِينَ
</p>

***“But when it shall descend in their courtyard, evil shall then be the
morning of the warned ones.” (Surah Saffat 37:177)***

“Punishment, when in the last period of Rajat and when their followers
will be brought back.”

**36-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in Hasan bin
Mahbub’s*Al-Mashiqa* that with regard to the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قَالُوا <p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَى خُرُوجٍ مِّن سَبِيلٍ
</p>
</p>

***“They shall say: Our Lord! twice didst Thou make us subject to death,
and twice hast Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is there
then a way to get out?” (Surah Momin 40:11)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said that it is about Rajat.

**37-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
that the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ
</p>

***“And He shows you His signs…” (Surah Momin 40:81)***

And:

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ
وَكَفَرْنَا بِمَا كُنَّا بِهِ مُشْرِكِينَ
</p>

***“But when they saw Our punishment, they said: We believe in Allah
alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him. (Surah Momin
40:84)***

…that they deny all they had associated with:

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَمْ يَكُ يَنفَعُهُمْ إِيمَانُهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا سُنَّتَ
اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ فِي عِبَادِهِ وَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ
الْكَافِرُونَ
</p>

***“But their belief was not going to profit them when they had seen Our
punishment; (this is) Allah’s law, which has indeed obtained in the
matter of His servants, and there the unbelievers are lost.” (Surah
Momin 40:85)***

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.) will come in the period
of Rajat and when the infidels and enemies of the Imams (a.s.) see them
they will recant their false beliefs; but it will be of no use at that
time, even though it might be during the period of Rajat.

38- Tafsir Qummi:

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
</p>

***“And he made it a word to continue in his posterity that they may
return.” (Surah Zukhruf 43:28)***

That is those who come back in Rajat, that the Holy Imams (a.s.) will
come to the earth once more.

39- Tafsir Qummi:

فَارْتَقِبْ يَوْمَ تَأْتِي السَّمَاء بِدُخَانٍ مُّبِينٍ {10} يَغْشَى
النَّاسَ هَذَا عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ {11} رَبَّنَا اكْشِفْ عَنَّا الْعَذَابَ
إِنَّا مُؤْمِنُونَ {12} أَنَّى لَهُمُ الذِّكْرَى وَقَدْ جَاءهُمْ رَسُولٌ
مُّبِينٌ {13} ثُمَّ تَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ وَقَالُوا مُعَلَّمٌ مَّجْنُونٌ
{14} إِنَّا كَاشِفُو الْعَذَابِ قَلِيلًا إِنَّكُمْ عَائِدُونَ {15}
يَوْمَ نَبْطِشُ الْبَطْشَةَ الْكُبْرَى إِنَّا مُنتَقِمُونَ

***“Therefore keep waiting for the day when the heaven shall bring an
evident smoke. That shall overtake men; this is a painful punishment.
Our Lord! remove from us the punishment; surely we are believers. How
shall they be reminded, and there came to them an Apostle making clear
(the truth). Yet they turned their backs on him and said: One taught (by
others), a madman. Surely We will remove the punishment a little, (but)
you will surely return (to evil). On the day when We will seize (them)
with the most violent seizing; surely We will inflict retribution.”
(Surah Dukhan 44:10-16)***

Explaining the above verses Imam (a.s.) says that it is about the time
of Rajat, because when they will come out of their graves, darkness will
surround all the people. It is in fact an allusion to the incident when
the people alleged that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was insane and they
ridiculed him about it. So the Almighty Allah told them that they will
be exempted for some time and***“you will surely return (to evil).…”***
that is on Judgment Day. If this verse had not been about Rajat, how the
Almighty Allah would have said thus? Because there is no possibility of
returning after Judgment Day.

Tabarsi (r.a.) says: When the Quraish denied the prophethood of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), the latter invoked against them saying: O Allah, do
what You did with Prophet Yusuf (a.s.).

So there was famine and the condition worsened to a point when they
began to starve and darkness used to befall their eyes and when they
looked at the sky it seemed to be smoke. So much so that they began to
eat carrion and chew bones. So they were compelled to come to the
Prophet and the latter prayed and the famine and drought were dispelled.
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The sky being smoke is one of the signs of Judgment Day, but for the
time being no smoke will be seen from the sky. Rather before Judgment
Day smoke will come from the sky and enter the ears of the infidels and
hypocrites and their heads will feel roasted in fire and the believers
will only be affected to the extent of suffering from a common cold and
the whole earth will be afire. This will continue for forty days.”

**40- Tafsir Qummi:**

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ تَشَقَّقُ الْأَرْضُ عَنْهُمْ سِرَاعًا ذَلِكَ حَشْرٌ عَلَيْنَا
يَسِيرٌ
</p>

***“The day on which the earth shall cleave asunder under them, they
will make haste; that is a gathering together easy to Us.” (Surah Qaaf
50:44)***

The Imam (a.s.) said: This will come to pass during the period of Rajat.

**41-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** With regard to the verse:

حَتَّى إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَضْعَفُ
نَاصِرًا وَأَقَلُّ عَدَدًا {24}

***“Until when they see what they are threatened with, then shall they
know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number.” (Surah Jinn
72:24)***

Imam (a.s.) said: “When they will see Imam Qaim and Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) they will realize who is weaker and less in number from the
aspect of helpers. And the same point was mentioned by Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) in anger when he said: O Ibne Zahak, if there had been no bequest
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) you would have known which of us is
weaker and less in number from the aspect of supporters.”

After that he said: “When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) informed
about the conditions of Rajat, they asked: When will it occur? The
Almighty Allah said: O Muhammad, tell them that:

قُلْ إِنْ أَدْرِي أَقَرِيبٌ مَّا تُوعَدُونَ أَمْ يَجْعَلُ لَهُ رَبِّي
أَمَدًا {25}

***“Say: I do not know whether that with which you are threatened be
nigh or whether my Lord will appoint for it a term.” (Surah Jinn
72:25)***

عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَى غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا {26} إِلَّا مَنِ
ارْتَضَى مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ
خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا {27}

***“The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any.
Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle; for surely He makes a guard
to march before him and after him.” (Surah Jinn 72:26-27)***

That is the Almighty Allah has told his chosen Prophet what all had
occurred before him and what will come to pass in future - that is the
advent of Qaim, Rajat and Judgment Day.”

**42-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Regarding the statement of the Almighty
Allah:

فَمَا لَهُ مِن قُوَّةٍ وَلَا نَاصِرٍ {10} وَالسَّمَاء ذَاتِ الرَّجْعِ
{11} وَالْأَرْضِ ذَاتِ الصَّدْعِ {12} إِنَّهُ لَقَوْلٌ فَصْلٌ {13} وَمَا
هُوَ بِالْهَزْلِ {14} إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا {15} وَأَكِيدُ
كَيْدًا {16} فَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا

***“He shall have neither strength nor helper. I swear by the rain
giving heavens. And the earth splitting (with plants). Most surely it is
a decisive word. And it is no joke. Surely they will make a scheme. And
I (too) will make a scheme. So grant the unbelievers a respite: let them
alone for a while.” (Surah Tariq 86:10-17)***

Ja’far bin Ahmad has narrated from Ubaidullah bin Musa from Hasan bin
Ali bin Abu Hamza from his father from Abu Basir that he said:

“It means that he will not have any strength remaining to oppose the
Almighty Allah and neither will he be helped in that opposition.”

The narrator says: “I asked: What is the meaning of “Surely they will
make a scheme?”

He replied: “Since they had schemed against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.),
schemed against Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and schemed against Lady Fatima
(s.a.) so the Almighty Allah says:

إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا {15} وَأَكِيدُ كَيْدًا {16} فَمَهِّلِ
الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا

***“(O Muhammad), Surely they will make a scheme. And I (too) will make
a scheme. So grant the unbelievers a respite: let them alone for a
while.” (Surah Tariq 86:15-17)***

When the Qaim arrives, he will take My revenge from Quraish, Bani
Umayyah and all the oppressors and tyrants of the world.”

**43-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Through the same chains of narrators, it is
narrated from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَلْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لَّكَ مِنَ الْأُولَى
</p>

***“And surely what comes after is better for you than that which has
gone before.” (Surah Zuha 93:4)***

“That is the second coming of the Prophet during the period of Rajat,
which will be better than the first period. The narrator says that I
asked: What is the meaning of the following words of the Almighty Allah?

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَسَوْفَ يُعْطِيكَ رَبُّكَ فَتَرْضَى
</p>

***“And soon will your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased.”
(Surah Zuha 93:4)***

The Holy Imam (a.s.) said: The Almighty Allah says: I will give you so
much from Paradise that you will be pleased.”

**44-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Shaykh Tusi has narrated through his
chains from Fadhal bin Shazan from the Infallible (a.s.) directly from
Buraidah Aslami that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said to Imam Ali
(a.s.):

“O Ali, the Almighty Allah has kept you in my company on seven
occasions.”

And after the mention of those (six) occasions, he said: “The seventh
occasion will be that we will remain when no else will remain and the
Almighty Allah will get all the groups eliminated through us.”

**45-** ***Uyun Akhbar Reza:*** Tamin Quraish has narrated from his
father from Ahmad Ansari from Hasan bin Jaham that once Mamun asked Imam
Ali Reza (a.s.):

“O Abul Hasan what do you say about Rajat?”

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said: “Rajat is a fact. It was there in the past
nations also. Regarding that the Almighty Allah says and the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has also said that the same will come to pass
whatever occurred in the past nations.” He also said: “Mahdi will appear
from my progeny. His Eminence, Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will descend from
the heavens and pray before Imam Mahdi (a.s.).”

Then he said: “Islam has begun strange and it will return to the strange
ones. So glad tidings to the strange ones.”

He was asked: “What will happen after that?”

He replied: “Then the right will come back to the rightful ones.”

**46-** ***Maniul Akhbar:*** My father has narrated from Saad from Barqi
from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from Sufyan from Faras from Shobi that once
Ibne Kawwa asked Imam Ali (a.s.):

“O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), what is the meaning of this statement of
yours that strange things will occur during the period of Jamadi and
Rajab?

He replied: Woe be on you, O blind man. In that time the dispersed will
be gathered and death will be everywhere, crops will be harvested, this
and that will happen, that there will be destructions everywhere;
neither I will be there nor you.”

**47-** ***Maniul Akhbar:*** Ibne Walid has narrated from Saffar from
Ahmad bin Muhammad from Uthman bin Isa from Salih bin Mitham from Abaya
Asadi that he heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say reclining on a pillow,
while I stood before him:

“We will definitely construct a pulpit in Egypt and destroy Damascus and
remove the Jews and Christians from each corner of the Arab world and
drive all the Arabs through this staff.”

Abaya says: I asked: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), as if you want to say
that you will return after death?

He replied, “It is not so, O Abaya, as you think; a man from me (my
descendants) would perform these tasks.”

**48-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Muhammad bin Abbas has narrated from
Ali bin Abdullah from Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi from Muslim bin Salih
bin Masud from Abul Jarud from a person who directly heard Imam Ali
(a.s.) say:

“Strange events will take place between the months of Jamadi and Rajab.”
A man arose from the audience and asked:

“O Amirul Momineen (a.s.) what are those strange events?”

He replied: “May your mother mourn for you! What will be stranger than
that the dead will emerge from the graves and kill the enemies of the
Almighty Allah, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and Ahle Bayt of the
Prophet and the following verse will be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَوَلَّوْا قَوْمًا غَضِبَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِمْ قَدْ يَئِسُوا مِنَ الْآخِرَةِ كَمَا يَئِسَ الْكُفَّارُ مِنْ
أَصْحَابِ الْقُبُورِ
</p>

***“O you who believe! do not make friends with a people with whom Allah
is wroth; indeed they despair of the hereafter as the unbelievers
despair of those in tombs.” (Surah Mumtahina 60:13)***

When killings will intensify, you will say that he is dead or slain or
has gone into some valley. At that time the interpretation of the
following verse will be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

**49-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ibne Abi Umair
from Hammad from Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he asked:

“What do people say about the following verse?

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا…
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party…”
(Surah Naml 27:83)***

The narrator says: It will occur on Judgment Day.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Would on Judgment Day the Almighty Allah
raise only one group and leave the rest? (It is impossible!)

This would, in fact happen during the time of Rajat and the following
verse is with regard to Qiyamat:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

Also Ali bin Ibrahim has said: “The following verse also proves Rajat:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَرَامٌ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا أَنَّهُمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ
</p>

***“And it is binding on a town which We destroy that they shall not
return.” (Surah Anbiya 21:95)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Every habitation that the Almighty Allah
destroyed through chastisement will not be returned to the earth during
the time of Rajat. But in Qiyamat all would be raised whereas during the
time of Rajat only the pure believers and absolute infidels and some of
those who did not die of divine chastisement will arise.”

**50-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ibne Abu Umair
from Abdullah bin Muskan from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said regarding the interpretation of the following
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ أَأَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِي قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ وَأَنَاْ
مَعَكُم مِّنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom - then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I (too) am of
the bearers of witness with you.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

The Imam (a.s.) said: By Allah, from Prophet Adam (a.s.) to Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) all the prophets that the Almighty Allah has sent,
He will send them to this world once more so that they may do Jihad with
the infidels in the company of Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

In this verse, ‘you must believe in him’ means that all prophets will
have faith in the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and ‘and you must aid him’
means that those prophets will help Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s.).

“Would those prophets help Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?” I asked.

Ali bin Ibrahim says: There are many verses like this in Quran in which
the Almighty Allah has promised Rajat to the Holy Imams (a.s.); thus He
says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا
</p>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me…” (Surah Nur 24:55)***

This promise will be fulfilled when they return to the earth.

Also this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
</p>
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs, and to
grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas 28:5-6)***

All this will come to pass during the time of Rajat.

**51-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** My father has narrated from Ahmad bin Nazar
from Amr bin Shimr that he said:

Once Jabir was mentioned in the presence of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
and the Imam said: May Allah have mercy on Jabir; his knowledge has
reached to such a state that he knew the interpretation of:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

That is he knew about the topic of Rajat.

**52-** ***Al-Kharaij:*** It is narrated from Sahl bin Ziyad from Ibne
Mahbub from Ibne Fudhayl from Saad Jallad from Jabir from His Eminence,
Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Before his martyrdom, the chief of the martyrs, Imam Husain (a.s.)
addressed his companions: My grandfather once told me: Son, you will be
called to Iraq by force and it is the land where prophets and successors
of prophets will also reach. That area will be known as Amura. You and
your companions will gain martyrdom at that place; your bodies will not
feel the strike of iron weapons.

After that he recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا نَارُ كُونِي بَرْدًا وَسَلَامًا عَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ
</p>

***“O fire! be a comfort and peace to Ibrahim.” (Surah Anbiya 21:69)***

This battle will become cool and comfort on you and your companions
(like Prophet Ibrahim).

So take these glad tidings that after we are all slain, we will meet our
Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

After that Imam (a.s.) remained silent for a few moments and then said:
First of all the grave will split open for me and I will emerge from it;
and this will occur with the reappearance of Imam Qaim and Rajat of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.). Then a group of angels will descend from the
heavens which would not have descended to the earth till that time.
Along with the angelic army, Jibraeel, Mikaeel and Israfeel will come
down to me and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and Ali and I and my brother
and all those who are blessed by Allah will be mounted on piebald
illuminated horses sent by Allah. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will wave his
blessed flag and will give the flag and the sword to our Qaim. Then I
will remain alive as long as Allah wills. Then the Almighty Allah will
cause to flow from Masjid Kufa (three) springs of oil, water and milk.

Then Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will give me the sword of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) and send me to the west and the east and from all the
enemies of Allah whoever comes before me, will be eliminated by me and I
will burn any idol that I come across; till I reach India and conquer
it.

Prophet Danial and Yusha bin Nun will come to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and
say: Allah and His Prophet said the truth. The Almighty Allah will send
them to Basra along with seventy men and they will slay the enemies and
send an army to Rome. The Almighty Allah will give him victory on Rome.

After that we will kill all the animals whose flesh the Almighty Allah
has prohibited, till no animal will remain on the earth, except the
lawful ones. I will call all communities along with the Jews and
Christians to either accept Islam or they shall be eliminated. I will
favor those who accept Islam and the Almighty Allah will slay those who
refuse.

The Almighty Allah will send an angel to each of Shia men, who will
clean dust from his face and show him his wife and abode in Paradise.
Every blind, cripple and afflicted will be cured through us.

Then so many blessings will descend on the earth that the Almighty Allah
will create any fruit from any tree and there will be so many fruits
that summer fruits will be enjoyed in winter and winter fruits will be
relished in summer. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَى آمَنُواْ وَاتَّقَواْ لَفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِم
بَرَكَاتٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاء وَالأَرْضِ وَلَـكِن كَذَّبُواْ فَأَخَذْنَاهُم
بِمَا كَانُواْ يَكْسِبُونَ
</p>

***“And if the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against
evil) We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the
heaven and the earth, but they rejected, so We overtook them for what
they had earned.” (Surah Araaf 7:96)***

Then the Almighty Allah will favor our supporters in such a way that no
treasure of the earth will remain concealed from them; so much so that
if a man wants to know how his family members are at that particular
time, he will be able to know that.

It is mentioned in*Muntakhabul Basair* that Abdul Hamid Hasani has
narrated a similar report through his chains of narrators from Sahl.

**53-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab and Ibne Yazid from Ahmad bin Hasan Mithami from Muhammad bin
Husain

from Aban bin Uthman from Musa Hannat that he heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) say:

“Days of Allah are three: Day of the reappearance of the Qaim, Day of
Karra (Rajat) and Judgment Day.”

*Khisaal* of Saduq says: Attar has narrated a similar tradition from
Saad from Ibne Yazid from Muhammad bin Hasan Mithami from Muthanna
Hannat from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.).

It is mentioned in*Maniul Akhbar* and Ibne Abu Umair has narrated from
Muthanna a similar report.

**54-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Umar bin Abdul Aziz from a man from Jamil bin Darraj from Mualla bin
Khunais and Zaid Shaham from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The first one to do Rajat will be Imam Husain (a.s.) and he will rule
for forty years till his brows will sag upon his eyes.”

**55-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Muhammad bin Sinan from Ammar bin Marwan from Munakhkhal
bin Jamil from Jabir bin Yazid from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“There is both death and killing for every believer; if he was killed
before, he would come to the world in Rajat and after that he will die a
natural death and if previously he died a natural death, he will come
back to the world in Rajat and then he will be killed.”

The narrator says: After that I recited the following verse before the
Imam:

<p dir="rtl">
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَآئِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ
</p>

***“Every soul shall taste of death…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:185/Surah
Anbiya 21:35/ Surah Ankabut 29:57)***

Imam (a.s.) said: ‘Wa man shura’

I said: What is it?

He replied: It was in this way that Jibraeel used to reveal that every
soul has to taste death and*manshura.*

Then he said: Every member of this community, whether he is righteous or
sinful, will be raised up in the world for the second time. But when the
believer will be raised, his eyes will be cool (he will be happy). And
the evil-doer will be raised in such a condition that the Almighty Allah
will involve him in chastisement. Have you not heard the following verse
of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَى دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ
</p>

***“And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer
chastisement before the greater chastisement…” (Surah Sajdah 32:21)***

He also said:

يَا أَيُّهَا الْمُدَّثِّرُ {1} قُمْ فَأَنذِرْ {2}

***“O you who are clothed! Arise and warn…” (Surah Muddaththir
74:1-2)***

That O Muhammad rise up during the period of Rajat and warn them of
chastisement.

Then he again says:

إِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ {35} نَذِيرًا لِّلْبَشَرِ

***“Surely it (hell) is one of the gravest (misfortunes) - a warning to
mortals…” (Surah Muddaththir 74:35-36)***

That is Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) will warn the whole humanity of
divine chastisement during the period of Rajat.

Then the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

That is the religion of Islam will dominate all the religions during the
period of Rajat.

Also:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّى إِذَا فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِم بَابًا ذَا عَذَابٍ شَدِيدٍ
</p>

***“Until when We open upon them a door of severe chastisement…” (Surah
Mominoon 23:77)***

It implies Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) who will come back
during the period of Rajat.

Jabir says that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
said with regard to the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
رُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَوْ كَانُواْ مُسْلِمِينَ
</p>

***“Often will those who disbelieve, wish that they had been Muslims.”
(Surah Hijr 15:2)***

“When I emerge from my grave during the period of Rajat and my Shia also
come out, and on the other hand, Uthman bin Affan and his followers come
out; and then we would eliminate Bani Umayyah; at that time they will
wish if they had only been from those who accepted Ali (a.s.).”

**56-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad narrated from Ibne Isa from Ali
bin Hakam from Ibne Amira from Abu Dawood from Buraidah Aslami that once
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“What will be your condition when my Ummah will have despaired of the
reappearance of Mahdi; and then he will reappear like sunrays? Seeing
which, inhabitants of the earth and the heavens will be elated.”

I asked: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), would this happen after
death?”

He replied: “By Allah, after death during the period of Rajat, there
will be guidance, faith and effulgence.”

I asked: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), which will be the longer
life, before or after death?”

He replied: “The last life will be many times longer.”

**57-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Umar bin Abdul Aziz from Jamil bin Darraj from His Eminence, Abu
Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he asked Imam (a.s.) about the
following words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ
</p>

***“Most surely We help Our apostles, and those who believe, in this
world’s life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up.” (Surah
Momin 40:51)***

That is: Help during the life in the world will be there for you and
also during the period of Rajat. Do you not know that many prophets of
Allah, who were not helped and they were slain and the Holy Imams (a.s.)
were also killed and they were not helped; all of them will be helped
during the period of Rajat.”

I asked: The Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاسْتَمِعْ يَوْمَ يُنَادِ الْمُنَادِ مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ يَوْمَ
يَسْمَعُونَ الصَّيْحَةَ بِالْحَقِّ ذَلِكَ يَوْمُ الْخُرُوجِ
</p>

***“And listen on the day when the crier shall cry from a near place.
The day when they shall hear the cry in truth; that is the day of coming
forth.” (Surah Qaf 50:41-42)***

On the day, people will be hearing the scream with certainty; that will
be the day of coming out.”

Imam (a.s.) said: It implies the period of Rajat.

It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali Ibne Ibrahim* that Ahmad bin Idris from
Ibne Isa has also narrated an almost identical report.

**58-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ahmad and
Abdullah, sons of Muhammad bin Isa and Ibne Abil Khattab all together
and they all have narrated from Ibne Mahbub from Ibne Raab from Zurarah
that:

“I did not like that I should ask Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) directly
about Rajat, so I asked him on a pretext.

“Please tell me if one who is killed is dead?”

He said: “No, death is death and killing is killing. There is a
difference between the two.”

I asked: “But there is no one in my view who has been killed, but he did
not die?”

Imam (a.s.) said: “O Zurarah, the statement of the Almighty Allah is
truer than your statement. Thus the Almighty Allah has in the Quran kept
a difference between killing and death. Thus He says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَإِن مَّاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ
</p>

***“…if then he dies or is killed…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:144)***

And:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَئِن مُّتُّمْ أَوْ قُتِلْتُمْ لإِلَى الله تُحْشَرُونَ
</p>

***“And if indeed you die or you are slain, certainly to Allah shall you
be gathered together.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:158)***

Therefore, O Zurarah, it is not as you say. Death is death and killing
is killing.

The Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
</p>
بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ
وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا
</p>

***“Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah’s way, so they slay and are slain; a promise which is binding on
Him…” (Surah Taubah 9:111)***

I asked: But the Almighty Allah also says:

<p dir="rtl">
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَائِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ
</p>

***“Every soul must taste of death…” (Surah Anbiya 21:35)***

In your view, the one who is killed has not tasted death?

He replied: One who is killed with the sword is not like the one who has
died on his bed; because one who is killed has to necessarily come back
to the world to taste death.

**59-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Safwan from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said regarding the
topic of Rajat:

“One who got death from the believers (will be enlivened and) will be
killed and one who is killed (will also be enlivened). Then he will get
death.”

**60-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ahmad and
Abdullah, sons of Muhammad bin Isa from Ibne Mahbub from Abu Jamila from
Aban bin Taghlib from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that:

“Once the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was informed that two clans of
Quraish talk among themselves that “it seems that when Muhammad dies,
this kingdom will go back to his Ahle Bayt only.”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) openly declared in the gathering of
Quraish and said:

O group of Quraish, what will be your condition when you adopt
infidelity after me? You will see that in the company of my followers I
am hitting your faces and striking off your heads.

Meanwhile Jibraeel descended to say: Insha Allah, it is also possible
that this may be done by Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).

Then Jibraeel (a.s.) said: “Once this will be done by you and after that
it will be done by Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and your promised abode is
Salam.”

Aban asked: “May I be sacrificed on you, where is Salam?”

He replied: “O Aban, it is at the rear of Kufa.”

**61-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Yaqtini from Ali bin Hakam from Muthanna bin Walid from Abu Basir from
either Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) or Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَن كَانَ فِي هَـذِهِ أَعْمَى فَهُوَ فِي الآخِرَةِ أَعْمَى وَأَضَلُّ
سَبِيلاً
</p>

***“And whoever is blind in this, he shall (also) be blind in the
hereafter; and more erring from the way.” (Surah Isra 17:72)***

One who is blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter, that is
Rajat as well.

**62-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is mentioned through the same
chains of narrators that Ali bin Hakam has narrated from Rufaa from
Abdullah bin

Ataa from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“I was unwell at the location of Mina and my respected father was with
me when a slave of his came to him and said that a group of Iraqis
sought permission to meet us. My father said: Seat them in the tent.

Then he arose and went to them and in a short while I heard the sound of
my father’s laughter, so I felt bad why my father was laughing in such a
way whereas I was lying sick? Then my father returned to me and said:
Perhaps you did not like my laughter.

I said: May I be sacrificed on you, why did you laugh?

He replied: It was a group of Iraqis who were inquiring something about
your ancestors and they also had faith on what passed on them and they
believed in their excellence and that is why I was pleased to meet them
and I laughed. Some such people are still present in the world, who have
faith and belief.

I asked: May I be sacrificed on you, what was the discussion about?

He replied: They asked about those who have died that when they will
return to the world? And fight the living ones on the matter of
religion.”

It is mentioned in*Muntakhabul Basair* that Saad has narrated a similar
report from Sandi bin Muhammad from Safwan from Rifaa.

**63-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is narrated through the same chains
of narrators that Ali bin Hakam has narrated from Hannan bin Sudair from
his father that:

I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about Rajat and he said: Qadiriya
deny it.

**64-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Abu Basir that once he went to His
Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and said:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, we were discussing among ourselves that
Umar bin Zar will not die till he does not confront the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.).”

Imam (a.s.) said: “Yes, the example of Umar bin Zar is same as the
person of Bani Israel who was called Abde Rabbih. He used to invite his
companions to deviation. When he died, they used to gather on his grave
and talk among themselves. One day the grave split opened and he emerged
from his grave dusting his head and began to converse with them.”

**65-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Hisham
from Barqi from Muhammad bin Sinan or from someone else from Abdullah
bin Sinan from His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he said the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“When my Lord carried me up to Meraj He revealed to me from behind the
veil whatever He wanted to and spoke to me about whatever He liked.
Among which He said:

O Muhammad, I am Allah, and there is no deity except Me, the knower of
the Unseen and seen and merciful and forgiving. I am that Allah, except
whom there is no deity. I am the king. I am the pure, I am the one who
grants security. I am the giver of faith. I am the All-seeing and the
owner of domination and power. The Almighty Allah is pure of all that
which people

consider to be His partners. Only I am Allah, and there is no deity
except Me. I am the creator, I am the one who gives form. All the good
names are reserved for Me. All the creatures in the heavens and the
earth recite My praises. I am the owner of glory and wisdom.

O Muhammad, I am Allah, and there is no deity except Me and there is
nothing before Me. I am the last and there is nothing after Me. I am the
apparent and there is nothing more apparent than Me. I am the hidden and
there is nothing more hidden than Me. There is no deity other than Me. I
am the knower of everything.

O Muhammad, Ali is the first of all the Imams from whom covenant is
taken.

O Muhammad, Ali is one whose soul will be captured last of all the
Imams; he is the same Daabba that will speak to the people after
emerging from the earth.

O Muhammad, I have conveyed all the secrets to Ali, which I have told
you through revelation. Therefore between you and Me, there is no secret
which Ali is unaware of.

O Muhammad, Ali is the knower all the lawful and unlawful that I have
created.”

**66-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It quoted from the book of Sulaym bin
Qais Hilali, from Aban bin Ayyash and which was read in the presence of
the companions including Abu Tufayl and Imam Zainul Abideen (a.s.) from
the beginning to the end, he said that it was his authentic saying.

Aban says: After that I met Abu Tufayl at his place and he narrated some
traditions about Rajat, which he had heard from companions, Salman,
Miqdad and Ubayy bin Kaab.

Abu Tufayl says: “I had presented all the traditions I had heard from
them before to Imam Ali (a.s.) and he had said: This is that special
knowledge, which this ignorant nation cannot bear. Then he testified to
the veracity of all the traditions that they had narrated to me. Apart
from that he also recited many verses and provided such a complete
interpretation that I began to believe in Rajat even more than Qiyamat.”

I had also asked Amirul Momineen (a.s.): “Where would the Hauz of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) be situated; in this world or the hereafter?”

He replied: “No, it will be there in the world.”

“Then who will drive away the people from it?”

He replied: “I will convey my followers to that Pool and drive away my
enemies.”

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

“What is the meaning of Daabba in this verse?”

He replied: “O Abu Tufayl, leave it; don’t ask me about it.”

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), may I be sacrificed on you, you must
tell me about it.”

He replied: “It is the Daabba that eats, moves in the markets and enters
into matrimony.”

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who is it?”

He replied: “He would be the central pole of the earth through whom the
earth is stable.”

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who that is?”

He replied: “He will be the Siddiq and Farooq of this Ummah and will be
its Rabbu Ardh and Dhulqarnain.”

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), who is that great personality.”

He replied:

<p dir="rtl">
يَتْلُوهُ شَاهِدٌ مِّنْهُ
</p>

***“…and a witness from Him recites it…” (Surah Hud 11:17)***

<p dir="rtl">
عِندَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ
</p>

***“…and whoever has knowledge of the Book.” (Surah Raad 13:43)***

وَالَّذِي جَاء بِالصِّدْقِ وَصَدَّقَ بِهِ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُتَّقُونَ
{33} لَهُم مَّا يَشَاءونَ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ ذَلِكَ جَزَاء الْمُحْسِنِينَ

***“And he who brings the truth and (he who) accepts it as the truth -
these are they that guard (against evil). They shall have with their
Lord what they please; that is the reward of the doers of good.” (Surah
Zumar 39:33-34)***

Then he said: “And other than him, all will be disbelievers.”

I asked: “Please mention his name.”

He replied: “O Abu Tufayl, I have told you his name.”

Then he said: “But by Allah, common Shia with whom I am waging a war and
who address me as Amirul Momineen and who consider Jihad against my
opponents as lawful, if I mention the points mentioned in the book that
Jibraeel had revealed to Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) they would all desert me
and only a few will remain in the party of truth. And among the group of
my Shia there will be persons like you.”

The narrator says: I began to tremble at this and I said: “O Amirul
Momineen (a.s.), I and some people like me; would we leave your company
or remain steadfast with you?”

He replied: “No, you will remain steadfast and those like you also.”

After that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) glanced at me and said: “See, our
matter is very difficult and complex and none can bear it except the
messenger prophets or the proximate angels or the believer whose heart
Allah has tested for faith.

O Abu Tufayl, as soon as the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) passed away,
due to their ignorance and deviation, people turned away from us Ahle
Bayt (a.s.).”

**67-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** Salam bin Mustanir has narrated from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“You have begun to address people by names that the Almighty Allah has
reserved for Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). (Amirul Momineen) and even the
time has not arrived for its interpretation.

I asked: May I be sacrificed on you, when will its time come?

He replied: When the Almighty Allah will gather the prophets and
messengers before Imam Ali (a.s.) so that they may help; thus the
statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ قَالَ أَأَقْرَرْتُمْ وَأَخَذْتُمْ
عَلَى ذَلِكُمْ إِصْرِي قَالُواْ أَقْرَرْنَا قَالَ فَاشْهَدُواْ وَأَنَاْ
مَعَكُم مِّنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom - then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My compact in this (matter)?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I (too) am of
the bearers of witness with you.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

On that day, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) will hand over his
standard to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and he will be the chief of all
the creatures and all the creatures will be under the shade on his flag.
That is time of its realization.”

**68-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** Zurarah has narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said regarding the saying of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَآئِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ
</p>

***“Every soul shall taste of death…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:185/Surah
Anbiya 21:35/ Surah Ankabut 29:57)***

“But the one who is slain has not tasted death. And it is necessary that
he should come back to the world and taste death.”

**69-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Sirrin that he said:

Once I was there in the company of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) when he
asked me: What do the people say about this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ
</p>

***“And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths:
Allah will not raise up him who dies.” (Surah Nahl 16:38)***

I said: People say that there is neither Qiyamat, nor raising or
gathering.

He said: They are liars, by Allah, it would happen when Imam Qaim
reappears and with him come those who have been enlivened once again. So
your opponents will say: O Shia, your kingdom has come and your
falsehood is exposed that so and so will do Rajat. By Allah, one who has
died will never be revived again. Don’t you see that they make a firm
swearing? And the Arabs used to venerate Laat and Uzza much and never
swore through anyone else. Regarding that the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
بَلَى وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا وَلـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ لِيُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ كَاذِبِينَ إِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا
لِشَيْءٍ إِذَا أَرَدْنَاهُ أَن نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ
</p>

***“Yea! it is a promise binding on Him, quite true, but most people do
not know. So that He might make manifest to them that about which they
differ, and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars.
Our word for a thing when We intend it, is only that We say to it, Be,
and it is.” (Surah Nahl 16:38-4)***

**70-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Abu Basir that he asked Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) about the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
</p>
بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ
وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا التَّائِبُونَ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ
وَالإِنجِيلِ وَالْقُرْآنِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللّهِ
فَاسْتَبْشِرُواْ بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُم بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ
الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ التَّائِبُونَ الْعَابِدُونَ الْحَامِدُونَ
السَّائِحُونَ الرَّاكِعُونَ السَّاجِدونَ الآمِرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَالنَّاهُونَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَالْحَافِظُونَ لِحُدُودِ اللّهِ وَبَشِّرِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

***“Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah’s way, so they slay and are slain; a promise which is binding on
Him in the Taurat and the Injeel and the Quran; and who is more faithful
to his covenant than Allah? Rejoice therefore in the pledge which you
have made; and that is the mighty achievement. They who turn (to Allah),
who serve (Him), who praise (Him), who fast, who bow down, who prostrate
themselves, who enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil, and who
keep the limits of Allah; and give good news to the believers.” (Surah
Taubah 9:111-112)***

He said: This is the covenant.

Then I recited:

<p dir="rtl">
التَّائِبُونَ الْعَابِدُونَ
</p>

***“They who turn (to Allah), who serve (Him)…” (Surah Taubah 9:112)***

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: Don’t recite this verse in this way.
You must say:

<p dir="rtl">
التَّائِبُونَ الْعَابِدينَ
</p>

Then he said: When you see them during the period of Rajat “they will be
those whose lives and properties have been purchased by Allah.”

After that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: There is both death and
killing for every believer. Thus one who has died will be raised up
again so that he may be killed again and one who has been killed will
also be raised again so that he may die (taste death).

This report is also narrated from Abdur Rahman Qaisar.

**71-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa and
Ibne Abdul Jabbar and Ahmad bin Hasan Ibne Faddal from Hasan bin Ali bin
Faddal from Humaid bin Muthanna from Shuaib bin Hazza from Abu Saba that
once he asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.):

“May I be sacrificed on you; I want to ask you something but I don’t
want to mention its name.

He asked: Do you want to ask about Rajat?

Yes, I replied.

So he said: All this destined and except for the Qadiriya sect no one
denies it. A tray came to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) from
Paradise containing Sunnahs in the shape of dates. The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) took from it one, which was followed by those before
you.

**72-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Ibne Isa has narrated from Hasan from
Husain bin Alwan from Muhammad bin Dawood Abdi from Asbagh bin Nubatah
that once Abdullah bin Abi Bakr Yashkari[^13] asked Amirul Momineen
(a.s.):

“O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Abu Motamar has said something, which I don’t
believe.”

He asked: “What is it?”

I said: “He says that you told him that you heard the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) say: I have seen or heard about a person whose age was more
than that of his father.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Only this much is unbelievable?”

“Yes,” said he. “Do you believe in it and do you know who that is?”

“Woe be on you Ibne Kawwa, I would have told you, if you had asked me.”

Then he said: “Once when Prophet Uzair (a.s.) took leave of his family,
his wife was one month pregnant and at that time Uzair was fifty years
old and due to one Tarke Awla[^14] , the Almighty Allah subjected him to
a test and he remained dead for a hundred years and after that he
returned home, while he was aged only fifty and by this time his son was
already a hundred years old.”

Ibne Kawwa asked: “Shall I ask something else?”

He replied: “Ask whatever you like.”

He said: “Most of your companions say that they will come back to the
world after death?”

He replied: “Then what did you tell them?”

He said: “I said: I don’t believe you.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Woe be on you, the Almighty Allah
subjected some people to a test due to their shortcoming before their
actual death; then he revived them and sent back to the world so that
they may consume their destined sustenance. After that He gave them
death.”

Ibne Kawwa Khariji could not understand this. So Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
said: “Woe be on you, do you know that the Almighty Allah says in His
Book:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاخْتَارَ مُوسَى قَوْمَهُ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلاً لِّمِيقَاتِنَا
</p>

***“And Musa chose out of his people seventy men for Our appointment…”
(Surah Araaf 7:155)***

Then Musa (a.s.) took those seventy men with him so that when they
return they may testify before Bani Israel that his Lord has spoken to
him. If they accept and testify for it, there is goodness for them. But
they told Prophet Musa (a.s.): We will not believe in you till we don’t
see the Almighty Allah clearly.

<p dir="rtl">
لَن نُّؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّى نَرَى اللَّهَ جَهْرَةً
</p>

***“…we will not believe in you until we see Allah manifestly…” (Surah
Baqarah 2:55)***

The Almighty Allah said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَأَخَذَتْكُمُ الصَّاعِقَةُ وَأَنتُمْ تَنظُرُونَ
</p>

***“…so the punishment overtook you while you looked on.” (Surah Baqarah
2:55)***

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَاكُم مِّن بَعْدِ مَوْتِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
</p>

***“Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.”
(Surah Baqarah 2:56)***

O Ibne Kawwa, they were revived and returned to their homes. Indeed it
happened thus.”

Ibne Kawwa said: “Did they die and come back to life?”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Otherwise the Almighty Allah would not
have said about them that:

<p dir="rtl">
وَظَلَّلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ الْغَمَامَ وَأَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ الْمَنَّ
وَالسَّلْوَى
</p>

***“And We made the clouds to give shade over you and We sent to you
manna and quails…” (Surah Baqarah 2:57)***

It was when they became alive again after death. And also, O Ibne Kawwa,
there is another group of Bani Israel, regarding whom the Almighty Allah
says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them: Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

Also with regard to Prophet Uzair, the Almighty Allah said:

<p dir="rtl">
أَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّىَ يُحْيِـي هَـَذِهِ اللّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللّهُ مِئَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ
</p>

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life.” (Surah Baqarah 2:259)***

The Almighty Allah kept Prophet Uzair (a.s.) dead for a hundred years
and then revived him and sent him back to the world. Then He asked:

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ لَبِثْتُ يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ قَالَ بَل
لَّبِثْتَ مِئَةَ عَامٍ
</p>

***“He said: How long have you tarried? He said: I have tarried a day,
or a part of a day. Said He: Nay! you have tarried a hundred years…”
(Surah Baqarah 2:259)***

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “O Ibne Kawwa, never doubt the power of
Allah.”

**73-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Abil
Khattab from Abu Khalid Qummat from Abdur Rahman Qasir from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he recited the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
</p>

***“Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property…” (Surah Taubah 9:111)***

Then he asked: “Do you know who are implied?”

I said: “Those who were killed by the believers will be killed and those
who were killed, will get death.”

He said: “One who got death from the believers (will be enlivened and)
will be killed and one who is killed (will also be enlivened). Then he
will get death.”

**74-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Through his chains of narrators, it is
narrated from Abu Khalid Qummat from Humran bin Ayyan that:

“Once I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) if there is something in Bani
Israel, which will not happen in this Ummah?

He replied: No.

I asked: Then what do you say about the following words of the Almighty
Allah?

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them: Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

Did they die on that day or they had returned to the world?

No, they had returned to the world, lived in their houses, lived a
normal life as long as Allah willed and then died when their death
arrived.”

**75-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ibne Isa from
Yaqtini from Husain bin Sufyan from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir bin Yazid
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Once again Imam Ali (a.s.) will return to this world waving his flag
with his son, Imam Husain (a.s.) and take revenge from Bani Umayyah,
Muawiyah and his followers and forces.

Then the Almighty Allah will send him back with his helpers and this
time there will 30000 from people of Kufa and 70000 from others and he
will fight in Siffeen once again and eliminate his enemies. Not one of
them will survive who can inform others what befell them.

Then the Almighty Allah will revive his enemies for the second time and
involve them in severe chastisement with Firon and his people.

Then His Eminence will arrive for the last time with the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) and he will be the ruler of the whole earth and other
Imams will be his deputies. The Almighty Allah will send him openly and
the Almighty Allah worshipped will be openly worshipped on the earth
just as before that it had been done in a secret manner.

Then he said: By Allah, there will be many times worship after that and
He will give power to His Prophet on all the people who are born since
the

earth is created till Judgment Day, till the promise that Allah has made
in His Book, is fulfilled:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

**76-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Musa bin Umar
from Uthman bin Isa from Khalid bin Yahya that once he asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.):

“Did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) name Abu Bakr as Siddiq?”

Yes,” he replied, “Because when he was hiding in the cave with him, he
told him: I can see the ship of Bani Abdullah Muttalib tossing on the
seas.”

Abu Bakr asked: “Did you really see it?”

He replied: “Yes.”

Abu Bakr said: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), can you show it to me
also?”

He said: “Come closer.”

When Abu Bakr went closer, he passed his blessed hand over his eyes and
then said: See now.

Abu Bakr saw the ship lurching in the seas and when he looked forward he
saw the houses of Medina and Abu Bakr said to himself: Now I am certain
that you are a sorcerer.

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: On the contrary you are Siddiq.

The narrator asked: And why did he call Umar as Farooq?

He replied: Because do you not see that he separated truth and falsehood
and people adopted falsehood?

Then he said: Why did he call Salim as Amin?

He replied: Because when people sent letters the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
he used to entrust it to Salim that is why he was named as Amin.

I said: the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Don’t harken to the call of
Saad. Why did he say thus?

He replied: Yes, it was because Saad will come to the world for the
second time and fight with Imam Ali (a.s.).

**77-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Muhammad bin Himyari has narrated from his
father from Ali bin Sulaiman bin Rashid from Ali bin Khazzaz that once
Ali bin Abi Hamza came to Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) and asked:

“Are you the Imam?”

“Yes,” said the Imam.

He said: “But I have heard your grandfather say that Imam is only one
who has an issue and heir.”

He said: “O Shaykh, have you forgotten? This is not what he said; His
Eminence, Ja’far has said something besides this. He said: Imam cannot
be one, except that behind him (after him) there should be one who rises
up against Husain bin Ali (a.s.). Thus there is no one behind him.”

He said: “You have said the truth, may I be sacrificed on you. I have
heard in the same way from your grandfather.”

**78-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Rifaa bin Musa that
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Indeed the first to be revived and sent to the world will be Imam
Husain (a.s.) and his companions and Yazid the accursed and his men. And
like they had killed them, they will kill them in the same way.

After that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“…and aided you with wealth and children and made you a numerous
band.” (Surah Isra 17:6)***

**79-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Hasan bin Abul Hasan Dailami has
narrated through his chains from Muhammad bin Ali from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَمَن وَعَدْنَاهُ وَعْدًا حَسَنًا فَهُوَ لَاقِيهِ
</p>

***“Is he to whom We have promised a goodly promise which he shall
meet…” (Surah Qasas 28:61)***

Imam (a.s.) said: The Almighty Allah has promised this to Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) that he will get him revenged in this world itself and in
the hereafter admit his friends to Paradise.

**80-** ***Majalis Mufeed:*** Katib has narrated from Zafrania from
Thaqafi from Ismail bin Aban from Fazal bin Zubair from Imran bin Mitham
from Abaya Asadi that he heard Imam Ali (a.s.) say:

“I am the chief of the aged, I have a Sunnah of Prophet Ayyub (a.s.). By
Allah, from me the Almighty Allah will gather my Ahle Bayt like he
gathered for Prophet Yaqub (a.s.).”

**81-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Abu Salih Khalaf bin Hammad has narrated from
Sahl bin Ziyad from Ali bin Mughira from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he said:

“As if I can see that Abdullah bin Sharik Aamiri has worn a black turban
and having long hair is climbing a mountain and along with the Qaim of
us Ahle Bayt (a.s.), there is a 4000 strong army which is marching
forward with slogans of God is the Greatest.”

**82-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Abdullah bin Muhammad has narrated from
Washsha from Ahmad bin Ayez from Abu Khadija that he heard Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“I had prayed that may Allah keep Ismail alive after me but the Almighty
Allah did not accept it. Instead of that He gave me the excellence that
Ismail will be one of the ten who will be raised from the graves and
Abdullah bin Sharik will (only) be one of them and he will be the
standard bearer.”

**83-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Muhammad bin Hasan bin Bandar Qummi has
mentioned in his book that Hasan bin Ahmad bin Maliki narrated from
Ja’far bin Fudhail that he asked Furat if he had met Asbagh.

He replied: Yes, when I met him with my father, he was very old and my
father told him: Please narrate a tradition that you have heard from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) directly.

He said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) remark from the pulpit: I am the
Chief of the aged, I have some similarity with Prophet Ayyub. The
Almighty Allah will gather my group like He united the family of Prophet
Ayyub.

Muhammad bin Furat says that he heard this tradition from Asbagh and he
passed away within a few days; may Allah have mercy on him.

**84-** ***Tafsir Kishi:*** Tahir bin Isa has narrated from Shajai from
Husain bin Bashar from Dawood Raqqi that he told him that he has become
very old.

“My bones have thinned. But I think that my end should be in your path.
He said: “This will indeed happen; if not sooner, later.”

**85-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad Rabah narrated from
Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ghalib from Muhammad bin Walid from Yunus bin
Yaqub from Abdullah bin Khaffa from Aban bin Taghlib that:

“Once I passed by some people and they blamed me even though I take
traditional reports from one who says: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said. This conversation was going on when some boys passed from there
singing this line. I asked: What is it? They said: Between Jamadi and
Rajab there will be a fight between the dead and the living.”

**86-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** I got a collection of sermons of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) written by Sayyid Raziuddin Ali bin Musa bin
Tawus in which it was stated that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) delivered the following sermon which is called
Makhzun:

“All praise is for God, who is one and deserving of praise. He is such a
God who is one in His dominion and is high-ranked in His power. I praise
Him as if I have obtained His Marifat through His way and I have been
inspired His obedience. And the knowledge of the hidden has come to me.
Thus He is deserving of praise for whatever He has bestowed and with
which He tests the creatures, for that He is deserving of thankfulness.
I witness that His statement is real justice and His command is real
mercy. No one has been able to say that He has come into existence now,
except that all have said that: He was before anything came into
existence.

And I witness that Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) is His slave he is the
chief of all His slaves and he is the best of the former and latters.
Whenever the Almighty Allah divided His creatures into two groups, He
placed the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in the best of the two groups. Such a
group in which there was neither any adultery nor extramarital
relationship.

Then the Almighty Allah sent a Prophet from them to you for whom your
hardships seemed very difficult. And who is very kind on the believers.
So follow the laws promulgated by your Lord and do not obey anyone else.

There are very few saints who remember Allah. Indeed the Almighty Allah
has made some people deserving of good, pillars of truth and protectors
of obedience. And He protects them from disobedience and He appoints His
right in them and for them He appointed guards and protectors so that
they may defend them with full strength and help them in this matter,
which is entrusted to them by the Almighty Allah.

So to say: In fact the soul of insight is the soul of life without which
no ones faith is acceptable. Along with it is needed Allah’s word and
His approval is also necessary. Because Kalimah is from soul, and soul
is from Noor and Noor is the light of the heavens. It is the channel and
cause in your hands. And you have got along with it sacrifice and
choice. Whatever the bounty of Allah whose thank you cannot pay, He has
given you all that

specially. These examples are for creatures, which no one knows except
those who act on it practically.

Thus glad tidings to all of you about immediate help of Allah and may
you get an easy victory and success which may please you and your sorrow
may be dispelled. May Allah keep you away from that which the creatures
have reached to the end. It is not hidden from you that at the time of
every obedience, help comes to you from the Almighty Allah, which is
mentioned by the tongues and which reaches to the depths of the hearts.
This is also a help of Allah for His saints, which He shows discreetly
in His bounties in a secret manner and He brings fruits in the branches
of the tree of life and the difference between the enemies and friends
of Allah becomes obvious. For him the Almighty Allah exalts the people
of obedience and degrades the disobedient.

Thus one should prepare his provision, but no provision can be got
without insight and sincerity of intention and submission and well
being. Those who are steadfast in the position of obedience; it will
seen that on Judgment Day their pan of balance will be heavy and the
heaviness of balance of deeds is when the act is according to wisdom.
Destiny is without vision and it is the wisdom of conscience. The people
of disobedience and doubt will be in Hell. Neither they are from us nor
for us nor their return is to us. The hearts of believers are
interspersed with truth. When the Almighty Allah wants to show whatever
is in their hearts, He opens it with revelation and sows wisdom in it.
And the truth is that a time is fixed for everything and one should wait
for that time. By Allah, the Almighty Allah is never in haste. He will
come when time is ripe for him.

So be happy that you are given his glad tidings and testify to that
which is near to you and confess to it with sacrifice in the way of
Allah that he is near to you and you must pray for the fulfillment of
whatever you have been promised. Indeed from our side, the creatures are
given a call that is pure of show-off and hypocrisy. The Almighty Allah
will show the evident proof through him and complete His favor and send
his blessings on one who is attached to him. He will honor them with
wisdom. The Almighty Allah has through His mercy given some mercy to you
and through His same mercy has illuminated your hearts and removed the
burden of sins from your necks. He has given immediate cure to your
hearts, and reformed your affairs and from our side, peace be upon you
all from us and through which security may reach the properties of the
time and the wombs of mothers. Without any doubt, the Almighty Allah has
selected a community for His religion and chosen them for establishment
of faith and its support. Through them, He expressed the word of Islam
and laws of Quran and obedience of the Almighty Allah.

Then without any doubt the Almighty Allah specialized you with Islam and
purified you because of it, because it is the actual security and unity.
The Almighty Allah selected him and explained His decisive proof and
favored him with His mercy. Fixed its limits and explained its
qualities. And it was somewhat that the creatures should be pleased with
Him as He Himself has described his morals and excellence and mentioned
his practice and stabilized his covenant in the outward and inward
spheres. He is the

owner of sweetness and security. Thus whoever saw him, saw the miracles
of sight at its source. And whoever saw its hidden aspect, saw the
concealed matters and strange examples.

Thus its outward is pleasing and inward is deep. Its wonders do not come
to an end. It contains springs of bounties and lamps that remove
darkness. The doers of goodness open only through His keys. Darkness is
dispelled only through His lamps and in it is detail and
interpretations. In it are mentioned two exalted names (Muhammad and
Ali), which are gathered at one place. These two names do not benefit as
long as they are taken together. If you believe in one and deny the
other, it is of no use. And when these two names are pronounced, they
should be with Marifat (cognition).

When they are described, they should be described together. They will
remain on their appointed positions till all survive. There are stars
for both of them and there is another star on them, which is like the
evident proofs. It is mentioned in Quran and its limits are narrated.
They are the carriers of divine treasure where the treasure is deposited
and the weight of its balance is mentioned as well as His judgments.

Indeed, the protectors of religion have drawn a line between certainty
and doubt and they came with manifest truth and laid the foundation of
Islam and established evidences for it, which are sufficient and
curative to those who seek it. These defenders of Islam polish Islam and
protect its crop. They avoid whatever must be avoided. And by the
command of the Almighty Allah they remain friendly to His beloved and
they mentioned those with Allah who should be remembered with Him. They
remain attached to Wilayat. They speak in a nice way and help each other
in exchange of views. They cooperate with each other and are generous
and well mannered and behave nicely with others.

There is no share in this for the miser. And there is no way for the
unseen. Whoever gained something from this depth, he has imbued himself
with the best of morals and has obtained certainty and changed his
destination from bad to good and made it sacred through considering it
lawful. Through that fixed covenant, which is a vow that one has taken
in sincerity of faith and treading the straight path and on the basis of
this covenant, they remain attached to each other. This is like the
growth, which is dispersed and some of it falls to the ground and some
of it is harvested till all of it comes to an end. Like the owner and
others take advantage of the crops, in the same way is the knowledge of
protectors of religion through which all benefit. Thus wait for commands
and prohibitions in the short tenure and in the short stop of your
journey till the destination is changed and the center is altered and
its recognitions are transformed.

Thus glad tidings to the owner of an immaculate conscience who obeys his
leader and remains away from those who reject him. Such a man enters
divine mercy and reaches to a secure path. He makes his insight seeing
and obeys his guide. He is proved through the best of proofs. The
curtain of ignorance is moved from his eyes. So whoever intended
contemplation has understood his estimation and expressed himself
through guidance although its door had not been closed. Even then he
opened the causes of guidance and followed the advice of the well wisher
with humility. Everlasting peace

and greetings on that humble ones who compete with each other in faith
and recognize the system of justice and accept the advice of the
advisors when he says: Be fearful before the terror of Judgment Day
arrives.

Doubtlessly, our matter is difficult; on the contrary most difficult. No
one can bear it except the proximate angel, a messenger prophet or one
whose heart, Allah has tested for faith. Our traditions do not protect
except those hearts which are like strong forts or breasts, which are
absolutely trustworthy, or intellects which are dignified; ‘It is a
matter of great surprise that between Jamadi and Rajab.’

Upon this a person arose from Shartul Khamis and said: “O Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) what is surprising about it?”

He said: “Why I should not be surprised while the divine decree has been
issued for you? You don’t understand the meaning of traditions, know
that, there will be many voices and deaths will occur between them and
bodies of people will be cut up and drop like vegetation and the dead
will be made alive. It will be a matter of surprise between Jamadi and
Rajab.”

Another person asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), what is that about
which you are expressing your surprise again and again?”

He said: “May your mother mourn for you, what is more surprising than
that the dead will emerge from the grave and hit upon the heads of the
living?”

Then someone asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), when and how will this
come about?”

He replied: “By the one who split the seed and created humans. As if I
can see that the dead who are enlivened, are roaming in the lanes of
Kufa with swords drawn out, and slaying the enemies of Allah, His
Messenger and believers. Thus the Almighty Allah has said about it that:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَوَلَّوْا قَوْمًا غَضِبَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِمْ قَدْ يَئِسُوا مِنَ الْآخِرَةِ كَمَا يَئِسَ الْكُفَّارُ مِنْ
أَصْحَابِ الْقُبُورِ
</p>

***“O you who believe! do not make friends with a people with whom Allah
is wroth; indeed they despair of the hereafter as the unbelievers
despair of those in tombs.” (Surah Mumtahina 60:13)***

Listen, O people, ask whatever you want, before you don’t find me;
because I am more aware of the paths of the heavens more than the paths
of the earth. I am the leader of faith and the aim of the former ones. I
am the tongue of pious and the seal of the successors. I am the heir of
the prophets and caliph of the Lord of the Worlds. I am the distributor
of Hell and the treasurer of Paradise and the owner of Hauz Kauthar. I
am the one who will be present at the heavenly heights (Araaf). All of
us Imams will be aware of his followers, thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُنذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
</p>

***“You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people.”
(Surah Raad 13:7)***

O people, ask me whatever you want before the mischief rises from the
east and the dead become alive again and begin to trample the living. Or
the

stack of logs burn in the west creating huge flames. And along with
evil, enmity and malice its like calamities descend and the protests
rise up.

And you all begin to say that he (Imam Zamana) is either killed or has
gone to some wilderness. Thus the following verse will be realized on
that day:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

But for the interpretation of this verse there are some signs. The first
sign is the siege of Kufa, which will be carried out through towers and
moats.

Then the shredding of water skins and burning them in lanes of Kufa. The
suspension of Masjids for forty days, waving of three flags around the
great Masjid, which will be the flags of guidance. But the killer and
the killed will both be condemned to Hell. The killing will be excessive
and death will be common. The Pure Soul will be killed between Rukn and
Maqam and the killing of his seventy men on the outskirts of Kufa will
take place as well as the and execution of those who united with the
Satans to pay allegiance to idols.

The second sign is rise of Sufyani with crucifix of gold and green
flags. His chief will be a man from Bani Kalab. Sufyani will send out a
twelve thousand-strong force to Mecca and Medina under the command of a
man from Bani Umayyah named Khuzaimah, who will be blind in his left eye
and a lump of blood will hang out from his other eye. He will be
tyrannical to the people and no will be able to subdue him, till he
reaches Medina and gathers some men and women of Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
and sends them to the house of Abul Hasan Umawi.

Then he will send a force in search of a man from Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
around whom a group of the deprived will be gathered. When this army of
Sufyani reaches Baidha near Safa Abyaz, the whole army will sink in the
sand and except for one, no one will survive and the Almighty Allah will
turn his face to his back to warn the Sufyanis. Thus on that day the
following verse will also be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place.”
(Surah Saba 34:51)***

Also Sufyani will send a 130000 strong force to Kufa. They will halt at
the Rauaha, Farooq, Qadisiya at the place of Maryam and Isa (a.s.).
Eighty thousand will camp at the place of the grave of Hud and Nakhila
and they will create furor on Eidus Zuha. At that time the ruler will be
a tyrant and it is possible that people call him a sorcerer and
soothsayer. He will come out with 5000 soothsayers from Zora (Baghdad)
and kill so many people at the bridge that the river will be red with
blood and filled with corpses. People will stop drinking water from it.
In Kufa, he will make captive of virgins who had so far remained in
perfect Hijab. He will send them to Najaf on camels.

After that a hundred thousand army including some polytheists and
hypocrites will come out to Kufa and reach Damascus and camp there and
no one will be able to stop them. The garden of Shaddad is located in
that area. Then some flags will arrive from the west; of neither cotton
nor silk and their poles will have the seal of the Prophet. They will be
led by a person from Aale Muhammad (a.s.). They would be such that if
they are unfurled, in the east, their fragrance will reach to west like
the scent of musk and amber and its awe will be perceived by the enemies
at a distance of a month’s journey.

In Kufa, the son of Sadul Saqa will be demanding the revenge for the
blood of his ancestors, but it will be the progeny of sinners. Meanwhile
the army of Imam Husain (a.s.) will move to them. Both will try to kill
each other. All these will be exhausted. One of them will cry out: There
is no good in any gathering after today. O Allah, we seek forgiveness
and prostrate with humility. These are the Abdal, whom the Almighty
Allah has described in the following words:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ
</p>

***“…surely Allah loves those who turn much (to Him), and He loves those
who purify themselves.” (Surah Baqarah 2:222)***

Such people can only be found in Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Then a monk from Najran will rise up and accept the call of the Imam and
he will be the first among Christians to do so and he will demolish the
monastery, throw away his crucifix and come out with the army of slaves
and the poor carrying the standard of guidance and move to Nakhila and
people from every area will conglomerate at the place of Farooq. He will
be the decisive proof of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) which will be located
between Bars and Euphrates. On that day three thousand will be killed
from the Jews and Christians of the world. The interpretation of the
following verse will be realized on that day:

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَا زَالَت تِّلْكَ دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ حَصِيدًا
خَامِدِينَ
</p>

***“And this ceased not to be their cry till We made them cut off,
extinct.” (Surah Anbiya 21:15)***

They would have always claimed thus till their heads will be striked off
and they will be silent under the swords.

Only an evil-eyed person from Bani Ashab will survive with a few persons
and he will flee with them to Sibtari near Damascus and they will rest
under a tree. On that day the interpretation of the following verse will
be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
فَلَمَّا أَحَسُّوا بَأْسَنَا إِذَا هُم مِّنْهَا يَرْكُضُونَ لَا
تَرْكُضُوا وَارْجِعُوا إِلَى مَا أُتْرِفْتُمْ فِيهِ وَمَسَاكِنِكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْأَلُونَ
</p>

***“So when they felt Our punishment, lo! they began to fly from it. Do
not fly (now) and come back to what you were made to lead easy lives in
and to your dwellings, haply you will be questioned.” (Surah Anbiya
21:12-13)***

Their abodes will house treasures containing wealth they had plundered
from Muslims and they will sink in the ground at that time and stones
will rain and they will be transmogrified. Then the interpretation of
the following verse will be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا هِيَ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ بِبَعِيدٍ
</p>

***“…and it is not far off from the unjust.” (Surah Hud 11:83)***

In the month of Ramadhan, at the time of sunrise a caller will call out
from the east: “O people of guidance come here.”

After sunset, a call will be raised from the west: “O people of
guidance, come here.”

The following day at noon, the sun will become dull and black. On the
third day the people of the truth will be separated from the people of
falsehood by the advent of Dabbatul Ardh. The group of truth will move
to a village of Rome by the sea and pass by the cave of the people of
the Cave. The Almighty Allah will revive the people of the Cave, one of
them will be Malikha and another Kamsalmina and they will be witnesses
of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and they would submit to him.

After that he will send one of them to Rome and he will return from
there unsuccessful. Then he will send the other and he will return
successful. At that time the interpretation of the following verse will
be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
</p>

***“…and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:83)***

Then the Almighty Allah will revive a group from every nation and send
it to them to show them that which they had been promised. At that time
the interpretation of the following verse will be realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

And the Great Siddiq [Ali (a.s.)] will set out with Zulfiqar and his
attendants and reach the land of migration twice and this will be Kufa.
He will demolish the Masjid and rebuild it again on the original
foundations and raze whatever was built during the rule of tyrants.
After that he will move to Basra and reach near the sea. He will be
having the Ark of tranquility and staff of Prophet Musa (a.s.). There
will be hard times in Basra and when he returns from there that place
will become a stormy sea and no place will remain except the Masjid will
be floating in the sea and everywhere there will be water.

After that he will move to Harur and burn it up and coming out from the
gate of Bani Saad reach the tribe of Thaqif who are the farmers of
Firon. After that he will move to Egypt and address the people. After
that justice will be established on the whole earth. The sky will rain,
trees will fructify and earth will throw out its minerals and the earth
will be decorated for its inhabitants. Wild beasts will roam with tamed
quadrupeds. So much

knowledge will be given to believers that they will not be in need of
others. At that time the interpretation of the following verse will be
realized:

<p dir="rtl">
يُغْنِ اللّهُ كُلاًّ مِّن سَعَتِهِ
</p>

***“…Allah will render them both free from want out of His ampleness…”
(Surah Nisa 4:130)***

The earth will put out its treasures for him and the Imam Qaim will ask
the people to enjoy it all in return for their past hardships. Thus
Muslims will be rightly guided and they will have the permission to have
debates. At that time, the interpretation of the following verse will be
realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَاء رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا
</p>

***“And your Lord comes and (also) the angels in ranks.” (Surah Fajr
89:22)***

On that day the Almighty Allah will not accept any religion, except His
true faith. Know that the religion is only for Allah. At that time the
interpretation of the following verse will be realized:

أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا نَسُوقُ الْمَاء إِلَى الْأَرْضِ الْجُرُزِ
فَنُخْرِجُ بِهِ زَرْعًا تَأْكُلُ مِنْهُ أَنْعَامُهُمْ وَأَنفُسُهُمْ
أَفَلَا يُبْصِرُونَ {27{وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَى هَذَا الْفَتْحُ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ {28{قُلْ يَوْمَ الْفَتْحِ لَا يَنفَعُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
إِيمَانُهُمْ وَلَا هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ {29} فَأَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ وَانتَظِرْ
إِنَّهُم مُّنتَظِرُونَ

***“Do they not see that We drive the water to a land having no herbage,
then We bring forth thereby seed-produce of which their cattle and they
themselves eat; will they not then see? And they say: When will this
judgment take place, if you are truthful? Say: On the day of judgment
the faith of those who (now) disbelieve will not profit them, nor will
they be respited. Therefore turn away from them and wait, surely they
too are waiting.” (Surah Sajdah 32:27-30)***

Thus there will be a period of more than three hundred years between the
rising of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and his death and he will have 313
companions, nine of whom will be from Bani Israel and seventy from Jinns
and 234 others. Seventy of them will also be of those who had become
angry when the polytheists had attacked the Prophet and they had sought
permission for Jihad, but he did not permit them and at that time the
following verse was revealed:

<p dir="rtl">
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ
كَثِيرًا وَانتَصَرُوا مِن بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ
ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنقَلَبٍ يَنقَلِبُونَ
</p>

***“Except those who believe and do good and remember Allah much, and
defend themselves after they are oppressed; and they who act unjustly
shall know to what final place of turning they shall turn back.” (Surah
Shoara 26:227)***

And twenty of them will be from Yemenites including Miqdad bin Aswad and
two hundred and fourteen will come from the coastal area of Aden, who
were invited to Islam by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and they had
responded positively.

Among the unnamed will be 1870 persons and 40000 angels, out of which
3000 will be dressed for war. 5000 will be arrayed in ranks. In this way
Imam Qaim (a.s.) will have in all 47130 supporters and nine of his
commanders will be from angels. 4000 will be from men and jinns equal to
those who attended the Battle of Badr. All of them will fight with the
enemies of Allah and Allah will help them. They will be successful. Some
of them will be extremely handsome and fresh.”

The author says: I have quoted the above report exactly as I found
although many mistakes and interpolations are seen in the text and the
original author has also confessed to it, but yet he has quoted it since
it contains many useful points.

**87-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Husain bin Muhammad and Muhammad bin Yahya has
narrated from Muhammad bin Salim bin Abu Salama from Hasan bin Shazan
Wasti that:

“Once he complained in writing to Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that the people
of Wast harassed him and attacked him in different ways, especially the
group of Uthmanis. So the Imam (a.s.) replied: Indeed the Almighty Allah
has took the promise of patience during the rule of tyrants, so be
patient. When the chief of the creatures will rise up, the same people
will say:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا وَيْلَنَا مَن بَعَثَنَا مِن مَّرْقَدِنَا هَذَا مَا وَعَدَ
الرَّحْمَنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
</p>

***“O woe to us! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place? This is
what the Beneficent God promised and the apostles told the truth.”
(Surah Yasin 36:52)***

**88-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِذَا جَاء وَعْدُ الآخِرَةِ
</p>

***“So when the second promise came…” (Surah Isra 17:7)***

That the promise implies Imam Qaim and his companions.

<p dir="rtl">
وُجُوهَكُمْ
</p>

***“…that they may bring you to grief…” (Surah Isra 17:7)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَلِيَدْخُلُواْ الْمَسْجِدَ كَمَا دَخَلُوهُ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
</p>

***“…and that they may enter the mosque as they entered it the first
time…” (Surah Isra 17:7)***

That is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and his companions and Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and his companions.

89- Tafsir Qummi:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّى إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ
</p>

***“…until they see what they were promised…” (Surah Maryam 19:73)***

He said: It implies Imam Qaim and Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

**90-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ayyashi* that
Salih bin Sahl narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them…” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

Imam (a.s.) said: It means that in Karra (Rajat) Imam Husain (a.s.) will
come for the second time with his seventy companions wearing two-sided
gold helmets.”

**91-** ***Irshad:*** Masada bin Sadaqah has narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has said:

“I am the chief of the aged. I have a Sunnah of Prophet Ayyub (a.s.). By
Allah, from me the Almighty Allah will gather my Ahle Bayt He gathered
for Prophet Yaqub (a.s.). It will be when people will begin to say that
the Qaim is dead or killed.

**92-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Saad has narrated from Ahmad bin
Muhammad and Abdullah bin Aamir bin Saad from Muhammad bin Khalid from
Thumali from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) used
to say:

“One who desired to fight the companions of Dajjal should fight with
those who weep at the killing of Uthman and the Kharijis. One who meets
Allah having belief that Uthman was killed unjustly will meet Allah when
He will be infuriated with him, even though he may not live till the
time of Dajjal.”

A man asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), whether he dies before the time
of Dajjal?”

“Yes, he will be raised from the grave during the time of Dajjal and if
he brings faith on Dajjal, he will be degraded.”

**93-** ***Ilalush Sharai:*** Majiluwayh has narrated from his uncle
from Barqi from his father from Muhammad bin Sulaiman from Dawood bin
Noman from Abdur Rahim Qasir that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“When our Qaim rises up, Humaira will be brought to him and he will
apply the penalty on her and take revenge of Fatima binte Muhammad…etc.
etc.”

**94-** ***Irshad:*** Abdul Karim Khathami has narrated from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that:

“When it will be time of the advent of Imam Qaim, there will be such
rain from the month of Jamadiul Akhir till 10th of Rajab that the world
has not seen such rain ever, due to which flesh will grow on the dead
believers in the grave. As if I can see them coming from Jahniya dusting
their heads.”

**95-** ***Elamul Wara*** **and** ***Irshad:*** Mufaddal bin Umar has
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Twenty seven persons will appear with Imam Qaim from the outskirts of
Kufa; fourteen of them will brother from the nation of Musa (a.s.),
regarding whom the Holy Quran says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِن قَوْمِ مُوسَى أُمَّةٌ يَهْدُونَ بِالْحَقِّ وَبِهِ يَعْدِلُونَ
</p>

***“And of Musa’s people was a party who guided (people) with the truth,
and thereby did they do justice.” (Surah Araaf 7:159)***

And seven will be from the people of the Cave and Yusha bin Nun, Prophet
Sulaiman, Abu Dujanah Ansari, Miqdad and Malik Ashtar will also
accompany him.

**96-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed from Yahya
bin Zakariya from Yusuf bin Kalib from Ibne Bataini from Ibne Hamid from

Thumali from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“When the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) stages an uprising, the Almighty
Allah will send angels for his help. And the first to come with him will
be Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and Imam Ali (a.s.) etc., etc.”

**97-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Saad has narrated from Hasan bin Ali Zaituni
from Himyari together from Ahmad bin Hilal from Ibne Mahbub from Imam
Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said in a long tradition about the signs of the
reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.), in which he said:

“A whole man will be seen in the circle of the sun who will be calling
that he is Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and he has come to the world again to
eliminate the enemies and oppressors.”

**98-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Fazal has narrated from Muhammad bin Ali
from Ja’far bin Bashir from Khalid bin Ammara from Mufaddal bin Umar
that he said:

“Once we were discussing the subject of Imam Qaim and those who died
waiting for him from among us. Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: When the
Qaim rises up, someone will come and say in the grave of every believer:
Your Imam has risen, if you want to join, you may do so. Otherwise you
may continue to lie in the mercy of God.”

**99-** ***Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih:*** Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa and Husain
bin Ibrahim bin Ahmad Katib from Muhammad bin Abu Abdullah Kufi from
Muhammad bin Ismail Barmaki from Musa bin Abdullah Nakhai from Abul
Hasan the third, Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) that he says in Ziyarat Jamia:

“O Allah, make me of those who keep his heritage in sight and who walk
on his way and take guidance from him and are gathered in his group. And
with them they also do Rajat in the world and live during his rule. That
they gain through Your blessings and enjoy the bounties and cool their
eyes on seeing him.”

It is mentioned in Ziyarat Wida that may the Almighty Allah also make us
alive during the period of your Rajat.

**100-** ***At-Tahdhib:*** A group of our scholars has narrated from
Harun bin Musa Talakbari from Muhammad bin Ali bin Moammar from Ali bin
Muhammad Masadah and Hasan bin Ali bin Faddal from Sadan bin Muslim from
Safwan bin Mahran Jammal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in Ziyarat
Arbaeen:

“I testify that I have faith in you and have certainty in your second
coming in the world.”

**101-** ***Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih:*** Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“One who does not believe in our Rajat and does not consider Mutah
lawful, is not from us.”

**102-** ***Al-Kafi:*** A group of narrators has narrated from Sahl bin
Ziyad from Muhammad bin Sulaiman Dailami from his father from Abu Basir
that he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ
</p>

***“And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths:
Allah will not raise up him who dies.” (Surah Nahl 16:38)***

Imam (a.s.) asked: O Abu Basir what is your opinion about this verse?

I replied: The polytheists thought so and they used to swear to the
Prophet that the Almighty Allah would definitely not revive the dead.

Imam (a.s.): Pity for the one who believes this. Ask him whether the
idolaters used to swear by Allah or by Laat and Uzza?

I said: You only tell us about it.

Imam (a.s.) said: O Abu Basir, when our Qaim reappears, the Almighty
Allah will revive a group of Shia and send to him, holding swords ready
to strike. This information will reach those Shia who would be alive at
that time and not dead. So and so, so and so and so and so have emerged
from their graves and are in the company of Imam Qaim. And when this
news reaches to our enemies, they will say: O Shia people, you are great
liars. This is only your rule in that also you lie? By Allah, no; they
will not become alive till Judgment Day. The Almighty Allah has
mentioned their statement in this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ
</p>

***“And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths:
Allah will not raise up him who dies.” (Surah Nahl 16:38)***

In*Tafsir Ayyashi* there is a similar report from Abu Basir.

Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.) has narrated a similar tradition in*Tafsir Quran
Fee Ahle Bayt (a.s.)* from Abu Harasa from Ibrahim bin Ishaq from
Abdullah bin Hammad from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).

**103-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Some scholars has narrated from Sahl from Ibne
Shamun from Isaam from Abdullah bin Qasim Batal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَى بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ فِي الْكِتَابِ لَتُفْسِدُنَّ فِي
الأَرْضِ مَرَّتَيْنِ
</p>

***“And We had made known to the children of Israel in the Book: Most
certainly you will make mischief in the land twice…” (Surah Bani Israel
17:4)***

That is you will slay Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and martyr Imam Husain
(a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَتَعْلُنَّ عُلُوًّا كَبِيرًا
</p>

***“…and most certainly you will behave insolently with great
insolence.” (Surah Isra 17:4)***

That is you will slay Imam Husain (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِذَا جَاء وَعْدُ أُولاهُمَا
</p>

***“So when the promise for the first of the two came…” (Surah Isra
17:5)***

That is the killing of Husain (a.s.). When it will be time for the
revenge of the killing of Husain (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
بَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَادًا لَّنَا أُوْلِي بَأْسٍ شَدِيدٍ فَجَاسُواْ
خِلاَلَ الدِّيَارِ
</p>

***“…We sent over you Our servants, of mighty prowess, so they went to
and fro among the houses…” (Surah Isra 17:5)***

That is this will the community, which the Almighty Allah will send
before the rising of the Qaim and they will not leave anyone from the
enemies of Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
وَكَانَ وَعْدًا مَّفْعُولاً
</p>

***“…and it was a promise to be accomplished.” (Surah Isra 17:5)***

That is the promise of the rising of the Qaim.

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them…” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

That is Imam Husain (a.s.) will rise with seventy companions wearing
gold helmets and they will tell the people that this is Imam Husain
(a.s.) who has done Rajat and the believers will have no doubt about it.
And that he is neither Dajjal nor Shaitan. And the Hujjat Qaim will be
before them. When all the believers will have a firm certainty that he
is really Imam Husain (a.s.), His Eminence, Hujjat (a.s.) will die and
Imam Husain (a.s.) will bathe, shroud, anoint and bury him in his own
grave, because only a Wasi can perform the last rites of a Wasi.

**104-** ***Misbahain:*** Some scholars have narrated from Abu Abdullah
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Khaza bin Sawfan bin Mahran Jammal
from his father from his grandfather, Safwan that:

“I sought the permission of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) to perform the
Ziyarat of Imam Husain (a.s.) and also asked him about the method of his
Ziyarat. He told me about all the methods and also mentioned the
following in the text of the Ziyarat: That I make Allah as a witness and
His angels and His prophets messengers that I have faith in you Imams
and I have certainty in your Rajat.”

**105-** ***Misbahain:*** The same sentence is present in the Ziyarat of
Abbas bin Ali (a.s.):

“I have faith in you Imams and am certain of your Rajat.”

**106-** ***Misbahain*** and***Misbahuz Zair:*** Ibne Ayyash has
narrated from Khair bin Abdullah from Husain bin Rauh that he said:

“You must perform the Ziyarat of whichever tomb you are close to and you
must recite as follows while entering: …and that you are successful in
Rajat.”

107- Iqbalul Aamaal and Misbahain:

Abul Qasim bin Hala Hamadani, the representative of Imam Hasan Askari
(a.s.) got an epistle that Imam Husain (a.s.) was born on Thursday, 3rd
Shaban. So on that day you must keep fast and recite the following
supplication:

In this statement, Yaumul Karra means Rajat and the last sentence of
this Dua is “…We will keep waiting for their return.”

**108-** ***Misbahuz Zair:*** The Ziyarat of Imam Qaim (a.s.) in the
cellar has the following sentences:

“O Lord, give me Taufeeq to obey the Imam Qaim (a.s.) in his time and
his service and living in his rule and not to disobey him and if I die
before his rising, please make me of those who become alive after his

reappearance, live in his rule and stay under his flag, who gather in
his army and whose eyes are lighted with his sight.”

**109-** ***Misbahuz Zair:*** It is mentioned in another Ziyarat of
Sahibul Amr that:

“O Maula, if I die before your reappearance, I pray to Allah through
your sake that He sends blessings on Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
and make me alive again in the time of your kingdom and that I should do
Rajat in your time so that I obey you and gain pleasure from it and that
I should be pleased to see your enemies killed.”

**110-** ***Misbahuz Zair:*** It is mentioned in another Ziyarat that:

“O Allah, show me the face of the master of your affair whether in my
life or after my death. O Allah, before the owner of the tomb I seek
your proximity through the belief in Rajat.”

Dua Ahad
--------

**111-** ***Misbahuz Zair:*** It is mentioned in another Ziyarat from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that:

“One who supplicated through this vow for forty days will be included
among the helpers of our Qaim and if he dies before his reappearance,
the Almighty Allah will raise him from his grave and include him among
the companions of Imam Zamana (a.s.). In exchange of each of these
words, He will write a thousand good deeds and erase a thousand sins
from his scroll of deeds.

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. O Allah! Lord of the
great light, Lord of the elevated throne, Lord of the tumultuous seas
and the revealer of the Taurat, Injil and Zabur, Lord of the shadows and
the warmths, and the revealer of the Great Quran. Lord of the proximate
angels and Prophets and Messengers. O Allah, I beseech thee, for the
sake of Your noble visage. And for the sake of Your enlightening visage,
and Your ever-existing kingdom. O Ever-living! O Controller! I beseech
thee in Your name. Which lits the heavens and the Earths; and in Your
name, by which the ancient and the latter ones become upright. O
Ever-living Who was before every living being. O Ever-living Who shall
(exist) after every living being. O Ever-living who existed when there
was no life. O giver of life to dead. O one who causes death to the
living ones. O Ever-living. There is no god except You. O Allah send our
master, the leader, the Guide, the guided, the upriser with Your
command. Blessings of Allah be on him and his pure forefathers. From all
the believing men and believing women. In the easts of the earth and its
wests, in its plains and its mountains, its lands and its seas, from me
and my parents. Blessings, which are the weight of Allah’s throne and
ink on his words, and whatever His knowledge enumerates and his book
encompasses. O Allah renew for him my covenant, pledge and allegiance on
my neck in the morning of this day of mine and whatever days (of my
life) I live. I shall never turn away from it nor let it ever vanish. O
Allah, appoint me among his helpers, aides and his protectors. Those who
hasten to fulfill his commands and obey his orders. Those who are his
supporters and compete with each other to (fulfill) his intention and
seek martyrdom in his presence. O Allah! If death occurs between me and
him (before the

reappearance) (death which You have made obligatory and decreed for Your
servants, then raise me from my grave, wrapped in my shroud, my sword
unsheathed, my spear bared, answering the call of the caller in cities
as well as deserts. O Allah! Show me the rightly guided face of (Imam
a.s.), the praiseworthy moon and enlighten my vision by looking at him.
Hasten his reappearance, make his arrival smooth, vasten his path, make
me tread on his way and implement his authority and strengthen his back.
O Allah, inhabit Your cities through him, and give life to your servants
due to him for surely You have said and Your word is
truth,***“Corruption will become rampant in land and on sea because of
the evil which men’s hand have earned.”*** Then O Allah! Manifest for us
Your slave and the son of Your Prophet’s daughter, whose name is same as
that of Your Messenger. So that nothing from falsehood is victorious,
except that he tears them (falsehood) to pieces, establishes the truth
and the truth confirms him. And O Allah! Appoint him as a refuge for
Your oppressed servant and a helper for the one who does not find any
helper for himself except You and the renewer of all the laws of Your
book, which have been tempered with and rebuilder of the signs of Your
religion and of Your Prophet (peace of Allah be on him and his Progeny).
And O Allah! Make him among those whom You have protected from the evils
of the adversaries. O Allah! And provide joy to your Prophet Muhammad
(Peace be on him and his Progeny). By his vision and (the vision of) the
one who follows him on his call. O Allah! Remove this sorrow (of
occultation) from this nation with his presence and hasten for us his
reappearance. They (the disbelievers) consider it to be distant while we
consider it to be near. For the sake of Your mercy, O the most Merciful
of all mercifuls.

…hit your hand on your thigh and say thrice:

Hasten! Hasten! O my Master, O master of the era.

**112-** ***Misbahuz Zair:*** It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that:

“One who wants to perform the Ziyarat of Imams (a.s.) and the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) from afar should recite as follows:

Indeed, I confess to the excellence of you all and have belief in your
Rajat and I don’t deny the power of Allah. I only want that which is
approved by the Almighty Allah.”

**113-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad from
Muhammad bin Sinan from Ammar bin Marwan from a person who heard from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in a long tradition about the capturing of the
soul of the believer that:

The Imam (a.s.) said: “Then that believer does the Ziyarat of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.) and Jannat Rizvi. He eats and drinks and sitting in
their company will continue to talk with them till our Qaim appears. And
when he reappears, the Almighty Allah will make those believers alive
again and send them to the world. They will come to him saying Labbaik
one after the other. At that time the people of falsehood will be
involved in doubt and the proximate ones will be successful.”

That is why the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: “O Ali, you are my brother
and the place of our meeting is in Wadius Salam.”

**114-** It is mentioned in the same book that Fazal has narrated from
Salih bin Hamza from Hasan bin Abdullah from Abu Abdullah, Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“I am the great Farooq and the owner of Misam. I am the owner of the
first and the second gathering. I am the one who will return in Rajat
again and again. I am the first ruler. Through me the promise of Allah
will be fulfilled and His word would be completed. And the religion will
be perfected through me.”

**115-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** Husain bin Muhammad bin Aamir from
Ahmad bin Ishaq bin Saad from Sadan bin Muslim from Abu Basir that he
said: One of our companions said regarding the Ziyarat of Imam Husain
(a.s.):

“Maula, my help is ready for you all. So much so that the Almighty Allah
commands and you are sent to the world again. I am only with you and not
with your enemies. I believe in your Rajat. I don’t deny the power of
Allah and neither do I deny the will of Allah and I don’t even doubt
that what Allah wants will not happen.”

**116-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** It is mentioned that Abu Abdur Rahman
Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Hasan Askari and Muhammad bin Hasan, all of them
have narrated from Hasan bin Ali bin Mahziyar from his father from Ibne
Abu Umair from Muhammad bin Marwan from Abu Hamza Thumali from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that the following is mentioned in the Ziyarat of
Imam Husain (a.s.):

“Maula, my help is ready for you Imams, till the Almighty Allah will
make us alive again for His religion. I witness that you are decisive
proofs of Allah. Due to you one can hope for divine mercy. Thus I am
with you, and not with your enemies. I have faith in your Rajat and I
don’t deny the power of Allah neither I falsify His will.

O Allah, send mercy on Amirul Momineen (a.s.) who is Your servant and
the brother of Your Messenger. O Allah, complete Your words through him
and fulfill Your promise through him. Destroy all Your enemies through
them and include us among their friends and devotees and make us their
helpers in Your obedience and the obedience of Your Messenger. O Lord of
the worlds.”

**117-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** My father and a group of teachers have
narrated from Muhammad bin Yahya Attar and Muhammad bin Matt Jauhari all
have narrated, from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Yahya from Ali bin Hassan
from Urwah bin Akhi Shuaib Aqarqufi from a person that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said: when you reach near the grave of Imam Husain (a.s.) you
must say:

“O Allah, do not make this Ziyarat as the last the Ziyarat of the son of
Your Prophet. O Allah, make him reach the Maqam Mahmud and take help for
Your religion from him. Eliminate your enemies through him, because it
is Your promise and You are the Lord who does not go against His
promise.

You can recite this on the grave of every Imam.”

**118-** ***Iqbalul Aamaal:*** It is recommended to recite the
supplication, which contains the following sentence on the Day of Dahwul
Ardh:

“And (O Lord) send us also during the Rajat of the Imam (a.s.) so that
we may be included among his helpers.”

**119-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** The Imam said in the interpretation of the
following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قُتِلَ الْإِنسَانُ مَا أَكْفَرَهُ
</p>

***“Cursed be man! how ungrateful is he!” (Surah Abasa 80:17)***

That it implies Amirul Momineen (a.s.). “Maa Akfara hu” means what was
the crime of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) for which he was killed?

After that:

مِنْ أَيِّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ {18}

***“Of what thing did He create him?” (Surah Abasa 80:18)***

مِن نُّطْفَةٍ خَلَقَهُ فَقَدَّرَهُ {19} ثُمَّ السَّبِيلَ يَسَّرَهُ {20}

***“Of a small seed; He created him, then He made him according to a
measure. Then (as for) the way- He has made it easy (for him).” (Surah
Abasa 80:19-20)***

That is doing of good is made easy for him.

ثُمَّ أَمَاتَهُ فَأَقْبَرَهُ {21} ثُمَّ إِذَا شَاء أَنشَرَهُ {22}

***“Then He causes him to die, then assigns to him a grave. Then when He
pleases, He will raise him to life again.” (Surah Abasa 80:21-22)***

It implies the time of Rajat.

<p dir="rtl">
كَلَّا لَمَّا يَقْضِ مَا أَمَرَهُ
</p>

***“Nay; but he has not done what He bade him.” (Surah Abasa 80:23)***

That is Amirul Momineen (a.s.) has not been able to complete what he has
been commanded; so he will come back again during Rajat and complete it.

It is narrated from Abu Salma that once he asked Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) about the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قُتِلَ الْإِنسَانُ مَا أَكْفَرَهُ
</p>

***“Cursed be man! how ungrateful is he!” (Surah Abasa 80:17)***

The Imam said that it was revealed about Amirul Momineen (a.s.).

That is his creation is from the Teenat of the prophets and he was
destined for good. Then the way guidance became easy. Then he died like
the prophets. Then I asked what is the meaning of:

ثُمَّ إِذَا شَاء أَنشَرَهُ {22}

***“Then when He pleases, He will raise him to life again.” (Surah Abasa
80:21-22)***

The Imam said: It means that after his martyrdom, he will come again
during the period of Rajat and complete his commission.

**120-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Muhammad bin Abbas narrated from
Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Husain from Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman from
Muhammad bin Abdul Hamid from Mufaddal bin Salih from Jabir from Abu
Abdullah Jadali who said:

One day I went to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and he said: “I am the
Dabbatul Ardh.”

Among the signs regarding the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) mentioned
by Amirul Momineen (a.s.) is the mention of the killing of Dajjal, after
which he said: “Know that, after this is Tammatul Kubra.”

“We asked what is Tammatul Kubra, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

He replied: “The Dabbatul Ardh will appear near the Safa mountain. He
will have the ring of Sulaiman and the staff of Musa (a.s.). He will
touch that ring to the forehead of every believer and it will be
imprinted that he is really a believer and when he touches the forehead
of the infidels, it will show that he is really a Kafir etc.”

**121-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** Fazal bin Shazan from Hasan bin Mahbub from
Amr bin Abil Miqdam from Ja’far Jofi that he heard Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) say:

“By Allah, after the passing away of Imam Qaim, a person from us Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will rule for three hundred and nine years.”

I asked: “When will this be?”

He replied: “After the Imam Qaim.”

I asked: “For how many years will Imam Qaim rule on the earth after
reappearance?”

He replied: “Nineteen years. After that Muntasir [Imam Husain (a.s.)]
will do Rajat and he will kill the enemies of Imam Husain (a.s.) in
revenge till Saffah [Amirul Momineen (a.s.)] will do Rajat.”

**122-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** Amr bin Thabit narrated from Jabir that he
heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say:

“By Allah, after the death of Imam Qaim (a.s.), a person from us Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will rule for 309 years.”

I asked: “When will this be?”

He replied: “After the passing away of Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

I asked: “For how many years will Imam Qaim rule on the earth after
reappearance?”

He replied: “Nineteen years from his reappearance to his death.”

I asked: “Then will there be a great confusion after that?”

He replied: “Yes, for fifty years. Then Muntasir will do Rajat and he
will kill his enemies and imprison them till people will begin to say
that if he had been from the progeny of the prophets, he would not have
shed so much blood. And all the people of the world will unite against
him and attack him and he will seek refuge in Kaaba. He will have to
face severe calamities and he will be killed in this process. After his
killing, Saffah will rise up in fury and eliminate all our enemies.

And O Jabir, do you know who Muntasir and Saffah are? Muntasir implies
Husain bin Ali (a.s.) and Saffah means Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).”

**123-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad from
Muhammad bin Hasan from Ali bin Hassan from Abu Abdullah Riyahi from Abu
Samit Halwani from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said: Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said:

“I was given these six things: Knowledge about death, and what happens
to people, and the commands, and the decisive speech, and I am the

possessor of returns, and the overcoming of (all) overcomings, and I am
the possessor of the staff and the one who marks and the one who moves,
who speaks to the people.”

**124-** ***Al-Kafi:*** Muhammad bin Mahran from Muhammad bin Ali from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad, all from Muhammad bin Sinan
from Mufaddal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that Amirul Momineen (a.s.)
used to often remark:

“I am the distributor of Paradise and Hellfire, I am the great Farooq. I
am the owner of Staff and Misam (one who marks the faces).”

A similar report is quoted from Muhammad bin Sinan.

Ali bin Muhammad and Muhammad bin Hasan have narrated a similar
traditional report from Sahl bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Walid Shabab
Sairafi from Sabadul Araj from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.).

**125-** ***At-Tahdhib & Al-Kafi:*** Ali has narrated from his father
from Hammad from Huraiz from Buraid bin Muawiyah from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“By Allah, the system of days and nights will not end till the Almighty
Allah does not revive the dead and make the living die and turn the
rights to their rightful owners and make His religion strong and
dominant, which He has selected for Himself.”

**126-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** The following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا
</p>

***“And We have enjoined on man doing of good to his parents…” (Surah
Ahqaf 46:15)***

…implies Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.). Then Allah has mentioned
Imam Husain (a.s.) and said:

<p dir="rtl">
حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ كُرْهًا <p dir="rtl">
وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا
</p>
</p>

*** “…with trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she
bring him forth…” (Surah Ahqaf 46:16)***

In this verse the Almighty Allah has given glad tidings of Imam Husain
(a.s.) before his birth and also mentioned that Imamate will remain in
his progeny till Judgment Day.

And also informed what calamities would befall them.

Then in recompense of that He said that Imamate has been appointed in
his progeny and that he will be slain.

Then he will come back again in the world and he will be helped, so that
he may eliminate his enemies and he will become the master of the whole
world. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land…” (Surah Qasas 28:5)***

And it was said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ
</p>

***“And certainly We wrote in the Zabur…” (Surah Anbiya 21:105)***

So the Almighty Allah gave the glad tidings to His Prophet that his Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will be the owners of the whole world. They will come back
in Rajat and eliminate their enemies and then the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) conveyed the news of the slaying of Imam Husain (a.s.) to
Lady Fatima (s.a.), hence she disliked the pregnancy.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) asked: Have you seen any lady who is given the
good news of a male child and that she dislikes her pregnancy? But when
Lady Fatima (s.a.) was informed about the slaying of this child, she was
aggrieved and she found this pregnancy despicable.

<p dir="rtl">
وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا
</p>

***“…and with trouble did she bring him forth…” (Surah Ahqaf 46:16)***

That is when she came to know that he would be slain, the delivery was
also despicable. And Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.) both were born
only after six months of pregnancy. And the period of nursing was
twenty-four months. That is why, the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا
</p>

***“…and the bearing of him and the weaning of him was thirty months…”
(Surah Ahqaf 46:15)***

**127-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا عَذَابًا دُونَ ذَلِكَ
</p>

***“And surely those who are unjust shall have a punishment besides that
(in the world)…” (Surah Tur 52:47)***

That is those who usurped the rights of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) for them
will punishment with the sword in addition to the chastisement of the
Hereafter.

**128-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِذَا تُتْلَى عَلَيْهِ آيَاتُنَا قَالَ أَسَاطِيرُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
</p>

***“When Our communications are recited to him, he says: Stories of
those of yore.” (Surah Qalam 68:15)***

<p dir="rtl">
سَنَسِمُهُ عَلَى الْخُرْطُومِ
</p>

***“We will soon brand him on the nose.” (Surah Qalam 68:16)***

Imam (a.s.) said: This will happen during Rajat, when Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and his enemies both will be sent back to the world; Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) will have a tool for marking their noses like animals
are branded.

**129-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is mentioned in*Tafsir Ali bin Ibrahim*
regarding the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قُمْ فَأَنذِرْ
</p>

***“Arise and warn…” (Surah Muddaththir 74:2)***

That is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) will threaten the people of
divine chastisement during the period of Rajat.

**130-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** Sayyid Jalil Bahauddin Ali bin Abdul
Hamid Husaini narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad Ayadi directly from Ahmad
bin Aqba from his father that once Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was asked
about Rajat and he said:

“Yes, (it is true).” Then it was asked: “Who will be the first to come
back in Rajat?”

He replied: “Imam Husain (a.s.); he will be first to do Rajat after the
reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

I (the narrator) asked: “And would all the people do Rajat with him?”

He replied: “No, but as the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا
</p>

***“The day on which the trumpet shall be blown, so you shall come forth
in hosts.” (Surah Naba 78:18)***

That is one community will do Rajat after another.

That is it is related from the same Imam that Imam Husain (a.s.) will
come back in Rajat with his companions, who were martyred with him; and
seventy prophets will also be raised with him like they were sent with
Musa bin Imran (a.s.). Imam Qaim (a.s.) will hand over the ring to Imam
Husain (a.s.) and finally the latter will give Ghusl (Mayyit) to Imam
Qaim (a.s.), shroud, anoint and bury him.

Also, it is narrated from Jabir bin Jofi that he heard Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) say:

“By Allah, after the death of Imam Qaim (a.s.), a person from us Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will rule for 309 years or more.”

I asked: “When will this be?”

He replied: “After the death of Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

I asked: “For how many years will Imam Qaim rule on the earth after
reappearance?”

He replied: “Nineteen years from his reappearance to his death. Then
Muntasir will do Rajat and he will kill his enemies and imprison them.
After that Saffah [Amirul Momineen (a.s.)] will do Rajat.”

And it is narrated through the chains of Asad bin Ismail from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said regarding the day about which the
Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
فِي يَوْمٍ كَانَ مِقْدَارُهُ خَمْسِينَ أَلْفَ سَنَةٍ
</p>

***“To Him ascend the angels and the Spirit in a day, the measure of
which is fifty thousand years.” (Surah Maarij 70:4)***

That is this will be the period of the Rajat of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) during which he will rule for fifty thousand years. And
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will rule for 44000 years during the period of
his Rajat.

**131-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is narrated in*Sultanul Mufarraj
An Eiman* by Sayyid Jalil Bahauddin Ali bin Abdul Karim Hasani from Ali
bin Mahziyar directly that:

Once he was asleep when he saw that a person was telling him to go for
Hajj that year and that he would be granted the honor of meeting the
Master of the Age and in this regard he narrated a lengthy tradition and
which he said:

“O Mahziyar, when peace will be destroyed and the Maghribi will start
moving, the Abbaside will set out and allegiance will be paid to
Sufyani, the Wali of Allah will get the permission to reappear and I
will rise up with 313 companions from Safa and Marwah. Then I will come
to Kufa and raze the Masjid and rebuild it anew on its original
foundation and destroy all the constructions around it that tyrants had
undertaken.

And taking those people with me, I will fulfill the rites of Hajjatul
Islam. From there I will go to Yathrib and demolish the chambers and
take out the two corpses, which will be fresh, and order them to be hung
on the tree opposite Baqi. As soon as they will be hung on that tree it
will put forth herbage and people will become more devoted to them. Just
then a caller will call: O sky, leave them and O earth swallow them.
Then except for the pure believers all will be swallowed by the earth.

I said: “My chief, when will this come to pass?”

He replied: “During Rajat, during Rajat.”

Then he recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

**132-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was asked:

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, is ‘Ismail’ of the verse,”

<p dir="rtl">
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صَادِقَ الْوَعْدِ
وَكَانَ رَسُولًا نَّبِيًّا
</p>

***“And mention Ismail in the Book; surely he was truthful in (his)
promise, and he was an apostle, a prophet.” (Surah Maryam 19:54)***

Ismail bin Ibrahim (a.s.), because the people think that it was so?”

Imam (a.s.) replied, “Ismail passed away before Ibrahim (a.s.). Ibrahim
(a.s.) was a Divine Proof and owner of a Shariah. So to whom was Ismail
sent?”

I asked, “May I be sacrificed on you! Then to whom does this verse
refer?”

Imam (a.s.) replied: It refers to Ismail, son of Prophet Hizqil (a.s.).
Allah sent him to the people but they denied him, slain him and skinned
his face. So Allah’s wrath fell on them. Allah sent Satatail, the angel
of chastisement, to him.

He said: “O Ismail! I am Satatail, the Angel of Chastisement. The
Exalted Lord has sent me to you to punish your people with various
chastisements, if you wish.”

“I don’t need this,” Ismail replied.

“Ismail! What do you want?” Allah revealed to him.

Ismail (a.s.) replied: O Lord! You have taken the covenant for the
people to accept You as the Lord, Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) as the Prophet,
and his successors (a.s.) as Divine Authorities. And You informed the
Prophet about that which his Ummah would do to Husain bin Ali (a.s.)
after him. And You promised Imam Husain (a.s.) that You would bring him
back in this world so that he can seek revenge against those who
martyred him. My Lord! I wish that You bring me back to life like Husain
(a.s.) so that I may take

revenge from those who did this to me. So Allah promised thus to Ismail
Ibne Hizqil (a.s.) and will return him to life with Husain (a.s.).”

**133-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** Himyari has narrated from his father
from Ali bin Muhammad bin Salim from Muhammad bin Khalid from Abdullah
bin Hammad Basri from Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman Asim from Abu Ubaidah
Bazzaz from Huraiz that once he asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“May I be sacrificed on you! How short your lives are, O Ahle Bayt! And
how close are your deaths to one another while the entire creation needs
you?”

Imam (a.s.) replied: There is a scroll for each of us which contains
everything that we need to do during our time. Once every order on that
scroll has been carried out, we know that our death is imminent. Allah’s
Messenger (s.a.w.s) comes to us and informs us that our death has come
and he informs us of the rewards Allah has prepared for us. Indeed
Husain (a.s.) read the sheet that was entrusted to him, and that which
would happen and that which was yet to come were explained to him. There
were a few things left on Husain’s sheet, which had not been fulfilled
when he rose to fight. Those matters were that the angels asked Allah
for permission to help Husain (a.s.) and Allah granted it to them. While
the angels descended to the earth, they found that Husain’s time had
passed and he had been martyred. Hence they said (to Allah):

“O Lord! You gave us permission to descend to earth to support Husain
but when we arrived, you had already captured his soul?”

The Almighty Allah revealed to them, ‘Stay besides his grave until you
see him rise again and then support him. Cry over him and over losing
the opportunity to support him. Indeed you have been chosen to support
him and to cry over him.” The angels were aggrieved and they cried and
lamented over losing the opportunity to support Husain (a.s.). And when
he rises, they will be among his supporters.

**134-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Muhammad bin Abbas from Ja’far bin
Muhammad bin Malik from Qasim bin Ismail from Ali bin Khalid Aquli from
Abdul Karim Khathami from Sulaiman bin Khalid that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

يَوْمَ تَرْجُفُ الرَّاجِفَةُ {6} تَتْبَعُهَا الرَّادِفَةُ

***“The day on which the quaking one shall quake. What must happen
afterwards shall follow it.” (Surah Naziyat 79:6-7)***

Indeed We will help Our prophets and those who believe in the life of
the world and the day on which witnesses will be raised. That day
excuses of the unjust will not avail them and there will be curse for
them and an evil abode and quake means Imam Husain (a.s.) and what
follows it is Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.). And first of all Imam Husain
(a.s.) will emerge from his grave dusting his head accompanied by 75000
companions. Thus the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ يَوْمَ لَا يَنفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ
مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ وَلَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ
</p>

***“Most surely We help Our apostles, and those who believe, in this
world’s life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up. The day
on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and for them is
curse and for them is the evil abode.” (Surah Momin 40:51-52)***

**135-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is narrated in*Kitabul Tanzil wa
Tahrif* from Ahmad bin Muhammad Siyari from Muhammad bin Khalid from
Uthman bin Abdul Aziz from Abdullah bin Najih Yamani that once he asked
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَنِ النَّعِيمِ
</p>

***“Then on that day you shall most certainly be questioned about the
boons.” (Surah Takathur 102:8)***

That what does ‘boons’ indicate?

Imam (a.s.) replied: “The bounties that the Almighty Allah has bestowed
on you through Muhammad and Aale Muhammad (a.s.).”

Then I asked what is the meaning of:

<p dir="rtl">
كَلَّا لَوْ تَعْلَمُونَ عِلْمَ الْيَقِينِ
</p>

***“Nay! if you had known with a certain knowledge.” (Surah Takathur
102:5)***

He said: It means that you will see with your eyes and the meaning of:

<p dir="rtl">
كَلَّا سَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***“Nay! you shall soon know.” (Surah Takathur 102:3)***

Imam (a.s.) said: Once in Rajat and next time on Judgment Day.

136- Fehrist Najjashi:

“Many interesting incidents took place between Momin Taq and Abu
Hanifah, one of them being that one day Abu Hanifah asked Momin Taq: O
Abu Ja’far, do you believe in Rajat? Yes, he replied, Abu Hanifah said:
All right lend me 500 dinars. I will return your loan when you and I
both are raised in Rajat in this world.”

Momin Taq immediately replied: “But I need a guarantor who can guarantee
that you will come back in human form. I am of the view that you will
come in the form of a monkey, so how will I get my money back?”

**137-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is mentioned in*Kitabul Gharat* by
Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi that once Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was asked
about Dhulqarnain. He said:

“He was a man whom the Almighty Allah had sent to his nation but they
denied him and hit him so hard on his forehead that he died. But the
Almighty Allah revived him and sent him back to his nation. They again
denied him and hit on the other side of the forehead and he died again.
The Almighty Allah made him alive again.

Thus he was called Dhulqarnain, because he was hit on both the sides of
his forehead at the point animals have horns.

It is mentioned in another tradition that Imam (a.s.) said: That is
among you also there is a Dhulqarnain like him, and he implied himself
by it.

And it is also mentioned in that book that Abdullah bin Asad Kindi who
was from Shartatul Khamis has narrated from his father that once I was
sitting with Amirul Momineen (a.s.) when at that time Ibne Moiz and Ibne

Naaj came with Abdullah bin Wahab dragging him by the neck. They said: O
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) eliminate this man and don’t be lenient on the
liars.

Imam (a.s.) said: Bring him to me.

When they brought him near, he asked: What does he say?

They said: He says that you are Dabbatul Ardh and you will be hit on the
head and your beard will be smeared in blood.

Imam (a.s.) asked: What do they say about you?

He replied: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), I had heard a tradition from Ammar
bin Yasir and I narrated the same to these two.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: Leave him as he has not said anything on
his own. He has narrated from someone else.

And O Ibne Umme Sawda, you analyze traditions in a nice way. Leave him.
If he is a liar, he will be punished for his falsehood and if he is
true, I will be injured in exactly the same way.

It is mentioned in the same book from Abaya that he heard Imam Ali
(a.s.) say: I am the chief of the aged, I have a Sunnah of Prophet Ayyub
(a.s.). The Almighty Allah removed his calamities and brought back his
sons who had died previously.

And it is mentioned in the authentic traditions of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) that
whatever happened in Bani Israel will happen in this Ummah also exactly.

And Amirul Momineen (a.s.) also said: By Allah, just as the Almighty
Allah gathered the family of Yaqub (a.s.), in the same way He will
gather my family members.

That is the Almighty Allah indeed reunited Prophet Yaqub (a.s.) with his
son. In the same way, Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will also be reunited with
his sons during the period of Rajat and the progeny of the purified
Imams (a.s.), which are clearly mentioned to have Rajat according to
authentic traditions. The Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
</p>

***“…and the end is for those who guard (against evil).” (Surah Araaf
7:128)***

And these Imams are those who guard (against evil).

**138-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is mentioned in*Kitab Tawil Maa
Nazala minal Quran fee Nabi (s.a.w.s.)* by Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin
Abbas bin Marwan that the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

The following traditions have been recorded in the interpretation of
this verse:

It is narrated from Ali bin Musa bin Tawus from Faqqar bin Maad Alawi
etc. from Shazan bin Jibraeel from his man regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

1- Narrated to us Ali bin Abdullah bin Asad from Ibrahim bin Muhammad
from Ahmad bin Moammar Asadi from Muhammad bin Fazal from Kulaini from
Abu Salih from Abdullah bin Abbas regarding the verse that:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

Abdullah bin Abbas said: This verse was revealed about us and Bani
Umayyah. We will rule over them and after griefs and difficulties, they
will submit to us.

2- Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from
some of our scholars from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he was asked about this verse and he said:

“Bani Umayyah will submit to us in defeat and it will at the time of
sunset at the appearance of a sign and that sign is Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) and people will recognize him with full lineage.

Then he said: A person from Bani Umayyah will go and hide behind a tree
and that tree will call out: A person of Bani Umayyah is hiding here,
kill him.”

3- Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abbas from Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Hasan
from Abdullah bin Muhammad Ziyat from Muhammad that is Ibne Junaid from
Mufaddal bin Salih from Jabir from Abu Abdullah Jadali that:

“Once I came to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and he said: I am Dabbatul
Ardh.”

4- Narrated to us Ali bin Ahmad bin Hatim from Ismail bin Ishaq Rashidi
from Khalid bin Mukhallad from Abdul Karim bin Yaqub Jofi from Jabir bin
Yazid from Abu Abdullah Jadala that he came to Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.)
and the latter said:

“Shall I not tell you the three things that are to happen in the
future?” “Yes,” I replied.

He said: “I am the servant of Allah and I am Dabbatul Ardh who spoke the
truth and established justice. And I am the brother of the Prophet and I
am the servant of Allah.”

Then he asked: “Shall I tell you about the appearance of the Mahdi?”
“Yes,” I replied.

He slapped his chest and said: “That is me.”

5- Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Sabah from Husain bin Hasan
Qashi from Ali bin Hakam from Aban bin Uthman from Abdur Rahman bin
Siyabah from Abu Dawood from Abu Abdullah Jadali that once he came to
Imam Ali (a.s.) and he said:

“Shall I tell about the seven things that are to happen in future?”

“Yes, may I be sacrificed on you.”

He said: “Do you know the appearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)?”

I replied: “It must be same as yours, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”

He said: “And the two sentries of misguidance whose disgrace will be
known in the last period of time.”

I said: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), I think that is so and so.”

He said: “And Daabba and his truthfulness and justice and the place of
his rising and one who oppressed him, will be destroyed by the Almighty
Allah.”

After that he narrated the whole tradition.

6- Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed from Hasan Salmi from
Ayyub bin Nuh from Safwan from Yaqub bin Shuaib from Imran bin Mitham
from Abaya that a person came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and said:

“Please tell me something about Dabbatul Ardh.”

He said: “You want me to do that?”

He replied: “I want to know something about him.”

Imam (a.s.) said: “That Daabba will be a believer, reciting the Quran
having faith in Allah; eating and frequenting the markets.”

7- Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Safwan a
similar tradition with the addition that the inquirer asked:

“Who is it, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

He replied: “May your mother mourn you, it is Ali.”

8- Narrated to us Ishaq bin Muhammad bin Marwan from his father from
Abdullah bin Zubair Qarashi from Yaqub bin Shuaib from Imran bin Mitham
from Abaya that once he was with Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and he was
saying:

“My brother, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) told me that he was the last of
a thousand prophets and that I am the last of a thousand successors and
such responsibilities have been entrusted to me that they were never
entrusted to anyone else. And I know one thousand such words, that
except for me and Muhammad no one knows. And a thousand chapters open
from each of that word and you don’t even know a word of it except that
you recite only one verse of Quran as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

Then he said: Do you know who that Daabba is?

9- Narrated to us Ahmad bin Idris from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Saeed from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Ishaq Hadhrami from Ahmad bin Mustanir from
Ja’far bin Uthman who was his uncle from Sabah Mazni from Muhammad bin
Kathir bin Bashir bin Umaira Azdi from Imran bin Mitham from Abaya bin
Rabi that:

“There were five persons in the company of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and I
was one of them.” After that he narrated the same tradition as mentioned
above.

10- Narrated to us Husain bin Ismail Qadi from Abdullah bin Ayyub
Makhzumi from Yahya bin Abu Bukair from Abu Huraiz from Ali bin Zaid bin
Jadhan from Khalid bin Aus from Abu Huraira from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“Dabbatul Ardh will come out with the staff of Prophet Musa (a.s.) and
the ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) and he will mark the face of every
believer with the staff of Musa (a.s.) and mark the face of every
disbeliever with the ring of Sulaiman.”

11- Narrated to us Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Hasan Faqih from Ahmad bin
Nasih from Husain bin Alwan from Saad bin Zarif from Asbagh bin Nubatah
that he went to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to find him eating bread, vinegar
and olive oil.

I asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

Who is implied by ‘a creature from the earth’ in this verse?

He replied: “It is the same Daabba, which is eating bread, vinegar and
olive oil.”

12- Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus bin
Abdur Rahman from Samaa bin Mahran from Fazal bin Zubair from Asbagh bin
Nubatah that once Muawiyah told him:

“O Shia, you think that Ali is Dabbatul Ardh?”

I said that we believed thus but the Jews are also of the same view.

Muawiyah summoned Rasul Jalut and said: “Woe be on you, have you found
anything mentioned about Dabbatul Ardh in your books?”

“Yes, it is a man.”

“Do you know his name?”

“Yes, his name is Eliya.”

Muawiyah turned to me and said: “O Asbagh, woe be on you; how close are
Eliya and Aliyyan!”

13- Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus
from his associates from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that
he was asked:

“What interpretation do the people offer for the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall talk to them,
because people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)?***

Imam (a.s.) said: “Although that Daabba is Amirul Momineen (a.s.).”

14- Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan bin Sabah from Husain bin Hasan
from Ali bin Hakam from Aban bin Uthman from Abdur Rahman bin Siyabah
and Yaqub bin Shuaib from Salih bin Mitham that he asked Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) to narrate a tradition.

He said: Have you not heard any tradition from your father?

I said: No, I was very young at that time (perhaps I may not remember
properly).

All right, I will narrate it; please tell me if that is right. And if I
am wrong you should correct my mistake.

He said: This is a very difficult condition.

I again said: Now I am narrating it. If I narrate correctly, instead of
saying that it is right you must keep quiet and if I am wrong, you
should correct it.

He said: This is easy for me.

I said: You Imams are of the view that Imam Ali (a.s.) is Dabbatul Ardh.

The Imam remained silent. That is the correct tradition was narrated.

15- Narrated to us Hamid bin Ziyad from Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Nahik
from Isa bin Hisham from Aban from Abdur Rahman bin Siyabah from Salih
bin Mitham from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that once Salih asked him to
narrate a tradition.

He asked: “Have you not heard any tradition from your father?”

I said: “I was very young when my father passed away. Perhaps I may not
remember properly. All right, I am narrating it; if I am right you don’t
say anything and if I make a mistake, you must correct it.”

He said: “Yes, that is easy for me.”

I said: “I believe that Imam Ali (a.s.) is Dabbatul Ardh.”

Imam didn’t say anything.

After that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: “I can see that you believe
that Imam Ali (a.s.) will come to us again in the world.” Then he
recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

I said: By Allah, I wanted to ask you the same thing, but I had
forgotten.

Imam (a.s.) said: Let me tell you something more important. It is
mentioned in Quran that:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ إِلَّا كَافَّةً لِّلنَّاسِ بَشِيرًا وَنَذِيرًا
</p>

***“And We have not sent you but to all the men as a bearer of good news
and as a warner…” (Surah Saba 34:28)***

That is no area of the earth will remain where his testimony will not be
given.

Indeed there is no deity, except the Almighty Allah and Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah.

Saying this he pointed all around.

16- Narrated to us Husain bin Ahmad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus
from Ibrahim bin Abdul Hamid from Aban Ahmar directly from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

“I think that your Prophet will come to you once again in this world.”

17- Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik from Hasan bin Ali bin
Marwan from Saeed bin Ammar from Abu Marwan that once he asked Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) about the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

He said: By Allah, as long as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imam Ali
(a.s.) do not gather at Thawiya (in Kufa) and do not make a Masjid
having 12000 doors, till that time the world will not come to an end.

Narrated to us Ahmad bin Hauza Bahili from Ibrahim bin Ishaq Nahawandi
from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari from Abu Maryam Ansari that he asked the
same thing from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and he replied in the same way
and recited this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَى دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ
</p>

***“And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer
chastisement before the greater chastisement…” (Surah Sajdah 32:21)***

18- Narrated to us Husain bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus
from Mufaddal bin Salih from Zaid Shahham from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
that he said regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَى دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ
</p>

***“And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer
chastisement before the greater chastisement…” (Surah Sajdah 32:21)***

“The nearer chastisement implies the chastisement during Rajat.”

Narrated to us Husain bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Isa from Yunus from
Mufaddal bin Salih from Zaid Shahham from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that
he explained ‘nearer chastisement’ as Dabbatul Ardh.

19- Narrated to us Hashim bin Abi Khalaf from Ibrahim bin Ismail bin
Yahya bin Salma bin Kuhail from his father from Salma bin Kuhail from
Mujahid from Ibne Abbas from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he
said in the sermon of the Farewell Hajj:

“I will take an armed force and definitely fight the Amaliqa.”

Jibraeel asked, “You will do that or Ali?”

He replied: “Yes, I or Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.).”

20- Narrated to us Muhammad bin Yaqub from Muhammad bin Yahya from
someone else from Hasan bin Musa Khashshab from Ja’far bin Muhammad from
Karam from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

If all the human beings in the world are gone and two remain, one of
them will be the Imam. And the one who is the Imam will die last. So
that no one may present the excuse that Allah left him without His
decisive proof.”

It implies that Imam Husain (a.s.) will remain till the end, because it
is mentioned in previous traditions that Imam Husain (a.s.) will perform
the last rites of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and it is necessary that the Imam
should be the one whose obedience is obligatory.

21- Narrated to us Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Musa bin Babawayh
from Ali bin Ahmad bin Musa Daqqaq from Muhammad bin Abi Abdullah Kufi
from Musa bin Imran Nakhai from his uncle, Husain bin Yazid Naufali from
Ali bin Abu Hamza from his father from Abu Basir that he asked Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“O son of Allah’s Messenger, I have heard your respected father say that
there will be twelve Imams after Imam Qaim?”

He replied: My respected father has said that there will twelve Mahdis
and not that there will be twelve Imams. But those Mahdis will be such
that they will call the people to our devotion and to recognize our
rights.

Note: We should know that there is no contradiction in the knowledge of
Aale Muhammad (a.s.). On the contrary they testify each other and we
have a large number of traditions about the Rajat of the twelve Imams,
but it seems that when Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) noticed the weakness of
the faith of the inquirer and felt that he would not be able to bear
their special knowledge, which the Almighty Allah has specially granted
to whomsoever He liked as the Almighty Allah Himself says:

<p dir="rtl">
ذَلِكَ فَضْلُ اللَّهِ يُؤْتِيهِ مَن يَشَاء وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ
الْعَظِيمِ
</p>

***“That is Allah’s grace; He grants it to whom He pleases, and Allah is
the Lord of mighty grace.” (Surah Jumua 62:4)***

So he presented such a nice interpretation, which he could bear and does
not deny it and fall into disbelief.

Thus it is mentioned in the traditions of Imams that the complete
knowledge they had was not spoken out to all and all that is said is not
that its time has arrived and that its deserving ones should be present.
And it is also narrated that Imam (a.s.) said: Do not talk of Jibt of
Taghut, rather only mention Rajat and if people say that before you used
to say that, you must tell them that now you don’t have such belief. He
said this under the exigency of Taqayyah which the Almighty Allah has
ordered during the time of the Successors.

22- It is mentioned in*Basharat* of Raziuddin Ali Ibne Tawus that he saw
in a book by Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Kufi in which he has quoted
through his chains from Humran that he said:

“The tenure of the world is a hundred thousand years, from which 20000
years are for all the people and 80000 years are reserved for Aale
Muhammad (a.s.).”

Sayyid Raziuddin (r.a.) says: I remember seeing this report in more
detail in the book of Tahar bin Abdullah.

Note: All these traditions are quoted from the book of Hasan bin
Sulaiman and the reports quoted by Muhammad bin Abbas through his chains
are mentioned in*Kanzul Fawaid* .

**139-** ***Muntakhabul Basair:*** It is mentioned in*Al-Mashikha* of
Hasan bin Mahbub from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said regarding
the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَى خُرُوجٍ مِّن سَبِيلٍ
</p>

***“Our Lord! twice didst Thou make us subject to death, and twice hast
Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is there then a way to
get out?” (Surah Momin 40:11)***

“This verse is specially for those nations who will do Rajat and this
will continue till Judgment Day. May the Almighty Allah keep away that
unjust nation.”

**140-** ***Kaamiluz Ziyaraat:*** Husain bin Muhammad narrated from
Mualla from Abul Mufaddal from Ibne Sadaqah from Mufaddal bin Umar from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see a throne of light which has been laid. A dome of red
ruby decorated with gems has been placed on it and ninety thousand green
domes surround it. As if I can see Imam Husain (a.s.) sitting on his
throne and believers going for his Ziyarat and saluting him.

The Almighty Allah will say, “My friends! Ask Me anything, because you
were hurt, humiliated and oppressed since long. But today you will not
ask Me for anything related from this life or Hereafter, but that I will
grant it.”

Imam (a.s.) added: Their foods and drinks are in Paradise, by Allah,
this is the unending honor and its greatness cannot be gauged.”

Note: The word of needs of the world in this tradition shows that it is
with regard to the world, because there is no question of asking for
needs in Hereafter.

141- Ghaibat Tusi & Ihtijaaj:

In the letter that Himyari sent to Imam Qaim (a.s.), he asked about a
man who has true faith, who considers Mutah as lawful and has belief in
Rajat etc.

**142-** ***Ihtijaaj:*** The epistle received by Himyari also mentions
as follows:

“I testify that you are the decisive proof of Allah; you are the first
and you are the last and your Rajat is a fact and there is no doubt that
it is the day on which,

<p dir="rtl">
لاَ يَنفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِن قَبْلُ أَوْ
كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا
</p>

***“…its faith shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or
earn good through its faith.” (Surah Anam 6:158)***

**143-** ***Ilalush Sharai*** by Muhammad bin Ali bin Ibrahim bin
Hashim. It is mentioned in an old copy of this book that:

“The Almighty Allah in His Book has informed His Prophet (s.a.w.s.) what
calamities would befall his Ahle Bayt (a.s.) after him; that is they
would be killed and their rights will be usurped and they will be
involved in different kinds of troubles. But after that they will be
sent to the world again and they will eliminate their enemies and will
be made the masters of the whole world. Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الْأَرْضَ
يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ
</p>

***“And certainly We wrote in the Book after the reminder that (as for)
the land, My righteous servants shall inherit it.” (Surah Anbiya
21:105)***

And the Almighty Allah has also said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ…
</p>

*** “Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion…” (Surah Nur 24:55)***

**144-** It is mentioned in the treatise of Saad bin Abdullah about the
kinds of verses in the Holy Quran, quoting from Ibne Quluwayh that Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said that the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا عَذَابًا دُونَ ذَلِكَ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ
لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***“And surely those who are unjust shall have a punishment besides that
(in the world), but most of them do not know.” (Surah Tur 52:47)***

…was in fact revealed as follows:

“And surely those who are unjust (to Aale Muhammad) shall have a
punishment besides that (in the world), but most of them do not know.”

That is most people are ignorant of the chastisement of the period of
Rajat.

**145-** ***Manaqib Ibne Shahre Ashob:*** It is mentioned therein that
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said about the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ الْأَرْضِ <p dir="rtl">
تُكَلِّمُهُمْ
</p>
</p>

***“We shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that shall
talk to them…” (Surah Naml 27:82)***

That it implies Imam Ali (a.s.).

**146-** ***Manaqib Ibne Shahre Ashob:*** Abu Abdullah Jadal narrated
from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“I am Dabbatul Ardh.”

**147-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** Jabir has narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said with regard to the words of the Almighty
Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْواتٌ غَيْرُ أَحْيَاء
</p>

***“Dead (are they), not living…” (Surah Nahl 16:21)***

It implies infidels and not believers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ أَيَّانَ يُبْعَثُونَ
</p>

***“…and they know not when they shall be raised.” (Surah Nahl 16:21)***

It implies that they will not bring faith, they will remain as
polytheists.

<p dir="rtl">
إِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ
</p>

***“Your God is one God…” (Surah Nahl 16:22)***

He is as if the Almighty Allah has said.

<p dir="rtl">
فَالَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
</p>

***“…so (as for) those who do not believe in the hereafter…” (Surah Nahl
16:22)***

It means that they do not believe in Rajat even though it is a fact.

Abu Hamza has also narrated a similar report from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.).

**148-** ***Tafsir Furat:*** Abdur Rahman bin Muhammad Alawi has
narrated from Ibne Abbas that he said with regard to the following
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا جَلَّاهَا
</p>

***“And the day when it shows it.” (Surah Shams 91:3)***

It means the Imams of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) who will be the masters of the
earth in the last period of time and would fill it with justice and
equity.

**149-** ***Tafsir Nomani:*** It is mentioned under the traditional
reports of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) in refutation of the deniers of Rajat
supported by the following verses of the Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

That is they will gathered in this world and there is another verse
about gathering on Judgment Day:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

Another verse to refute the deniers of Rajat is:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَرَامٌ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ أَهْلَكْنَاهَا أَنَّهُمْ لَا يَرْجِعُونَ
</p>

***“And it is binding on a town which We destroy that they shall not
return.” (Surah Anbiya 21:95)***

But in Qiyamat, all will be returned without an exception. And the
following verse refutes them:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّيْنَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُم مِّن
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُّصَدِّقٌ لِّمَا مَعَكُمْ
<p dir="rtl">
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنصُرُنَّهُ
</p>
</p>

***“And when Allah made a covenant through the prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom - then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
aid him.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:81)***

It is clear that this promise of help from the prophets will be
fulfilled only during the time of Rajat.

Also the verse in which the Almighty Allah has promised help to the
Imams and revenge from the enemies:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا
</p>

***“Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
those before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them
their religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most
certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange; they shall
serve Me, not associating aught with Me…” (Surah Nur 24:55)***

And this promise will also be fulfilled when they come to the world for
the second time; that is during Rajat.

In addition to this, the following verse is also about Rajat:

<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
</p>
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs…”
(Surah Qasas 28:5)***

And the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

That is they will come back to the world once again.

Another example is the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them: Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

Also:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاخْتَارَ مُوسَى قَوْمَهُ سَبْعِينَ رَجُلاً لِّمِيقَاتِنَا
</p>

***“And Musa chose out of his people seventy men for Our appointment…”
(Surah Araaf 7:155)***

Thus the Almighty Allah revived the seventy men once again and sent them
to the world and they ate and drank and married etc.

Same is the story of Prophet Uzair (a.s.).

**150-** ***Basairud Darajat:*** Abdullah bin Muhammad has narrated from
Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“I am the owner of Staff and Misam (one who will mark the faces).”

**151-** ***Basairud Darajat:*** Ahmad bin Muhammad and Abdullah bin
Aamir have narrated from Ibne Sinan from Mufaddal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) from Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“I am the owner of Staff and Misam (one who will mark the faces).”

**152-** ***Basairud Darajat:*** Abul Fazal Alawi has narrated from Saad
bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Hakam Ibne Zahir from his father from Sharik
bin Abdullah from Abdul Aala from Abi Waqqas from Salman Farsi from
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) that he said:

“I am the owner of Misam[^15] I am the great discriminator (Farooq). I
will do Rajat again and again and I am the king of the kings.”

**153-** ***Manaqib Ibne Shahre Ashob:*** Explaining the statement of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) says:

“That is in Rajat before Qiyamat, the Almighty Allah will help the
believers through me and my descendants.”

**154-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** Ja’far bin Ahmad has narrated from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Bataini from his father from Abu Basir from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the words of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا
</p>

***“Surely they will make a scheme…” (Surah Tariq 86:15)***

He said: People schemed against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imam Ali
(a.s.) and Lady Fatima (s.a.); so the Almighty Allah said:

إِنَّهُمْ يَكِيدُونَ كَيْدًا {15} وَأَكِيدُ كَيْدًا فَمَهِّلِ
الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا

***“Surely they will make a scheme, and I (too) will make a scheme. So
grant the unbelievers a respite: let them alone for a while.” (Surah
Tariq 86:15-17)***

“And when the Imam Qaim (a.s.) will arrive, he will take revenge from me
from Bani Umayyah, Quraish and other people and the tyrants and the
unjust.”

**155-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Muhammad bin Abbas narrated from Ali
bin Muhammad from Abi Jamila from Halabi and from certain tradition
scholars, from Ali bin Hakam from Aban bin Uthman from Fazal bin Abbas
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said regarding the words of Allah:

فَدَمْدَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّهُم بِذَنبِهِمْ فَسَوَّاهَا {14} وَلَا
يَخَافُ عُقْبَاهَا

***“…therefore their Lord crushed them for their sin and leveled them
(with the ground). And He fears not its consequence.” (Surah Shams
91:14-15)***

That “it will be the period of Rajat.”

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَا يَخَافُ عُقْبَاهَا
</p>

***“And He fears not its consequence.” (Surah Shams 91:15)***

That is, “He is fearless of Rajat.”

**156-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Some scholars has narrated from
Muhammad bin Ali from Umar bin Abdul Aziz from Abdullah bin Najih from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said regarding the words of the
Almighty Allah:

كَلَّا سَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ {3} ثُمَّ <p dir="rtl">
كَلَّا سَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***“Nay! you shall soon know. Nay! Nay! you shall soon know.” (Surah
Takathur 102:3-4)***

“Once they will know during the time Rajat and the second time on
Judgment Day.”

**157-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** Muhammad bin Khalid has narrated from
Ibne Samaa from Abdullah Qasim from Muhammad bin Yahya from Maisar from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said regarding the words of the
Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الَّذِي
كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
</p>

***“Their eyes cast down; disgrace shall overtake them; that is the day,
which they were threatened with.” (Surah Maarij 70:44)***

“That is the day that is promised will be the day of the reappearance
and uprising of Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

**158-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Ahmad bin Ali bin Kulthum narrated that:

“When Rajat was mentioned before Ahksam bin Bashar, he used to deny it
and that is why we used to include him among the deniers.”

**159-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** Ahmad bin Ali Qummi narrated from Idris bin
Ayyub from Husain bin Saeed from Ibne Mahbub from Abdul Aziz Abdi from
Zurarah from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Jabir knows the meaning of this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

**160-** ***Rijal Kishi:*** It is mentioned through the same authorities
from Husain from Hasham bin Salim from Muhammad bin Muslim and Zurarah
that they asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about the traditions that
they narrate from Jabir and said:

“What do we have to do with Jabir?”

He said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرَادُّكَ إِلَى مَعَادٍ
</p>

***“Most surely He Who has made the Quran binding on you will bring you
back to the destination.” (Surah Qasas 28:85)***

That is the belief of Jabir has reached such a stage that he often
recited the above verse.

Through the same authorities, Husain has narrated a similar report from
Muhammad bin Ismail from Ibne Uzuniya from Zurarah.

**161-** ***Sifatus Shia*** of Shaykh Saduq: It is mentioned that Ali
bin Ahmad bin Abdullah bin Abi Abdullah Barqi narrated through his
chains from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“One who believes in seven points is a believer,” and among them he also
mentioned Rajat.

And in the same book it is mentioned that Ibne Abdus narrated from Ibne
Qutaibah from Fazal bin Shazan from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“One who believes in the oneness of Allah…” and further on he said:
“…and believes in Rajat and the two Mutahs… and also Meraj and the
interrogation in the grave and the Hauz and intercession and creation of
Paradise and Hell and Sirat and Mizan and raising and scattering and
recompense and accounting…he is in fact a believer and is among the Shia
of us Ahle Bayt (a.s.).”

Note: The prefaces and clarifications that we have presented regarding
Rajat should be sufficient to remove all the doubts about Rajat and the
Shia have in every period had consensus on it and this belief is
absolutely clear to them. So much so that they have also versified this
subject and debated with their opponents in various ages and areas while
the latter continued to ridicule them. And these people continued to
prove Rajat in their writings. And among the critics were people like
Fakhruddin Razi and Nishapuri and also Ibne Abil Hadid Mutazali, who
have explained the Imamiyah faith in

their books. If we had not feared prolongation of discussion, we would
have presented their statements.

How can one who believes in the rightfulness of Imams deny Rajat about
which there are two hundred clear traditions of the Imams; of whom more
than forty are narrated by prominent scholars and mentioned in more than
fifty books like:

1- Thiqatul Islam Muhammad Yaqub Kulaini

2- Shaykh Saduq Muhammad bin Babawayh

3- Shaykh Abu Ja’far Tusi

4- Sayyid Murtadha Alamul Huda

5- Najjashi

6- Kishi

7- Ayyashi

8- Ali bin Ibrahim Qummi

9- Sulaym Hilali

10- Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.)

11- Karajaki

12- Nomani

13- Saffar

14- Saad bin Abdullah

15- Ibne Quluwahy

16- Ali bin Abdul Hamid

17- And his son, author of*Rawaidul Fawaid*

18- Muhammad bin Ali bin Ibrahim

19- Furat bin Ibrahim author of*Tanzil wa Tahrif*

20- Abul Fazal Tabarsi

21- Ibrahim bin Muhammad Thaqafi

22- Muhammad bin Abbas bin Marwan

23- Barqi

24- Ibne Sharh Ashob

25- Hasan bin Sulaiman

26- Qutb Rawandi

27- Allamah Hilli (r.a.)

28- Sayyid Bahauddin Ali bin Abdul Karim Amili

29- Ahmad bin Dawood bin Saeed

30- Hasan bin Ali bin Ibne Hamza

31- Fazal bin Shazan

32- Shaykh Shaheed Muhammad Makki

33- Husain bin Hamadan

34- Hasan bin Muhammad bin Jamhur Ammi, author of*Al-Wahida*

35- Hasan bin Mahbub

36- Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Malik Kufi

37- Tahir bin Abdullah

38- Shazan bin Jibraeel

39- Author of*Fazail*

40- Author of*Al-Ateeq*

41- Author of*Khatab*

In addition to this, we have books of other scholars also whose names
could not be specified, therefore the traditions of Rajat could not be
attributed to them.

Now if in spite of this, the tradition of Rajat is not called Mutawatir,
which tradition can be said to be Mutawatir? And apart from that the
whole Shia community has narrated it from their ancestors.

And I am of the view that one who doubts such traditions is in fact
doubting the Imamate of the Imams of religion, but he does not speak out
openly fearing the criticism of believers and is trying to mislead those
who are weak in faith.

<p dir="rtl">
يُرِيدُونَ لِيُطْفِؤُوا نُورَ اللَّهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَاللَّهُ مُتِمُّ
نُورِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْكَافِرُونَ
</p>

***“They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths but
Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse.”
(Surah Saff 61:8)***

Now for emphasis of claim we mention the names of the scholars, who have
written exclusive books on Rajat:

1- Ahmad bin Dawood bin Saeed Jarjani regarding whom Shaykh Tusi has
written in his*Fehrist* that he has written a book on Mutah and a book
on Rajat.

2- Hasan bin Ali Abi Hamza Bataini. Najjashi has included him among
those who have written something about Rajat.

3- Fazal bin Shazan Nishapuri. Shaykh Tusi has written in his*Fehrist*
and Najjashi has written that he has compiled book on proofs of Rajat.

4- Shaykh Saduq Muhammad bin Ali Ibne Babawayh is also included by
Najjashi among those who have written a book on Rajat.

5- Muhammad bin Masud Ayyashi: Shaykh Tusi and Najjashi have said that
he has written a book on Rajat.

6- Hasan bin Sulaiman: As we have narrated traditions from him.

7- Shaykh Muhammad bin Hasan Hurre Amili has written a comprehensive
book on the discussion of Rajat entitled:*Al-Iqaz Minal Hujjata bil
Burhan Ala Rajat* .

In addition to these there are other scholars who have written books
about the proof of occultation of Imam Qaim (a.s.) in which they have
mentioned Rajat. Even though they have not written a separate book on to
his topic and we should also know that most of our scholars have written
separate books. And before this you have seen that great scholars, whose
greatness cannot be doubted, have narrated traditions about Rajat.

Allamah Rahmatulla has written in*Khulasatul Rijal* in the account of
Maisar bin Abdul Aziz that Aqiqi has said that Aale Muhammad (a.s.) have
praised him and he used to hold debates on the subject of Rajat.

In*Tafsir Majmaul Bayan* Shaykh Aminuddin Tabarsi has written in the
explanation of:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them…” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

When the chastisement became certain on them and its meaning is also
explained that when they became such that neither anyone of them can get

salvation nor anyone can get salvation through them. And it can also be
said that when the Almighty Allah became infuriated at them and also
that when chastisement will come on them in the near Hour:

<p dir="rtl">
أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ
كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“We shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth that shall
talk to them, because people did not believe in Our communications.”
(Surah Naml 27:82)***

And he will come out between Safa and Marwah and will tell the believer
that he is a believer and tell the disbeliever that he is a disbeliever.
Time of repentance will end and no ones repentance will be henceforth
accepted and it will be a sign of Qiyamat.

It is narrated from Ibne Umar and it is also said that there will be no
believer that he does not touch and no hypocrite will remain whose nose
he does not mark and he will come out on Friday eve, when people will be
heading to Mina.

And it is narrated from Muhammad bin Kaab Qurzi that Imam Ali (a.s.) was
asked about Dadbatul Ardh and he said: That Daabba will not have a tail,
on the contrary he will be having a beard and this reply implies that he
will be human.

Ibne Abbas has narrated that he will be a quadruped of the earth. His
body will have fur and hair and he will have four legs.

Huzaifah has narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he
said: Dabbatul Ardh will be seventy cubits in length and he will move at
such speed that no one will be able to catch him. He will mark the
foreheads of the believers that they are believers and mark the forehead
of the disbelievers that they are disbelievers. He will have the staff
of Prophet Musa (a.s.) and the ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.). He will
mark the faces of the believers with the staff and the noses of the
disbelievers with the ring, seeing which all will be addressed as: ‘O
believer’ and ‘O disbeliever’.

It is also narrated from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that Dabbatul
Ardh will come out three times. The first time he will come out from the
side of Medina and his news will spread all over the desert; but his
news will not reach Mecca. Then he will live for a long time and after
that the second time he will come out at Mecca; at that time his news
will spread in the whole desert and also in Mecca.

Then one day people will come to Masjidul Haraam and he will not
threaten them and remain in the corner of the Masjid and even if he
comes near, people will run to the right between Hajar Aswad and between
Bani Makhzum and he will pass through the people dusting his head. His
face would be shinning like a brilliant star. Then he will enter the
earth and no will be able to get him and people will stand up to pray to
get refuge from him. He will approach them from the rear and say: O so
and so, you are praying now? He will mark the faces of the people, which
will distinguish the believers and disbelievers. Now people will address
each other as: ‘O believer’ and ‘O disbeliever’.

Wahab has said that the face of the Dabbatul Ardh will be human and the
body will be that of a bird. After that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
تُكَلِّمُهُمْ
</p>

***“…shall talk to them…” (Surah Naml 27:82)***

That is he will talk to the people about that which they would not like.
He will talk to them in a tongue, which they could understand and say:
All of them are destined to Hell.

It is also said that he will say: He is a believer and he is a
disbeliever. He will tell the people:

<p dir="rtl">
أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“…people did not believe in Our communications.” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

Those who follow the Imamiyah faith prove the correctness of Rajat from
this verse. They say that in*Min* in*Mimman* is for specification. That
is one day we will raise some from every people that deny our
communications. This shows that that day is other than Judgment Day on
which some will be raised, whereas on Judgment Day all will be raised.
As mentioned in the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

Moreover, traditions of the Imams of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) clarify that at
the time of the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) the Almighty Allah will
raise some from the followers of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) who had previously
died and send them to the world again so that they may earn the rewards
of helping Imam Qaim (a.s.) and that they are pleased to see their
kingdom.

The Almighty Allah will also send a group from their enemies so that
they may take revenge from them and that they (the enemies) may face the
chastisement that has become obligatory on them. That they may be killed
at the hands of the Shia of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and become degraded and
aggrieved on seeing the word of Imam Qaim (a.s.) exalted.

It is not at all beyond reason, because the Almighty Allah is capable of
all this as He has already done that in the previous nations. This is
mentioned in various instances in the Holy Quran; for example Prophet
Uzair etc. that we have already narrated before.

It is mentioned in a correct tradition of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said: Very soon, all that has passed in Bani Israel
will come to pass in my Ummah also. That is if someone entered a
porpoise hole in Banu Israel, you would also enter it.

In addition to this, the statements of the opponents about Daabba are
also remarkable. Their traditions also show that Daabba is the owner of
the Staff and the Misam, which they have narrated in most of their
books. And then

one should see what Imam Ali (a.s.) says about it. He has often remarked
that: I am the owner of the staff and Misam.

Thus Allamah Zamakhshari has written in*Tafsir Kashaf* that: The Daabba
will come to from Mount Safa and he will be having the staff of Prophet
Musa (a.s.) and the ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.) and he will mark the
foreheads of the believers with the staff of Musa (a.s.) and a white
spot will appear on his forehead like a shinning star and it will be
written on his forehead that he is a believer. In the same way, he will
mark the noses of the disbelievers and a black spot will develop, which
will make his whole face black and it will written on his forehead that
he is a disbeliever.

After that he writes that “Tukallimahum” is also read as “Tukallamahum”
which means ‘to injure’ that is he will injure them, but it also implies
marking with the staff or the ring.

Says the Shaykh Abu Ja’far: Our belief concerning Rajat is that it is a
fact. Verily Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has said in His Mighty Book:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them: Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

These people were the residents of 70000 houses, and they were visited
by the plague each year. The rich on account of their opulence, used to
go out; while the poor would remain on account of their poverty. So the
plague used to attack lightly those that went; while it raged severely
among those that remained. Now those that remained would say: If only we
had departed, surely the plague would not have come upon us. And those
that went would say: Had we stayed, it would have attacked us, even as
it attacked them. So they all agreed to depart from their houses
collectively when the time of the plague was nigh. Then they all went
out and camped on the banks (of a river). And when they had put down
their belongings, Allah cried to them: Die, and they perished, one and
all. And the passers-by swept them off from the road, and they remained
in that condition as long as Allah willed. One of the prophets of Israel
named Jeremiah passed by them. He said: If You will, O my Lord, You
could revive them so that they may inhabit Your cities, and beget Your
slaves, and worship You with those who worship You. And Allah, through a
revelation asked him: Do you wish that for your sake I should bring them
back to life? The Prophet said: Yes, O my Lord. So Allah revived them
for his sake and sent them with him.

Now these people died and returned to the world and (again) they died at
their appointed times. Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّىَ يُحْيِـي هَـَذِهِ اللّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللّهُ مِئَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ لَبِثْتُ
يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ قَالَ بَل لَّبِثْتَ مِئَةَ عَامٍ فَانظُرْ
إِلَى طَعَامِكَ وَشَرَابِكَ لَمْ يَتَسَنَّهْ وَانظُرْ إِلَى حِمَارِكَ
وَلِنَجْعَلَكَ آيَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَانظُرْ إِلَى العِظَامِ كَيْفَ
نُنشِزُهَا ثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْمًا فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ قَالَ
أَعْلَمُ أَنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life. He said: How long have you tarried? He said: I have tarried a
day, or a part of a day. Said He: Nay! you have tarried a hundred years;
then look at your food and drink- years have not passed over it; and
look at your ass; and that We may make you a sign to men, and look at
the bones, how We set them together, then clothed them with flesh; so
when it became clear to him, he said: I know that Allah has power over
all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:259)***

…and so their prophet remained dead for a hundred years, then he
returned to the world and remained therein, and then died at his
appointed term. He was Ezra, but it is also related that he was
Jeremiah.

And the Almighty Allah says in the story of those that were selected
among the Bani Israel of the community of Musa (a.s.) for the appointed
term:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَاكُم مِّن بَعْدِ مَوْتِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
</p>

***“Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.”
(Surah Baqarah 2:56)***

And that was because when they heard the Word of Allah, they said: We
shall not believe in its truth until we see Allah clearly. So, on
account of their wrong-doing the thunderbolt fell upon them and they
perished. Musa (a.s.) pleaded: O my Lord, what shall I say to Bani
Israel when I return to them? So Allah revived them and they returned to
the world; they led a normal life in the world and died at their
appointed times.

Allah said unto Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.): (Remember the time) when you
caused the dead to live by My command, and all the dead who were revived
by Isa by the command of Allah returned to the world and lived therein
so long as they lived, and then they died at their appointed times.

As for the people of the Cave, “they tarried in their cave three hundred
years and nine years over”. Then the Almighty Allah revived them and
they returned to the world in order that they might question one
another; and their story is well known.

And if a questioner were to ask: Verily the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَتَحْسَبُهُمْ أَيْقَاظًا وَهُمْ رُقُودٌ
</p>

***“And you might think them awake while they were asleep…” (Surah Kahf
18:18)***

(Then how can there be resurrection of those that slumber?) To him it
may be answered: Verily they were dead; for the Almighty Allah has said:

قَالُوا <p dir="rtl">
يَا وَيْلَنَا مَن بَعَثَنَا مِن مَّرْقَدِنَا هَذَا مَا وَعَدَ
الرَّحْمَنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
</p>

***“They shall say: O woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent God promised and the
apostles told the truth.” (Surah Yasin 36:52)***

And if they (the unbelievers) say: That is so (that is, if the
unbelievers say that this refers to the resurrection of the dead); (then
we say) verily the people of the Cave were also dead. There are many
examples of this kind.

Thus it is established that resurrection did take place among the
peoples of the past. For the Prophet, on whom be peace, has said: There
will occur among these people (the like of) what has occurred among
previous people, even as one horseshoe resembles another, or as one
arrow feather follows another. Wherefore, according to this premise, it
is necessary to believe that resurrection will take place in this
community as well.

Our opponents (the Sunni) have related that when the Mahdi, on whom be
peace, will appear, Isa Ibne Maryam (a.s.) will descend upon the earth
and pray behind him. Now the descent of Isa (a.s.) to the earth is his
return to the world after death, because the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنِّي مُتَوَفِّيكَ وَرَافِعُكَ إِلَيَّ
</p>

***“I will cause you to die and take you up to Myself…” (Surah Aale
Imran 3:55)***

And the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

And He says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications…” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

Hence the day on which the multitude will be gathered together will be
other than the day on which shall be gathered together the host.

And the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَقْسَمُواْ بِاللّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ بَلَى وَعْدًا عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا وَلـكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

***“And they swear by Allah with the most energetic of their oaths:
Allah will not raise up him who dies. Yea! it is a promise binding on
Him, quite true, but most people do not know…” (Surah Nahl 16:38)***

The reference here is to Rajat. And that is because thereafter He says:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ
</p>

***“So that He might make manifest to them that about which they
differ…” (Surah Nahl 16:39)***

And this “making manifest” is to be found in this world, not in the
next. And if Allah wills, I shall write a book exclusively on the topic
of Rajat, in which I shall explain its real nature and the proofs
regarding the authenticity of its occurrence. And the theory of
transmigration of souls is false, and one who believes in it is an
unbeliever, because transmigration involves the denial of Paradise and
Hell.

Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.) has written in replies to*Masail Akbariya* that:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ
</p>

***“Most surely We help Our apostles, and those who believe, in this
world’s life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up.” (Surah
Momin 40:51)***

He said that Imamiyah are of the view that the Almighty Allah will
fulfill this promise to help His friends before Hereafter in the
reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and the period of Rajat.

He has also narrated in his book,*Al-Fusul* from Harith bin Abdullah
Rabi that once Mansur was at the great bridge and I was in his company
and Sawwar Qadi was also in his company and Sayyid Himyari, the poet was
reciting this panegyric in praise of Mansur:

**Indeed He is Allah, who has no equal. He has given both the rulership
of the world and religion.**

**The Almighty Allah has given such a kingdom that has no decline.
Fafoor of China will also be brought to you.**

**The Maharaja of India will also be apprehended and the king of Turk
shall also be imprisoned.**

Sayyid Himyari continued to recite couplets in praise of Mansur and the
later was pleased at this. Sawwar Qadi could not bear it any longer. He
said: “He is not sincere about what he is saying. He is devoted to
others and is actually hateful to you.”

Sayyid Himyari said: “By Allah, he is a liar. I am really praising you.
Seeing you pleased at my couplets he has become jealous. I am in fact
attached to you all. On the contrary, the love to you Ahle Bayt is
ingrained in us from our ancestors and Sawwar and his people had enmity
to you since the Jahiliyya and after the coming of Islam. And the
Almighty Allah has revealed the following verse to His Prophet:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُنَادُونَكَ مِن وَرَاء الْحُجُرَاتِ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا
يَعْقِلُونَ
</p>

***“(As for) those who call out to you from behind the private chambers,
surely most of them do not understand.” (Surah Hujurat 49:4)***

Mansur said: You are right.

Sawwar said: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), he believes in Rajat, condemns
Abu Bakr and Umar and pick faults in them.

Sayyid Himyari said: As for your saying that I believe in Rajat; it is
because the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

And the Almighty Allah has also said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

These two verse show that the gathering will be of two types: general
and special and the Almighty Allah has also said:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَى خُرُوجٍ مِّن سَبِيلٍ
</p>

***“They shall say: Our Lord! twice didst Thou make us subject to death,
and twice hast Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is there
then a way to get out?” (Surah Momin 40:11)***

He also says:

<p dir="rtl">
أَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّىَ يُحْيِـي هَـَذِهِ اللّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللّهُ مِئَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ
</p>

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life.” (Surah Baqarah 2:259)***

Also:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them, Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

These were the verses in support of Rajat. Now the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) says: On Judgment Day the arrogant will be raised in the form
of a tiny ant.

Also the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said that all that happened in Bani
Israel, will also happen in my Ummah; like the splitting of the earth,
transmogrification of the people and the dropping of stones etc.

Huzaifah says that it is not unlikely that the Almighty Allah should
raise most people of this Ummah in the form of monkeys and pigs. So the
Rajat that I believe, is also proved from Quran and traditions of the
Prophet and I am certain that the Almighty Allah will send Sawwar to the
earth in form of dog, pig and ant, because he is unjust, arrogant and
infidel.

Mansur began to laugh at the discourse of Sayyid Himyari and the latter
completed his panegyric.

Shaykh Mufeed writes in*Al-Fusul:* In an academic gathering, a Mutazali
scholar asked one of our Imamiyah elders in my presence:

“Why are you of the view that before the Hereafter, during the period of
the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) the Almighty Allah will send some
infidels to the earth again so that revenge might be taken from them,
like it happened with Bani Israel according to you and you prove this
with the following verse of Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Isra
17:6)***

If Yazid, Shimr, Abdur Rahman bin Muljim are again sent to the world and
if they leave their infidelity and deviation and become obedient to Imam
Qaim (a.s.), it will become obligatory on you to befriend them and they
will become eligible for rewards; how can you avoid it? This is the
greatest defect of Shia religion.

First Reply: Shaykh Mufeed (r.a.) says: We have two replies to this
objection. First of all it is mentioned in the traditional reports of
the Holy Imams (a.s.) that all of them will go to Hell forever and their
end will be like that of Firon, Hamman and Qaroon. Just as Firon, Hamman
and Qaroon never accepted faith, in the same they also did not bring
faith. The Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ أَنَّنَا نَزَّلْنَا إِلَيْهِمُ الْمَلآئِكَةَ وَكَلَّمَهُمُ
الْمَوْتَى وَحَشَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ قُبُلاً مَّا كَانُواْ
لِيُؤْمِنُواْ إِلاَّ أَن يَشَاء اللّهُ
</p>

***“And even if We had sent down to them the angels and the dead had
spoken to them and We had brought together all things before them, they
would not believe unless Allah pleases…” (Surah Anam 6:111)***

And with regard to them, the Almighty Allah said:

إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابَّ عِندَ اللّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ لاَ
يَعْقِلُونَ {22} وَلَوْ عَلِمَ اللّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْرًا لَّأسْمَعَهُمْ
وَلَوْ أَسْمَعَهُمْ لَتَوَلَّواْ وَّهُم مُّعْرِضُونَ

***“Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah’s sight, are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand. And if Allah had known any good in them He
would have made them hear, and if He makes them hear, they would turn
back while they withdraw.” (Surah Anfal 8:22-23)***

Then the Almighty Allah says to Iblis about these people:

<p dir="rtl">
لَأَمْلَأَنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنكَ وَمِمَّن تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
</p>

***“That I will most certainly fill hell with you and with those among
them who follow you, all.” (Surah Saad 38:85)***

Then the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ لَعْنَتِي إِلَى يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
</p>

***“And surely My curse is on you to the day of judgment.” (Surah Saad
38:78)***

Also the saying of the Almighty Allah:

تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبٍ وَتَبَّ {1} مَا أَغْنَى عَنْهُ مَالُهُ وَمَا
كَسَبَ {2} سَيَصْلَى نَارًا ذَاتَ لَهَبٍ

***“Perdition overtake both hands of Abu Lahab, and he will perish. His
wealth and what he earns will not avail him. He shall soon burn in fire
that flames…” (Surah Lahab 111:1-3)***

These verses show that all of them are destined to Hell and they will
never do any such thing, which can make them eligible for divine
rewards.

Second Reply: The next reply to this objection is that the Almighty
Allah will send infidels to the world again only so that revenge might
be taken from them. At that time their repentance was not accepted. The
same order that was issued for Firon when he was about to drown, will
also be issued for them:

<p dir="rtl">
آمَنتُ أَنَّهُ لا إِلِـهَ إِلاَّ الَّذِي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُو إِسْرَائِيلَ
وَأَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
</p>

***“I believe that there is no god but He in Whom the children of Israel
believe and I am of those who submit.” (Surah Yunus 10:90)***

The Almighty Allah said in reply to Firon:

<p dir="rtl">
آلآنَ وَقَدْ عَصَيْتَ قَبْلُ وَكُنتَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ
</p>

***“What! now! and indeed you disobeyed before and you were of the
mischief-makers.” (Surah Yunus 10:91)***

That the Almighty Allah has rejected his faith when he reached that
stage of disobedience and only fear led him to claim thus and his
repentance was of no use. Like in Hereafter, neither repentance nor
regret will be of any use and it is the demand of divine wisdom that
their repentance should not be accepted.

And this second reply is perfectly correct on the basis of Imamiyah
faith and many traditions have been recorded from the Holy Imams (a.s.).
Thus the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ يَأْتِي بَعْضُ آيَاتِ رَبِّكَ لاَ يَنفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا
لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِن قَبْلُ أَوْ كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا خَيْرًا
قُلِ انتَظِرُواْ إِنَّا مُنتَظِرُونَ
</p>

***“…On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come, its
faith shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good
through its faith. Say: Wait; we too are waiting.” (Surah Anam 6:158)***

The Holy Imams (a.s.) have said in the interpretation of this verse that
it implies Imam Qaim (a.s.) and after his reappearance no repentance of
any opponent will be accepted.

This reply destroyed the basis of the objection of the Mutazali
opponent.

And the view that if these infidels are sent back to the world with the
hope that they might repent and come to the right path; the Almighty
Allah has refuted this view through the following verses:

وَلَوْ تَرَىَ إِذْ وُقِفُواْ عَلَى النَّارِ فَقَالُواْ يَا لَيْتَنَا
نُرَدُّ وَلاَ نُكَذِّبَ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّنَا وَنَكُونَ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
{27} بَلْ بَدَا لَهُم مَّا كَانُواْ يُخْفُونَ مِن قَبْلُ وَلَوْ رُدُّواْ
لَعَادُواْ لِمَا نُهُواْ عَنْهُ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ

***“And could you see when they are made to stand before the fire, then
they shall say: Would that we were sent back, and we would not reject
the communications of our Lord and we would be of the believers. Nay,
what they concealed before shall become manifest to them; and if they
were sent back, they would certainly go back to that which they are
forbidden, and most surely they are liars.” (Surah Anam 6:27-28)***

That is the Almighty Allah says that if they are taken out of Hell and
sent back to the world they will again do what they are doing; that is
they will not give up infidelity. In spite of the fact that they would
have seen the chastisement of the grave and also witnessed the
punishment of Hell.

Also in*Masail Sarwaiya,* Shaykh Mufeed has narrated a tradition from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: He is not from us who does not
believe in Mutah and has no faith in Rajat.

When he was asked about Rajat; that what it means and would only special
believers be sent to the world or other unjust people also? He said
after replying to the objection against Mutah:

Imam (a.s.) said: “One who does not believe in Rajat is not from us.

Thus it implies that special statement that the Almighty Allah will
raise some people from the Ummah of Muhammad from the graves before
Qiyamat. And it is the particular faith of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and the
following statement of the Almighty Allah proves this when He says about
Judgment Day:

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَشَرْنَاهُمْ فَلَمْ نُغَادِرْ مِنْهُمْ أَحَدًا
</p>

***“…and We will gather them and leave not any one of them behind.”
(Surah Kahf 18:47)***

And with regard to the gathering of Rajat, He says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ فَوْجًا مِّمَّن يُكَذِّبُ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
</p>

***“And on the day when We will gather from every nation a party from
among those who rejected Our communications, then they shall be formed
into groups.” (Surah Naml 27:83)***

This shows that gatherings are of two types: general and special; and
those who will be raised in both will say on Judgment Day:

<p dir="rtl">
قَالُوا <p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَى خُرُوجٍ مِّن سَبِيلٍ
</p>
</p>

***“They shall say: Our Lord! twice didst Thou make us subject to death,
and twice hast Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is there
then a way to get out?” (Surah Momin 40:11)***

Some questions came to Sayyid Murtadha Alamul Huda from Rayy including a
query on the factuality Rajat, because a few very few Imamiyah scholars
used to hold that Rajat implied that during the time of Imam Qaim (a.s.)
only the kingdom of the Holy Imams (a.s.) will come back and the Holy
Imams (a.s.) will not come themselves physically.

He replied: The religion of Shia Imamiyah says that at the time of the
reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.), the Almighty Allah will resurrect a
group of Shia who had previously died and send them to the world so that
they may also get the rewards for helping Imam Zamana (a.s.) and be
pleased to see his rule through their own eyes. Thus the Almighty Allah
will also resurrect some of their enemies and send them to the world so
that the Shia believers take revenge from them, gain pleasure from it
and see the exaltation of the word of truth. And the proof of this
belief, which no sane person can deny, which is within the power of
Allah and not beyond it; is not a logical impossibility. Our opponents
deny Rajat as if it is itself logically impossible and beyond the power
of the Almighty Allah. Thus when it is decided that Rajat is within the
power of the Almighty Allah and it is possible; in order to prove its
occurrence, the consensus of the Imamiyah is sufficient. Because no one
from the Imamiyah has any objection against Rajat and I have mentioned
before that we Imamiyah have consensus on this matter, because the
statement of the infallible is present in its favor and anything
verified by the statement of an infallible is definitely correct.

Now in view of some of our associates that Rajat denotes the kingdom of
the Holy Imams (a.s.) and that their commands and prohibitions will come
back; it does not mean that the Holy Imams (a.s.) will become alive and
return to the world; it is those who have become helpless by the
evidence

and justification of the possibility of Rajat and they have interpreted
the traditional reports of Rajat in this way which is not correct.
Because there is consensus of whole Imamiyah sect on the meaning and
connotation of Rajat; that at the time of the reappearance of Imam Qaim
(a.s.) the Almighty Allah will resurrect some of his followers and some
of his enemies and send them back to the world; so there is no scope of
interpretation.

Sayyid Ibne Tawus (r.a.), may Allah illuminate his tomb, writes
in*Taraif* that Muslim has in the beginning of the first volume of
his*Sahih* , narrated through his chains from Jarrah bin Malih that he
heard Jabir bin Yazid say: I am in possession of seventy thousand
traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) narrated by Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.), but people (Sunni scholars) have not taken anything from
them.

Also in*Sahih* , Muslim has narrated through his chains from Muhammad
bin Umar Razi that he heard Huraiz say that he met Jabir bin Yazid Jofi
but did not note down a single tradition from him, because he used to
have faith in Rajat.

After that Sayyid Ibne Tawus (r.a.) says that may Allah bless you; see
how these people have made it unlawful for themselves to benefit from
seventy thousand traditions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)? Only
because the traditions were narrated through Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.),
even though he was a member of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) attachment to which is
commanded by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

It is also interesting that all Muslims have narrated many reports of
the revival of the dead in this world. They have also narrated that the
Almighty Allah enlivens the dead in the grave for questioning.

Before this we have narrated those traditional reports mentioned in
their books and in the interpretation of this verse also the enlivening
of the dead is mentioned:

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ خَرَجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَهُمْ أُلُوفٌ
حَذَرَ الْمَوْتِ فَقَالَ لَهُمُ اللّهُ مُوتُواْ ثُمَّ أَحْيَاهُمْ
</p>

***“Have you not considered those who went forth from their homes, for
fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them: Die;
again He gave them life…” (Surah Baqarah 2:243)***

Also those seventy persons who had gone to Mount Tur with Musa (a.s.),
who were struck with lightning and they died. After that the Almighty
Allah bestowed them with life once again.

Then Prophet Uzair (a.s.) returned to life after death.

Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) enlivened many people through the permission of
the Almighty Allah.

Then is the tradition of Jarih, in whose authenticity all have
consensus.

And the tradition, which mentions that the Almighty Allah enlivens the
dead in the graves for interrogation. All these are mentioned in their
books and accepted by all.

Please think about what is the difference between their coming back to
life and the coming back to life during Rajat according to the
traditional reports of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)? And what was the fault of Jabir
bin Yazid that his traditional reports were rejected?

Sayyid Ibne Tawus (r.a.) says in*Sadus Saud* that:

Shaykh Tusi, in his*Tafsir Tibyan* has written under the interpretation
of this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَاكُم مِّن بَعْدِ مَوْتِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
</p>

***“Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.”
(Surah Baqarah 2:56)***

Some of our companions have tried to justify Rajat through this verse
and if this verse alone is used to justify Rajat, it is correct and
whoever does not accept, will be refuted by the Holy Quran and if this
verse is used to prove the necessity of Rajat, it is not correct.

After that the Sayyid says: We should know that regarding those about
whom the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said that I leave among you two
important things: Book of Allah and my progeny, my Ahle Bayt (a.s.). The
two will not separate from each other till they meet me at Hauze
Kauthar.

They have not voiced any dissent from this that the Almighty Allah will
resurrect some people from this Ummah and send them to the world, and it
is supported by all traditions quoted by the proponents as well as the
opponents from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.).

Thus from among the opponents, Hamidi has quoted from Abu Saeed Khudri
in*Jama Bainus Sahihain* that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:
You will definitely follow the practices which have passed in the
previous nations. Palm by palm and hand by hand (exactly); so much so
that if someone from them entered the hole of a porpoise, you will also
follow suit.

We said: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), which previous nations? Jews
and Christians?”

He replied: “Who else?”

Zamakhshari has quoted from Huzaifah in*Tafsir Kashaf* that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: You are very similar to Bani Israel
in your habits and practices and you will act in the same way as them.
You will walk step by step according to them. Although I cannot say
whether you will worship the calf like them or not.

After that Sayyid Ibne Tawus says: When this traditional report is
present about following the past nations, let us see what the Holy Quran
and Mutawatir traditions say that when a some Jews from the previous
nations said:

<p dir="rtl">
لَن نُّؤْمِنَ لَكَ حَتَّى نَرَى اللَّهَ جَهْرَةً
</p>

***“…we will not believe in you until we see Allah manifestly…” (Surah
Baqarah 2:55)***

So the Almighty Allah gave them death and then resurrected them.

So according to this, there must some people in this nation also whom
the Almighty Allah will give death and then resurrect them in this
world.

And apart from the statement of Shia, I have seen indication in their
writings also that Imam Ali (a.s.) will return to the world after the
strike of Ibne Muljim and after death in the same way as Dhulqarnain had
returned.

Thus Zamakhshari in his*Tafsir Kashaf* has narrated the following
tradition from Imam Ali (a.s.) about Dhulqarnain:

Clouds were under the control of Dhulqarnain and his influence was
spread all over the world and the light was spread from him. So it was
asked why it was so? He replied: He loved the Almighty Allah and the
Almighty Allah loved him.

And Ibne Kawwa asked: Who was Dhulqarnain? Was he a king or a prophet?

Imam (a.s.) replied: Neither he was a king nor a prophet. On the
contrary he was a righteous servant of Allah. He was busy in the
obedience of Allah when he was hit on the right side of his forehead and
he died. The Almighty Allah made him alive again and sent him back to
the world; then he was hit on his right temple and the Almighty Allah
again revived him and sent him back and since he was hit on both the
sides of his temples; he came to be known as Dhulqarnain or ‘one hit
twice’. And there is someone like Dhulqarnain among you.

Also we have seen in Sunni tradition books about many Muslim persons
that after their death before their burial or after it, they came back
to life, talked and then died. Hakim Nishapuri has written in
his*History* that:

Husam bin Abdur Rahman has narrated from his father from his grandfather
who was the Qadi of Nishapur that a man came to me and people said: This
person has a strange story. I asked what is it? He said: I was a
grave-digger and I marked a new grave so that I may recognize it. I had
also performed the funeral prayer of this deceased. When night fell, I
dug the grave to steal the shroud and as I was pulling it out, the
deceased lady said: Very nice! How can a believer man pull out the
shroud of a believer lady? Do you know that you have prayed on me and
the Almighty Allah has forgiven all those who prayed on me?

Sayyid (r.a.) says: It is a pity that although they have included the
report of a grave-digger in their books but rejected the traditional
reports of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) about the revival of the dead. And this
woman was also not revived for any important reason. But the Rajat which
scholars of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and their Shia have faith in, is from the
signs and miracles of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the position of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is more than that of Musa, Isa and Danial
according to all Muslims. And many dead were revived through him also.

Shaykh Hasan bin Sulaiman has narrated in*Mohtazar* , from the book of
Sayyid Jalil Hasan Kabash and he has in turn taken from*Muqtazab*
through his chains of narrators from Salman Farsi that he said:

Once I came to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.); when he saw me, he
said: O Salman, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime appointed twelve
successors for every prophet.

Yes, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), we have heard this from both
people of book, Jews and Christians.

He said: But O Salman, do you know who my twelve successors are, whom
the Almighty Allah has chosen for my Imamate after me?

I said: Allah and His Messenger know better.

He said: Know that O Salman, the Almighty Allah created me from His
special effulgence; then He called me, and I said Labbaik. Then He
created Ali (a.s.) from my effulgence and then called him and he also
said Labbaik.

Then He created Fatima (s.a.) from my and Ali’s Noor and then called her
and she also said: Labbaik. Then the Almighty Allah created Hasan and
Husain from the Noor of me, Ali and Fatima (s.a.) and called them and
they also said Labbaik. Then the Almighty Allah named us after five of
His names. That is Allah is Mahmud and I am Muhammad; Allah is Ali and
he is Ali. Allah is Fatir and she is Fatima, Allah is Zul Ahsan and he
is Hasan; Allah is Mohsin and he is Husain.

Then through our Noor and the Noor of Husain, the Almighty Allah created
nine Imams and called them and they also said: Labbaik. And it was
before the Almighty Allah created the heavens or spread the earth or
created the wind, water, humans and angels. We were in the form of
lights in His knowledge and we used to praise Him and obey Him.

Salman asked: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), May my parents be
sacrificed on you, what is the reward for one who has their Marifat
(cognition)?

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied: O Salman, one who has their true
Marifat and follows them; befriends their friends and is inimical to
their enemies and is aloof from them; by Allah, he is from us and he
will follow wherever we go and live where we live.

Salman asked: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), can one believe in them
without knowing their names and lineage?

He replied: No.

I asked: Then how I should have faith in them?

He replied: You know all of them till Husain; so after Husain there will
be the chief of the worshippers, Ali bin Husain (a.s.), then his son,
Muhammad bin Ali Baqir, expounder of the sciences of all the former and
latter prophets and messengers; after that will be Ja’far bin Muhammad,
the truthful tongue of Allah; then Musa bin Ja’far Kazim who will
observe restraint with regard to divine matters; then Ali Ibne Musa
Reza; then Muhammad bin Ali Mukhtar; then Ali bin Muhammad Hadi; then
Hasan bin Ali Samit and the trustee of the religion of Allah; then
M.H.M.D. Ibne Hasan Mahdi, Natiq and Qaim.

Salman says: I began to weep at this and said: O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), it’s a pity that Salman will not be able to see their time!

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Don’t worry Salman, you and people
like you and those who would be devoted to them, who would be having
their true recognition, would definitely reach their period.

I thanked Allah in excess and then asked: O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), would I remain alive till that time?

He replied: O Salman, read the following verses:

فَإِذَا جَاء وَعْدُ أُولاهُمَا بَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَادًا لَّنَا
أُوْلِي بَأْسٍ شَدِيدٍ فَجَاسُواْ خِلاَلَ الدِّيَارِ وَكَانَ وَعْدًا
مَّفْعُولاً <p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ
</p>
<p dir="rtl">
وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“So when the promise for the first of the two came We sent over you
Our servants, of mighty prowess, so they went to and fro among the
houses and it was a promise to be accomplished. Then We gave you back
the turn to prevail against them, and aided you with wealth and children
and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Isra 17:5-6)***

Salman says: I began to weep more intensely due to my longing and then I
said: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), is it your promise?

He replied: Yes, by the one who sent Muhammad as a Messenger, it is my
promise about Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain and nine Imams after him; on
the contrary for all the believers and every victim that they will all
do Rajat. Then Iblis and his army will be brought and pure believer and
absolute infidels will also be sent back so that revenge might be taken
from them and the Almighty Allah will not be unjust on anyone and we are
the interpretation of this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
</p>
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs, and to
grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas 28:5-6)***

Salman says: After that I arose from the presence of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) and was the least worried when death comes to me.

In*Muqtazab,* Ibne Ayyash has narrated a similar report from Ahmad bin
Muhammad bin Ja’far Suli from Abdur Rahman bin Salih from Husain bin
Hamid bin Rabi from Amash from Muhammad bin Khalaf Tatari from Shazan
from Salman.

He has also narrated from Salih bin Husain Naufali that Abu Sahl
Naushjani recited the following couplets of his father, Musab bin Wahab:

**If you ask me what my religion is, I will reveal it even though I had
concealed it till now.**

**I believe that there is no one more powerful than Allah and greater
Creator than Him.**

**And that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is the most superior of the
prophets, whose glad tidings were given by the past prophets in their
books.**

**And that Ali and the eleven Imams after him are promised by the
Almighty Allah which cannot be cancelled.**

**These are our twelve Imams and guides after the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), and as far as I am alive, I will continue to have sincere
faith in them.**

**Of the twelve, eight have passed and four remain, who will complete
the figure of twelve.**

**And I can say with certainty that Rajat is a fact, like I have
certainty about turning from one side to another.**

The author says: I found in the writings of certain scholars who have
narrated from the Shaheed (a.r.) as follows:

Safwani has narrated from his chains of narrators in his book that Imam
Ali Reza (a.s.) was asked about the interpretation of***“twice didst
Thou make us subject to death”*** (***أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ*** )[^16] .
Imam as said: By Allah, this verse is about the Rajat.


