30
==

Chapter Thirty: Signs of Reappearance
=====================================

<p dir="rtl">
الطَّالَقَانِيُّ عَنِ الْجَلُودِيِّ عَنْ هِشَامِ بْنِ جَعْفَرٍ عَنْ
حَمَّادٍ عَنْ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ بْنِ سُلَيْمَانَ وَ كَانَ قَارِئاً
لِلْكُتُبِ قَالَ قَرَأْتُ فِي الْإِنْجِيلِ وَ ذَكَرَ أَوْصَافَ
النَّبِيِّ ص إِلَى أَنْ قَالَ تَعَالَى لِعِيسَى أَرْفَعُكَ إِلَيَّ ثُمَّ
أُهْبِطُكَ فِي آخِرِ الزَّمَانِ لِتَرَى مِنْ أُمَّةِ ذَلِكَ النَّبِيِّ
الْعَجَائِبَ وَ لِتُعِينَهُمْ عَلَى اللَّعِينِ الدَّجَّالِ أُهْبِطُكَ
فِي وَقْتِ الصَّلَاةِ لِتُصَلِّيَ مَعَهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ أُمَّةٌ مَرْحُومَةٌ
</p>

**1-** ***Amali Saduq:*** It is narrated from Taliqani from Jaludi from
Hisham bin Ja’far from Hammad from Abdul bin Sulaiman that he said:

“I read in Injeel where the qualities of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) are
mentioned; till the Almighty Allah said to Isa (a.s.): O Isa, I will
raise you up and then send you down during the last period of time, so
that you may witness the extraordinary things of the nation of that
prophet and help him in fighting Dajjal (anti-Christ). I will send you
down at the time of prayers, so that you may pray with them as they are
the recipients of divine mercy.”

**2-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Harun from Ibne Sadaqah
from Ja’far from his father (a.s.) that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said to his companions:

“What will be your condition at a time when your women will be corrupted
and your youth will be transgressors; and when you will neither
encourage good nor forbid evil?”

They asked: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), would such a thing really
happen?”

He replied: “Yes and worse. What will be your condition when you will
order evil and forbid good?”

They asked: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), would such a thing really
happen?”

He replied: “Yes and worse. What will be your condition when you will
consider good as evil and evil as good?”

**3-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from the two[^2] of them from
Hanan that he asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about the splitting of
the earth at Baidha and he replied:

“(It will occur at) A valley in Sahra, between Mecca and Medina and it
is at a distance of twelve miles from Zatul Jesh.”

**4-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from Abul Jarud from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ قَادِرٌ عَلَى أَن يُنَزِّلٍ آيَةً
</p>

***“Surely Allah is able to send down a sign…” (Surah Anam 6:37)***

Imam (a.s.) said: “In the last period of time, the Almighty Allah will
show you many of His signs, among them being the appearance of Dabbatul
Ardh, the advent of Dajjal, the descent of Prophet Isa (a.s.) and the
rising of the sun from the west.”

And Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said with regard to the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَى أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن
فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ أَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعاً
وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ انظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَفْقَهُونَ
</p>

*** “Say: He has the power that He should send on you a chastisement
from above you or from beneath your feet, or that He should throw you
into confusion, (making you) of different parties; and make some of you
taste the fighting of others. See how We repeat the communications that
they may understand.” (Surah Anam 6:65)***

“‘From above you’ means the advent of Dajjal and the call from the sky.
‘From beneath your feet’ means the splitting of the earth. ‘Throw you
into confusion’ denotes difference about religion and ridiculing each
other. ‘Make some of you taste the fighting of others’ means that you
will kill each other and all this will occur among Muslims only.”

**5-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Ibne Isa from Ibne Asbat
that he said: Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said:

“Do you think that the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will occur
without the advent of Sufyani? It will not be so. The reappearance of
the Qaim as well as the advent of Sufyani are inevitable. The
reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will occur only after the advent of
Sufyani.”

**6-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated from Ibne Isa from Bazanti
from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“Before the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) there will occur the
killing of ‘Buyuh’.”

I asked: “What is the meaning of killing of ‘Buyuh’?”

He replied: “Continuous bloodshed and killings.”

**7-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated through his chains from Imam
Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“In the view of Ibne Abi Hamza, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) thought that my
father (Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.)) was the Qaim. But Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) did not know what command was supposed to come from the Almighty
Allah. By Allah, the Almighty Allah mentions the statement of His
Prophet in the Holy Quran that he said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَدْرِي مَا يُفْعَلُ بِي وَلَا بِكُمْ إِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلَّا مَا
يُوحَى إِلَيَّ
</p>

*** “I do not know what will be done with me or with you: I do not
follow anything but that which is revealed to me…” (Surah Ahqaf 46:9)***

And Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) also used to remark:

“The reappearance of the Qaim will be preceded by four events: and they
will prove the truth of his reappearance. Three have occurred and only
the fourth remains.”

We said: “May we be sacrificed on you, what are those events that have
already occurred?”

He replied: The month of Rajab when the man of Khorasan dismissed the
caliphate of Mamun and removed his name from the coins and seals. After
that came the Rajab in which he attacked Ibne Zubaidah and removed Amin
from the throne. After that came the Rajab in which Muhammad bin

Ibrahim bin Ismail bin Ibrahim bin Hasan bin Imam Hasan (a.s.), alias
Ibne Tabatabai staged an uprising in Kufa.”

We asked: “Is the fourth Rajab a continuation of the same?”

He (Imam Ali Reza) replied: “Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) had said only
this much.”

**8-** ***Qurbul Asnad:*** It is narrated through his chains from Imam
Ali Reza (a.s.) that he was asked:

“How near is the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (a.s.)?

He replied: “Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said: The first sign of the reappearance will be
seen in 195 A.H. Then in 196 A.H. the Arabs will be divested of their
kingdom and there is annihilation in 197 A.H. In 198 A.H. there is
exile.”

Then he said: “Can you not see that the Bani Hashim clan has been
uprooted completely?”

I asked: “Is there exile for them?”

He replied: “For others also and in 199 A.H. if Allah wills, all the
calamities will be dispelled and in 200 A.H. will happen what the
Almighty Allah wills.”

We asked: “May we be your ransom, what will happen in 200 A.H.?”

He replied: “If I had informed anyone else I would have told you also.
And in my view I don’t think it will be proper to inform you also. But
when the Almighty Allah would intend to express a matter, no one will be
able to conceal it.”

I asked: “May I be your ransom, you have narrated the statement of your
respected father and said at the beginning of the year that the kingdom
of so-and-so will end in so-and-so year.”

He said: “Yes, I did say that.”

I said: “May Allah, keep you in health, when the kingdom of so-and-so
ends, would the kingdom of anyone from Quraish be established?”

He replied: “No.”

Then I asked: “Then what would happen?”

He said: “The same which you and your associates say.”

I said: “That is the advent of Sufyani?”

He replied: “No.”

I asked: “Then the advent of Qaim?”

He replied: “Whatever the Almighty Allah wills will come to pass.”

I asked: “Then are you that Qaim?”

He replied: “Definitely not! Some signs will become visible before the
advent of the Qaim. An event will occur between the holy sanctuaries.”

I asked: “Which event?”

He replied: “Bloodshed and killings and so-and-so man from so-and-so
family will slay fifteen men.”

**9-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from his (author’s) father
from Muhammad bin Fudhail from his father from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that he asked the Imam:

“May I be sacrificed on you, thus when would this happen? Imam (a.s.)
replied: We have not been informed about any fixed time for this. But
you should know that when we tell you something and that is fulfilled,
you

should say: Allah and His Messenger told the truth. And if that is not
fulfilled, you should still say: Allah and His Messenger told the truth.
In this way you will be rewarded twice. Then he said: But when hunger
and poverty increases and people will deny each other, at that time you
should await for the reappearance day and night. The narrator asked:
What does, “people will deny each other” means? The Imam said: When a
person approaches other, the former will not meet him cheerfully, like
he used to do previously and neither would he talk to him with the same
courtesy as he used to do before.”

**10-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from Abul Jarud from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَتَاكُمْ عَذَابُهُ بَيَاتًا أَوْ نَهَارًا
مَّاذَا يَسْتَعْجِلُ مِنْهُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ
</p>

***“Say: Tell me if His punishment overtakes you by night or by day!
what then is there of it that the guilty would hasten on?” (Surah Yunus
10:50)***

“This punishment will befall the sinful Muslims of the last period of
time, when they will reject the fact that any heavenly punishment can
befall them.”

**11-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from Abul Jarud from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified but (then) there
shall be no escape…” (Surah Saba 34:51)***

Imam (a.s.) said: “This terror will be from the sky and a sound will
come from the sky.

<p dir="rtl">
وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>

***“…and they shall be seized upon from a near place…” (Surah Saba
34:51)***

He said: “That is the ground below their feet will split and they would
sink into the earth.”

The author of*Kashaf* has narrated from Ibne Abbas that he said: “This
verse was revealed about the splitting of the earth in the desert.”

It is narrated from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said: “I heard from Ali
bin Husain and Hasan bin Hasan bin Ali both that it denotes the army of
the desert which will sink into the punishment below their feet.”

Narrated to me Amr Bin Murra and Humran bin Ayyan and they from Mohajir
Makki who says that he heard Lady Umme Salma (r.a.) say: the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: A seeker of refuge will take refuge in the
Kaaba and an army will be sent to apprehend him. When that army reaches
the desert of Medina, ground will split and the whole army will sink
into it.

Huzaifah Yamani says that once the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was
explaining the mischief that would occur between the people of the east
and the west. His Eminence, said: They would have been involved in this
mischief when Sufyani will arise from the valley of Yabis and reach
Damascus. Then he will send an army to the east and another to Medina
and they will camp in Baghdad, the unlucky city of Babel and slay more
than

three hundred men and rape a hundred ladies. They will also eliminate
three hundred men from Bani Abbas.

Then they will move to Kufa and plunder the surrounding areas. From
there, they will turn to Shaam. At that time a standard of guidance will
come out from Kufa and slay all of them, free all the prisoners and take
booties in their possession. Another army will reach Medina and indulge
in plunder and slaughter for three days.

After that the army will come out from there and set out for Mecca. When
it reaches the desert, the Almighty Allah will send Jibraeel and order
him to destroy all of them.

When Jibraeel arrives there and kicks the ground, it will split and the
whole army will sink into it. Only two men from the tribe of Jahina will
survive.

It is with regard to this that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified but (then) there
shall be no escape…” (Surah Saba 34:51)***

Thalabi has also mentioned this report in his*Tafsir* .

And our associates have also narrated in the account of Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) a similar report from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) and Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.).

**12-** ***Tafsir Qummi:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Muhammad from
Mualla from Muhammad bin Jamhur from Ibne Mahbub from Abul Jarud that he
asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) regarding the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَنَّى لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِن مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ
</p>

***“And how shall the attaining (of Imam Mahdi) be possible to them from
a distant place?” (Surah Saba 34:52)***

Imam (a.s.) said: “They will seek Imam Mahdi (a.s.), but the time would
have passed and it will be of no use.”

**13-** ***Kanz Jamiul Fawaid:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Abbas
from Muhammad bin Hasan bin Ali bin Sabah Madaini from Hasan bin Mahbub
bin Shuaib from Musa bin Umar bin Yazid from Ibne Abi Umair from Mansur
bin Yunus from Ismail bin Jabir from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Imam Qaim (a.s.) will rise up and then when he sets out from that
place, on the way he would be informed that the person he had appointed
as his governor has been assassinated. He will return and fight the
enemies and then again set out from their calling the people. Till the
time he reaches Baidha. Two armies of Sufyani will emerge from there and
the Almighty Allah will order the earth to sink beneath their feet. Thus
the Almighty Allah has said:

وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ <p dir="rtl">
وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>
{51} وَقَالُوا آمَنَّا بِهِ وَأَنَّى لَهُمُ التَّنَاوُشُ مِن مَكَانٍ
بَعِيدٍ

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place.
And***

***they shall say: We believe in it. And how shall the attaining (of
faith) be possible to them from a distant place?” (Surah Saba
34:51-52)***

They will say: We believe in the coming of the Mahdi. But how can they
reach him from so far? Although before that they had denied it under
various pretexts.”

**14- Tafsir Qummi:**

<p dir="rtl">
سَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ
</p>

***“One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall.” (Surah
Maarij 70:1)***

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was asked about the meaning of the above
verse and he said: “A fire will rise up from the west and a king will be
flaming it from behind till reaches the house of Saad bin Hamam near
their mosque. And he will not leave any house of Bani Umayyah without
burning it down. He will burn to ashes all those who have oppressed Aale
Muhammad (a.s.). He will be Imam Mahdi (a.s.).”

**15-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** It is narrated from Ibne Walid from Saffar
from Ibne Maruf from Ibne Faddal from Zareef bin Nasih from Abi Husain
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was asked about the timing of
Judgment Day and he replied: When people will have faith in astrology
and deny destiny and fate from Allah.”

**16-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Shaykh Mufeed from Ahmad
bin Muhammad bin Isa Alawi from Haider bin Muhammad Samarqandi from Abu
Amr Kishi from Hamduyah bin Bashar from Muhammad bin Isa from Husain bin
Khalid that he said:

“I said to Imam Ali Reza (a.s.): O son of Allah’s Messenger, Abdullah
bin Bukair has reported a tradition, which I would like to quote before
you.

Imam (a.s.) asked: Which tradition is it?

I said: Abdullah bin Bukair has narrated a tradition from Ubaidah bin
Zurarah that he said: I met Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in the year of the
uprising of Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Hasan[^3] and a man asked him if
it was allowed to support Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Hasan in his
uprising? He said: “Be quiet till the sky is silent and the earth is at
rest.”

He said: Abdullah bin Bukair used to say: “By Allah, if we are supposed
to sit quiet till the sky and the earth are at rest, it implies that
there is neither any uprising nor any Qaim.”

Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said: “The tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) is
right but what Ibne Bukair has concluded is wrong.”

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) means to say that till the sky and the earth is
silent you must remain quiet; that is till a call does not come from the
sky and till the earth does not split.”

**17-** ***Maniul Akhbar:*** Shaykh Saduq (r.a.) has narrated from his
father from Ahmad bin Idris from Sahl from Ali bin Rayyan from Dahqan
from Husain bin Khalid from Abul Hasan Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that I said
to him:

“May I be your ransom, Abdullah bin Bukair has narrated a tradition from
Ubaidah bin Zurarah that he said: I met Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) in the

year of the uprising of Ibrahim bin Abdullah bin Hasan and he said to
me: “Be quiet till the sky is silent and the earth is at rest.”

He said: Abdullah bin Bukair used to say: “By Allah, if Ubaidullah bin
Zurarah is true, it implies that there is neither any uprising nor any
Qaim.”

He said: Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) said to me: “The tradition as Ubaidullah
has narrated and as interpreted by Abdullah bin Bukair. Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) means to say that till the sky is silent and the name of
your Qaim is not announced and till the earth remains quiet and the army
of Sufyani does not sink in it.”

**18-** ***Maniul Akhbar*** **&** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from
Ibne Walid from Muhammad bin Attar and Ahmad bin Idris together from
Ashari from Sayyari from Hakam bin Saalim from one who narrated to him
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“We and the progeny of Abu Sufyan are two houses that are opposed to
each other with regard to the Almighty Allah. We say that the Almighty
Allah has said the truth and they say that Allah has lied. It was upon
this that Abu Sufyan fought the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), Muawiyah fought
Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) and Yazid bin Muawiyah fought Imam Husain
(a.s.) and on the same pretext will Sufyani fight Imam Qaim (a.s.).”

**19-** ***Basairud Darajaat:*** It is narrated from Muawiyah bin Hakim
from Muhammad bin Shuaib from Ghazwan from a person from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“A man from Balkh came to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and the Imam asked
him: O Khurasani, do you know about such and such valley?”

He replied: “Yes sir, I do.”

“And do also know of a cracked lowland in that valley?”

“Yes sir, I do.”

“That is the point from where Dajjal will arise.”

The narrator says that after that Imam (a.s.) asked a Yemenite man: “Are
you familiar with this depression and mountain pass?”

“Yes sir, I do.”

“Do why know about such and such tree that grows in that pass?”

“Yes sir, I do.”

“Have you seen a huge rock below that tree?”

“Yes sir, I have.”

“It is the point where the tablets of Prophet Musa (a.s.) are buried for
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).”

**20-** ***Thawabul Amaal:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father
from Ali from his father from Naufili from Sakuni from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“A time will come when my Ummah will become impure from inside and
attractive from outside in order to acquire wealth. They will do showoff
instead of gaining divine rewards. They will not fear Allah. Allah will
punish all of them. At that time, people will supplicate like a drowning
man, but their supplications will not be accepted.”

**21-** ***Thawabul Amaal:*** Through the same chains, it is narrated
from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“A time will come on my Ummah when only the name of the Holy Quran will
remain. They will have only the title of Islam, while they will be far
away from it. Their mosques will be filled apparently, but will be
completely deprived of guidance. Their jurists will be worst under this
sky and mischief will start from them and return to them.”

Remoteness of Islam
-------------------

**22-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Ja’far bin
Ali bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abdullah bin Mughairah Kufi (r.a.) that he
said: Narrated to me my grandfather Hasan bin Ali from his grandfather
Abdullah bin Mughairah from Ismail bin Muslim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) from his father from his ancestors from Ali (a.s.) that he said:
The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Islam certainly began strange and very soon it will revert to being
strange. Thus blessed be the strange ones.”

In*Ghaibat Nomani* this same tradition is narrated through another chain
of narrators and it is narrated in*Ikmaaluddin* from Imam Ali Reza
(a.s.) from another chain of narrators.

**23-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muzaffar
bin Ja’far bin Muzaffar Alawi Amari Samarqandi (r.a.) that he said:
Narrated to us Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Masud from his father Muhammad
bin Masud from Ja’far bin Ahmad from Amaraki bin Ali Bufaki from Hasan
bin Ali bin Faddal from Ali bin Musa Reza from his father Musa bin
Ja’far from his father Ja’far bin Muhammad from his father Muhammad bin
Ali from his father Ali bin Husain from his father Husain bin Ali from
his father Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Islam certainly began strange and very soon it will revert to being
strange as it started. Thus blessed be the strange ones.”

Effect of the Uprising of Imam Zamana (a.s.) and its Signs
----------------------------------------------------------

**24-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Muhammad bin Isaam (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Muhammad bin
Yaqub Kulaini: Narrated to us Qasim bin Alaa: Narrated to me Ismail bin
Ali Qazwini: Narrated to me Ali Ibne Ismail from Asim bin Humaid Hannat
from Muhammad bin Muslim Thaqafi that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far
Muhammad bin Ali Baqir (a.s.) say:

“The Qaim from us will be aided by awe and helped with divine
assistance. The earth will fold up for him and the treasures will be
exposed for him. His dominions will be in the east and the west and
through him will Allah, the Mighty and Sublime make His religion
dominate over all religions even though the polytheists hate this. Then
no ruin will remain in the earth, but that he will restore it. And the
spirit of Allah, Isa bin Maryam (a.s.) will come down and pray behind
him.

I said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, when will your Qaim appear? He
replied: When the men will resemble women and women will resemble men.
When men will satisfy their lusts with men and women with women. When
women will ride horses. False testimony will be accepted and true
testimony will be obstructed. Murder will be considered a minor thing.
Adultery and usury will be common. People will fear the talks of the
evil

people. Sufyani will arise from Shaam and Yamani will appear from Yemen.
The Baidha desert will sink. A youth from Aale Muhammad will be killed
between the Rukn and Maqam. He will be Muhammad bin Hasan
Nafs-e-Zakiyyah. A call will come from the sky that the truth is with
him and with all the Shia. At that time will arise our Qaim. When he
reappears, he would lean on the Kaaba and three hundred and thirteen men
would reach him, and the first words he speaks would be:

<p dir="rtl">
بَقِيَّةُ اللّهِ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

***“What remains with Allah is better for you if you are believers…”
(Surah Hud 11:86)***

Then he would say: “I am the remnant of Allah on the earth and the
vicegerent of God and His Divine Proof upon you.” Then no Muslim would
greet him except by the words:

“Peace be on you, O the remnant of Allah on His earth.”

And when the number of his supporters reaches one*Iqd,* that is 10000
men, he would set out. Then no deity except Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime would remain on the earth. Idols, statutes and such other things
would be destroyed, and fire would rise up among them; and this would
come to pass after a prolonged occultation till the Almighty Allah knows
who brings faith during the occultation and who obeys.”

**25-** ***Al-Mahasin:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Ali from
Mufaddal bin Salih from Asadi from Muhammad bin Marwan from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: “One who harbors enmity to Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will be raised by Allah as a Jew.”

He was asked: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), even though he has
confessed to Islamic beliefs?”

“Yes, although by his confession he would have escaped death and payment
of Jizya.”

Then he said: “One who harbors enmity to Ahle Bayt (a.s.) will be raised
by Allah as a Jew.”

He was asked: “Why is it so?”

He replied: “Because if he reached to the time of Dajjal, he would bring
faith in him.”

Sermon of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and the conditions in the last period of time
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**26-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Ibrahim bin Ishaq (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Abdul Aziz bin
Yahya Jaludi in Basra: Narrated to us Husain bin Maaz: Narrated to us
Qais bin Hafs: Narrated to us Yunus bin Arqam from Abi Yasar Shaibani
from Zahhak bin Muzahim from Nazaal bin Sabra that he said:

“Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) delivered us a sermon; he
praised Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, invoked blessings on the Holy
Prophet and his progeny (a.s.). Then he said thrice:

‘Ask me, O people, before you lose me.’

Saasa bin Sauhan arose and asked with respect, ‘O Amirul Momineen, when
will Dajjal appear?’ Imam (a.s.) said: ‘Sit down as the Almighty Allah

has heard you and He knows your intention. By Allah, one who is asked is
not more knowledgeable than the questioner. But there are some signs and
aspects for it, which come one after another, like one step falls after
another. If you want, I can inform you about it. “Yes, please do, O
Amirul Momineen (a.s.),” said the narrator.

The Imam (a.s.) said: “Know that those signs are as follows:

When people would forget the prayers, trusts will be betrayed. Lying
would be considered lawful. Usury will become common. Bribes would be
rampant. Tall buildings would be constructed. Religion will be sold in
exchange of worldly gains. Fools will be in power. Advice will be sought
from women. Relationships will be broken off. Carnal desires will be
widely followed. Bloodshed will be considered a minor matter.

Forbearance will be looked upon as weakness and oppression will be
considered a matter of pride. Kings and rulers will be sinners and
transgressors. Ministers shall be liars. The general public shall be
dishonest. The reciters of Quran will be transgressors. False testimony
will be acceptable. Sins would be committed openly. Laying false
allegations will be a common thing. Sinfulness and rebellion will be
rife. The Quran will be looked down upon. Mosques will be decorated.
Minarets will be elevated. Evil people would be accorded honor. Rows,
instead of displaying unity would present a scenario of strife.

Hearts of the people will be distant from each other. Oaths and promises
will be readily broken. That which has been promised will come near.
Greed for wealth will impel people to take women as partners in
business. Voices of the singers will rise up high and they shall find
much audience.

The lowly people shall become the leaders of the community. Male and
female singers shall be procured on payment. The people of this age will
curse the people of the past. Women will ride (horses). Women will
resemble men and men will resemble women.

Witnesses will testify without being asked to do so and other people
without recognizing the truth and in other than religion they will give
deep thought and give testimony. World would be given precedence over
the hereafter. Apparently they would be like wolves, but their hearts
will be more rotten than carrion. They shall be stinking and more bitter
than aloe. At that time all would say, ‘Hurry up, hurry up. At that time
the Baitul Maqdas will be the best place to live in. And a time will
come upon the people that everyone will desire to reside in the Baitul
Maqdas.”

Who is Dajjal?
--------------

Asbagh bin Nubatah stood up and said: O Maula! Who would Dajjal be? He
replied, ‘The name of Dajjal is Saeed bin Saeed. Thus one who supports
him is unfortunate. And are fortunate who deny him. He shall emerge from
Yahoodiya village of Isfahan.

He shall be blind in the right eye. The left would be on the forehead
like a bloody piece, which would be glinting like the morning star. On
his forehead would be inscribed: ‘*Kafir* ’ (disbeliever) which would
readable to the literate as well as the illiterate. He shall jump into
the seas. The Sun will follow him. A mountain of smoke will precede him
and a white mountain

will follow him, which in times of famine will be mistaken to be a
mountain of food (bread).

He shall be mounted on a white ass. One step of that ass will be of one
mile. Whichever spring or well he reaches, will dry up forever. He will
call out aloud, which shall be audible to all in the east and the west
from the Jinns, humans and satans. He would tell his friends: “I am the
one who created then shaped. And I estimated and guided. I am your High
Lord.” That enemy of Allah will be a liar. He shall be a one-eyed man
having human needs, who walks about while your Lord is neither one-eyed
nor in need of food. He neither walks nor is there decline for him. He
is above all things.

Know that the majority of his followers will be persons of illegitimate
birth and they shall be wearing green caps. The Almighty Allah will have
him eliminated on a Friday after three hours would have passed in the
evening on the Uqbah Afeeq at the hands of one behind whom Prophet Isa
(a.s.) would pray. Know that! After this will come to pass the Great
event.”

Thus we asked: O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), what would that be? He replied,
“Daabbatul Ardh will emerge from Mt. Safa. He shall be having the seal
ring of Prophet Sulaiman (a.s.). When that ring would be touched on the
face of a believer, it would brand him to be a true believer. And when
it is touched on the face of an infidel it would clearly mark that he is
really a disbeliever. So much so that the believer will say to the
infidel, “Hell is ordained for you, O infidel.” And the disbeliever will
say to the believer, “Tooba is ordained for you, O believer. Alas! If
only I were also successful and delighted with you this day!”

Thus when the Daabba raises his head he would, by the permission of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime be able to see whatever is present between
the east and the west. And it would be at a time when the Sun will rise
from the west. At that time the time for repentance would be over and no
repentance would be accepted from anyone. Neither would any deed rise up
to the heavens as mentioned:

<p dir="rtl">
لاَ يَنفَعُ نَفْسًا إِيمَانُهَا لَمْ تَكُنْ آمَنَتْ مِن قَبْلُ أَوْ
كَسَبَتْ فِي إِيمَانِهَا
</p>

***“…its faith shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or
earn good through its faith…” (Surah Anam 6:158)***

Then Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Do not ask me about the conditions
following this. This is a covenant that I have made with my dearest one
that I would not inform about this to anyone except my descendants.”

Nazaal bin Sabra says that I asked Saasa bin Sauhan what Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) meant by this? He replied, “O Ibne Sabra, he is the same behind
whom Prophet Isa (a.s.) would pray. He shall be the twelfth descendant
and he would be the ninth descendant of Husain bin Ali (a.s.). He would
be the one for whom the Sun would rise from the west and he shall
reappear between the*Rukn* and*Maqam* . Then he would purify the earth
and establish the scales of justice. Then no one would be able to
oppress another. Thus the dearest one of Amirul Momineen (a.s.), the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had taken an oath from the latter that he
must

not inform anyone about the events after this except his purified
descendants, Allah’s blessings be on them all.”

Saduq has narrated this traditional report from Nafe from Abdullah bin
Amr and he has also narrated the same from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

Would Dajjal be a Jew?
----------------------

**27-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Abu Bakr
Muhammad bin Umar bin Uthman bin Fadl Uqaili Faqih through this chain of
narrators from his Mashayakhs (teachers) from Abi Yala Musili from Abdul
Alaa bin Hammad Narsi from Ayyub from Nafe from Ibne Umar that he said:

“One day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) prayed the Morning Prayer
with his companions. After that he arose and accompanied by his
companions reached to a house in Medina and knocked the door. A lady
emerged and asked: What do you want, Abul Qasim? The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) said: O Abdullah’s mother allow me to go to Abdullah. She
said: O Abul Qasim, what do you want from Abdullah? By Allah, he has
lost his mind and he speaks to himself. He is disputing with me in a
very important matter.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Let me see him. She said: Are you
prepared to meet him at your own risk? He replied in the positive. She
said: Come. So he entered the house to find him covered with a shawl and
shivering and muttering to himself. She told him to keep quiet and to
sit up. This is Muhammad. He has come to you. So he fell silent and sat
up. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: What is wrong with him? May
Allah’s curse be upon him. If he leaves me I can tell you if he is that
same one.”

After that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asked: What can you see. He
replied: I can see truth and falsehood and I can see a throne on the
water. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: Will you testify the
oneness of Allah and my messengership? He replied: Rather*you* testify
the oneness of Allah and*my* messengership! Because Allah has not made
you worthier than me for it.

On the next day again the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) prayed the
Morning Prayer with his companions. After that he arose and they came to
that house and knocked the door. A lady emerged and said: Please come
in. They saw that he was atop a date palm, singing a song. His mother
said: Shut up! And come down. This is Muhammad and he has come to meet
you. That man fell silent. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said: What
has happened to him? Allah’s curse be on him! If he leaves me I can tell
that he is the same one.

On the third day again the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) prayed the
Morning Prayer with his companions. After that he arose and they came to
that house and saw that he was baaing with a sheep. His mother said:
Keep quiet. This is Muhammad and he has come to meet you. He became
quiet and sat down.

On that day some verses of Surah Dukhan had been revealed and the
Prophet had recited them in the daily prayer that day. The Prophet again
asked him: Do you testify that there is no god except Allah and that I
am the Messenger of Allah? He said: Rather you should testify to the
oneness of

Allah and that I am the messenger of Allah, because Allah has not made
you more rightful than me for it. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
said: I have concealed something from you. Tell me what it is? He
replied: Smoke. Smoke.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: Keep quiet, and remember that you will
not proceed before your appointed period and you will not reach to your
aim. And you will get only as much as is decreed for you. Then he told
his companions: O people, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime did not send any
prophet but that he warned his nation of Dajjal and Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime has kept him alive till your time. When you fall in doubt
about him you should remember that your Lord cannot be one-eyed.

Indeed Dajjal would be astride an ass and the distance between the two
ears of the ass will be one mile. He will be accompanied with Paradise
and Hell and a mountain of bread and a stream of water. Most of his
followers will be Jews, women and ignorant ones. He will roam through
the whole earth except for the Holy Kaaba in Mecca, and the Prophet’s
Mosque in Medina.”

Opinion of Ahle Sunnat scholars about Dajjal
--------------------------------------------

The same incident is quoted from Abu Saeed Khudri in*Sharh Sunnah* and
it is mentioned therein that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) asked
him: What can you see?

He replied: “I can see a throne on water.”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said: “It is the throne of Iblis.”

Abu Sulaiman says: In my view that incident occurred when a treaty was
signed between the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the Jews and their
successors and Ibne Sayyid was also present in this armistice. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had been told that he claimed to be a
soothsayer; hence he tested him and found that he was a soothsayer or a
sorcerer or that he controlled a jinn or a devil.

The author says: There is difference among Ahle Sunnat whether Ibne
Sayyad and Dajjal are same or not. According to one view they are
different and it is due to this that there is a report that Ibne Sayyad
repented at a later stage and passed away in Medina. When his face was
uncovered he was found dead.

Another report from Abu Saeed Khudri also shows that Ibne Sayyad was not
Dajjal.

On the other hand some people believe that Ibne Sayyad was in fact
Dajjal and this view is supported by the reports of Ibne Umar and Jabir
bin Abdullah Ansari.

Shaykh Saduq’s Statements about Dajjal
--------------------------------------

The author says: People of malice and denial accept all such reports and
they consider reports about Dajjal, his occultation, long age and his
advent in the last period of time as correct. But they are not prepared
to accept that the Qaim is present, that he will remain in occultation
for a long time and then finally reappear and fill the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and tyranny.
This is despite the fact that we have traditions from the Prophet and
the Imams regarding the Imam’s name,

lineage and occultation. And there are traditional reports on
prolongation of occultation. The aim of their denial is to put out the
light of Allah and invalidate the matter of the Wali of Allah. But Allah
will perfect His light even though polytheists may find it distasteful.
Our opponents say that the reason of their denial is that the traditions
regarding the Imam and his occultation that are present in our
collections are not in their books of traditional reports.

This is the same argument that apostates, Hindus, Jews, Christians and
Zoroastrians give for denying the prophethood of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). They also say that the reports you quote with regard to his
miracles and evidences, are not found in our books. Through this we
prove the falsity of those reports. If we accept the objection of our
opponents to be true, what would be done with the objection of those who
deny the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) who are more than the deniers of the
Imam?

Objections
----------

In the same way our opponents also object that they also cannot
understand how the age of a person can exceed the age of the people of
his time like it is thought about our Imam.

Thus we shall tell them: You agree that it is possible for the age of
Dajjal in occultation to exceed the age of other people, and in the same
way you admit to the longevity of the accursed Iblis; yet you don’t
accept this could be possible with regard to the Qaim, inspite of the
fact that there are traditional reports with regard to his occultation,
long lifespan and his reappearance and advent after the divine command.
Such traditions have also been presented in this book. This is further
supported by the tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that says:
Whatever had passed in the previous nations, the same will come to pass
in this, exactly.

And it has been mentioned that many prophets and Divine Proofs had long
life spans. Like Prophet Nuh (a.s.) who lived for 2500 years. And the
Quran say that he lived in his nation for 950 years.

We have also presented the tradition whose chain of narrators is
mentioned in this book that it says: In the Qaim there is resemblance to
Prophet Nuh (a.s.) and that is having a long lifespan. Then what is the
reason that you cannot understand this and that you consider it
impossible? You should in fact accept it, because the existence of the
Imam is proved by the traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

Accepting the existence of the Qaim is necessary just as it is necessary
to accept that the People of the Cave slept in their cave for 309 years.
If the latter report can be accepted then the former is also worthy of
acceptance. How are the reports of Wahhab bin Munabbah and Kaab bin
Ahbar accepted when there is no statement of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) vouchsafing their truthfulness? Their traditions do not fit
any logic. While people are in doubt and they deny whatever has been
related by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) with regard to Qaim, about his
occultation and his reappearance, even though it is about a true fact.
Is it anything other than a willful denial of truth?

How can the opponents say that a person cannot exceed the age of the
people of his time while the statement of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) is

true that all the practices of the past nations will be repeated in this
Ummah, especially in well known aspects. Now which aspect is more well
known than that of the Qaim? Who is it that is mentioned by the people
of the east and the west? Who is it that is mentioned by those who
believe in him as well as those who deny him? Thus if the occultation of
the Qaim has been proved invalid even though there are authentic
traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) it would in fact prove the
invalidity of the prophethood of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), because he
has informed about the occultation of the Qaim. Thus in this way the
prophethood of the Prophet will be proved false.

Although the opponents accept that the Prophet said regarding Ammar
Yasir that he would be killed by a rebellious group, and that the beard
of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) would be dyed in the blood of his head, he
said regarding Imam Hasan (a.s.) that he would be martyred through
poison, and that Imam Husain (a.s.) would be martyred through the sword.
Then why don’t the opponents deny his sayings stating the occultation of
the Qaim and his name and lineage etc?

Indeed the Prophet was true in all his statements and held particular
views. No one can have perfect faith till one does not accept the
decisions of the Prophet and submits to all his commands without there
being the slightest doubt. This is what Islam is. Islam means submission
and obedience and one who brings a religion other than Islam, it would
not be accepted and such a person will be a loser in the hereafter.

The most surprising fact is that our opponents narrate that Prophet Isa
(a.s.) passed through Kerbala and saw a herd of deer. When he moved
closer he saw that they were weeping. Seeing this Prophet Isa (a.s.) sat
down and his disciples sat around him.

Thus Isa (a.s.) cried and his disciples also cried even though they did
not know why he had sat down and why he was crying. They asked: O spirit
of Allah and His word, why did you cry? He asked: Do you know this land?
They said: No, we don’t. He said: It is the land where the son of Ahmad,
the prophet of the last period of time and son of the Purified Batool
(s.a.) who is an image of my respected mother, Maryam will be martyred
and buried. The dust of this land is purer than musk, because it is the
burial ground of this oppressed martyr. And the essence of the prophets
and his progeny is such.

These deer talk me to me and they say that they graze on this land in
devotion to the oppressed Imam as a result of which they feel secure
over here. After that Isa (a.s.) split their droppings and smelt them
and said: O Lord, preserve these dropping in this state so that the
father of the martyr may smell them and obtain comfort. Thus those
droppings remained till the time of Ali (a.s.). When Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) passed from there he smelt those droppings, cried and informed
about the impending tragedy of Kerbala.

Our opponents accept the veracity of this incident and agree that those
droppings remained for more than five hundred years and there was no
difference in their freshness and smell. The passage of time did not
affect them in any way. But they don’t accept that the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad, the Imam of the Age is alive. And that he will rise with the
sword, eliminate

the enemies of Allah make the religion of Allah dominant while there are
authentic traditions of the Prophet and Imams in this regard, which
mention his name, lineage, his long occultation and which also state
that the practice of the previous nations with regard to long life spans
has been decreed for this Imam. This denial is only due to malice,
bigotry and obstinacy against acceptance of truth. [We seek Allah’s
refuge from humiliation].

Signs of the Uprising of the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------------

**28-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father:
Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from Ahmad bin Hilal from
Hasan bin Mahbub from Abi Ayyub Khazzaz and Alaa bin Razeen from
Muhammad bin Muslim that he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Before the rising of the Qaim, Allah will appoint signs for the
believers. I asked: What are those, may I be sacrificed on you? He
replied: They are mentioned in the saying of Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ
</p>

That is before the advent of the Qaim the believers will be tested
through fear and hunger and loss of property and lives and fruits; and
give good news to the patient.

<p dir="rtl">
بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوفْ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِّنَ الأَمَوَالِ وَالأنفُسِ
وَالثَّمَرَاتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
</p>

***“And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient…”(Surah Baqarah 2:155)***

He said: The believers will be tested through the fear of the last ruler
of Bani so-and-so. Hunger through rise in prices. Loss of property and
lives and fruits means loss in business and agriculture. And give good
news to the patient means those who await for the reappearance.”

After that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said to Muhammad bin Muslim: O
Muhammad this is the interpretation of the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلاَّ اللّهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ
</p>

***“…but none knows its interpretation except Allah, and those who are
firmly rooted in knowledge…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:7)***

This traditional report is also mentioned in*Ghaibat Nomani* through
another chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Muslim from the Holy Imam
(a.s.).

**29-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq has narrated from his father
from Himyari from Ibrahim bin Mahziyar from his brother Ali, from Ahwazi
from Safwan from Muhammad bin Hakim from Maimoon Laban that Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Five signs will be seen before the uprising of the Qaim: Arrival of the
Yemenite man, Sufyani, Call from the sky, Sinking of the ground in
Baidha desert and Killing of the Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah).”

**30-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.): Narrated to us Muhammad bin Hasan
Saffar from Abbas bin Maruf from Ali bin Mahziyar from Abdullah bin

Muhammad Hajjal from Thalaba bin Maimoon from Shuaib Hadhdha from Salih,
freed slave of Bani Azra that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
say:

“There will be only a gap of fifteen days between the rising of the Qaim
of Aale Muhammad and the killing of the Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah).”

This traditional report is also mentioned in*Ghaibat Shaykh* and*Irshad
Mufeed.*

**31-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Husain
bin Hasan Ibne Aban from Husain bin Saeed from Nadhr bin Suwaid from
Yahya Halabi from Harith bin Mughaira Basri from Maimoon Alban that he
said:

“I was with Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in his tent. He lifted the
opening of the tent and said: ‘Our Wilayat is clearer than this sun.’
Then he said: ‘A caller will call out from the sky that so-and-so, son
of so-and-so is Imam. And he would call out his name. While Iblis, may
Allah curse him, would call out from the earth, in the same way as he
had called the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) on the night of Uqbah.’”

**32-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan bin Ahmad bin Walid (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us Husain
bin Hasan Ibne Aban from Husain bin Saeed from Safwan bin Yahya from Isa
bin Ayyan from Mualla bin Khunais from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“Indeed the advent of Sufyani is a certain matter and it shall take
place in the month of Rajab.”

**33-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** And through the same chain of narrators from
Husain bin Saeed from Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim bin Umar from Abi
Ayyub from Harith bin Mughaira from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“The call from the sky shall be raised on the 23rd eve of Friday of the
month of Ramadhan.”

**34-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** And through the same chain of narrators from
Husain bin Saeed from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from Umar bin Hanzala that
he said: I heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“Five signs will become manifest before the reappearance of the Qaim:
Advent of Yamani and Sufyani, call from the sky, the killing of the Pure
Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah) and the sinking of Baidha land.”

**35-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father:
Narrated to us Saad bin Abdullah: Narrated to us Muhammad bin Husain bin
Abil Khattab from Ja’far bin Bashir from Hisham bin Saalim from Zurarah
from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“A caller will call out in the name of the Qaim.” I asked: “Will it be
for some people or for all?” He replied: “It would be for all. And every
community will hear it in its own language.” I asked: “Would the
opponents of Qaim be also called in his name?” “No,” he said: “For them
Iblis will call out at the end of the night and put suspicion in the
hearts of the people.”

The author says: Apparently it should be the last part of the day
instead of night as will be mentioned in the coming reports. It seems to
be a mistake of the calligrapher, because in some copies there is no
mention of last part of the night.

Sufyani
-------

**36-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Ali Majiluwayh (r.a.) that he said: Narrated to us my uncle,
Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from Muhammad bin Abi
Umair from Umar bin Uzaina that he said: Abi Abdullah (a.s.) said to me:
Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“The son of Hind, the liver-eater will come out from the valley of
Yabis. He shall be of medium height. His face will be horrible. He will
be fat. His face will be pockmarked. He will be one-eyed. His name will
be Uthman and his father’s name will be Anbasa. He will be from the
progeny of Abu Sufyan. He will camp in the land of stability, where he
will sit on the pulpit.”

The author says: The ‘land of stability’ has been interpreted as Kufa or
Najaf in reports.

**37-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Ahmad bin
Ziyad bin Ja’far Hamadani: Narrated to us Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim
from his father Ibrahim bin Hashim from Muhammad bin Abi Umair from
Hammad bin Uthman from Umar Ibne Yazid that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) said to me:

“If you have seen Sufyani, you have seen the most horrible man. He is
red, blond and blue. He will say: My Lord, I will take revenge even if I
have to go to Hell. The extent of his evil is that he would bury alive
his slave mother so that she may not reveal his true ancestry.”

**38-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us my father
and Muhammad bin Hasan - May Allah be pleased with them - they said:
Narrated to us Muhammad bin Abil Qasim Majiluwayh from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi: Narrated to us Husain bin Sufyan from Qutaibah Ibne Muhammad from
Abdullah bin Abi Mansur Bajali that he said:

I asked Abi Abdullah (a.s.) about the name of Sufyani. He replied: “Why
do you want to know his name? When he conquers the districts of Shaam,
Hams, Palestine, Jordan and Qanassireen, you wait for the reappearance.”
I asked: “Would he rule for nine months?” He replied: “No, only for
eight months and not a day more.”

**39-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Ali Majiluwayh (r.a.) from his uncle Muhammad bin Abil Qasim from
Muhammad bin Ali Kufi from his father from Abi Maghra from Mualla bin
Khunais from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he said:

“First the call of Jibraeel will come from the sky and the voice of
Iblis will come from the earth. So you must obey the first call and do
not pay attention to the second, since it would be to spread mischief.”

**40-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us Abdullah bin Ja’far Himyari from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan bin Mahbub from Abu Hamza Thumali
that he said: I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.):

Abu Ja’far (Imam Baqir a.s.) says: Is the advent of Sufyani inevitable?
He replied: “Yes, and the conflict of Bani Abbas, the killing of the
Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah), the advent of Qaim (a.s.) are among the
inevitable

occurrences. I asked: How would the call be? He said: On the first day,
the caller will call out from the sky: Indeed, the truth is with Ali and
his Shia. After that Iblis, may Allah curse him, will call at the end of
the day that: Indeed, the truth is with Sufyani and his followers. Thus
at that time those who are inclined to falsehood will fall into doubt.”

**41-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Hasan (r.a.): Narrated to us Husain bin Hasan Aban from Husain bin
Saeed from Nadhr bin Suwaid from Yahya Halabi from Hakam Hannat from
Muhammad bin Hammam from Ward from Abi Ja’far (a.s.) that he said:

“Two signs will be seen before the reappearance: there will be a lunar
eclipse for five days and there will be solar eclipse for fifteen days.
Such a phenomenon has not taken place since the arrival of Adam (a.s.)
on the earth. At that time the calculations of the astrologers will
fail.”

**42-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: And through the same chain
of narrators from Husain bin Saeed from Safwan bin Yahya from Abdur
Rahman Ibne Hajjaj from Sulaiman bin Khalid that he said: I heard Abi
Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“The reappearance of the Qaim will be preceded by two types of death:
the red death and the white death. Five out of seven people will perish
through this. The red death is killing by the sword and the white death
is plague.”

**43-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** Shaykh Saduq says: Narrated to us Muhammad
bin Musa bin Mutawakkil: Narrated to us Ali bin Husain Sadabadi from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid from his father from Muhammad bin Abi
Umair from Abi Ayyub from Abi Basir from Abi Abdullah (a.s.) that he
said:

“There will be a solar eclipse on the 5th of Ramadhan preceding the
reappearance of the Qaim.”

**44-** ***Ikmaaluddin:*** And through the same chain of narrators from
Abi Ayyub from Abi Basir and Muhammad bin Muslim that they said: We
heard Abi Abdullah (a.s.) say:

“It will not take place till two-third of human population does not
perish.” He was asked: “If two-third perish, who will remain?” He
replied: “Are you not satisfied that one-third will remain?”

**45-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Qirqara from Nazr bin
Laith Maruzi from Ibne Talha Juddari that he said: Narrated to us:
Abdullah bin Lahiya from Abi Zaraa from Abdullah bin Razeen from Ammar
bin Yasir that he said:

“The rule of the Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of your Prophet shall be there in the
last period of time and there are some signs for it; you should sit
tight and keep quiet until you see them.

When Rome and Turks attack you; when armies are prepared and that Caliph
of yours who hoards wealth passes away. He is succeeded by an honest
person, but within a few years of his allegiance, he is dismissed from
where he was appointed (from Khorasan). Turks and Rome confront each
other and battles rage everywhere. A caller will call out from the war
shelters of Damascus: Perdition is near for humans. The western portion
of the Masjid of Damascus caves in and its boundary walls collapse.
Three groups will set out from Damascus to seize power. One would be led
by a

person on a piebald horse, another on a red horse and a man from the
descendants of Abu Sufyan who would bring all the people to Damascus and
expel the people of the west to Egypt.

When they enter Damascus, it would be the sign for the uprising of
Sufyani and before that a person would stage an uprising and call the
people to Aale Muhammad (a.s.). The Turks would camp in Hira and the
Romans would camp at Palestine and Abdullah would march forward till
both the armies come face to face at Qurqisa river and a severe battle
would ensue. When the king of the west marches, he would kill the men
and captivate the women. Then he would return to Qubs till Sufyani
enters the peninsula. Then Yamani would move and take over whatever the
people had gathered.

Then he would come to Kufa and slay the followers and supporters of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.); on the contrary, he would also slay the one who is
named after them. After that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would arise and his
standard would be held by Shuaib bin Salih. When Syrians realize that
their country has come under the rule of the descendant of Abu Sufyan
they would go to Mecca. Nafse Zakiyyah and his brother would be killed
at that time. A call would be raised from the sky: Your Amir is
so-and-so (that is Imam Mahdi a.s.) who would fill up the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression.”

**46-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** A group has narrated from Talakbari from
Ahmad bin Ali Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali from Uthman bin Ahmad Sammak
from Ibrahim bin Abdullah Hashmi from Yahya bin Abi Talib from Ali bin
Asim from Ataa bin Saib from his father from Abdullah Ibne Umar that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“The hour will not arise until the Mahdi from my descendants comes
forth. The Mahdi will not come forth until sixty liars come forward, all
of them declaring: I am a prophet.”

**47-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl bin Shazan from
Washa from Ahmad bin Ayez from Abu Khadija that he said: Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The Qaim will not come forth until twelve of the Bani Hashim come forth
before him, all of them summoning men to themselves.”

**48-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ibne Faddal from Hammad
from Husain bin Mukhtar from Abu Nasr from Aamir bin Wathila from Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) that he said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“Ten things are inevitable before Judgment Day: Sufyani, Dajjal, Smoke,
Daabba, advent of the Qaim, rising of the sun from the west, splitting
of the earth in the east, descent of Isa (a.s.), splitting of the earth
in the Arabian Gulf, rising of a fire from the sea of Adn which will
herd the people towards the field of gathering (*Mahshar* ).”

**49-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ibne Faddal from Hammad
from Ibrahim bin Umar from Umar bin Hanzala from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) that he said:

“Five signs will become visible before the reappearance of the Qaim:
Call from the sky, advent of Sufyani, splitting of the earth in the
desert, advent of Yamani and killing of Nafse Zakiyyah (the pure soul).”

**50-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl bin Shazan from
Nasr bin Muzahim from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir that he said:

“I said to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.): When will this event occur? He
replied: Jabir, that will occur at a time when the killing between Hira
and Kufa is considerable.”

**51-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ibne Abi
Najran from Muhammad bin Sinan from Husain bin Mukhtar from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“When the wall of the mosque of Kufa, which adjoins the house of
Abdullah bin Masud is destroyed, at that time the ruler of the people
will disappear. At his disappearance, the Qaim will come forth.”

**52-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Saif bin
Umaira from Bakr bin Muhammad Azdi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“There will be three appearances in one year, one month and one day -
the Sufyani, the Khurasani and the Yamani. The standard of guidance will
not be among them, except the standard of the Yamani, because he will
summon (people) to the truth.”

**53-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ibne Faddal
from Ibne Bukair from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said:

“Misri and Yamani will appear before Sufyani.”

**54-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Uthman bin Isa
from Darast from Ammar bin Marwan from Abu Basir that he said: I heard
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“I am prepared to guarantee Imam Qaim to one who guarantees the death of
Abdullah; because after the death of Abdullah, the Muslims will not have
consensus on any one person and this matter will not end except with
your Imam. If Allah wills, the kingdom running into years will end and
the kingdom running into days and months will begin.”

I (the narrator) asked: “Would this matter be prolonged?”

He replied: “Definitely not.”

**55-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Muhammad bin
Ali from Salam bin Abdullah from Abu Basir from Bakr bin Harb from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The kingdom of Bani so-and-so cannot decline till the two swords of
so-and-so do not clash. When they clash, their kingdom will begin to
decline.”

**56-** ***Irshad*** **&** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl
from Bazanti from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) that he said:

“Among the signs of the relief is an event, which will occur between the
two mosques (of Mecca and Medina). So-and-so from the descendants of so-
and-so will kill fifteen leaders of the Arabs.”

**57-** ***Irshad*** **&** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl
from Ibne Faddal and Ibne Abi Najran from Hammad bin Isa from Ibrahim
bin Umar Yamani from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“The kingdom of these men will not disappear until they slaughter people
in Kufa on Friday. It is as if I was looking at heads falling between
the Gate of al-Feel and (the place of) the soap-sellers.

**58-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Abdullah bin
Jabla from Abu Ammar from Ali bin Abu Mughira from Abdullah bin Shareek
Aamiri

from Umaira binte Nufail that she said: I heard binte Hasan bin Ali
(a.s.) say:

“The matter for which you are waiting for, will not occur till you do
not get fed up of each other, till you don’t curse each other, till you
don’t spit at each other’s face and call each other disbelievers.”

I (the narrator) said: “There is nothing positive about it!”

He said: “There is indeed, because at that time our Qaim will reappear
and all that will end.”

**59-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ali bin Asbat
from Muhammad bin Abi Bilad from Ali bin Muhammad Awdi from his father
from his grandfather that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“Before the Qaim, there will be red death and white death; there will be
locusts at their usual time and at their unusual time like the colors of
blood. As for red death it is (from) the sword, while the white death is
(from) plague.”

**60-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Nasr bin
Muzahim from Abu Lahiya from Abu Zaraa from Abdullah bin Razeen from
Ammar bin Yasir (r.a.) that he said:

“The call from the Ahle Bayt (a.s.) of your Prophet will come during the
last period of time. Thus till you don’t see the leader of this call,
hold on to the earth and keep quiet till the Turks confront the Romans;
battles rage all over the world; a caller calls out from Damascus:
Mischief is near, and the wall of the mosque of Damascus does not
collapse.”

**61-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ibne Abi
Najran from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud from Muhammad bin Bashar
that he asked Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah about the reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (a.s.) and he said:

“How is it possible so soon? The cruel time has not yet arrived. How is
it possible so soon? As yet brothers have not started oppressing
brothers. How is it possible so soon? The ruler of the time has not
started oppressing. How is it possible so soon? The atheists have not
staged an uprising from Qazwin. That they may halt their progress; who
may change their town shelters, who destroys their joys, who apprehends
those who try to flee from them, who kills those who come out to fight
them, those who recede to solitude become needful, one who obeys them
becomes a denier; so much so that there will finally be two kinds of
mourners: One who will mourn for their religion and another who will
mourn for their world.”

**62-** ***Irshad*** **&** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl
from Hasan bin Mahbub from Amr bin Abil Miqdam from Jabir Jofi from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Stay close to the ground. Don’t move an arm or a leg until you see the
signs, which I will mention to you - I don’t think that you will live
until that time. The Abbasides will dispute; a voice will call from the
sky; one of the villages of Syria called Jazira; the Byzantines will
attack Ramla; at that time there will be much conflict throughout the
land until Syria is destroyed. The cause of its destruction will be the
meeting of three standards there; the standard of the Red, the standard
of the Spotted and the standard of the Sufyani.”

**63-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Ali Raazi from
Maqani from Bukkar bin Ahmad from Hasan bin Husain from Abdullah bin
Bukair from Abdul Malik bin Ismail Asadi from his father that he said:
Narrated to me Saeed bin Jubair that:

“It will rain twenty-four times in the year in which Imam Mahdi (a.s.)
will reappear; and its effects and bounties would be clear.”

**64-** It is narrated from Kaabul Ahbar that he said:

“When the one whose name begins with Ain [A’] from Bani Abbas comes to
the throne; that is Abdullah, then this rule will begin with a person
named Abdullah and end with a person named Abdullah. He will be the key
to calamities and the sword of annihilation. When his announcement will
be read in the evening, that: From the slave of Allah, Abdullah, the
chief of believers, to the people of Syria: Know that you will
immediately come to know it is being announced from the pulpit of Egypt:
From the slave of Allah, Abdullah, the chief of believers, to the people
of Egypt…”

It is mentioned in another tradition that the rule of Bani Abbas will
continue till you will get information that this announcement had been
read out in Egypt that: From the slave of Allah, Abdullah, the chief of
believers, to the people of Egypt…When this happens, it will be the time
of the decline of the kingdom of Bani Abbas. When this announcement is
made by Bani Abbas in the morning, in the name of Abdullah you should
wait till this announcement is made in the evening, in the name of Abdur
Rahman and the latter will attack Abdullah in the most cruel way.”

**65-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Hazlam bin Bashir that
he said:

“I said to Ali bin Husain (a.s.): Describe to me the rise of Mahdi and
tell me about his proofs and signs. He said: Before his advent, a man
will appear whose name is Auf Salmi, in the land of Jazira, who will
stay in Tikrit and will be killed in the Masjid of Damascus; after that
will appear Shuaib bin Salih from Samarqand; at that time will appear
the accursed Sufyani from the valley of Yabis, and he would be from the
progeny of Utbah bin Abu Sufyan; and when Sufyani appears, the Mahdi
will go into concealment, after that he will appear again.”

**66-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“A man will rise up from Qazwin, whose name will be same as the name of
a Prophet. People will make haste in accepting his authority; but the
mountains will be full of disbelievers and believers due to his fear.”

**67-** ***Irshad*** **&** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl
bin Shazan from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Nasr from Thalaba from Badr
bin Khalil Azdi that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“Two signs will come before the Qaim (a.s.); there will be a solar
eclipse in the middle of Ramadhan and a lunar eclipse at the end of it.”

“Son of Allah’s Messenger,” I said, “usually a solar eclipse occurs at
the end of the month and lunar eclipse occurs in the middle of it?”

“I know what I have said,” replied Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), “They are
signs, which have not occurred since Adam came down.”

**68-** ***Irshad*** **&** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl
from Ibne Asbat from Hasan bin Jaham that he said:

A man asked Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) about the reappearance and he asked
in return: “Do you want most of it or shall I give you a summary?”

“Would you give me a summary?” he said.

“(It will be) when the standards of Qays are carried in Egypt and the
standards of Kinda in Khurasan,” he replied.

**69-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ibne Mahbub
from Bataini from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The year preceding the reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will be so
verdant that dates will rot on the trees and there will be no one to
pick them. Have no doubt about it.”

**70-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ahmad bin Umar
bin Saalim from Yahya bin Ali from Rabi from Abi Lubaid that he said:

“The people of Abyssinia will demolish the Kaaba; the Black Stone will
be taken away and fixed in the Kufa Masjid.”

**71-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is from Fazl from Ibne Abi Umair from
Ibne Uziyana from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said: I heard His
Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“After the Sufyani gets control over five provinces he would rule equal
to the duration of pregnancy of a woman.” Then he said: “I seek
forgiveness of Allah, he would rule for the duration of pregnancy of a
camel. And his matter is inevitable.”

**72-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Ismail bin
Mahran from Uthman bin Jabla from Umar bin Aban Kalbi from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I can see the Sufyani or a representative of Sufyani camped
outside Kufa and his statements are being announced to the people:
Anyone who brings a severed head of a Shia of Ali (a.s.) would be
rewarded a thousand Dirhams. Then a neighbor would attack his neighbor
and say: ‘he is from them’, and he would cut off his head and collect a
thousand Dirhams.

And indeed the rulership and kingdom at that time would not be in the
control of anyone except the illegitimate born. As if I can see the
veiled one. I asked: ‘Who is the veiled one?’ He replied: ‘He is a man
from you who would be talking just like you. He would be veiled and he
would identify each of you so that you may be captured, he is not, but a
bastard.”

**73-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from a group from Abu
Mufaddal Shaibani from Abu Naeem Nasr bin Isaam Ibne Mughira Amri from
Abu Yusuf Yaqub bin Naeem bin Amr Qarqara Katib from Ahmad Ibne Muhammad
Asadi from Muhammad bin Ahmad from Ismail bin Abbas from Muhajir bin
Hakim from Muawiyah bin Saeed from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said: Imam Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) said:

“After that there will be a terrible earthquake in Shaam, which will be
a blessing for the believers but a punishment for disbelievers. A
hundred thousand will die because of it. When this happens, you will see
an army mounted on red horses coming from the west, waving a yellow flag
and entering Shaam. When this happens, you will see a village of Shaam,
named Kharashna sink into the earth. When this also happens, you will
witness the rising of (Sufyani) the son of Hind, the liver-eater from
the Yabis Valley.”

**74-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Qarqara from Muhammad
bin Halaf from Hasan bin Salih bin Aswad from Abdul Jabbar bin Abbas
Hamadani from Ammar Dahni that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“For how long will the rule of Sufyani last?”

I replied: “For the duration of a normal human pregnancy (nine months).”

Imam (a.s.) said: “O people of Kufa, how knowledgeable is this man among
you!”

**75-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Qarqara from Ismail bin
Abdullah bin Maimoon from Muhammad bin Abdur Rahman from Ja’far bin Saad
Kahili from Amash from Bashir bin Ghalib that he said:

“Sufyani will come from the Roman area in the disguise of a Christian. A
cross will hang from his neck and he will be leading a group.”

**76-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Ali Raazi from
Muhammad bin Ishaq Muqri from Maqani from Bukkar from Ibrahim bin
Muhammad from Ja’far bin Saad Asadi from his father from Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“In the year of the reappearance, there will be such a terrible flood in
the Euphrates that even the lanes of Kufa will be inundated.”

**77-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Fazl from Muhammad bin
Ali from Uthman bin Ahmad Sammak from Ibrahim bin Abdullah Hashmi from
Ibrahim bin Hani from Naeem bin Hammad from Saeed from Abu Uthman from
Jabir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Those black flags will emerge from Khorasan and come upto Kufa. When
Imam Mahdi (a.s.) reappears, they will be sent to give allegiance to
him.”

**78-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Qarqara from Muhammad
bin Halaf Hammad from Ismail bin Aban Azdi from Sufyan bin Ibrahim
Jurairi that he heard his father say:

“Nafse Zakiyyah (the pure soul) is a young man from the Progeny of
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), his name is Muhammad bin Hasan, who would be killed
without any crime and sin and when they slay, him they shall neither
have any excuse in the heavens nor would they have any friend in the
earth. At that time the Almighty Allah will send the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad with a group that in the view of the people would be softer
than antimony. When they come out, the people will weep at their
condition as they would think that they would very soon be eliminated at
the hands of the enemies. However the Almighty Allah will conquer the
easts and the wests of the earth for them. Know that they are the true
believers. Know that the best of the Jihads shall be in the last period
of time.”

**79-** ***Ghaibat Tusi:*** It is narrated from Qarqara from Abbas bin
Yazid Bahrani from Abdur Razzaq bin Hammam from Muammar from Ibne Tawus
from Ali bin Abdullah bin Abbas that he said:

“The Mahdi will not reappear till a sign appears with the Sun.”

**80-** ***Kashful Yaqeen:*** I found in the writing of Muhaddith
Akhbari Muhammad bin Mashhadi through his chains from Muhammad bin Qasim
from Ahmad bin Muhammad from his teachers from Sulaiman Amash from

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that he said: Narrated to me Anas bin Malik,
servant of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), that:

“When Amirul Momineen (a.s.) returned after routing the people of
Nahrawan he camped at Barasa where Habbab, a hermit lived in his
monastery. When he hard the clamor of the army outside his recluse, he
looked out to see a displeasing scene. He came down immediately and
asked: What army is this and who is the commander? He was told that it
was commanded by Amirul Momineen (a.s.) who has returned from the Battle
of Nahrawan. He came pushing against the crowd and stood before Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) and said: O genuine Amirul Momineen (a.s.), peace be on
you.

He asked: “How did you conclude that I am the genuine?”

He replied: “Our religious leaders have told us about it.”

He said: “O Habbab.”

He asked: “How did you know what my name was?”

Imam (a.s.) said: “My beloved, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had
informed me about it.”

Habbab said: “Give me your hand. I testify that there is no god except
Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and you Ali Ibne Abi Talib,
are his successor.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) asked: “Where do you live?”

He replied: “I live in a monastery over here.”

He said: “Now you should leave it. On the contrary you should construct
a Masjid, which you should name on the name of its founder.”

Thus a man named Barasa had a Masjid constructed over there and the
Masjid was named as Masjid Barasa.

Then the Imam asked: “From where do you get drinking water?”

He said: “From the Tigris.”

Imam (a.s.) asked: “Why don’t you dig a well over here?”

He replied: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), wells are salty in this area.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: “All right, dig a well at this spot.”

When it was dug out, they came upon a huge rock, which they could not
extract. So Amirul Momineen (a.s.) removed it with a gesture of his hand
and the water of that well proved to me extremely sweet and delicious.

Then he said: O Habbab, you may continue to use this well, but you
should know that in a short while a town would come up near this Masjid
of yours. And in that place there would be many sinners and oppressors.
Every Thursday they would commit seventy thousand evil deeds and horses,
donkeys and camels would be tied up in your Masjid and a disbeliever
would demolish it. Hajj would be prohibited for three years. Crops would
be reduced to ashes. Then an evil person would get power on them. He
would destroy every area that he goes to and would eliminate all the
inhabitants. Then he would come to Basra and raze every pillar and make
all the inhabitants of that place restless. Then those ruins would be
inhabited once more and a Jame Masjid would be constructed there. After
that Basra would be destroyed once again; after that the evildoer would
move to Wasit, which would have been established by Hajjaj; and would
deal with that town in a similar way. Then he will come to Baghdad and
plunder it. People would

flee to Kufa from there. Then he and the one who had invited him to
Baghdad would set out to dig up my tomb. They would confront Sufyani who
would defeat them. Sufyani’s army will march to Kufa and kill anyone it
comes across, including children. At that time, O Habbab, it’s a pity
that you must expect many oppressions and mischiefs and remember what I
have said.”

**81-** ***Ikhtisaas:*** It is narrated from Saad from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Abdullah bin Aamir Saad from Muhammad bin Khalid from Abu
Hamza Thumali that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said:

“One who desires to fight against the followers of Dajjal should fight
those who mourn the killing of Uthman and those who mourn the people of
Nahrawan. One who meets Allah with belief that Uthman was killed
unjustly, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will meet Him while He is angry
with him and he will not live till the time of Dajjal.”

A man asked: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), what if he dies before that?”

He replied: “Allah will raise him from the grave till he brings faith in
him.”

**82-** ***Irshad:*** Traditions have been reported mentioning the signs
for the time of the appearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.) and the events, which
will take place before his appearance, together with the indications and
features of it. Among them are: The Sufyani will come out in revolt; the
Hasanid will be killed; the Abbasids will dispute over worldly kingdom;
there will be a solar eclipse in the middle of Ramadhan; a lunar eclipse
at the end of the month in contrast to ordinary happenings; the land
will be swallowed up at Baidha; it will be swallowed in the east; it
will be swallowed up in the west; the sun will stay still from the time
of its decline to the middle of the time from the afternoon prayer; it
will rise from the west; a pure soul (Nafe Zakiyyah) will be killed on
the outskirts of Kufa with seventy righteous men; a Hashemite will be
slaughtered between the corner of the Kaaba and the Place of Ibrahim
(a.s.); the wall of the Kufa mosque will be destroyed; black standards
will advance from Khurasan; Yamani will come out in revolt; Maghribi
will appear in Egypt and take possession of it from Syria; the Turk will
occupy the region of Jazira; the Byzantines (Romans) will occupy Ramla;
the star will appear in the east giving light just like the moon; then
(the new moon) will bend until its two tips almost meet; a color will
appear in the sky and spread to its horizons; a fire will appear for a
long time in the east remaining in the air for three or seven days; the
Arabs will throw off the reins and take possession of their land,
throwing out the foreign authority; the people of Egypt will kill their
ruler and destroy Syria; and three standards will dispute over it
(Syria); the standards of Qays and the Arabs will come among the people
of Egypt; the standards of Kinda (will go) to Khurasan; horses will come
from the west until they are stabled in Hira; the black standards will
advance towards them from the east; the Euphrates will flood so much
that the alleys of Kufa will be inundated; sixty liars will come
forward; all of them claiming prophethood, and twelve will come forward
from the family of Abu Talib, all of them claiming the Imamate; a man of
important rank of the supporters of the Abbasides will be burnt

between Jalula and Khaniqin; the bridge next to Karkh in the city of
Baghdad will be established; a black wind will raise it at the beginning
of the day and then an earthquake will occur so that much of it will be
swallowed up; fear will cover the people of Iraq and Baghdad; swift
death (will occur) there and there will be a loss of property, lives and
harvests; locusts will appear at their usual times and at times not
usual so that they attack agricultural land and crops and there will be
little harvest for what the people planted; two kinds of foreigners will
dispute and much blood will be shed in their dispute; slaves will rebel
against obedience to their masters and kill their masters; a group of
heretics will be transformed until they become monkeys and pigs; slaves
will conquer the land of their masters; a cry (will come) from the sky
(in such a way) that all hear it in their own languages; a face and a
chest will appear in the sky before the people in the centre of the sun;
the dead will arise from their graves so that they will return to the
world and they will recognize one another and visit one another; that
will come to an end with twenty-four continuous rain storms and the land
will be revived by them after being dead and it will recognize its
blessings; after that every disease will be taken away from the Shia of
the Mahdi (a.s.), who believe in the truth; at that time they will know
of his appearance in Mecca and they will go to him to support him.

(These signs) are as the reports have mentioned. Among the total of
these events are some, which are inevitable and others which are
conditional. God knows best what will take place. We have only mentioned
them on the basis of what is recounted in basic sources of traditions,
because of their inclusion in traditions, which have been handed down.
From God we seek help and Him do we ask for success.

**83-** ***Irshad:*** Ali bin Abi Hamza has narrated from Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) that he said with regard to the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنفُسِهِمْ
</p>

***“We will soon show them Our signs in the Universe and in their own
souls…” (Surah Fussilat 41:53)***

That there will be a disturbance on the horizons and the enemies of
truth will be changed in form.

**84-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Wuhaib bin Hafas from Abu
Basir that he said: I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say about the
following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

He said: “God will do that to them.”

“Who are they?” I asked.

“The Umayyads and their supporters,” he answered.

“What is the sign?” I asked.

“Between the decline of the sun (at noon) and the time of the afternoon
prayer, the sun will remain still,” he said. “The chest and face of a
man will appear in the centre of the sun, who will be recognized by his
standing and genealogy. That will occur during the time of the Sufyani.
At that moment his destruction will occur as well as the destruction of
his people.”

**85-** ***Irshad:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Zaid from Mundhir
Jauzi from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Before the coming of the Qaim (a.s.), the people will be chided for
their acts of disobedience by a fire, which will appear in the sky and a
redness, which will cover the sky. It will swallow up Baghdad, it will
swallow up Kufa. There blood will be shed and houses destroyed. Death
will occur amid their people and a fear will come over the people of
Iraq from which they shall have no respite.”

**86-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is quoted from Ayyashi from Ajlan Abu
Salih that he said: I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“The days and the nights will not end till the caller announces from the
sky: O people of truth come away, O people of falsehood come away. Thus
the former would separate from the latter and the latter would separate
from the former.” The narrator says: I asked: “May Allah bless you,
after this announcement would they again mix together?” He replied: “No,
the Almighty Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
مَّا كَانَ اللّهُ لِيَذَرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَى مَآ أَنتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
حَتَّىَ يَمِيزَ الْخَبِيثَ مِنَ الطَّيِّبِ
</p>

***“On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which
you are in until He separates the evil from the good…” (Surah Aale Imran
3:179)***

**87-** ***Tafsir Ayyashi:*** It is narrated from Jabir Jofi from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Sit tight, and do not move your hands and feet till you don’t see the
signs that I tell you of. One year you will see a caller announcing in
Damascus and a village of Syria will sink into the ground and a part of
the Masjid will collapse. Then you will see Turks march forward and land
in the peninsula and the Romans would also move forward and camp at
Ramla.

That year will be full of events everywhere from the direction of the
west. The first country that will be ruined is Shaam. Then people will
disagree and divide into three armies; the red army, the piebald army
and the army of Sufyani. Bani Kalab will accompany Sufyani as they will
be related to him from the maternal side. Sufyani and his companions
will subjugate Bani Zambul Himar and slay them in the most terrible
manner and whoever from Bani Zambul Himar enters Damascus, will be slain
along with his companions.

Thus the Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاخْتَلَفَ الْأَحْزَابُ مِن بَيْنِهِمْ فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
مِن مَّشْهَدِ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
</p>

***“But parties from among them disagreed with each other, so woe to
those who disbelieve, because of presence on a great day.” (Surah Maryam
19:37)***

Sufyani and his men will set out from there and they will only target
Aale Muhammad (a.s.) and their Shia. Thus he will send an army to Kufa,
where a large number of Shia will be killed or impaled. An army will
come from Khurasan, which will disembark at the banks of Tigris. He will
send a battalion towards Medina where a man will be killed; then Imam
Mahdi (a.s.) and Mansur will leave Medina and all the followers of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.) will be arrested and imprisoned. Then the army will come

out in search for them. Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will flee from there in fear
like Prophet Musa (a.s.) and set out for Mecca.

The army of Sufyani will sink in the desert and none of them will escape
death except one who will convey the news. Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will pray
between Rukn and Maqam and his assistant will be with him. Then he will
address the crowd:

On that day the Qaim will be in Mecca leaning his back against the
Kaaba. He will announce: “O people, we resort to Allah to make us
succeed. Whoever of you wants to support us, let him join us. We are the
progeny of your Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). We are worthier of Allah
and Muhammad than other people. Whoever argues with me about Adam, I am
the worthiest of Adam. Whoever argues with me about Nuh, I am the
worthiest of Nuh. Whoever argues with me about Ibrahim, I am the
worthiest of Ibrahim. Whoever argues with me about Muhammad (s.a.w.s.),
I am the worthiest of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). Whoever argues with me about
the prophets, I am the worthiest of the prophets. Whoever argues with me
about the Book of the Almighty Allah, I am the worthiest of the Book of
Allah.

Indeed we all testify and all Muslims will testify that we had been
oppressed and our rights were trespassed and we were betrayed. We have
been wronged, offended, expelled from our homes, separated from our
families, deprived of our rights and our honor and virtues have been
distorted by the evil people. For the sake of Allah, do not fail us.
Support us that may Allah supports you!”

Allah will make his (the Mahdi’s) three hundred and thirteen persons
join him including fifty women and all will gather at Mecca like shreds
of clouds gather in rainy season and it is with regard to this that the
Almighty Allah has said in the Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

At that time a man from the family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) would
say: This is the town whose people are oppressors. Then he would leave
Mecca with those who accompany him numbering three hundred and odd
persons who would pledge allegiance to him between the*Rukn* and*Maqam*
after seeing the pledge of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the flag and
the weapon of His Eminence and his deputy would be accompanying him.
After that the announcer will call out from the sky under his name and
command in Mecca till all the people of the world would hear (his name).
His name will be the name of the Prophet. If you have any doubt about
it, you should not have any doubt about the relics of the Prophet and
his weapons etc. and if you are still in doubt, you will not doubt when
his name is called out from the sky. Beware of some particular persons
of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) because the flag of Muhammad and Ali will be the
same and others will have other standards. Thus it is necessary to sit
tight and not to follow any of them as long as you don’t confirm that
that person is from the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.) and he has the
flag, relics and weapons

of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Because the relics of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) will remain with Ali bin Husain (a.s.) and then pass on
to Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) and the Almighty Allah will do what He likes.

Then you should remain attached to him and keep away from those I have
mentioned. And when one of them arises with three hundred and thirteen
men and along with the relics of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and
he sets out in the direction of Medina and passes through the desert and
says: This is the location where an army will sink. Thus the Almighty
Allah says:

أَفَأَمِنَ الَّذِينَ مَكَرُواْ السَّيِّئَاتِ أَن يَخْسِفَ اللّهُ بِهِمُ
الأَرْضَ أَوْ يَأْتِيَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ {45}
أَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ فِي تَقَلُّبِهِمْ فَمَا هُم بِمُعْجِزِينَ {46}

***“Do they then who plan evil (deeds) feel secure (of this) that Allah
will not cause the earth to swallow them or that punishment may not
overtake them from whence they do not perceive? Or that He may not seize
them in the course of their journeys, then shall they not escape.”
(Surah Nahl 16:45-46)***

When he reaches Medina, Muhammad bin Shajari will come out according the
practice of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) and that he would proceed to Kufa and
stay there for a long time. After that he will set out from there and
reach Azra, where Muawiyah had killed Hujr bin Adi in Damascus. A large
number of people will join the Imam. Sufyani will be in the Ramla valley
at that time. When the two armies meet, it would be a day of exchange.
That is those Shia who are in the army of Sufyani will come out and join
the forces of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and those Sufyanis who are there in the
army of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will come out and join Sufyani. That is the
day of exchange.

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: On that day Sufyani and all his followers
will be slain and no one will survive to even convey the information of
their death. That day from the booty of Bani Kalab whoever remained
deprived was really deprived. After that the Qaim would return to Kufa
and set his residence there.

He would not leave a single Muslim slave, but that he would purchase him
and set him free and he would repay the debts of every debtor. He would
also free everyone from any liability they might be having upon their
necks. If any slave has been killed he would have his heirs paid his
blood money. If any free man has been killed, he would repay his debts
and would give much monetary help to his family members. Till the earth
would be full of justice and equity as it would have been fraught with
injustice and oppression. After that he and the people of his house
(Ahle Bayt) would settle down in Rahba, which is a pure and clean place;
it is also the place of residence of Prophet Nuh (a.s.).”

**88-** ***Majalis:*** It is narrated from Jaabi from Muhammad bin Musa
Hadhrami from Malik bin Ubaidullah from Ali bin Mabad from Ishaq bin Abi
Yahya Kaabi from Sufyan Thawri from Mansur Rabi from Kharrash from
Huzaifah bin Yaman that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) say:

“The Almighty Allah will separate His friends and chosen servants from
the hypocrites and deviated persons and their descendants. So much so
that

fifty women will approach a man and say: Sir, please purchase me.
Another one will say: Please take me under your protection.”

**89-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Muhammad Dinawari from Ali bin Hasan Kufi from Umrah binte Aws that
she said: Narrated to me my grandfather, Khizr bin Abdur Rahman from
Abdullah bin Hamza from Kaabul Ahbar that he said:

“On the Day of Resurrection, the human beings will be resurrected in
four categories; riders, walking people, groveling people and deaf, dumb
and blind people, who do not understand, are not spoken to and not
permitted to apologize.

<p dir="rtl">
تَلْفَحُ وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ وَهُمْ فِيهَا كَالِحُونَ
</p>

***“These are whom (the fire shall scorch their faces, and they therein
shall be in severe affliction).” (Surah Mominoon 23:104)***

It was said to him: “O Kaab, who are these people, whose condition will
be so?”

He said: “It is those, who have kept on deviation, apostasy and breaking
the allegiance. Evil is that which their souls have sent before for them
when they will meet Allah with the sin of fighting, the caliph and the
guardian of their prophet, their most aware jurisprudent, their most
virtuous master, the bearer of the banner, the guard of the pond, the
hope and the hoped one out of all this world, the knowledge that is
never ignored, the straight path, from which whoever deviates will
perish and fall in Fire. It is Ali, by the Lord of the Kaaba, who is the
most aware of them, the senior in peace (Islam) and the most discerned
of all of them. I wonder at those, who prefer others to Ali.

From among the descendants of Ali is al-Qaim al-Mahdi, who will change
the world into another one and by whom Isa (a.s.) will argue against the
Christians of Rome and China. Al-Qaim al-Mahdi is the most similar one
to Isa (a.s.) in form, character, nobility and dignity. Allah will give
him all what He has given to the prophets and more than that and He will
prefer him to all. The Qaim, the descendant of Ali (a.s.), will
disappear like the disappearance of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) and will
reappear like the reappearance of Isa the son of Maryam (a.s.). He will
reappear after his disappearance, with the appearance of the red star,
the destruction of az-Zawra’ (Rayy), the sinking of Muzawarra (Baghdad),
the rising of Sufyani, the war of Bani Abbas against the people of
Armenia and Azerbaijan, in which thousands and thousands will be killed.
Each one of the warriors will seize on an adorned sword, over which
black banners will flutter. It will be a war full of red death and
terrible plague.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) and Umar Ibne Saad
-----------------------------------------

**90-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains as
above from Khizr bin Abdur Rahman from his father from his grandfather
that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“The Day of Resurrection will not come until the eye of the world is
gouged out and redness appears in the sky, and this redness is the tears
of the bearers of the Throne weeping for the people of the earth, and
until a bad

gang appears propagandizing for my progeny whereas in fact they are free
from my progeny. It is a gang with no morals, prevailing over the evils,
deceiving the tyrants and destroying the kings (rulers). It is a gang
that appears in Kufa headed by a black-faced and black-hearted man, who
is weak in faith, with no morals, hybrid, mean and rude. He is
circulated among prostitute mothers from the worst progenies. May Allah
have no mercy upon them. They will appear in the same year, in which my
disappearing son with the red banner and the green flag will reappear.

What a terrible day for the deviants between Anbar and Heet it will be!
A day, on which a great misfortune will occur to the Kurds and the
(Kharijites), on which there will be the destruction of the house (city)
of the Pharaohs (tyrants), the abode of the arrogants, the shelter of
the unjust rulers, the mother of calamities and the sister of shame!

O Umar bin Saad, by the God of Ali, it is Baghdad! May Allah damn the
mutineers of the Umayyads and the Abbasids; the traitors, who will kill
my virtuous descendants, who will never regard my sanctity when killing
them and who will not fear Allah when doing anything to my progeny.

Woe unto the followers of the Abbasids from a war that will break out
between Nahawand and Daynour. It will be the war of the paupers of Ali’s
Shia headed by a man from Hamadan, whose name will be like the name of
the Prophet (s.a.w.s.).”

**91-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Hamid bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa-a from Ahmad bin
Hasan from Zaidah bin Qudamah from Abdul Karim that he said:

Imam Qaim (a.s.) was mentioned in the presence of Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) and he asked: “How will that be and yet the orbit has not turned
nor has it been said: Has he died, perished or in which valley has he
gone?”

I (Abdul Karim) asked him: “What is the turning of the orbit?”

He said: “It is the disagreement of the Shia among themselves.”

**92-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Hamid
bin Ziyad from Ali bin Sabbah from Abu Ali Hasan bin Muhammad from
Ja’far bin Muhammad from Ibrahim bin Abdul Hamid from Ibne Tarif from
Asbagh bin Nubatah that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“After one hundred and fifty years unbeliever rulers, unreliable
treasurers and dissolute officials will control the rule. Then the
merchants increase but the profits decrease. Usury spreads, illegitimate
sons will be everywhere, adultery increase, relatives deny each other,
the crescent is regarded as greater than it is, a woman is satisfied
with a woman (in lesbianism) and a man is satisfied with a man.”

A man said to him: “What will we do when such a time comes?”

Imam Ali said: “Escape! Escape! The justice of Allah will still spread
among this Ummah as long as the scholars do not incline to the rulers
and as long as the pious still forbid the dissolute from committing
sins. If they do not do so and then they are alerted and say: There is
no god but Allah, Allah will say from on His Throne: You say it falsely.
You are not truthful.”

**93-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ibne Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from Abu
Basir that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“There must be a sedition before the appearance of the Qaim, during
which people become hungry, terrified by killing and they lose their
properties and lives. This has been clarified by the Book of Allah.
Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوفْ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِّنَ
الأَمَوَالِ وَالأنفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
</p>

***“And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient.” (Surah Baqarah 2:155)***

**94-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa Alawi from Ali bin Ibrahim Hashim from his father
from Muhammad bin Hafas from Amr bin Shimr from Jabir Jofi that he said:

“Once I asked Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) about the meaning of this saying
of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنَ الْخَوفْ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِّنَ
الأَمَوَالِ وَالأنفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
</p>

***“And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient.” (Surah Baqarah 2:155)***

…and he said: “O Jabir, it has a general meaning and a special meaning.
The special meaning is that hunger will afflict Kufa and especially the
opponents of Muhammad’s progeny and will destroy them. As for the
general meaning, there will be terror and hunger in Shaam that has never
been faced before. Hunger will be before the rising of the Qaim (a.s.)
but terror will be there after his rising.” This report is also
mentioned in*Tafsir Ayyashi* through another chain of narrators.

**95-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal from Ibne Faddal from Thalaba from Muammar bin
Yahya from Dawood Dajjaji from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Once Amirul Momineen (a.s.) was asked about (the meaning of) this
Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
فَاخْتَلَفَ الْأَحْزَابُ مِن بَيْنِهِمْ
</p>

***“But parties from among them disagreed with each other…” (Surah
Maryam 19:37)***

He said: “Expect deliverance when three signs appear.”

He was asked: “What are they?”

He said: “Disagreement among the people of Shaam, the black banners
coming from Khurasan and terror in the month of Ramadan.”

He was asked: “What is terror in Ramadan?”

He said: “Have you not heard the saying of Allah in the Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
إِن نَّشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِم مِّن السَّمَاء آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ
</p>

***“If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven
so that their necks should stoop to it.” (Surah Shoara 26:4)***

It is a sign that will bring the girls out of their veils, awaken the
sleepers and terrify the awake.”

Report of Abu Basir about other signs of reappearance
-----------------------------------------------------

**96-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ibne Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father from Wuhaib
from Abu Basir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“If you see a great fire burning in the east for three days or seven
days, then wait for the deliverance of Muhammad’s progeny inshallah.
Allah is Mighty, Wise!”

Then he said: “The cry will not occur except in the month of Ramadan,
because Ramadan is the month of Allah and the cry is the cry of Jibraeel
to the people.”

Then he added: “A call will come from the heavens with the name of the
Qaim. It will be heard by everyone in the east and everyone in the west.
The cry will make every sleeper awake, every stander sit and every
sitter stand because of fright. Allah will have mercy upon whoever
submits to the cry and obeys the caller, because the first cry will be
the cry of Jibraeel (a.s.)”

Then he said: “The cry will be in the month of Ramadan, in a night of a
Friday, which will be the twenty-third of the month. Do never doubt
that. Listen, and obey! At the end of the day there will be the voice of
Iblis the cursed calling out: “So-and-so (Uthman) is killed unjustly”
just to make people doubt and become confused. On that day much many
people will doubt and become confused and then go to Hell.

If you hear the call in Ramadan, do not doubt it. It will be the voice
of Jibraeel. The evidence is that he will call out the name of the Qaim
and the name of his father. The call will be heard by everyone until the
virgins in their veils persuade their fathers and brothers to rise (to
join the Qaim).

These two calls must occur before the appearance of the Qaim. One will
be from the heavens calling out the name of the Qaim and the name of his
father. It will be the call of Jibraeel. The other will be from the
earth and it will be the call of Iblis calling out the name of someone
claiming that he has been killed unjustly just to create sedition among
people. Obey the first call and beware of being deceived by the second
one!”

He also said: “The Qaim will not appear except after a great terror
among people, earthquakes, seditions, calamities, plague, terrible
killing among the Arabs, great disagreements among people, separation in
the religion and bad living until one will wish to die in the morning or
in the evening, because of the oppression of people and their striving
to eat each other. The Qaim will disappear after the people will have
become so desperate and hopeless to get any deliverance. How blessed is
he, who lives until the appearance of the Qaim and becomes one of his
assistants and woe unto whoever opposes him, objects to his orders and
becomes one of his opponents.”

He said: “When he (the Qaim) rises, he will rule with a new method, new
principles, new Sunnah and new judgments. He will be severe with the
Arabs. He will kill a large number of people without forgiving anyone
and without caring for any blame, because he will act according to the
will of Allah.”

He said: “If the people of the family of so-and-so disagree among
themselves, then you wait for deliverance to come soon, because your
deliverance will not come except after their disagreement. If they
disagree, then expect the cry in Ramadan and the appearance of the Qaim.
Allah does what He wills! The Qaim will not appear and you will not get
what you look forward to unless those people disagree among themselves.
If that occurs, people will seize the opportunity against them,
separation will occur and then Sufyani will rise.”

He said: “The family of so-and-so must rule. When they rule and disagree
among themselves, their state will be separated and lost. Khurasani and
Sufyani will rise against them; this from the east and that from the
west. They will compete towards Kufa as two racehorses until that family
will be destroyed by them.”

He said: “The risings of Sufyani, Yamani and Khurasani will be in the
same year, in the same month and on the same day. They will be like the
beads of a rosary; one following the other. Sufferings will be from
every side. Miserable will be whoever resists them. From among the three
banners, only the banner of Yamani will be a banner of guidance, because
he will invite to the mission of your man (the Qaim). When Yamani rises,
he will forbid selling weapons for all of the people and for the Muslims
as well. When Yamani rises, you are to join him, because his banner will
be a banner of guidance. It is not permissible for any Muslim to turn
away from him and whoever does so, will be in Hell, because Yamani will
invite to the truth and to the straight path.”

He said: “The loss of the rule of the family of so-and-so will be like
the breaking of pottery or like a man, who has a piece of pottery in his
hand while he is walking. It falls from his hand while he is
inattentive, but immediately he becomes attentive to find that it is
broken. So is the loss of their rule. They will be so inattentive when
their state will be lost.

One day Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said from on the pulpit of Kufa: “Allah
has determined that it is inevitable for the Umayyads to be killed by
the sword openly and for the family of so-and-so to be defeated
unexpectedly.”

He said: “There must be mill stones. When they begin to turn around
their axis, Allah will send a severe man, whose mention is obscure
against them. Victory will be always with him. His companions will have
long hair and moustaches. They would be dressed in black and their
banners will also be black.

Woe unto whoever opposes them. They will kill their opponents excitedly.
By Allah, as if I see them, their actions and what distresses the
dissolute and the rude nomads will get from them! Allah will make them
defeat those rude people with no mercy. They will kill them in their
city at the shore of the Euphrates as a reward of what they have
committed...and Allah is not in the least unjust to the servants!”

**97-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Musa bin Ja’far bin Wahab from Washa from Abbas bin
Ubaidullah from Dawood bin Sarhan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“Before the year of the cry (from the heavens), there will be a sign in
the month of Rajab.”

He was asked: “What is it?”

He said: “A face will appear on the moon and a protruding hand.”

**98-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Yaqub bin Yazid from Ziyad bin Marwan from
Abdullah bin Sinan from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The cry (from the heavens), the rising of Sufyani, the rising of
Yamani, killing the pure innocent man and a hand appearing in the sky
will be inevitable. There will be also a fright in Ramadan, which will
awaken the sleepers, terrify the awake and bring the girls out of their
veils.

**99-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Ali bin Asim from Bazanti from Imam Ali Reza (a.s.)
that he said:

“Before the appearance of the Qaim, there will be the risings of
Sufyani, Marwani, Yamani and Shuaib bin Salih. Then how does this one
(Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ismail known as Ibne Tabatabai) claim such a
thing (to be the Qaim)?”

**100-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Ali bin Mahziyar from Hammad bin Isa from Husain bin
Mukhtar from Abdullah bin Abi Yafur that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) told
him:

“Keep in mind the destruction of so-and-so (he mentioned a name of a man
from the Abbasids), the rising of Sufyani, killing the pure innocent
man, the ‘sinking and the call, by which the man of this matter (the
Qaim) will be known, entire deliverance will be after the destruction of
that of man the Abbasids.”

Report of Abaya Rabi
--------------------

“Once we came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.). We were five persons and I was
the youngest. I heard him say: “My brother, the messenger of Allah, has
said to me: “I am the last of a thousand prophets and you are the last
of a thousand guardians. I have been entrusted with what they have not
been entrusted with.”

I said: “People were not just to you.”

He said: “It is not as you think, my nephew. By Allah, I know a thousand
words (facts, data, information...etc.) that no one other than me and
other than Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) knows. People recite a verse from the
Quran, which is:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا وَقَعَ الْقَوْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَخْرَجْنَا لَهُمْ دَابَّةً مِّنَ
الْأَرْضِ تُكَلِّمُهُمْ أَنَّ النَّاسَ كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا لَا
يُوقِنُونَ
</p>

***“And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring
forth for them a creature from the earth that shall speak unto them,
because people did not believe in Our communications…” (Surah Naml
27:82)***

…but they do not ponder on it deeply. Should I tell you about the end of
the rule of the family of so-and-so?”

We said: “Yes please, O Amirul Momineen!”

He said: “(when) killing of an innocent sacred man on a sacred day and
in a sacred place will occur. I swear by Him, Who has split the seed and
created man, they will not rule after that except for fifteen nights.”

We asked: “Would something occur before or after that?”

He said: “A cry in Ramadan, that will terrify the awake; awaken the
sleepers and bring the girls out of their veils.”

**101-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Yahya
bin Zakariya bin Shaiban from Abu Sulaiman bin Kalib from Bataini from
Ibne Amira from Hadhrami that he heard Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say:

“The Abbasids must rule. When they rule, they will disagree and their
state will separate. Khurasani and Sufyani will rise against them. One
will come from the east and the other from the west. They will hurry
towards Kufa as two racehorses. The decline of the Abbasids will be
caused by these two leaders. None of them (the Abbasids) will remain
alive.”

**102-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim
from Ubais bin Hisham from Ibne Jabla from his father from Muhammad bin
Samit that Imam Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) was asked:

“Will there be certain signs for his matter (the appearance of the
Qaim)?”

“Yes, there will be.”

“What are they?”

“The destruction of the Abbasids, the rising of Sufyani, killing the
pure innocent man, the sinking of the desert and the call from the
heavens.”

“May I be your ransom! I am afraid that these things may take time! “

“No. They will be like the beads of a rosary; one following the other.”

**103-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from Wuhaib from Abu
Basir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim (a.s.) will rise in an odd year; one, three, five, seven or
nine.

When the Umayyads rule and disagree among themselves, their state will
decline and then the Abbasids will rule. Their state remains strong and
they live at ease and wealth until they disagree among themselves. Then
their state will decline and the people of the east and of the west will
disagree. People will face difficult times full of terror. They will
remain so until a caller calls out from the heavens. When you hear the
call, you are to hurry up (to join the Qaim). By Allah, as if I see him
(the Qaim) between the corner (of the Kaaba) and the Place of Ibrahim.
He will be paid allegiance to rule over the people with a new method,
new principles and a new rule determined by the heavens. None of his
armies will be defeated until he dies.”

**104-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Abdullah bin Hammad from Ibrahim bin Abdullah
bin Alaa from his father from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Amirul Momineen (a.s.) informed of some things that would happen after
him until the appearance of the Qaim.

Imam Husain (a.s.) asked him: “O Amirul Momineen, when does Allah clear
the world from the unjust people?”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Allah does not clear the world from the
unjust until the sacred blood is shed.” He mentioned the story of the
Umayyads and the Abbasids in a long tradition then he said: “When the
Qaim rises in Khurasan, defeats Kufa and the two nations, passes the
island of Bani Kawan, and another revolter from us rises in Jeelan, who
will be supported by the people of Aabir and Daylaman, then the banners
of the Turks will rise in different countries to support my son (the
Qaim). Then some things will happen here and there. Basra will be
destroyed and the emir of the emirs will rule in Egypt.”

He told a long story and then said: “When armies get ready, different
leaders rise, revolters rebel and unbelievers perish then the expected
Qaim and the unknown Imam will appear with honor and virtue.

O Husain, he is your descendant, who has no like at all. He will appear
between the two corners (of the Kaaba) in ragged cloths. He will rule
over all the peoples and will clear the world of every evil. Blessed is
he, who lives until his (the Qaim’s) age and enjoys his rule.”

Report of Jabir Jofi and General Conditions in the Last period of time
----------------------------------------------------------------------

**105-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal and Saadan bin Ishaq and Ahmad bin Husain bin
Abdul Malik and Muhammad bin Ahmad together from Ibne Mahbub that
Kulaini said: Ali bin Ibrahim has narrated from his father and Muhammad
bin Yahya from Ibne Isa and Ali bin Muhammad etc. from Sahl together
from Ibne Mahbub that he said: Narrated to us Abdul Wahid bin Abdullah
from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Yasir from Ahmad bin Halil from Amr bin
Abul Miqdam from Jabir that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said:

“O Jabir, keep quiet until you see some signs that I will mention to
you - if you remain alive until then: The first is the disagreement of
the Abbasids. I do not think that you live until then, but narrate this
from me after my death. Other signs are a call from the heavens, a cry
comes from the direction of Damascus, one of the villages of Shaam
called Jabiya sinks, a part of the mosque of Damascus falls down, a
group of Turk apostates and then there will be commotion in Rome. The
Turks come and occupy the island whereas the Romans come to settle at
Ramla.

O Jabir, that year will be full of events everywhere from the direction
of the west. The first country that will be ruined is Shaam. Then people
will disagree and divide into three armies; the army of the red one, the
army of the spotted one and the army of Sufyani. Sufyani will fight the
spotted one and he will kill him with his followers and then he will
fight the red one and he will kill him too.

Then he will move towards Iraq. He will pass by Qarqeesiya. A fight will
break out. Sufyani will kill about one hundred thousands of the
arrogants. Then he will send an army of seventy thousand warriors
towards Kufa. They will kill, crucify and capture many of the people of
Kufa. While they are doing so, an army will come from the direction of
Khurasan. With this army there will be some companions of the Qaim.

A faithful man from Kufa with weak followers will revolt, but he will be
killed by the leader of Sufyani’s army between Kufa and Heera. Sufyani
will send a troop to Medina. The Mahdi will flee from Medina to Mecca.
The leader of the army will be informed that the Mahdi has gone to Mecca
so he will send a troop to follow him, but with no use. The Mahdi will
enter Mecca frightfully and cautiously like Prophet Musa (a.s.).

The army of Sufyani will stop in the desert. A caller from the heavens
will call out: “O desert, destroy these people!” The desert will sink
with the army and none of them will escape death, except three persons
whom Allah will turn their faces towards their backs. It is about them
that this verse has been revealed:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ آمِنُواْ بِمَا نَزَّلْنَا
مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا مَعَكُم مِّن قَبْلِ أَن نَّطْمِسَ وُجُوهًا
فَنَرُدَّهَا عَلَى أَدْبَارِهَا
</p>

***“O you who have been given the Book! believe that which We have
revealed, verifying what you have, before We alter faces then turn them
on their backs.” (Surah Nisa 4:47)***

On that day the Qaim will be in Mecca leaning against the Kaaba. He will
announce: “O people, we resort to Allah to make us succeed. Whoever of
you wants to support us, let him join us. We are the progeny of your
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). We are worthier of Allah and Muhammad than
other people. Whoever argues with me about Adam, I am the worthiest of
Adam. Whoever argues with me about Nuh, I am the worthiest of Nuh.
Whoever argues with me about Ibrahim, I am the worthiest of Ibrahim.
Whoever argues with me about Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), I am the worthiest of
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). Whoever argues with me about the prophets, I am the
worthiest of the prophets.

Has Allah not said in his Book:

إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ عِمْرَانَ
عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ {33} ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِن بَعْضٍ وَاللّهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of Imran above the nations; offspring one of the other;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing?” (Surah Aale Imran 3:33-34)***

I am a remainder of Adam, a relic of Nuh, elite of Ibrahim and a choice
of Muhammad, peace be upon them all. Whoever argues with me about the
Book of Allah, I am the worthiest of the book of Allah. Whoever argues
with me about the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah, I am the worthiest
of the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah.

I adjure everyone, who hears my speech today, to inform the absent of
it. I ask you with the right of Allah, the right of His Messenger and
with my right, for I have a right of kinship to the Messenger of Allah,
to support us and to protect us from those who have wronged us. We have
been wronged, offended, expelled from our homes, separated from our
families, deprived of our rights and our honor and virtues have been
distorted by the evil people. For the sake of Allah, do not fail us.
Support us that may Allah support you!”

Allah will make his (the Mahdi’s) three hundred and thirteen companions
join him without any previous appointment. O Jabir, it is the verse that
Allah has revealed in His Book:

<p dir="rtl">
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى
كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

***“Wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together; surely Allah
has power over all things.” (Surah Baqarah 2:148)***

People will pay allegiance to him between the corner (of the Kaaba) and
the Place (of Ibrahim). With him there will be a covenant from the
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that has been inherited by the descendants; one after
the other. O Jabir, the Qaim is one of Husain’s descendants; Allah will
reform his affair overnight. O Jabir, if people doubt all that, let them
not doubt his descending from the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his inheriting
knowledge from the Scholars (the infallible Imams) one after the other.
If all these things become confusing to them, then the call that will
come from the heavens and will call out his name and his parents’ names
certainly will not be confusing to them at all.”

This report is narrated from Shaykh Mufeed in*Ikhtisaas* from another
chains of narrators.

In*Tafsir Ayyashi* it is narrated from Jabir Jofi that he said: Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) told me in a lengthy tradition: O Jabir, the first
country to be destroyed in the west is the land of Shaam. Three groups
with three different flags will clash there. This report is also like
the previous detailed narration and it ends at the verse of:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ آمِنُواْ بِمَا نَزَّلْنَا
مُصَدِّقًا لِّمَا مَعَكُم مِّن قَبْلِ أَن نَّطْمِسَ وُجُوهًا
فَنَرُدَّهَا عَلَى أَدْبَارِهَا
</p>

***“O you who have been given the Book! believe that which We have
revealed, verifying what you have, before We alter faces then turn them
on their backs.” (Surah Nisa 4:47)***

**106-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim
bin Muhammad from Ubais bin Hisham from Ibne Jabla from Muhammad bin
Sulaiman from Alaa from Muhammad (bin Muslim) from Imam Muhammad Baqir
(a.s.) that the Imam (a.s.) said:

“The advent of the Sufyani and the uprising of Qaim will occur in the
same year.”

**107-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ismail bin Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father and
Wuhaib from Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“While people are standing on Arafat, a rider on a swift she-camel will
come to inform them of the death of a caliph, after whose death the
deliverance of Muhammad’s progeny and the deliverance of all the people
will come.” He also said: “When you see a sign in the sky; a great fire
burning for some nights in the east, then deliverance will come. It will
occur a little before the appearance of the Qaim (a.s.).”

**108-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa bin Muhammad bin Musa from Ahmad bin Abu Ahmad from
Muhammad bin Ali from Ali bin Hakam from Amr bin Shimr

from Jabir from Abu Tufayl that he said: Abdullah Kawwa asked Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) about divine anger. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“How far anger is! A death after a death! The rider of the quick
she-camel and what the rider of the quick she-camel is! He will inform
people of something and they will kill him. Then the Almighty Allah will
send anger on the people!”

**109-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Ibne Abu Malik from
Muhammad bin Abil Hakam from Abdullah bin Uthman from Hasin Makki from
Abu Tufayl from Huzaifah bin Yaman that he said:

“A caliph, whom no one in the heavens will forgive nor will he have any
supporter on the earth, will be killed and another caliph, who will have
no chance of getting forgiveness in the afterlife, will be deposed and
then the son of the bondmaid will become the caliph.”

Abu Tufayl said (to Aslam): “O my nephew, I wish we would live in his
time!”

Aslam said: “O uncle, why do you wish so?”

Abu Tufayl said: “Because Hudhayfa has told me that the rule will return
to the Prophet’s family.”

**110-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ahmad
bin Yusuf from Ibne Mahran from Ibne Bataini from his father and Wuhaib
from Abu Basir that he said:

Once Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) was asked about the interpretation of the
Quranic verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنفُسِهِمْ حَتَّى يَتَبَيَّنَ
لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ
</p>

***“We will soon show them Our signs in the Universe and in their own
souls, until it will become quite clear to them that it is the truth.”
(Surah Fussilat 41:53)***

…and he said:

“Allah will show them His signs in the skies and in their selves. The
saying, ‘until it will become quite clear to them that it is the truth,’
means the appearance of the Qaim, who is the truth that Allah will make
His people see inevitably.”

**111-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Ali bin Mahziyar from Hammad bin Isa from Husain bin
Mukhtar from Abu Basir that he said:

I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) what is the implication of the saying
of Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
عَذَابَ الخِزْيِ فِي الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا
</p>

***“The chastisement of disgrace in this world’s life…” (Surah Yunus
10:98)***

‘What is the chastisement of disgrace in this life?”

He said: “O Abu Basir, is there a disgrace worse than that when a man is
in his house and among his family and then his family begins to cry and
weep and people ask what the matter is to be said to them that that man
is transmogrified?”

I asked: “Will that happen before or after the appearance of the Qaim
(a.s.)?”

He replied: “Before it.”

**112-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Musa from Ahmad bin Abu Ahmad from
Yaqub bin Sarraj that he said:

I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “When will the deliverance of
your Shia come?”

He said: “When the Abbasids disagree, their rule will become weak,
those, who have never thought of the rule, will seize the opportunity to
gain their (the Abbasids’) rule, the Arabs will become uncontrolled,
Sufyani will rise, Yamani will come with his army, Hasani will move with
his troops and then the Qaim will appear in Medina and move towards
Mecca with the heritage of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.).”

I said: “What is the heritage of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.)?”

He said: “The heritage of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is his sword, armor,
turban, garment, banner, stick, horse and saddle.”

**113-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hammam
from Fazari from Muawiyah bin Jabir from Bazanti that he said: I heard
Imam Ali Reza (a.s.) say:

“Before this matter (the appearance of the Mahdi) there will be
(bayooh).” I did not know the meaning of (bayooh). When I went to offer
the Hajj, I heard a nomad say: “This is a (bayooh) day.” I asked him:
“What does (bayooh) mean?” He said: “It means very hot.”

**114-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Bataini from Abu
Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“One of the signs that precede the appearance of the Mahdi will be the
solar eclipse in the middle of Ramadan on the thirteen and fourteenth of
the month.”

**115-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Ibne Abil Khattab from Husain bin Ali from Salih bin
Sahl that he said that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said when
talking about the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سَأَلَ سَائِلٌ بِعَذَابٍ وَاقِعٍ
</p>

***“One demanding, demanded the chastisement which must befall…” (Surah
Maarij 70:1)***

“It is a fire that will flame in Thawiyya and then it will move to the
tribe of Asad and then to the tribe of Thaqif. It will burn the enemies
of Muhammad’s progeny. This will be before the appearance of the Qaim
(a.s.).”

This report is also quoted from Jabir Jofi on the authority of Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) in the same book.

**116-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from his father from Ahmad bin Umar from Husain bin Musa from
Muammar bin Yahya bin Saam from Abu Khalid Kabuli from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“As if I see some people rising in the east. They will ask for the truth
but they will not be given it. They will ask for it again and they will
not be given it. Then they will unsheathe their swords and they will be
given what they will ask for, but they will not accept it. They will
revolt and deliver their victory to your man (the Mahdi). Their killed
ones will be martyrs. If I live until that time, I will sacrifice myself
to the man of this matter.”

**117-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Yaqub from Ziyad Qandi from Ibne Uzniyah from Maruf bin
Kharbudh that he said:

“Whenever we go to Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.), he says: “Khurasan!
Khurasan! Sajistan! Sajistan!” As if he wants to tell us good news
(about deliverance).”

**118-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
from Hasan and Muhammad sons of Ali bin Yusuf from their father from
Ahmad bin Umar Halabi from Salih bin Abul Aswad from Abul Jarud that he
said: Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) had said:

“When people pay allegiance to the young boy, every young boy will try
to rise.

**119-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
from Muhammad bin Abdullah from Ibne Abi Umair from Hisham bin Saalim
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim will not appear except after that every class of people will
have ruled over people so that no one may say: ‘If we had ruled, we
would have spread justice;’ then the Qaim will rise to rule with truth
and justice.”

**120-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Hisham from Zurarah that he said:

“Once I asked Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) if the call (from the
heavens) is inevitable.

He said: “Yes, by Allah, until every nation will hear it in its own
language.” He also said: “The Qaim will not appear unless nine tenths of
people perish.”

**121-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Ahmad bin Muhammad from Ahmad bin Ali Himyari from Hasan bin Ayyub from
Abdul Karim from a man from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The Qaim will appear after twelve men will have agreed upon that they
have seen him, but they will be considered as liars.”

**122-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
bin Hamid bin Ziyad from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Samaa from Ahmad bin
Hasan Maithami from Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad from Maaz bin Matar from
a man from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Before the appearance of the Qaim, the war of (tribe of) Qays[^4] will
break out.”

**123-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain from
Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Hasan from Muhammad bin Ali Kufi
from Muhammad bin Sinan from Ubaid bin Zurarah that he said:

“Once Sufyani was mentioned before Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.). He
said: “He (Sufyani) will not rise except after the rising of the one in
Sana’a.”

**124-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Timli from Muhammad bin Umar bin Yazid from Muhammad bin Walid
from Khalid together from Hammad bin Uthman from Abdullah bin Sinan from
Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Abil Balad from his father from Asbagh bin
Nubatah that Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“Before the appearance of the Qaim there will be deceitful years, in
which a truthful one will be considered as a liar, a liar will be
considered as truthful and a cheater will be respected.”

**125-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Abdul Wahid from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Qarashi from Ibne Abil Khattab from Muhammad bin
Sinan from Hudhayfa bin Mansur that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had
said:

“Allah will have a banquet. A caller from the heavens will call out: O
birds of the sky and beasts of the earth, come to eat and be satiated of
the flesh of the tyrants.”

**126-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza bin
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Abu Basir that Abu
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

“A caller (from the heavens) will call out the name of the Qaim: O you,
son of so-and-so, get up!”

**127-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Abdur Rahman bin Qasim from Muhammad bin Umar
bin Yunus [Ibrahim bin Harasa from his father] from Ali bin Hazawwar
from Muhammad bin Bashir that he said:

“I heard Muhammad bin Hanafiyyah (may Allah be pleased with him) say:
“Before our banner (the banner of the Qaim), there will be a banner
(rule or state) of the family of Ja’far and another one of the family of
Mardas. As for the banner of Aale Ja’far, it will begin with nothing
(important) and will end to nothing.”

I became angry at this and said: “May I be your ransom! Will there be
banners before yours?”

He said: “Yes, there will be. By Allah, Aale Mardas will have a strong
rule, but with no goodness. Their state will be full of difficulties but
with no ease. They will bring the foreigners closer and will remove the
near. When they feel that they are safe from the punishment of Allah and
think that their state would never decline, a cry will come upon them
and then no ruler will remain to gather them, no one to listen to them
and no people to support them. Allah has given an example in His Book,
when saying:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّىَ إِذَا أَخَذَتِ الأَرْضُ زُخْرُفَهَا وَازَّيَّنَتْ وَظَنَّ
أَهْلُهَا أَنَّهُمْ قَادِرُونَ عَلَيْهَآ أَتَاهَا أَمْرُنَا لَيْلاً أَوْ
نَهَارًا
</p>

***“…until when the earth puts on its golden raiment and it becomes
garnished, and its people think that they have power over it, Our
command comes to it, by night or by day…” (Surah Yunus 10:24)***

Then Muhammad bin Hanafiya swore by Allah that this verse had been
revealed concerning those people.

I said to him: “May I be your ransom! You have told us about a great
thing concerning those people, but when will they perish?”

He said: “O Muhammad (bin Bishr), Allah reverses the timing of the
diviners. Prophet Musa (a.s.) promised his people (that Allah would do
away with their enemy) after thirty days but Allah had determined
further ten days and He had not told Prophet Musa (a.s.) of that. When
the time of the promise passed, the people of Musa disbelieved and began
to worship the calf. Prophet Yunus (a.s.) warned his people that they
would be tortured but Allah had willed to forgive them, but without
informing Prophet Yunus (a.s.) of that and then happened what had
happened to them.

When you see neediness spread and one says that he has spent his night
without eating anything and when one receives you in a manner and the
other day he receives you in a different manner then you expect it!”

I said: “I know what neediness is. What is the other thing?”

He said: “It is when one meets you smilingly, but when you go to borrow
something from him, he will meet you in a different manner. Then the cry
(from the heavens) will occur somehow soon.

The author says: Bani Mardas is an allusion to Bani Abbas, because there
was a man among the companions named Abbas bin Mardas.

**128-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
bin Hamid bin Ziyad from Muhammad bin Ali bin Ghalib from Yahya bin
Sulaym from Abu Jamila from Jabir that he said: Narrated to me the one
who saw Musayab bin Najba that:

“One day a man came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) with another man called
Ibne Sawda and said: “O Amirul Momineen, this man ascribes lies to Allah
and His messenger and he mentions you to be the source of that.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “What does he say?”

The man said: “He mentions an army of anger.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “Set the man free! The army of anger will
come at the end of time. They will gather like the cloudlets of autumn.
A man, two or three will come from every tribe until they become nine
(from each tribe). By Allah, I know their emir and his name and I know
the place where their mounts stay.”

Then he got up saying: “Baqir! Baqir! Baqir! He is from my descendants.
He will split open traditions so extensively.”

**129-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Husain Masudi
from Muhammad Attar from Muhammad bin Hasan Raazi from Muhammad bin Ali
Kufi from Abdur Rahman bin Abu Hammad from Yaqub bin Abdullah Ashari
from Atiba bin Saad [aan] bin Yazid from Ahnaf bin Qais that he said:

“Once I went to Imam Ali (a.s.) for some business. Then Ibnul Kawwa and
Shabth bin Rabiy came and asked permission to meet him. Imam Ali (a.s.)
said to me: “If you like to permit them, you can do that, because you
are the first to have your business achieved.”

I said: “O Amirul Momineen (a.s.), permit them to come in.” When they
came in, he said to them: “What made you secede from me in Haroora?”
They said: “We wanted to be with the army of anger.” He said: “Woe unto
you! Is there any kind of anger in my guardianship? Anger comes after
many kinds of calamities and distresses occur. Then they (the army)
gather

like cloudlets of autumn; one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine or ten from every tribe.

Rise of the Sufyani is inevitable
---------------------------------

**130-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Mufaddal bin Ibrahim from Ibne Faddal from Thalaba from Isa
bin Ayyan that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The rising of Sufyani is an inevitable matter. He will rise in the
month of Rajab. It will take, since his rising until his end, fifteen
months. He will fight for six months. When he conquers the five
districts, he will rule for nine months; no more no less.”

**131-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Qasim
bin Muhammad Husain from Ubais bin Hisham from Muhammad bin Bashir from
Ahwal from Ibne Jabla from Isa bin Ayyan from Mualla bin Khunais that he
said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) say:

“Some things are inevitable and others are not. From among the
inevitable things is the rising of Sufyani in Rajab.”

**132-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan from Abbas bin Aamir from Abdullah bin Bukair from Zurarah
from his brother, Abdul Malik bin Ayyan that he said:

“Once I was with Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) when the Qaim (a.s.) was
mentioned before him. I said to him: “I hope that he (the Qaim) appears
sooner without being preceded by the rising of Sufyani.”

He said: “By Allah, that will not be! It is an inevitable thing.”

**133-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Husain from Muhammad bin Khalid Isaam from Ibne Bukair from Ibne
Thalaba from Zurarah from his brother, Humran bin Ayyan that he said:
that Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) had said when talking about this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ قَضَى أَجَلاً وَأَجَلٌ مُّسمًّى عِندَهُ
</p>

***“Then He decreed a term; and there is a term named with Him…” (Surah
Anam 6:2)***

…said: “They are two terms; one is inevitable and one is pending.”
Humran asked him: “What is the inevitable one?” He said: “It is a thing
that has been determined by the will of Allah.” Humran said: “I hope
that the term of Sufyani is of the pending ones.” Abu Ja’far Baqir
(a.s.) said: “No, it is not. By Allah, it is of the inevitable ones.

**134-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from
Muhammad bin Salim from Abdur Rahman Azdi from Uthman bin Saeed Tawil
from Ahmad bin Muslim from Musa bin Bakr from Fudhayl bin Yasar that Abu
Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) had said:

“Matters are of two kinds; pending and inevitable. The rising of Sufyani
is inevitable that must occur.”

**135-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Ibad bin Yaqub from Khallad Saigh that Abu Abdullah
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“The rising of Sufyani is inevitable. He will rise in Rajab.” A man
asked: “O Abu Abdullah, when he rises, what shall we do?” He said: “When
he rises, you are to keep to us (Ahlul Bayt).”

**136-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad Ansari from Amr bin Shimr
from Jabir Jofi that he said:

“Once I asked Abu Ja’far Baqir (a.s.) about Sufyani and he said:
“Sufyani does not rise until Shaysabani rises before him. He
(Shaysabani) will rise from Kufa. He will flow like water. He will kill
your delegation. After that you expect the rising of Sufyani and then
the Qaim (a.s.).”

**137-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Hasan bin Ali bin Yasar from Khalil bin Rashid from
Bataini that he said:

“One day I accompanied Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) from Mecca to Medina. He
said to me: “O Ali, if the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth
revolt against the Abbasids, the earth will be watered with their bloods
(without defeating the Abbasids) until Sufyani rises.” I asked: “O my
master, is his rising inevitable?” He said: “Yes, it is.” He pondered
for a while then he raised his head and said: “The rule of the Abbasids
is based on cunning and deceit. It will go until it will be said that
nothing of it has remained and then it will return as if nothing has
happened.”

**138-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Abdullah Khalanji from Dawood bin Abul Qasim
that he said:

“Once we were with Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali Jawad (a.s.) when Sufyani
was mentioned and that his matter was inevitable. I asked Abu Ja’far
Jawad (a.s.): “Does Allah change His determination concerning the
inevitable matters?”

He said: “Yes, He does.”

We said to him: “We fear that He may change his determination concerning
the matter of the Qaim!”

He said: “The matter of the Qaim is a part of the promise of Allah and
Allah does not fail to perform His promise.”

**139-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Musa from Ahmad bin Abu Ahmad from
Muhammad bin Ali Qarashi from Hasan bin Ibrahim that he said:

“Once I said to Imam Reza (a.s.): “May Allah make you succeed! People
narrate that Sufyani will rise after the rule of the Abbasids declines.”

**140-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ahmad bin Hawza from
Ibrahim bin Ishaq from Abdullah bin Hammad from Husain bin Abul Alaa
from Abdullah bin Abi Yafur that he said: Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
narrated to us:

“The Abbasids and Marwanids will meet in Qarqeessiya in a terrible
battle that causes a young boy to age. Allah will preclude them from
gaining victory and will reveal to the birds in the sky and the beasts
on the ground to satiate themselves with the flesh of the tyrants. After
that Sufyani will rise.

**141-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Ali
bin Hasan Taimili from Abbas bin Aamir bin Rabah from Muhammad bin Rabi
Aqra from Hisham bin Abi Salim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“When Sufyani conquers the five districts, then you count to him nine
months (the period of his rule)” Hisham claimed that the five districts
were Damascus, Palestine, Jordan, Hims and Halab.

**142-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Abdullah bin Muhammad from Muhammad bin Khalid
from Hasan bin Mubarak from Abu Ishaq Hamadani from Harith that Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) said:

“The Mahdi (a.s.) will have prominent eyes, curly hair and there will be
a mole on his cheek. He will appear from the east, but before that
Sufyani will rise in Shaam. He (Sufyani) will rule for nine months only.
All the people of Shaam will submit to him, except a very few believers,
who will still keep to the truth and whom Allah preserves from following
him.

He will move towards Medina with a great army, but when they reach the
desert of Medina, Allah will make the desert sink with them. It is the
saying of Allah in His holy Book:

وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ <p dir="rtl">
وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place.”
(Surah Saba 34:51)***

Advent of Sufyani
-----------------

**143-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Ibrahim bin Hashim from Ibne Abu Umair from
Hisham bin Salim from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Yamani and Sufyani will rise like two racehorses.”

**144-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Ahmad from
Ubaidullah bin Musa from Muhammad bin Musa from Ahmad bin Abu Ahmad from
Ismail bin Ayyash from Mohajir bin Halim from Mughira bin Saad from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said: “When the two spears (two armies) disagree
in Shaam, it will not come to an end except with a sign of Allah.” He
was asked: “What is it, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?” He said: “It is an
earthquake in Shaam, by which more than a hundred thousand people will
perish. Allah will make it as mercy to the believers and torment upon
the disbelievers. When that occurs, you will see the riders of gray
horses with yellow banners coming from the west until they stop at
Shaam. There will be great terror and red death. Then you will see the
sinking of one of the villages of Damascus called Harasta. Then the son
of the livers-eater will come out of the Yabis valley to sit on the
pulpit of Damascus. After that you expect the appearance of the Mahdi
(a.s.).”

**145-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Muhammad bin Hamam
from Fazari from Hasan bin Wahab from Ismail bin Aban from Yunus bin
Yaqub that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“When Sufyani rises, he will send an army to fight us (the Hashemites)
and an army to fight you (the Shia). If that takes place, hurry to us by
any means!”

**146-** ***Ghaibat Nomani:*** It is narrated from Ibne Uqdah from Hamid
bin Ziyad from Ali bin Sabah from Abu Ali Hasan bin Muhammad from Ja’far

bin Muhammad from Ibrahim bin Abdul Hamid from Abu Ayyub Khazzaz from
Muhammad bin Muslim from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“Sufyani is red, blond and blue. He has never worshipped Allah at all.
He has seen neither Mecca nor Medina. He says: O my God, I take revenge
even if I go to hell! O my God, I take revenge even if I go to Hell!”

**147-** ***Al-Kafi:*** In*Rawdha* it is narrated from Muhammad bin
Yahya from Ahmad bin Muhammad from some companions and Ali bin Ibrahim
from his father from Ibne Abu Umair together from Muhammad bin Abu Hamza
from Humran that he said: When in the presence Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
the pitiable plight of Shia was mentioned, he explained his own
condition:

“Once Abu Ja’far Mansur Dawaniqi was going somewhere with his battalion
and preceded and followed by riders and he was also riding. I was
astride a donkey besides him. He asked me, ‘O Aba Abdullah! Indeed it is
a fact that the Almighty Allah has given us kingdom and security and an
honor, which He made easy for us. Be happy with it and do not say to the
people you and your Ahle Bayt are more eligible than us for this
rulership, because if you utter such a thing it would be as if you have
instigated yourself and the people against me.’”

He says, “I said, ‘Who has told you such a thing. Whoever has said it
has lied.’” Mansur asked, “Can you swear that you have not said anything
like it?”

He says, “I replied, ‘People are magicians. They like to instigate you
against me. It is upto you to keep your ears protected and not to accept
all they say, because our caution regarding you is more than your
caution about us.’

At that time he said to me, ‘Do you remember that day when I asked you
whether I would reach your throne? You said: Yes! A rule of long
duration widespread and secure, which will not decline. In your kingdom,
you will be given respite and comfort. And in your world would be
increase and excess till the time that in the Holy month and the Holy
city their hands shall be smeared in our blood.’”

The Imam says, “I understood that I remembered that incident. I said,
‘Yes! I hope Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime would keep you safe and I
also on that day by those words did not mean you by that person. Rather
it was a tradition I had quoted for you. Although it is possible that
person who would smear his hands with our blood may be a person from
your family.’

When I told him this he fell silent and did not say anything else. After
we reached our destination one of our supporters came to me with some
people and said to me, ‘May I be sacrificed on you! I saw you in the
caravan of Abu Ja’far (Mansur). You were on an ass while he rode a
horse. His head was bowed towards you and he was speaking to you. As if
he wanted to control you. I said to myself: O flatterer! This is the
proof of God on the creatures and is the real owner of this kingdom and
grandeur. And he is the one whom all the rulers of the world should
follow. And this other person is an oppressor, a tyrant and the slayer
of the children of the prophets and a blood-shedder who spills innocent
blood and whom Allah does not like. At that time he was riding a horse
while you rode an ass. That thought worried

me so much and I got such a doubt that I began to doubt about my life
and my religion.’

Imam (a.s.) said, “I told you that if you had seen the honor and the
service of the angels who were moving ahead of me and behind me,
Mansur’s kingdom would have become worthless in your view.”

When my follower heard this he said, “Now my heart is satiated.”

And then he asked, “For how long would these people remain in power? And
in which time would Islam become safe from their mischief?”

I replied to him, “But you don’t know that there is a limit to
everything.”

He said, “Why not! (I know it)”

I said, “If you know when this would occur, before the blink of the eye.
At that time your knowledge would be beneficial to you. Yes! You knew
the position these people have near Allah at that time your hatred to
them will increase. If you and all the people of the earth endeavor to
make more severe the condition in which they are, you are not at all
capable of it. Then Shaitan would not touch you. That honor is for
Allah, the Messenger and the believers, but the hypocrites do not know.”

Do you not know that those who are in anticipation of our affair and are
patient on difficulties they face, tomorrow they shall be in our army?
Thus whenever you see that truth is extinct and inhabitants of the earth
are destroyed and injustice and oppression have surrounded from all
sides and Quran has become old-fashioned and those things become
apparent in it that are not in it and you see Quran interpreted by
selfish motives and see that religion is inverted like a bowl. (Another
version says: Like water is inverted). And you see people of falsehood
dominating over people of truth and see mischief becoming common, but no
one restraining it. Rather the mischief-makers shall be defended and you
will see that transgression is openly committed. Men shall satisfy their
lust with men and women shall satisfy theirs with women. You will see
that the believer assumes silence as his advice will not be accepted.
You will see the transgressor lying and also see that his lies are being
accepted and no one is refuting and falsifying his words. You will see
the young insulting the elders. You will see that dissociating with
relatives has become common. You will see that when a person praises sin
he would do it laughingly and one who says it will not be refuted. You
will see boys will be given to those whom they give women. You will see
women marrying women. You will see that praise and extolling would
increase. You will see people spending their wealth on the way of other
that God and there would be none to restrain them and hold back their
hands. You will see that when people see a believer making effort and
searching, they would seek the refuge of Allah that they may not become
like him. You will see a neighbor harassing other neighbor and no one
would stop him. You will see that when a disbeliever sees the poor
condition of the believer, he would be elated by his own condition and
when he sees corruption widespread on the earth, he would be happy. And
you will see that wine is openly imbibed and people who are gathered
around tables do not care about Allah, the Mighty and the Sublime. You
will see that enjoining good has become extinct. You will see that the
transgressor is powerful and is being defended and praised in deeds
disliked by Allah. You

will see that those having the signs (Another version: Those having the
relics) would also face humiliation. You will see that the path of good
is closed and the path of mischief is open and full of people who walk
upon it. You will see that the Holy Kaaba is rendered empty and people
shall be prevented from its visitation and encouraged to leave it. You
will see each one advising others what he himself hasn’t done. You will
see men dressing up for men and women shall dress up for women (and show
off themselves as they are not). You will see men earning their living
through service and women through their private parts.

You will see women arranging for themselves assemblies like men do. You
will see descendants of Bani Abbas openly committing sodomy and women
becoming men. That is why they dye and comb their hair like ladies make
up their hair for their husbands. Men would spend their wealth for their
private parts. Many people would fight for one man and each of them
would try to put to shame the other.

You will see that one possessing wealth is more respected than a
believer. Usury would be openly practiced and none shall be chastised
about it. You will see a woman praised for her adulterous exploits. The
wife would help and support her husband in committing sodomy with
another man. You will see people helping their ladies in sensual deeds
and they shall be considered the best family men.

You will see the believer always in sorrow, degradation and humiliation.
You will see innovations and adultery common. You will see people
competing with each other in testifying falsely. You will see that the
prohibited has become permissible, the permissible has become
prohibited. You will see people justifying their religion on the basis
of their personal views and opinions and the Book of God and its
commands are rendered useless.

You will see that no one is committing sins in the darkness of the
night. Rather you will see them committing sins in broad daylight. You
will see the believer, except by his heart, cannot refute the evils. You
will see unprecedented wealth being squandered on activities hated by
God. You will see wealthier people more deserving of leadership of the
people. You will see relatives of prohibited degree satisfying each
other and marrying each other. You will see people killed merely on
allegations and doubts. You will see men dropping their shame in
competing for the love of a boy. So much so, that they would sacrifice
their life and wealth on this love.

You will see people denouncing men who go to women to satisfy their
lusts. You will see people living off the adulterous earnings of their
wives knowingly. You will see wives dominating and suppressing their
husbands. They act contrary to their desires and spend money on it. You
will see people hiring out their wife, daughter, and maid for sex and be
satisfied to eat and drink things purchased by such money. And you will
see that false oath is common, chess is played openly and wine is sold
openly and no one is prohibiting it. And you will see Muslim women
giving their kinswomen to disbelievers.

And you will see music and singing very open and common. Muslims would
go beyond that and none shall refrain the other and none shall dare to

prevent him. You will see respectable people humiliated by those whose
power they dread. You will see that the closest people to their leaders
shall be those who speak ill of us, Ahle Bayt and praise those leaders.
You will see that people would find it very difficult to listen to
Quranic recitation while on the other hand, it would be easy and
acceptable for them to listen to impermissible sounds.

You will see people respecting a neighbor for fear of his sharp tongue.
You will see the most truthful people lying. You will see that mischief
is open and tale telling is common. You will see that rebellion and
injustice has come out in open. You will see backbiting has become a
sort of good and jovial manner and people would give glad-tidings to
each other through it. You will see that the aspect of other than Allah
would be found in Hajj and Jihad. You will see the ruler humiliating a
believer because of a disbeliever. You will see destructions dominating
their lives. You will see that human life would become a saleable
commodity. You will see that bloodshed would become an easy and very
common matter.

You will see that someone is standing up for leadership while his sole
aim will be the world and he would introduce himself to be a
harsh-tongued person so that none may dare to oppose him and through it
he may have his purpose solved. You will see that carelessness is
exercised with the Prayer. You will see that the rich has much wealth
collected with him and since he has started hoarding it, he has not paid
Zakat on it. You will see that they would take out the corpse out of the
grave, hurt it and sell off its shroud. You will see that there is too
much of topsy-turvy. You will see that people are intoxicated in the
morning and late afternoon without any care for anyone or anything. You
will see them having sexual intercourse with animals. You will see
animals fighting and killing each other.

You will see people going to places of worship and coming back in
condition of having their garments looted. You will see that the hearts
of the people have become hard and their eyes have no shame and the
remembrance of Allah is hard on them and consumption of prohibited would
become open and they would compete with each other in this. You will see
that if a worshipper goes to the worship house, he does so with the
intention of showing off. If you see a jurisprudent is contemplating
something other than religious aim, it is that he intends to obtain
material gains and worldly power. You will see that people are
supporting only those who are powerful and those who are victorious
without any thought of whether they had been on the right or wrong.

You will see that those who try to earn through lawful means are
denounced and criticized and those who seek through unlawful means are
respected and praised. You will see such activities in the two holy
sanctuaries of Kaaba and Medina, that the Almighty Allah does not like
and none would be there to stop it. Rather there would be no obstacle
between them and their ignorance. You will see music being played openly
in the two sanctuaries. You will see a person issuing good exhortation,
but someone would stand up and say that Allah does not want him to say
these things; while he would be considered a well-wisher of this man.
You will

see people united in following the people of mischief. You will see that
paths of good are deserted and no one walks upon them.

You will see that they shake up the dead body and no one would be
disturbed by it. You will see that every year there is increase in
innovations and mischief would increase. You will see that people and
groups do not follow anyone except the rich. You will see that the needs
of the needy are fulfilled laughingly and mockingly and their kindness
shall be for ulterior motives. You will see that the heavenly signs
shall become apparent, but none would be afraid of them. You will see
people clinging to each other like animals and none would consider it
bad. Even if they consider it bad, they would not say anything against
it due to the fear of the people. You will see people spending most of
their wealth in ways other than Allah’s and they would be unwilling to
spend even a little on the way of Allah. And you will see that hurting
parents, being disowned by them or insulting the parents would be
common. Parents would be considered the worst of the people in view of
their children. So much so, children will be pleased when allegations
are made against their parents. You will see women dominating rulership
and they would be having power on everything that fulfills their sensual
desires.

You will see children making allegations against their parents and
criticizing them. They would be elated on hearing the news of their
demise. You will see that the conditions reach to such a stage that if a
day passes for a man without having committed any sin, short-selling,
misappropriation, usurpation and wine-drinking he would think that a day
of his life is wasted. You will see the ruler hoarding essential
commodities and the property of the near kindred of the Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) being distributed unjustly. And he will spend it in gambling
and drinking.

You will see him seeking cure through wine, and he would praise and
recommend it for those who are sick. He would say: Such and such wine is
beneficial for you. He would seek cure from alcohol. You will see people
united in leaving off the enjoining of good and restraining from evil.
You will see that the flag of hypocrites is flying high and the flag of
people of truth missing. You will see callers to Prayer and worshippers
calling Azaan and performing prayers for money.

You will see the mosques full of people who do not fear God. They have
gathered to backbite and consume the flesh of the people of truth. They
shall discuss about wine-drinkers. You will see the prayer-leader
leading prayer in a state of intoxication. Such that he would not
understand what he is reciting and none would denounce him. Rather if he
is intoxicated, people would respect him due to fear and leave him
alone. They would not pursue him; rather they would consider him worthy
of being excused. You will see people who usurp the property of orphans
praised. You will see judges issuing judgments against divine commands.
You will see rulers, because of greed, seeking refuge of those who
misappropriate.

You will see the guardians giving off the wealth to transgressors and
sinners against Allah rather than pay the inheritance according to
religious law. They would accept their bribes as fees. And they shall
leave him free, so that inheritors may do whatever they like. You will
see people advising

good from the pulpit, but themselves not acting upon it. You will see
that Prayer is not recited on time and preference will not be accorded
for praying at the earliest hour. You will see charity (Sadaqah) and
alms are being paid on the basis of recommendation. And in it there
would be no intention of seeing Allah’s pleasure, but it would be only
because people are petitioning. You will see that people are free in
satisfying carnal desires and they do not care what they eat and where
they fulfill their lust. You will see that the world is moving towards
the people.

You will see that the signs of religion have become outdated, antiquated
and old. Then beware of such a day for the sake of Allah and beseech the
Almighty for salvation. Know that in such days people shall be deep in
divine chastisement. And if the Almighty Allah has given them respite,
it is because you must wait for the time Allah has appointed for a
matter. You must try to be such that you are opposed to these types of
people so that if chastisement descends upon them, you may soon reach
the mercy of Allah. If their chastisement is delayed and they fall into
it, you may be out of their midst; you must not be the one who has dared
to disobey Allah. You should know that the Almighty Allah does not waste
the rewards of the good doers. And the mercy of Allah is near to the
righteous ones.”

**148-** ***Jamiul Akhbar:*** It is narrated from Jabir bin Abdullah
Ansari that he said:

“I performed the Farewell with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and
when he completed the rituals of Hajj, he came to the Kaaba to say
farewell to it. He held the ring of the door of the Kaaba and said: O
people…

Upon hearing his voice, all the people in the Masjid as well as outside
gathered there. He said:

“Listen, I will tell about that which will happen after me. Thus all of
you who are present here should convey it to those who are absent.”

After saying this he began to weep and seeing him the whole gathering
began to weep. After the weeping stopped, he said:

“May Allah have mercy on you. You should know that today you are like
that plant, which has only leaves and no thorns and this will continue
till 140 A.H. After that, both leaves as well as thorns will appear in
it and this will continue till 200 A.H. After that this plant will get
only thorns and not a single leaf will appear. That is at that time,
none except tyrant rulers, stingy rich, greedy scholars, lying beggars,
sinful old men, bad character boys and wantons will be visible.”

After saying this he began to weep again.

Salman Farsi arose and asked: “When will this come about?”

He replied: “O Salman, it will be at a time when there will be a
shortage of scholars among you, the reciters of Quran will pass away,
when you stop giving Zakat, when you commit sins openly, when you make
noise in the Masjids, when you honor material wealth and disregard
knowledge, when your statements will be based on falsehood, when
backbiting will be considered a pastime, when unlawful earning will be
considered booty, when your elders will not be kind to your youngsters
and when your youngsters will not respect the elders. At that time
curses will fall on you.

There will be mutual conflicts among you and religion will remain only
in name.

When these things appear, you should expect red storms; faces will
become distorted, stones will rain down from the sky and it is mentioned
by the Almighty Allah in His Book as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَى أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابًا مِّن
فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ أَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعاً
وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ انظُرْ كَيْفَ نُصَرِّفُ الآيَاتِ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَفْقَهُونَ
</p>

***“Say: He has the power that He should send on you a chastisement from
above you or from beneath your feet, or that He should throw you into
confusion, (making you) of different parties; and make some of you taste
the fighting of others. See how We repeat the communications that they
may understand.” (Surah Anam 6:65)***

Some people arose and asked: O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), when will
this happen?

He replied: When you start delaying prayer inordinately and follow your
selfish desires, when you take to wine and you start abusing your
parents.

So much so that unlawful wealth will be considered as profit and Zakat
will be considered loss. The husband will be under the control of his
wife. Neighbors will harass each other. Cruelty will be done to
relatives. Elders will have no kindness, youngsters will lack shame and
modesty. Strong edifices will be constructed. Servants will be
oppressed. False testimonies will be common. Judgments will be given on
the basis of injustice. The son will abuse the father. The brother will
be jealous of his brother. Partners will cheat each other. Disloyalty
will increase. Fornication will become common. Men will dress like women
and women will become shameless. Arrogance will permeate the people like
poison spreads in the body. Good deeds will decrease. There will be
increase in crimes. Recognition will be purchased through wealth. Money
will be spent on songs and music. Leaving the hereafter, people will be
busy in the world. There will be decrease in piety. Greed will increase.
The believer will be degraded and the hypocrite will be exalted. Azaan
will echo in the Masjids but the hearts of the people will be without
faith. The Holy Quran will be considered light and unimportant. The
believer will be degraded in every way.

At that time you will see that human beings are there but their heart
will be satanic; their words will be sweeter than honey, but the hearts
will be more bitter than poison ivy. They will be wolves in the dress of
humans. Every day the Almighty Allah will say: Are you deceiving Me or
you have in fact become disrespectful to me?

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَحَسِبْتُمْ أَنَّمَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ عَبَثًا وَأَنَّكُمْ إِلَيْنَا لَا
تُرْجَعُونَ
</p>

***“What! did you then think that We had created you in vain and that
you shall not be returned to Us?” (Surah Mominoon 23:115)***

I swear by My majesty and honor, if there had not been among you some of
Our sincere servants who worship us with sincerity, I would not have
given respite to those criminals even for a moment. If there had been no
pious ones, I would not have sent a drop of rain and neither would I
have grown a single leaf from the earth. Thus amazing is the case of
people who

have taken wealth as their deity. Their hopes are long, but lives are
short. They wish to gain the proximity of their Lord, but it is not
possible through good acts and good deeds are incomplete without
intellect.”

**149-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Ali from his father from
Ibne Mahbub from Ishaq bin Ammar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he
said:

“That which you hope for will not happen till strife develops among Bani
so-and-so. When people see their mutual discord, they would try to
snatch the power away from them. And till the time there is no conflict
in the word and the Sufyani does not appear.”

**150-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some persons from Ahmad bin
Muhammad from Ibne Abi Najran from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud
from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“That which you are awaiting for will not occur till you don’t become
like those lifeless goats who can be attacked by any lion who wants to
attack them. Till there remains some skill and excellence through which
you can progress. Till you don’t have a point of reference whom you can
refer.”

**151-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some scholars from Sahal
from Musa bin Umar Saiqal from Abu Shuaib Mahamili from Abdullah bin
Sulaiman from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said: Amirul Momineen
(a.s.) said:

“A time will come on the people when the sinners will gain respect, the
shame will be loved and the equitable will be considered weak.”

He was asked: “When will this happen, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

He replied: “When a trust will be considered booty, when Zakat will be
seen as a loss, when worship will be considered useless, when good
behavior with close relatives will be considered as a favor on them.”

It was asked: “When will this happen, O Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?”

“When women and slave girls will be in power and young children will be
appointed as leaders and rulers.”

**152-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from some scholars from Sahal
from Ismail bin Mahran from Muhammad bin Mansur Khuzai from Ali bin
Suwaid and Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Husain from Ibne Bazi
from his uncle, Hamza from Ali bin Suwaid and Hasan bin Muhammad from
Muhammad bin Ahmad Nahdi from Ismail bin Mahran from Muhammad bin Mansur
from Ali bin Suwaid that:

“I wrote to Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.) and asked some questions when he was
in the prison; he replied to me and also wrote as follows:

When you see an ugly Bedouin in a ferocious army, you must expect
victory for yourself and your Shia believers. When the sun is eclipsed,
you must look on the sky to see what Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has
done with the believers. I have mentioned this in a gist. May Allah
bless Muhammad and his chosen progeny.”

**153-** ***Al-Kafi:*** It is narrated from Hamid bin Ziyad from
Ubaidullah Dahqan from Tatari from Muhammad bin Ziyad from Aban from
Sabbah bin Siyabah from Ibne Khunais that he said:

“Once I came to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) with many letters of Abdus
Salam bin Naeem and Sudair etc. It was when the black clad army of Abu
Muslim Khurasani had staged an uprising before the Abbaside rule. The

Imam threw away those letters in which was stated: We refer to you in
this matter.

Then he said: It’s a pity that I am not their Imam; do they not know
that the master of this affair will eliminate Sufyani?”

**154-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Jabir Ansari from the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The Mahdi of this Ummah will be from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.). When
confusion and mischief will reign all over the world. Everywhere there
will be mischief and plunder and large scale looting. Neither the elder
will have mercy on the young nor the young respect the elders. Thus the
Almighty Allah will send a Mahdi from us, who will be the ninth
descendant of Husain. He will conquer the forts of misguidance and the
unaware hearts. He will establish religion during the last period of
time just as it was established at the beginning and he will fill up the
earth with justice and equity just as it would have been fraught with
injustice and oppression.”

**155-** ***Kifayatul Athar:*** It is narrated from the same chains from
Al-Qaam bin Qais that he said: Amirul Momineen (a.s.) delivered a sermon
to us from the pulpit of Kufa and said:

“Know that I am about to depart and go into occultation. Now you must
expect mischiefs of Bani Umayyah and a kingdom like that of Kisra. That
which Allah has revived will be killed and that which Allah has killed
will be revived. You must pray at your house and maintain absolute
patience and remember Allah more, because the remembrance of Allah is a
great thing, if you can understand.

Then he said: You will see a city being established at Zora, which is
between Tigris and Euphrates.

If only you could have seen that it would have solid buildings of bricks
and mortar and which would be embellished with gold, silver, lapis
lazuli and marbles; it have doors of ivory, tents, domes and different
types of curtains. It will have teak, cypress and pine trees. There
would be many palaces in it and twenty-four kings of Bani Shethan
(Shaitan) will rule over it one after another. They are as follows:
Saffah, Maqlas, Jamuh, Khadu, Muzaffar, Muannas, Nizar, Kabash, Mahtur,
Athaar, Mustalam, Mustasid, Allaam, Rahbani, Khali, Sayyar, Mutraf,
Kadid, Aktub, Masraf, Aklab, Dasim, Seelaam and Einuq.

A grey dome will be constructed in the red desert, behind which will be
the Qaim bil Haqq, whose face will be shinning like a moon amongst the
stars.

And beware that there are ten signs of his reappearance. The first will
be the appearance of a comet; after that strange events will unfold till
ten signs will have passed; then the brilliant moon (Imam Qaim) will
appear and word of the unity of the Almighty Allah will reach to
perfection.”

**156-** ***At-Tahdhib:*** It is narrated through his chains from Salim
Abu Khadija from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that a person was asking some
questions and the Imam was explaining to him: that man asked:

“After the Morning Prayers, I recite the obligatory devotions and then I
like to go sleep before sunrise, although it not something that I should
do.”

“Why is that?” asked the Imam.

He replied: “Perhaps the sun might rise from another direction.”

Imam (a.s.) said: “There is no problem. The sun always rises from the
same direction. Once you have recited the devotions, there is no problem
if you go to sleep.”

**157-** ***Imamah wat Tabsira:*** It is narrated from Ali bin Babawayh
from Muhammad bin Yahya from Muhammad bin Ahmad from one who mentioned
to him from Safwan bin Yahya from Muawiyah bin Ammar from Abu Ubaidah
Hazaa that he said: I asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about the advent
of the master of the affair, that when it would occur. The Imam said:

“When you are certain that he will definitely reappear, what is the
worry about?”

It is narrated from Harun bin Musa from Muhammad bin Musa from Muhammad
bin Ali bin Khalaf from Musa bin Ibrahim from Imam Musa Kazim (a.s.)
from his father from his forefathers from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) that he said:

“The disease of piles, sudden deaths and leprosy will increase when the
Hour is near.”

**158-** ***Iqbalul Amaal:*** I found in the book of*Malahim* by Bataini
that Abu Basir has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“It does not befit the Almighty Allah that He should leave the earth
without a just Imam.”

I (Abu Basir) asked: “Maula, may I be your ransom, tell us something
that may give us peace.”

Imam (a.s.) said: “O Abu Muhammad, the Ummah of Muhammad will not see
good times till the kingdom of Bani so-and-so does not end. When their
rule ends, the Almighty Allah will give to the Ummah of Muhammad a
person from us, Ahle Bayt (a.s.) who will be pious, righteous and who
will not take bribes.

And by Allah, I know his name and the name of his father. After that
will come a person of medium height with a mole on his cheek and long
hair. He will guard the heritage of all the prophets and he would fill
up the earth with justice and equity like it would have been fraught
with injustice and oppression.”

**159-** ***The author says:*** And it is mentioned in*Suroor Ahlal
Imaan* from Sayyid Ali bin Abdul Hamid through his chains from Jabir
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“Sit tight and don’t move till the signs I have mentioned do not appear.
Although I cannot see it but you might live till that time: Conflict in
people, call from the sky, sinking of the Syrian village, Jabia in the
ground, arrival of the Turks in the peninsula, arrival of the Romans in
Ramla; at that time there will discord all over the world. And the
destruction of Shaam will take place as three standards will converge
over there. Standard of Ashab, standard of Baqa and the standard of
Sufyani.”

**160-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Ahmad bin Muhammad
Ayyadi directly from Buraid from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he
said:

“O Buraid, beware of the gathering of Ashab.”

“What is Ashab?”

“Abqa.”

“I don’t even know what Abqa is.”

“Beware of Abras and Sufyani as well. Beware of the two descendants of
so-and-so who have come out of their house. They will come to Mecca and
distribute money to imitate Imam Qaim (a.s.). Also beware of the man who
would, from Aale Muhammad (a.s.) but will be aloof from them.”[^5]

**161-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Ahmad bin Umair bin
Muslim from Muhammad bin Sinan from Abul Jarud from Muhammad bin Bashr
Hamadani that he said:

I said to Muhammad Ibne Hanafiyyah: May I be your ransom, I have heard
that the progeny of Ja’far will also have a standard and the progeny of
so-and-so will also have a standard. Do you know anything about it?

He replied: The standard of the progeny of Ja’far is not of any
importance. As for the standard of the progeny so-and-so, it will gain
power; in its rule, the proximate ones will be removed and the distant
ones will be given proximity. They will be absolutely harsh. They will
also have to face lightning and thunder but they all would disperse like
clouds. And when they are comfortable in every way and they become sure
that their kingdom will not decline, a voice will be raised among them,
due to which no will remain among them who can unite them and one around
who all gather and it is with regard to this that the Almighty Allah has
said:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّىَ إِذَا أَخَذَتِ الأَرْضُ زُخْرُفَهَا وَازَّيَّنَتْ وَظَنَّ
أَهْلُهَا أَنَّهُمْ قَادِرُونَ عَلَيْهَآ أَتَاهَا أَمْرُنَا لَيْلاً أَوْ
نَهَارًا فَجَعَلْنَاهَا حَصِيدًا كَأَن لَّمْ تَغْنَ بِالأَمْسِ كَذَلِكَ
نُفَصِّلُ الآيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُون
</p>

***“…until when the earth puts on its golden raiment and it becomes
garnished, and its people think that they have power over it, Our
command comes to it, by night or by day, so We render it as reaped seed-
produce, as though it had not been in existence yesterday; thus do We
make clear the communications for a people who reflect.” (Surah Yunus
10:24)***

I said: May I be your ransom, is there a fixed time for it?

He said: No, because the knowledge of Allah dominates the knowledge of
those who fix the time. The Almighty Allah promised thirty nights to
Prophet Musa (a.s.) and then increased ten nights; but neither Prophet
Musa (a.s.) was aware of it nor Bani Israel. Thus when the time expired,
they said that Musa has deceived us. And they began to worship the calf.
Hence when famine and deprivation increases and people begin to deny
each other, you should expect the arrival of the divine command day and
night.

I said: May I be your ransom, I have understood famine, but what is the
meaning of denying each other?

He replied: A person approaches his friend for something and the latter
will not meet as he used to meet before. Now his tenor will be changed.”

Sufyani will cut them off like grass
------------------------------------

Through the same chains, it is narrated from Uthman bin Isa from Bakr
bin Muhammad Azdi from Sudair that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.)
said:

“O Sudair, remain in your house and remain quiet like this earth and the
sky are silent. And when you learn of the advent of Sufyani, you should
come to us at once even if you have to come walking.

I said: May I be your ransom, would it be preceded by some event?

He replied: Yes. Then he pointed three fingers to Shaam and said: There
will be three standards, Hasanide standard, Umayyad standard and the
Qaisiya standard; they will be in such, when Sufyani arrives and cuts
them off like grass.”

**162-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Ibne Mahbub
directly from Jabir from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that he said:

“O Jabir, the advent of Imam Qaim (a.s.) will take place when the people
of the areas between Hira and Kufa will be surrounded by calamities and
would be trying to find a way out of them. Their dead would be lying by
the river banks, when a call would be heard from the sky.”

**163-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.) in a lengthy report that he said:

“The reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.) will occur after a person from
the progeny of Abu Sufyan will arise and rule for nine months, equal to
the duration of a human pregnancy. And it will be at a time when a
descendant of the Shaykh will arise and he will be killed in the center
of Najaf. By Allah, as if I can see their weapons and belongings in an
orchard of Najaf. It will be a Monday and he will be killed on a
Wednesday.”

**164-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Ibne Mahbub from
Ibne Asim Hafiz from Abu Hamza Thumali that he said: I heard Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) say:

“When you learn that mutual discord has developed among the Syrians, you
should flee from there, because there will be mischief and bloodshed
there.

I asked: Where do I flee to?

He replied: You should go to Mecca as it is the best place and people
will take refuge there only.

I asked: And Kufa?

He replied: Do you know what would befall Kufa? All males, except the
Syrians will be killed there and as for those who live in the outskirts,
they will have to bear untold calamities. Men and women will be taken
prisoners, but the best will be those who cross the Euphrates to the
other side and do not witness what goes on there.

I asked: What is your opinion about those who inhabit the suburbs of
Kufa?

He replied: It is better to leave that place.

I asked: How long would it to take for all this to happen?

He replied: Only an hour.

I asked: And what would be the fate of those who are arrested?

He replied: They will be safe, because they will be rescued by those who
would be valueless in the view of Kufians at that time and they will not
be taken out of Kufa.”

**165-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Hasan bin Alaa from
Abu Basir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that when he was asked about
Rajab he said:

“It is the month that was sacred even during the period of Jahiliyya and
the Arabs referred to it as the deaf month.

I asked: And Shaban?

He replied: In it all the affairs are reformed and there is blossom
during it.

I asked: And Ramadhan?

He replied: It is the month of the Almighty Allah. It is in this month
that there will an announcement from the sky in the name of your Sahibul
Amr (master of affair) and his father.

I asked: And Shawwal?

He replied: In this month, the affairs related to the Muslims are
concluded.

I asked: And Zilqad?

He replied: In this month, the Muslims are at rest.

I asked: And Zilhajj?

He replied: It is the month of blood (sacrifice).

I asked: And Mohurrum?

He replied: In this month that which is unlawful becomes lawful and that
which is lawful becomes unlawful.

I asked: And Safar, Rabiul Awwal and Rabius Thani?

He replied: In these month there is shame and troubles and a great event
will occur.

I asked: And Jamadi?

He replied: There is victory in its first as well as in its second.”

**166-** And through his chains it is narrated from Ismail bin Mahran
from Ibne Amira from Hadhrami that he said: I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(a.s.):

“What should we do when the Sufyani appears?

He replied: Your men should go underground and no harm will come to the
women and children. When he has conquered all the five areas of Shaam,
you must go to the master of affair (*Sahibul Amr* ).”

**167-** And through his chains, it is narrated from Ishaq directly from
Asbagh bin Nubatah that he said: I heard Amirul Momineen (a.s.) say:

“Ask me before you are deprived of me. Because I am more knowledgeable
about the paths of the heavens than about the paths of the earth. I am
the leader of religion and the chief of believers and the Imam of the
pious. And on Judgment Day I will take account of the people. I and the
distributor of Paradise and Hell. I am the owner of the heights. And
from us each Imam will know his followers. That is why the Almighty
Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا أَنتَ مُنذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
</p>

***“You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people.’
(Surah Raad 13:7)***

Know that you may ask me whatever you want, before you lose me, because
in my heart there are hoards of knowledge. So ask me before a

mischief arises from the east and like a ferocious dog, tears up its own
leg. And a fire arises from the west that will burn up large logs of
wood and you may continue to yell: Alas, where is the Sahibul Amr? You
will say that perhaps he is dead or has gone into some valley and at
that time the following verse will actualize:

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا
</p>

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and aided
you with wealth and children and made you a numerous band.” (Surah Bani
Israel 17:6)***

And many signs will appear before his reappearance. The first being the
surrounding of Kufa with a moat. Bursting of water skins in the lanes of
Kufa. The Masjids remaining inaccessible for prayers for forty day.
Invention of figures and statues. Waving of different flags at the
largest Masjid, in which both the killer and the victim will go to Hell.
Deaths by murder and hanging will be quick. On the back of Kufa the
killing of Nafse Zakiyya will occur. A man will be killed between the
Rukn and Maqam. A white headed man will be confined in a temple and then
he will be executed.

The arrival of Sufyani with a red flag. It would be led by a man of Bani
Kalab and another army of 12000 riders will set out to Mecca and Medina
and it will be in charge of a man named Hazima. He will be blind in one
eye. He will have clear scar in the eye. His flag will not be halted by
anyone and he will camp in a house in Medina, named Darul Abul Hasan
Amawi. Then he will send a battalion in search of a man of Aale Muhammad
(a.s.). A group of Shia will gather around him and force him to turn to
Mecca. This group will be led by a man from Bani Ghitfan. When he
reaches into the middle of the white desert, the earth will sink and all
will sink into it and none except one man will survive. His face will
turn to his back so that people may be shocked how the Almighty Allah
has punished him and gain lesson from it. On that day will be known the
interpretation of the following verse:

وَلَوْ تَرَى إِذْ فَزِعُوا فَلَا فَوْتَ <p dir="rtl">
وَأُخِذُوا مِن مَّكَانٍ قَرِيبٍ
</p>

***“And could you see when they shall become terrified, but (then) there
shall be no escape and they shall be seized upon from a near place.”
(Surah Saba 34:51)***

And Sufyani will send a 130000 strong army to Kufa which will camp at
Rauha and Faraq. Sixty thousand army men will camp near the grave of
Prophet Hud (a.s.) in Nakhila. Then they will be attacked on a festive
day and their chief will be a man of nasty disposition who will named
soothsayer. And he will rise against them from city of Zora accompanied
by 5000 soothsayers. He will slay 70000 on the bridge and the Euphrates
will be dyed in blood for three days. Corpses will rot in it. 70000
girls will be arrested from Kufa and they will be loaded on camel backs
and taken to Thawiya Gharra.

After that a hundred thousand will come out from Kufa including
polytheists and hypocrites and they will reach Damascus and no one will
stop them. This is in fact the Iram Zatul Imad. Some flags will come
from the east whose banner will neither be of cotton or silk; the mark
of the great

chief will be imprinted on it and it will be led by a man of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.). He will appear from the east and the fragrance of that
flag will reach to the west. It will be like musk. It will be preceded
by awe upto a distance of a month’s journey. And he will come to Kufa to
take revenge for his holy ancestors.

They will be such when the group of Khurasani and Yamani will move
forward and try to take precedence over each other and when one of them
sees this, he will remark: After today there is no good in sitting idle.
O Lord, we repent and they are the same chiefs that the Almighty Allah
has mentioned in His Book:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ
</p>

***“Surely Allah loves those who turn much (to Him), and He loves those
who purify themselves.” (Surah Baqarah 2:222)***

They will be expecting the person from Aale Muhammad (a.s.).

Then a man will come out from the people of Najran, who would hark at
the call of the Imam and he will be the first to harken from among the
Christians and he will demolish his chapel and break the cross and will
come out with his supporters from the downtrodden. He will finally reach
Nakhila and all the people of the world will gather at Farooq and they
will slay each other and that day 300000 people will be killed. That day
the interpretation of the following verse would be known:

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَا زَالَت تِّلْكَ دَعْوَاهُمْ حَتَّى جَعَلْنَاهُمْ حَصِيدًا
خَامِدِينَ
</p>

***“And this ceased not to be their cry till We made them cut off,
extinct.” (Surah Anbiya 21:15)***

And a caller will call out in the month of Ramadan from the east at
dawn: O people of guidance, come together: and a caller will announce
from the west after the disappearance of the glow from the horizon: O
people of falsehood, come together. And the next day at the time of
reappearance, the color of the Sun will be changed from red to yellow,
after that it will become black and dark. On the third day, the Almighty
Allah will separate truth and falsehood from each other and the walker
of the earth (*Dabbatul Ardh* ) will emerge. And Rome will extend till
the shore and reach the land where the people of the cave sleep. So the
Almighty Allah will bring them out of their cave along with their dog.
One of them is named Maleekha and another is named Hamlaha and they
shall be the two Muslim witnesses for Qaim (a.s.).”

**168-** ***Adad:*** Salman Farsi says:

“Once I came to Amirul Momineen (a.s.) when he was all alone. I asked: O
Amirul Momineen (a.s.), when will the Qaim appear from your descendants?
He sighed deeply and said:

He will reappear when children will become rulers and the rights of the
Almighty Allah will be trespassed; the Holy Quran will be recited like
songs; when the Bani Abbas rulers will be assassinated one after the
other; when Basra will be destroyed; at that time will Imam Qaim rise up
from the descendants of (Imam) Husain (a.s.).”

**169-** ***Adad*** : It is mentioned in this book that:

“Most of the signs of reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.) have already
occurred; for example the collapsing of the wall of the Kufa Mosque;
killing of the Egyptian ruler at the hands of his people; the downfall
of the Abbaside kingdom at the hands of one who rose up against them;
death of the last Abbaside ruler; destruction of some Syrian
territories; collapse of the bridge in Karkh locality of Baghdad; all
this will occur within a short time and the split in Euphrates has
already occurred, if Allah wills, its water will reach upto the lanes of
Kufa.”

**170-** ***Amali Tusi:*** It is narrated from Husain bin Ibrahim
Qazwini from Muhammad bin Wahban from Ahmad bin Ibrahim from Hasan bin
Ali Zafrani from Barqi from his father from Ibne Abi Umair from Hisham
bin Saalim that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said when Sufyani was
mentioned in his presence:

“At that time men will go into hiding and the women will have no
problem.”

From the same chains of narrators it is narrated from Hisham bin Salim
that when the one who demanded his rights staged an uprising, Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) was told that it was hoped that he might be the
Yamani.

He said: “No, Yamani will be in favor of Imam Ali (a.s.) whereas this
once is inimical to and aloof from him.”

From the same chains of narrators, it is narrated from Hisham bin Salim
that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “The advent of Sufyani and Yamani
will be simultaneous; like the running of two race horses.”

**171- The Author says:** Shaykh Ahmad bin Fahd has narrated in
his*Muhazzab* , from Mualla bin Khunais etc. that it is narrated from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) that he said:

“The day of Navroz is the day when the Qaim and Wali Amr of us, Ahle
Bayt (a.s.) will reappear and the Almighty Allah will make him
victorious over Dajjal and he will impale Dajjal at Kinasa in Kufa.”

**172-** ***Kitabul Mohtazar:*** Hasan bin Sulaiman has narrated from
Kitabul Meraj of Shaykh Salih Abu Muhammad Hasan through his chains from
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) from Ibne Idris from his father from Sahal from
Muhammad bin Adam Nasai from his father Adam bin Abi Ayyas from Mubarak
bin Faddala from Wahab bin Munabbah directly from Ibne Abbas that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said:

“When My Lord took me up in ascension, I was called and I responded:
Here I am my Lord.

The Almighty Allah revealed to me: O Muhammad, do you know what
controversy had developed at the heavenly kingdom.

I replied that I was unaware of it.

Allah said: O Muhammad, have you appointed anyone as your deputy and
brother from the human beings after you?

I asked: My Lord, whom should I appoint?

So He revealed: O Muhammad, I select Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) from the
men for you.

I asked: Is it my cousin?

It was revealed to me: O Muhammad, indeed, after you only Ali is your
successor, the successor of your knowledge and the carrier of your
standard

(*Liwaul Hamd* ) on Judgment Day, and the server of drinks at the Pool
of Kauthar. From your Ummah whoever brings faith on you, Ali would give
to him a drink from the water of Kauthar.

And it was also revealed: O Muhammad, by My self and being, your
enemies, enemies of Ahle Bayt and your purified progeny would not be
allowed to drink from this pool. And O Muhammad, I am true in what I
say, that I would admit all your followers to Paradise, except those who
refuse to enter Paradise.

I asked: O my Lord, can anyone refuse to enter Paradise?

It was revealed to me: Yes, they would refuse.

I asked: How anyone can refuse?

It was revealed to me: O Muhammad, I have selected you from all My
creatures and after you appointed a successor as well and he is having
the same relation to you as Harun had to Musa, except that there will be
no prophet after you. And I have imbued your heart with his love. I made
him the father of your sons. Thus after you he would have the same right
on your Ummah as you have on them in your lifetime. Now whoever denies
his rights, has in fact denied your right, and whoever has denied his
Wilayat has in fact refused to enter Paradise.

I fell down in prostration of thanks to the Almighty Allah. Just then a
call came asking me to raise my head and said that I would be given
whatever I asked for.

I said: O my Lord, unite my whole Ummah on the Wilayat of Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a.s.) so that all may come to me on Judgment Day at Hauze
Kauthar.

It was revealed to me: O Muhammad, I have decided about the people
before I created them and My decision would be effected in them. That I
would destroy anyone I like because of this Ali and would guide
whomsoever I like through this Ali and I have given him your knowledge
after you and appointed him as your legatee. After you, he is your
caliph on your family and Ummah. And I have decided that whoever harbors
hatred him and denies his authority would never enter Paradise.

And you should know that whoever is inimical to Ali, is inimical to you
and whoever is inimical to you is in fact inimical to me and whoever
loved him has loved you and whoever has loved you has in fact loved Me.

And I made it an excellence of that Ali that I would create eleven
Mahdis from his loins and all would be from your descendants from the
sons of Fatima. The last Mahdi would be one behind whom Isa (a.s.) would
pray and he would fill the earth with justice and equity just as it
would be fraught with injustice and oppression. Through him, I would
save the people from destruction and bring them out from misguidance to
guidance. And through him would I cure the blind and the sick.

I asked: O my Lord, when would this happen?

It was revealed to me: When knowledge would be taken away from the
world, when ignorance would become common. When there would many
reciters of Quran and practical deeds would increase, when killings
would increase; sincere jurisprudents would decrease and dishonest
scholars would increase. Poets would increase in number.

All this would happen when your Ummah would construct Masjids over
graves and copies of Quran will be embellished, Masjids would be richly
decorated. Oppressions would increase and sins would be committed openly
and your Ummah would be ordered to commit sin and evil and they would be
restrained from deeds of virtue. Homosexuality and lesbianism would
become common. Rulers would be infidels, their associates would be
sinners, their helpers would be oppressors and their advisors would be
transgressors.

At that time the earth would sink in three places: one in the east, one
in the west and third in the Arabian Peninsula. And Basra would be
destroyed at the hands of one of your descendants. Negroes would follow
him and a person from the descendants of Hasan would stage an uprising
and Dajjal would appear; who would come out from Sajistan in the east
and Sufyani would appear.

I asked: My Lord, what mischiefs would appear after me? It was revealed
to me and I was told about the mischief of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas.
I was informed about all that was to occur till Judgment Day. Thus when
I returned from Meraj, I made a bequest to Ali, my cousin and I conveyed
to him the message of Allah; and I praise Allah like the previous
prophets have praised and like the past people have praised Him and like
He would be praised by everything till Judgment Day.”

**173-** ***Nahjul Balagha:*** Amirul Momineen (a.s.) said:

“Your society will pass through a period when cunning and crafty
intriguers will be favored by status, when profligates will be
considered as well-bred, well-behaved and elegant elites of the society,
when just and honest persons will be considered as weaklings, when
charity will be considered as a loss to wealth and property, when
support and help to each other will be considered as favor and
benevolence and when prayers and worship to Allah will be taken up for
the sake of show off to gain popularity and higher status, at such
times, regimes will be run under the advice of women and the youngsters
will be the rulers and counselors of the State.”


