33
==

Chapter Thirty-Three: What will happen at the time of the Reappearance of Imam Zamana (a.s.) according to the report of Mufaddal bin Umar
=========================================================================================================================================

Some of our associates have narrated from Husain bin Hamadan from
Muhammad bin Ismail and Ali bin Abdullah Hasani from Abi Shuaib from
Muhammad bin Nusair from Umar bin Furat from Mufaddal bin Umar that he
said: Once I asked my master, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.):

“Is any time fixed for the reappearance of the awaited Mahdi (a.s.) that
can be declared?”

He said: “By Allah, there is no such fixed time that can be told to our
Shia.”

“Why is it so, my master?” I asked.

He replied: “It is the same Hour regarding which the Almighty Allah
says:

<p dir="rtl">
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا قُلْ إِنَّمَا
عِلْمُهَا عِندَ رَبِّي لاَ يُجَلِّيهَا لِوَقْتِهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ ثَقُلَتْ
فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ
</p>

***“They ask you about the hour, when will be its taking place? Say: The
knowledge of it is only with my Lord; none but He shall manifest it at
its time; it will be momentous in the heavens and the earth…” (Surah
Araaf 7:187)***

He said: “And it is the same Hour regarding which the Almighty Allah has
said:

<p dir="rtl">
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ السَّاعَةِ أَيَّانَ مُرْسَاهَا
</p>

***“They ask you about the hour, when it will come.” (Surah Naziyat
79:42)***

<p dir="rtl">
عِندَهُ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ
</p>

***“…with Whom is the knowledge of the hour.” (Surah Luqman 31:34)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِّلسَّاعَةِ
</p>

***“And most surely it is a knowledge of the hour…” (Surah Zukhruf
43:61)***

That is, He did not say that anyone had any knowledge of it.

He also said:

<p dir="rtl">
فَهَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلَّا السَّاعَةَ أَن تَأْتِيَهُم بَغْتَةً فَقَدْ جَاء
أَشْرَاطُهَا
</p>

***“Do they then wait for aught but the hour that it should come to them
all of a sudden? Now indeed the tokens of it have (already) come…”
(Surah Muhammad 47:18)***

Then He said:

<p dir="rtl">
اِقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ
</p>

***“The hour drew nigh and the moon did rend asunder.” (Surah Qamar
54:1)***

Then He said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّ السَّاعَةَ تَكُونُ قَرِيبًا
</p>

***“…and what will make you comprehend that the hour may be nigh.”
(Surah Ahzab 33:63)***

And before that it is mentioned:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّ السَّاعَةَ قَرِيبٌ
</p>

***“…and what shall make you know that haply the hour be nigh?” (Surah
Shura 42:17)***

<p dir="rtl">
يَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
مُشْفِقُونَ مِنْهَا وَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهَا الْحَقُّ أَلَا إِنَّ
الَّذِينَ يُمَارُونَ فِي السَّاعَةِ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ
</p>

***“Those who do not believe in it would hasten it on, and those who
believe are in fear from it, and they know that it is the truth. Now
most surely those who dispute obstinately concerning the hour are in a
great error.” (Surah Shura 42:18)***

Mufaddal says: I asked: What is the meaning of “those who dispute”? Imam
(a.s.) replied: “They say: when was he born? Who has seen him? Where
does he reside? and When will he reappear? And all these things imply
making haste in the command of Allah, doubting in the divine decree and
interfering in the power of Allah. These are the one who will suffer
loss in the world and indeed the disbelievers have an evil abode.”

I asked: “So no time is fixed for his reappearance?” He replied: O
Mufaddal, I don’t fix any time from his reappearance and neither is any
time fixed for it. And one who fixes a time for our Mahdi, considers
himself to be a partner of Allah in His knowledge and he claims to
dominate the secrets of the Almighty Allah and also no divine secret has
been disclosed to the common people. Those who have deviated from the
right path and are ignorant of the divine saints. Only these are having
and the news of Allah and it is safe with them and the Almighty Allah
inspires it to them so that the proof is completed for them.

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, how will the reappearance of Imam
Mahdi (a.s.) occur and how he would be accepted by the people?

He replied: “O Mufaddal, initially people will be in doubt, then
gradually his remembrance will be exalted. His name, Kunniyat and
lineage will be announced from the heavens and this will be talked about
extensively by all: the good and the evil and the supporters and
opponents; so that it may serve as the decisive proof for them. And we
have mentioned his conditions, signs, name and lineage, and declared
that the great grandfather of the Mahdi, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) had named him and mentioned his Kunniyat, so that no one can
say that he was unaware of his name, Kunniyat and lineage.

By Allah, his name, Kunniyat and lineage will be talked of by all and
each will mention it to others. And that will be the great decisive
proof on them. After that the Almighty Allah will make him appear
according to the

promise of his grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). Thus the
Almighty Allah Himself says:

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33)***

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master what is the meaning of the verse:
“that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse?” Please explain it to me.

Imam (a.s.) said: Its interpretation is present in the following
statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ كُلُّهُ
لِلّه
</p>

***“And fight with them until there is no more persecution and religion
should be only for Allah…” (Surah Anfal 8:39)***

By Allah, at that time all the differences of sects and religions will
be gone and all will have the same faith, as the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ
</p>

***“Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam…” (Surah Aale Imran
3:19***

Also He says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَن يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الإِسْلاَمِ دِينًا فَلَن يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ وَهُوَ
فِي الآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
</p>

***“And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the losers.”
(Surah Aale Imran 3:85)***

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, was the religion of your forefathers,
Ibrahim, Nuh, Musa and Muhammad Islam?

He replied: Yes, O Mufaddal, it was Islam and nothing else.

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, is there any mention of it in the
Holy Quran?

He replied: Yes, from the beginning to the end; it is mentioned in the
Holy Quran. First of all is the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ
</p>

***“Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam…” (Surah Aale Imran
3:19***

Then the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
مِّلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمينَ
</p>

***“…the faith of your father Ibrahim; He named you Muslims…” (Surah
Hajj 22:78)***

Also with regard to Prophet Ibrahim and Ismail it was said:

<p dir="rtl">
رَبَّنَا وَاجْعَلْنَا مُسْلِمَيْنِ لَكَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِنَا أُمَّةً
مُّسْلِمَةً لَّكَ
</p>

***“Our Lord! and make us both submissive to Thee and (raise) from our
offspring a nation submitting to Thee…” (Surah Baqarah 2:128)***

And in the story of Firon it is said:

<p dir="rtl">
حَتَّى إِذَا أَدْرَكَهُ الْغَرَقُ قَالَ آمَنتُ أَنَّهُ لا إِلِـهَ إِلاَّ
الَّذِي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُو إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَنَاْ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
</p>

***“…until when drowning overtook him, he said: I believe that there is
no god but He in Whom the children of Israel believe and I am of those
who submit.” (Surah Yunus 10:90)***

Also it is mentioned in the story of Prophet Sulaiman and Bilquis as
follows:

<p dir="rtl">
قَبْلَ أَن يَأْتُونِي مُسْلِمِينَ
</p>

***“…before they come to me in submission?” (Surah Naml 27:38)***

And the statement of Bilquis that:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَسْلَمْتُ مَعَ سُلَيْمَانَ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
</p>

***“…and I submit with Sulaiman to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
(Surah Naml 27:44)***

And Prophet Isa (a.s.) has said:

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ أَنصَارِي إِلَى اللّهِ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنصَارُ
اللّهِ آمَنَّا بِاللّهِ وَاشْهَدْ بِأَنَّا مُسْلِمُونَ
</p>

***“Who will be my helpers in Allah’s way? The disciples said: We are
helpers (in the way) of Allah: We believe in Allah and bear witness that
we are submitting ones.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:52)***

And the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
</p>

***“…and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly…” (Surah Aale Imran 3:83)***

And it is mentioned in the story of Prophet Lut (a.s.) that:

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَا وَجَدْنَا فِيهَا غَيْرَ بَيْتٍ مِّنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
</p>

***“But We did not find therein save a (single) house of those who
submitted (the Muslims).” (Surah Zariyat 51:36)***

And the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
قُولُواْ آمَنَّا بِاللّهِ وَمَآ أُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَى
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالأسْبَاطِ وَمَا
أُوتِيَ مُوسَى وَعِيسَى وَمَا أُوتِيَ النَّبِيُّونَ مِن رَّبِّهِمْ لاَ
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِّنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
</p>

***“Say: We believe in Allah and (in) that which had been revealed to
us, and (in) that which was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and
Yaqub and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to Musa and Isa, and
(in) that which was given to the prophets from their Lord, we do not
make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we submit.”
(Surah Baqarah 2:136)***

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, how many sects are there?

He replied: Four and the Shariat are also four.

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, why are Majus called as Majus?

He replied: They are called as Majus in Syriac, because they attribute
falsehood on Prophet Adam (a.s.) and Prophet Sheeth (a.s.) and they say
that they had legalized incest.

And that they ordered them that when the sun rises, they should face it
in worship. No time is fixed for prayers, even though it is a falsehood
attributed to the Almighty Allah, Prophet Adam and Sheeth (a.s.).

Mufaddal says: I asked: My master, why is the community of Prophet Musa
(a.s.) called Yahud?

He replied: Because the Almighty Allah has quoted them in the Holy
Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا هُدْنَـا إِلَيْكَ
</p>

***“…for surely we turn to Thee.” (Surah Araaf 7:156)***

Then he asked: Why the Christians are called as Nasara?

He (a.s.) replied: Because the statement of Prophet Isa (a.s.) is quoted
in the Holy Quran:

<p dir="rtl">
مَنْ أَنصَارِي إِلَى اللّهِ قَالَ الْحَوَارِيُّونَ نَحْنُ أَنصَارُ
اللّهِ
</p>

***“Who will be my helpers in Allah’s way? The disciples said: We are
helpers (in the way) of Allah:” (Surah Aale Imran 3:52)***

Mufaddal says: I asked: Why are the Sabians known as such?

He replied: Because they are inclined to invalidate all the prophets,
messengers and all religions and Shariats. And they are deniers of the
monotheism of Allah, prophethood of the prophet and the successorship of
the successors and neither they have any book nor prophet, they are in a
state of suspension.

Mufaddal said: Subhan-Allah, how vast is the knowledge!

Imam (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, convey this to my Shia so that they may
not harbor any doubt in religion.

Mufaddal said: My master, please tell me from where will Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) reappear?

He replied: At the time of the reappearance not one eye will see him but
every eye will see him and if anyone else says to the contrary, he
should be considered a liar.

Mufaddal said: My master, would no one see him even at the time of his
birth?

He replied: Yes, from the time of his birth till the passing away of his
respected father, he will be seen for two years and nine months. That is
from the time of his birth, Friday dawn on 9th Shaban 257 A.H. till
Friday, 8th Rabiul Awwal, 260 A.H., the date of the demise of his
respected father. And he will pass away in town at the banks of Tigris
River, which would have been established by an arrogant tyrant named
Ja’far and having the title of Mutawakkil. But he will not be
Mutawakkil, on the contrary he would be Mutakkil.

That town is named Surre man Raa, that is one who sees it will be
pleased, but it would in fact be Saman Raa, that is one who sees it
would be aggrieved. Till 260 A.H. only the true believers will be able
to see him. The doubter will not be able to see him and till that time
his commands and prohibitions will be in force.

After that he will go into occultation and then he will reappear in Qasr
Sabar in the sanctuary of his respected grandfather, that is Medina and
there only those will able to meet him whom the Almighty Allah bestows
the

fortune. Then on the last day of 266 A.H. he will disappear in such a
way that no one will be able to see him. So much so, a day will come
when all would be able to see him.

Mufaddal said: My master, with whom will he interact during this period?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: “Angels and believers from the Jinns and
his trustees (reliable scholars) will convey his commands and
prohibitions to his governors and representatives. His sentry on the day
of the occultation will be Muhammad bin Nasir Numairi in Sabar. After
that he will appear in Mecca.

By Allah, O Mufaddal, as if I see with my own eyes, that he has entered
Mecca with the robe of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) on his
shoulders, a yellow turban on the head and wearing sandals of the
Prophet, having stitches. He will be holding the staff of the Prophet.
Some weak goats will be ahead of him and he will be herding them. He
will reach the Holy Kaaba in such glory, but no one will be able to
recognize him and he will be youthful at the time of the reappearance.

Mufaddal said: My master, he will reappear in old age or youthfulness?

He replied: Pure is the being of Allah, would anyone be able to
recognize him? When the command of Allah is issued, he will come in
whichever glory he likes and will appear in whichever form he likes.

Mufaddal said: My master, where and how he would reappear?

He replied: “O Mufaddal, he will reappear alone and come upto the Holy
Kaaba alone. He will enter the Kaaba alone. He will remain alone there
for the night. When it is late into the night and all the people go to
sleep, His Eminence, Jibraeel and Mikaeel will descend with rows of
angels and Jibraeel will step forward and say: O chief and leader! Your
prayer has been accepted, now the kingdom shall be yours.

The Imam will pass his hand over his face and say:

<p dir="rtl">
الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ وَأَوْرَثَنَا الْأَرْضَ
نَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ نَشَاء فَنِعْمَ أَجْرُ الْعَامِلِينَ
</p>

***“(All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made good to us His promise,
and He has made us inherit the land; we may abide in the garden where we
please; so goodly is the reward of the workers.” (Surah Zumar 39:74)***

Then he will stand between the*Rukn* and*Maqam* and call out loudly: O
my deputies! My special helpers, whom the Almighty Allah had kept alive
on the earth, since before my reappearance to help me. Come to me at
once! Thus these people will hear him from the east and the west
wherever they might be, whether busy in worship or sleeping on their
beds. His voice will reach to everyone of them and in an instant they
would all reach Mecca and join him between*Rukn* and*Maqam* . Then the
Almighty Allah will command the ‘*Noor* ’ and a pillar of light will be
established from the earth to the heavens through which all the
believers of the earth receive light. The light of this effulgence will
even enter their homes by which the believers shall be extremely happy.”
But they will not know that our Qaim has appeared.

After that they will stand before Imam Mahdi (a.s.) till the morning and
their number will be equal to the companions of Badr, that is 313.

Mufaddal said: My master, will he be accompanied by the seventy-two, who
were martyred with Imam Husain (a.s.)?

He replied: From them only Imam Husain (a.s.) will reappear, along with
twelve thousand Shia of Ali (a.s.). He will be wearing a black turban.

Mufaddal said: My master, is it possible to take allegiance from Imam
Qaim (a.s.) before?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal every allegiance taken before
the reappearance of the Qaim is heresy, hypocrisy and a deception. And
curse of Allah be on one who takes allegiance on his behalf or one who
demands allegiance from him.

O Mufaddal, the Qaim will lean on the Kaaba and stretch his hand. An
effulgence will emit from his palm. And he will say: This is the hand of
Allah, from Allah and the Almighty Allah commands you to pledge
allegiance. Then he will recite the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ
اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ فَمَن نَّكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنكُثُ عَلَى
نَفْسِهِ
</p>

***“Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to
Allah; the hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore whoever breaks
(his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul…” (Surah
Fath 48:10)***

Thus the first to pledge allegiance to him will be Jibraeel; after that
angels and nobles from Jinns and after that nobles will pledge
allegiance for him. There will be a clamor among the people of Mecca.
They will say: Who is this man at the side of the Kaaba and who are in
his company? What are these signs and portents that we witnessed last
night? We never saw such signs before. Then they will say to one
another. It is the same shepherd.

Then they will say among themselves: Try to recognize someone from his
companions. They will say: No, we don’t recognize anyone except four
from Mecca and four from Medina and that is so and so.

All this will occur at the time of sunrise. And when the sun would be
up, a caller will call out from the horizon, which will be heard by all
in the earth and the heavens: O creatures, he is the Mahdi of Aale
Muhammad (a.s.), whose name is same as that of his respected
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and his Kunniyat, Abul
Qasim is also same. His lineage reaches through his father, Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.) to Imam Husain Ibne Ali (a.s.). All of you pledge
allegiance to him and you will be guided. Do not act contrary to his
orders or you will be deviated.

After that announcement the first to shake hands with him will be the
angels, then Jinns and then nobles and they will say: We have heard the
call from the sky and we submit to him. And all the creatures will hear
that call. And they will discuss among themselves, whether they be on
land or at sea, in habitations or in wilderness.

When the sun will be about to set, a caller will call out from the west:
O creatures, your Lord has appeared in Palestine in the valley of Yabis.
And

he is from the lineage of Uthman bin Ambasa Amawi Yazid bin Muawiyah.
You must follow him and you will be guided and do not oppose him or you
shall be deviated. And the angels, Jinns and nobles will refute and
reject him.

And they will say: We heard you but we will not follow your advice. At
that time there will be no doubting infidel or hypocrite who will not be
deviated on hearing that last call.

And our master, Imam Qaim (a.s.) would be standing, resting his back to
the Kaaba. And he will say: O people, whoever wants to see Adam and
Sheeth, should know that I am Adam and Sheeth. And whoever wants to see
Nuh and his son, Saam, should know that I am that same Nuh and Saam. And
whoever wants to see Ibrahim and Ismail, should know that I am that same
Ibrahim and Ismail. And whoever wants to see Musa and Yusha, should know
that I am that same Musa and Yusha. And whoever wants to see Isa and
Shamoun, should know that I am that same Isa and Shamoun. And whoever
wants to see Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and Amirul Momineen, should know that I
am that same Muhammad and Amirul Momineen. And whoever wants to see
Hasan and Husain, should know that I am that same Hasan and Husain. And
whoever wants to see the Imams from the progeny of Husain, should know
that I am those same purified Imams. Accept my call and gather near me
as I would inform you about all that has been said and all that has not
been said.”

Those of you who has read the heavenly books and divine scriptures
should hear this: After that he would begin reciting those scriptures
that were revealed on Prophet Adam and Prophet Sheeth and the community
of Prophet Adam and Prophet Sheeth would listen to it and say: By Allah,
these are the complete scriptures that he has shown us, which even we
were unaware of and whatever had been concealed from or whatever that
had been cancelled from them and that which had been interpolated and
changed in them. After that he will he will recite the scriptures of
Prophet Nuh and Ibrahim (a.s.); and the Taurat, Injeel and Zabur. The
people of Taurat, Injeel and Zabur will say: Indeed, these are the
scriptures of Prophet Nuh and Ibrahim and from which omissions and
interpolations are made. By Allah, this is the complete Taurat, Injeel
and Zabur, and it is better than whatever we used to recite so far.

Then he will recite the Holy Quran and the Muslims will exclaim: By
Allah, this is in fact is the Quran that the Almighty Allah revealed on
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and some verses had been cancelled from it
and interpolations had been done in this.

After that a walking creature (Daabba) will appear between the Rukn and
Maqam and he will write on the forehead of the believer that he is a
believer and mark the forehead of an infidel that he is an infidel.

Then a man will come to Imam Qaim (a.s.) whose face will be turned to
his back and he will say: My Chief and master, I am Bashir and an angel
has ordered me to present myself in your service and deliver to you the
good news of the sinking of the army of Sufyani in Baidha.

The Imam will ask him to narrate the incident about himself and his
brother.

Bashir will say: I and my brother were in the army of Sufyani. We set
out from Damascus and reached Zora and plundered it. Then we moved
forward and destroyed Kufa. From there we set out for Medina and
destroyed it. Finally we demolished the pulpit of the Prophet and tied
our horses in the Masjid of the Prophet and desecrated the place. Then
we thirteen thousand persons set out from there to raze the Kaaba and
eliminate the Meccans. When we reached Baidha and camped there, a caller
announced from the sky: O Baidha, destroy these unjust people. So the
ground sunk within itself swallowing all the men, except me and my
brother. So much so that not even a tether remained intact.

Meanwhile an angel slapped both of us causing our faces to be turned
backwards as you can see and they told my brother: O warner, go to
Damascus and inform the Sufyani about the reappearance of Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) and told me: O Bashir, go to Mecca and meet Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and
convey to him the good news of the destruction of the unjust and repent
for your past deeds in his presence. He will accept your repentance.

On hearing this Imam (a.s.) will pass his hand over his face and it will
return to its normal condition and Bashir will pledge allegiance at his
hands and remain in his company.

Mufaddal asked: My master, would the angels and jinns become visible to
humans during that period.

He replied:: Yes, by Allah, O Mufaddal, they will converse with them
like they talk to their companions and family members.

I said: O Master, would they go with them?

He replied: Yes, by Allah, O Mufaddal, they will camp on the land of
Hijrat between Kufa and Najaf. At that time there will be 46000 angels
in his army and 6000 (according to another report 46000) jinns. The
Almighty Allah will grant him victory through them.

Mufaddal asked: My master, how will they deal with the Meccans?

He replied: He will call them through wisdom and a goodly exhortation
and they will obey him. After that he will appoint a person from his
Ahle Bayt (a.s.) as his representative and set out for Medina.

Mufaddal asked: My master, how will they deal with the Kaaba?

He replied: He will raze the Kaaba and rebuild it on the foundations
laid during the period of Prophet Adam (a.s.) and on which Prophet
Ibrahim and Ismail had raised the walls. And no one has rebuilt it on
those foundations. In this way he would destroy all the monuments built
by the oppressors. In Mecca as well as in Medina rather in all the
countries. In the same way he will raze the Kufa Masjid and rebuild it
on its original foundations. Then he will also demolish the Atiq Castle
because its founders had been accursed.

Mufaddal asked: My master, would Imam Mahdi (a.s.) continue to camp in
Mecca?

He replied: No, O Mufaddal, he will appoint a representative from a
person of his Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and set out from there. But as soon as he
sets out from there, the Meccans will attack and assassinate him. On
getting this news, Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will return to Mecca and the
Meccans will come to him weeping and wailing in regret and say: O Mahdi
of Aale Muhammad (a.s.) we repent! We repent! He will dispense good
counsel to them and

again appoint another representative and set out from there. As soon as
he sets out from there, again they will attack him and assassinate him.
So the Imam will send some jinns and nobles from his army with
instructions not to leave anyone alive who does not bring faith. “If the
mercy of your Lord had not encompassed everything; and I am that mercy,
I would also have accompanied you. They have not left any excuse between
the Almighty Allah and me.” Thus by Allah, the helper jinns will come to
Mecca and will not leave one in a hundred or even one in a thousand.

Mufaddal asked: My master, please tell us the location of the holy house
of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) and the place of the gathering of believers?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Kufa will be his capital and his
proclamations will be issued from Kufa Jame Masjid and Masjid Sahla will
be the Public Treasury and center for distribution of funds.

Mufaddal asked: My master, would all the believers reside in Kufa at
that time?

He replied: Yes, by Allah, every believer will reside there or its
outskirts. The price for land enough to accommodate a horse will reach
upto 2000 dirhams and most people will even be willing to buy a span of
land in Saba in exchange of a span of gold. Saba is an area of Hamadan.
At that time the population of Kufa will spread to a radius of
fifty-four miles and its borders will touch the borders of Kerbala and
the Almighty Allah will exalt the status of Kerbala so much that it will
be frequented by angels and believers all the time. It will have a
strange glory and so many blessings will come down there, that if a
believer stands there and calls his Lord, the Almighty Allah, in
exchange of his single prayer would give him wealth equivalent to
thousand times the rulership of the world.

Then Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) sighed and said: O Mufaddal, once the
different parts of land boasted among themselves. Thus Kaaba prided
itself over Kerbala. The Almighty Allah revealed to it: O Kaaba, keep
quiet, don’t be arrogant to Kerbala. It is that blessed land where Musa
(a.s.) was called by the blessed tree. It is the place where Maryam and
Masih (a.s.) had taken refuge. There is the shore where the head of
Husain was washed. Maryam had performed the Ghusl of birth on Isa (a.s.)
at this place and also performed the Ghusl herself. This is the best
land from where the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had gone to Meraj. And in
this land there is good for our Shia till the reappearance of the Qaim
(a.s.).

Mufaddal said: My master, where will Imam Mahdi (a.s.) go after this?

He replied: After that he will proceed to Medina and camp there and the
believers will experience a strange joy and the infidels will be
sorrowful in a strange way.

Mufaddal said: My master, what will be the cause of that joy and sorrow?

Imam said: He will come to the grave of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and
call out: O people, is this the grave of my grandfather? People would
reply: O Mahdi of Aale Muhammad (a.s.), yes, this is the tomb of your
grandfather. He would ask: Who are buried with him? They will say: Two
of his companions.

Although he would be knowing them better than anyone else. Yet people
would pay attention to what he is saying. He would ask: Who are they and

how did only these two from all the people were buried with my
grandfather? Perhaps others are also buried here. People would say: O
Mahdi of the progeny of Aale Muhammad (a.s.), no one other than these
two are buried here, because they were caliphs and fathers-in-law of the
Prophet. Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would repeat this question thrice and then
order them to be taken out from their graves. When they remove the two
corpses, they would come out fresh and un-decayed.

Then Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would ask: Does anyone of you recognize them?
People would reply: Yes, we recognize them through their qualities, they
were companions of your grandfather. He would ask: Is there anyone among
you having another opinion or having any doubt in it? People would say:
No. Then Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would delay their removal for three days and
this news would spread among the people.

After that Mahdi will come to their graves and order his men: Open their
graves and search for them. They would put their hands inside the grave
and pull them out as fresh as they were three days ago. Then he will
order them to be hung from a dried up tree; but as soon as they hang the
corpses on it, it would become green and fresh.

Seeing this their followers would remark: This is the true dignity which
they possessed and we would also benefit by our devotion to them, anyone
who has even a little devotion to them should come and witness this
spectacle.

Meanwhile the caller of the Imam would call out: All those who are
devoted to the two companions of the Prophet, should move to one side.
People would divide into two groups: a group friendly to them and a
group inimical to them. Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would ask the group friendly
to them to recant their loyalty. They would say: O Mahdi of the progeny
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), since at that time we were not
aware of your status and the position that the Almighty Allah has given
you, we did not become aloof from them. Should we become aloof from them
now inspite of seeing their bodies so fresh and how the leafless tree
became green due to them?

By Allah we seek aloofness from you and those who have faith in you and
from those who don’t bring faith on them, and those who have hung them
on the tree and dug them out of the grave and dealt with them in this
manner. Thus Mahdi (a.s.) will order the black wind to blow on them and
they will fall dead like dry date palms.

Then Imam Mahdi (a.s.) would order them to be brought down and they
would become alive by the command of Allah and all the people would be
ordered to gather there. Then he would mention all the crimes in every
period of time and attribute them to those two, beginning with the
killing of Habil, son of Adam (a.s.), then stoking of the fire for
Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), throwing of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) into the well,
captivity of Prophet Yunus (a.s.) in the belly of the whale, killing of
Prophet Yahya, persecution of Isa (a.s.), torture of Prophets Jirjees
and Daniyal (a.s.), beating of Salman Farsi, arson of the house of
Amirul Momineen, Lady Fatima, Hasan and Husain (a.s.), lashing the side
of Lady Fatima (s.a.), miscarriage of Mohsin, poisoning of Imam Hasan
(a.s.), killing of Imam Husain (a.s.) and his

children, cousins and friends and taking prisoners of the descendants of
the Prophet and shedding of the blood of Aale Muhammad (a.s.), and every
blood that is shed unrightfully and every lady who is molested, and
every fraud and evil act, and sin and oppression which is committed by
human beings from the time of Adam (a.s.) till the occasion of the
reappearance of Imam Qaim (a.s.), he would make the two of them
responsible to all of them and they would also confess being responsible
for them.

Then he would announce that however has suffered any injustice at their
hand should take retaliation from them and they will do that. Then he
would have them hung from the tree again and then issue a command by
which a fire would emerge from the ground and burn them along with the
tree on which they are impaled. After that he would order the wind to
blow their ashes to the seas.

Mufaddal asked: Master, is it the last chastisement they would suffer?
The Imam replied: No, no, O Mufaddal, by Allah, tomorrow on Judgment Day
every believer and infidel would be present on the mass gathering and
also the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), Amirul Momineen (a.s.), Lady Fatima
(s.a.), Imam Hasan and Imam Husain (a.s.), and the Holy Imams (a.s.) and
all would take retaliation from those two. So much so that they would
killed a thousand times everyday and every time revived by the command
of Allah so that they may be punished again.”

After that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will set out for Kufa and halt between Kufa
and Najaf. At that time there will 46000 angels, 6000 jinns and nobles
and 313 special companions with him.

Mufaddal said: My master, what will be the condition of the abode of the
sinners at that time?

He replied: Curse and will be descending on it and it will be involved
in divine chastisement. Many will destroy it completely. Yellow flag and
different flags of the west, invader from peninsula; also all the flags
from far and near will wreak havoc on it and its inhabitants.

By Allah, from the beginning of the time till the end, all the
chastisements that have befallen the accursed and rebellious people will
befall it. On the contrary such chastisement will befall it that no eye
has ever seen and no ear has ever heard.

There will be a storm of swords there. Woe on its inhabitants! Whoever
continues to reside there is really very unfortunate. And one who leaves
that place has been bestowed with mercy by the Almighty Allah.

By Allah, its residents will live in such a way that all will say that
it is the world. Their houses will be like the castles of Paradise and
their girls will be like the Houries of Paradise and their boys will be
like the boys of Paradise. They will be thinking that the sustenance
that the Almighty Allah has created for people is only for them. They
will be bent on opposition to the Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). Their judgments will be taken without the Holy Quran. False
testimonies, wine and sinfulness, unlawful income, murder and killings
will be widespread in all the world.

Then the Almighty Allah through those mischiefs and different flags
destroy it in such a way that anyone passing from there will remark:
Once Zora was based at this spot.

“Hasani is that elegant youth who will emerge from Dailam and with an
eloquent power of speech that he has, he shall plead: ‘O Progeny of
Muhammad! Please harken to call of the distressed ones.’ And this call
will be issued from the*Zari* (perhaps the reference is to the Kaaba).
Then divine treasures hidden in Taliqaan will harken to his call. These
will not be treasures of gold and silver, but they will be strong men
mounted on crimson horses and carrying weapons and slaying the
oppressors they will reach Kufa, by this time most of the areas will be
cleaned up and it will be a place of refuge for them.

Then the news of the reappearance of Mahdi (a.s.) will reach Sayyid
Hasani and his companions. His companions shall ask: O son of the
Prophet, who is this gentleman that has entered our boundaries? He will
reply: “Come on, lets go and see who it is”, while by Allah, Sayyid
Hasani would know that it is Mahdi, and he shall say that only so that
they may recognize the companions of His Eminence. Then Hasani shall
come out till he would reach the Mahdi (a.s.). Then he shall say: If you
are the Mahdi of Aale Muhammad, where is the staff of your grandfather,
the Prophet, his finger ring, his dress and coat of armor*(Fazil)?*
Where is*(Sahaab* ) his turban,*Yarbu* (his horse),*Ghazba* (his
camel),*Duldul* his horse,*Yafoor* his donkey and the original horse of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.),*Buraq* and the*Mushaf* (scroll) of
Amirul Momineen (a.s.)?

Then His Eminence will show him all these things. He would take up the
staff of the Prophet and hit it upon a hard stone, it would instantly
produce sparks. His aim by this is to show the greatness and excellence
of Mahdi (a.s.) to his companions so that they pledge allegiance to him.

Then Sayyid Hasani would remark, “God is the Greatest (Allaahu Akbar), O
son of the Prophet, give me your hand so that I may pledge allegiance to
you. Mahdi (a.s.) will stretch out his hand. Sayyid Hasani and his
companions will pay allegiance to him. But 40000 persons having the
scroll, who will be known as Zaidiyyah, will not pay allegiance, saying:
This is great magic.

The armies shall confront each other. Mahdi (a.s.) will come out towards
the deviated group and dispense good counsel to them, inviting them
towards himself, but they would persist in their infidelity and
rebellion. His Eminence will order that they all be killed and they
shall be put to the sword.

Then Mahdi (a.s.) will say to his companions: Do not take their Qurans,
leave it as it will cause them despair just as they have changed and
tampered it and they have not acted according to it.”

Mufaddal said: My master, what will Imam Mahdi (a.s.) do after that?

Imam (a.s.) said: After that he will send an army to Damascus, which on
reaching its destination will apprehend Sufyani and slaughter him at
Saqra.

After that Imam Husain (a.s.) will do Rajat and arise with 12000
Siddiqeen and seventy-two companions who were martyred with him. What an
age of glory it would be!

Then the Siddiq Akbar, Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a.s.) will
appear and a dome will be fixed for him at Najaf, one of whose pillar
will be in Najaf Ashraf and another in Hijr, one in Sana and one in
Tayyaba. As if I

can see that the lamps of this dome is emitting light like that of the
sun and the moon. And the mysteries will be investigated.

<p dir="rtl">
تَذْهَلُ كُلُّ مُرْضِعَةٍ عَمَّا أَرْضَعَتْ وَتَضَعُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ حَمْلٍ
حَمْلَهَا وَتَرَى النَّاسَ سُكَارَى وَمَا هُم بِسُكَارَى وَلَكِنَّ
عَذَابَ اللَّهِ شَدِيدٌ
</p>

***“…every woman giving suck shall quit in confusion what she suckled,
and every pregnant woman shall lay down her burden, and you shall see
men intoxicated, and they shall not be intoxicated but the chastisement
of Allah will be severe.” (Surah Hajj 22:2)***

After that the great Sayyid, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) along with his
Ansar and Muhajireen, and those who brought faith in him and those who
testify to him and the ones who were martyred in the battles in his
company; all of them will come back into the world (Rajat). Those who
had falsified him will also be presented and doubted his prophethood,
disobeyed him and continued to say: He is a sorcerer, soothsayer and
insane; he speaks according to his personal whims. Also will be
presented those who fought against him, and they will be made to
compensate fully for all this. And from the reappearance of the Prophet
till the advent of the Mahdi, all the acts committed by them will be
scrutinized. And the interpretation of the following verse will be
realized:

<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs, and to
grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas 28:5-6)***

Mufaddal said: My master, who are the Firon and Haman?

He replied: So and so.

Mufaddal said: My master, would the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) accompany Imam Mahdi (a.s.)?

He replied: In is inevitable that the two of them will travel to the
face of the earth till they reach to the cave of Qaf and in the depths
of darkness in the oceans. Thus no place will remain where they don’t
step.

O Mufaddal, I can see that we Imams are standing before the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) complaining for the atrocities wreaked upon us by the Ummah,
how it rejected our statements, abused and cursed us and threatened us
with death and before the eyes of the Ummah the tyrant rulers forced us
out of our homes and took us to their capitals; killed, poisoned and
imprisoned us.

Upon this the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) is weeping and then he says:
O sons, all these calamities had previously befallen your grandfather
also.

First of all Lady Fatima (s.a.) will initiate her complaints and narrate
all the harassments on her through Abu Bakr and Umar; that is usurpation
of Fadak, her protestations for restoration of her rights in the crowd
of Muhajireen and Ansar and their usurpation of Fadak on the pretext
that neither the prophets inherit nor are they inherited. And her
argumentation

through the examples of Prophet Zakariya and Yahya and Prophet Dawood
and Sulaiman.

After that the complaints of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) for all the
calamities that were forced on him after the passing away of the
Prophet.

Then saying of Amirul Momineen (a.s.) to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.): I had to face the same situation that was faced by Harun
(a.s.) from Bani Israel. And he will also say what he said to Prophet
Musa (a.s.):

<p dir="rtl">
ابْنَ أُمَّ إِنَّ الْقَوْمَ اسْتَضْعَفُونِي وَكَادُواْ يَقْتُلُونَنِي
فَلاَ تُشْمِتْ بِيَ الأعْدَاء وَلاَ تَجْعَلْنِي مَعَ الْقَوْمِ
الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

***“Son of my mother! surely the people reckoned me weak and had
well-nigh slain me, therefore make not the enemies to rejoice over me
and count me not among the unjust people.” (Surah Araaf 7:150)***

Thus, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), I have also observed patience and
restraint. I remains satisfied with divine decree, although I had
exhausted the proof on them and they had broken the pledge that you had
taken from them.

O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), I have borne so much that no one from
the successors of the prophets has done, so much so that I was
assassinated by Abdur Rahman Ibne Muljim and how they broke the
allegiance they had paid to me as the Almighty Allah is the one who sees
everything.

And how Talha and Zubair went to Mecca with Ayesha under the pretext of
going to the Hajj and their going to Basra from there; and finally I had
to pursue them.

O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), I adjured to them in the name of Allah,
the Holy Quran and you. In spite of that they did not desist. As a
result of which the Almighty Allah gave me victory on them. Twenty
thousand Muslims were killed in that battle and seventy hands were
severed on the reins of the camel.

O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), it was a severe day, which was not seen
in your battles or even after that. It was the most difficult battle
that I had to fight. It was a terrible situation that I faced and it was
an important contest. But I observed patience, since you had ordered me
patience and the Almighty Allah has (also) commanded patience.

<p dir="rtl">
فَاصْبِرْ كَمَا صَبَرَ أُوْلُوا الْعَزْمِ مِنَ الرُّسُلِ
</p>

*** “Therefore bear up patiently as did the apostles endowed with
constancy bear up with patience…” (Surah Ahqaf 46:35)***

And He said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلاَّ بِاللّهِ
</p>

***“And be patient and your patience is not but by (the assistance of)
Allah…” (Surah Nahl 16:127)***

In fact, O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) the interpretation of this
verse that the Almighty Allah had revealed was realized after your
passing away.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلاَّ رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِن مَّاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَابِكُمْ وَمَن
يَنقَلِبْ عَلَىَ عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَن يَضُرَّ اللّهَ شَيْئًا وَسَيَجْزِي
اللّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ
</p>

***“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the
grateful.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:144)***

O Mufaddal, after that Imam Hasan (a.s.) will rise up before his
respected grandfather and say: Dear grandfather, I was with Amirul
Momineen (a.s.) in the abode of migration, Kufa, when he was
assassinated by the accursed Abdur Rahman Ibne Muljim and he made to me
the bequest you had made to him. And when the news of my father’s
martyrdom reached Muawiyah, he sent Ziyad with 150000 strong army and
ordered him to apprehend me, my brothers and all supporters and take
allegiance for Muawiyah. And if anyone refused, his head should be cut
off and sent to Muawiyah.

When I got this information, I went to Kufa Masjid, prayed there and
then went to the pulpit. People gathered to listen to my sermon. After
divine praise and glorification I said:

O people, (You can see that) the country is being destroyed and all
divine signs are being erased. How much patience can one have? The acts
of these satans and rule of the usurpers is unbearable. Now the divine
proof has been completed and the signs have become clear. And the
interpretation of the following verse has been realized fully:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلاَّ رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِن مَّاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَابِكُمْ وَمَن
يَنقَلِبْ عَلَىَ عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَن يَضُرَّ اللّهَ شَيْئًا وَسَيَجْزِي
اللّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ
</p>

***“And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least; and Allah will reward the
grateful.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:144)***

By Allah, my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has passed
away and my respected father has been martyred. Satanic doubts have
begun to haunt the people. Crows of mischief have begin to crow. You
have opposed the practice of the Prophet and what a pity how blind and
deaf this mischief is; that it does not give a ear to anyone and does
not harken to any call. Hypocrisy is everywhere. Opponents are roaming
about with their flags. Armies of rebels are marching from Iraq and
Shaam. So may Allah have mercy on you. Hasten to clear light, beneficial
knowledge, ever-lighted lamps and the ever-evident truth.

O people, wake up from the sleep of unawareness. By the one who split
the seed and germinated it. Even if one of your groups is with sincere
intention, unblemished by hypocrisy, I will fight them at every step and
hinder their approach.

May Allah have mercy on you. What do you say?

But no one harkened to me as if all of them were under the rein of
silence. Only twenty men arose and said: Son of the Messenger, we have
control over our own selves. We agree to obey you. You may issue any
command to us.

I looked left and right and could not see anyone besides the twenty. I
said to myself that I should act on the practice of my respected
grandfather, because in the initial stages, although there were
thirty-nine persons with him and when their figure reached forty, he
declared his prophethood. In the same way, when I also have as many
supporters, I will do Jihad in the way of Allah as it deserves to be
performed.

Then I raised my head to the sky and said: My Lord, (You saw) that I
invited them to the truth, warned them and enjoined good to them and
forbid evil. But they were not prepared to harken to my call and they
ignored the duty of rendering help to me. And they on the contrary began
to assist my enemy. O Allah, send such a chastisement on them that does
not spare them. Saying this I descended from the pulpit.

After that I left Kufa for Medina. Now they came to me and said:
Muawiyah’s army came to Anbar and Kufa, plundered the Muslims and also
slew those who did not oppose them; putting the ladies and children to
the sword.

I said: You are disloyal, but in spite of that I sent some men and a
unit of the army; but they also broke my allegiance and joined Muawiyah
and what I had predicted came to pass.

After that Imam Husain (a.s.) will arise smeared in blood in the company
of those who were slain with him. When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) sees
him in that condition, he will weep profusely and all the folks of the
sky and earth will weep on his weeping; and Lady Fatima (s.a.) on seeing
her son in that condition will scream in such way that the earth and its
inhabitants will tremble. Amirul Momineen (a.s.) will be on his right,
along with Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Lady Fatima (s.a.) will be to his
right. And in this way Imam Husain (a.s.) will proceed and the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) will embrace him and say: O Husain, may I be
sacrificed on you. May Allah make you happy. And His Eminence, Hamza,
lion of Allah will be on the right of Imam Husain (a.s.) and Ja’far
Tayyar will be to his left. And Lady Khadija binte Khuwailad and Lady
Fatima binte Asad will come with Mohsin. They would be weeping in
profusion and Mohsin’s mother, Lady Fatima (s.a.) will say:

<p dir="rtl">
هَذَا يَوْمُكُمُ الَّذِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ
</p>

***“This is your day which you were promised.” (Surah Anbiya 21:103)***

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوَءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا
</p>

***“On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that (evil) there was a long duration of time…” (Surah Aale Imran
3:30)***

After narrating this, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) weeps so much that his
beard will be wet in his tears.

After that he said: May the Almighty Allah never show happiness to the
eye that does not shed tears on this mention.

Mufaddal also continued to lament for quite a long time. Then he asked:
My master, what is the recompense of these tears?

He said: Unlimited; if they fall from the eye of one who can discern the
truth.

Mufaddal asked: What is your opinion about the following verse:

وَإِذَا الْمَوْؤُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ {8} بِأَيِّ ذَنبٍ قُتِلَتْ

***“And when the female infant buried alive is asked for what sin she
was killed…” (Surah Takwir 81:8-9)***

Then the Imam said: O Mufaddal, by Allah, ‘Mawaddat’ means Mohsin and
you must regard as a liar anyone who says to the contrary.

Mufaddal asked: My master, what will happen after that?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: After that Lady Fatima (s.a.) will
say: O Allah, fulfill Your promise and decide between me and those who
oppressed me, usurped by rights and forced to me to lament each of my
child.

Upon these words, all those who inhabit the seven heavens, the carriers
of Arsh and all those who reside in space and the inhabitants of the
earth and below the surface of the earth will all begin to lament and
wail to the Almighty Allah.

After that those who had oppressed and killed us and those who were
pleased at our oppression, will on that day be killed a thousand times.
On the contrary those who were killed in the way of Allah; there will no
death for them. As the Almighty Allah has said:

وَلاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أَمْوَاتًا بَلْ
أَحْيَاء عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ {169} فَرِحِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمُ
اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ وَيَسْتَبْشِرُونَ بِالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَلْحَقُواْ بِهِم
مِّنْ خَلْفِهِمْ أَلاَّ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ

***“And reckon not those who are killed in Allah’s way as dead; nay,
they are alive (and) are provided sustenance from their Lord; rejoicing
in what Allah has given them out of His grace and they rejoice for the
sake of those who, (being left) behind them, have not yet joined them,
that they shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve.” (Surah Aale Imran
3:169-170)***

Mufaddal asked: My master, but some of your Shia do not believe in the
Rajat of you all?

He replied: Even though they have heard the statement of my grandfather
and all the Imams about this:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَى دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ
</p>

***“And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer
chastisement before the greater chastisement…” (Surah Sajdah 32:21)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: In the following verse, the nearer
chastisement implies the chastisement during Rajat. And the greater
chastisement is the chastisement in which the earth and the heavens will
change.

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ وَبَرَزُواْ
للّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ
</p>

***“On the day when the earth shall be changed into a different earth,
and the heavens (as well), and they shall come forth before Allah, the
One, the Supreme.” (Surah Ibrahim 14:48)***

Mufaddal asked: My master, we know that you Imams are the chosen servant
of the Almighty Allah according to the following verses:

<p dir="rtl">
نَرْفَعُ دَرَجَاتٍ مَّن نَّشَاء
</p>

***“We exalt in dignity whom We please…” (Surah Anam 6:83)***

<p dir="rtl">
اللّهُ أَعْلَمُ حَيْثُ يَجْعَلُ رِسَالَتَهُ
</p>

***“Allah best knows where He places His message.” (Surah Anam 6:124)***

إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ عِمْرَانَ
عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ {33} ذُرِّيَّةً بَعْضُهَا مِن بَعْضٍ وَاللّهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ

***“Surely Allah chose Adam and Nuh and the descendants of Ibrahim and
the descendants of Imran above the nations. Offspring, one of the other;
and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:33-34)***

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, where is our mention in this
Quran?

Mufaddal said: By Allah, this is clear from the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ أَوْلَى النَّاسِ بِإِبْرَاهِيمَ لَلَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ وَهَـذَا
النَّبِيُّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَاللّهُ وَلِيُّ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

***“Most surely the nearest of people to Ibrahim are those who followed
him and this Prophet and those who believe and Allah is the guardian of
the believers.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:68)***

<p dir="rtl">
مِّلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمينَ
</p>

***“…the faith of your father Ibrahim; He named you Muslims…” (Surah
Hajj 22:78)***

<p dir="rtl">
وَاجْنُبْنِي وَبَنِيَّ أَن نَّعْبُدَ الأَصْنَامَ
</p>

***“…and save me and my sons from worshipping idols…” (Surah Ibrahim
14:35)***

And we know that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) did not worship idols
even for a second, neither did he indulge in polytheism. Also the
Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَى إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ قَالَ
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا قَالَ وَمِن ذُرِّيَّتِي قَالَ لاَ
يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

***“And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men. Ibrahim said: And
of my offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust, said He.”
(Surah Baqarah 2:124)***

In this verse ‘covenant’ means Imamate, which will not be given to any
oppressor.

Then he said: O Mufaddal, how do you know that the oppressor will not
get the post of Imamate?

Mufaddal: My lord and master, don’t take my test, I am incapable of it.
Please don’t test my knowledge, because we have received all of it from
you Imams only. We have benefited from you Imams alone.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.): You are right O Mufaddal. The bounty that the
Almighty Allah has bestowed to you regarding this, if you had not
confessed to it, you would not have been like this. Then he said: O
Mufaddal, tell me where in the Holy Quran it is mentioned that infidels
are oppressors?

Mufaddal said: The Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
</p>

***“….and the unbelievers- they are the unjust.” (Surah Baqarah
2:254)***

and it is derived from the verse of Surah Maidah that “….and the
unbelievers- they are the sinners.”

The Almighty Allah will not appoint as Imam, anyone who has sinned and
transgressed.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, you have made a nice
statement. Now tell me in what type of our Rajat do you believe? While
some of our miserly Shia consider that the Almighty Allah will give
material rule and wealth and make Imam Mahdi (a.s.) as the ruler. But
woe unto them, when was our kingdom usurped that it would be restored to
us?

Mufaddal said: Your kingdom has never been usurped from you, because it
is in fact prophethood, messengership, Imamate and successorship.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, if our Shia had pondered on
the Holy Quran, they would never have doubted in our excellence. Have
they not heard the following saying of the Almighty Allah?

<p dir="rtl">
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ
فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

***“And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in
the land, and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs, and to
grant them power in the land, and to make Firon and Haman and their
hosts see from them what they feared.” (Surah Qasas 28:5-6)***

By Allah, O Mufaddal, although the above-mentioned verses were revealed
in connection with Bani Israel, its interpretation is realized through
us. And Firon and Haman are from Bani Teem and Adi (that is Abu Bakr and
Umar).

Mufaddal asked: My master, what do you say regarding Mutah?

He replied: Mutah is lawful and it is proved by the following saying of
the Almighty Allah:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا عَرَّضْتُم بِهِ مِنْ خِطْبَةِ النِّسَاء
أَوْ أَكْنَنتُمْ فِي أَنفُسِكُمْ عَلِمَ اللّهُ أَنَّكُمْ
سَتَذْكُرُونَهُنَّ وَلَـكِن لاَّ تُوَاعِدُوهُنَّ سِرًّا إِلاَّ أَن
تَقُولُواْ قَوْلاً مَّعْرُوفًا
</p>

***“And there is no blame on you respecting that which you speak
indirectly in the asking of (such) women in marriage or keep (the
proposal) concealed within your minds; Allah knows that you will mention
them, but do not give them a promise in secret unless you speak in a
lawful manner…” (Surah Baqarah 2:235)***

Imam (a.s.) said: Mutah is lawful and its evidence is present in the
Holy Quran. The Almighty Allah has made it lawful in His book and the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) has made it lawful for all Muslims on
behalf of the Almighty Allah. Thus it is mentioned:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالْمُحْصَنَاتُ مِنَ النِّسَاء إِلاَّ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُكُمْ
كِتَابَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَأُحِلَّ لَكُم مَّا وَرَاء ذَلِكُمْ أَن
تَبْتَغُواْ بِأَمْوَالِكُم مُّحْصِنِينَ غَيْرَ مُسَافِحِينَ فَمَا
اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً وَلاَ
جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيمَا تَرَاضَيْتُم بِهِ مِن بَعْدِ الْفَرِيضَةِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا حَكِيمًا
</p>

***“And all married women except those whom your right hands possess
(this is) Allah’s ordinance to you, and lawful for you are (all women)
besides those, provided that you seek (them) with your property, taking
(them) in marriage not committing fornication. Then as to those whom you
profit by, give them their dowries as appointed; and there is no blame
on you about what you mutually agree after what is appointed; surely
Allah is Knowing, Wise.” (Surah Nisa 4:24)***

And the difference between the lady who enters Nikah and one who enters
Mutah is that dower is prescribed for the former, whereas for the
latter, it is known as payment.

So all Muslims continued to practice Mutah during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) on the occasions of Hajj etc. during the
whole tenure of Abu Bakr and the first four years of Umar’s reign. But
one day when Umar came to Afra, he found her suckling an infant. He was
highly infuriated and he took the child from her and brought it to the
Masjid and mounted the pulpit. He told them to announce the public
prayers, even though it was not a time for prayers, so all understood
that Umar has summoned them for something important. People gathered
immediately and Umar said:

“O Muhajireen and Ansar, and progeny of Qahtan. Who from among you would
like that your sisters and daughters should give birth to and suckle
children, even though being without husband?”

Some people said: “No, we don’t like such a situation.”

Umar said: “Don’t you know that my sister, who is the daughter of my
mother Khaithama and father, Khattab is also without a husband?”

People said: “Yes, we know that.”

He said: “I had just been to her place and I found this child in her
arms. I adjured her and asked from where she got the child? She said: I
had done Mutah.”

“Now all of you should know that the Mutah, which was lawful during the
time of the Prophet; I prohibit it and I will lash one who denies its
unlawfulness.” So dreading his lashes all accepted the verdict and no
one dared to oppose it. And neither did anyone say that no prophet or
book has come after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and the Holy
Quran, which may abrogate its commands. Therefore we don’t accept your
command in opposition to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the Holy Quran.
On the contrary, all of them accepted it without any objection.

Mufaddal asked: My master, what are the requirements for Mutah?

He replied: There are seventy conditions for it. Anyone who goes against
even one of those conditions has wrought oppression on himself.

Thus, after that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: Then my grandfather, Ali
bin Husain (a.s.) and my father Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) will arise
and

complain to their respected grandfather for the oppression they had to
suffer at the hands of his Ummah.

Then I will stand up and complain to my grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions wrought on me by Mansur Dawaniqi.

Then my son, Musa (a.s.) will stand up and complain to his grandfather,
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions wrought on him
by Harun Rashid.

Then Ali bin Musa (a.s.) will stand up and complain to his grandfather,
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions wrought on him
by Mamun Rashid.

Then Muhammad bin Ali (a.s.) will come forward and complain to his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions
wrought on him by Mamun Rashid.

Then Ali bin Muhammad (a.s.) will come forward and complain to his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions
wrought on him by Mutawakkil.

Then Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) will come forward and complain to his
grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) about the oppressions
wrought on him by Motizbillah.

Then Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will come forward, whose name will be same as
that of my respected grandfather’s and he would be wearing the shirt of
the Prophet, having stains of blood when he was injured in Battle of
Uhad. Angels will be to his left and he will approach and stand before
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and say: O respected grandfather, you had
informed your Ummah about my distinctive qualities and guided the people
about me. You had told them about my name and lineage and even declared
what my Kunniyat will be. But in spite of that your Ummah refused to
believe in me and they were bent on rebellion claiming that he is not
even born yet. Where he was previously and where he is at present? Where
he will be and if even if he had been there previously he must have died
by now. And today he does not even have any descendants.

And if he had been a fact, why the Almighty Allah should have delayed
his reappearance? I continued to observe patience even after hearing
this, but now the Almighty Allah has commanded me to reappear. O
respected grandfather! Upon this, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) will
say:

Praise be to Allah, who made true His promise and made us inherit the
complete earth; and we shall reside wherever we may choose in Paradise
and how good is the reward for the doers of good.

Then he will say:

<p dir="rtl">
إِذَا جَاء نَصْرُ اللَّهِ وَالْفَتْحُ
</p>

***“When there comes the help of Allah and the victory…” (Surah Nasr
110:1)***

And this statement of the Almighty Allah is true:

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَى وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ لِيُظْهِرَهُ
عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***“He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.” (Surah Taubah 9:33; Surah Saff 61:9)***

Then he would recite the following verse:

إِنَّا فَتَحْنَا لَكَ فَتْحًا مُّبِينًا {1} لِيَغْفِرَ لَكَ اللَّهُ مَا
تَقَدَّمَ مِن ذَنبِكَ وَمَا تَأَخَّرَ وَيُتِمَّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ
وَيَهْدِيَكَ صِرَاطًا مُّسْتَقِيمًا {2} وَيَنصُرَكَ اللَّهُ نَصْرًا
عَزِيزًا

***“Surely We have given to you a clear victory. That Allah may forgive
your community their past faults and those to follow and complete His
favor to you and keep you on a right way. And that Allah might help you
with a mighty help.” (Surah Fath 48:1-3)***

Mufaddal asked: My master, what sin of the Prophet is mentioned in this
verse, which the Almighty Allah forgave?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: O Mufaddal, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) had prayed: O Allah, please transfer the burden of the sins
of the former and latter Shia of my brother and descendants successor,
but do not make me ashamed before the prophets and messengers. So the
Almighty Allah transferred the burden to him and then He forgave all the
sins.

Mufaddal said: I continued to weep for along time and then said: My
master, the Almighty Allah has bestowed this mercy to us for the sake of
you, Ahle Bayt (a.s.).

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, you and people like you are
those Shia; but don’t narrate this tradition to low-grade Shia, or they
would leave good deeds and then no one will be able to save them from
divine chastisement, because we are only such as the Almighty Allah has
said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَى وَهُم مِّنْ خَشْيَتِهِ
مُشْفِقُونَ
</p>

***“…and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves, and for
fear of Him they tremble.” (Surah Anbiya 21:28)***

Mufaddal said: My master, the Almighty Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ
</p>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions…” (Surah
9:33)***

But the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) was not able to prevail on all
religions?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said: O Mufaddal, if the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) had prevailed on all religions, there would not have remained
on the earth, either a Jew or a Majusi or Sabean or Christians; neither
these sects would have remained nor any opponent nor doubter, polytheist
or idol worshipper; worshippers of Laat and Uzza or devotees of Sun,
Moon and stars. No fire or idol worshipper. On the contrary what the
Almighty Allah has said is that:

<p dir="rtl">
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ
</p>

***“…that He might cause it to prevail over all religions…” (Surah
Taubah 9:33)***

He has in fact said it with regard to the time of the reappearance of
the Mahdi. It will be the time of Rajat and it was in connection with
that time that the Almighty Allah has said:

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَاتِلُوهُمْ حَتَّى لاَ تَكُونَ فِتْنَةٌ وَيَكُونَ الدِّينُ كُلُّهُ
لِلّه
</p>

***“And fight with them until there is no more persecution and religion
should be only for Allah…” (Surah Anfal 8:39)***

Mufaddal said: I testify that your knowledge is derived from the
knowledge of the Almighty Allah and you possess the kingdom given to you
by Allah; you speak with His permission and act according to His
commands.

Thus after that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) said:

“Then Mahdi will return to Kufa and the sky would rain golden locusts -
just as the Almighty Allah rained them on Prophet Ayyub (a.s.) in Bani
Israel - and on his companions treasures of the earth from gold and
jewels and … he would distribute it.

Mufaddal asked: My master, please tell me what the fate of one of your
Shia will be if he dies indebted to other?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: “The first thing on the agenda of
Mahdi (a.s.) is that he would have it announced openly in all the world:
Pay attention, if from among our Shia, anyone owes anything to anyone,
he must inform us so that it may be repaid. Thus even if a piece of
garlic or a grain of mustard is owed by a Shia, it would be repaid. All
the debts shall be repaid even if they constitute huge amounts of gold
and silver or some other wealth.”

Mufaddal asked: My master, what will happen after that?

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) replied: “Qaim (a.s.), after having conquered
the east and the west, would come to Kufa Masjid and he would raze down
a Masjid that Yazid bin Muawiyah, the cursed one had built after he had
slain Husain bin Ali (a.s.) and also one who makes a Masjid that is not
for Allah is accursed, accursed.”

Mufaddal asked: My master, what will be the tenure of Qaim’s rule?

فَمِنْهُمْ شَقِيٌّ وَسَعِيدٌ {105} فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقُواْ فَفِي
النَّارِ لَهُمْ فِيهَا زَفِيرٌ وَشَهِيقٌ {106} خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا مَا
دَامَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ إِلاَّ مَا شَاء رَبُّكَ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ
فَعَّالٌ لِّمَا يُرِيدُ {107} وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ سُعِدُواْ فَفِي
الْجَنَّةِ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا مَا دَامَتِ السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ إِلاَّ
مَا شَاء رَبُّكَ عَطَاء غَيْرَ مَجْذُوذٍ

***“…then (some) of them shall be unhappy and (others) happy. So as to
those who are unhappy, they shall be in the fire; for them shall be
sighing and groaning in it: Abiding therein so long as the heavens and
the earth endure, except as your Lord please; surely your Lord is the
mighty doer of what He intends. And as to those who are made happy, they
shall be in the garden, abiding in it as long as the heavens and the
earth endure, except as your Lord please; a gift which shall never be
cut off.” (Surah Hud 11:105-108)***

In this verse, the bounty of the Lord would be never-ending and their
rule will never come to an end except by the will of Allah regarding
which no one has any knowledge.

After that Qiyamat will occur that the Almighty Allah has mentioned in
His Book and all praise is for the Almighty Allah and may blessings

continue to descend on Muhammad, who is the Messenger and his purified
progeny and peace be on him and his descendants in excess.


