Publisher’s Note
================

The holy religion of Islam, which was presented to mankind by God
through the last of the divine Prophets, Hadhrat Muhammad (S.A.W.), is a
collection of tenets, ethics, and rulings. Encompassing the Muslims’
practical duties, divine rulings are so comprehensive that they cover
all individual and social aspects of their life. As being devised by the
Exalted Allah, who is fully aware of all the things useful and harmful
to mankind, these rulings are so consolidated that despite centuries
passed they are still capable of responding to the human needs.

Among these divine rulings are those concerning children. As the most
principal source of rulings for the Muslims, the Holy Qur’an has in
various verses dealt with the children’s issues and spoken about their
rights as well as the parents’ duties towards them, in detail.
Furthermore, religious leaders, i.e., the Holy Prophet of Islam
(S.A.W.), and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) have more extensively
addressed these issues and examined them from various perspectives.

What is inferred from the collection of religious teachings is the
justice-oriented approach of Islam towards the child’s rights from the
infancy up to the age of maturity. Accordingly, on one hand, the mother
is obliged to breastfeed her child at least for 21 months; and the
father, on the other hand is committed to provide for the material needs
of the mother and the child in this period in the best way possible.
This approach continues after the suckling period, too; the parents
cooperate with one another to take care of their child and provide for
their various needs so long as they grow old enough to be able to stand
on their own.

Justice-orientedness and attending to the child’s rights is carried on
even through the period when parents are separated. Islam, on one hand,
officially recognizes the mother’s right to take care of her child and,
on the other, emphasizes the father’s right to his guardianship over his
child. However, the child’s right to enjoy the paternal and maternal
affection and kindness is not ignored as well.

**Child Custody in the Islamic Jurisprudence**, written originally in
Persian by the distinguished researcher Saeid Nazari Tavakkoli and
published by The Islamic Research Foundation of Astan Quds Razavi in
cooperation with The Center for Studying and Compiling University Books
in Humanities (SAMT) in 2006, is considered as the first independent
book concerning children’s rights and custody, an issue discussed with a
Qur’anic approach on the basis of jurisprudential, exegetical, and
hadith fundamentals of various Islamic sects.

Holding a PhD in philosophy and besides being familiar with Islamic
jurisprudence, philosophy, and mysticism, the writer has for years been
dealing with jurisprudential issues and is at present among those making
research on bioethics and medical jurisprudence.

The author’s works published by The Islamic Research Foundation of Astan
Quds Razavi are:

1. *Al-Tarqi‘ wa Zar‘ al-A‘dha’ fi Fiqh al-Islami* (Arabic) [Organ
Transplantation in Islamic Jurisprudence] (1380/2001)

2. *Payvand A‘dha’ dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Organ Transplantation
in Islamic Jurisprudence] (1381/2002)

3. *Hidhanat-i Kudakan dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Child Custody in
Islamic Jurisprudence] (1386/2007)

4. *Hadithi Wilayat, Nigarishi Naw dar Ma‘na Shinasi* (Persian)
[*Hadith* of Guardianship, a New Approach to Semantics] (1387/2008)

5. *Guzargah-ha dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Passageways in Islamic
Jurisprudence] (1388/2009)

6. *Hayvanat, Qavanin Himayati wa Hudud- Bahravari dar Islam* (Persian)
[Animals; Protective Rules and Exploitation Limits in Islam] (Islamic
Research Foundation & SAMT Publication – 1388/2009)

7. *Nazariyya Padayish-i Jahan dar Hikmat-i Yamani wa Hikmat-i
Muti‘aliya* (Persian) [Origins of the Universe in Transcendent
Philosophy and the Yamani Wisdom] (1389/2010)

The IRF hopes that the English publication of **Child Custody in the
Islamic Jurisprudence** is an effective step towards introducing the
high capacity of Islamic jurisprudence in solving children’s problems.

**Islamic Research Foundation of Astan Quds Razavi**


