Part One:  A Study on the Legal Issues of Breastfeeding (Ridhaʿ)
================================================================

Legal Standing of Mother's Milk in Islamic Texts
------------------------------------------------

Human need for nutrition begins since the ovary is formed in the
mother's uterus, a need which increases as time passes.

According to the latest scientific achievements, no food is more
nutritious for a baby than mother's milk; as it is the best and most
complete natural food that provides for all its needs.

Mother's milk is a vital liquid that can, with its property of
transformability, meet a baby's needs quite desirably in various
conditions.[^1]

Vitality of mother's milk is in that it contains living components such
as white globules and the substances required for safeguarding and
immunizing the baby against pathogenic infections.

Its transformability is because it is transformed in proportion to the
baby's needs. In the early days of the baby's life, when it needs more
rest, the milk is secreted in a condensed form (colostrum) so that
besides providing the baby's nutritional and immunity needs, it would
befit its stomach size.

### Constituents of Mother's Milk

Mother's milk, with its six nutritional components, is produced and
secreted according to the baby's need.  
 These components are as follows:

#### 1. Protein Substances

As we know there are two kinds of important proteins in the milk of the
mammals: casein with large clots, very hard to digest as befitting
animals' digestive system; proteins with small clots which are easily
digested and their ratio in mother's milk is 80 to 20.

Therefore, the proteins existing in mother's milk is of best quality for
digestion and absorption by the infant and greatly contributes to its
optimal growth and development.

#### 2. Fatty Substances

The fats contained in mother's milk are more of the kind of fats needed
for brain structure, which fully satisfies the infant's nutrition needs.

Furthermore, since mother's milk naturally contains more cholesterol, it
operates the cholesterol metabolism system of the body more desirably.
As a result, the babies who have been breast-fed for over a year would
be protected from the risk of increased cholesterol, blood pressure, and
the related cardiovascular disorders in their middle age; or would be
less prone to such maladies than other people.[^2]

#### 3. Sugary Substances (Hydrocarbons)

Mother's milk synthesis is different from other milks in the amount and
type of sugar matters.  
 The sugar in mother's milk is lactose. This substance increases the
absorption of calcium in the infant's intestine and improves its bone
growth process.

In addition, the lactose in the mother's milk lessens the infant's
constipation, and thus eases its bowel movements.

Also, due to the interaction of this sugar matter with other substances,
the useful microbes of the intestine further grow and multiply and with
the secretion of an acid substance, create an inappropriate environment
for the pathogenic microbes to grow and prevent digestive disorders.

#### 4. Water

The amount of water in mother's milk is sufficient to liquefy with
appropriate density so that the infant would not need extra water.

For this reason during the first five months that the infant is
breastfed only with mother's milk, it does not need water beside the
milk.  
 The amount of water in mother's milk is so much that if the infant is
afflicted with diarrhea for any reason, it will be safe against lowering
of body water (dehydration), which is the major incidence of diarrhea.

#### 5. Vitamins

Mother's milk contains various kinds of vitamins dissolved in water and
fat;[^3] and since this milk is fed fresh and without being heated, it
contains the highest amount of vitamins, for most of these vitamins are
ruined and rendered useless when heated over 60˚ C.

#### 6. Salts and Minerals

The minerals existing in mother's milk are quantitatively compatible
with the infant's urinary system and kidneys.  
 Such salts as calcium, phosphorus, sodium, and potassium exist in
mother's milk to the extent that while providing for bone growth,
nervous system, and other tissues and satisfying the baby's natural
needs, they do not impair the kidneys' discharge of urine.

The minerals existing in mother's milk are of such high quality that
they satisfy the body's structural needs through better absorption.

In any case, the researches indicate that feeding the babies with human
milk would reduce the incidence or intensity of diarrhea, the infection
of lower respiratory system, and the urinary system.  
 In addition, mother's milk is protective against sudden infant death
syndrome, insulin-dependnt sweet diabetes, allergic diseases, and other
chronic digestive problems.[^4]

### The Value of Mother's Milk in Religious Texts

What is perceived from a study of Islamic texts concerning mother's milk
is the very important conclusion that mother's milk is the best and the
most perfect food for a baby, and that nothing, even other natural
animal milks, can be substituted with it.

Besides the attention paid by the jurists in legal texts[^5], the
importance of mother's milk has been brought up in *hadith* sources and
many traditions have stressed its importance in the form of short
statements related to us from the Infallible Imams.  
 The Holy Prophet of Islam (S.A.W.) describes mother's milk as follows:
"There is no better milk for an infant than mother's milk."[^6]
Similarly, Imam ʿAli (A.S.) is quoted as saying: "No milk is more
blessed than mother's milk for the infant."[^7]

Thus, if not saying breastfeeding a baby is an obligation upon the
mother – which we will explain later on – it is, at least, recommendable
and desirable (*musthab*), which is evidenced by its compatibility with
the baby's body.[^8]

### The First Milk (Colostrum)

Colostrum is a condensed liquid with a lemon yellow color which is the
first milk excreted from the breast. This liquid which is called *aghuz*
(in Persian) excretes from the nipples from the second day of childbirth
and continues to excrete for five days; during the next four weeks it
gradually turns to mature milk.

Comparing mother's milk, colostrum contains more minerals and proteins,
which mainly consist of globin, and to less degree, sugar and fat.[^9]

The importance and nutritious-hygienic value of feeding the infants
colostrum has made this issue to be brought up in legal texts and many
jurists have obliged mothers to feed it to their infants, even if they
may demand wages for it, since the baby's survival is dependent upon
eating it.[^10]

In contrast, some people criticize this claim and reject it as untrue,
maintaining that the baby can survive without eating the colostrum, for
it can be breastfed after birth by a woman other than its mother; some
women do not secrete colostrum and it may so happen that breastfeeding
the colostrum would not be possible because of the mother's
illness.[^11]

Paying attention to these points has made some great jurists claim that
the baby's life is dependent upon taking colostrum milk in most but not
all instances; besides, taking this milk makes the baby's body stronger
and more vigorous.[^12]

Regardless of the reasons proposed by the proponents and critics of
obliging mothers to feed their infants colostrum, feeding this milk to
infants is so important that a group of Shiʿa jurists have given *fatwa*
(a legal edict) that if a woman is sentenced to *qisas* (retaliation
punishment) or lapidation (stoning to death) for murder or other
criminal acts, the execution of the punishment should be postponed so
that the mother could feed the infant colostrum, reasoning that the
infant's livelihood is dependent upon the intake of colostrum, as the
infant is often unable to survive without it; hence, observing the
infant's rights and safeguarding his life.[^13]

According to some, the execution of *qisas* can be postponed until the
end of the two-year period of breastfeeding; and if no wet nurse is
found to breastfeed the infant after it had colostrum from its mother,
this postponement is even preferable (*mustahab*), for the infant may
not accept milk other than its mother's.[^14]

This claim is testified by the traditions the Shiʿa transmitters of
*hadith* have related about the way the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and Amir
al-Mu’minin ʿAli (A.S.) have dealt with this issue.[^15]

It is to be mentioned that no specific time is determined in the
religious texts for the legal obligation of feeding the infant
colostrum; although some have limited it to three days.[^16]

### How to Breastfeed the Baby

As the religious dignitaries have recommended, it is preferable
(*mustahab*) for the mother to breastfeed the baby from her both
breasts. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) of Islam said in this respect:
"Allah, the exalted, has placed the infant's daily sustenance in the
mother's two breasts; water in one and food in the other".[^17]
Similarly, Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) said to a woman who was breastfeeding
her two babies at the same time: "Do not feed them from one breast, feed
them from both, as one is water [provides water] and the other
food".[^18]

### Breastfeeding Time

The Holy Qur’an has stressed through several verses on being kind to
one's parents.[^19] Meanwhile, in two *verses*, it has pointed out the
mother's difficulties during pregnancy, the length of pregnancy, and
breastfeeding.

The holy *Surat* *al-Ahqaf* (46), considers the length of pregnancy and
breastfeeding to be thirty months altogether:

 ***﴾We have enjoined man to be kind to his parents. His mother has
carried him in travail, and bore him in travail, and his gestation and
weaning take thirty months﴿.*** ***(46: 15).***

Obviously, if the pregnancy period fluctuates between six to nine months
– as pointed out in some traditions[^20] – the breastfeeding period may
vary between twenty one to twenty four months to sum up to thirty
months.[^21]

It goes without saying that since according to scientific findings and
Islamic instructions concerning the end of pregnancy period, from among
the four choices of six to nine months only three choices, i.e. 6, 7,
and 9 month periods are feasible[^22], therefore the breastfeeding
period may vary between 21, 23, and 24 months.

The variation of breastfeeding period to be between 21 to 24 months –
which of course exceeds one year – can be understood from *aya* 14 of
*Surat Luqman* (31), where the Almighty Allah mentions that weaning a
baby takes place within two years:

***﴾We have enjoined man concerning his parents: His mother carried him
through weakness upon weakness, and his weaning takes two years. Give
thanks to Me and to your parents. To Me is the return.﴿***
***(31:14).***

The Length of Breastfeeding
---------------------------

Given the above explanations, the length of a mother's breastfeeding her
baby is not to be less than twenty months, as according to what is
related by ʿAbd al-Wahhab b. al-Sabah and Sumaʿa[^23], Imam al-Sadiq
(A.S.) asserts, using the two words *fardh* (obligation) and *jawr*
(wrong), that the mother is obliged to breastfeed her baby for twenty
one months and if she contents herself with less than that, she has
wronged her baby.[^24]

Then, claiming that the minimum length of breastfeeding is not distinct
and depends on the baby's need and the impact on its health[^25], is
totally baseless.

Of course, it is clear that, according to the practical principle of
exemption, the mother has no obligation to breastfeed her baby more than
this length of time[^26], and if she does – as it is asserted in the
traditions related by Ashʿari and Halabi[^27] – the father does not have
to pay for the surplus of the twenty one months of breastfeeding[^28],
unless the baby is in need of its mother's milk further than that for a
specific reason such as illness, in which case the father is obliged to
pay her for the whole period of breastfeeding, as this is part of the
baby's necessary expenditure which is upon the father to pay.[^29]

Mother's Duties in Breastfeeding Period
---------------------------------------

In the two verses[^30] explained in previous chapter, it was only stated
that the total sum of pregnancy and breastfeeding periods are thirty
months and breastfeeding is done within two years, without giving any
further explanation as to how it is done.

However, the Holy Qur’an, as the major and most important source of
Islamic legislation, examines in detail in two other verses[^31] the
issue of breastfeeding the infant – of course, while stating the
situation of the women who have separated from their husbands.

The Qur’an's silence in stating the ordinances for breastfeeding a baby
and the way the three members of family, i.e., father, mother, and the
child are related, while a matrimonial relationship is established
between the parents, strikes the mind that the clarity of the ordinance
for this issue was the reason for not bringing it up.

The way the parents treat their children, both during infancy and after
that, seems to be so self-evident that there is no need to be stated;
however, it is in divorce and when the marriage bond is for any reason
broken that raising this issue becomes seriously necessary.

From verse 227 of *Surat al-Baqarah* onward, the Qur'an has examined the
issue of divorce. In these verses such issues as divorce permit, *ʿidda*
(waiting period after divorce), husbands' priority in returning to their
ex-wife, times of divorce, the way to treat divorced women during the
*ʿidda* period and after that are explained.

The question remains to be raised that if a man divorces his wife while
having a suckling baby or being pregnant, what obligations are upon him
toward his wife and baby. What has the mother to do in this situation?

God has answered this question and said about the women with a suckling
baby who have separated from their husbands. He says:

***﴾Mothers shall breastfeed their children for two full years, that for
such as desire to complete the breastfeeding and on the father shall be
their maintenance and clothing, in accordance with honorable norms. No
soul is to be tasked except according to its capacity: neither the
mother shall be made to suffer harm on her child's account, nor the
father because of his child, and on the [father's] heir devolve [duties
and rights] similar to that. And, if the couple desire to wean, with
mutual consent and consultation, there will be no sin upon them. And if
you want to have your children wet nursed, there will be no sin upon you
so long as you pay what you give in accordance with honorable norms, and
be wary of Allah, and know that Allah sees best what you do.﴿*** ***(2:
233).***

This verse contains several issues as follows, respectively:
breastfeeding the baby for two full years; providing divorced mother
with her maintenance during breastfeeding period; Divine tasks as being
proportionate to human capacity; forbidding fathers to inflict harm on
mothers, or mothers on fathers, and both on children. As well as the
responsibility of the father's heir after his death to provide for
mother's maintenance; permission to wean the child with mutual consent
and consultation by both parents; permission to have one's children wet
nursed in accordance with their financial rights; necessity of being
wary of Allah; Allah's mastery over all human actions.

Similarly, concerning the women who get divorced from their husbands in
their pregnancy, Allah says:

***﴾House them where you live, in accordance with your means, and do not
harass them to put them in straits, and should they be pregnant,
maintain them until they deliver. Then, if they breastfeed [the baby]
for you, give them their wages and consult together honorably; but if
you make things difficult for each other, then another woman will
breastfeed [the baby] for him. Let the affluent man spend out of his
affluence, and let he whose provision has been tightened spend out of
what Allah has given him. Allah does not task any soul except [according
to] what He has given it. Allah will bring about ease after
hardship.﴿*** ***(65:6-7).***

This verse has examined within nine statements the rulings concerning
the residence of the divorced women during their *ʿidda* period. After
separation from their husbands and the way their ex-husbands are to
treat them, providing a pregnant woman with her living expenses after
separating from her husband until delivery. Paying wages to mothers
during their breastfeeding period, the amount of the payment and their
interrelation after separation.

Since issues relating to the residence of the divorced women during
their *ʿidda* period after divorce as well as their financial problems
in this period are beyond the main framework of the present book, we
avoid examining the details, and suffice to state that according to the
Qur’an, the man is obliged to provide his divorced wife with residence
during the time she passes her *ʿidda* period; similarly, if she is
pregnant, he has to provide her with her living expenses until delivery.

However, the main theme of our discussion includes the fourth statement
of the above verse onward in which such issues as paying mothers for
breastfeeding during the period after separation and the way the man and
woman interrelate are examined.

The Holy Qur’an has separately discussed the issues concerning baby
breastfeeding and the parents' duties during the time after their
separation, depending on whether it is before or after the childbirth.
However, there are many content similarities among the details of these
two subjects, that we will bring up these details according to their
content and examine the statements of the above two verses as per our
subject of discourse.

Mother's Duties during Breastfeeding Period
-------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an has dealt with mothers' duties during the breastfeeding
period in the following statement: ﴾Mothers shall breastfeed their
children for two full years, that for such as desire to complete the
breastfeeding﴿. Since the study of legal rulings deduced from this
statement is based on correct understanding of the meaning of the terms
used in it, we will follow the juridical discourses of this section
while assessing the meaning of the terms.

The term *walidat* is the plural form of *walida*. *Walida* and *umm*
are both used in Arabic as meaning mother, with the difference that
*walida* is used for a woman who has given birth to a child, but *umm*
is used for grandmother, too[^32]; and as the former is characterized by
childbirth, it is normally associated with breastfeeding and
infancy.[^33]

*Walidat* apparently includes all women who have given birth to their
children and breastfeed them. In addition, it seems to mean only the
women who have separated from their husbands and have infants[^34], for
there must be a logical relation between this verse and the verses
before and after that as well as a semantic consistency within the
statements of the verse itself.

There are statements in this verse, which are definitely about divorced
women and cannot include all women. For example, as agreed by all
interpreters, the statement ﴾on the father shall be their maintenance
and clothing﴿ merely concerns the women who have separated from their
husbands, for the obligation of paying maintenance and providing the
woman with her expenses, given the continuance of matrimony, is because
of the continuing marriage bond, rather than for breastfeeding. In other
words, provision of a woman's expenses is upon her husband, whether she
is breastfeeding or not.

On the other hand, in *rizquhunna* (their maintenance) and
*kiswatuhunna* (their clothing), the pronoun *hunna* (their) refers to
*alwalidat* (mothers). The conformity between the pronoun and its
antecedent denote the point that the same women whose provision of
maintenance and clothing during breastfeeding period is upon their
husbands, are obliged to breastfeed their children.

In other words, if this verse includes all mothers, there must be two
portions of maintenance for the women who have separated from their
husbands and at the same time breastfeed their babies. One including the
expenses whose provision is undertaken by the husband through wedlock,
whether breastfeeding is involved or not, and the second, the expenses
whose provision is obligatory for the husbands as mandated by the verse
and because of breastfeeding, whereas women in marriage bond deserve to
receive only one portion of maintenance.[^35]

*Yurdhiʿna* is the present tense from the root *radhaʿa*, meaning
breastfeeding from breast.[^36] Using this word denotes the point that
the mother should directly undertake breastfeeding her baby, and feeding
the baby with animal or industrial milk does not rule out her duty.

Although *yurdhiʿna* is a present tense verb, and a verb signifies an
action or appearance of an attribute or state in the present or future,
there is no doubt the word *yurdhiʿna* in this verse could not have been
used as a statement, since there are mothers who do not breastfeed their
babies.[^37] For this reason, in spite of its appearance as statement,
it is used as imperative and demanding, which means "mothers have to (it
is obligatory for mothers to) breastfeed their babies."[^38]

It is worth mentioning that even those believing that the verb
*yurdhiʿna* does not denote the obligation of breastfeeding, they regard
mother's breastfeeding her baby as obligatory in several cases due to
the necessity of saving the baby's life.

1. The baby would accept no breasts other than its mother's,  
 2. The baby would survive only with its mother's milk and no other milk
would befit it,  
 3. No one other than its mother would be around to breastfeed it, and  
 4. The baby does not have a father, it does not have any capital to pay
for the mother's wage, and no one else is ready to provide it.[^39]

Although the mother is obliged to breastfeed her baby only for 21
months, but if in time of separation her ex-husband wants her to
complete the breastfeeding period, the mother has to feed her baby up to
maximum twenty four months (two full years).

The necessity of completing the breastfeeding period to twenty-four
months can be implied from the phrase ﴾for two full years, that for such
as desire to complete the breastfeeding ﴿because:

First: what is intended by ﴾two full years﴿ is that the two years is not
to be calculated approximately or with compromise; rather, care must be
taken that the mother breastfeed her baby for two full years (twenty
four months).[^40] On the other hand, the longest time for a baby to be
breastfed and deemed as helpful is two years, after which the baby's
breastfeeding is no longer of any benefit to the baby.[^41]

Accordingly, it is obvious that a ruling as to the necessity of
breastfeeding a baby up to two full years is not exclusive to the
premature babies (born at 26 weeks) or whose parents are in
dispute[^42]; rather, it includes all children and it means that twenty
four months is the maximum acceptable time for breastfeeding, without
the pregnancy period having any impact on this ruling.[^43]

Second: although, according to the statement ﴾that for such as desire to
complete the breastfeeding﴿ , the completion of breastfeeding period is
conditional on someone's demanding the full breastfeeding period, but
this one is not intended to be the mother herself; rather, this one is
intended to be the father. Therefore, if the father provides for the
required expenses of breastfeeding the baby up to two years, the mother
is obliged to complete the breastfeeding period.[^44]

**Conclusion**: Comparing the content of the verse ﴾Mothers shall
breastfeed their children for two full years, that for such as desire to
complete the breastfeeding ﴿with the content of the verse ***﴾His***
***mother carried him through weakness upon weakness, and his weaning
takes two years.﴿***[^45] and ***﴾and his gestation and weaning take
thirty months*** ***﴿,***[^46] we conclude that the breastfeeding period
varies between twenty one to twenty four months. Since the total length
of pregnancy and breastfeeding is thirty months and the pregnancy period
varies between six to nine months.

Twenty one months is the least length of time for breastfeeding that the
mother is obliged to complete; however, its completion to twenty months
during the parents' separation is upon the mother only when the father
demands it from the mother (of his baby) while paying for her expenses.
Thus, the obligation for completion of breastfeeding period is a
conditional obligation rather than an absolute one.[^47]

Obviously, legal obligation of completing the breastfeeding period in
case of the father's demand is reconcilable with the non-permissibility
of forcing the mother to breastfeeding, which is understood from
Sulayman b. Dawud b. Minqari’s tradition and other evidences[^48] and
over which there is consensus by the Sunni and Shiʿa jurists[^49]; for,
there is no correlation between the legal obligation of an action and
the coercion to perform it.

On the other hand, although the mother is legally obliged to breastfeed
her baby for twenty months, it is preferable for the mother to complete
the breastfeeding period up to twenty-four months to the benefit of the
baby.[^50]

Father's Duties during Breastfeeding period
-------------------------------------------

### Provision of the Mother's Expenses during Breastfeeding Period

After stating the divorced mothers' duties concerning the completion of
breastfeeding period, God proceeds to state their husbands' reciprocal
duties.

With the phrasing ***﴾and on the father shall be their maintenance and
clothing, in accordance with honorable norms﴿***, the Holy Qur’an points
out that the baby's father is legally obliged to provide his ex-wife's
maintenance and clothing during the breastfeeding period.

In the above verse (Q. 2: 233), God has made use of the [Arabic] phrase
*al-mawludi lahu* (i.e., the one for whom the baby has been born)
instead of the word father in order to show that the payment of the
expenses of breastfeeding during the period after separation is upon the
father. Because the baby had been born for his sake and as, he had
wished.[^51]  
 The Holy Qur’an assigns responsibility for the provision of two things
to the father during the breastfeeding period: *rizq* (maintenance,
sustenance) and *kiswa* (clothing).

Although the term *rizq* is translated as sufficient food[^52], and
*kiswa* as clothing,[^53] it seems that *rizq* is not restricted to food
alone but includes all the things that the mother requires during her
breastfeeding period.[^54] Therefore, the father is obliged to provide
the mother with all her requirements during the breastfeeding period
after separation.[^55]

Provision of mother's needs during the breastfeeding period is referred
to as wage in verse 6 of *Surat al-Talaq*; thus, it may be concluded
that what is meant by the breastfeeding wages for the mother is the
provision of her requirements during breastfeeding period.[^56]
Similarly, it can be claimed that the wage that the father pays to his
ex-wife for breastfeeding has to be so much as it provides her food and
clothing (requirements).[^57]

Of course, the change of the Qur’an tone from "maintenance [food] and
clothing" to "wages" is perhaps because if the divorce comes through
before childbirth, the woman's *ʿidda* period will be over once
delivered and there will remain no relationship between the man and the
woman. However, if the divorce is after the childbirth, the matrimonial
relation between the man and the women will remain unbroken – however
weakened – until the *ʿidda* period is over. As we explained before, the
woman cannot ask for wages for breastfeeding her baby while matrimonial
relation is still valid; rather, it is incumbent upon the husband to
provide his wife with food and clothing.

Now that the father is obliged to provide the mother's expenses during
the breastfeeding period, the question arises that how much the amount
of these expenses will be. To answer this question, the Qur’an uses the
phrase *bi al-maʿruf* (in accordance with honorable norms).

There are various probabilities as to what is meant by *maʿruf,* which
can be divided into two general categories: 1. how to pay, 2. and how
much to pay.

According to the first probability, the father has to pay for his
ex-wife's requirements in a decent way during the breastfeeding period.
According to the second probability, however, the amount of the father's
payment to his ex-wife during that period has to be honorable; in such a
case, there are three probabilities: proportion to the mother's social
status, proportion to the father's financial ability, sufficiency of the
amount.[^58]

It seems that the criterion for determining *maʿruf* is the financial
power and potential of the baby's father and does not have anything to
do with the mother's social status,[^59] since the Qur’an continues to
emphasize that God does not task man except according to his capacity,
***﴾No soul is to be tasked except according to its
capacity﴿***[^60]***.*** The best witness to the truth of the above is
what God has said in *Surat al-Talaq* concerning *maʿruf*:

***﴾Then, if they breastfeed [the baby] for you, give them their wages
and consult together honorably… Let the affluent man spend out of his
affluence, and let he whose provision has been tightened spend out of
what Allah has given him. Allah does not task any soul except [according
to] what He has given it. Allah will bring about ease after
hardship.﴿*** ***(65: 6-7).***

### Breastfeeding Wage

As mentioned before, God has brought up in *Surat al-Talaq* the issue of
giving wages to breastfeeding mothers, ﴾Then, if they suckle [the baby]
for you, give them their wages﴿.

Therefore, it is noteworthy that the Qur’an talks about giving wages to
mothers for breastfeeding when all matrimonial bonds are broken and
there would be no difference between her and other women. However, while
the woman is still in her *ʿidda* period and there are some signs of
matrimony remained, the Qur’an does not say anything about wages, but
suffices to mention the provision of food and clothing, which we refer
to in legal convention as *nafaqa* (maintenance or alimony). This was of
course what the man as a husband, had to provide for even if no divorce
were to come through.[^61]

Perhaps it can be understood from this difference in phrasing that the
institution of marriage is too sacred to use such terms as wages, which
in itself denotes a kind of wage earning and a master-servant
relationship, in regulating the financial relationship between the man
and the woman.

In any case, one of the issues discussed in Islamic law is establishment
of a leasehold relationship between the wife and the husband concerning
breastfeeding their baby.

Some Sunni jurists such as Shafiʿi and Ahmad b. Hanbal, as well as
Shaykh Tusi from among the Shiʿa jurists believe that no wage contract
is made between the wife and the husband in relation to breastfeeding.
Moreover, the wife cannot demand wages for breastfeeding her baby. That
is because the husband is the beneficiary of his matrimonial relation to
his wife and there is no reason for receiving wages. The permissibility
of a leasehold relationship between a woman and someone other than her
husband concerning breastfeeding (i.e., as a wet nurse) is no reason for
the existence of this relationship between she and her husband; and
finally, receiving wages is against the requirements of marriage
contract.[^62]

In contrast, most of the Shiʿa jurists believe that a contract for
breastfeeding is made between the wife and the husband and the former
can demand wages for breastfeeding her baby. In order to prove it, they
provided evidence from the verses of the Qur’an, the correlation between
the permissibility of contract with one's wife and the permissibility of
contract with other people, and the husband's being undeserved of all
his wife's benefits.[^63]

To our opinion, none of the previous reasons denies or proves the
permissibility of establishing a leasehold relationship between the wife
and the husband; therefore, lacking the verbal signification, we have to
turn to practical principles.

If we doubt about the permissibility of hiring the mother for
breastfeeding her own baby, the principle of lawfulness denotes the
permissibility of such a deal, since on one hand, the father pays the
wages, and on the other hand, the mother breastfeed her own baby[^64];
just as the principle of soundness of transactions denotes the soundness
and the necessity for each party to observe the content of such a
transaction.

Moreover, if we doubt that, in case of the mother's one-sided request
for wages, whether the father is obliged to pay for it or not, the
principle of non-necessity and his exemption from obligation suggests
that the father is not committed to pay wages.

Thus, two issues should not be confused with each other; one is the
parents' consent for paying and receiving wages while marriage bond is
still established between them; the other is the father's obligation to
pay wages when the mother makes breastfeeding her baby conditional on
receiving wages.

Reconciliation between these two principles prompts us to say that if
the father agrees on such a contract, the deal is sound and the two
parties are obliged to fulfill their commitments, but the father cannot
be forced to pay wages.

Obviously, if the mother receives wages from her husband for
breastfeeding her own baby, she is not permitted to feed the baby with
supplementary food or animal milk instead of giving it milk from her own
breasts[^65]. Since she is not permitted to have the baby wet nursed by
another woman (i.e., a foster suckling-mother), unless the father
permits her to do so.[^66]

As it was said, according to the Qur’anic ***statement*** ***﴾Then, if
they breastfeed [the baby] for you, give them their wages*** ***﴿,***
the father of the baby is committed to pay the mother's wage during
their separation period, and if the father dies, the expense is to be
paid for from the baby's share of inheritance.[^67] Moreover, the
possibility that the provision of expenses for the breastfeeding would
lie with the baby (even if the father were alive) and is paid from the
baby's assets[^68], is incorrect.

In addition, the father is obliged to pay for the mother's wage once she
undertakes to breastfeed the baby,[^69] and there is no need for the
breastfeeding period to end – as al-Jassas claims[^70] – so that the
mother may receive her wage.

Determining the amount of the mother's wage is a matter of agreement,
too, which depends on the mutual consent. Restricting it to the wage
that the other women receive for this task in equal conditions (*ujrat
al-mithl* – fair equivalent wage)[^71] is incorrect, because the amount
of breastfeeding wage is subject to the father's financial capability.

In order to prove this issue, besides the verse ***﴾but if you make
things difficult for each other, then another woman will breastfeed [the
baby] for him﴿,***[^72] which regards the father's being in dire straits
as the criterion for permitting the baby to be left with the foster
suckling-mother. We can rely on the content of traditions related by
Dawud b. Husayn, Kanani, Abi al-ʿAbbas, and Halabi[^73], for the wage
which the mother is demanding is less than, more than, or equal to the
fair equivalent wage.[^74]

In these traditions, two issues are emphasized explicitly or implicitly:
permissibility of taking the baby from the mother in case of asking for
higher wage and the mother's priority in breastfeeding her baby if she
does not ask for higher wage.[^75] Therefore, taking the baby from the
mother and leaving it with a foster suckling-mother when the former asks
for a higher wage is permissible, whether the amount she is demanding is
equal to the fair equivalent wage, lower, or higher than that. On the
other hand, the mother is given priority over other women for
breastfeeding her baby in case she receives equal wage and does not
demand a higher wage than they do.[^76]

Reciprocal Duties of Parents during the Breastfeeding Period
------------------------------------------------------------

Through the statement ﴾neither the mother shall be made to suffer harm
on her child's account, nor the father on account of his child﴿ the
Qur’an specifies that the mother should complete the breastfeeding
period upon the father's demand and the father, in return, should
undertake her living expenses during this period. The parents'
separation should not be a means to harming each other or their child.

This part of the verse is divided into two independent parts, i.e. *la
tudharra walidatun bi waladiha* (neither the mother shall be made to
suffer harm on her child's account), and *la tudharra mawludun lahu bi
waladihi* (nor the father shall be made to suffer harm because of his
child). The verb *tudharr* is read in two ways: *la tudharru* in the
active form and *la tudharra* in the passive form, due to which in the
former case the two words *walidatun* and *mawludun lahu* are subjects
(*faʿil*) and in the latter case they are the subject of the passive
(*na’ib faʿil*), therefore, two possibilities are perceived in its
meaning:

**First, children may suffer because of their parents**. Accordingly,
God undertakes to prevent the parents from harming their children,
saying: the mother must not harm her child and the father must not do,
either.[^77]

Mother's harming her own child is imaginable in several ways, such as
refraining from breastfeeding the child, which can be due to fury
against the father and negligence in taking care of the child's needs
such as cleaning, feeding, and clothing.[^78]

Father's harming his child can be done in various forms, such as
negligence or delay in paying the child's living expenses, unduly
separating the child from the mother and leaving it with another
person.[^79]

**Second, the parents may suffer on each other's account**. Experience
has shown that in many cases that dispute and conflict arises between
the wife and the husband, each one of them tries to harm the other by
taking the child as a means to this end; in the meantime, the only one
who suffers most is the child.

If we accept this possibility in the meaning of the Qur’anic verse, it
shows that the Qur’an is trying to state that the parents should not try
to harm each other by using their child as bait.[^80]

Father's harming the mother may be through such acts as emotional
instigation of the mother by making her breastfeed their baby without
paying for her living expenses, depriving her of seeing and taking care
of her baby, taking the baby away from her in order to revenge her and
leaving it with someone else for breastfeeding, as well as preventing
her from breastfeeding the baby while she is indeed able to breastfeed
the baby herself. Obviously, in the above cases, the first one to be
harmed is the baby.[^81]

On the other hand, since the mother is not able to persecute the father
directly, she tries to achieve her goal by using the baby as bait
throughout one of the following ways. Through emotional provocation of
the father making him to pay more for her breastfeeding the baby;
preventing the father from seeing his baby; avoiding to breastfeed the
baby and abandoning the baby to its father.[^82]

Although some believe that the verse ﴾neither the mother shall be made
to suffer harm on her child's account, nor the father on account of his
child﴿ encompasses both possibilities[^83], the statement can prohibit
harming the baby or the wife in itself and out of the context of the
verse as a general law whether the verb is in the active or passive form
– as according to some traditions, shunning from intercourse by the wife
or the husband during pregnancy is an evidence of mutual harming of both
husband and the wife.[^84]

To our opinion, this phrase, given the sentences before and after this
statement, suggests the prohibition of the wife and the husband from
harming one another after separation and during the breastfeeding
period. The duties of the wife and the husband in this period should not
turn into means for taking revenge from each other, the revenge that due
to the breaking of marital relation would occur just through their
mediating link, namely their child.[^85]

Therefore, the verb *la tudharru* is used in the passive form and
concerns the prohibition of the ex-couple harming each other via their
child rather than the parents directly damaging their child; although,
in its own place, the latter can be true.

Duties of the Father's Successors during the Breastfeeding Period
-----------------------------------------------------------------

With the clarification of the duties of both the parents toward their
child during the period after separation and also their reciprocal
duties toward each other, the question remains to be answered that if
the father dies during the breastfeeding period, who would take on his
duty to pay for the mother's wage.

Stating ﴾and on the [father's] heir devolves [duties and rights] similar
to that﴿, the Qur’an intends to say that the father's duties during the
baby's breastfeeding period are transferred over to his heir.  
 For what is meant by heir (*warith*) different possibilities have been
considered: the father's heir, the child's father, either of the mother
or the father when the other is dead, the heir to each of the father or
the mother, the child's future heirs, the child itself, the child's
executor (*wasi*).[^86]

Despite what some sources have claimed[^87], there are different
possibilities as to what is meant by *mithl-i dhalik* (similar to that):
payment of the mother's maintenance or alimony (*nafaqa*), not
inflicting any harm, provision of the mother's expenses, and having the
child wet nursed.[^88]

To our opinion, what “heir” means in this statement is the heir to the
father and as this statement refers to the two statements before it, it
contains two issues of providing the mother's maintenance (daily
sustenance and clothing) and not inflicting any harm on her.

Therefore, the father's heirs are obliged not to inflict any harm on the
mother by means of her child, just as they have to provide for her food
and clothes in a decent way.

It is clear, of course, that the holy verse proposes the transfer of the
father's duties to his heirs, but it is silent about the source of
provision and payment of the mother's maintenance.[^89] Thus, the
father's heirs do not need to provide for the baby's expenses during the
breastfeeding period from their own property; rather, either they
provide the related expenses from the father's properties (shared among
the heirs) – should we say these expenses are regarded as among his
debts – or from the baby's possessions.[^90]

Such a meaning of the statement ﴾and on the [father's] heir devolve
[duties and rights] similar to that﴿ can also be understood from the
traditions related from the Infallible Household of the Prophet
(S.A.W.). Since some of these traditions have referred to the issue of
alimony[^91], to the effect that as the father undertakes the
responsibility of providing for the mother's maintenance during the
breastfeeding period, after his death, this responsibility will be
transferred to his heir.

However, not to the effect that the father's heirs provide for the
mother's maintenance during the breastfeeding period from their own
property like what is true regarding the father's executor in relation
to the minor children of the demised father.[^92] Moreover, it is for
the same reason that it is asserted in the tradition related by Muhammad
b. Abi ʿUmayr and Ibn Abi Yaʿfur that this maintenance is paid from the
baby's own share of inheritance.[^93]

In some traditions the father and the heir in the statement ﴾and on the
[father's] heir devolve [duties and rights] similar to that ﴿are taken
to be the same with respect to the statement before that, i.e., ﴾neither
the mother shall be made to suffer harm on her child's account, nor the
father on account of his child [^94].﴿

Careful examination of this group of traditions would clearly reveal
that what is intended by the Words of Allah is preventing the father's
heirs from persecuting the mother and her child. These persecutions may
occur in various forms in their mental and financial affairs such as
taking away the child from her mother, failure to give the child's share
of inheritance in due time, etc. The mother’s separation from the
child’s father before his death lays the ground for numerous challenges
between the father's family and heirs, i.e., grandfather, grandmother,
brothers, and sisters on one side and his ex-wife (the child's mother)
on the other.

The great Qur’an interpreter, ʿAli b. Ibrahim Qummi, comments on the
statement ﴾and on the [father's] heir devolve [duties and rights]
similar to that﴿: that “it means if a man dies and leaves behind a
suckling baby, it is not befitting the heirs to cut down the baby's
maintenance cost; rather, it is best to increase it generously."[^95]

How to Wean the Baby
--------------------

So far we explained that the mother is obliged to breastfeed her baby up
to twenty one months; and in case she has separated from her husband, if
her ex-husband wants her to complete the breastfeeding period, she is
obliged to do so. Anyhow, the father is obliged, in return and as per
his capacity, to provide for her maintenance during this period, and if
he dies, his heirs are responsible to provide for the mother's living
expenses during this period.

Now, the question remains to be answered that if the baby is to be
weaned, who should make the decision in this respect.

The Holy Qur’an replies the above question as follows:

***﴾And if the couple desire to wean, with mutual consent and
consultation, there will be no sin upon them.﴿*** ***(2:233).***

There are two possibilities as to which two people's desire matters:
that of the father and mother[^96] or the heir and the mother[^97]; what
is meant by *fisal* (which means both separating and weaning)[^98] in
the above verse, is either separating the baby from its paternal next of
kin, or simply weaning.[^99]  
 Weaning the baby could mean that the baby starts eating food and is not
being fed with milk or simply weaned from mother's milk, although it may
be left with a foster suckling-mother to be breastfed.[^100]

The term *fisal* in the above verse seems to mean *fitam*, and what is
meant by *fitam*, as it is related in traditions, is weaning the baby
from the mother's milk before the ending of two years (i.e., twenty-four
months).[^101] Since after two years there remains no obligation on
anyone for breastfeeding to talk about separation[^102], for this reason
claiming that the issue in question either is weaning the baby from
milk, before or after two years, would be incorrect.

Having brought up the issue of weaning the baby, the Qur’an emphasizes,
by stating ﴾with mutual consent and consultation﴿ that this weaning is
to be consented and consulted by both parents.

The requirement of the consent of the father and the mother (the heir
and the mother) is a factor restraining unilateral decision of each one
of them on weaning the baby before two years.[^103]

Consultation and conferring, from the viewpoint of the Qur’an, is among
the qualifications for weaning the baby. Nevertheless, whom should be
conferred, the baby's parents or the parents and other people?

The question arises since, when talking of consent (*taradhin*), Allah
limits its range of application to the baby's father and mother by using
the adverb *minhuma* (each one of them, translated here as mutual) and
thus deems consent of others as unnecessary; however, when talking of
consultation (*tashawurin*), He uses it without any adverb.

Some believe that not mentioning the adverb *minhuma* for consultation
is simply due to the literary structure of the Arabic language, and for
this reason, the parents can wean their baby after consent and
consultation with each other.

In contrast, some believe that not mentioning the adverb *minhuma* for
consultation suggests that consultation is not restricted to the parents
alone, rather it includes child nutrition specialists (specialized
physicians), which indicates the significant role of conferring with
specialists in the field of Islamic legislation.

Although there seems to be no basic difference between these two views,
as the parents' consultation with one another is for the purpose of
recognition of their own baby's interests and if they are not in a
position to recognize it, they would naturally refer to child nutrition
specialists and experts.

Obviously, in both cases, whether the consulted party is the parent or
another person, the consultation has to be directed towards the child's
interests and benefits.[^104]

Consultation following consent indicates that any agreement that is
reached between the parents in this respect is not sufficient by itself.
Since there is the possibility that both of them are benefiting from
this agreement the father wishes to shun the financial burden, and the
mother would like to live her personal life and get rid of the child's
attachment to her.

Thus, consent alone is not enough; rather, this consent has to be for
the child's interests, which will be obtained through consultation to
safeguard the child from any harm.[^105]

It is clearly implied from what was said that weaning the baby needs to
be consented by both parents and no one's view is preferable to the
other. Therefore, giving priority to the mother in this respect and the
father's being subject to the mother does not have a Qur’anic basis.
However, it should be noted that the parents' consent and consultation
for weaning the baby is permissible only after the baby has been
breastfed for twenty one months, as it was stated before that observing
the least length of time for breastfeeding the baby is obligatory.
Therefore, *fisal* – as some claim[^106] - cannot occur without time
limit, rather it is applicable within the complementary period, which is
between twenty one to twenty four months.[^107]

Leaving the Baby with a Foster Suckling-Mother
----------------------------------------------

Suckling the baby is among the problems of the children's life we face
in almost all societies.  
 There is no doubt that mother's milk is the best food for the child;
however, despite the importance of this issue, there are mothers who for
some problems are not able to breastfeed their child, or if they are,
they are not willing to do so.

The easiest way to solve this problem, which has since long ago been
pursued by many, is to find a substitute for the mother and to leave the
baby with the woman who is able to breastfeed.  
 Taking care in choosing the suckling foster mother has been greatly
emphasized in some Islamic sources, since breastfeeding the baby,
besides providing for its nutritional needs, can have profound impact on
its mind and soul:

"Look who is breastfeeding your baby, as the baby nourishes with that
[milk]."[^108]

"As you select a woman for marriage, so also select women for
breastfeeding your babies, for breastfeeding changes natural
disposition.[^109]

Therefore, it is quite natural that for selecting a foster
suckling-mother, besides the ability to breastfeed, the legislator deems
the other factors such as mental and physical health, chastity, and even
outward beauty as effective:

"I asked the Imam (A.S.) whether it is appropriate to choose an
adulterous woman for breastfeeding my child. The Imam (A.S.) said:
Neither she nor her daughter is appropriate for such a task."[^110]

"Do not choose a feeble-minded or bleary-eyed woman for breastfeeding
your child, as milk transfers (the features)."[^111]

"Choose a good-looking woman for breastfeeding your child and beware of
the ugly-faced woman, as milk transfers (the features)."[^112]

"It is upon you to choose a good-looking foster suckling-mother, as milk
transfers (the features)."[^113]

It is understood that these traditions are not comparing the mother's
milk with that of other than mother; they only introduce criteria for
choosing foster suckling-mother, the effects of which would not be
lasting. So, it is not implied from these traditions that a good-looking
mother's milk is better than that of an ugly-faced mother. Particularly
because according to some traditions, avoidance of choosing certain
women as foster suckling-mothers is for the existence of other factors
than milk in them.

For example, it is related concerning not choosing a non-Muslim woman
for breastfeeding a Muslim child:

"I asked the Imam (A.S.) whether it was appropriate for a Muslim man to
choose a Jewish or Christian foster suckling-mother for his child, while
they drink wine. The Imam (A.S.) said: When they breastfeed your babies,
do not permit them to drink wine."[^114]

The Holy Qur’an has examined the issue of hiring a foster
suckling-mother for one's child in the following statement:

***﴾And if you want to have your children wet nursed [hire a foster
suckling-mother], there will be no sin upon you so long as you pay what
you give in accordance with honorable norms.﴿*** ***(2:233)***

The first question arising in respect to this Qur’anic statement is 'Who
is this statement addressed to?'

Some claim that it is addressed to parents; thus, leaving the child with
a foster suckling-mother is possible when both parents share this
intention.[^115]

In contrast, some also maintain that God has given the right to hire a
foster suckling-mother for the baby only to its parents, since the
expenses of the child rest with the father.[^116]

The afore-mentioned explanations clarify that the Qur’an has given the
primary right to breastfeeding to the mother of the baby; therefore,
leaving the baby with a foster suckling-mother is permissible in case
this right is not ignored. Thus, it is with the mother's consent and
considering her priority that a foster suckling-mother can be
hired.[^117] Moreover, it is feasible when the mother is not able to
breastfeed her baby due to illness, pregnancy, or lack of milk, or else,
she would fail to do her duty as a mother for having married, demanding
more wages, and so forth.[^118]

With the statement, ﴾so long as you pay what you give in accordance with
honorable norms﴿, the Qur’an makes leaving the baby with a foster
suckling-mother conditional on payment of the mother's due right.[^119]
The mother's inability to breastfeed or her unwillingness to do so, ,
does not allow the father to use it as a pretext to ignore her previous
rights; rather, he is obliged to pay her wages thoroughly and in
accordance with honorable norms up to the time she had breastfed her
baby.[^120]

[^1]: It is to be pointed out that there are other definitions of
mother's milk, too, such as: The liquid that is secreted from mammals'
mammary gland and used by their newborn. It is a whitish liquid,
slightly sweet, and with a specific odor. It is a serum containing fat,
organic materials, diastase, and white globules.

[^2]: It is noteworthy, of course, that since the mother's milk fats are
secreted more at the end of each breastfeeding period she had better
feed her baby in each period with all the milk of her breasts.

[^3]: It is worth mentioning that all vitamins except vitamin k are
found in mother's milk; however, their amount is varied and mother's
complementary nutrition would further increase their excretion. See:
Williams, Pregnancy and Childbirth, tras. Bahram Qadhi Jahani, 21st
edition, Golban Publication 1/411.

[^4]: For more information, see: Williams, Pregnancy and Childbirth,
1/413; Nuri, Sayyid Muhammad Ridha, Taghdhiya-yi Madar wa Kudak,
Shahidipur Publication, Mashhad, 1423/2002, pp. 38-47.

[^5]: Ibn Barraj Tarablusi, Qadhi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2 vols.
ed. Jaʿfar Subhani, Jamiʿa-yi Mudarrisin, Qum, 1406/1986, 2/261; Makki,
Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3
vols. 2nd ed, Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1410/1990., 2/648;
Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya,
Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, ed.
ʿAli Akbar Ghaffari, 7 vols, 2nd edition, Tehran, Saduq Publication,
1397/1977, p. 194; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz fi Sharh
al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. Ishtahardi, 2 vols. 1st edition, Nashr-i
Islami Publication, Qum, 1410/1989, 2/200; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid
al-Ahkam fi Maʿrifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3 vols. 1st edition, Nashr-i
Islami Publicatrion, Qum, 1413/1992., 3/101; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad
b. Hasan, Al-Nihaya fi Mujarrad al-Fiqh wa al-Fatawa, Dar al-Andulus,
Beirut, n.d., p. 503; Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ fi Sharh
al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 5 vols. Nashr-i Islami
Publication, Qum, 1407/1987, 3/424; ʿAmili, Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram
fi Sharh-i Mukhtasar Shara’iʿ al-Islam, ed. Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 2 vols. 1st
edition, Nashr-i Islami Publication, Qum, 1413/1993, 1/460; Fadhil
Hindi, Muhammad b. Husayn, Kashf al-Litham, 2vols. Ayatollah Marʿashi
Library, Qum, 1405/1984, 2/105; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira fi
Ahkam al-ʿItrat al-Tahira, ed. Muhammad Taqi Iravani, 20 vols. Nanshr-i
Islami Publication, Qum, 14014/1984, 25/71; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli,
Riyadh al-Masa’il fi Bayan al-Ahkam bi al-Dala’il, 2 vols. Al al-Bayt
Institute, Qum, 1404/1983, 2/160; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ
al-Madarik fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. ʿAli Akbar Ghaffari, 7
vols, 2nd edition, Tehran, Saduq Publication, 1397/1977, 4/468.

[^6]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, ʿUyun Akhbar al-Ridha (A.S.), 2 vols. 1st
edition, Mu’assisat al-Aʿlami li al-Matbuʿat, 1404/1984, 1/38, No. 69.

[^7]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Usul al-Kafi, ed. ʿAli Akbar
Ghaffari, 8 vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Tehran,
1388/1968.6/40, No. 1.

[^8]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram,
4 vols. 2nd edition, Istiqlal Publication, 1409/1988, 2/566; ʿAllama
Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan ila Ahkam al-Iman, ed. Shaykh Faris al-Hassun,
Nashr Islami Publication, 2/40; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili,
Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, 1st edition, Dar al-Fikr, Qum, 1411/1990, p.
176; ʿ Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham ila
Tanqih Shara’iʿ al-Islam, Mu’assisa Maarif Islami, Qum, 1413/1993.,
8/420.

[^9]: Williams, Pregnancy and Childbirth, 1/410; also, see: Paknejad,
Sayyid Ridha, Avvalin Danishgah va Akhirin Payambar, Shahid Dr.
Paknizhad Cultural Foundation, Yazd, 1405/1985. 6/82-83.

[^10]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya
fi Sharh al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, 10 vols., 2nd edition, Dawudi
Publication, Qum, 1398/1978, 5/452; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkam ʿ,
3/103; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/262.

[^11]: Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, Isfahan,
n.d., p. 193; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, ed. Shaykh ʿAbbas Quchani, 43 vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyya, Tehran, 1409/1988, 31/273; Ardabili, Mulla Ahmad, Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, ed. Ishtahardi, 14
vols. Jamiʿa-yi Mudarrisin, Qum, 1403/1983., 8/260; Bahrani, Yusuf,
Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira ʿal-Tahira, 19/424.

[^12]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdha al-Bihiyya ʿ,
5/454; idem, Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 8/413;
Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf, 2/105.

[^13]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawaʿid, 13
vols. 1st edition, Al al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1408/1987. 4/158;
Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli Riyadh, al-Masa’il 1/565; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 10/100; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 15/252.

[^14]: ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/628; Hilli, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Idhah al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 4 vols. 1st
edition, ʿIlmiyya Publications, Qum, 1387/1967, 4/629; Shahid Thani,
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Shara’iʿ al-Islam Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad
b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 5/224.

[^15]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 7/185, No. 1; Ibn Babuwayh
Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, ed. ʿAli
Akbar Ghaffari, Jamiʿa-yi Mudarrisin, Qum, 1404/1984, 4/32; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, ed.
Akhundi, 10 vols. 4th edition, Al-Maktabat al-Murtadhawiyya, Tehran,
1387/1967, 10/9, No. 23; Darimi, ʿAbd Allah b. Bahram, Sunan al-Darimi,
2 vols. Matbaʿt al-Iʿtidal, Damascus, n.d., 2/179; Ibn Hanbal, Ahmad
Musnad, Dar Sadir Beitut, n. d., 5/348; Muslim, Sahih, 3/1323, No. 23,
Abi Dawud Sajistani, Sulayman b. Ashʿath, Sunan Abi Dawud, ed. Saʿid
Muhammad al-Lahham, 2 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1410/1990,
4/152, No. 4442.

[^16]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
5/452.

[^17]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/413-414, No.
5901.

[^18]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub Al-Kafi, 6/40, No. 2; Ibn Babuwayh
Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/475, No. 4664; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/108, No. 366.

[^19]: For more details, see: Q. 2:83; 4: 36; 6: 151; 17: 23; 29: 8.

[^20]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/563, No. 32 and 6/82, No.
3; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/115, No. 394.

[^21]: See: Mufid, Muhammad b. Nuʿman, Al-Irshad fi Maʿrifat-i Hujaj
Allah ʿala al-ʿIbad, Al al-Bayt (ed.), Qum, Dar al-Mufid, 1413, 1/206;
Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam wa Dhikr Halal wa al-Haram
wa al-Qadhaya wa al-Ahkam ʿan Ahl-i Bayt Rasul Allah ʿAlyhi wa ʿAlayhim
Afdhal al-Salam, 2 vols. Dar al-Maʿarif, Egypt, 1383/1963, 1/86; Hurr
ʿAmili. Muhammad Hasan, Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa,
ed. Rabbani, 20 vols. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, n.d.,
15/117; Bayhaqqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10 vols. Dar
al-Fikr, Beirut, n.d., 7/442; Sanʿani, ʿAbd al-Razzaq, Al-Musannaf, ed.
Habib al-Rahman Aʿzami, 11 vols. 2nd edition, Jamiʿa-yi Mudarrisin, Qum,
1404/1984, 7/350, No. 13444 and 352, No. 13449; Zarandi Hanafi,
Muhammad, Nazm al-Durar al-Simtayn fi Fadha’il al-Mustafa wa al-Murtadha
wa al-Batul wa al-Sibtayn, Imam Amir al-Mu’minin (A.S.) Library
Publication, 1377/1959, p. 131.

[^22]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/52, No. 2; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/115, No. 394.

[^23]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/106, No.
357-358.

[^24]: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira ʿal-ʿItrat , 25/79.

[^25]: Tabarsi, Fadhl b. Husayn, Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 10
vols. Dar Ihya al-Turath al-ʿArabi, 1379/1960, 2/113.

[^26]: Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ ʿʿ 3/424; ʿAmili, Sayyid
Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/462; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat, 2/627;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/456;
Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan Kashf al-Litham, 2/105; Tabataba’i,
Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/160; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir,
31/277.

[^27]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/41, No. 8; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/107, No. 363, 105, and
355.

[^28]: Mufid, Muhammad b. Muhammad, Al-Muqniʿa, Muʿassisa Nashr Islami,
1410, p. 530; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Nihaya, p.503; Ibn
Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/263; Makki,
Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/648; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 2/566; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasaral-Nafiʿ , p. 194;
Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz 2/200; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid
al-Ahkam ʿ, 3/101; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2 vols. Al al-Bayt Institute,
Mashhad lithography, n.d. 2/43.

[^29]: ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad Nihayat al-Maram, 1/464; Fadhil Hindi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106.

[^30]: Q. 31: 14; 46: 15.

[^31]: Q. 2: 233; 65: 6.

[^32]: Tabataba’i, Muhammad Husayn, Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an,
Ismaʿiliyan Institute, Qum, 1393/1973, 2/251; Taliqani, Sayyid Mahmud,
Partuwi az Qur'an, Shirkat Sihami Intishar, 1399/1979, 2/156.

[^33]: Musawi Sabzwari, ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib al-Rahman fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an, 4 vols. Matbaʿat al-Adab, 1404/1983, 4/58; Raghib Isfahani,
Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Qur'an, 1st edition, Daftar-i Nashr-i Kitab,
14704/1984, p. 532; Turayhi, Fakhar al-Din, Majm-ʿal-Bahrayn,
Murtadhawi, Publication, 1365, 3/164.

[^34]: Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/442; Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd
al-Rahman, Zad al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 8 vols. 1st edition, Dar
al-Fikr, Beirut, 1407/1986, 1/240; Suyuti, Jalal al-Din, Al-Durr
al-Manthur fi Tafsir bi al-Ma’thur, 6 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Fikr,
Beirut, 1365/1946, 1/287; Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari, Dar al-Maʿrifa, Beirut, n.d., 9/417; Tabari, Muhammad b.
Jarir, Jamiʿ al-Bayan ʿan Ta’wil Aya al-Qur'an, ed. Sidqi Jamil
al-ʿAttar, 30 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1379/1960, 2/664; Sanʿani,
Al-Musnaf, 7/57, No. 12173. For more information on other views in this
respect as well as about the objections toward it, see: 1. All
breastfeeding mothers in general: Sabzwari, Muhammad, Al-Jadid fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an, 1st edition, 7 vols., Dar al-Hadith, Beirut, 1415/1995,
1/286; Mashhadi, Mirza Muhammad, Kanz al-Daqa’iq wa Bahr al-Al-Ghara’ib,
14 vols. 1st edition, Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance, Tehran,
1404/1988, 2/352; Shubbar, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Jawhar al-Thamin fi
Tafsir al-Kitab al-Mubin, 6 vols., 1st edition, Maktibat al-Alfayn,
1407/1987, 1/235; Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat al-Bayan fi Ahkam al-Qur'an,
ed. Muhammad Baqir, Bihbudi, Al-Maktibat al-Murtazawiyya, n.d., p. 557;
Maghniyya, Muhammad Jawad, Al-Kashif, 7 vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-ʿIlm
li al-Mala’in, Beirut, 1401/1981, 1/355; Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah,
Manhaj al-Sadiqin fi Ilzam al-Mukhalifin, 10 vols. 2nd edition,
Islamiyya Bookstore, Tehran, 1388/1968, 2/29; 2. Married mothers in
particular: Qurtubi, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur'an, 20
vols. 2nd edition, Mu’assisat al-Ta’rikh al-ʿArabi, 1405/1985, 3/160.

[^35]: Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, ed. ʿAbd al-Salam Muhammad ʿAli Shahin,
3 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, Beirut, 1415/1994, 1/488.

[^36]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an, ed. Ahmad Habib Qaysar ʿAmili, 10 vol. 1st edition, Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1409/1989, 1/333.

[^37]: Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/488; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b.
Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255.

[^38]: Nahhas, Abi Jaʿfar, Maʿani al-Qur'an, ed. Muhammad ʿAli Sabuni, 6
vols. 1st edition, Umm al-Qura University, Saudi Arabia, 1408/1988 ,
1/214; Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/416; Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd
al-Rahman, Zad al-Masirʿ, 1/240; for more information about other views
brought up in this regard, see: 1. indicative statement: Shubbar, Sayyid
ʿAbd Allah, Al-Jawhar al-Thamin, 1/235; Qurtubi Ansari, Abu ʿAbd Allah
Muhammad b. Ahmad, Tafsir-i Qurtubi (Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an), 20
vols. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1405/1985., 3/161; 2.
preference of breastfeeding: Musawi Sabzwari, ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib
al-Rahman, 4/58; Sabziwari, Muhammad Al-Jadid, 1/286; Kashani, Mulla
Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan ʿMajmaʿ
al-Bayan , 1/333; Ha’iri Tehrani, Mir Sayyid ʿAli, Muqtaniyat al-Durar
wa Multaqatat al-Thamar, 12 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Tehran,
1378/1959. 2/76; Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/488; Tabari, Muhammad b.
Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayan ʿ, 2/664; Maghniyya, Muhammad Jawad Al-Kashif,
1/365; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-MaramShara’iʿ al-Islam,
1/460; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
5/456; 3. mother's priority in breastfeeding: Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an,
1/490; Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat al-Bayan, p. 556-557; Fadhil Hindi,
Muhammad b. Hasan Kashf al-Litham, 2/105.

[^39]: Faydh Kashani, Mulla (Mawla) Muhsin, Al-Safi fi Tafsir Kalam
Allah, Dar al-Murtadha li al-Nashr, n. d., 1/239; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-AfhamShara’iʿ al-Islam, 8/412;
Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 19/424.

[^40]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/665; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255; Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat
al-Bayan, p. 557.

[^41]: Raghib Isfahani, Al-Mufradat, p. 441; Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah,
Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29.

[^42]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/666; Kashani,
Mulla Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik AfhamShara’iʿ al-Islam, 8/417; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Tibyan, 2/256; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ
al-Bayan, 1/333; Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/665;
also for more information on other possibilities see: 1. a measure for
being mahram (one who ا is within a prohibited degree of ا marriage) as
a result of breastfeeding: Ibn Qudama, ʿAbd Allah b. Ahmad, Al-Mughni,
12 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, Beirut, n.d., 9/202; 2. a measure
for the necessity of provision of maintenance by the father: Jassas,
Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/488, 1/496.

[^43]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/672; Ibn Hajar
ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/416.

[^44]: Sabziwari, Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 1/286; Sanʿani, Al-Musannaf, 7/57,
No. 12173; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli, Fath al-Qadir al-Jamiʿ bayn Fanni
al-Riwaya wa al-Diraya min ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 5 vols. ʿAlam al-Kutub,
Beyrut, n.d., 1/245; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/161;
Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/273; Tabataba’i,
Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/160; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b.
Hasan, Al-Khilaf, ed. Sayyid ʿAli al-Khurasani, 6 vols. 1st edition,
Nashr-i Islami Publication Qum, 1407/1987.07, 5/130.

[^45]: Q. 31: 14.

[^46]: Q. 46: 15.

[^47]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/412.

[^48]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/40, No. 4; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/107, No. 362; Ibn Babuwayh
Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/139, No, 3510; also for more
information on other evidences expressed for non-permissibility of
forcing the mother to breastfeed her baby and their criticisms, see:
Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/160; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2 vols. Makyabat al-Radhawiyya li Ihya’ al-Athar
al-Jaʿfariyya, n.d., 2/627; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan
Al-Khilaf, 5/130; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-MaramShara’iʿ
al-Islam, 1/461; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut fi fiqh
al-Imamiyya, ed. Muhammad Tqi Kashfi, 8vols, Al-Maktabat
al-Murtadhawiyya, Tehran, 1387/1967, 3/239; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur,
Al-Sara’ir, 2/471; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq fi Sharh
al-Tabsira, 26 vols. 3rd edition, Mu’assisa-yi Dar al-Kitab, Qum,
1412/1991, 22/296.

[^49]: See: Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/648; Muhaqqiq
Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/566; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf
al-Rumuz, 2/200; Qummi Sabziwari, Shaykh ʿAli, Jamiʿ al-Khilaf wa
al-Wifaq bayn al-Imamiyya wa bayn al-Aʿimmat al-Hijaz wa al-ʿIraq, ed.
Husayn Husayni Birjandi, 1st edition, Zamina Sazan-i Ẓuhur-i Imam-i ʿAsr
(A.S.), 1421/2001, p. 510; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/101;
idem, Irshad al-Adhhan, 2/40; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/248; Mihaji
Asuyuti, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Jawahir al-ʿUqud wa Muin al-Qudhat wa
al-Muqiʿin wa al-Shuhud, 2 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya,
Beirut, 1417/1996, 2/174; Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/417; Ibn
Zuhra Hilli, Ghunyat al-Nuzuʿ ila ʿIlmiya al-Usul wa al-Furuʿ, ed.
Ibrahim Bahaduri, 1st edition Imam Sadiq Institute, Qum, 1417/1996, p.
387; Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ, 3/424; Kashani, Abu Bakr b.
Masʿud, Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib al-Shara’iʿ, 7 vols. 1st edition,
Al-Maktibat al-Habibiyya, Pakistan, 1409/1989, 4/40; Nawawi, Yahya b.
Sharaf, Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 20 vols. Dar al-Fikr, nd.,
18/312.

[^50]: Mufid, Muhammad b. Muhammad al-, ʿAl-Muqniʿa, Nashr Islami
Publication, 1410, p.531; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Nihaya,
p. 503; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/261;
Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/43; idem, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin fi Ahkam al-Din,
ed. Sayyid Ahmad Husayni, 1st edition, Faqih Publication, Tehran,
1410/1989, p. 187; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/263; Shahid Thani,
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 8/416; also see:
Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan, 2/113; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255; Rawandi, Qutb al-Din, Fiqh
al-Qur'an, 2 vols. 2nd edition, Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum,
1405/1984, 2/120.

[^51]: ʿAmili, ʿAli b, Husayn (b. Muhyi al-Din Abi al-Jamiʿ), Al-Wajiz
fi Tafsir al-Qur’an al-Aziz, Dar al-Qur’an al-Karim, 1413, 1/191; Qummi
Mashhadi, Kanz al-Daqa’iq, 2/352. For more information about the other
possibilities in the meaning of mawludi lahu and their criticisms, see:
1. genetic or juridical dependence of the baby on the father: Faydh
Kashani, Al-Safi, 1/239; Sabziwari, Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 1/286; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham Shara’iʿ al-Islam,
8/414; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Fath al-Qadir, 1/245;
Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws (Ruh al-Qawanin), trans. Ali Akbar
Muhtadi, Amir Kabir Publication, 1390/1970, p. 630; 2. paying attention
to emotional aspects: Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib al-Quran
ila al-Adhhan, al-Wafa’ Publication, Beirut, 1400/1980, 2/86; 3. paying
attention to the social conventions: Tabataba’i, Muhammad Husayn,
Al-Mizan, 2/251; Musawi Sabzwari, ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib al-Rahman, 4/58.

[^52]: Qurtubi, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur'an, 20 vols.
2nd edition, Mu’assisat al-Ta’rikh al-ʿArabi, 1405/1985, 3/16;
Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Al-Jawahir al-Hisan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, ed.
ʿAbd al-Fattah Abu Sunna, 1st edition, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi,
Beirut, 1415/1994, 1/467.

[^53]: Farahidi, Khalil b. Ahmad, Al-ʿAyn, ed. Mahdi al-Makhzumi, 8
vols. 2nd edition, Dar al-Hujra, Qum, 1409/1989, 15/223; Turayhi, Fakhar
al-Din, Majm-ʿal-Bahrayn, 3/164; Zubaydi, Muhammad Murtaza, Taj al-ʿArus
min Jawahir al-Qamus, 10 vols. Maktibat al-Ihya, Beirut, n.d. 10/315.

[^54]: Jawahiri, Ismaʿil b. Hammad, Al-Sihah (Taj al-Lugh wa Sihah
al-ʿArabiyya), ed. Ahmad b. ʿAbd al-Ghafur ʿAttar, 6 vols. 4/1481; Ibn
Manzur, Lisan al-ʿArab, 15 vols. 1st edition, Adab al-Howza, Qum,
1405/1985, 10/115; Turayhi, Fakhar al-Din, Majmaʿ al-Bahrayn, ed. Sayyid
Ahmad Husayni, 4 vols. 2nd edition, Maktab al-Nashr al-Thiqafat
al-Islamitta, 1405/1985, 1/87 & 131; ʿAskari, Abu al-Hilal, et al,
Muʿjam al-Furuq al-Lughawiyya, ed. Al-Shaykh Baytullah Bayat, 1st
edition, Mu’assisat al-Nashr al-Islamiyya, Qum, 1412/1991, p. 254, No.
999-1000; also see: Fadhlullah, Muhammad Husayn, Min Wahy al-Qur'an, 25
vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Zahra, 1405/1985, 4/184.

[^55]: Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, Majmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333; Sabziwari,
Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 1/286; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Fath
al-Qadir, 1/245; for more information about the other possibilities
brought up about this part of the verse and their criticisms, see: 1.
expenses of the wife, whether still married or divorced: Jassas, Ahkam
al-Qur'an, 1/489; Maghniyya, Muhammad Jawad, Al-Kashif, 1/365; Tabrisi,
Fadhl b. Hasan, Majmaʿ al-Bayan , 1/333; Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad
Husayn, Taqrib al-Quran, 2/86; 2. the baby's expenses: Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ
li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/163; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/282.

[^56]: It is perhaps for this reason that some interpreters have claimed
that this part of the verse denotes the permissibility of hiring a
foster suckling-mother in exchange for food and clothing; for more
information, see: Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/488.

[^57]: Qurashi, ʿAli Akbar, Ahsan al-Hadith, 12 vols. 1st edition,
Bunyad Biʿthat, Tehran, 1407/1987. 1/435.

[^58]: For more information, see: Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat al-Bayan ,
p. 557; Khuzaʿi Nayshaburi, Husayn b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Rawdh al-Jinan
wa Rawh al-Janan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, Islamic Research Foundation of
Asan Quds Razavi, Mashhad, 1408/1987, 3/286; Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah,
Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; Balaghi, Sayyid ʿAbd al-Hamid, Hujjat
al-Tafasir wa Balagh al-Iksir, 10 vols. 1st edition, Hikmat, Qum,
1386/1966, 1/181; Taliqani, Sayyid Mahmud, Partuwi az Qur'an, 2/156;
Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/163, and 18/170-171; Ibn Kathir
Qurashi, Ismaʿil, Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 4 vols. Dar al-Maʿrifa,
Beirut. 1412/1992, 1/291; Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/489; Ibn Jawzi,
ʿAbd al-Rahman, Zad al-Masir, 1/241; Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman,
Al-Jawahir al-Hisan, 1/468; Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, Jamiʿ al-Bayan,
2/672; Nahhas, Abi Jaʿfar, Maʿani al-Qur'an, ed. Muhammad ʿAli Sabuni, 6
vols. 1st edition, Umm al-Qura University, Saudi Arabia, 1408/1988,
1/217.

[^59]: See: Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333; Sabziwari,
Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 2/286; Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Zad al-Masir,
8/45; Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, Jamiʿ al-Bayan, 28/190-191, No.
26625-26628; Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 3/619; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam
al-Qur’an, 8/172.

[^60]: Q. 2: 233.

[^61]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 6/30; Makki,
Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/649; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 2/566.

[^62]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/298; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 5/239; Nawawi Yahya b. Sharaf, Rawdhat
al-Talibin, ed. ʿAdil Ahmad ʿAbd al-Mawjud, 8 vols. Dar al-Kutub
al-ʿIlmiyya, n.d., p.882; Ibn Qudama, Al-Mughni, 6/85; ʿAllama Hilli,
Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 9 vols. 1st edition, Nashr-i Islami Publication,
Qum, 1412/1992, 7/305; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/649;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/413;
ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/43; Ibn Barraj Trablusi,
Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262.

[^63]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/298; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam,
1/247; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/472; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 3/485; idem, Al-Mabsut, 5/238; ʿAllama
Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 6/160-161 and 7/304; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
3/262; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 7/546; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/413; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 193; Bahrani, Yusuf,
Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 12/605.

[^64]: ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 6/160 (in principle we regard
it as permissible); Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/160;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/413;
Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/74.

[^65]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/299.

[^66]: For more information about the views on issue, see: 1. permit for
wet-nursing: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/262; Shahid Awwal,
Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 176; ʿAllama
Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/101; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/43; 2.
concerning the quality of contract between the father and the mother:
Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz Al-Muhadhdhab, 1/481; ʿAmili,
Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/462; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq
al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/74; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik
al-Afham, 8/415.

[^67]: Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262;
Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; ʿJamiʿ al-Khilaf
wa al-Wifaq, p. 510; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Nihaya, p.
503; Ibn Zuhra Hilli, Ghunyat al-Nuzuʿ ila ʿIlmiya al-Usul wa al-Furuʿ,
ed. Ibrahim Bahaduri, 1st edition, Imam Sadiq Institute, Qum, 1417/1996.
p. 387; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 22/293; Tusi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 9/244, No. 946-947.

[^68]: Al-Sara’ir, 2/471; Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 8/419; ʿAllama Hilli,
Qawaʿid al-Ahkam, 3/101; ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 2/40; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/274; Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira, 25/74-75.

[^69]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/419; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 3/489; Ibn Zuhra
Hilli, Ghunyat al-Nuzuʿ, p. 286.

[^70]: Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 3/619.

[^71]: Al-Basa’ir, 47/275; ʿAmili, ʿAli b, Husayn (b. Muhyi al-Din Abi
al-Jamiʿ), Al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAziz, 1st edition, Dar
al-Qur’an al-KArim, Qum, 1413/1993, 2/116; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh
al-Muhadhdhab, 18/313.

[^72]: Q. 65: 6.

[^73]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 4, 2 and 6/103,
No. 3.

[^74]: ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram fi Sharh-i Mukhtasar
Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 1/464; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat
al-Ahkam, p. 193; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham,
2/105.

[^75]: ʿAl-Muqniʿa, p. 530; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Nihaya, p. 503; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz,
Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/650;
Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 13/281; Ahkam al-Nisa, p. 50; Halabi,
Abu al-Salah, Al-Kafi fi al-Fiqh, ed. Ridha Ustadi, Maktaba Amir
al-Mu’minin, Isfahan, 1403/1983, , p. 316; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan,
Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194. Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf
al-Rumuz, 2/200.

[^76]: ʿShahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat
al-Damishqiyya, p. 176; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/101; ʿAllama
Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 2/40; ʿJamiʿ al-Khilaf wa al-Wifaq, p. 510;
Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/105; Muhaqqiq Hilli,
Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/566; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf,
5/130.

[^77]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, Jamiʿ al-Bayan, 2/677, No. 3938; Tusi,
Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/257.

[^78]: Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/478; Sanʿani, Al-Musannaf,
7/59, No. 12178; Ha’iri Tehrani, Muqtaniyat al-Durar, 2/76; ʿAmili, ʿAli
b, Husayn, Al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAziz, 1/191.

[^79]: Sabziwari, Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 1/286; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan,
ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333; Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib
al-Quran, 2/86.

[^80]: Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/256, No. 975;
Maghniyya, Muhammad Jawad, Al-Kashif, 1/365; Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir,
ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/674-675, No. 3932-3937.

[^81]: Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib al-Quran, 2/86;
Tabataba’i, Muhammad Husayn Al-Mizan, 2/251; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam
al-Qur’an, 3/167; Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/478.

[^82]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/657, No. 33.

[^83]: Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, Majmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255.

[^84]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/41, No. 6; also, see:
Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat al-Bayan, p. 558.

[^85]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/509, No, 4788.

[^86]: Faydh Kashani, Al-Safi, 1/239; Muqaddas Ardabili, Zubdat
al-Bayan, p. 557 and 559; Nahhas, Maʿani al-Qur'an, 1/219-220; Shaybani,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Nahj al-Bayan ʿan Kashf-i Maʿani al-Qur’an, 1st
edition, Da’irat al-Maʿarif al-Islamiyya Publication, Tehran, 1413/1993,
1/306; Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; 2/29; ʿAmili,
ʿAli b, Husayn, Al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAziz, 1/191; Musawi
Sabzwari, ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib al-Rahman, 2/255-258; Sanʿani,
Al-Musannaf, 7/59-60, No. 12178-12184.

[^87]: Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Nawasikh al-Qur'an, Dar al-Kutub
al-ʿIlmiyya, Beirut, n.d., p. 90; Ibn al-ʿArabi, Muhammad b. ʿAbd Allah,
Ahkam al-Qur'an, Dar al-Maʿrifa, Beirut, n.d., 1/205.

[^88]: Kufi, Ibn Abi Shayba, Al-Musannaf, ed. Saʿid Muhammad al-Liham, 8
vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Fikr, Qum, 1409/1988, 4/166, No. 1-4 and No.
165 and 167, No. 10; Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/681,
No. 3956-3958 and 684; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan,
2/255; Nahhas, Maʿani al-Qur'an, 1/218 and 216; Qummi Mashhadi, Kanz
al-Daqa’iq, 2/352; Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/478; Ibn Hajar
ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/424; Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Al-Jawahir
al-Hisan, 1/470; Shubbar, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Jawhar al-Thamin, 1/235;
Qummi, ʿAli b. Ibrahim, Tafsir al-Qummi, ed. Sayyid Tayyib Musawi
Jaza’iri, 2 vol. 3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub li al-Ttibʿa wa al-Nashr,
Qum, 1404/1984. 1/76; Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/492; Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd
al-Rahman, Zad al-Masirʿ, 1/242; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ
al-Bayan, 1/333; Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/256,
No. 975; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/170; Shawkani, Muhammad
b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Fath al-Qadir, 1/246.

[^89]: Fadhlullah, Muhammad Husayn, Min Wahy al-Qur'an, 25 vols. 3rd
edition, Dar al-Zahra, 1405/1985.

[^90]: Kufi, Al-Musannaf, 4/165, No. 4 and 166, No. 7; Sanʿani,
Al-Musannaf, 7/60, No. 12186; Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib
al-Quran, 2/86; Janabadhi, Sultan Muhammad, Bayan al-Saʿada fi Maqamat
al-ʿIbada, 4 vols, Tehran University, Tehran, 1385/1965.

[^91]: ʿAyyashi, Muhammad b. Masʿud, Tafsir al-ʿAyyashi, ed. Hashim
Rasuli Mahallati, 2 vols. ʿIlmiyya Islamiyya Publication, Tehran, n.d.,
1/12, No. 383; Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/290, No.
1109.

[^92]: Karrami, Muhammad, Al-Tafsir li Kitab Allah al-Munir, 7 vols.
Matbaʿa ʿIlmiyya, Qum, 1402/1982.

[^93]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 9/244, No. 946-947.

[^94]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/41, No. 6 and 103, No. 3;
Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/510, No.4788; Tamimi,
Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/290, No. 1109; Ayyashi, Muhammad
b. Masʿud, Tafsir al-ʿAyyashi, 1/120, No. 384.

[^95]: Qummi, ʿAli b. Ibrahim, Tafsir al-Qummi, 1/76; also see: Jassas,
Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/492.

[^96]: Ibn Kathir Qurashi, Ismaʿil, Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 1/291;
Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Al-Jawahir al-Hisan, 1/470; Khuzaʿi
Nayshaburi, Husayn b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Rawdh al-Jinan wa Rawh al-Janan,
3/286; Waʿiz Kashifi, Husayn, Tafsir-i Mawahibun ʿAlayh, 4 vols. 1st
edition, Iqbal Bookstore, Tehran, 1357/1938; Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah,
Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; Sharif Lahiji, Shaykh ʿAli, Tafsir-i Sharif-i
Lahiji, Mu’assisa Matbuʿati ʿIlmi, 1363 sh/1984; Tabrisi, Fadhl b.
Hasan, Majmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333; Shubbar, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Jawhar
al-Thamin, 1/235; Ha’iri Tehrani, Muqtaniyat al-Durar, 2/76; Shirazi,
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib al-Quran, 2/86; Maghniyya, Muhammad
Jawad, Al-Kashif, 1/356.

[^97]: Qummi, ʿAli b. Ibrahim, Tafsir al-Qummi, 1/76; Musawi Sabzwari,
ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib al-Rahman, 4/58.

[^98]: Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Zad al-Masir, 1/242.

[^99]: Qummi, ʿAli b. Ibrahim, Tafsir al-Qummi, 1/76; Tabari, Muhammad
b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/686; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Tibyan, 2/255; Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/416.

[^100]: Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Fath al-Bari, 9/416; Taliqani, Sayyid
Mahmud, Partuwi az Qur'an, 2/156.

[^101]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/105 No. 355;
Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, /443, No. 2-3 and 6/103, No. 3;
Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/241, No. 903 and 290,
No.1109; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/509, No.
4788.

[^102]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/686; Sanʿani,
Al-Musannaf, 7/57, No. 12174; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Tibyan, 2/255; Janabadhi, Sultan Muhammad, Bayan al-Saʿada fi Maqamat
al-ʿIbada, 1/205.

[^103]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/667; Kashani,
Mulla Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; Faydh Kashani, Al-Safi,
1/239; ʿAmili, ʿAli b, Husayn, Al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAziz,
1/191.

[^104]: Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan, 1/333.

[^105]: Musawi Sabzwari, ʿAbd al-ʿAli, Mawahib al-Rahman, 4/58.

[^106]: See: Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29;
Tabataba’i, Muhammad Husayn, Al-Mizan, 2/251.

[^107]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/280.

[^108]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/43, No. 10.

[^109]: Himyari, ʿAbd Alla b. Jaʿfar, Qurb al-Isnad, 1st edition, Al
al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1413/199, p. 93, No, 312.

[^110]: ʿAli b. Jaʿfar, al-Imam al-Sadiq, Masa’il ʿAli b. Jaʿfar wa
Mustadrakatiha, ed. Al al-Bayt Institute, 1st edition, Imam Reza World
Congress, Mashhad, 1409/1989, p. 282, No. 711.

[^111]: Ibn Babwayhh, ʿUyun Akhbar al-Ridha (A.S.), 1/37, No. 67.

[^112]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/44, No. 12.

[^113]: Ibid, 6/44, No. 13.

[^114]: Himyari, Qurb al-Isnad, p. 93, No, 312.

[^115]: Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/172; Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd
al-Rahman, Al-Jawahir al-Hisan, 1/471; Ibn Kathir Qurashi, Ismaʿil,
Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 1/291.

[^116]: ʿAlawi Husayni, Muhammad Karim, Kashf al-Haqa’iq ʿan Nukat
al-Ayat wa al-Daqa’iq, 3 vols. 3rd edition, Haj ʿAbd al-Majid - Sadiq
Nowbari Publication, Tehran, 1396/1976. 1/167; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan,
ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan , 1/333; Ha’iri Tehrani, Muqtaniyat al-Durar, 2/76;
Shirazi, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Taqrib al-Quran, 2/86; Sabziwari,
Muhammad, Al-Jadid, 1/286.

[^117]: Suyuti, Jalal al-Din, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 1/287; Taliqani,
Sayyid Mahmud, Partuwi az Qur'an, 2/156.

[^118]: Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/478; Tabari, Muhammad b.
Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/688-689 Khuzaʿi Nayshaburi, Husayn b. ʿAli b.
Muhammad, Rawdh al-Jinan wa Rawh al-Janan, 3/286.

[^119]: For more information about other implications of this statement,
see: 1. Paying wages to the foster suckling-mother: Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd
al-Rahman, Zad al-Masirʿ, 1/243; Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Al-Jawahir
al-Hisan, 1/471; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255;
Kashani, Mulla Fath Allah, Manhaj al-Sadiqin, 2/29; 2. Accepting to
leave the baby with a foster suckling-mother: Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli
b. Muhammad, Fath al-Qadir, 1/247; Tabrisi, Fadhl b. Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ
al-Bayan , 1/333; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, 3/173; 3.
Surrendering to Allah's command: Suyuti, Jalal al-Din, Al-Durr
al-Manthur, 1/287; 4. Pledging not to inflict harm.

[^120]: Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli b. Muhammad, Fath al-Qadir, 1/24;
Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 2/689-690; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/255; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Khilaf, 1/365.


