Part Two: A Study of the Legal Issues of Child Custody (Hidhanat)
=================================================================

Child Custody According to the Holy Qur’an
------------------------------------------

It was explained in part one that according to the teachings of the
Qur’an the mother is obliged to breastfeed her baby up to twenty one
months after its birth. It is clear, however, that besides feeding on
milk, the baby needs certain caring to keep on nourishing; and this
caring is to be performed, in normal circumstances, by someone who has
the most emotional and physical relations with that baby.

Talking about taking care of the child, which is called *hidhanat*
(custody) in juridical and legal texts, has since long ago been of
interest to the Muslim scholars. In addition, because of its
significance and the great role it plays in forming and adjusting
socio-familial relationships, it has been examined in various chapters
of legal books and the traditions of the infallible household of the
Prophet (S.A.W.).

Although the root word *hadhana* and its derivatives are not used in the
Holy Qur’an, but the root *kafala* concerning the issue of child custody
and providing for its needs have been brought up in two instances; one
about the Prophet Moses (A.S.) and the other for the Holy Mary (S.A.).

In the two *sura*s of *Surat Ta Ha* and *Surat al-Qasas*, God mentions
the story of Moses. When his mother put him afloat in an ark and Asiya,
Pharaoh's wife, took him from the water, he rejected the breasts of the
foster suckling-mothers. Afterward he was returned to his family as per
her sister's advice:

 ***﴾When your sister walked up [to Pharaoh’s palace] saying, "Shall I
show you someone who will take care of him (yakfuluhu)?" Then We
restored you to your mother, that she might be comforted and not
grieve.﴿***[^1]***,***

 ***﴾And We had forbidden him to be suckled by any nurse since before.
So she said," Shall I show*** ***you a household that will take care of
him (yakfulunahu) for you and will be his well-wishers?*** ***﴿***[^2]

The motivation behind sending back Moses (A.S.) to his family was to
undertake his *kifala* (taking charge of his care), except that *kifala*
in the first statement refers to one person and in the second to a
group, i.e. the household of Moses (A.S.).

Thus, by definition, *kifala* includes tasks that are partly done by the
foster suckling-mother and partly by other people, or at least part of
those tasks could be undertaken by others, which is clearly implied from
the statement ﴾and will be his well-wishers﴿.

In *Surat Al-i ʿImran*, the holy Qur’an brings up the issue of taking
charge of Mary's care (*kifala*) by Zechariah. Having stated how
ʿImran's wife dedicated to Him what was in her belly and the birth of
Mary, Allah first emphasizes that Zechariah took charge of Mary's care:

***﴾Thereupon her Lord accepted her with a gracious acceptance, and made
her grow up in a worthy fashion, and He charged Zechariah with her
care.﴿.***[^3]

Then He mentions that charging him with her care has been determined by
casting lots:

 ***﴾These accounts are from the Unseen, which We reveal to you, and you
were not with them when they were casting lots [to see] which of them
would take charge of Mary's care (yakfulu), nor were you with them when
they were contending.﴿***[^4]

Choosing a guardian (*kafil*) by casting lots denotes a disagreement
existing between Zechariah and the dignitaries of Bani Israʿil, which
the Qur’an points out with surprise. A disagreement that can be an
outcome of everybody's desire to take charge of Mary's care, as it can
be due to everyone's unwillingness to do so, as well. In the former
case, Mary's moral-spiritual merits and certain familial and social
considerations lead to casting lots and in the latter case, the adverse
economical conditions caused by draught prompted it.[^5]

Three possibilities have been brought up in exegetical texts as to when
the disagreement over Mary's guardianship occurred.

a) Upon her birth and being handed over to the mosque by her mother in
order to fulfill her vow.

b) While she became an orphan as she lost her parents.

c) While she reached maturity and Zechariah's inability to provide for
her livelihood.[^6]

It is clearly understood from what was said above that *kifala*
(guardianship), at least in its Qur’anic application, is used in a more
inclusive meaning than child custody. *Kifala* in this usage includes
all aspects of a human being ranging from breastfeeding to provision for
his/her living expenses and caretaking without any time limitation; but
custody does not enjoy such comprehensiveness, as will be explained in
the following chapters.

Preliminary Discussions
-----------------------

The term *hidhana* in Arabic is derived from the root *hadhana*. In
Arabic *hadhana* means "the distance between the armpits to the loins",
"the chest and the two arms and what includes in between", that can be
summed up as "embrace".

Accordingly, *hidhana*, which can grammatically be either infinitive or
noun[^7], means, "to clasp the baby to one's breast", "to nurture the
baby", "to embrace the baby", which can be viewed as a synonym to
"nursing" and "wet nursing".[^8]

In Islamic jurisprudence, *hidhana* is used in its lexical meaning[^9]
and it does not have a new meaning (legal reality) – as some believe.
Thus, using the word *wilaya* in the meaning of "guardianship" for the
definition of *hidhana*[^10] would not be correct.

Among the issues open to discussion about custody is whether it is a
right or a decree. Some believe that religious laws (legal fabrications)
are divisible into right and decree, the most important difference of
which is in transferability of their use to others; and also the
possibility of refusing to use it (*isqat* = relinquishment) in case it
is a right and the impossibility to do so in case it is a decree.[^11]

If we accept that transferability and relinquishment are two basic
features of right, then it is argued whether child custody is a right or
a decree.

To those who believe custody is a kind of guardianship (*wilaya*), it is
a decree, for *wilaya* is among the granted legal decrees which are
removed or devised by the grantor or legislator and the one who is
religiously accountable (*mukallaf*) has no option in fabricating or not
fabricating them; consequently, neither of the parents can refuse to
accept it.

However, those who do not regard *wilaya* as valid in the concept of
custody, naturally view it as among the rights; as a result either of
the parents would be permissible to refuse to take care of the child
(accept its custody).[^12]  
 To our opinion, even if we regard custody to be among the rights, no
conclusion can be made from it for the permissibility to refuse to put
it into action in all cases; for, right is divisible in one aspect into
two types of natural-innate and entrusted.

The entrusted right is an authority given to a person by law and perhaps
it can be viewed as synonym to "sovereignty"; natural right, however, is
one genetically enjoyed by everybody without requiring any legal
authority, like right to freedom.

Accordingly, undertaking a person's custody takes place in one of the
following two ways: 1. Genetic (natural) and 2. Legislative (granted);
for, in some cases, one's genetic relationship with another person in
itself is sufficient to undertake their custody, but in some other
cases, one has to be *permitted* to take over a task or someone's
affairs.

For example, every human being undertakes their own affairs because of
their innate authority over themselves without needing anything or
anyone in this authority; in contrast, however, if they wish to
interfere in others' lives and undertake to manage them, they have to
have permission for it.[^13]  
 In cases where the custody of parents is concerned, mention is made of
a natural-genetic right that is created as soon as a filial relationship
is realized.

Naturally, such a right cannot be relinquished so much as the genetic
relationship between the child and its parents cannot be relinquished,
especially if we remember that custody is a reciprocal right. On one
side is the child and on the other either the father or mother. On one
hand if the child is not protected, it would fall prey to annihilation –
so the parents are obliged to protect and support their child, and on
the other hand, the realization of father-child or mother-child
relationship itself necessitates the parents and not other people to
undertake their child's care.

Therefore, it is incumbent on the parents to fulfill their duties in
this respect and they are not allowed to shun this responsibility, for
failure in this case would inflict serious harms on the child.[^14]

However, as we will explain in the following chapters, besides the
parents and the child's blood relatives who naturally undertake the
child's custody; there are other people who can undertake this task,
such as a person who by specific conditions can undertake the custody of
abandoned babies.  
 Although picking up abandoned babies from public passageways
(*iltiqat*) is a collective obligation, by leaving the baby to the
finder of the baby or any other person through the organizations which
are authorized to make decisions about such a baby, that person is
privileged (permitted) to undertake the baby's custody.

This privilege or right is a legal right according to which God has
given the person the responsibility of taking care of a baby and that
person has the right to relinquish or transfer it to others. As he can
discontinue his cooperation in this respect or due to losing the
competence for taking care of the baby the right to custody is taken
back from them.

Finally, it is concluded from all the traditions related from the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) that from the viewpoint of Islamic law, taking
care of the child is the father's main responsibility; although at a
juncture this responsibility is transferred to someone else such as the
mother. In all the traditions dealing with the mother's entitlement
(precedence) to the custody of the child, it is stressed that the
mother's priority is temporary and at a certain due time, it is
nullified.[^15] Nevertheless, the traditions stating the father's status
mention his priority and entitlement (precedence) without any limitation
or determining a specific due time and as an inclusive law (a man is
more entitled than a woman to his child's custody ecause of his status
as a father).[^16]

Stages of Child Custody
-----------------------

The issue of child custody is examinable in two stages: the infancy and
afterwards; or, in other words, before and after two years of age.

It is evident that the issue of custody and who should undertake this
responsibility is brought up when the parents have been separated; but
in case of continued matrimony, this issue is out of discussion because
the parents cooperate in taking care of their child.

### 1. Child Custody before the Age of Two

Some jurists believe that the custody of a child before the age of two
is to be undertaken by the mother[^17]; others believe that the custody
of the child is upon both parents, even though they are separated.[^18]

Despite certain arguments[^19], the most significant reason that the
proponents of both views present is the traditions related from the
Infallible Imams in Islamic sources.

Regarding their content, these traditions are divisible into three
categories:

1. Partnership of both parents in child custody (the tradition related
by Dawud b. Husayn).[^20]

2. Child custody as exclusive to the mother: Viewing the mother as more
deserving (*ahaqq* = more rightful) towards her child, these traditions
state this priority sometimes in respect to breastfeeding[^21] and at
other times irrespective of it.[^22] As a result, some jurists argue
that the lack of reference to the object of this priority (omission of
the dependent – *mutaʿallaq*) denotes the generality of mother's
priority in the custody of her child. Moreover, they claim the
correlation between breastfeeding (*ridhaʿ*) and child custody
(*hidhanat*) have implied that during the breastfeeding period the child
custody rests with the mother.[^23]

3. Child custody as Exclusive to the mother (absoluteness of the
tradition is related by Ibn ʿAbbas and Fudhayl b. Yasar).[^24]

#### Survey and Summation of the Narrations

The first group of the traditions, including that of Dawud b. Husayn, is
reliable in *sanad* (chain of transmission). This tradition in itself
includes all parents, either divorced or still in marriage bond, and
denotes that taking care of the child in its first two years of life,
i.e., infancy, is upon both the parents who share this task together.

However, it must be noted that, as an explanation of the statement of
the verse 233 of *Surat al-Baqara*: ﴾Mothers shall breastfeed their
children for two full years﴿, the Imam (A.S.) has uttered the statement
"So long as the baby is suckling, its custody is equally shared between
the parents". In addition, we said previously that this verse suggests
that after separation from their husbands, the mothers are obliged to
breastfeed their babies for two full years if their husbands ask them to
do so, and that the babies can be weaned before two years only if the
parents make such decision by mutual consent and consultation.

Therefore, the phrase "equally shared between the parents" is derived
from the statement ﴾with mutual consent and consultation﴿ and has
nothing to do with the issue of *hidhanat* (custody)[^25], thereby none
of the objections raised against the *sanad* or evidentiary proof of
this tradition by some jurists would be valid.[^26]

From among the second group of traditions, although varied in type, only
the tradition related by Ayyub b. Nuh via Shaykh al-Saduq is valid in
its chain of transmission. The content of which denotes the mother's
priority in the custody (*hidhanat*) of her child up to the age of
seven.

Ayyub b. Nuh's tradition has constrained the absoluteness of the third
group traditions, i.e. the traditions related by Abi al-ʿAbbas and
Fudhayl b. Yasar which denote the father's priority in the custody of
his child. The above would sum up to the fact that during the first two
years of the child's life (i.e., infancy) the mother is superior over
the father in taking care of the child.[^27]

It is worth mentioning that in order to be able to undertake the custody
of her child; the mother has to meet certain qualifications that will be
talked about later on.[^28]

It is to be noted that a child can be turned over to its mother to be
taken care of (custody) during its first two years of life (infancy) as
long as the mother consents to breastfeed her child. However, if she
rejects to do so, the father is permitted to hire a foster
suckling-mother for the child and take it away from its mother;[^29]
because, as mentioned above, taking care of the child (its custody) is
upon the father and the mother would take up this responsibility for a
limited period due to a specific reason. Transfer of custody to the
mother is sure to occur when the mother breastfeeds her child for free
or for a wage equal to that demanded by others; otherwise, the principle
of non-transfer of child custody to the mother is in effect.[^30]

### 2. Child Custody after the Age of two

Once the infancy period is over while the parents have separated, who
should undertake the custody of the child?

Answer to this question can be examined in the form of three hypotheses:

**2. 1. The parents being alive:** In case the parents are divorced and
are both alive, there are various views stated by the jurists on the
custody of the child in terms of its gender. The most important is the
priority of the mother in the custody of a son up to the age of two and
a daughter up to the age of seven. To prove this as agreed by all
jurists (consensus), reference has been made to the reconciliation of
the traditions and preference of the traditions denoting seven years of
age;[^31] of course, none of these reasons are sufficient to prove it
and the differentiation between a son and a daughter concerning custody
does not seem right.[^32]

As stated previously, the custody of the child, although after being
weaned, is the main responsibility of the father; however, the mother is
also given the right to undertake this responsibility up to the age of
seven if she wishes so irrespective of the child's gender.[^33]

The best evidence for proving this view is the tradition related by
Ayyub b. Nuh, which explicitly states: "The woman is more deserved to
[take care of] her child until it reaches seven, unless she wishes
otherwise."[^34] It is obvious that this statement can constrain the
absoluteness of the tradition related by Dawud, the tradition related by
Abi al-ʿAbbass and the one related by Fudhayl b. Yasar[^35] denoting the
father's priority, and regard his right as authorized after the age of
seven.[^36]

**2. 2. Either of the parents being alive:** In case the mother dies
while undertaking the custody of her child (to the age of seven), the
responsibility of the child custody will be transferred to the
father.[^37] Since the child custody – as it was said before – is the
responsibility of the father and it is transferred to the mother for
seven years in case she desires so; therefore, the father has priority
over others in his child's custody. The possibility of transferring this
privilege to the child's maternal grandmother – as Ibn Barraj has
asserted – does not sound correct.[^38]

However, if the father dies, there is no doubt that the mother would
undertake the custody of the child up to the age of seven. However, who
should take care of the child after this age?

Some jurists have mentioned the restoration of custody to the mother and
have invoked the verse ***﴾the blood relatives are more entitled to
inherit from one another in the Book of Allah.﴿***[^39] and the verse
***﴾neither the mother shall be made to suffer harm on her child's
account, nor the father on account of his child﴿.***[^40] The jurists'
consensus (*ijmaʿ*), Dawud b. Husayn's tradition, Ibn Sanan's tradition,
the practical principle of continuance (*istishab*), the mother's
emotional condition, and the very traditions concerning *hidhanat*
(custody).[^41]

In contrast, there are some other possibilities brought up such as
transfer of the child custody to the father's *wasi* (executor of the
father's will),[^42] to the paternal grandmother,[^43] and to the
paternal grandfather, of which the latter possibility is more likely to
be correct by all the reasons presented.[^44]

**2. 3. None of the parents being alive:** If a child loses one of its
parents before it reaches maturity, who must undertake its custody?

To answer this question, first we have to look for a specific reason for
which one or more persons are determined to undertake this
responsibility and if there is not such a reason, seek to decide on
someone by means of resorting to the existing generalities.

As it was stated before, this responsibility is transferred to the
child's paternal grandfather, since seeing into and appropriation of the
child's properties and making decision about its marriage, at least
before reaching maturity, is only upon the grandfather to a similar
level as its father in his absence. All the more so, then, the child's
affairs and custody rest with him.[^45]

In case the child's grandfather is not alive, this responsibility will
be transferred to the father's and grandfather's executor. That is
because the latter is the exclusive successor of the father and
grandfather, who is authorized to intervene in the underage child and it
is clear that custody and rearing of the child is among the duties of
the father and the grandfather.[^46]

Furthermore, although Ibn Abi ʿUmayr's tradition denotes the mother's
priority over the executor, it is also implied from this same denotation
that the executor has some responsibility toward the custody of the
child.[^47]

In contrast to this view, i.e., transferring the duty of child custody
after the death of its parents to its paternal grandfather, other views
have also been raised in Islamic jurisprudence, such as: transfer of
custody to the child's near of kin according to the hierarchy of their
inheritance (*awla bi* *mirathihi*)[^48], transfer to the child's
paternal kin (*ʿusba*),[^49] transfer to the child's maternal aunt[^50],
which, given the previous explanations, do not sound correct.

Qualifications for Child Custody
--------------------------------

Although the mother can take care of her child up to seven years after
divorce from her husband, she has to meet certain qualifications for
undertaking such a task, the lack of each one of which would lead to
losing her competence to this end.

Of course, it is to be noted that if undertaking the child’s custody is
subject to the realization of these qualifications, there is no
difference in this task between the mother and other people of equal
rank or her successors.

Eight qualifications have been stated in old legal texts for
confirmation of the mother's competence in the custody of her child:

**1. Islam**: Since before reaching maturity the child is legally
attached to the religion of its father or mother, some jurists believe
that the mother can take the custody of her child after separation from
her Muslim husband if she is a Muslim herself.

The most important reason for this, notwithstanding the possibility of a
non-Muslim mother's influencing her child's beliefs, is the
impermissibility of the guardianship of a non-Muslim (unbeliever) over a
Muslim child.[^51]

To our opinion, however, what is meant by negation of way (*nafyi
sabil*) in the verse ﴾and Allah will never provide the faithless any way
[to prevail] over the faithful.﴿[^52] is not the negation of dominance
of the non-Muslims over the Muslims, since a Muslim can have a
non-Muslim employer. Rather, it means that the non-Muslim has no reason
(argument) for disapproving Muslims. Furthermore, what is meant by child
custody is only taking care of the child and has nothing to do with
guardianship over the child so that a non-Muslim mother's taking care of
a Muslim child may require the guardianship of non-Muslims over the
Muslims.[^53]

Irrespective of its weak chain of transmission (*sanad*) and as
proportionate to other traditions,[^54] the tradition "Islam takes
precedence over all and nothing takes precedence over it"[^55] is
dedicated to inheritance and indicates that a Muslim inherits from a
non-Muslim but not vice versa.[^56] So, it cannot be proved through this
tradition that a non-Muslim mother cannot take the custody of her Muslim
child.[^57]

**2. Intellect**: Among the basic requirements of the mother's custody
of her child is her being sane. If the mother does not enjoy the
soundness of intellect, she cannot undertake her child's custody,
because she is not only unable to take care and safeguard her child, but
she herself needs someone to take care and custody of her.[^58]

However, the jurists wonder if there is a difference between the
periodical and chronic insanity in this respect.

Some of the jurists believe that there is no difference between these
two types of insanity; for, taking care of the child (its custody) does
not require guardianship over the child; thus, it can be reconciled with
insanity and the decision in this regard is left with the mother's legal
guardian.[^59] In contrast, some also believe that in both cases the
child's custody cannot be left with the mother, unless the recurrence of
the mother's insanity is extremely low and its duration is not too
long.[^60]  
 To our opinion, however, taking care of her child is possible for a
mother only in case she enjoys soundness of intellect, because how can
an insane person who is unable to manage his or her own life, be able to
take care of another person?

Therefore, if the mother is suffering from chronic insanity, she is
certainly not qualified to take the custody of her child and
transferring this issue to the mother's guardian is baseless, because
child custody is not like the right of pre-emption. The right of
delimitation, option of cancellation, and similar rights so that with
the mother's loss of competence decision about them [her and her child]
is transferred to her guardian; rather, child custody is a duty
incumbent upon the mother, which will not be possible to fulfill if the
mother is afflicted with insanity.

But if the mother's insanity is periodical so that she is able to do her
duties, its occurrence will not endanger the child's physical and
psychological health and the mother can in due time undertake her
child's custody.

Of course, it is evident that if the criterion for the permission of
child custody is the mother's capability, she can be judged as not
forbidden from her child's custody due to periodical insanity only when
its occurrence is not so frequent as to having an impact on the child's
life and practically depreciate the mother's ability in taking care of
her child and satisfying its needs.[^61]

**3. Freedom**: Among the qualifications mentioned in some of the early
legal books, concerning the mother's custody of her child is that she is
not a slave, which to our opinion is not a valid qualification at least
for the mother.[^62]

Although talking about the rules of slavery in our time is useless due
to the abolishment of slavery, this issue – by refinement of reason –
can be useful in two cases. When the mother is imprisoned for committing
a crime or is living in a forced labor camp; for, as the slaves have
been deprived of wielding power in most of their daily affairs and
unable to make independent decisions about their lives, it is also true
for the person who lives in a prison or a forced labor camp.

Now the question is raised that whether the child is sent to prison
along with her mother to be taken care of by her, although she is not
able to make independent decisions concerning her own daily life
affairs. Alternatively, it is separated from the mother to be left with
the father or any other person who can legally take its custody because
of the inappropriate atmosphere of such places and the destructive
effects that such places may have on the personality growth of the
child.

**4. Freedom from Matrimonial Rights**: According to this qualification,
the mother may not marry while holding her child's custody.

To prove this issue, such reasons as consensus of the jurists, failure
of mother in her maternal duties when remarried, and several traditions
have been relied on, among which the traditions are of most
importance.[^63]

In five traditions, reference has been made to the mother's marriage and
child custody and it is emphasized that the mother enjoys the right to
have the custody of her child so long as she has not married. Among
these traditions, of course, only Dawud Riqqi's is valid in *sanad*.
However, the tradition related by Sulayman b. Dawud b. Minqari is weak
for the uncertainty of its transmitter as Hafs b. Qiyath or someone
else.[^64] The tradition related by ʿAbd Allah b. ʿAmr b. al-ʿAs is also
weak for its lack of *sanad* and thus both are invalid.[^65]

In Dawud Riqqi's tradition, although the Imam does not directly talk
about the prohibition of the mother's getting married, the statement
"the slave is not privileged to separate his children from their mother
until he is freed even though she is married"[^66] clearly indicates
that although the mother's marriage is an obstacle to her taking the
custody of her child, but the father's being a slave is an obstacle to
hold his child's custody as well. As his obstacle is greater than the
mother's being married, the child remains in its mother's custody and
upon the removal of the greater obstacle, i.e., the father’s slavery,
the child is returned to him.

Thus, there remains no doubt that if the mother gets married during her
child's first seven years of age while the child's father is alive and
there is also no obstacle for her to take care of her child, this
marriage will cause the loss of her right to her child's custody, which
will then be transferred to the father.[^67]

Of course, it is clear that the mother's marriage is a barrier to her
child's custody when she gets married to a man other than her
ex-husband.[^68] That is because if she remarries her ex-husband and the
father of her child, the issue of custody is by itself resolved since
all the evidences for custody are relevant in case the two have been
separated. However, if the father dies, will the mother's marriage still
result in the loss of her right to her child's custody?

Although some jurists believe that in case the father dies, the mother's
marriage will not result in losing her right.[^69] To our opinion, as
indicated by Dawud Riqqi's tradition, the mother's marriage is an
obstacle to her child's custody whether the father is dead or alive,
because if the father dies the responsibility of child's custody goes to
the paternal grandfather. Thus, with the mother's marriage the custody
of her child is transferred to the father or his successor.

It is clear that in this problem the second husband's consent has no
effect on the child custody, since the traditions that mention the
mother's marriage as an obstacle are effectual irrespective of the
second husband's consent or refusal.[^70] In addition, the inhibition of
marriage is for observing the right of the father and the child, and
this right is not vindicated with the consent of the mother's second
husband.

**Renewability of the Mother's Right**: If we accept that the mother's
marriage will hinder her from taking the custody of her child, then the
question is raised that if the mother separates from her second husband,
can she take back the custody of her child?

Some jurists believe that if the mother separates from her second
husband during the time that she enjoys the right to her child's custody
– i.e., the first seven years of the child's life – she can take back
her child's custody.[^71]

If we accept such a claim, since in Islamic law a woman's separation
from a man (divorce) is possible in two forms of revocable (*rijʿi*) and
irrevocable (*ba’in*)[^72], two possibilities are set forth. 1. The
mother's right to custody is given back to her when she has separated
from her second husband by irrevocable divorce, or in case she has
separated by revocable divorce, her *ʿidda* period has to be over.[^73]
2. The criterion in the mother's renewal of her child's custody is her
separation from her second husband, whether by revocable or irrevocable
divorce. Since in revocable divorce there is no matrimonial obligation
upon the mother, therefore she can freely take care of her child.[^74]

The most significant reasons presented by the proponents of the return
(or restoration) theory – despite the tradition of ʿAbd Allah .b ʿAmr b.
al-ʿAs which is not valid for its lack of *sanad*[^75] – is that the
mother's marriage is an obstacle to her child's custody. It is clear
that the existence of an obstacle causes a ruling to relinquish rather
than the lack of an obstacle creating a ruling,[^76] therefore, the
mother's priority remains intact with her separation from her second
husband.

In addition, the mother's marriage makes her occupied with fulfilling
her marital duties and her second husband's rights, which are far more
powerful than the right to custody; now, if the mother separates from
her husband, that obstacle is removed and she can undertake the custody
of her child again.[^77]

To our opinion, however, the mother's separation from her second husband
does not restore her right to undertake her child's custody, since the
restoration of the mother's right after its loss requires a reason. If
we have doubt in the restoration of this right, the practical principle
signifies the non-restoration of this right, just as in other instances
the relinquished right will not be restored with the restoration of the
circumstances to the earlier state.

**5. Trustworthiness**: Among the qualifications mentioned in legal
texts for permitting the mother to take the custody of her child is her
trustworthiness.[^78]

Mother's being trustworthy is interpreted from two aspects. Lack of
sinful signs (depravity) in her, which is sometimes mentioned as
justice[^79] or lack of perfidy and negligence in the issues related to
the child's life,[^80] which seems to be more pertinent, since a mother
may not be abiding by the moral instruction of the religion but does not
show the slightest negligence in taking care of her child.

Although, for proving this condition such reasons as incompatibility
with guardianship (*wilayat*), uncertainty of perfidy, creation of an
atmosphere of learning bad habits for the child, and the appearance of
distress and constriction have been referred to,[^81] to our opinion,
the validity of the parents' having moral competence for undertaking the
custody of their child does not require a specific reason, since the
very legislation for custody is for protecting the life and
psychophysical well-being of the children whose parents have separated
by the ominous phenomenon of divorce.[^82] Now, how is it possible to
leave the child with a parent who may inflict serious physical or moral
damages upon that child?

Is it logically permissible to transfer the children's custody to the
parents (either father or mother) who misuse them as tools for earning
money by sending them to street to engage in such acts as beggary, shoe
shining, windshield cleaning, etc? Can it be claimed that the Holy
Lawmaker would  
 consent to such transference?

Besides, if we regard the child custody and leaving it to either of the
parents as a trust, the generalities that validate a person to be
entrusted would be evidentiary in the validity of this qualification in
the issue of custody.[^83]

**6. Unchanging of the Mother's Residence**: Some of the Sunni jurists
believe that in order to be able to take care of her child a mother
should not change her residence, whether temporarily or permanently
(through traveling).[^84]

To our opinion, although as Muhaqqiq Tusi and some other Shiʿa jurists
have asserted that the application of traditions on custody includes the
two hypotheses of the mother's residence and change of residence, whose
giving up is to be reasonable,[^85] it should be noted that the child is
not merchandise in the hands of the father or mother who have the right
to posses it; rather, it is entrusted to them to take care of during the
time it is not able to manage its own life and to provide means for its
growth. Therefore, during the time the child is living under the
supervision of its mother or father, its interests must be taken into
account.

Therefore, if the change of residence does not have a negative impact on
the child's life trend, psychophysical health, education, and moral
conduct, it will undoubtedly live with its mother given the (other)
proofs hold true. But, if the change of residence is detrimental to it
in any of the physical, psychological, emotional, religious, and
educational aspects, this change will not be permissible. Nor will
resorting to the absoluteness of traditions for its permissibility be
possible, as certitude about the custody of either of the parents is
true when the child's health is in all aspects secured.

**7.** **Unchanging of the Father's Residence**: The Sunni jurists have
made the child's custody by the mother conditional on the unchanging of
the father's permanent or temporary (by travel) residence, in a way that
if the father decides to change his place of residence, he can take the
child away from the mother.[^86]

To our opinion, since there is no legal evidence for these issues in the
traditions and Qur’anic verses,[^87] what is in the child's best
interests has to be taken into account. If being with the father or
mother is to the child's interest, it would move along with them and if
staying in its present residence were in his best interests, it would
stay on.[^88]

**8. Unafflicted with Chronic and Contagious Diseases**: We explained
previously that the mother's insanity is a factor in disclaiming her
competency in the custody of her child. Furthermore, some jurists have
raised the question whether the mother's being afflicted with chronic
and contagious diseases, as was the case for insanity, causes the loss
of her competency or not.[^89]

By raising the issue, that a child's living with its sick mother will
cause harm to it and by referring to the Prophet's words warning to keep
a distance from those infected with leprosy and not watering a diseased
camel from the same place as the healthy animals drink, some claim that
such medical considerations in a religious context prompt us to proclaim
with certainty that a child must be separated from its sick mother.[^90]

In contrast, some also believe that the mother's affliction with chronic
and contagious diseases would not cause the loss of her right to the
custody of her child. Proving this, they have made reference to the
tradition related by Nadhr b. Qirwash al-Jammal,[^91] as well as the
traditions on custody and their non-reference to these diseases as
restraining the mother's right to custody, the invalidity of mother's
assistance and interference in the custody of her child and the
practical principle of preference (*istishab*).[^92]

To our opinion, the contagious diseases have to be distinguished from
the chronic ones. In the contagious diseases, so long as the mother has
not recovered from her illness, the child may not be left in her care;
in the chronic diseases, however, its effect on the mother's ability to
take care of the child is to be taken into account.

If the mother is afflicted with certain chronic diseases such as
different kinds of cancers, which do not hinder the mother from taking
care of her child, her right to her child's custody is retained even
though she receives help from others to this end. But if this disease is
so serious that it does not allow the mother to fulfill her duty and
someone else is to help out, there is no doubt that the child cannot be
left with her since the narrations concerning custody are applicable
where the mother is directly undertaking the duties of taking care of
her child. In other words, the mother's right to custody is certainly
valid when the mother is capable of fulfilling her duties so that the
child's psychophysical health is not endangered.

Accordingly, it is not unlikely to claim that if the mother is addicted
to narcotic drugs or alcoholic drinks, she is not qualified for her
child's custody, although she is able to fulfill her duties, as its
ethico-moral soundness, and in some cases its physical health, will be
endangered. Thus, leaving the child with such a mother will cause the
relinquishment of a purpose for which the law of custody has been
devised.  
 In the end, it is necessary to consider some points:

**First**: All the qualifications mentioned for custody, if we have
reason for their validity, are not exclusive to the mother but common
between her and the father, unless in regard to marriage, which, in case
of validity, is only exclusive to the mother and is not applied to the
father.[^93]

**Second**: As, to our opinion, the mother's custody period includes the
first seven years of the child's life, be it a boy or a girl, and after
that the custody is transferred to the father up to the age of maturity,
therefore, each of the parents is to observe these terms during their
custody period.[^94]

**Third**: The qualifications explained above are related to custody;
and the custody of a child and the related discourses are in effect only
when the parents have been separated. Therefore, when they are living
together they both undertake their child's care and in case of the
incompetence of either one, the other takes the custody of the
child.[^95]

**Fourth**: Given the fact that the child's infancy is part of the
seven-year period that it spends with its mother, the qualifications for
custody are true and necessary during the infancy, too; therefore, not
asserting them for the infancy period is not because of their
invalidity, rather, because of the clarity of their validity.[^96]

Loss of the Required Qualifications for Child Custody
-----------------------------------------------------

If either of the parents, while holding the custody of his or her child,
loses any of the qualifications for this task, who will take over their
duty?

**1. Loss of Mother's Qualifications**: Some of the jurists believe that
if the mother lacks or loses one of the qualifications required for the
custody of her child, then the father will substitute her and undertake
the duty of the child's custody.[^97]

Therefore, if the mother is qualified for taking care of her child but
refuses to fulfill her duties for it, the father has to undertake care
of his child even when the mother has the duty for that and if the
father also refuses to do so, he can be forced to in order to protect
the child.[^98]

In contrast, some also claim that in this case the maternal grandmother
substitutes and fulfills her duties;[^99] naturally, if the grandmother
is a successor to the mother, in case of the mother's absence or her
refusal to undertake her child's custody, this duty is transferred to
her.

To our opinion – as we also explained before – the child's custody is
the father's main intrinsic duty that for special reasons is transferred
to the mother for the first seven years of its life; then, if the mother
cannot or does not want to fulfill this duty, the father will substitute
her.

**2. Loss of Father's Qualifications**: However, if the father lacks or
loses one of the required qualifications, the possibility has been set
forth in some legal texts that the task of taking care of the child up
to maturity is transferred to the mother.[^100]

The proponents of this view believe that according to the traditions
narrated by Fudhayl b. Yasar and Dawud Riqqi,[^101] if the father is a
slave, so long as he is not set free, his child's custody will be left
with the mother, even if she has been married to someone else.
Accordingly, if other barriers to the father's custody of the child such
as lack of moral competency, lack of intellectual soundness, and
affliction with contagious diseases occur too, the mother, all the more
so and in case of enjoying the required qualifications, has priority
over other people in her child's custody. Besides the practical
principle of continuance (*istishab*) also indicates the continuation of
the mother's right.[^102]

To our opinion, however, during the time that the father is undertaking
his child's custody, i.e., from seven until maturity, in case the father
does not have the requirements for the child's custody or if he loses
them, this duty will be transferred to the paternal grandfather. That is
because with the termination of the mother's custody period, the duty of
taking care of the child is transferred to the father or his successor;
and as we explained before, the paternal grandfather is the
successor.[^103]

Return of the Requirements
--------------------------

So far, we have stressed that custody of a child is subject to certain
qualifications and if any of the parents loses one of them they will no
longer be qualified to hold the custody of their child. However, it is
natural to raise the question that if either of the parents regains the
required qualifications for the child's custody, can the child be put
under their care?

If the father regains the required qualifications, his child's custody
will undoubtedly be given back to him. The statement, "he is more
deserved of his child than the mother due to his status as a father" in
Fudhayl b. Yasar's tradition indicates that loss of qualifications is an
obstruction to the father's status and it is obvious that if the
obstructions are removed, his fatherliness will restore its efficacy.

Similarly, if the mother is also able to regain the required
qualifications while holding the custody of her child, for example, when
signs of insanity are removed from her, her contagious disease is
treated, etc., she will regain her right to the custody of her child,
for the expediency for custody is retained in her. Here, only an
obstacle has barred its efficacy, which if removed, the expediency will
be effective, except for the marriage of the mother, which we have
previously talked about.

Parents' Relationship during the Child Custody
----------------------------------------------

Among the most important issues brought up in child custody is the way
the parents treat each other and the kind of relationship existing
between them during this period, for as we explained before, child
custody comes up when the parents have separated through divorce.

Naturally, when the parents are not living together under a single roof,
the child has to live with one of them as according to the previous
explanations the child, regardless of gender, lives with its mother
during the first seven years of its life, and after that the father
undertake its custody up to maturity.

It needs to be noted, however, that the parents' separation in itself
creates tension between them, which may lead to hostile and vengeful
behavior.

This unfriendly relationship between the parents would most often reach
its peak by using the child as bait, that is, the child being with one
parent is a means or pretext to exert indirect pressure on the other
parent. For this reason, the great Shiʿa jurists have since long ago
attempted by stating a definition of these relations to minimize the
probable damage being inflicted upon any of the parents as well as the
child.

During the period in which the child is living with its father, whether
due to the mother's lack of qualification for the child's custody or
because her legal time for this purpose has run out, the father must
make arrangements for the child's relationship with its mother in a way
that neither the child nor the mother may be kept at bay. To this end,
the father has to prepare the ground for certain affairs to
fulfill:[^104]

**First, meeting with the child**: He should prepare the ground for the
meeting between the child and its mother. Moreover, not to prevent it,
since preventing the child from meeting its mother would lead to
breaking off the ties of relationship, which is strongly repulsive to
Islam.

**Second, nursing the child**: If the child gets sick, the father must
not prevent the mother from nursing and treating the child and hold her
back from staying with her child, since the mother is more caring than
others towards her child, and the sick child needs someone to take care
of it and it is obvious that the mother is the most deserving person for
this task.

**Third, nursing the mother**: When the mother gets sick, the father
must not prevent the child – whether her son or daughter – to visit
their mother frequently.

**Fourth, child's mourning ceremony**: In case the child passes away
while the father is holding its custody, the mother can be present at
her child's deathbed and attend to the related tasks.[^105]

**Fifth, mother's mourning ceremony**: And if the mother dies, her child
can be present at her deathbed, and if old enough, the child can
undertake to administer the burial services such as funeral ablution,
enshrouding, funeral procession, and burial, provided that the mother's
husband gives them permission for this.

As the researches indicate, nothing is mentioned in any of the Shiʿa
legal texts about the child's relationship with its father while living
with its mother.[^106]

To our opinion, taking care of the child by any of the parents cannot
lead to the relinquishment of the mutual rights of the child and
parents; thus, all the things that are conventionally regarded as the
requirements and functions of the father-child or the mother-child
relationships are permissible and the child or any of the parents cannot
be deprived of it.

[^1]: Q. 20: 40.

[^2]: Q. 28: 12.

[^3]: Q. 3: 37.

[^4]: Q. 3: 44.

[^5]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan, 2/459-460; Tabrisi,
Fadhl b. Hasan, Majmaʿ al-Bayan, 283; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli b.
Muhammad, Fath al-Qadir, 1/339.

[^6]: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, ʿJamiʿ al-Bayanʿ, 3/331; Faydh Kashani,
Al-Safi, 1/336; Qummi Mashhadi, Kanz al-Daqa’iq, 2/87; Tabrisi, Fadhl b.
Hasan, ʿMajmaʿ al-Bayan, 2/292.

[^7]: Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Subul al-Salam, Mustata al-Albabi Halabi,
1379/1959,3/227; Fayyumi, Ahmad b. Muhammad, Al-Misbah al-Munir, ed.
Muhammad Muhi al-Din ʿAbd al-Hamid, 1347/1927, 1/193.

[^8]: See: Jawahiri, Ismaʿil b. Hammad, Al-Sihah, 5/2101; ʿLisan
al-ʿArab, 13/122-124; Zubaydi, Muhammad Murtaza, Taj al-ʿArus,
9/180-181.

[^9]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/295 and 311; idem, Tahrir
al-Ahkam, 1/247; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/273; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn,
Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 7/129 and 246; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir,
27/293; Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 3 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya,
Berut, n.d., 2/388.

[^10]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/43; idem, Qawaʿid
al-Ahkamʿ, 3/101; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/263; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad
b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; ʿAmili al-Faqʿani, Zayn al-Din Abu
al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi Maʿrifat Siyagh al-Niyyat wa al-Iqaʿat
wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat, Maktibat al-Imam al-ʿAsr, Shiraz, 1st
edition, 1418/1997, p. 204; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/139;
ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/460; Sabziwari, Muhammad
Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 193; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/458; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/421; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq
al-Nadhira, 25/83; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/160;
Fathullah, Dr. Ahmad, Muʿjam-i Alfadh al-Fiqh al-Jaʿfari, 1st edition,
Mtabiʿ al-Madukhal, 1415/1995, p. 162.

[^11]: Tawhidi, Muhammad ʿAli, Misbah al-Fiqaha, 7 vols. 3rd edition,
Qum, Matbaʿa al-Sayyid al-Shuhada, 1412/1992., 2/47; Ruhani, Sayyid
Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 15/206-204.

[^12]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/284; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad,
Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 4/472-473.

[^13]: It is by this same consideration that in relation to establishing
the principle of guardianship (wilaya) it is stated that the principle
is (taken to be based on) the non-guardianship and non-authority of a
human ruling over another human being, because every human being is
created free and independent and, in terms of creation and nature, is
dominant over their own life, property, and mind. See: Muntaziri, Husayn
ʿAli, Dirasat fi Wilayat al-Faqih wa Fiqh al-Dawlat al-Islamiyya, 2nd
edition, Al-Markaz al-ʿAlimi li al-Dirasat al-Islamiyya, 1409/1988,
1/27.

[^14]: Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/338-339; also, for more
information about the reasons of those who regard custody as an
unrelinquishable right and criticism of them, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/464; Najafi, Muhammad
Hasan, Jawahir, 31/284; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il,
2/163; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/305; Fadhil
Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/107; Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd
Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya fi Sharh Nukhbat al-Muhsiniyya, manuscript,
Astan Quds Razavi, p.296.

[^15]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/103, No. 1 and 45, No. 3;
Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/509, No. 4788 and 275,
No. 1303 and 1305; Hurr ʿAmili, Muhammad Hasan,Wasa’il al-Shiʿa, 15/191,
No. 2-3, and 192, No. 7; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz,
2/201.

[^16]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/105, No. 353; Ibn
Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275, No. 1304. For more
information, see: Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham,
2/106-107; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/652; Jaza’iri,
Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p.295.

[^17]: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id
fi al-Fiqh wa al-Usul wa al-ʿArabiyya, ed. Sayyid ʿAbd al-Hadi Hakim, 2
vols. Maktibat al-Mufid, n.d., 1/395; Miqdad Suyuri, Nadhd al-Qawaʿid
al-Fiqhiyya ʿala Madhhab al-Imamiyya, ed. ʿAbdul Latif Kuhkamari,
Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum, 1403/1982, 433; Sabziwari, Muhammad
Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 193.

[^18]: Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ, 3/426; also, to learn
about its criticism, see: ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram,
1/466; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/162.

[^19]: See: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/285; Kulayni, Muhammad
b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/492, No. 1; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Tusi, Al-Amali, ed. Biʿthat Institute, 1st edition, Dar al-Thiqafa, Qum,
1414/1993., p. 342, No. 700.

[^20]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 4.

[^21]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/103, No. 3 and 41, No. 6
and 44, No. 1; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/509,
No. 4788; Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/256, No. 976.

[^22]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275, No. 1303,
1305; Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 3; Hurr ʿAmili,
Muhammad Hasan,Wasa’il al-Shiʿa, 15/192, No. 7.

[^23]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/421; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/302-303.

[^24]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/105, No. 353; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275,
No. 1304.

[^25]: There are other alternatives in explaining this statement, such
as: 1. the parents both share in the child custody, 2. the child is
equally related to both the mother and the father; and none of them is
superior [in this respect] to the other one, 3. the mother is obliged to
breastfeed (ridha) and the father is obliged to pay the wage; this way
reaning of the child is equally shared between the father and the
mother; see: Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/162; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/286.

[^26]: Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/162; Ruhani, Sayyid
Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/304; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat
al-Maram, 1/466; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/86.

[^27]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/421; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/304.

[^28]: For more information, see: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam,
2/567; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; Yusufi,
Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/200; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan,
Jawahir, 31/273.

[^29]: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/87; Muhaqqiq Hilli,
Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/566 and 568; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd
al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir,
2/651; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; Yusufi,
Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/200.

[^30]: It is worth mentioning that in order to prove the annulment of
the mother's right to custody, some jurists have referred to such
reasons as: distress and constriction, correlation between custody
(hidhanat) and suckling (ridhaʿ, the emergence of the term nazʿ (death
agony) in the tradition related by Dawud b. Husayn in the child's
separation from its mother, and the concept of ahaqq (more rightfull);
as some have claimed – with reference to the practical principle,
directing attention in judgment to the dominant case, and the
non-correlation between custody and suckling – that the mother's right
to custody of her child will not be annulled through her refusing to
breastfeed it, which are all criticizable in their context. For more
information, see: Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya,
p.295; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
5/457; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/290-300, and 285; ʿAmili,
Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/466; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/436; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b.
Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
3/263; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/43; Makki, Muhammad
b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/652; Qurtubi, Al-Jamiʿ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an,
3/169.

[^31]: See: Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab,
2/262; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan,
Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf
al-Rumuz, 2/200; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/43; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin, p. 187; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki
ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 176; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat
al-Maram, 1/466; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 7/308; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/291; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/421-422.

[^32]: See: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25-88; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194; Khwansari, Sayyid
Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarikʿ, 4/474; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh
al-Masa’il, 2/162.

[^33]: Al-Wafi, 3/207, chapters on wiladat; Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah,
Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p.296; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and
2/44; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 5/131, problem 36;
Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 6/39; Ruhani, Sayyid
Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/304.

[^34]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/435, No. 4504.

[^35]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 4 and 1; Ibn
Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275, No, 1304.

[^36]: Other views have also been brought up in Islamic jurisprudence in
this respect, such as: mother's priority in custody of her child until
the latter's marriage; priority of mother in custody of her son up to
the age of two and the daughter up to the age of nine; mother's priority
in the custody of her son until the age of seven and the daughter until
the mother gets married; mother's priority in the custody of her son
until maturity and the daughter until she [the daughter] gets married;
mother's priority in the custody of her son until he can eat and dress
by himself and the daughter until she gets married; mother's priority in
the custody of her son until the age of two in case there is a clash and
until the age of seven in case there is no clash; the preference of
leaving the son's custody to the mother until the age of seven. For more
information concerning the reasons for these views and their criticism,
see: Al-Muqni, p. 360; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 7/306, 308,
and 313; Ibn Fahd Hilli, Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ,
3/426-427 and 429; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz,
Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/352; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; Hilli,
Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid
al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/44; Al-Marasim, p.
166; ʿAl-Muqniʿa, p. 531; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Masalik al-Afham, 8/420; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf
al-Litham, 2/106; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/291; Tabataba’i,
Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/162; Bahrani,
Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira, 25/89; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Khilaf, 5/131, issue 35-36; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir,
3/653; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/467-468; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 6/39; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ
al-Madarik, 4/474.

[^37]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 31/293.

[^38]: Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/353-354
and 318; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106;
Jawahir al-ʿUqud, 2/189.

[^39]: Q. 8: 75; 33: 6.

[^40]: Q. 2: 233.

[^41]: For more information of how these evidences have been alluded to
as well as their criticism, see: Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir,
2/652; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/293; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad
b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106-107; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq,
Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/308-309; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il,
2/162; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102; idem, Irshad al-Adhhan,
2/40; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan,
Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz,
Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/44;
Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 4 and 41, No. 7.

[^42]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/510; Shahid Thani,
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/66.

[^43]: ʿAl-Muqniʿa, p. 531.

[^44]: Although in regard to custody, none of the jurists have brought
up the above possibility, it is asked in the book of inheritance whether
one can after his death hand over his child to a stranger to take care
of while the child's grandfather is still alive. Giving a negative
answer to this question, the Shiʿa jurists – contrary to the Sunnis –
have brought up some matters from which it can be concluded that the
custody of the child after its father's death rests with its paternal
grandfather in case the parents have already divorced and the child is
over seven years of age. For more information, see: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 4/161-162, issue 40-41; idem, Al-Mabsut,
4/54-55 and 6/154-155; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/586, 510,
460, and 80; Ali Bahr al-ʿUlum, Sayyid Muhammad, Bulghat al-Faqih, 4th
edition, Maktabat al-Sadiq, 1403/1984, 4/72-73; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad
Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 20/398; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Masalik al-Afham, 6/144 and 268, and 7/195; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf
al-Shiʿa, 6/378; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 3/204; Bahrani,
Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 19/94-95 and 22/16; Muhaqqiq Hilli,
Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/470 and 506; Ansari, Shaykh Murtadha, Al-Wasaya wa
al-Mawarith, 1st edition, Baqiri Publication, Qum, 1415/1995, p. 61;
ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/219 and 2/541 and 7 and 7/418; ʿAllama
Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/52; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf
al-Rumuz, 3/229; ʿAllama Hilli, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin, p. 173; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/151; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus al-Sharʿiyya fi Fiqh
al-Imamiyya, 3 vols. 1st edition, al-Nashr al-Islamiyya Publication,
Qum, 1412/1991 2/323; Hakim, Sayyid Muhsin, Mustamsik al-ʿUrwat
al-Wuthqa, 14 vols. 4th edition, Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut,
1391/1971, 14/593; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 28/277.

[^45]: To prove this view some arguments have been presented which are
not free from dispute. For more information, see: Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad
b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir,
31/295; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/430-431; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; ʿAllama Hilli,
Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/256; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/459-460;
ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/472.

[^46]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/296.

[^47]: It is worth mentioning that the legal texts maintain that in case
of the grandfather's death there are other possibilities such as
transfer of the child's custody to the nearest of kin, the child's
probable legatees in the order of their inheriting from the child, and
to the Islamic ruler. For more information of the reasons for these
views and their criticisms, see: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili,
Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 176; ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 2/40;
Qawaʿid al-Ahkam fi Maʿrifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/102; Fadhil Hindi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106-107; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din
b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/431; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan,
Jawahir, 31/296; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; ʿAmili,
Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/472; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b.
Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira,
25/97.

[^48]: For more information about the reasons set forth by the
proponents of this view, their criticisms, as well as the criterion for
selecting one of the kin, see: Shafiʿi, Abu ʿAbd Allah Muhammad b.
Idris, Al-Umm, 8 vols. 2nd edition, Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1403/1983,
5/92; Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p. 295; Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira, 25/96-97;
Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 5/134-137; Al-Sara’ir,
2/653-654; Qatifi, Ibrahim b. Sulayman, Al-Siraj al-Wahhaj li Dafʿ ʿIjaj
Qatiʿa al-Lijaj, 1st edition, Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum,
1413/1990474; Al-Muqniʿa, p. 531; Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd
al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/353; Al-Wafi, 2/119; Al-Wasila, p.288;
Qurtubi al-Andulusi, Abu Walid Muhammad b. Ahmad (Ibn Rashid al-Hafid)
Bidayat al-Mujtahid wa Nahayat al-Muqtasid, ed. Khalid ʿAttar, 2 vols.
Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1415/1995, 2/46; Qurtubi al-Andulusi, Bidayat
al-Mujtahid, 2/43-44; Jawahir al-ʿUqud, 2/188; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan,
Jawahir, 31/296-300; Shashi, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Hilyat al-ʿUlama fi
Maʿrifat Madhahib al-Fuqaha, Risalat Institute, Beirut, 1400/1980. ,
7/437; Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567-568; Sharh al-Akhbar, 3/201-202, No.
1130; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
5/461-462; Ishtahardi, Shaykh ʿAli Panah, Fatawi-yi Ibn Junayd,
Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1416/1996. p. 264; Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/
311; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkam, 3/102; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/107; Muzni, Ismaʿil b. Yahya, Mukhtasar
al-Muzni, Dar al-Maʿrifa, Beirut, n.d. p. 235; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf
al-Shiʿa, 7/310, and 314-315; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Masalik al-Afham, 8/430-431 and 435; Mughni al-Muhtaj, 3/452; ʿAmili,
Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/472-471.

[^49]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 5/137-138; Makki,
Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/654.

[^50]: Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/654; Ruhani, Sayyid
Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/296.

[^51]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/422; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194;
Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; ʿAmili, Sayyid
Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/468; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh
al-Sadiq, 22/306;

[^52]: Q. 4: 141.

[^53]: Khu’i, Muhammad Taqi, Kitab al-Nikah (Mabani ʿUrwat al-Wuthqa), 2
vols. Dar al-ʿIlm School, 1407/1986, 2/311; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad,
Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 4/476.

[^54]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/344, No.
5717-5718, Awali al-Li’ali, 3/496, No. 15; Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub,
Al-Kafi, 7/143, No. 5.

[^55]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/334, No. 5719.

[^56]: It is to be noted that there are other possibilities brought up
in the meaning of this tradition: 1. Islam will dominate all other
religions, 2. Islam is the best of religions, 3. The truth of Islam is
based on clear evidence and evident proofs, 4. The non-superiority of a
non-Muslim over a Muslim, 5. Encouraging the Muslims to develop the
scholarly global prevalence of Islam, 6. Islam will not be abrogated, 7.
Devising legal ordinances that lead to the Muslims' superiority, 8. The
license for the precedence of the Muslims over non-Muslims, and 9. Not
legislating ordinances that lead to the non-Muslims' superiority over
the Muslims. For more information, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 13/20; Yazdi, Sayyid Muhammad Kazim,
Hashiyat al-Makasib, 2 vol. Ismaʿiliyan Institute, Qum, 1378/1956.,
2/446; Tawhidi, Muhammad ʿAli, Misbah al-Fiqaha, 1/490 and 5/90; Ruhani,
Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 13/75 and 14/157 and 15/40; Khu’i,
Kitab al-Tahara, 8/91; Khomeini, Ruhullah, Kitab al-Tahara, 3 vols.
Ismaʿiliyan Institute, Qum, 1410/1989, 3/311; idem, Kitab al-Bayʿ, 5
vols. 4th edition, Ismaʿiliyan Institute, 1410/1989.2/545; Isfahani,
Muhammad Husayn, Hashiyat al-Makasib, ed. ʿAbbas Muhammad Al-i Sabaʿ,
1st edition, Matbaʿa ʿIlmiyya, Qum, 1418/1997., 2/446; Ansari, Muhammad
ʿAli, Al-Mawsuʿat al-Fiqhiyyat al Maysara, 3 vols. 1st edition, Islamic
Thought Association, Qum, 1415/1995, 3283.

[^57]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/273.

[^58]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/423; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194;
Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/342; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkam,
3/102.

[^59]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/287; for more information
about the criticism of this issue, see: Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq,
Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/307.

[^60]: Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/423; for
more information of its criticism, see: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir,
31/287.

[^61]: Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194.

[^62]: For more information about the reasons proposed for the validity
of this condition, i.e., contradiction of guardianship with slavery,
contradiction of custody with ownership and traditions, as well as their
criticism, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik
al-Afham, 8/422; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam,
p. 194; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/468; Ibn Hajar
ʿAsqalani, Subul al-Salam, 3/229; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf
al-Litham, 2/106; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 4/475-476;
Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/91; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man
la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275, No, 1304; Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan,
Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/107, No. 361; Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi,
5/492, No. 1.

[^63]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/424; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/290; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh
al-Sadiq, 22/305-306; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/469;
Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Al-Muqniʿ, Imam Hadi Publication, Qum, 1415/1995, p.
360; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 7/306; Ibn Fahd Hilli,
Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ, 3/426.

[^64]: Sulayman b. Dawud b. Minqari from Hafs b. Qiyath or other than
him.

[^65]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/45, No. 5; Ibn Babuwayh
Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/435, No. 4502; Tusi, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/105, No. 354; Abi Dawud, Sunan 4/508, No.
2276; Ibn Abi Jumhur Ahsa’i, Muhammad b. ʿAli, ʿAwali al-Li’ali, ed.
Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 4 vols. 1st edition, Sayyid al-Shuhada Publication,
1403/1983., 3/369-370, No. 346.

[^66]: Ibid.

[^67]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/567; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid
al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102; Al-Wasila ila Nail al-Fadhila, p. 288; Makki, Muhammad
b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/651; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar
al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; ʿAllama Hilli, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin, p. 187;
Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p.
176; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 5/132; Shahid Thani,
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 5/463.

[^68]: It is to be pointed out that some of the Sunni jurists claim that
if the mother gets married to her child's paternal uncle, her right to
custody is not lost and she will keep on taking her child's custody:
Minhaji Asyuti, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Jawahir al-ʿUqud, 2/189; Sayyid
Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/344; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli, Nayl al-Awtar
min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 9 vols. Dar al-Jil, Beirut, 1393/1973,
7/139.

[^69]: Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194;
Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam,
31/295; Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya fi Sharh
Nukhbat al-Muhsiniyya, p.296.

[^70]: Jawahir al-ʿUqudud, 2/189; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/424.

[^71]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 5/133; Shahid
Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 176;
Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/568; ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad
al-Adhhan, 2/40; Jawahir al-ʿUqudud, 2/190; Ibn Hamza, Muhammad b. ʿAli,
Al-Wasila ila Nayl al-Fadhila, ed. Muhammad al-Hassun, 1st edition,
Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum, 1408/1988, p. 288.

[^72]: Revocable divorce is one after which a man has the right to go
back to his wife up until the end of her ʿidda period and re-establish
the marital bond. Since this type of divorce is characterized by a
specific inconsistency, the woman enjoys all the rights she used to
enjoy before divorce until the end of her ʿidda period; in the
irrevocable divorce, however, the man does not have the right to return
to his ex-wife, unless after her ʿidda period when he can marry her
again observing all the marriage rules such as the woman's consent and
payment of bridal gift. Naturally, during the ʿidda period the woman
does not enjoy any of the matrimonial rights.

[^73]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf, 5/134; ʿAllama
Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir,
2/651.

[^74]: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 19/93; Fadhil Hindi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106.

[^75]: Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli, Nayl al-Awtar, 7/138; Abi Dawud,
Sunan 1/508, No. 2276; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Khilaf,
5/134; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/651; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/437.

[^76]: The existence of an obstacle is effective in lack of emergence of
a ruling rather than the lack of it to be effective in the existence of
the ruling.

[^77]: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id
fi al-Fiqh wa al-Usul wa al-ʿArabiyya, 2/40; Nadh al-Qawaʿid
al-Fiqhiyya, p. 95; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat
al-Bihiyya, 5/463; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 7/310.

[^78]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/424; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194.

[^79]: For a definition of justice in Islamic Jurisprudence terminology
and various viewpoints about it see: Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh
al-Masa’il, 2/324; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham,
2/107; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 1/149; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad,
Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 12/311; Al-Wasila ila Nail al-Fadhila, p. 230; Makki,
Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 1/280; Al-ʿUrwat al-Wuthqa, 1/10;
Ansari, Kitab al-Tahara, 2 vols. 1st edition, Mu’assisa-yi Al-Hadi, Qum,
1415/1994, p. 402; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 8/217;
ʿAl-Muqniʿa, p. 725.

[^80]: Al-Wasila ila Nail al-Fadhila, p. 288; Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd
Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p.296; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat
al-Maram, 1/469; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/93.

[^81]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham ila
Tanqih Shara’iʿ al-Islam\\, 8/424; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Mabsut fi fiqh al-Imamiyya, 6/40; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat
al-Maram fi Sharh-i Mukhtasar Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 1/469; Fadhil Hindi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/107.

[^82]: Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/289.

[^83]: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 3/265; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/107.

[^84]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 18/341; Sharbini, Muhammad,
Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4 vols. Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1377/1958, 3/452; Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi
Tartib al-Shara’iʿ, 4/45; Ibn Qudama, Al-Mughni,9/307.

[^85]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 6/40; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/425; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, b. Al-Khilaf, 5/132, problem No. 37; ʿAmili,
Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/469; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan,
Jawahir, 31/289.

[^86]: Kashani, Abu Bakr b. Masʿud, Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib
al-Shara’iʿ, 4/45; Ibn Qudama, Al-Mughni,9/307; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh
al-Muhadhdhab, 18/342; Ghazali, Al-Wajiz fi Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim,
2/71; Jawahir al-ʿUqudud, 2/190; also, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/425; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki
ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id, 1/396; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad,
Nihayat al-Maram, 1/469; and for more information about other
possibilities on this problem, see: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Mabsut, 6/40; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham,
2/107.

[^87]: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 19/94.

[^88]: Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/352.

[^89]: In early legal texts, given the knowledge of the time, mention
has been made of such diseases as leprosy, scadies, anthrax, and plague
(cholera); for more information, see: Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah,
Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p.296; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Masalik al-Afham, 8/423 and 425; ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat
al-Maram, 1/469.

[^90]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/557, No. 4914
and 4/357; Ahmad, Musnad, 2/406; Bukhari, Abu ʿAbdullah Muhammad b.
Ismaʿil, Sahih al-Bukhari, 8 vol. Dar al-Fikr li al-Tibaʿat wa al-Nashr
wa al-Towziʿ, 1401/1981 , 7/31; Muslim, Sahih, 7/31; Abi Dawud, Sunan
2/231, No. 3911; Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn, Sunan, 7/135; also see:
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/425;
ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/469; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad
b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id, 1/394; Damad, Muhammad Baqir,
Al-Rawashih al-Samawiyya, Ayatollah Marʿshi Library, Qum, 1405/1985, p.
165.

[^91]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/40, No. 134; Mazandarani,
Mowla Muhammad Salih, Sharh-i Usul al-Kafi, with additional notes by
Mirza Abulhasan Shaʿrani, 12 vols. n.d., 12/259; Muslim, Sahih (Nawawi,
Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi (Sharh-i Muslim), 18 vols. Dar al-Kutub
al-ʿArabiyya, Beirut, 1407/1987.) 1/35; Ghaffari, ʿAli Akbar, Dirasat fi
ʿIlm al-Diraya (Summary of Miqbas al-Hidaya), 1st edition, Imam Sadiq
(A.S.) University, Tehran, 1369 sh. p.49; Nasr, Sayyid Hasan, Nihayat
al-Diraya, ed. Majid al-Gharbawi, Mashʿar Publication, 1935/1975, pp.
168-169; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa
al-Fawa’id, 1/397.

[^92]: ʿAmili, Sayyid Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/468; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 194; Bahrani, Yusuf,
Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhiraʿ, 25/91; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh
al-Masa’il, 2/162; Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq, 22/307;
Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/288; Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah,
Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p.296.

[^93]: Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/162.

[^94]: Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya, p. 296.

[^95]: Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/284.

[^96]: Idem, Jawahir, 31/289.

[^97]: Idem, Jawahir, 31/295; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/43-44;
Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262 and
352-353; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 5/131; ʿJamiʿ
al-Khilaf wa al-Wifaq, p. 510; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkam, 3/102.

[^98]: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id,
1/396.

[^99]: Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/353;
Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106.

[^100]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/429; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 31/295.

[^101]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/275, No, 1304;
Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/107, No. 361.

[^102]: Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/262
and 353; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/652; ʿAmili, Sayyid
Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram, 1/470-471; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/428; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam,
2/567; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan, Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, p. 194; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/44; ʿAllama Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkamʿ, 3/102;
ʿAllama Hilli, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin, p. 187; Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad
b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/106; Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira,
24/210.

[^103]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/44.

[^104]: For further information, see: ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam,
2/44; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/426-427; Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/351.

[^105]: It is to be noted that some jurists while emphasizing the
mother's presence at her child's preparation for burial, enshrouding,
and burial service, have stressed according to some traditions that the
mother is not to attend her child's funeral procession, which from the
viewpoint of the Shiʿi jurists is not true; see: Abi Dawud, Sunan 2/72,
No. 3167; Qazvini, Muhammad b. Yazid, Sunan-i Ibn Majja, ed. Muhammad
Fu’ad ʿAbd al-Baqi, 2 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, n.d. 1/501, No.
1574-1578; Ahmad, Musnad, 6/408-409; Hurr ʿAmili. Muhammad Hasan,Wasa’il
al-Shiʿa, 2/817-819.

[^106]: It is worth mentioning that in some Sunni legal texts there are
phrases that include both the father and mother: "If either of the
parents gets sick or dies and the child is with the other one, it would
not prevent the child to visit him or her or attend his or her funeral."
Sayyid Sabiq, Fiqh al-Sunna, 2/351.


