Part Three: A Study on the Legal Issues of Abandoned Children (Laqit)
=====================================================================

Preliminary Topics of Discourse
-------------------------------

As one of the most important functions of marriage, reproduction
sometimes turns into a serious problem in both individual and social
aspects.

Many women and men in a legitimate or illegitimate way and through
wanted or unwanted submission to sexual intercourse may provide the way
for a baby to be born, whom none of them desired to live on and if it
happens to be born, they cannot manage its life due to certain social or
economic problems.

Such people can take action in two ways to get rid of this problem:
destroying the fetus before birth (abortion), or abandoning the baby
after birth, leading to formation of the “abandoned children”
phenomenon.

Of course, the role of the natural factors in creating abandoned
children is not to be ignored, since some natural disasters such as
flood, earthquake, epidemic diseases, war, etc., may cause the death of
the parents or even close relatives of the child. It is unfortunately in
these circumstances that we encounter the tragic phenomenon of
"unattended children".

Besides the abandoned and unattended children, there is a third group of
children called laboring children. These are a group of children who
despite enjoying legal guardians and living with them, spend most of
their time out of their homes or on the streets in order to earn money
for their guardians.

Similarly important is the issue of the fourth group, i.e., "run-away
children", since there are many children who because of poor family
conditions leave home and wander about aimlessly, continuing to live in
public places in much more unhealthy ways.

Talking about the latter two groups, i.e., "laboring children" and
"run-away children" is beyond the scope of this book, because taking
care of the children who have identified protectors, legally rests with
their guardians (*wali*) or people such as their father or grandfather.
However, a study of the ways in which such children come into being is
to be undertaken as a social problem by sociologists.

The jurists have independently studied the issue of the abandoned
children in books of jurisprudence concerning *luqata*. *Luqata* means
something that someone finds in public places, whether it is property,
animal, or human being.[^1]

Discussing about the found properties and animals and the way to
introduce and find their proprietor is again beyond the scope of this
book, but talking about the babies abandoned in public places, which in
legal terminology are named by three words of *laqit*, *malqut*, and
*manbudh*,[^2] is what we deal with in this chapter.

Of course, it is not to be neglected that many of the rulings set forth
about the abandoned children are true for the unattended children too,
namely the children who have for natural or social reasons lost their
protectors. Thus, among the issues brought up in this chapter, we will
talk about both topics – as relevant to the subject.

*Laqit* refers to any child who is abandoned to its fate, with no one to
raise and take care of it.[^3]

It goes without saying that if the child is old enough to be able to
satisfy its own needs and to take care of its own health, this title
(*laqit*) does not apply to it, nor do the rulings that we will talk
about in the following.[^4]

Now, if such a child has guardians, it will be handed over to them;
otherwise, someone should undertake its custody.

It is also necessary to note that although the term *laqit* does not
apply to the grown up people (adults) since they do not need to be taken
care of (through custody), if their life is at risk, helping them and
saving them from danger is obligatory to everyone.[^5]

### Necessity of Taking Care of the Unattended Children

If we encounter a child in the streets or a public place who does not
have a guardian or whose legal guardian has abandoned and this child is
wandering about with no shelter, what should we do?  
 There are three views in the legal texts concerning the duty of the
people who encounter such children:

Most of the Shiʿa jurists believe that collecting the abandoned and
unattended children and taking care of them is a collective or communal
(*kifa’i*) duty, i.e., if one person undertakes it, others will be
exempt from this task. However, if no one does, all those who are
informed about it while having the possibility to take care of such
children, are sinful.[^6]

Collecting the abandoned children and taking care of them is obligatory,
since it is among the benevolent deeds that God has obliged us to
cooperate with one another and commissioned us to act in this respect,
as saving one's life is also among the most important duties of every
Muslim: ***﴾Cooperate in piety and God wariness, but do not cooperate in
sin and aggression.﴿,***[^7] ***﴾O you who have faith! Bow down and
prostrate yourselves, and worship your Lord, and do good, so that you
may be felicitous.﴿***[^8]***,*** ***﴾And whoever saves a life is as
though he had saved all mankind.﴿***[^9]

In addition, if giving food to someone who is starving or keeping people
clear of harm is obligatory from a religious perspective, it can be well
concluded that collecting the unattended and abandoned children,
sheltering them, and fulfilling their needs is obligatory in sight of
God.[^10]

Given these explanations, although collecting children from public
places is obligatory, it is indeed a communal duty, because collecting
such children is aimed at protecting their lives and fostering and
educating them. This goal is achievable by any Muslim who may undertake
it; besides, the jurists' consensus (*ijmaʿ*) and reference to the
practical principle of disavowal (*bara’a*) would confirm it not to be
*ʿayni* (personal duty) and to be *kifa’i* (collective or communal
duty).[^11]

The question arises for the jurists who believe collecting the abandoned
and unattended children is a communal duty that if someone undertakes
this task, can they give up later on or are they obliged to live up to
their commitment until the child reaches maturity?

Answering this question involves the doctrinal rather than
jurisprudential (legal) research that whether the undertaking that has
been communal at the outset can turn into personal so that it is not
possible to give it up, or it will remain as a communal duty to be
continued.[^12]

In contrast to communal obligation, some jurists believe that picking up
abandoned children and taking care of them is a praiseworthy and
preferably religious act, in which lies otherworldly reward besides its
worldly value.

To prove this view, in addition to practical principle of exemption
which results in non-obligation of collecting such children, it is
emphasized that cooperation in pious deeds which is implied from the
verse ***﴾Cooperate in piety and God wariness, but do not cooperate in
sin and aggression﴿***[^13] is desirable and not obligatory.[^14]

To our opinion, there is no doubt that collecting such children and
sheltering them is among the good and pious acts which have always been
recommended, ***﴾and We revealed to them the performance of good
deeds﴿***[^15], doing this pious act sometimes become essential and
obligatory, since failing to do so may endanger a child's life.

Thus, collecting the abandoned children and taking their custody is a
desirable (*mustahab*) act, which will turn into an obligation when
their lives are endangered. This obligation can be communal or
individual given the child's conditions.[^16]

In any case, whether picking up and collecting such children is
desirable or obligatory, the finder of the child (*multaqit*) is to do
their best in safeguarding it in a decent way and fulfill their
commitment toward that child either directly or indirectly through
someone else, so long as they have not dispensed with their decision.
Naturally, whenever in the meantime they failed to continue or by any
reason were unwilling to continue this task, they are to leave the child
with the judge (Islamic ruler or supportive institutions).[^17]

**Permit Requirement (Asking for Permission)**: Although special
requirements are to be fulfilled for custody of a child which we will
deal with later on, collecting the children from the streets or any
other public places does not require anyone's consent.[^18] However, in
case of lacking financial, moral, and social qualifications in the
finder, the child is taken back from him; for, asking permission from
the judge or the Islamic ruler can lead to wasting time and further
damage to the child.

**Producing a Witness**: If someone encounters an infant or child
abandoned in a public place, do they need a witness for picking it up
from the public passageways? Naturally, if a witness is supposed to bear
witness on picking up the child by the finder, they should point out two
things:

1. Finding the child by the finder (*multaqit*),

2. The properties and things possibly found along with the child.

It is related from some Shafiʿi jurists that the presence of a witness
when picking the abandoned child (*laqit*) is obligatory, because such
children must remain secure both in terms of life and parentage and this
will not be realized except by taking a witness statement.[^19]

With reference to the principle of exemption and comparing picking up
abandoned children to accepting trusts, some jurists have claimed that
taking a witness – like when accepting trusts – is not obligatory, and
it is possible to proceed to collect them without anyone to be present
as witness.[^20]

A group of jurists also believe that if the finder of the child
(*multaqit*) is a just person, there is no need for taking a witness;
however, if his or her justice is not evident, taking witness is
obligatory, as this would create more trust in that person.[^21]

Finally, this possibility is also brought up in legal texts that taking
a witness for picking up an abandoned child is a desirable action
(*mustahab*). It can be a factor in preserving the child's parentage
(lineage) and preventing any possible misuse by the person who has found
the child. It is possible to increase the possibility of finding the
child's parents.[^22]

To our opinion, although the presence of a witness for collecting and
taking custody of abandoned and unattended children is desirable as
reason dictates that someone should witnesses the one picking up the
child. Especially when there are personal belongings with that child so
that the finder would not get into trouble later on by being accused and
suspected by others, this is not obligatory or *mustahab* in a legal
sense since we have no valid reason for it. Besides, finding a witness
for such a matter is sometimes impossible and it may at times be so
time-consuming that the child's life could be endangered, especially in
large cities where due to unfamiliarity with each other, people would
usually not agree to witness.

Conditions for the Custody of Abandoned Children
------------------------------------------------

Jurists have set certain conditions to be fulfilled by the person who
has found a child and wants to undertake its custody. If they do not
meet all or any of the conditions, they are not allowed to undertake
this task and in case they have picked up the child, it is taken back
from them and left with someone qualified.

It is to be noted that these conditions are valid only for the finder
that for whom the finding of the child is a preliminary step toward
protecting and safeguarding it, or else, they are not required for the
finder who does not have the intention or the ability to undertake such
a task. Therefore, the term *multaqit* in the Islamic jurisprudence does
not apply to any person who finds a child.

**1. Maturity and Intellect**: Maturity and intellect are among the
general requirements of any obligation; that is why some jurists instead
of mentioning those requirements have pointed out that the first
requirement for permission to take the custody of a child is maturity of
age. Thus, all the reasons that validate maturity and intellect in other
obligations would include *iltiqat* (picking up abandoned babies from
public passageways) as well.[^23]

In addition to this, only he can manage someone else's life who can at
least manage his own life; naturally, the one who is not qualified to
manage his own life will not be able to run someone else's life.

Given this, it is obvious that for validation of these two conditions,
there is no need for relating the discussion of custody to the issue of
guardianship (*wilaya*),[^24] for we have no reason for the validity of
guardianship in the sense set forth in Shiʿa jurisprudence regarding the
issue of *hidhanat* and *iltiqat*.

**2. Mental Maturity**: Mental maturity (*rushd*) is opposite to
feeble-mindedness (*safah*), as mentally mature (*rashid*) is opposite
to feeble-minded (*safih*). The feeble-minded individual who is referred
to as inconsistent and simpleton, is the one who is unable to use their
properties rightly and handle them wisely. In contrast, the mentally
mature is someone who is capable of making correct use and preventing
damage of his or her properties.[^25]

With reference to this issue, the Holy Qur’an states: ﴾Do not give the
feeble-minded your property, which Allah has assigned you to manage:
provide for them out of it, and clothe them, and speak to them honorable
words. Test the orphans when they reach the age of marriage. Then if you
discern in them maturity, deliver to them their property.﴿[^26]

It is noteworthy that the designation of orphan does not do anything
with mental maturity (*rushd*) and the ruling ensued, for although the
object of verse 6 of *Surat al-Nisa* and the two traditions narrated by
Hisham and ʿAbd Allah b. Sanan[^27] is orphan, but as verse 5 of the
same *sura* denotes the ruling for not delivering property to the
feeble-minded is a general ruling that includes both orphan and
non-orphan. Then, reaching the age of maturity is not sufficient for
taking hold of one's property; one has to achieve a mental maturity for
this purpose, as well.[^28]

Although we have no reasons in *hadith* collections that explicitly
proclaim a person does not need custody when they reach mental maturity,
this does not mean that the immature person can do anything except
property ownership, since conditionality of such matters as maturity in
religious rulings and regulations are not legal and founded; rather,
they are exhortative and emphasized according to intellectual
stipulation and procedure.

Thus if according to the intellectuals maturity is necessary in other
matters except property ownership, it can be judged to be conditional;
although legal reasons are silent about it.

Examination of the families whose decisions are intellectually oriented
clearly indicates that the newly matured adolescents who enjoy
inadequate wisdom cannot be left to themselves to manage their own
lives. Rather, they need to be taken care of, a care that needs no
specific reason issued by the legislator to prove its necessity, but the
intellectuals' practical prescription is sufficient for this purpose.

Therefore, included among those who are in need of custody are the
feeble-minded and intellectually underprivileged people who do not enjoy
the required mental health and maturity to run their own lives.

It goes without saying that even if the feeble-minded reach their
maturity, they have to remain under protection of their guardians; thus,
they will not be able to undertake running another person's life.[^29]

**Conclusion**: If what is meant by *iltiqat* is picking up a baby from
the street and handing it over to the unattended-children care centers,
a feeble-minded person will be able to do this. However, if it means
undertaking the responsibility for taking care of the baby, we should
note that only he could take care of a child who is at least able to
take care of his own life, and the feeble-minded person does not enjoy
this ability. And the fact that according to the Holy Qur’an leaving the
properties of an orphan at his or her own disposal is, besides maturity,
contingent on mental maturity does not mean that the feeble-minded
require a guardian only in financial matters and can undertake their own
life affairs in non-financial matters as well.

For this reasons, claiming that a child's custody can be entrusted to a
feeble-minded person but not letting him or her to interfere with the
child's financial affairs,[^30] is not legally justified.

**3. Justice**: In some jurisprudential texts, enjoyment of justice is
regarded as one of the requirements of the finder of the above-mentioned
child.

The word justice (*ʿidalat*) is conceptually opposite to tyranny (*zulm*
= injustice), but in legal texts its opposite is iniquity (*fisq*),
although some have regarded it as higher than not committing sins and
defined it as a kind of perpetual self-restraining (innate
disposition).[^31]

If we translate justice as not committing sins, then being just equals
not being sinful or reprobate (*fasiq*). but if we translate it as
innate quality and moral disposition, then not being sinful cannot be
regarded as equivalent to being just, as there is a third state to them
that although a person does not have the habit of self-restrain, he or
she does not commit any sins in some instances, either.[^32]

Some jurists have regarded as precautionary the existence of justice in
the finder of the child[^33]; some believe that justice is not valid
because child custody is not safekeeping to require justice and if it
does, being a Muslim by itself encompasses being trustworthy, as well.
Besides, permitting a non-Muslim person to undertake the custody of a
Muslim child, the practical principle of exemption, and inclusiveness of
traditions indicate the invalidity of justice, too.[^34]

Finally, the possibility has also been proposed that if a child has some
properties of his own, the one who proceeds to pick up the child has to
be just, since the breach of trust is strongly probable; but if the
child lacks properties, justice is not valid.[^35]

Irrespective of the third theory, which is not evidenced by any proof,
the other two theories can be reconciled, since although leaving the
child with someone who has a disposition of justice is precautionary;
there is no reason for observing it. Moreover, some proofs can be given
according to which we do not need to make sure of such a level of piety.
Since, sometimes we can trust someone who, despite lack of certain
desirable features, is certainly able to protect the child by paying
enough affection and care in managing its affairs to the extent that a
just person may not enjoy such ability. However, it does not mean that
we can leave a child with a reprobate (*fasiq*) person.[^36]

To our opinion – as we already said in the discussion about the custody
of parents – enjoyment of moral competence of the finder of the child
(*multaqit*) is among the most fundamental requirements of leaving the
child's custody to them. Since the legitimacy of *iltiqat* in Islamic
jurisprudence is for its protection of the life and psychophysical
health of the children whose parents have for some reasons shunned their
duty in undertaking their care and abandoned them in public passageways.
Now, how would it be possible to leave the child with someone who would
inflict serious physical or moral damages on it?

Is it reasonable to give the child's custody to someone who due to moral
corruption and lack of sufficient religious commitments would misuse
them in various ways, or at least provide the ground for sins in them?

Thus, if the finder of the child is a reprobate (*fasiq*) person or
happen to become so later on, the Islamic ruler (the judge of the
institutions in charge) would take over the child from him or her, since
the *fasiq* is not legally trustworthy. *Fasiq* is a wrongdoer
(*zalim*), and trusting their wrongdoing is not permissible according to
the holy verse: ***﴾And do not incline toward the wrongdoers, lest the
Fire should touch you﴿,***[^37] as it can lead to the miseducation of
the child.[^38]

But if the finder's state is unclear or only apparently seems
trustworthy, although in some legal texts it is considered permissible
to give the child's custody to them,[^39] to our opinion , so long as we
are not reassured that the child's physical and moral soundness is taken
care of, we cannot leave the child with them. To prove such a claim we
do not need any particular reason, since the attitude and procedure of
the intellectuals, which is undoubtedly confirmed by the Holy Lawmaker
(the Prophet – S.A.W.), is that not everyone should be trusted with the
education of one’s child.

How would a religion that does not deem it permissible to leave a child
with a wet nurse who is familially, ideologically, or intellectually
unhealthy and regards it as inappropriate to leave one's property to a
thoughtless person, would allow it to leave a child to someone who we
know does not have the required competence, or at least we do not know
whether he has it or not?[^40]

Can we not hold the words of Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) as a model to follow,
who said: "Whoever trusts an untrustworthy person there is no proof for
them with God"? In addition, should we not take heed of the message that
the Imam would always impart by saying: "A trustworthy person never
betrays you, but that you have trusted a betrayer [to be
betrayed]."[^41]

Perhaps it has been for the importance of the issue of the unattended
children that some jurists have distinguished between *luqata* and
*laqit* and emphasized giving the custody of such children to a
non-reprobate person, while casting doubt on the necessity of entrusting
property to a non-probate person, because there are no supportive
procedures to prevent misuse of children like the ones existing
concerning the prevention of misuse of property by untrustworthy people.
Similarly, some jurists deem it necessary for achieving more reassurance
to take someone as witness over a person who finds an abandoned child,
even though the finder is a trustworthy person.[^42]

**4. Islam**: Being a Muslim is among the requirements stipulated in
some legal texts for the finder (*multaqit*) of the abandoned child.

The question has been raised by the Shiʿa jurists as to whether a
non-Muslim can pick up an abandoned Muslim child from the streets and
undertake its custody. Besides, can a non-Muslim undertake to manage the
life of a Muslim child?

Some believe that only a Muslim is allowed to collect and take care of
unattended children, since a non-Muslim may provide the ground for the
deviation of the child by influencing its beliefs and faith.[^43]

In contrast, some also believe that being a Muslim is not a condition
for such a task, because two basic goals legitimize the collection of
the abandoned children: fulfilling the child's basic and natural needs
and providing for its educational requirements, both of which can be
afforded by a non-Muslim person, too. Furthermore, the application of
the proofs for *iltiqat* encompasses the two hypotheses of the
*multaqit* (finder of the abandoned child) as being a Muslim or
non-Muslim. If we are doubtful about the permission of leaving the
child's custody to a non-Muslim, we should know that the practical
principle of exemption denotes its permission, whether the child is a
Muslim or a non-Muslim.[^44]

A third view is also brought up in legal texts and its followers believe
that even though a non-Muslim cannot take care of a Muslim child, they
can take care of a non-Muslim child.

It is emphasized that custody is a kind of guardianship (*wilaya*) and
the non-Muslim cannot have guardianship over a Muslim according to the
verse ***﴾and Allah will never provide the faithless any*** ***way [to
prevail] over the faithful.﴿***[^45] So the non-Muslim cannot take care
of a Muslim child. In addition to that, the non-Muslim can have a great
impact on a child's tendency toward a doctrine other than Islam, as the
same has also been brought up concerning the marriage of a Muslim woman
to a non-Muslim man.[^46]

A non-Muslim can undertake to pick up and hold the custody of a
non-Muslim child because the guardianship of a non-Muslim over a
non-Muslim is permissible and there is no obstacle to undertake such a
task. When a child is non-Muslim, there is no such issue of negative
impact on the child's beliefs; and if we doubt about the permissibility
of this task, the exemption principle signifies its permissibility.[^47]

Since the critical review of each of these reasons would lengthen the
discussion, we suffice it to say that to our opinion Islam is the main
requirement for collecting and undertaking the custody of abandoned and
unattended children, because:

There is not the slightest doubt in that a non-Muslim can fulfill the
material and psychological needs of an unattended child as much as, or
sometimes even better than, a Muslim can, for the non-Muslims are
well-capable of this responsibility for their own children. However, it
has to be noted that satisfying the children's physical and emotional
needs alone for taking care of them is not enough, for living with one
or more persons by itself provides a suitable ground for compliance and
modeling, a context that has a great and undeniable impact on the
child's behavior and beliefs.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) of Islam has described this impressionability
as follows: "No child is born except according to its inner nature
[Islam]; then, it is its parents who rear it as a Jew, a Christian, or a
Magus."[^48] Accordingly, it can be well understood that trying to
preserve the Monotheistic inner nature and preventing it from deviation
is not only decent and praiseworthy but an indisputable task for any
Muslim, as well.[^49]

With this consideration in mind, there remains no room for dividing
children into Muslim and non-Muslim. That is because the title
"non-Muslim" is applied to the child who is found in non-Muslim
settlements, otherwise, such a child has neither reached a mature age to
have selected a specific religion out of his/her own investigation, nor
he/she has specific parents so that the title Jewish-born or
Christian-born, etc., is true for him/her.  
 Thus, if we find a child in such a circumstance and can leave it with a
Muslim, the latter is more preferable to a non-Muslim. However, if we
find a Jewish-born or Christian-born child abandoned in the street who
lacks a guardian in all aspects, then it is not clear whether its being
a Christian-born is a license for leaving its custody to the church.

It goes without saying that this matter does not contradict the right of
non-Muslim parents in taking care of their own child, for our discussion
concerns a situation in which undertaking the guardianship of a child is
a legislative matter and requires passing a law by the legislator.
However, every parent naturally undertakes their child's life simply by
fulfillment of generic relation between them and their child without
needing any conventional right; and it is obvious that in generic
matters it is the external fulfillment of an action that is functional
rather than the conventional matters such as acceptance of a specific
religion.

Therefore, like the Muslim parents, the non-Muslim parents can undertake
their own child's care and nothing can deny them this generic right.
However, this right can be restricted to specific limitations and
conditioned on special conditions when it is entrusted to someone
through passing a law so that not all people can exploit it.

**5. Financial Capacity**: Should the finder of an abandoned or
unattended child (*multaqit*) enjoy financial capacity besides other
requirements, to be able to take the custody of the child?  
 Answering this question is possible when it is clarified how the
expenses for the child would be provided during the time the finder
undertakes its care.

Undoubtedly, paying for the expenses of the child's care is not upon the
finder. Rather, if the child owns property, the expenses will be paid
thereby, but if the child does not have such property, the Islamic state
(public treasury) is responsible for paying for the expenses and in case
of the government's non-existence or inability to pay for it, provision
of expenses will be upon the well-to-do class or the public. Thus, in
all these assumptions, the finder's financial capacity cannot be a
condition.[^50]

However, if we assume that the provision of the child's expenses is not
possible by any of the above means, the finder of the child is obliged
to pay for the expenses by him/herself. It is natural that in such
circumstances the finder's financial capacity is the basic requirement
for accepting the responsibility of the unattended child's custody.

Anyhow, the financial capacity of the child's finder can be an advantage
for them for in this case they can provide more welfare for the child,
which in turn can have a significant role in its growth. Thus, it is not
unlikely to claim that in equal circumstances the one who is more
well-to-do has priority in undertaking the child's care.[^51]

**6. Residence Constancy**: Does the permanent or temporary change of
residence of the person who takes care of an unattended or abandoned
child have any impact on the child's care process?

Some argue that the finder of the child is regarded as its guardian, has
the right to make decisions for the child, and is allowed to move their
residence along with the child to avoid harming it; furthermore, the
practical principle of exemption does confirm the permissibility of the
move.[^52]

In contrast, arguing that the child's distancing from the place it was
abandoned will in itself reduce the chance for finding its probable
relatives, some believe that moving the child's residence is not
permissible and the finder is permitted to hold its custody so long as
they do not move it from that place to another.[^53]

Finally, some have also commented on this issue considering the finder's
moral characteristic as well as the type of the place that the child is
moved onto.

On this basis, if the finder of the child is a really trustworthy and
just person, he is entitled to take the child with them, but if they are
apparently trustworthy and just, they do not have the right to move the
child away since there is the possibility of misuse.[^54]

In some legal text, the issue of moving the child in relation to the
type of place that it is supposed to be moved onto is examined, such as
move from town to desert, town to village, from town to town, and
finally, the nomadic life.

It is noteworthy here that most of these matters have been brought up by
Muhaqqiq Tusi and ʿAllama Hilli, with the legal judgments (*fatawa*) of
the Sunni scholars playing a significant role in their formation.[^55]

To our opinion, none of the stated reasons can prove or disprove the
permissibility of transfer or move of the child in general. What is of
importance to us is the child's interests. It is to be noted whether the
child's move is helpful in its physical and mental growth or not. If the
answer is yes, this move is permissible; otherwise, it is not. In order
to become more assured of this, the realization of its helpfulness and
the way it should be carried out can be left upon the organization that
is in charge of control and care of the families who take the custody of
such children.

It is not unlikely, of course, that like the late Shahid (Awwal), we
give a legal judgment (*fatwa*) that the child had better not be taken
from a city to a village and from a village to the desert, so that its
living condition does not worsen, its kinship bonds remain more
preserved, and its physical health care can be pursued more easily.[^56]

**7. Gender**: Among the questions asked about the finder of the child
is the impact of their gender; is it necessary for the finder to be a
man? Or can a woman also take the abandoned child's custody simply by
finding it?

ʿAllama Hilli claims that although affection is stronger in women, the
men's physical superiority and their higher strength makes them more
reliable to be entrusted with a child's custody. Ahmad Ardabili, known
as Muhaqqiq, also claims that if the child is a girl, a woman has
priority over a man in undertaking her custody, because women are kinder
and are more mentally prepared to take care of a child.[^57]

To our mind, there is no gender advantage in taking care of the child as
what is important is the benefit and interests that the child receives.

Legal Issues of Abandoned Children
----------------------------------

Legal issues of the unattended children are examinable from two
perspectives; one is identifying the proprietor and the degree of
proprietorship of the property found along with the children and the
other is provision of the expenses for their care and determining the
required sources for that purpose.

### Property Found along with the Abandoned Children

The children who are abandoned in one of the public places usually have
some objects with them. Who do these objects legally belong to?

Although there is disagreement among the jurists concerning the
proprietorship of some of the objects, there is no doubt that since the
child, like adults, is entitled to take possession of objects, it has
ownership over what it has dominance over.[^58]

The objects used by the abandoned child such as the clothes it is
wearing, the blanket covering it, the cloth wrapped around it, etc., are
undoubtedly among the child's belongings.[^59]

There are two different opinions concerning the proprietorship of the
objects found around the abandoned child; some regard them as belonging
to the child and some believe that they do not belong to the child.[^60]

If some objects are hidden under or around the place where the child is
abandoned, can one by finding those objects judge them as the child's
belongings?

Some believe that if these objects are buried in a piece of land that
belongs to the child, the buried objects belong to the child as well;
otherwise, their simply being buried around the child does not
necessarily mean they belong to it.[^61]

But if there is a written note with the child indicating that a specific
property belongs to this child, can this note be trusted and accordingly
judged to the child's proprietorship of the belonging?

By accepting the note as an indication of proprietorship, some judge the
property as belonging to the child; and some, by doubting it to be an
indication, judge it as not belonging to the child.[^62]

To our opinion, the belongings used by the child or found with it are
undoubtedly regarded as its properties, such as the clothes it is
wearing, garments somehow relating to it (bedcover, sheet, blanket,
mattress, and the like); ornaments that are with the child, and the
stuff around it (such as hammock, baby carriage, and the like), and
generally all the things that are customarily said to belong to a
child.[^63]

However, what are found around the child do not belong to it, unless
there exists valid and reliable evidence as to the child's ownership of
them or they are in a place dedicated to the child.[^64]

### Providing for the Abandoned Children's Living Expenses

Among the most important issues concerning the abandoned (unattended)
children is the provision of their living expenses.

The question is raised by most of the jurists as to who would commit to
provide for the child's living expenses once its custody is taken by the
person who has found it.

In case the child has sufficient financial means, provision of its
living expenses, like other people, is not obligatory on anyone else and
its material needs are fulfilled through its own assets.[^65]

Although the jurists are unanimous about this ruling in and by itself,
they disagree concerning how it is to be implemented; for, the jurists
have raised the question as to whether the finder of the child is
permitted to directly take from the child's property and use it to
provide for the living expenses of the child or they require permission
from certain authorities (Islamic judge) for taking from the child's
property.[^66]

Some believe that the finder of the child can without needing to ask
permission from any authority such as the orphan's guardian, use the
child's property to provide for its living expenses.[^67]

In contrast, most of the Shiʿa jurists believe that the finder of the
child cannot undertake to use the child's property to provide for its
living expenses without asking from the Islamic ruler.

Accordingly, if the Islamic ruler is present and one can ask permission
from him for this purpose, the finder of the child can provide for the
child's expenses using its own property, since education, custody, and
*infaq* (giving away in charity) require a kind of guardianship which is
among the responsibilities of the father, grandfather, the executor
(*wasi*), and the Islamic ruler. Besides, usufruct (*tasarruf*) is
possible only by having general or specific guardianship, whereas the
finder of the child (*multaqit*) does not enjoy any of these two types
of guardianship.

Therefore, if the finder appropriates the child's property except in
necessary cases without permission from the Islamic ruler, they will
stand responsible for it proportionate to the amount they have
appropriated and they are obliged to refund it.[^68]

In this case the Islamic ruler can give permission to the finder to
spend from the child's property, as he can also leave the child's
property to a trusted person and specify certain amount of the property
for the child's expenses.[^69]

But if the Islamic ruler does not exist or access to him is not
possible, the finder can use the child's property to provide for its
expenses as *hisba* (accountability).[^70]

To our opinion, if we scrutinize the arguments of both proponents of the
independence and non-independence of the child's finder (*multaqit*), we
would find out that the core of their discussion is the existence or
non-existence of the *multaqit*'s guardianship over the abandoned child
; however, we explained at the outset of the discussion that custody
(*hidhanat*) means taking care of the child and that guardianship in the
concept used in jurisprudence has nothing to do with its actualization
or veracity.

It is clear that if the issue of guardianship is no longer under
consideration, no room is left for discussion about asking permission
from the Islamic ruler and the like; thus, for the same reason that the
finder of the child is permitted to undertake the custody of the child,
they are also permitted to appropriate the child's property to actualize
the custody.

The point that is to be taken into consideration is the trustworthiness
of the finder of the child, as we already explained that taking the
custody of a child is the acceptance of a kind of trust and safekeeping
a trust requires some qualification, without which it is not possible to
accept the trust.  
 Thus, if the finder of the child is trustworthy and thereby permissible
to adopt the child, then there is no difference between the child and
its property.

If the finder is trustworthy, the issue of their surety (*dhamam*) is no
longer an option unless they have not correctly fulfilled their duties
(by going to extremes), in which case they will definitely stand
accountable whether they have appropriated the child's property by the
Islamic ruler's permission or without it.

It is also to be noted that as confirmation of the finder's
trustworthiness requires being done by an authority that is in charge of
this task, confirmation of correct and pertinent expenditure of the
child's property by the finder also requires a supervisory system to
prevent the finder from probable shortcomings (going to extremes) and
care be taken that the child's interests are in all cases secured.  
 It is obvious that the realization of such a matter does not
necessarily require asking permission from the Islamic ruler if the
ruler is meant to be an Infallible Imam or his special deputy,[^71] let
alone that the title of ruler includes the jurist (general deputy) and
other than him; for, we have no reason for its validity except for the
prophetic tradition that says: "Sultan is guardian of the one who does
not have a guardian"[^72] which, given the studies done, is a part of a
tradition that ʿA’isha has narrated from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
concerning a woman's getting married without permission of her
guardian.[^73]

Despite the debates of the Sunnis themselves over the chain of
transmission (*sanad*) and the non-acceptance of its content by the
Shiʿa jurists, this tradition has been first related by ʿAllama Hilli
during jurisprudential discussions and without mentioning its
*sanad*.[^74]

In addition to this, although some have claimed that what is meant in
this tradition by Sultan is the Infallible Imam or his specific and
general deputies and for the same reason they have resorted to it to
prove the guardianship of jurisprudence (*wilayat-i faqih*),[^75] to our
opinion what is meant by Sultan is the Infallible Imam or his specific
deputy and inclusion of others such as the Shiʿa jurist during the
occultation age requires another reason that may regard the jurists as
deputies of the Infallible Imams in all issues.[^76]

Therefore, there is no reason for the necessity of asking permission
from the Islamic ruler (the jurist during the occultation age) to spend
from the child's properties, and if we are doubtful of the necessity to
ask permission from the Islamic ruler (*faqih*), the principle of
exemption (*bara’a*) proves it unnecessary;[^77] although caution
demands to ask permission for this purpose from the jurist or the
supervisory organizations that have been established to this end.

Since most of the unattended children who are abandoned in public places
have no properties or money with them so that their livelihood is
thereby taken care of, the question has been raised by our jurists as to
how the living expenses of such children is to be provided.

A group of the Shiʿa jurists have set forth the possibility – which is
somehow influenced by the Sunni views – that the living expenses of such
children are to be provided and paid by the public treasury,[^78] as
there is no doubt that such a task is in the interest of the public; and
since the assets of such people would be transferred to the public
treasury after their death in case they have no blood relatives or
relatives by marriage, the government is obliged to provide for their
living costs now that they are in need of help.[^79]

Naturally, if the state's public budget does not respond to the living
expenses of such children or there are more important expenses for the
government to cover, then the people are required to provide for these
expenses as collective obligation.

Such public collaboration can be carried out in two forms of loan or
alms, which in the first form; the child should pay back its previous
living expenses after reaching maturity and earning a livelihood. Bu as
for the second form, it does not have to pay back the expenses.[^80]

In contrast, some jurists have suggested that the government has no duty
in paying for the living expenses of such children and their expenses
have to be provided for through non-governmental sources.[^81] To this
end, three ways have been suggested: granting a loan; using the budget
at the disposal of the Imam; and provision by the one who is taking care
of the child (*multaqit*).

Apart from the option of granting loan, which has no legal foundation,
raising the issue of the budget at the disposal of the Imam is based on
the notion that we consider a specific budget for the Infallible Imam
(A.S.) other than the public treasury, as he is the heir to the people
who have no heir and as he receives certain share of the *khums* (one
fifth tax); but the Imam's treasury seems to be no different from the
public treasury, but this dichotomy is resulting from the fact that
after the demise of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) some illegally took over
the rule and prevented the Infallible Imams from involving in running
the state's affairs.[^82]

Similarly, obliging the person who is taking care of the abandoned child
(*multaqit*) to provide for its living expenses does not sound right,
because, in order to undertake the provision of other people's living
expenses there must exist a kinship bond or marital relation between
them, which are characterized in tradition texts as father, mother,
spouse, and children, none of which applies to an abandoned child whom
someone has found in public places.

Besides, compelling the finder of the child to pay for its living
expenses causes reluctance in people to collect abandoned children
because this will double their commitment, i.e., both undertaking the
child's custody (*hidhanat*) and providing for its living expenses
(*nafaqa*).

It is obvious that with the increase of responsibility, people's
participation in such tasks will decrease, which in turn would lead to
inflicting harm on such children and in case we suspect obligatoriness
of *infaq* on the finder of the child, we can repudiate its probable
obligatoriness by implementing the practical principle of legal
exemption.[^83]

To our opinion, in order to determine whose duty it is to pay for the
living expenses of abandoned (unattended) children, we should see what
motivation lies behind picking up (*iltiqat*) the child from the public
passageways.

If the motivation behind picking up abandoned children is merely
protecting their health and after picking up they will be handed over to
the police centers or establishments dedicated to this purpose (e.g.,
orphanage), the duty of providing for their living expenses rests with
the Islamic state and no one else has any commitment in this respect,
irrespective of the child being a Muslim or a non-Muslim.[^84]

However, if the finders of the child have undertaken the child's custody
and adopted it as their stepchild with the coordination of the
supervisory establishments – as explained during previous discussions –
then providing for the living expenses of that child would be upon the
finders; for if not logically, but normally and conventionally it is
upon them to provide for the living expenses of the child they have
agreed to adopt.[^85]

For this reason, when someone picks up a child from the streets or takes
it over from the center for collecting these children in order to adopt
it as a stepchild, they implicitly accept all exigencies and
consequences of such an undertaking, which include providing for the
food, clothing, hygiene, and medical treatment as well as the education
and marriage of that child, just like any father and mother who normally
undertake such tasks for their children in ordinary circumstances,
without having any right to refund their expenses in the future.[^86]

The exception is that, since accepting the responsibility of taking care
of a child is a primitive commitment and the finder of the child can,
depending on their ability or willingness, refuse to accept some of the
exigencies and consequences, they restrict fulfilling their
responsibility to a specific time or task, in which case they are
obliged to fulfill their commitment proportionate to the extent of their
responsibility.

In this case, the finder can accept only the supportive aspects of
custody provided that the child's expenses are undertaken by someone
else; or, supposing that the finder is paying the expenses too, they may
reserve the right to refund it after the child reaches maturity and is
able to pay back those expenses.[^87]

In any case, to prove the permissibility of refunding the expenses of
taking care of the child in this latter presumption (intention of
recourse), we can rely on the traditions related by ʿAzrami, Mada’ini,
Muthanna, and Muhammad b. Ahmad.[^88]

### Disagreement in Expenses for the Custody of Abandoned Children

If we suppose that we cannot supply for the expenses of such children
through any governmental or non-governmental sources and the finder of
the child is ready to undertake to pay for these expenses provided that
they are refunded, then it is argued that if the abandoned child, after
achieving financial means and ability to pay back what the finder had
spent for it, disagrees with the finder over the amount of refund, what
has to be done to resolve the disagreement?

The disagreement of the finder and the found is to be viewed in two
ways:

**First, disagreement over the expenditure itself**: If the finder of
the child (*multaqit*) claims to have spent a sum of money for its
livelihood but the abandoned child (*laqit*) denies such expenses, the
claims of the finder is accepted, since it is obvious that the child's
growth would not have been possible without expenditure, whether this
disagreement is over the spending from the child's own property or from
the finder's property.[^89]

**Second, disagreement over the amount of expenditure**: If the amount
of money that the finder reports to have spent for the child is not
accepted by the found (*laqit*) but this amount is equivalent to the
conventional expenditure of taking care of a child, then the finder's
report will be accepted because it is assumed that since the finder of
the child has been a trustworthy person, the child's custody has been
entrusted to him or her; thus his claim in this respect is
accepted.[^90]

However, if the finder demands an amount higher than the conventional or
claims to have spent from the child's own property and the child, after
reaching maturity, disclaims that amount of expenditure, the child's
claim is accepted, because the finder of the child himself admits having
gone to excess and the practical principle necessitates the child
(*laqit*)'s non-commitment (non-indebtedness) to the expenditure
excessive to the convention.[^91]

To our opinion, since entrusting a child's custody to its finder has to
be supervised by the Islamic state, the supervisory institution would
monitor the way the living expenses of the child are provided for, just
as it keeps under its surveillance the finder's moral soundness and the
child's psychophysical health.

Therefore, if the finder of the child, who also undertakes the child's
custody, is an honest and trustworthy person and the supervisory
institution would approve his actions as right, then his claiming as to
the amount of the child's living expenses will be accepted, whether
supplied from the child's properties or from his own; otherwise, the
child's finder has to present trustworthy documents to prove his claim.
Of course, it is obvious that the child's claiming no expenses have been
paid for its maintenance is triable only when there has been another
source for providing its living expenses.

Penal Problems of Abandoned Children
------------------------------------

Penal problems of the abandoned (unattended) children are examinable
from two perspectives:

### Crime against Abandoned Children

Among the problems discussed in Islamic jurisprudence is the crime
against the abandoned (unattended) children and the examination of its
penal and legal aspects.

This discussion is brought up since in Islamic law physical injuries to
other people are divided into two parts of deliberate and erroneous,
depending on the perpetrator's intention. In deliberate crimes, the one
who is the victim of a crime (*mujanna ʿalay*) and in case of death, his
or her inheritors have the right to inflict the same criminal act
(*qisas*) with the same degree and intensity on the criminal (*jani*),
or receive damages (*diya*) in case it is done mistakenly and without
premeditation, depending on the intensity and the place of injury.

As for the crime against children, if the child has a natural guardian
(father or paternal grandfather), its guardian can, depending on the
type of crime and the observance of his or the child's expedience,
retaliate by *qisas*, receive *diya*, or forgive the criminal without
receiving money or by receiving money as much as he deems appropriate.
In case the criminal act results in the murder of the child, he can ask
for *qisas* or be content with receiving *diya*.

The question is raised by the jurists that if a child does not have a
guardian, who will make decisions on the above cases?

We will examine the juridical and penal aspects of this issue in regard
to the type of the crime and the punishment in the following four forms:

**First, deliberate crime leading to death**: If someone kills a human
being on purpose and with criminal premeditation, his/her inheritor or
inheritors (blood avengers) can punish and kill the murderer in
retaliation (*qisas*) on the conditions explained in legal books:

***﴾Do not kill a soul [whose life] Allah has made inviolable, except
with due cause, and whoever is killed wrongfully, We have certainly
given his heir an authority***[^92]***﴿***

Now, if someone killed an abandoned (unattended child), whose
responsibility would it be to make decision about *qisas* or forgiveness
of the criminal? And in case of forgiveness, who would the money taken
thereby belong to?

Some jurists believe that making decision in this respect rests with the
Infallible Imam (A.S.), who can have the criminal killed through *qisas*
as he can forgive him and receive the blood money, which he will spend
on what is in the Muslims' interests,[^93]

***﴾But if one is granted any extenuation by his brother, let the follow
up [for the blood-money] be honorable, and let the payment to him be
with kindness. That is a remission from your Lord and a mercy.﴿***[^94]

A group of jurists also believe that the Imam (A.S.) is the successor to
the inheritor and to the guardian of the murdered person and like the
guardian can forgive the murderer by receiving some money; or forgive
him without receiving any money; so, the Infallible Imam (A.S.) has the
right to show Islamic affection to the murderer without receiving any
money.[^95]

Muhaqqiq Hilli and some of the Shafiʿi jurists believe that the Imam can
– like in other instances – only punish the murderer in *qisas*, because
forgiveness of the criminal is contrary to the Muslim's interest.[^96]

**Second, erroneous crime leading to death**: If someone causes
another's death in a non-criminal act and without predetermination
(erroneous murder), he has to pay blood money.[^97] Therefore, the one
who causes the death of abandoned (unattended) children has to pay the
blood money; and according to the Sunni jurists this blood money is to
be deposited to the public treasury, and according to the Shiʿa jurists
it is handed over to the Infallible Imam (A.S.) to spend it wherever he
deems necessary.[^98]

**Third, premeditated crime leading to bodily retaliation (*****qisas***
**on the body)**: if someone by means of a criminal act causes maiming,
fracture, rupture, and the like to a person's body, they have to be
retaliated (by *qisas*), unless the one to whom the crime has been
inflicted consents to forgive without compensation or with compensation.

Now, what should be done if someone inflicts such a crime on an
abandoned (unattended) child?  
 Some jurists maintain that since making decision in this respect is
left with the very person who had been the victim of the crime, we must
wait for the child to reach maturity so that he or she may decide
accordingly, since one of the purposes of *qisas* is to pacify the anger
of the person who has been the victim of a crime and this purpose is
fulfilled through *qisas* or receiving blood money by the blood avenger.

Therefore, as the father cannot retaliate or forgive the criminal before
his child reaches maturity, so also is the Imam (A.S.) not permitted to
do so, either.[^99]

Since such a view requires imprisonment of the criminal until the child
reaches maturity and there is no permit for imprisonment which in itself
is an independent punishment, this view has been criticized.[^100]

Muhaqqiq Tusi believes that if a child has reason and power of
discrimination, we must wait for the child to reach maturity, since it
is the child’s right to wish to revenge. However, if the child is
feeble-minded and insolvent (*muʿsir*), his or her guardian shall take
blood money instead of retaliation (*qisas*); and if the child is
well-to-do (*mawsir*), blood money cannot be received for him/her.[^101]

The reason for this distinction is the difference made between the child
and the insane concerning *qisas* in legal texts. According to some
jurists, a guardian (*wali*) can make decision about crime against an
insane person, but he is not permitted to do so in relation to a child;
he has to wait for the child to reach maturity. It is because the length
of time to wait for the child to reach maturity is specified, but this
time is not distinct for the insane person, as it is not clear when
he/she would recover his/her mental health.[^102]

It is also mentioned in legal texts that since the Infallible Imam is
the guardian (*wali*) of the unattended children and the guardian can
ask for *qisas* on behalf of the one over whom he practices *wilaya*
(*muwalla ʿalayh*), the Imam or his deputy can retaliate the criminal in
*qisas* in the best interest of the child or forgive him in lieu of
*diya*. There is no reason postponing this for the child to reach
maturity, especially when this postponement may remove the conditions
for *qisas* or receiving *diya*.[^103]

**Fourth, erroneous or deliberate crime not leading to bodily
retaliation (*****qisas*** **on the body)**: If someone does something
unintentionally resulting in damaging another’s body or deliberately
inflict an injury on another person whose retaliation (*qisas*) is not
possible, he/she has to pay *diya* for this infliction.

As for crime against a child, this *diya* shall go to the child’s
guardian, and as the abandoned (unattended) child’s guardian is the
Infallible Imam (A.S.), he shall receive the *diya* for the crime
against the child.[^104]

It is to be noted that in all these four instances performing *qisas* or
receiving *diya* for the deliberate or erroneous crime, if in the best
interest of the child, rests with the Imam (A.S.). However, the finder
or the person who takes care of the child (*multaqit*) does not have any
rights and cannot make any decision in this respect, since they have no
guardianship over the child.[^105]

### Abandoned Children’s Offenses

Among the most important issues, concerning the abandoned (unattended)
children is the offenses committed by them and the legal and penal
responsibilities that ensue.

Although this issue is not restricted to the abandoned (unattended)
children and includes all children, since someone must undertake their
responsibility, the issue becomes doubly important.

**First, erroneous offenses**: If the child erroneously commits an
offense that entails *diya* as punishment, such as murder, beating, and
injuring, its paternal kinsmen (*ʿaqila*) are obliged to undertake to
pay off.

Since what is meant by “paternal kinsmen” is the father as well as the
mature, wise, and wealthy men among the paternal relatives of an
individual,[^106] and there exist no such people for the abandoned
(unattended) children, thus someone has to substitute for the child’s
paternal kinsmen.  
 According to the Sunnis an unattended child’s *ʿaqila* is the
government; however, to the Shiʿa jurists it is the Infallible Imam
(A.S.)[^107], unless when the Infallible Imam is also in charge of the
state, then the government would undertake such a duty.

**Second, deliberate offenses**: If committing an offense is after the
child reaches maturity, then he will be punished in *qisas* like other
people and in case of the victim’s consent, he may pay *diya*.  
 But, if the child commits an offense before reaching maturity, since
the child’s deliberate offense amounts to mere erroneous offense, paying
*diya* is upon its *ʿaqila*, i.e., the Infallible Imam (A.S.).[^108]

Of course, the possibility is brought up in some legal texts that the
payment of *diya* will rest upon the child until after maturity to pay
it himself.[^109]

**Third, quasi-deliberate offense**: What is meant by quasi-deliberate,
also known as *ʿamd al-khata’* (intentional blunder), is a state in
which a person intentionally does something but what ensues is not what
he had intended (intentional in action and erroneous in purpose). For
instance, he beats someone intentionally with a tool, which is mostly
not a killing tool but the victim dies thereby.

According to the Shiʿa jurists, *diya* in qausi-deliberate offense will
be paid for through the criminal’s own property; therefore, by this
presumption, the damage resulted from the criminal act of the abandoned
child is to be paid for through his own property.[^110]

Disagreement on the Custody of Abandoned Children
-------------------------------------------------

If we accept that finding and collecting a child from the public places
create a right for the finder (*multaqit*) to undertake its custody,
then the question arises as to if there are two or more finders who
claim such a right, who can be entitled to take its custody?  
 There are three criteria presented in legal books to answer this
question.

**First criterion, examining the evidence (*****bayyina*****)**: A group
of jurists believe that in order to verify the claim of those who claim
having found the child and having priority for its custody, their
documentary evidence has to be examined.

If we presume that only one of the two persons has a document or
evidence for his/her claim, the child’s custody is to be entrusted to
that same person. However, if both of them are able to present evidence
to prove their claim, it is to be verified whether their evidence points
to the time of finding the child or without referring to the time, it
just asserts that the child has been found by a particular person.

In case the documents each one of them presents does not refer to the
time of the finding or if both refer to a specific time, these documents
will lose their legal value and will be rejected. Nevertheless, if any
of these documents report a different time for the finding of the child
by an individual, the child’s custody will be entrusted to the one who
declare an earlier time.  
 It is obvious that if the content of the documents are different, with
one reporting a specific time for finding the child and the other just
pointing out the finding of the child by an individual without referring
to the time, the child’s custody will be entrusted to the one whose
documents determine a specific time.

Naturally, if none of the claimants of finding the child can present
supporting documents to prove their claim, then the Islamic ruler will,
as he deems it advisable, determine someone to undertake the
custody.[^111]

**Second criterion, examining the individuals’ features**: According to
some jurists, in order to solve this disagreement the claimants’
differences in four features of religion, wealth, justice, and type of
residence are to be examined.

In case of their equality in these features, lots must be drawn to
decide who would take the child’s custody, since leaving the child’s
custody to both of them would cause detriment to the child.[^112]
However, in case of inequality, a Muslim has priority over a non-Muslim,
a trustworthy (just) Muslim over an impious Muslim, rich over poor, and
a townsman over a villager.[^113]

It is to be remembered that from the viewpoint of most jurists the
gender of the claimants of picking up the child accords them no
privilege and neither a man nor a woman have priority over each other in
this respect. Although a woman is more successful than a man in managing
the child’s affairs and her emotional aspects are stronger, the man has
more ability in maintaining the child’s life.[^114]

**Third criterion, examining the child’s situation**: The proponents of
this theory believe that if none of the two claimants did anything for
picking up and taking care of the child, making decision about the
child’s custody would rest with the Islamic ruler.[^115]

But if both have attempted to pick up the child, the child’s custody
would be entrusted to the one who is sufficiently qualified to undertake
this task and if both are equally qualified, the decision as to who
should the child be entrusted to is made by means of drawing lots, the
judge’s decision, or letting the child to decide. Since entrusting the
child to both of them or taking turns (*muhayat*) in taking care of the
child, would inflict harm on it.[^116]

In our opinion and as we previously mentioned, finding a child and
picking it up from public places does not entail any right for the
fonder. Therefore, the one who finds a child has to hand it over to the
institutions in charge of undertaking the life of such children.

After examining the individual and social competence of the person who
asks for a child’s custody and considering the child’s interests, the
institution hands over the child’s custody to that person temporarily or
for a limited period whether that same person has found the child or
someone else has.

Of course, the child’s desire to live with a certain person when it has
found power of discrimination can also be one of the factors effective
in the child’s interests.

Thus, presenting documents as to who has first found the child or
examining the features of the individuals claiming to have found the
child alone do not have any impact on entrusting the child to an
individual, just as the finder’s gender has no effect in this respect.

Kinship Relationship with the Abandoned Children
------------------------------------------------

A child being left in public places provides an opportunity for a number
of people with different motivations to claim the found child to be
theirs.

Since this claim can have an impressive impact on the life process of
the child, its verification is one of the most important issues
concerning the unattended children.

### Claiming a Blood Relation to the Child

Talking about blood relation to a child is examinable in three ways:

#### 1. Claiming paternal relationship with the child

If someone who has found the child claims that the child is his or hers,
a group of the jurists maintain that their claim suffices to prove
paternal relation. The reason is that this confession does not harm
anybody, as it is helpful to the child in that someone undertakes its
responsibility, and it is a natural course of events (in agreement to
the apparent state of affairs) as in normal circumstances no one takes
care of another’s child.[^117] In contrast, some Sunni jurists have been
quoted to say that such a claim is not acceptable, since in normal
conditions no one abandons one’s own child in public places to require
picking it up later.[^118]

However, some jurists, relying on the fact that the child does not enjoy
a recognized parentage and adopting it does not do any harm to others,
believe that if someone other than the finder of the child claims that
the found child belongs to him, such a claim is acceptable although no
evidence (*bayyina*) is available to prove it, in case the age of the
child and that of the claimant is such that the child can normally be
regarded as his or her child.[^119]

In contrast, Muhaqqiq al-Hilli maintains that this claim is not accepted
unless the child itself accepts the existence of such a relation. On
that basis, proving the paternal relation between an individual and the
abandoned (unattended) child will depend on two factors: the claim of
the claimant and the acceptance of this claim by the child after
reaching maturity.[^120]

In the third case, two individuals – none of whom has had any role in
picking up the child from public places as well as taking care of it –
may claim to have a paternal relation to the child.  
 It is clear that in this case, only the confession of the one who can
present evidence (*bayyina*) to prove his claim will be taken into
consideration. If we presume that both of them can present evidence for
such a claim, there are other ways in earlier Shiʿi and Sunni
jurisprudential texts that can be referred to, such as physical
resemblance between the man claiming to be the father and the child or
drawing lots.[^121]

Finally, this may be claimed by the finder of the child on one hand and
another person on the other, in which case, if they have contradicting
documents, as in the previous case, there will be two ways for the Shiʿi
and Sunni jurists to tackle the problem.[^122]

In any case, wherever a man claims to have a blood relation to a child
and his claim is also accepted, the child will be regarded as his; but
such a claim does not mean that the man’s wife is the child’s mother,
too, even though that man claims such a relation, unless his wife
accepts this claim as well.[^123]

#### 2. Claiming maternal relationship with the child

Independent study of this issue despite its close similarity to the
previous one, i.e., proving a paternal relationship with a child, is
because some jurists believe that there is no difference between a man
and a woman in proving to have a blood relation with the child. As the
man’s confession is accepted, so also is the woman’s, and the child is
joined by her.[^124] In contrast, however, some contend that the method
for proving the claim of a man and a woman to have a parental (paternal
and maternal) relationship with the child is different for each.

Although a man’s confession and claim suffices for the child to join
him, a woman’s confession to this end is not sufficient and she has to
present evidence for her claim. That’s because knowledge about the
existence of a maternal-filial relation between a woman and a man is
something which can be proved by observation since there are always some
people present at the child-birth who can bear witness; but for a man’s
claim as to being a child’s father such a witnessing is not
possible.[^125]

Therefore, if the woman can provide evidence for her claim, the child
would be regarded as hers and her husband’s, provided that it would be
likely for her to have given birth to that child and the evidence can
prove that the child has been born to her while she had been that man’s
wife.[^126]

And finally, the possibility has also been set forth that if the woman
has a husband, her claim that the child is hers is not accepted; but if
she does not have a husband, her claim is accepted because it is not
possible for the child to belong to the woman but not to her husband; in
other words, it is not possible for the woman to be the child’s mother
but her husband would not.[^127]

In any case, if two women claim that each of them is the abandoned
child’s mother, genealogically the child belongs to the woman who can
present evidence for her calim, and if both of them have evidence for
their claims, then due to contradiction the mother will be determined
through casting lots.[^128]

#### 3. Claiming parental relationship with the child

If a couple, (a man and a woman) claim that the abandoned (unattended)
child is theirs; the child genealogically belongs to both of them, since
there is no incompatibility between these two claims.[^129]

### Denial of Blood Relation by the Child

Among the issues set forth about kinship relationship with unattended
children is the child’s acceptance or denial of kinship after reaching
maturity.

The question is raised by the jurists as to what has to be done if after
reaching maturity this child denies having any blood relation with the
person who has had a parental claim on the child.

Some Shiʿi jurists contend that the child’s rejection (denial) after
reaching maturity has no legal effect, unless he/she can provide some
evidence for his/her claim.[^130]

So far, we brought up the views of Shiʿi jurists and lawyers concerning
the claim to have kinship relation with unattended children based on
admitting or rejecting to admit the existence of kinship relation with
the child.

To our opinion, however, there is no reason for the validity of claiming
(admitting) about proof of parental relation with the child, whether the
claimant is the finder of the child or someone else, just as it makes no
difference whether the finder is a man or a woman.

At present, since a physician or a midwife in the hospital or a health
care center carries out any childbirth in a city or village, the
identity of the parents would be confirmed by means of the report
provided by that center. Besides, in normal conditions, the child’s
national identity specifications based on the report presented by the
center in which the childbirth is carried out is registered in the
parents’ national identity cards; and, in return, the specifications of
the child’s parents are registered in a national identity card that is
issued for the child, as well.

Therefore, if a person – whether a man or a woman has found the child or
someone else has – claims that the child is theirs, they have to present
the required documents to prove their claim. Moreover, if we suppose
that for any reason it is not possible to present such documents, their
claim can be verified according to the child’s blood group and that of
the claimant, as well as through genetic tests and DNA information.

Therefore, if there are more than one person – two men, two women, or a
man and a woman – claiming such a relation to the child, the required
documents are to be scrutinized as explained above.

**Conclusion**: Proving the paternal or maternal relation to the child
is in itself a proof of the maternal or paternal relation to it, too.
That is to say, if it is clarified that a man is the child’s father, it
can be readily perceived whether his wife is the child’s mother or not.
The child’s claim after reaching maturity to accept or reject the
above-mentioned relation is similarly examinable; the claimant’s
religion or beliefs do not have any impact on the process of examining
his or her relation to the child.

Figurative Kinship with Abandoned Children
------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that the legal rights resulting from kinship is to be
fulfilled only when there is a type of blood relation or a relation by
marriage between the individuals, that is why adoption as asserted by
the Qur’an lacks any legal impacts –

 ***﴾… nor has he made your adopted sons your sons. These are mere
utterances of your mouths. But Allah speaks the truth and He guides to
the way.﴿;***[^131]

however, according to Islamic jurisprudence in order to enjoy some of
the legal rights, a kind of figurative kinship can be established
between individuals without any blood relation or a relation by marriage
existing between them, known as *wila’* (alliance).

The contract of figurative kinship (*wila’*) has two reciprocal legal
impacts: 1. Inheritance, 2. Compensation of inadvertent financial
damages. A person who lacks relations would agree that after their death
their properties be transferred to another person (inheritance),
provided that if in their lifetime they cause damage to others
inadvertently, the other party would undertake to pay for it (alliance
guarantee of offense - *wila’ dhiman jarira*).[^132]

The issue of *wila’* is brought up along with the issues concerning the
abandoned (unattended children) in order to determine whether they would
involuntarily and in their own rights achieve figurative kinship when
they reach maturity, since they have no identified kinship and have no
clear kinship with anyone.

Naturally, this issue is raised in case such a person [the abandoned
child] is not voluntarily concluding a contract of figurative kinship
(*wila’ dhiman jarira*) with another person, since, like everybody else,
he/she too can conclude such a contract with whomever he/she wishes and
impart his/her alliance to that person,[^133] even though that person
(*multaqit*) is the one who had found him/her in childhood and had
undertaken his/her custody up to the age of maturity.[^134]

The important question, however, is whether the finder of the child and
the one who is undertaking the child’s custody is naturally undertaking
its guardianship, too.

Referring to the traditions related by ʿAzrami and the prophetic
tradition, some jurists contend that the child’s guardianship (*wila’*)
after maturity would be upon its finder, unless they wish to leave their
guardianship to another person, in which case they have to pay back all
the expenses that the finder had spent for them since finding them up to
the time they reached maturity.[^135] The result of such an issue, as
related by Ibn Junayd, is that if they cannot pay pack the expenses that
the finder had paid for them, their guardianship and the inheritance
would belong to the person who had found them at childhood and taken
care of.[^136]

To our opinion, the finder of the child does not have any natural
guardianship over the child,[^137] because we explained before that the
custody of an abandoned child with unlimited responsibility would
normally require the payment of its living expenses as well. If this
acceptance of responsibility is restricted to and contingent on some
conditions including the refunding of the expenses spent for the child,
it is upon the Islamic government to provide for those expenses; thus,
there remains no right for the finder of the child to undertake the
found child’s guardianship accordingly.

However, after maturity, the abandoned children (*laqit*) had better
leave their guardianship to the person who had taken care of them for
years.

[^1]: Faydh, ʿAli Ridha, Mabadi-yi Fiqh wa Usul, 4th edition, Tehran
University Publication, 1410/1990, p. 338.

[^2]: These three words are used with the same meaning, but perhaps
these names are applied to babies in their different states of being,
because first they are abandoned in a public place, hence called
manbudh, and then found by someone, thus called laqit. For more
information, see: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/336;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/73.

[^3]: ʿAmili, Shaykh Baha al-Din, Al-Jamiʿ al-ʿAbbasi, Farahani
Publication, Tehran, n.d., p. 251; it is to be noted that other
definitions have also been given for laqit in legal texts as follows:
Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/799; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib,
Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/406; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270; idem,
Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/123; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/135;
Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 5/249; ʿAmili al-Fuqʿani,
Zayn al-Din Abu al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi Maʿrifat Sigh al-Niyyat
wa al-Iqaʿat wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat, Maktibat al-Imam
al-ʿAsr, Shiraz, 1st edition, 1418/1997; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/73; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili,
Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 206; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min,
Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 234; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/66; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il,
2/323.

[^4]: Although laqit does not solely apply to babies (infants), it
includes all the children in various age groups. However, the question
has been raised in legal texts as to whether or not this title includes
the discerning children (mumayyiz) and the adolescents who have
approached maturity (marahiq), as well. For more information, see:
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 8/462;
Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 1/393-394; Karaki, ʿAli b.
Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/97.

[^5]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270.

[^6]: ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 2/441; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir
al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/123; ʿAllama Hilli, Tabsirat al-Mutiʿallimin, p.
142; ʿAmili al-Fuqʿani, Zayn al-Din Abu al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi
Maʿrifat Sigh al-Niyyat wa al-Iqaʿat wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat,
Maktibat al-Imam al-ʿAsr, Shiraz, 1st edition, 1418/1997; Al-Jamiʿ li
al-Shara’iʿ, p. 356.

[^7]: Q. 5: 2.

[^8]: Q. 22: 77.

[^9]: Q. 5: 32.

[^10]: For more information on how to refer to these issues as evidence
as well as the criticism on them, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut,
3/336; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/323-324; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/471; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/77;
Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/409.

[^11]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270.

[^12]: This issue has been examined in two books: first, Kitab-i Jihad
(Siyar), explaining the difference between learning sciences and making
jihad despite the fact that both are communal duties; second: the
Kitab-i Luqata explaining what we are currently discussing. See: ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 1/408 and 2/271; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
11/123 and 38/175.

[^13]: Q. 5: 2.

[^14]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/800; Ibn Fahd Hilli,
Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ, 4/297; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ
al-Madarik, 5/249; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat
al-Bihiyya,ʿ7/77; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik
al-Afham, 12/472.

[^15]: Q. 21: 73.

[^16]: Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/409; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 234; Tabataba’i, Sayyid
ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/324.

[^17]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76; ʿAmili
(Shahid idem, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/75; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat
al-Fuqaha, 2/271; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/139.

[^18]: Ibid, 2/140; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 7/139..

[^19]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270.

[^20]: Idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/247 and 2/123; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din
b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/473; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/78; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 4/801.

[^21]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/627.

[^22]: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya,
p. 206; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76.

[^23]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/799; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/75; ʿAmili al-Fuqʿani, Zayn al-Din
Abu al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi Maʿrifat Sigh al-Niyyat wa al-Iqaʿat
wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat, Maktibat al-Imam al-ʿAsr, Shiraz, 1st
edition, 1418/1997; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat
al-Bihiyya, 7/69; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/406;
ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270..

[^24]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/464; Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/323; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ
al-Madarik, fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. ʿAli Akbar Ghaffari, 7
vols, 2nd edition, Tehran, Saduq Publication, 1397/1977, 5/251.

[^25]: See: Fathullah, Dr. Ahmad, Muʿjam-i Alfadh al-Fiqh al-Jaʿfari, p.
229; Qalʿaji, Muhammad, Muʿjam Lughat al-Fuqaha, 2nd edition, Dar
al-Nafaʿis, Riyadh, 1408/1988, p. 222 and 245; Abu Habib Saʿdi, Al-Qamus
al-Fiqhi, 2nd edition, Dar al-Fikr, Damascus, 1408/1988.

[^26]: Q. 2: 5-6.

[^27]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 7/68, No. 2; Tusi, Muhammad
b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 9/182, No. 731.

[^28]: Shahid Awwal, Muhammad b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Qawaʿid wa al-Fawa’id,
2/41 and 173; Miqdad Siyuri Nadhd al-Qawaʿid al-Fiqhiyya, p. 91 and 321;
Maraghi, Mir ʿAbd al-Fattah, Al-ʿAnawin al-Fiqhiyya, 2 vols. 1st
edition, Nashr-i Islami Publication, Qum, 1417/1997, 2/685-686 and 738.

[^29]: Although with these explanations there is no need for criticizing
and reviewing the views and arguments of the proponents and opponents of
the veracity of iltiqat (picking up abandoned babies from public
passageways) by the feeble-minded, there are two contrasting views in
legal texts for the validity and invalidity of mental maturity. For more
information of the reasons of each of these viewpoints and their
criticism, see: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus,
3/76; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/109; Tabataba’i,
Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/323; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida, 10/402; Wahid Bihbahani, Muhammad Baqir, Hashiya Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan, 1st edition, ʿAllama Wahid Bihbahani Institute,
1417/1996p. 583; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik
al-Afham, 12/465; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/138; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271.

[^30]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
7/70.

[^31]: For more information, see: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
1/149; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 12/311; Al-Wasila ila
Nail al-Fadhila, p. 230; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 1/280;
Naraqi, Ahmad, Mustanad al-Shiʿa fi Ahkam al-Shariʿa, 19 vols. 1st
edition, Al al-Bayt Institute, Mashhad, 1415/1995. 18/74; Al-ʿUrwat
al-Wuthqa, 1/10; Ansari, Kitab al-Tahara, p. 402.

[^32]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
8/424.

[^33]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,
7/73.

[^34]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/75; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida, 10/400.

[^35]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/108.

[^36]: Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/402.

[^37]: Q. 11: 113.

[^38]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/338; ʿAllama
Hilli, Qawaʿid al-Ahkam, 2/201; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/123;
Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/800.

[^39]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ
al-Maqasid, 6/108; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/406.

[^40]: Hurr ʿAmili, Muhammad Hasan, Wasa’il al-Shiʿa, 15/184-188 and
6/230-234.

[^41]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/299, No. 3-4.

[^42]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/338.

[^43]: Wahid Bihbahani, Hashiya Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, p. 582.

[^44]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/75;
Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/324; Ibn Fahd Hilli, Ibn
Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ, 4/297 and 295; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi
Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/406.

[^45]: Q. 4: 141.

[^46]: See: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/348, No. 1 and 351,
No. 156; Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Daʿa’im al-Islam, 2/199, No. 732;
Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, ʿIlal al-Shara’iʿ, 2 vols. Maktabat Haydariyya,
1386/1966. 2/503, No. 1; Rawandi, Fadhlullah, al-Nawadir, ed. Saʿid
Ridha ʿAli ʿAskari, 1st edition, Dar al-Hadith, 1407/1987.

[^47]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/75; ʿAmili
al-Fuqʿani, Zayn al-Din Abu al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi Maʿrifat
Sigh al-Niyyat wa al-Iqaʿat wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat, Maktibat
al-Imam al-ʿAsr, Shiraz, 1st edition, 1418/1997; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/270; ʿAllama Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/123;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/72;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/466-467;
Khu’i, Kitab al-Nikah, 2/311; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik,
5/251 and 4/476; Ibn Fahd Hilli, Ibn Fahd Hilli, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ,
4/295; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/398; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 234.

[^48]: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 2/49, No. 1668.

[^49]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/102; Wahid Bihbahani,
Hashiya Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, p. 582.

[^50]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76.

[^51]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 5/224.

[^52]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 7/129 and 6/111.

[^53]: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/139.

[^54]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/76; Tusi,
Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/345; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat
al-Fuqaha, 2/271.

[^55]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/340-341; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271-272; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 4/800.

[^56]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/77.

[^57]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad,
Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/429.

[^58]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/472.

[^59]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/800; Al-Jamiʿ li
al-Shara’iʿ, p. 356; ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441.

[^60]: Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 357; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
2/139; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/74; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/77-78;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/473.

[^61]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272; also, for information
about the Sunnis's view in this regard see: Ibn Babuwayh Qummi,
Al-Muqni, , 6/409; Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 6/407.

[^62]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/74; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/473; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
2/140.

[^63]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272; Shahid Awwal, Muhammad
b. Makki ʿAmili, Al-Lumʿat al-Damishqiyya, p. 206.

[^64]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801; Al-Jamiʿ li
al-Shara’iʿ, p. 356; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 1/422.

[^65]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan Al-Mabsut, 3/338; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272.

[^66]: It is to be remembered that the child's properties are divisible
into two types: 1. the properties that belong to the child because of
its being a foundling (laqit), like what is endowed to the unattended
children or someone has stated in their will for this purpose, 2. the
properties that the child is a private proprietor of, such as clothes,
blanket, jewelry, cash money, hammock, tent, and the like. For more
information, see: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272; idem,
Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/124.

[^67]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/273; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad,
Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/417-418.

[^68]: ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam,
2/123; idem, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/140; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ
al-Maqasid; 6/112; Sabziwari, Muhammad Baqir b. Mu’min, Kifayat
al-Ahkam, p. 235; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/325.

[^69]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/338-339; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/273.

[^70]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/474; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801; Hilli, Yahya b. Saʿid,
Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, Sayyid al-Shuhada Publication, Qum. 1405/1985,
p. 356; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 8/260.

[^71]: Not needing to ask permission from an Infallible Imam does not
mean disclaiming guardianship, because the Infallible Imams, following
the Holy Prophet of Islam (S. A.W.), have innate superiority as well as
generic and legislative guardianship. For an example, we can refer to
the traditions concerning the divorce of the insane. See: Kulayni,
Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 6/125, No. 1-2; Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan,
Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 8/75, No. 253.

[^72]: Ibn Tamimi, Ahmad b. ʿAli, Musnad Abi Yaʿla Musili, ed. Husayn
Salim Hasan, 13 vols. Dar al-Ma’mun li al-Turath, n.d.

[^73]: Suyuti, Jalal al-Din, Al-Jamiʿ al-Saqir fi Ahadith al-Bashir
al-Nadhir, 2 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1401/1981, 1/457,
No. 29630; Abi Dawud, Sunan, 1/462, No. 2083; Dar Qutni, ʿAli b. ʿUmar,
Sunan Dar Qutni, 4 vols. 1st edition, Dar al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyya, Beirut,
1417/1996, 3/158; Ibn Tamimi, Musnad Abi Yaʿla Musili, 8/191, No. 4749.

[^74]: Ziʿali, Jamal al-Din, Nasb al-Rayat al-Ahadith al-Hidaya, 6 vols.
1st edition, Dar al-Hadith, Cairo, 1415/1995., 3/362; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/277.

[^75]: Ibid., 2/592; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 28/430; Fadhil
Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2/15; Naraqi, Ahmad, Mustanad
al-Shiʿa fi Ahkam al-Shariʿa, 16/143; Naraqi, Ahmad, ʿAwa’id al-Ayyam fi
Qawaʿid al-Ahkam wa Muhimmat Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3rd edition,
Qum, Basirati Library, 1408/1987, p. 200; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli,
Riyadh al-Masa’il, 2/81.

[^76]: Ansari, Shaykh Murtadha, Kitab al-Nikah, Baqiri Publication, Qum,
1415/1995, p. 152; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 4/165.

[^77]: Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 22/293.

[^78]: Hilli, Yahya b. Saʿid, Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 357; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/123.

[^79]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/339; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272.

[^80]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/74; Karaki,
ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/115 and 117; ʿAmili (Shahid Thani),
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli, Masalik al-Afham, 12/467; ʿAmili (Shahid Thani),
Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/75.

[^81]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/272.

[^82]: Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 5/253; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 4/70 and 6/25; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 4/5, issue 1, and 4/22, issue 145, and
4/23, issue 15, and 5/209, issue 87; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa,
6/106; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 3/272 and 337; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 13/40; Najafi,
Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir, 38/139 and 39/44; ʿAmili al-Fuqʿani, Zayn
al-Din Abu al-Qasim, Al-Durr al-Mandhud fi Maʿrifat Sigh al-Niyyat wa
al-Iqaʿat wa al-ʿUqud, ed. Muhammad Barakat, Maktibat al-Imam al-ʿAsr,
Shiraz, 1st edition, 1418/1997.

[^83]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271-272; idem, Tahrir
al-Ahkam, 2/123; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/416; Ibn
Babuwayh Qummi, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/105, No. 3424; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Istibsar fi Makhtalafa min al-Akhbar, ed.
Sayyid Hasan al-Khirsan, 4 vols. 4th edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya,
Tehran, 1405/1985 ; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi, ʿIlal al-Shara’iʿ, 2/371, No. 1;
Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 6/293, No. 815.

[^84]: Al-Muqniʿa, p. 648; Tusi, Muhammad b. al-Hasan Al-Nihaya, p.322;
Ibn Barraj Trablusi, Qazi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/569; Al-Wasila
ila Nail al-Fadhila, p. 277; Makki, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir,
2/107; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/276.

[^85]: Perhaps it is for this consideration that the jurists have
claimed that custody demands infaq (giving away in charity); for more
information, see: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/109.

[^86]: Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/420; Makki, Muhammad
b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir, 2/107.

[^87]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/800; Yusufi, Hasan b. Abi
Talib, Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/407; ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441;
Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/339; Khwansari, Sayyid
Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik, 5/250.

[^88]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/225, No. 3-4; Tusi,
Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 7/78, No. 337; Ibn Babuwayh Qummi,
Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/145, No. 3532.

[^89]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/802; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/273.

[^90]: ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad
b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/339; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Masalik al-Afham, 12/487.

[^91]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/117; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/339; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam,
4/803; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/273; also, for more views
see: Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 357; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/77.

[^92]: Q. 17: 33.

[^93]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/346.

[^94]: Q. 2: 178.

[^95]: Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 358; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat
al-Fuqaha, 2/276; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus,
3/80.

[^96]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/277.

[^97]: It is to be noted that in the erroneous murder the criminal's
paternal kinsmen (ʿaqila) would pay the blood money; see: Al-Jamiʿ li
al-Shara’iʿ, p. 358.

[^98]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/346; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha,
2/276.

[^99]: Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 358; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
2/143; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 4/126; Muhaqqiq Hilli,
Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801-802.

[^100]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/479.

[^101]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/346.

[^102]: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/143.

[^103]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/124; Ardabili, Mawla
Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/423; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha,
2/277; idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/124; idem, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441;
Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/79;
idem, Masalik al-Afham,12/478.

[^104]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/346; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/276.

[^105]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/802.

[^106]: Faydh, ʿAli Ridha, Mabadi-yi Fiqh wa Usul, p. 315.

[^107]: Ibn Barraj Tarablusi, Qadhi ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Jawahir al-Fiqh, ed.
Ibrahim Bahaduri. 1st edition, Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum,
1411/1990, p. 145-146, issue 513; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha,
2/276; Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 358; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 4/801; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus,
3/79.

[^108]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/345-346;
ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ
al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawaʿid, 6/124; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya,7/78; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/477.

[^109]: See: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/346.

[^110]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 7/115; Muhaqqiq
Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/801; 2/124; ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id,
2/142; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/477.

[^111]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/348-349.

[^112]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ, 4/803; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/80.

[^113]: Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p.357; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/73; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271.

[^114]: Idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/123; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b.
Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/340; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Al-Durus, 3/74.

[^115]: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/99; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/271.

[^116]: Idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/123; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli
ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/73.

[^117]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/347.

[^118]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/277.

[^119]: ʿAllama Hilli, Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/441; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/483; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/277; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid,
6/118; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/425; Wahid Bihbahani,
Muhammad Baqir, Hashiya Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, p. 588.

[^120]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/802.

[^121]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/347 and 350;
Ibn Zuhra Hilli, Ghunyat al-Nuzuʿ, p. 304; ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf
al-Shiʿa, 6/107; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 3/596,
issue 25; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham,
12/483; Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid, 6/103; Ibn Qudama,
Al-Mughni, 6/430; Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 6/435; Bani, Muhammad Nasir al-Din,
Irwa’ al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahadith Minar al-Sabil, 8 vol., Al-Maktab
al-Islami, Beirut, 1405/1985.

[^122]: Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/8 Tusi,
Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/347/348; ʿAllama Hilli,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/278-279.

[^123]: Idem, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/124.

[^124]: Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/802; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad,
Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/426.

[^125]: ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 6/110; Shahid Thani, Zayn
al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham, 12/483; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar
Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/350.

[^126]: ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/278.

[^127]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/350; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/278.

[^128]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/351; ʿAllama
Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/280.

[^129]: Ibid.

[^130]: ʿAllama Hilli, Idhah al-Fawa’id, 2/140; Al-Jamiʿ al-ʿAbbasi, p.
252; Ardabili, Mawla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida, 10/426.

[^131]: Q. 33: 4.

[^132]: Wila’ is fulfilled in three ways: wila’ ʿitq (alliance of slave
emancipation), wila’ Imam (alliance of Imam), and vila’ dhiman jarira
(alliance guarantee of offense); for more information see: Fathullah,
Dr. Ahmad, Muʿjam-i Alfadh al-Fiqh al-Jaʿfari, p. 452.

[^133]: Daylami, Hamzat b. ʿAbd al-ʿAziz, Al-Marasim al-ʿAlawiyya fi
Ahkam al-Nabuwwiyya, ed. Muhsin Husayni Amini, Ahl al-Bayt World
Association, Qum, 1414/1993, p. 208; Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan,
Al-Nihaya, p. 323; ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/285; Shahid
Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili, Masalik al-Afham , 12/468.

[^134]: To prove this issue two narrations by Hurayz and the narration
by Mada’ini can be referred to; see: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib
al-Ahkam, 8/227, No. 820; Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, 5/224,
No. 2.

[^135]: Tusi, Abu Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut, 3/347; Tusi, Abu
Jaʿfar Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf, 3/594, issue 21; Tusi, Muhammad b.
Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam, 7/78, No. 336; Ibn Abi Jumhur Ahsa’i, ʿAwali
al-Li’ali, 1/225, No. 116.

[^136]: See: ʿAllama Hilli, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 6/106.

[^137]: Al-Muqniʿa, p. 648; Muhaqqiq Hilli, Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 4/800;
ʿAllama Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/285; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b.
ʿAli ʿAmili, Al-Durus, 3/81; Shahid Thani, Zayn al-Din b. ʿAli ʿAmili,
Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya, 7/77.


