Translator’s Foreword
=====================

**In the Name of Allah, The Most Merciful, The Most Beneficent All
praise is for Allah the Lord of the Universe**

**Peace and Blessings be upon Muhammad the Prophet of Allah and his Holy
Progeny**

This wonderful work before us by Marhoom Jafar Ali Asil has been
translated into English so that it reaches a wide readership. Mourning
for Imam Hussain (pbuh), the prophet Muhammad (pbuh)’s grandson, on his
brutal murder on the orders of Yazid ibn Muawiya from the Banu Umayya
clan, is the bedrock of Shia Muslim life: without Hussain (pbuh)’s
sacrifice, there would not have been Islam in its purest pristine form.
Thus it is no surprise that over the centuries there have been constant
attempts to stop the mourning gatherings that are held, either by
attacking the mourners, or by spreading propaganda that mourning and
crying is against the spirit of Islam.

By questioning the act of mourning and remembrance, the enemies of Imam
Hussain (pbuh) have tried to create an atmosphere of doubt. However,
there are two things we take solace in: firstly, that it is Fatima
(pbuh)’s prayer and Allah’s promise to her that there will always remain
a nation on earth to mourn her son’s supreme sacrifice. Secondly, it is
the effort of sincere people like Jafar Ali Asil who spent a lifetime
devoted to writing and preaching Islam that we continue to take
inspiration to keep the message of Hussain alive.

This translation offered is not always literal, as language semantics
need to be taken into account: therefore I have remained as close as
possible to the original Urdu whilst also trying not to compromise on
the sense and on appropriate use of English expressions and idioms. The
author used a very informal tone throughout his work, as it was intended
for ordinary readership: I have tried to retain that. Further I have
used subheadings which do not appear in the original, for ease of
reading. Finally, pbuh/t denotes peace be upon him/her/them, and Quranic
references appear with the surah (chapter) number, name, followed by the
verse.

The views expressed herein are the original author’s, except for the
Introduction and an edit on page 19 (see below for details). The purpose
of the Introduction is to explain Islamic history in brief up to the
events of Karbala so that it becomes clear to the reader why we cry and
mourn for Hussain (pbuh). For further information please consult other
more detailed works.

There is only one purpose behind translating this work: to bring Karbala
into the very lives and hearts of people, because remembering Hussain
(pbuh) at Karbala teaches us core values of humanity and worship. This
mourning and commemoration is a miracle, it is a healing, it is an
inspiration for the oppressed, it is a lesson in bravery, it is a source
of peace par excellence.

Many people collaborated in bringing this message before you: may Allah
accept the efforts of each and every one.

R. Bokhari,  
 United Kingdom 2013


