Prostration
===========

Prostration before Allah is the sole prostration of worship. But
prostration out of respect and obedience to one other than Allah, has
indeed been ordered by Allah Himself. We find in the Quran;

***And when We said to the angels: Prostrate before Adam, they did
prostrate, but Iblis (did it not). He refused and he was proud, and he
was one of the unbelievers. (Surah 2, al-Baqarah verse 34)***

Iblis the Shaytan used to prostrate himself before Allah for he was one
who worshipped Allah a great deal. However he refused to prostrate
before Allah’s creation Adam (pbuh) and on the basis of this he was
rejected from Allah’s Heaven. Now if a respectful prostration was
considered idolatrous, why would Allah the Generous Lord have asked his
angels to prostrate themselves before Adam (pbuh)? If it were in any
sense an idolatrous prostration, Allah would never have commanded it in
Adam (pbuh)’s honour. If there is disagreement on this view then it has
to be said that Allah forbid, Allah Himself ordered idolatry!

Indeed in defence of this prostration it may be said that Allah Himself
commanded the prostration before Adam (pbuh). Thus the prostration of
the angels was not to Adam (pbuh) as such but it was a prostration to
Allah’s command. And there is nothing wrong at all with prostrating
before Allah’s command. (We are all agreed in this matter that the
prostration here was one of respect, on the basis of Allah’s command.)

The question arises, where did Allah give the command to kiss the
shrines of the martyrs or to bow before them? A sufficient answer would
be, when did Allah expressly prohibit such actions? A second reply would
be that even without Allah’s explicit command, there have been other
instances of bowing and prostrating out of respect. At no point did
Allah prohibit those prostrations of respect, and further, they have
been proved by the actions of two prophets.

The two prophets in question neither hindered the prostrations that were
offered out of respect, nor did they reprimand and stop those
prostrating. Allah Himself in turn did not advise the two prophets that
such prostrations should not be offered. Further, Allah did not term
those offering the prostrations as unbelievers or idolaters. Therefore
it has to be admitted that a prostration of respect is not a
reprehensible act in Allah’s sight. The Quranic ruling on this matter is
thus;

***And he raised his parents upon the throne, and they bowed to him in
prostration. (Surah 12, Yusuf verse 100).***

Yusuf (pbuh) was a prophet and his father Yaqub (pbuh) was also a
prophet. Yusuf sat both his parents (even though his mother was not a
prophet) on the throne. Subsequently everyone prostrated to him. In this
verse Allah does not say that all prostrated ‘except Yaqub’, that is, it
was not the case that the whole gathering bar Yaqub (pbuh) prostrated to
Yusuf (pbuh).[^1]

Now let us reflect: one prophet is prostrating before another prophet:
neither is the prostrating prophet hesitant nor is the prophet who is
prostrated to objecting. Further, Allah does not say that this is
disliked by Him. If a prostration out of respect and obedience was
considered idolatrous, then without a doubt neither Yaqub nor Yusuf
(pbut) would have remained prophets after this act, indeed, Allah
forbid, they would have become disbelievers. Thus we can conclude from
these two prophets’ actions that a prostration of respect and obedience
is not idolatry, it is not unlawful and Allah does not forbid it.

Hence no one has the right to say that to kiss, to prostrate with
respect or to respect places and items associated with revered
personalities, is considered idolatry and innovation. Indeed according
to the Quran one who says so would leave Islam.

[^1]: This is the translator’s wording: the author originally claimed
that Yusuf (pbuh) prostrated – ‘Yusuf sat both this parents (even though
his mother was not a prophet) on the throne. Subsequently everyone
prostrated. In this verse Allah does not say that all prostrated ‘except
Yusuf’, that is, it was not the case that the whole gathering bar Yusuf
(pbuh) prostrated.’ However, in following authentic Quranic
translations, Yaqub was the prophet who prostrated to his son Yusuf, in
fulfilment of the dream mentioned in verse 4 of this surah. Agha Mahdi
Puya writes, ‘Sajada-falling down in prostration. The father, the
brothers and the aunt fell down in prostration before Yusuf. There are
two types of sajdahs-one is that which is for Allah in total submission
to His will, and the other is done in reverence to pay homage to a
divinely chosen representative of Allah (see commentary of al Baqarah:
34) (http://quran.al- islam.org/). Shakir writes, ‘And he raised his
parents upon the throne and they fell down in prostration before him,
and he said: O my father! this is the significance of my vision of old;
my Lord has indeed made it to be true’. The vision of old from verse 4
Shakir translates as, ‘When Yusuf said to his father: O my father!
Surely I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon-- I saw them making
obeisance to me.’ (http://quran.al-islam.org/).


