The Days of Mourning
====================

***In the Name of Allah, The Most Merciful, The Most Beneficent***

As soon as the month of Muharram arrives, the lovers and devotees of the
Ahlul Bayt (pbut) become heartbroken and grief stricken. Through their
lamentation and intense weeping, their complaints and grief over the
tragedy of Karbala, they present their devotion and love in the court of
the Oppressed of Karbala, and become engrossed in expressing their grief
in different ways.

Just under 1400 years ago, that is in 61 AH, the Yazeedi government of
Shaam (present day Syria) had caused such a storm of lust, godlessness,
and rampant liberty that values such as truthfulness, honesty, piety,
holiness, peace and justice were fast disappearing, scattered like
droplets everywhere.

Islam was about to be annihilated. Monotheism, the oneness of Allah, was
made into a laughing stock. Prophet-hood in fact was labelled a drama,
an act: that which Muhammad (pbuh) had labelled unlawful was being made
lawful, and what he had explained to be lawful was being criminalised.
It was to save this fast disappearing lifestyle, etiquette, nobility,
faith and humanity, that Imam Hussain (pbuh) left for Karbala with his
small band of travellers.

However, the cruel oppressors took control of the river and prevented
Imam Hussain (pbuh), his family and his loyal followers from taking any
water from it. The Imam (pbuh), his followers and his pure family,
amongst who were also tiny innocent children, suffered pangs of extreme
thirst. But the merciless and inhumane cursed enemiesâ€™ hearts had turned
to stone: there was no scope for kindness or mercy in them. Finally on
the 10th Muharram, after three days of hunger and thirst, our great Imam
(pbuh) was martyred, along with his companions, sons, brothers, and
nephews.


