The Arguments Raised Against Mourning
=====================================

‘Will they come back to life with your crying?’ This sarcastic response
often given to oppose mourning is a clear indication that those uttering
it think the martyrs are in fact dead (Allah forbid), otherwise why
would they say such a thing? Therefore anyone saying this cannot
possibly remain Muslim, submitting to Allah’s Quran.

A second strange argument raised is that if the martyrs are indeed
alive, then why mourn and cry over them, do people ever grieve or cry
over those alive, and what is the point of mourning for martyrs? This is
a totally redundant argument. Prophet Adam (pbuh) cried for hundreds of
years at his separation from Heaven. In fact he cried so much that the
tears left two streaks imprinted on his cheeks. This very fact annuls
the above argument because Adam (pbuh)’s crying was not for any living
or dead person: the above objection is on crying over a person, and yet
Adam (pbuh)’s crying was not even over a person, and yet still as a
prophet he cried profusely!

What is perhaps even stranger is that sometimes these objectors claim
that any form of crying, totally, is a ‘bid’at’, an innovation and thus
unlawful, and at other times they argue that there is no objection in
crying for oneself. But to cry for another living being is an
unacceptable innovation! Please reflect on this argument, that it is
complete trickery. All glory is to Allah! He was not unaware that such
baseless arguments would be presented.

This group crying out, ‘innovation, innovation!’ was already in Allah’s
sights, that is why He had already provided answers. Therefore in His
Book, the Noble Quran, He had already presented arguments and examples
of mourning being a legitimate act.


