The Mourning of Prophets in the Quran
=====================================

Yaqub (pbuh) was a prophet: he had twelve sons, one of who was the
Prophet Yusuf (pbuh). Yaqub (pbuh) was temporarily separated from Yusuf
(pbuh). However, he was informed by Allah that his son Yusuf (pbuh)
would soon be returned to him alive. This proved that Yusuf (pbuh) was
alive and well, that later he would be returned to his father, and that
without a doubt this separation was merely temporary. Furthermore, Yusuf
(pbuh) was not Yaqub (pbuh)’s only son: he had eleven other sons, and
yet despite this Yaqub (pbuh) could not tolerate the separation. He
cried so much for Yusuf (pbuh) that his eyes turned white and as the
Quran states:

***And he (Yaqub pbuh) said, "Oh, my sorrow over Yusuf," and his eyes
became white from grief because of the sorrow that he suppressed. (Surah
12, Yusuf verse 84)***

This was the crying of a prophet, over his living son, so much so that
he lost his sight through crying! Why do these ‘innovators’ not cry
‘innovation, innovation’ here? Why are they silent over the crying of
Yaqub (pbuh)? Why do they not declare here that it is an innovation and
unlawful to cry over a living person?

This was solely the separation from Yusuf (pbuh), one son: the remaining
eleven were with Yaqub (pbuh). And yet Yaqub (pbuh) cried so much! But
in Karbala, there were eighteen Yusufs of the Bani Hashim clan who were
sacrificed with such tyranny and oppression, and yet to cry over them is
an innovation! To cry over one Yusuf (pbuh) is the sunnah, the way of a
prophet, but to cry over Karbala is wrong? What injustice! As has been
said in Persian, ‘the mind is distraught at the incomprehensible
ignorance of this tragedy!’


