Crying in the Quran
===================

If crying were wrong or an innovation, then Allah would have declared it
as a flawed action. But instead, we find that crying is a commendable
act. Let alone mankind crying, the Quran details the crying of the skies
and the earth. How the skies and earth cry, only Allah knows. If the
skies and earth do not cry, then why would Allah state in the Quran;

***And the skies and the earth did not weep for them (Firawn and his
people) nor were they given a respite. (Surah 44, ad-Dukhan verse
29).***

Allah forbid this is not a poetic metaphor, this is Allah’s truthful
word. This verse is testifying that on the death and destruction of the
enemies of Allah, neither the skies nor the earth cries, because the
enemies of Allah are from those rejected by Him and at a loss, not those
preferred by Him. Therefore, it is clear that when Allah’s chosen
saintly people leave this earth, then the skies and the earth cry for
them.

Then what of those who were martyred in Allah’s path, thirsty and hungry
for three days? Undoubtedly the skies and the earth both cry for them.
If it were an innovation in faith to cry, then neither the sky nor the
earth would cry. This proves that crying for the deceased is not an
innovation, but on the contrary it is the manifest will of the
Cherisher.

This also proves that crying is a manifestly natural human instinct.
That is, mankind cries, the skies and earth cry, thus the ones calling
this act an innovation are themselves innovators against the Quran. In
the sight of the Lord of the Worlds, rather than being insignificant,
the act of crying is one of the best of the commendable acts: the Quran
itself testifies to this in the following words;

***And they say, "Exalted is our Lord! Indeed, the promise of our Lord
has been fulfilled." And they fall upon their faces weeping, and the
Quran increases them in humble submission.*** ***(Surah 17, Bani Israil
verses 108-109)***

This proves that crying in the court of Allah increases humility and
thus increases the approval and status of a believer’s deeds. If Allah
did not approve of crying and considered it an innovation, he would
indeed have reprimanded us for it. But instead, here we see that it is
being approved of, which can only mean that it is highly liked by Allah.


