Preface
=======

" since ancient times, two forces have been struggling to gain control
over the globe; the forces of good and evil. The struggle between these
two poles will continue until the Day of Judgment. However, this point
may appear controversial and should, therefore, be fully discussed and
concretely established before delving into the details of the
theoretical propositions of this paper.

**The Establishment of Conflict and Complementarity**

The conflict between evil and good may be traced back to ancient times.
Some may presuppose that the struggle between these two poles cannot be
tracked to the ancient epochs as it is based, for the main part, on the
production tools of the industrial society, as espoused by the Marxist
material dialectic;

however, it would be more reasonably realistic to accept that it
certainly has existed since the earliest days of the human species on
this earth and shall continue until the Day of Judgment.

It may assume different forms, represented by outwardly different
figures, but what counts is the essence of these forces rather than
their various external manifestations. Also, what we mean by evil is
that party which opposes Divine will and the rightly guided party of
Almighty God (swt). Some think this might be summarized in one
characteristic, i.e. possession or otherwise of the fear of Allah.

The conflict between good and evil is established in the majority of
sacred books, albeit with dissimilar references and terms. The Qur\\'an
has emphasized the existence of this distinction as well as the fight in
the story of Adam\\'s sons after the first division took place between
them when Abel, the potential victim, upon hearing his brother\\'s
pronouncement of intention to kill him, strongly despising such an act -
and despite being fully aware of the risk of being killed for doing so -
declared:

<p dir="rtl">
".لئن بسطت إلي يدك لتقتلني ما أنا بباسط يدي لأقتلك إني أخاف الله رب
العالمين"
</p>

"Even if you stretch forth your hand towards me in order to kill me, I
will never stretch out a hand towards you to kill you. I fear God, Lord
of the Universe!" Qur'an 5:28

By the end of this paper we shall refer to the Qur'anic verse which is
both linked to the Imam Al-Mahdi (as) and his opponents and to the
status of fearing Allah.

The only difference is that the conflict was manifested here in
individual representation, while our discussion topic goes beyond,
extending the matter to communities, groups and, ultimately, various
societies. However, the essence is contradiction between two totally
different forces. This shall lead us to a thorough discussion of
contradiction and its philosophical definition within the social
arena.


