Contradiction As a General Concept
==================================

One studies contradiction in Aristotelian formal logic in simple
concepts, particularly in the propositional. The definition and the
conditions are different compared to the social field and political
philosophy. It is clearly obvious that the logical definition of
contradiction - within Aristotelian frameworks - is not applicable to
societies and the principles governing them, as both the concepts and
compounds within the formal logic never claimed to apply such rules to
the societal field. We, therefore, face two concepts with totally
different connotations yet dissimilar meaning.

As this discussion necessitates the study of contradiction and
dialectic throughout the latest philosophical discussions, we are forced
to discuss the Marxist and the Hegelian models of contradiction, paving
the way for analyzing the recent brainchild of Huntington and his clash
of civilizations.

**Contradiction within Marxism in the Social Field**

In dialectical materialism, contradiction, as derived by Karl Marx from
Hegelianism, usually refers to an opposition of conflicting social
forces. According to Marx, most prominent is the fact that capitalism
promotes a social structure which has contradictions because the social
classes have conflicting collective goals.

These contradictions stem from the lethargic social function of the
society\\'s structure and inherently lead to class conflict, economic
crisis, and eventually revolution, the existing order\\'s overthrow and
the formerly oppressed classes\\' ascension to political power.

Thus for formal societal approaches, the main predication of
\\'dialectical opposition or contradiction\\' must be understood as
\\'some sense\\' opposition between the objects involved in a directly
associated context. \\'Dialectical contradiction\\' is not reducible to
simple \\'opposites\\' or \\'negation\\'.

According to Marxist thinkers, dialectics is the science of the general
and abstract laws of the development of nature and society. We are going
to introduce their ideas based on Friedrich Engels. These principal
features might be introduced as four, which are:

1. The universe, far from being a disconnected mixture of separate
isolated entities, is an integral whole, with resultant universal
interdependency. To sum it up: The law of unity and conflict of
opposites.

The first of Engel\\'s laws or expressions was seen by Hegel as the
central feature of a dialectical understanding of things. Hegel wrote:
"It is in this dialectic as it is here understood, that is, in the
grasping of oppositions in their unity, or of the positive in the
negative, that speculative thought consists. It is the most important
aspect of dialectic."

This principle may be easily acceptable as Muslim social philosophers
have repeatedly emphasized this very point; however, astute thinkers may
distinguish between various groups co-existing within a society, and
reach different conclusions regarding each individual community. We
cannot, therefore, accept this principle in its vague formulation.

2. Nature - the natural world or cosmos - is in a state of constant
motion. Some have formulated these changes to occur either generally or
in the particular form of quantitative into qualitative. Friedrich
Engels, the German philosopher, wrote in his \\'Dialectics of
Nature\\':

"All nature, from the smallest thing to the biggest, from a grain of
sand to the sun, from the protista to man, is in a constant state of
coming into being and going out of being, in a constant flux, in a
ceaseless state of movement and change."

While the second principle is widely accepted within the milieu of
Muslim philosophers - in particular the Sadrian (Al-Harakah
Al-Jawhariyyah), it is nevertheless unclear how this could be applied
within the social field. The exception is where it could be used to
prove the need for Divine power and guidance, something which the
materialistic dialectic has rejected since its establishment. We find
ourselves forced to discuss the other part of this principle as a
separate issue.

3. Development is a process whereby insignificant and imperceptible
quantitative changes lead to fundamental, qualitative changes. The
latter occur not gradually, but rapidly and abruptly, in the form of a
leap from one state to another. A simple example from the physical world
might be the heating of water: a one degree increase in temperature is a
quantitive change, but at 100 degrees there is a qualitative change -
water to steam.

This principle is probably taken by Hegel from Aristotle, and is
equated with what scientists call "phase transitions". In each case, the
phase transition of water is one of the main expositions of quantity
into quality and vice versa. Karl Marx has also emphasized this law in
his Capital. "Merely quantitative differences, beyond a certain point,
pass into qualitative changes."

As regards this principle, we may view the case from a specific angle
as, within the social field, we found it difficult to adopt as a
constant clear-cut rule where conditions supposedly bring about
transformation from quantitative to qualitative, as societal factors are
flexible and depend on many varying factors that can affect the destiny
and future of the whole society. One is also able to defend an approach
where contradiction may tend to affect the human societies within
themselves, i.e. individuals whereby parts of the whole shall reach
perfection towards elevated positive levels, and others may descend to
ultimate lower levels.

4. All things contain within themselves internal dialectical
contradictions, which are the primary cause of motion, change, and
development in the world. This principle might be formulated as: The law
of the negation of the negation.

The principle of the negation of the negation is Hegel\\'s distinct
expression. It was the expression through which, amongst others,
Hegel\\'s dialectic became fashionable during his life-time,
notwithstanding his vague formulation; interpretation will be a
difficult task. There is much related literature and many philosophical
theories - amongst which one has, oneself, developed an innovative
theory though we are not going to discuss it in this article.

However, speaking critically and briefly - and interpreting solely from
a materialistic context - one can straightforwardly reject the need for
internal contradiction in order to perpetuate motion and to keep things
changing and moving towards different levels. Further explanations might
be needed in the next few paragraphs to elaborate upon this idea and to
strengthen its depth.

Before concluding, there is a need, at this point, to emphasise that
dialectical materialism is often defined by reference to two claims by
Marx:

first that he "put Hegel\\'s dialectics back on its feet" and second,
that "the history of all hitherto existing society is the history of
class struggles." See (The Communist Manifesto, 1848).

Dialectical materialism is essentially characterized by the belief that
history is the product of class struggle obeying the general Hegelian
principle of philosophy of history that is the development of thesis
into its antithesis which is sublated by the "Aufhebung" (~synthesis, a
word that Hegel was loathe to use) - which conserves thesis and
antithesis while simultaneously abolishing it. Thus the conflict of
society\\'s classes is a necessity for history\\'s development, and
adheres to the Hegelian principles of history.

In conclusion, within this dialectic, the process of modification
through the conflict of opposing forces, whereby a given contradiction
is characterized by a primary and a secondary aspect, the secondary
succumbing to the primary is then transformed into an aspect of new
contradiction. Ayatollah S. M. B. As-Sadr differs from Marx regarding
the origin of social contradiction.

Marx relates contradiction to the growth of means of production.
Although As-Sadr pictured the rise of contradiction in social relations
due to the changing economic conditions of society, he regarded the real
cause behind it not as consisting of external-environmental conditions,
but rather as resting within man, himself.

Man is not always the product of his environment, which itself is
shaped by his mentality, thoughts and activities. The development of
economic conditions is his doing, and social relationships are developed
and organized to meet his needs. It was his intellectual and physical
capabilities that made it possible for man to enhance his living
conditions.

Without these faculties, the external conditions would have remained
the same since the dawn of history. The reason behind the rise of the
social contradiction is that man deviated from the way of God. Changes
in the conditions surrounding man would only serve as instigators of
man\\'s mental capabilities. They act as \\'raw material\\' for
promoting and stimulating the appetite for the human brain to work.
Change of environmental condition gives man the ability to develop new
tools or means of production to counteract the effects of the changing
conditions. He states:

'...the natural forces of production do not, by themselves, reach their
[state of] perfection and growth, or quicken their development and
maturation, but rather they only instigate the senses and the thinking
of man. Their natural development, thus, is not [the result of a]
dialectical process, and the positive effect [i.e., the emancipation of
life] does not emerge from this development. Rather, the forces of
production are governed by an historical factor that is superior to
them.'

That superior factor, according to Sadr, is the human ego of mankind,
himself. Hence, the primary factor behind the contradictions that exist
in society is, according to Sadr, not changing economical conditions
(forces of productions) but rather the contradictions within man
himself. The Holy Qur'an made it explicitly clear:

<p dir="rtl">
"كلا إن الإنسان ليطغى، أن رآه استغنى."
</p>

"However man acts so arrogant, for he considers he is self-sufficient."
Qur'an 96:7

<p dir="rtl">
"إن الله لا يغير ما بقوم حتى يغيروا ما بأنفسهم."
</p>

"God does not change what any people may have until they change
whatever they themselves have." Qur'an 13:11

Thus the historical process can be defined between two poles of
political thinking; those who would like to protect their interests and
retain the existing system of alienation indefinitely, and those who
would like to revolt and replace the existing oppressive system of
social relations with a just one.

The natural course of action for the deprived and weak has always been
to lead a revolution against corrupt oppressive political regimes. The
history of revolutions, according to Sadr, has taken two different
routes to confront unjust social structures. The first is revolution
that advocates the elimination of materialistic forms of societal
oppression, considered as forms of alienation, encountered by the
downtrodden on a daily basis.

These feelings of exploitation by the masses lead them first to silent
opposition. When oppression continues, they organize their effort in
vocal political movements that give voice to their demands upon the
system. These groups eventually resort to violent actions when all else
fails. Revolutions of this type of movement mobilize masses on the basis
that a new system would distribute wealth and resources to all members
of society and eliminate privilege for the upper dominate class.

However, such revolutions, while concerned about certain kinds of
social needs, are short-sighted. The masses would continue to face other
forms of alienation in the post-revolutionary system. The oppressed of
yesterday would become the masters, and thus, the oppressor of today.
The whole historical process would repeat itself with new players.

Thus, "the revolution would only change the position of exploitation,
but would not accomplish its elimination." That is probably why Marx
considered the existence of a historical dialectic process whereby each
rising class resorts to oppressive means and measures to protect its
interests against other groups, i.e., every thesis gives rise to an
antithesis.

The second type of revolutionary process is one that tries to eliminate
the source of alienation rather than merely emphasizing elimination of
its materialistic contradictions. It is a revolution that would resort
to the creation of new social values that would see an end to all
sources of exploitation.

The revolution that would advocate the values of justice,
righteousness, and equality that stem from belief in God is the only
revolution that would secure man from the domination and exploitation of
other powers. It is the total surrender of man to God that would free
him from surrendering to others. When the revolution advocates the
equality of all people,

it must be on the basis that all are equal before God and no single
group has special rights with respect to others. When such
revolutionaries try to eliminate the means of control of the dominate
group, it is not because of a belief that they have no right to reign,
but because all people have equal right to govern before God and act as
His representative on earth. Sadr called the latter type of revolution
the \\'(Divine) real revolution\\' and the former the \\'(Taghuti)
relative revolution.\\'

These few sentences have been an attempt to establish a correction of
the theoretical Marxist approach, and while touching on the theoretical
version of social contradiction, they should suffice to lead us to
profoundly study and extensively examine the new approach, including its
relation to Real Practiced Life.


