Examining the Authenticity of Dialectical Marxism in Practice
=============================================================

**The Role of Religion in Mobilizing the Masses towards Revolution**

The last few decades of the last century witnessed a new phenomenon,
namely the Islamic revolution of Iran, where religion demonstrably
played a major role in mobilizing the masses for the purpose of a
national cause, simultaneously inspiring aspirations of International
proportions with regard to the oppressors happily hogging their way
around the globe. However, there are some politically observant and
strategic analysts who have tried to trivialise or belittle the role of
religious ideology in forming and motivating the forces of the
revolution.

In his book: \\'Six theories of the Victory of the Islamic Revolution
in Iran\\', Haghighat edited an article entitled: \\'The Role of
Ideology, Leadership and People in the Islamic Revolution\\' by
Manoochehr Mohammdi that states that religion was the main factor for
the victory of the Islamic revolution. Analyzing the main ideologies
that could and eventually did influence the destiny of the revolution,
we read in the article by Mohammadi:

\\'In Iran, since long ago and from the early years of the present
century, three different eastern and western ideologies have attracted
different social groups. These are Nationalism, Marxism-Leninism, and
Islam. Their advocates have endeavoured to gather a following by
painting their own picture of ideal society. Nationalism, in the minds
race, incorporates historical background,

language, culture and traditions of people, who have gathered inside a
set of geographical boundaries as an undissociatable unit, and
considering such, honour it as friendly and otherwise as alien and
enemy. The Marxist movement, despite the extensive efforts made, was
less successful than nationalism in Iran for two reasons:

The atheistic structure and materialistic nature of Marxism-Leninism
contradicted the Iranian society\\'s nature and their deep religious
beliefs. Thus, it could not find popular acceptability.

The extensive affiliation of Marxists to Moscow resulted in their
becoming regarded "as a result of the bitter experiences of
Iranian-Russian relation",

or as a group of Russian puppets. However, Islam as a divine school of
thought had historical roots in the minds of various classes of people.
A society with 98% of its members being traditional Muslims, and most of
them adhering to their divine book\\'s commands, is well prepared to
accept revolution.\\'

Many have rejected the idea that religion, and in particular Islam
could have played a strong role in the people\\'s motivation towards
revolting against the Shah. Mohammadi writes:

\\'Among the main arguments against this ideology being used as the
ideology of the revolution are:

Many years of western imperialist propaganda had inspired the notion
that, "Religion should be separated from politics and have no
relationship with socio-political problems". This program of insinuation
had affected various classes of people and even some of the clergy and
religious authorities. The ideal society that Islam intended to
establish belonged to 14 centuries in the past and many believed it
impossible to establish its orders in the modern era. Doubts existed
whether it could answer the present epoch\\'s conundrums.

Reliance on some of the Islamic principles, such as dissimulation and
waiting for the advent of the 12th Imam in Shi\\'ah tradition and
obeying the designated guardian among the Sunnis, had left no room, not
even in the minds of some true Muslims, for the idea that Islam could be
wielded as a revolutionary ideology for changing the prevailing
values.\\'

After discussing many of the abovementioned points he insists:

\\'The evidence in all of these popular and mass movements proves that
the essential accelerating factor in the revolution had a purely
religious aspect and was related to the insulting article as follows:

From January 10, 1978 till the victory of the revolution, all of the
demonstrations had a religious aspect and were performed using religious
traditions, ceremonies and festivities, (like Ashura, the 40th day
mourning ceremony, and religious festival), and had no other
distinguishing traits.

The starting and ending points of the demonstrations were at mosques
and the regime showed its enmity to religion by attacking the Great
Mosque of Kerman, Habib Mosque in Shiraz, and Lonradeh Mosque in Tehran,
trying to stop these gatherings.

Invitation for the gatherings for street marches and leadership of the
demonstrations were accomplished by the scholars. Non-religious leaders
never had any role in administering and leading the demonstrations. Even
when the National Front, trying to test its power, declared a strike and
street march on the 40th day of mourning for the martyrs of Black
Friday, it was unsuccessful.

These initiatives had no relationship with the more open political
atmosphere or Carter\\'s human rights, policy, but they were brutally
and ruthlessly answered. Even American so-called human rights supporters
encouraged and supported the Shah in these acts of brutality.

People\\'s slogans and requests were religious and political, and were
based on two axes: Firstly the Shah\\'s leaving and the fall of the
Pahlavi regime, and secondly, establishing an Islamic state.
Non-religious groups had no choice but to join the Muslim masses and
were thus forced to abandon their own slogans so as not to face popular
objection.


He concludes at the end of his article:

\\'The greatest role in the victory of the revolution in Iran was
played by religion and the school of martyrdom. Any attempt to relate it
to issues such as Carter\\'s human rights policy, the coalition of
various forces, nationalistic movements, and so on, is distortion of
reality and disagrees with documented historical facts.\\'

This fact is also shared and confirmed by sharp and astute Western
writers, such as Fred Halliday who, in an article titled: The
Contradictory Legacies of Ayatollah Khomeini: The Iranian Revolution at
Twenty presented in a London International Conference in 1999, wrote
describing the above mentioned elements as follows:

"Khomeini had built a regime that combined religious and ideological
authority with strong security system….The Iranian revolution claimed to
be a novel kind of revolution, and many outside Iran agreed with this:
this was a revolution made in the name of religion, and led by the
clergy. This has never happen before in the history of modern
revolutions.

There were indeed other elements of novelty: this… Its ideological
character was evident in the fact that it did not seek to invoke a long
set of predecessors: Khomeini insisted…. The only model was that of the
Prophet in the seventh century.

It is explicitly emphasizing that the Islamic revolution produced a new
model for revolution in modern history that was both ideological and
religious. Two factors combined to demonstrate in favour of Islam at the
beginning of the third millennium.

The revolution faced many challenges and succeeded in stabilising and
dynamically carrying out its functions. What was remarkable to observe
was the domino effect collapse of the Communist states which had for so
many years served as staunch rivals to the capitalist model. This has
provided an extremely significant opportunity to revive the role of
religion and the Divine values within the everyday life of the human
being.

The transformation or the influence of Divine values on the
International arena was witnessed by politicians and strategists.
Referring to this remarkable change, Shirin Hunter wrote the following
in an article entitled: "The Post-Soviet International System and the
Dialogue of civilizations":

- "Between 1950s and 1970s, these efforts (referring to the United
Nation Charter and the activities of other countries struggling to
achieve independence within the International arena) were related mostly
to issues of political and economic independence and to trying to
[become part] of the International political system.

In the 1980s, however, cultural and value-related issues acquired
greater importance, and this trend was strengthened in the 1990s,
following the Soviet Union collapse. Today, cultural and civilisational
issues are key elements of the International discourse and inter and
intra-state relations."

While ideology and religion - especially Islam in the case of the
Soviet failure in Afghanistan - provided an indispensable service in
effecting the failure of communism, one could have possibly
prognosticated the ideology, in general, and Islam in particular, to be
central to the mind of strategists and theoreticians alike were it not
for the number of remaining doctrinaires who were either not vigilantly
engaged in scrutinizing the International arena, or who wilfully ignored
this enormous ideological role, preferring to jettison the importance of
religion.

Some leading political figures espoused the idea of a "New World Order"
with the existence of a single world Mega Power. However, they felt less
at home with the resulting un-confrontational vacuum; having an
adversary served well for uniting inner fronts in the face of a (real or
imagined) major external enemy.

In order to groom the everyday minds of leaders, minions and masses
actively in the same direction, it was assumed that Islam could fill the
void and become the perfect alternative bogeyman. Speaking about a
\\'New World Order\\' was a politically motivated vague formulation and
an attempt to present American Western hegemony over the rest of the
world. It was not, however, shaped as an intellectual theory nor
received as a well formulated theorem from a charismatic individual.

The reason should be intrinsically clear as simply highlighting a fact
is not an exceptional accomplishment, nor a great task entrusted to a
magnificently charismatic global leadership.

Again, it was left to an American thinker to produce a theory to serve
as Trojan Horse, saving ship, and dynamic vehicle within the \\'New
World Order\\'. The theory of the \\'Clash of Civilizations\\' was
introduced in a book by Samuel Huntington. He, a US political scientist,
was "the director of security-planning for the National Security
Council" in the White House regime of Jimmy Carter. Huntington has had
access to a lot of very interesting behind-the-scenes data denied to
lesser mortals.

The ideas in this book were first presented in a lecture at the
Washington "American Enterprise Institute." One of the crucial purposes
and motivation for Huntington\\'s brainchild lay in this factor, as,
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, some considered the world could
finally be able to breathe a sigh of relief due to the death of the cold
war.

According to the ideas in Huntington\\'s book, however, one should not
take that breath of relief as humanity\\'s destiny has been ensnared,
once again, by a huge, profound and wider global Clash. As he put it,
paving the way for presenting his brainchild, namely 'The Clash of
Civilization': true friends require true enemies:

"For peoples seeking identity and reinventing ethnicity, enemies are
essential, and the potentially most dangerous enmities occur across the
fault lines between the world\\'s major civilizations." (p. 20)

Within and between these lines one is able to discern a crucial
insidious factor, i.e. a shift from emphasis on ideology to something
rarely, if ever, discussed within the circles of strategists, due to its
fluid character the very nature of which escapes clear definition based
on solid background: civilization.


