The Shift of Importance From Ideology-religion Into Civilization-strategy
=========================================================================

This shift from emphasis on religion to civilization was lucrative,
provided a wonderful opportunity and unleashed great energy for the
masterminds behind the so-called \\'New World Order\\'. Otherwise, no
one would ever have implemented the civilisational factor within
International affairs of state, as this term was nonexistent in the
lexicon of International affairs. According to Shirin Hunter in her
article, entitled: The Post-Soviet International System and the Dialogue
of civilizations\\':

'Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 a new concept
has been introduced into the lexicon of International affairs, namely
that of 'civilizations' as actors on the International scene and,
therefore, if not replacing, then competing with the nation state as the
principal unit of the International system.

- The idea was first introduced by Samuel Huntington in the context of
his 'Clash of civilizations' theory. According to this theory,
civilisational incompatibility or affinity will be the main factor
determining the nature of international and inter-state relations

Moreover, this theory implies that rather than individual states
interacting with one another -albeit at different levels, bilateral,
multilateral etc.- it will be a cluster of states bound together by
certain common values within the framework of a particular civilization,
that will become the main actor.'

Although she might be attempting to present his ideas, one has to state
that, despite being a complex, learned and thought provoking work, his
book introducing the Clash of Civilizations should in no way change the
way one regards the international social and political order. It is
especially important to be wary of rushing into judgements while
applying it to world events post-September 11th, 2001.

The idea was indeed invented several years before this tragic so-called
wake-up event. And the course and history for its background was meant
to elaborate, or substitute the \\'New World Order\\' in the academic
milieu.

Huntington's book has been denounced by some Left-wings as being
written by a right-winger and therefore, presumably, of no intellectual
significance.

On the other hand S. Sayed, from the sociology department of the
University of East London, despite admitting the complications of
defining a \\'civilization\\', enjoyed Huntington's analysis that Muslim
Nations are being replaced by quasi-primordial constructs such as
civilizations. He also shares the same idea that these entities are the
manifestation of a national logic and likes the idea and recognition of
the relationship between the nation and the form that the political
entity has taken.

He refutes, however, the idea which has animated Huntington and upon
which he bases his theory. After mentioning a couple of shared practices
amongst Muslims he says:

'It is difficult to conclude from these examples that that which
constitutes the unity of the Muslim Ummah is its uniform way of life.
(Of course, it is precisely this idea of a Muslim/ Islamic civilization
that animates people such as Huntington; nevertheless, like all attempts
which conceptualise civilization as an unity, these flounder since they
rest upon an eclectic collection of observable and generalized
features.')

The negative affects of this book (Clash of Civilisations), which seem
to be frequently encountered in post 2001 readings, lies in its
unmerciful ramification and pessimistic prognostication for the future
of humanity.

One could probably link the thesis with the fact that America was in a
period of increasing tension, particularly from confronting Muslims in
various locations across the globe.

Huntington is neither a liberal nor a left winger. In his advice, he
emphasises that the West must restrain the military power of Islamic and
Sino countries in their attempt for technological/military superiority
over other civilisations. Of course, his brainchild is not limited to
the Islamic territories but rather extends to cover two civilizations:
the Islamic and the Buddhist world (China and countries in close
geographic orbit/influence). (p. 312)

During a London Conference on \\'Muslims Identity in the 21st
century\\' organized in Oct. 1998, Dale F. Eickleman, declared that
Huntington\\'s rhyming "West versus Rest" is of little use for the
modern understanding of Muslim societies. He states:

'They obscure, or even distort, the immense spiritual and intellectual
ferment that is taking place today among the world's nearly one billion
Muslims, reducing this innovation, in most cases, to a fanatical
rejection of everything modern, liberal or progressive.'

As Huntington has suggested, the core of the challenge and his absolute
obsession lies in the fear of being inferior - both economically and
militarily- to the two civilizations. Thus our main concern should be to
confront the superiority complex, and to resolve it in finding ways to
let others think of themselves as equal to others, and to recognize that
the others are very much alike - regardless of their various
differences - and that they, too, possess the ability to add something
to the Mega Powers; knowledge and purification.

<p dir="rtl">
" ولولا دفع الله الناس بعضهم ببعض لهدمت صوامع وبيع وصلوات ومساجد يذكر
فيها اسم الله كثيرا."
</p>

"If it were not because God repels some men by means of others,
cloisters, churches, synagogues and mosques where God\\'s name is
mentioned frequently would have been demolished." Qur\\'an 22:40

<p dir="rtl">
"قال الإمام علي (ع): الناس صنفان، أما أخ لك في الدين، وأما نظير لك في
الخلق." الإمام علي (ع)، نهج البلاغة، الكلمات القصار
</p>

Imam Ali (as) said: "People are of two categories: either brethren in
faith, or peer in creation." Nahj ul-Blaghah, short sayings of Imam Ali
(as).


**Introduction of the Dialogue of Civilizations
**
Just as the pursuit of mono-cultural, single religion, territorial and
oppositional states has proven problematic since the demise of the
Middle Ages, so has the increasingly singular pursuit of the American
example of democracy for the post-Cold War world in the twenty-first
century.

The American type of democracy may function within certain societies
with special conditions, but it is not the only or exemplary way to
achieve a peaceful, productive, pluralistic and culturally dynamic
society. After the refutation of the Clash of civilizations, there was
the introduction of a wiser theory from the Muslims by Sayyed M.
Khatami.

The call was made prominent by the Iranian President in his keynote
address at the opening of the United Nation in 1999. This call for a
grand dialogue at the demise of the 20th and the inauguration of the
21st century was timely. Cultures have already encountered each other on
religious journeys, modern holidays and vacations, military conquests,
business transactions and intellectual exchanges and excursions.

The idea of the Dialogue of Civilizations cannot be rejected by a
humble civilized human being, nor disapproved by an astutely religious
individual. One should get beyond the various forms of contemporary
fundamentalism and extremism wherever possible. Muslims today should
operate with epistemological modesty, as no one can deny that great
civilizations have been built by wise non-fundamentalist leaders like
the Greeks, Chinese, Persian and Muslims.

The Qur'anic principle supports such a civilized approach, and we may
quote the following Qur'aic verses:

<p dir="rtl">
"إذ قال لصاحبه وهو يحاوره، أكفرت .... الآية."
</p>

"His companion said to him while disputing with him: Do you disbelieve
in Him who created you from dust, then from a small seed, then He made
you a perfect man?" Qur\\'an 18:37

<p dir="rtl">
"أدع الى سبيل ربك بالحكمة والموعظة الحسنة وجادلهم بالتي هي أحسن."
</p>

"Invite to the Way of the Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching."

Qur\\'an 16:125

Also in a narration we read:

<p dir="rtl">
"إن الحكمة ضالة المؤمن، فحيث وجدها ألتقطها، فهو أحق بها."
</p>

"Wisdom is the ultimate goal of the believer, and wherever he finds it,
it is his prerogative to acquire it, as he deserves it more than anybody
else."

Many Muslims among the religious minorities seem to have succeeded in
dealing with cultural contradictions presented by others, and in
conceiving themselves in tolerant, complex and realistic terms. Also,
religious minorities, such as Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians, live in
a number of Islamic countries, and for instance in I. R.

Iran under the Wilayat Faqih regulations are a model of
cosmopolitanism. Yet superiority is still not manifested in each and
every different way. These religious minorities, for example, don\\'t
pay the jizyah (the religious taxation upon non-Muslims within an
Islamic State), while maintaining the application of the Islamic
Shari\\'ah Law. Some of them are not so favoured in other Islamic
countries.

On the other hand, some Muslim communities living in the Free-World do
not share an elevated position within the society, and are deprived of
certain rights in a smooth smart way.

Some of them have, consequently, remained on the hard shoulder of the
main highway. The reasons are many and varied; some stemming from
psychological seclusion, stigmatization of faith and humiliation of
their holy figures during the last few decades.

Appropriateness of the society\\'s popular faith, such as Christianity,
is so excessively focused and extremely emphasized to possibly cause a
number of civilisational conversions, despite being increasingly
abhorrent to the Muslim community. These social limitations, which have
caused a number of nominal conversions to Christianity or other faiths,
have had a negative impact on the status of sociology of the Free-World,
regardless and notwithstanding its positive attributes.

The exclusion, conversion and attempted elimination of Muslims
sensibilities and devotion will not help any healthy society to
flourish. Rather it contributes to the instability of free societies.

It is, therefore, wise to promote the Dialogue of Civilizations in
order to minimize tensions and decrease elevated levels of confusion and
misunderstanding. However, this peaceful idea, despite its many
advantages, has not appeared to have been welcomed by arrogant
individuals and atheistic Mega Powers.

An intellectual thinker marked the idea with a presentation designed to
show that we are in a transitional phase from the "Rise and Fall" model
to the "Dialogue" model. According to him:

"The implications are far reaching, not the least, a new understanding
of civil society, cultural achievements by human beings of different
nationalities and cultural manifestations."

He also rightfully insists that Gibbon's study on the Rise and Fall of
Civilizations contributes to the topic of our discussion. He, therefore,
advises a further study of the theory of 'Dialogue of Civilizations', as
it lacks much sense without further investigation of the various
technical terms implemented:

'We must, in a dialogue of civilizations, investigate exactly, if
historical records and archaeological evidence permit, why and how
civilizations constitute themselves and fall apart and transform
themselves into another form of civilization, or simple drop dead and
become another chapter in the book on world history….

'Much interdisciplinary research must be done in the Dialogue of
Civilizations to achieve a kind of sense, so as to come to terms why and
how any type of form of civilization emerges, flourishes, and ultimately
dies.'

While analyzing the reasons for the fall of the Roman Empire - despite
the fact that it had adopted the Christian religion - Gazo quoted
Gibbons to blame the very same adopted religion as the main cause for
its decline. He writes:

'Gibbons, hitherto, is read for his literary style, for an example of
the enlightenment attitude towards Rome and Christianity, and
ultimately, for the Rise and Fall paradigm, inherent in his narrative.
Of course, everyone somehow knowledgeable of a little historical reading
knows Gibbons verdict: The basic reason for Rome's fall and decline was
Christianity.'

It seems, as he, himself, realized, there is a fault in generalizing
the cause to be a 'Religion' or any religion, and he could not help
adding, therefore, that even Gibbons, the very same theoretician, cannot
put Islam under the same category. However, he presented it in the form
of a smart political manoeuvre:

Gibbons, as a figure from the enlightenment, needs no apology for his
version of Rome and the Christian subversion. The enlightenment thinkers
themselves were, as is well known, not positively inclined toward the
Roman Catholic Church. Again it is no surprise that Gibbons and his
friends should be benignly inclined toward Islam.'

By these quotes we find ourselves not entrapped into rejecting the role
of ideology or religion, especially Islam, as some previous American
thinkers have, but rather encouraged to further study our theory as the
workable alternative to the Marxist Material Contradiction, the New
World Order and to both the Clash of Civilizations and the Dialogue of
Civilizations.


