Imam Al-mahdi (as) and Opponents
================================

Adopting the Qur'anic principle of Imamah, one is naturally positioned
to face criticism that one is inclined towards promoting a One-Party
government. Imam Al-Mahdi (as) being the representative of good, his
opponents may be defined as representing the evil forces. One of the
most commonly observed features is the accusation levelled at the Divine
party as being dictatorial and a one-party rule.

Conversely, the accusers indirectly manipulate the concept that the
distinctive qualities of their party, i.e. the opponents of Imam
Al-Mahdi's (as) Divine revolution are totally free, declaring the 'Free
World'.

His opponents claim to protect - at least - elementary human rights
such as extreme tolerance, opening the space for diversity, tolerance,
and freedom of belief and expression. The logical accusation of human
rights promoters to the Mahdis (as) would be negligence of basic rights
of peace, security, and freedom.

From the abovementioned elaboration and information, we understand that
those opinions are not identical with the actual given facts, either
theoretically, or practically. Also, the contradiction was not formed
according to Marxist definition, nor is society expected to be formed
following Hegelian principles.

The institution (Sunnan At-Ta'rikh) of this dialectical struggle
between positive and evil forces reflects a totally different image and
a completely different application. A closer realistic scenario to the
abovementioned dialectic is that these accusations reflect a
self-egoistic Eurocentric nature leading to contradiction followed by
complementarity, but towards totally opposite directions.

<p dir="rtl">
"وقال الذين كفروا لرسلهم لنخرجنكم من ارضنا او لتعودن في ملتنا فاوحى
اليهم ربهم لنهلكن الظالمين، وَلَنُسْكِنَنَّكُمُ الأَرْضَ مِن بَعْدِهِمْ
ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَافَ مَقَامِي وَخَافَ وَعِيدِ "
</p>

"Those who disbelieved told their messengers: "We\\'ll run you out of
our land unless you return to our sect!" Their Lord [however] inspired
them [as follows]: "We shall wipe out wrongdoers and settle you on the
land to succeed them." That is [in store] for anyone who fears My
position and fears My threat." Qur'an 14:13-14


**Conclusion**

- Human history is overwhelmed with examples of the contradiction
between the good and the evil forces; however this contradiction should
be grasped in its natural and human context. The Marxist material
dialectic is not irrefutable. Most of the Hegel-Engels concepts were
studied and critically discussed. Contradictions within social fields
are facts, while any attempt to reject them is detached from reality.

The main point is to try to grasp an all-inclusive and thorough model.
The ideas of Muslim philosophers such as S. M. B. As-Sadr were analyzed
as an alternative to the suggested Models and principles.

- The theoretical study was then supplemented by discussing reality
using the most significant phenomenon of the last century, i.e. the
Islamic Revolution of Iran, in the light of which, after studying
different examples of both Western and Islamic thinkers, the prevailing
opinion was presented.

- The effect of the collapse of the Soviet Union in the contemporary
world was analyzed, and the introduction of the New World Order,
followed by both the Clash and the Dialogue of Civilizations were
introduced with their positive and negative elements.

- The ultimate and final holistic solution to fill the vacuum within
the intellectual milieu was then presented. A holistic approach capable
of being applied to the stark reality of life, presenting a civilized
and moral alternative was introduced.

The alternative to the abovementioned theories was established while
paving the way for complementarity for each and every active party
within the socio-political and economic spheres for both internal and
external contradiction, when both parties - evil or good - consciously
or unwittingly, will be forced towards interacting within the inevitable
social contradiction, then ultimately reaching complementarity, albeit
towards opposite directions.

- The holistic approach was presented along with supporting evidence
from Qur'anic verses as well as narrations from the Sunnah, and in the
light of this theory, we have attempted to understand the relationship
between Imam Al-Mahdi (as) and his opponents.

Title of the article: Mahdism and Messianism utopia: believers
attributes at "The Time of Appearance".

"Do not make haste for a matter which is to happen and is awaited, and
do not wish for delay in what tomorrow is to bring for you." (1) There
is an increasing interest in our society today concerning the appearance
of the Messiah for Christians and the Mahdi (a.s. ) for Muslims that
will bring God kingdom to earth. Many religions and schools of thoughts
have prophesized and predicted it.

The Mahdi (a.s.) is the main eschatological messianic figure in Islam
that will bring peace and reconciliation to our suffering world before
the "End of Time". His appearance will bring spiritual harmony and order
and He will encourage people to live for the needs of "others". The
strong believe of the Shi´a religious community in the appearance of the
Mahdi (a.s.) has propitiated hope and inspiration to them to accept the
responsibility of taking the necessary steps to accomplish all changes
needed before his appearance.

"So have no fear of them; for nothing is covered up that will not be
uncovered, and nothing secret that will not become known. What I say to
you in the dark, tell in the light; and what you hear whispered,
proclaim from the housetops." (2)

The appearance of the Mahdi (a.s.) or Messiah is inevitable and sure,
but those that believe in His appearance will have to be aware of the
transcendental changes that will occur in their life at a personal and
professional level. Is no doubt that this is the greatest task that a
human being could ever had in his/her life, but, still is a long journey
to go and a lot of work to do before His appearance, but a bright future
is awaiting us at the end of the "Journey".


**Time is now for actions and courage!**

Peace be upon al-Mahdi through whom Allah has promised to unite
nations, put an end to disunion, and fill the earth with justice. I.-
Three key principles of religious utopia o Our Soul is immortal.

"He first created man from clay, tem made his descendants from an
extract of underrated fluid. Then he mounded him; He breathed from His
Spirit into him". (3)

There is only one true God ,powerful, eternal, immense and infinite in
His understanding and will as we are taught by the Sacred Scriptures. He
created all creatures, among them men and women, and He made them
capable of knowing and loving their Creator. Human beings acknowledge
themselves as superior to all the other creatures created by God.

In the profound intimacy of his being as a man, is where he finds his
Creator. And it is through this encounter with God that man knows and
feels that he possesses a spiritual and immortal soul. There is no
deception: by entering his deep interior world, man can attain the truth
about his human reality.

Throughout the centuries, human beings have carried out great works
with their ingeniousness and intelligence. They have achieved great
successes in scientific research, in the empirical sciences, and above
all in the domination of the material world. But the activity of human
intelligence cannot be limited to phenomenological thought when it was
created by God to be able to achieve, with real certainty, that other
immaterial, intelligible reality.

The intellectual nature of human beings must perfect itself by means of
wisdom, which acts like a gentle breeze attracting the mind of man and
his thinking to the search for truth and the love of truth and goodness.
Wisdom leads man to the sources of supreme knowledge; it leads him from
visible and material knowledge to invisible and spiritual knowledge.
However, this step requires the acknowledgement on man's part of his own
insignificance in the face of the greatness of God.

Man has access to knowledge through his natural reason and by means of
divine faith, because, apart from the things that natural reason can
explain, there are the mysteries hidden in God that cannot be known by
mere human reason without divine revelation.

When reason searches, illuminated by faith, acknowledging God as the
supreme wisdom, it finds - with the help of the gift of God - the
intelligence that permits it, by analogy with what it knows through
natural reason or through the connection of the self-same mysteries
amongst themselves, that he is allowed to discover a part - not all - of
God\\'s mysteries. However, man will never understand all of God's
mysteries, because their nature as divine mysteries surpasses man's
understanding, "for we walk by faith, not by sight" (4)

Although faith is beyond reason, God Himself, who reveals the mysteries
and inspires faith, put the light of reason in the human soul. In this
way, righteous reason demonstrates the fundaments of faith, and, through
the light of faith, cultivates the sciences of the divine, while faith,
on its side, delivers and defends reason from error and provides it with
a diversity of knowledge.

Less scientifically and technologically advanced human communities in
the world today are able to show great examples of wisdom and teach
those more sophisticated and developed communities the true value of
humanity, that value that is tempered by the heart and is filtered
through love.


