Letter 11: Given to the contingent sent to confront the enemy.
==============================================================

*Part of instructions to his marshal when Imam Ali (a) sent him to a
battle* [^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن وصية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصّى بها(عليه السلام) جيشاً بعثه إلى العدو
  </p>
</blockquote>

When you proceed towards the enemy or he proceeds towards you, the
position of your force should be on the approaches high ground or on the
edges of mountains or the bends of rivers, so that it may serve you as a
help and a place to return to. Your encounter should be from one side or
two sides.

Place watchers on the peaks of mountains and the raised sides of the
high ground so that the enemy may not approach you from any place,
whether of danger or safety. And know that the vanguard of an army
serves as their eyes, and the eyes of the vanguard are their informers.
Beware of dispersal. When you halt do so together and when you move you
should move together. When night comes fix your spears in a circle and
do not sleep except for dozing or napping.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإذَا نزَلتُمْ بِعَدُوّ أَوْ نَزَلَ بِكُمْ، فَلْيَكُنْ مُعَسْكَرُكُمْ
فِي قُبُلِ الاْشْرَافِ، أَوْ سِفَاحِ الْجِبَالِ، أَوْ أثْنَاءِ
الاْنْهَارِ، كَيْما يَكُونَ لَكُمْ رِدْءاً، وَدُونَكُمْ مَرَدّاً،
وَلْتَكُنْ مُقَاتَلَتُكُمْ مِنْ وَجْه وَاحِد أَوِ اثْنيْنِ، واجْعَلُوا
لَكُمْ رُقَبَاءَ فِي صَيَاصِي الْجِبَالِ، وَمَنَاكِبِ الْهِضَابِ،
لِئَلاَّ يَأْتِيَكُمُ الْعَدُوُّ مِنْ مَكَانِ مَخَافَة أَوْ أَمْن.
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ مُقَدِّمَةَ الْقَومِ عُيُونُهُمْ، وَعُيُونَ
الْمُقَدِّمَةِ طَلاَئِعُهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِيَّاكُمْ وَالتَّفَرُّقَ، فَإِذَا نَزَلْتُمْ فَانْزِلُوا جَمِيعاً،
وَإذا ارْتحَلْتُمْ فَارْتَحِلُوا جَمِيعاً، وَإِذَا غشِيكُمُ اللَّيْلُ
فَاجْعَلُوا الرِّمَاحَ كِفَّةً، وَلاَ تَذُوقُوا النَّوْمَ إِلاَّ
غِرَاراً أَوْ مَضْمَضَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When Amir al-mu'minin put Ziyad ibn an-Nadr al-Harithi and Shurayh
ibn Hani al-Harithi in command of contingents of eight thousand and four
thousand strong at the camp of an-Nukhaylah and ordered them to advance
towards Syria (ash-Sham), some dispute arose between them about their
ranks, of which they apprised Amir al-mu'minin and wrote letters of
complaints about each other. In reply, Amir al-mu'minin wrote to them
that when they marched jointly the command of the whole force would be
with Ziyad ibn an-Nadr al-Harithi and when they marched separately each
would be in command of the force over which he had been placed.  In this
letter Amir al-mu'minin also wrote for them certain instructions. Here
as-Sayyid ar-Radi has taken down only the portion containing the
instructions. These instructions are not only useful as concerns the
strategies of fighting of those days, but their utility and importance
in bringing out the principles of fighting in these days also is
undeniable. These instructions are that at the time of encounter with
the enemy the forces should be encamped on the tops of mountains and
turns of rivers, because in this way the low areas of the rivers would
serve as trenches and the peaks of mountains as the walls of the
fortress and thus it would be possible to feel secure and face the enemy
from the other side. Secondly, that tile attack should be from one side
or at the most from two sides, because by distribution of the entire
force on several fronts weakness would inevitably arise. Thirdly, that
the watchers should be put in position on the tops of high ground and
the peaks of mountains so that they may give warning before the attack.
Sometimes it happens that instead of attacking from the expected side
the enemy attacks from a different side. Therefore, if watchers are in
position in high places they will detect the enemy from the cloud of
dust seen from a distance. To clarify the useful aspect of these
instructions Ibn Ahi'l-Hadid has recorded (in vol.15, p.91) a historical
incident that when Qahtabah (ibn Shabib at-Ta'i) encamped in a village
after leaving Khurasan, he and Khalid ibn Barmak went and sat on the top
of a nearby hill. No sooner had they sat down than Khalid noticed flocks
of deer coming running from the forest. On seeing this he said to
Qahtabah, "O' commander, get up and announce to the army that they
should at once fall in line and takeup arms." Hearing this, Qahtabah was
startled and stood up but looking hither and thither said, "I do not see
the enemy's men anywhere." He replied, "O' Amir, this is not the time
that should be lost in conversation. You see these deer which are
proceeding towards the people, leaving their abodes. This means that the
army of the enemy is marching from their rear." Consequently, he ordered
his army to get ready. As soon as the army got ready the noise of
horses' hoofs was heard and within moments the enemy was on them. Since
they had prepared themselves for defence in time, they defended
themselves against the enemy thoroughly. Now, if Khalid had not been at
such a height and had not acted with such sagacity, the enemy would have
attacked them unawares and annihilated them. Fourthhly, that the
reconnaissance should be spread here and there, so that they can be
aware of the movements and intentions of the enemy, and thereby foil his
plans. Fifthly, that when the army camps it should camp together and
when it moves it should move together so that the enemy does not attack
you in a state of dispersal and overpower you easily. Sixthly, that at
night the guard should be formed by fixing spears in a circle in the
ground so that if the enemy attacks in the night, it is possible to
prepare for defence by taking up arms at once and if the enemy showers
arrows that too can be defied. Seventhly, that deep sleep should be
avoided lest you remain unaware of the enemy's approach and he succeed
in attacking you before you get ready.


