Letter 17: In reply to a letter from Mu'awiyah
==============================================

*In reply to a letter from Mu'awiyah* [^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى معاوية، جواباً عن كتاب منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for your demand to me to (hand over) Syria, I cannot give you today
what I denied you yesterday. As regards your saying that the war has
eaten up Arabia save its last breath, you should know that he whom right
has eaten up goes to Paradise and he whom wrong has eaten up goes to
Hell. As for our equality in (the art of) war and in (numbers of) men,
certainly you cannot be more penetrating in doubtfulness (of belief)
than I am in certainty (of belief), and the people of Syria are not more
greedy for this world than the people of Iraq are for the next world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا طَلَبُكَ إِلَيَّ الشَّامَ، فَإِنِّي لَمْ أَكُنْ لاِعْطِيَكَ
الْيَوْمَ مَا مَنَعْتُكَ أَمْسِ. وَأَمَّا قَوْلُكَ: إِنَّ الْحَرْبَ
قَدْ أَكَلَتِ الْعَرَبَ إِلاَّ حُشَاشَاتِ أَنْفُس بَقِيَتْ، فَمَنْ
أَكَلَهُ الْحَقُّ فَإِلَى الْجَنَّةِ،مَنْ أَكَلَهُ الْبَاطِلُ فَإِلَى
النّارِ. وَأَمَّا اسْتِوَاؤُنَا فِي الْحَرْبِ والرِّجَالِ، فَلَسْتَ
بِأَمْضَى عَلَى الشَّكِّ مِنِّي عَلَى الْيَقِينِ، وَلَيْسَ أَهْلُ
الشَّامِ بِأَحْرَصَ عَلَى الدُّنْيَا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْعِرَاقِ عَلَى
الاْخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for your saying that both of us are sons of 'Abd Manaf, it is no
doubt so, but Umayyah cannot be like Hashim, nor Harb like Abd
al-Muttalib, nor can Abu Sufyan be like Abu Talib. The muhajir
(immigrant) cannot be a match for him who was set free (on the day of
fall of Mecca), nor can one of pure descent be a match for him who has
been adopted, nor the pursuer of truth be a match of the adherent to
wrong, nor a believer be a match for a hypocrite. How bad are the
successors who go on following their predecessors who have fallen in the
fire of Hell!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا قَوْلُكَ: إِنَّا بَنُو عَبْدِ مَنَاف، فَكَذلِكَ نَحْنُ،
وَلكِنْ لَيْسَ أُمَيَّةُ كَهَاشِمَ، وَلاَ حَرْبٌ كَعَبْدِ
الْمُطَّلِبِ، وَلاَ أَبُوسُفْيَانَ كَأَبِي طَالِب، وَلاَ المُهَاجرُ
كَالطَّلِيقِ، وَلاَ الصَّرِيحُ كَاللَّصِيقِ، وَلاَ الْـمُحِقُّ
كَالْمُبطِلِ، وَلاَ الْمُؤْمِنُ كَالمُدْغِلِ، وَلَبِئْسَ الْخَلَفُ
خَلَفٌ يَتْبَعُ سَلَفاً هَوَى فِي نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Besides that, we also have the distinction of prophethood among us, by
virtue of which we subdued the strong and raised up the down-trodden.
When Allah made Arabia enter (the fold of) His religion, and the people
submitted to it willingly or unwillingly, you were among those who
entered the religion either from greed or from fear, at a time when
those who had gone first had preceded and the first muhajirun had
acquired their (peculiar) distinction. Now, do not allow Satan have a
share with you nor let him have his sway over you; and that is an end to
the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِي أَيْدِينَا بعْدُ فَضْلُ النُّبُوَّةِ الَّتِي أَذْلَلْنَا بِهَا
الْعَزِيزَ، وَنَعَشْنَا بِهَا الذَّلِيلَ. وَلَمَّا أَدْخَلَ اللهُ
الْعَرَبَ فِي دِينِهِ أَفْوَاجاً، وَأَسْلَمَتْ لَهُ هذِهِ الاْمَّةُ
طَوْعاً وَكَرْهاً، كُنْتُمْ مِمَّنْ دَخَلَ فِي الدِّينِ: إِمَّا
رَغْبَةً وَإِمَّا رَهْبَةً، عَلَى حِينَ فَازَ أَهْلُ السَّبْقِ
بِسَبْقِهِمْ، وَذَهَبَ الْمُهَاجِرُونَ الاْوَّلُونَ بِفَضْلِهِمْ.
فَلاَ تَجْعَلَنَّ لِلشَّيْطَانِ فِيكَ نَصِيباً، وَلاَ عَلَى نَفْسِكَ
سَبِيلاً، وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: During the battle of Siffin, Mu'awiyah thought of again demanding
the province of Syria from Amir al-mu'minin and to play such a trick as
to succeed in his designs. In this connection, he consulted 'Amr ibn
al-'As. But the latter did not agree with this idea and said, "O'
Mu'awiyah, think a little, what effect will this writing of yours have
on 'Ali? How can he fall in this trap by your persuasion." On this
Mu'awiyah said, "We are all descendants of 'Abd Manaf. What difference
is there between 'Ali and me that he may score over me and I may not
succeed in deceiving him?" 'Amr ibn al-'As said, "If you think so, then
write and see (the outcome)." Mu'awiyah therefore wrote a letter to Amir
al-mu'minin wherein he made a demand for Syria and also wrote: "We are
descendants of 'Abd Manaf. There is no distinction of one over the other
among us." Then, Amir al-mu'minin wrote this letter in reply and
mentioning his own predecessors along with those of Mu'awiyah disproved
his contention of equality. Although the origin of both was the same and
the paternal chain of both joined at 'Abd Manaf, the progeny of 'Abd
Shams was the source of all evil in morality and character and was
involved in heresy and vice whereas the house of Hashim was the
worshipper of one God and kept aloof from idolatory. If the branches
growing out of the same root bear both flowers as well as thorns, then
both cannot be deemed equal. Consequently, it does not need any detailed
explanation to show that Umayyah and Hashim, Harb and 'Abd al-Muttalib
and Abu Sufyan and Abu Talib were not match of each other from any
angle. This is not denied by any historian nor by any biographer. In
fact, after this reply even Mu'awiyah did not dare refute it, because
the fact could be concealed that after 'Abd Manaf it was Hashim alone
who possessed conspicuous prestige among the Quraysh, and the most
important positions with relation to the Ka'bah namely siqayah (i.e.,
the superintendence of the water-supply, especially with a veiw to the
needs of pilgrims) and rifadah (provisioning of pilgrims) was assigned
to him. As such, at the time of hajj, caravan after caravan used to come
and stay with him and he was such a generous host to them that those who
partook of his generosity and benevolence would praise him for long
thereafter. The worthy son of this very large-hearted and courageous
father was 'Abd al-Muttalib whose name was Shaybah and surname was
Sayyidu'l-Batha' (the Chief of the Valley of Mecca). He was the
successor to the distinction of Abraham's line and owner of the
greatness and chiefdom of Quraysh. The high courage and far-sightedness
showed by him before Abraham is a shining star of the family of 'Abd
Manaf.'Abd Manaf was a pearl and 'Abd al-Muttalib was the lustre of the
pearl. 'Abd al-Muttalib's son was Ahu Talib whose lap served as the
cradle for 'Abdullah's orphan child and the training place of the
Prophet. He brought up the Prophet in his care, and shielded him against
his enemies. To compare Abu Sufyan, Harb and Umayyah with them or to
regard them as their matches is the same as to close one's eyes to the
lustre of light and to regard it as darkness. After recounting this
geneological difference the next point of distinction that Amir
al-mu'minin has described is that he himself is a muhajir (immigrant
from Mecca) while Mu'awiyah is a taliq (i.e., one of those whom the
Prophet had spared on the day of fall of Mecca). Therefore, when the
Prophet entered Mecca victorious he enquired from the Quraysh how they
thought he would deal with them, and all said that being a generous son
of a generous father they expected only good from him, whereupon the
Prophet said, "Go away, you have all been spared." That is, "you did
deserve to be detained as slaves but as a mark of obligation you have
been left free." These spared ones included Mu'awiyah and Abu Sufyan
also. Thus, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid and ash-Shaykh Muhammad 'Abduh have recorded
the following note in their annotations to this letter "Abu Sufyan and
Mu'awiyah both were among the spared ones." (Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.17,
p.119;'Abduh, vol.3, p.17) The third point of distinction is that Amir
al-mu'minin's lineage is pure and clear and there is no doubtful point
anywhere. As against this, for Mu'awiyah he has used to the word
"lasiq". Men of letters have given lasiq to mean "One who is attributed
to other than his father." In this connection, the first doubt that is
entertained about Umayyah is whether he was the son of 'Abd Shams or
only his slave who began to be known as his son because of having been
brought up by him. Thus, al-'Allamah al-Majlisi has related from Kamil
al-Baha'i that: Umayyah was a Byzantinian slave of 'Abd Shams. When he
found him intelligent and sagacious he freed him and adopted him as
hisson, as a result of which he began to be called Umayyah son of 'Abd
Shams, as Zayd (ibn al-Harithah) was called Zayd ibn Muhammad before the
verse was revealed (to prohibit it).(Bihar al-anwar, 1st ed., vol.8,
p.383) The second doubt in the Umayyad lineage is whether Harb who is
known as the son of Umayyah was really his son or a slave brought up by
him. In this connection, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid has quoted from Abu'l-Faraj
al-Isbahani's book that: Mu'awiyah enquired from the lineage expert
Daghfal (Ibn Hanzalah) whether he had seen 'Abd al-Muttalib and he
replied in the affirmative.He further enquired how he found him and
Daghfal replied, "He was prestigious, handsome and a man of open
forehead, while his face bore the brightness of Prophethood." Then,
Mu'awiyah enquired whether he had seen Umayyah ibn 'Abd Shams also, and
he replied that he had seen him too. He enquired how he found him and he
replied, "Weak bodied, bent stature and blind in the eyes. In front of
him was his slave Dhakwan who led here and there." Mu'awiyah said it was
his son Abu 'Amr (Harb) whereupon he said, "You say so but the Quraysh
only know that he was his slave." (al-Aghani, vol.1, p.12; Sharh Nahjul
Balaghah al-balaghah, vol.17, pp.231-232)  In this connection, the third
doubt is about Mu'awiyah himself. Thus Ibn Abi'l-Hadid has written that:
Mu'awiyah's mother Hind led a life of vileness and immorality.
az-Zamakhshari (Abu'l-Qasim Mahmud ibn 'Umar [467/1075- 538/1144]) has
written in his book Rabi'u 'l-abrar that Mu'awiyah's parentage was
traced back to four persons who were: Musafir ibn Abi 'Amr, 'Umarah ibn
al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, al-'Abbas ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib and as-Sabbah
(a singer for 'Umarah). (Sharh Nahjul Balaghah al-balaghah, vol.1,
p.336) The fourth point of distinction that Amir al-mu'minin has stated
is that he himself was the devotee of right while Mu'awiyah was the
devotee of wrong and this fact needs no proof, for the whole life of
Mu'awiyah was spent in suppressing right and hankering after wrong. No
where is his step seen advancing towards right.  The fifth distinction
that Amir al-mu'minin has mentioned is that he himself was a believer
whereas Mu'awiyah was a mischief-monger and a hypocrite. Just as there
can be no doubt about Amir al-mu'minin's belief, there can be no doubt
about Mu\`awiyah's mischief-mongering and hypocricy. Thus, Amir
al-mu'minin has exposed his hypocricy in the earlier writing in these
words.  These people had not accepted Islam but they had secured safety
by verbally professing it and had hidden their misbelief. Consequently,
when they found helpers for their mischief they disclosed it.


