Letter 18: To `Abdullah ibn al- `Abbas, his Governor of Basrah
==============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى عبد الله بن العباس وهو عامله على البصرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

You should know that Basrah is the place where Satan descends and
mischiefs happen. Keep the people of this place pleased with good
treatment and remove the knots of fear from their hearts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ الْبَصْرَةَ مَهْبِطُ إِبْلِيسَ، وَمَغْرِسُ الْفِتَنِ،
فَحَادِثْ أَهْلَهَا بِالاْحْسَانِ إِلَيْهِمْ، وَاحْلُلْ عُقْدَةَ
الْخَوْفِ عَنْ قُلُوبِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have come to know of your strictness with Banu Tamim [^1] and your
harshness over them. Banu Tamim are those that if one star sets another
one rises for them. They were never exceeded in (the art of) war in
pre-Islamic times or after Islam. They have a special kinship with us
and a particular relationship. We shall be rewarded if we pay heed to
the kinship and be deemed sinful if we disregard it. O Abu'l-\`Abbas,
may Allah have mercy on you. keep yourself restrained in whatever you
say or do, good or bad about your people, as we are both partners in
this (responsibility). Prove yourself according to my good impressions
about you, and do not prove my opinion (about you) wrong; and that is an
end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ بَلَغَنِي تَنَمُّرُكَ لِبَنِي تَمِيم، وَغِلْظَتُكَ عَلَيْهِمْ،
وَإِنَّ بَنِي تَمِيم لَمْ يَغِبْ لَهُمْ نَجْمٌ إِلاَّ طَلَعَ لَهُمْ
آخَرُ، وَإِنَّهُمْ لَمْ يُسْبَقُوا بِوَغْم فِي جَاهِلِيَّة وَلاَ
إِسْلاَم، وَإِنَّ لَهُمْ بِنَا رَحِماً مَاسَّةً، وَقَرَابَةً خَاصَّةً،
نَحْنُ مَأْجُورُونَ عَلَى صِلَتِهَا، وَمَأزُورُونَ عَلَى قَطِيعَتِهَا.
فَارْبَعْ أَبَا الْعَبَّاسِ، رَحِمَكَ اللهُ، فِيَما جَرَى عَلَى يَدِكَ
وَلِسَانِكَ مِنْ خَيْر وَشَرّ! فَإِنَّا شَرِيكَانِ فِي ذلِكَ،كُنْ
عِنْدَ صَالِحِ ظَنِّي بِكَ، وَلاَ يَفِيلَنَّ رَأَيِي فِيكَ،
وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When Talhah and az-Zubayr reached Basrah it was Banu Tamim who
took active part in the movement to avenge \`Uthman's blood and werc
foremost in fanning this mischief. Therefore, when \`Abdullah ibn
al-Abbas took over as the Governor of Basrah, in view of their breach of
faith and animosity, he thought they deserved harsh treatment and was to
some extent severe with them. But in this tribe there were also a few
sincere followers of Amir al-mu'minin. When they saw this behaviour of
Ibn 'Abbas with their tribe they sent a letter to Amir al-mu'minin
through Jariyah ibn Qadamah wherein they complained of Ibn 'Abbas's
harsh treatment. Thereupon, Amir al-mu'minin wrote this letter to Ibn
'Abbas in which he instructed him to change his ways and to behave well
with them, and has drawn his attention to the kinship existing between
Banu Hashim and Banu Tamim. That kinship was this that Banu Hashim and
Banu Tamim join the lineal line at Ilyas ibn Mudar because Hashim is the
descendant of Mudrikah ibn Ilyas, while Tamim is the descendant of
Tabikhah ibn Ilyas.


