Letter 19: To one of his officers
=================================

*The following is a letter to one of his governors. It speaks volumes
about the ways of Divine Rule. It shows how Imam Ali (a) was training
the Muslims to behave tolerantly towards other religions, how minority
was to be treated and what should those who hold a different creed,
expect of a Muslim ruler. *

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى بعض عماله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, the cultivators [^1] (dahaqin, plural of dihqan) of your city have
complained of your strictness, hard heartedness, humiliating treatment
and harshness. I thought over it and found that since they are
unbelievers they cannot be brought near nor kept away or treated
severely because of the pledge with them. Behave with them in between
strictness and softness and adopt for them a mingling or remoteness and
aloofness with nearness and closeness if Allah so wills.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَإِنَّ دَهَاقِينَ أهْلِ بَلَدِكَ شَكَوْا مِنْكَ
غِلْظَةً وَقَسْوَةً، وَاحْتِقَاراً وَجَفْوَةً، وَنَظَرْتُ فَلَمْ
أَرَهُمْ أَهْلاً لاَنْ يُدْنَوْا لِشِرْكِهِمْ، وَلاَ أَنْ يُقْصَواْ
وَيُجْفَوْا لِعَهْدِهِمْ، فَالْبَسْ لَهُمْ جِلْبَاباً مِنَ اللِّينِ
تَشُوبُهُ بِطَرَف مِنَ الشِّدَّةِ، وَدَاوِلْ لَهُمْ بَيْنَ الْقَسْوَةِ
وَالرَّأْفَةِ، وَامْزُجْ لَهُمْ بَيْنَ التَّقْرِيبِ وَالاْدْنَاءِ،
وَالاْبْعَادِ وَالاْقْصَاءِ، إِنْ شَاءَاللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: These people were Magians (majus). That is why the treatment of
Amir al-mu'minin's officer with them was not the same as with Muslims.
Disgusted with this they wrote a letter of complaint to Amir al-mu'minin
and spoke of the Officer's harshness. In reply, Amir al-mu'minin wrote
to his officer that he should meet out treatment to them in which there
should be neither harshness nor such leniency which they may exploit to
create mischief because if they are let loose they get involved in
machinations against the government and disturb the country's
administration by creating one mischief or the other, while a wholly
repressive policy cannot be justified because they are counted among the
subjects and their rights as such cannot be ignored.


