Letter 37: To Muawiyah
======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى معاوية
  </p>
</blockquote>

Glory be to Allah! How staunchly you cling to innovated passions and
painful bewilderment along with ignoring the facts and rejecting strong
reasons which are liked by Allah and serve as pleas for the people. As
regards your prolonging the question of 'Uthman's [^1] murder the
position is that you helped 'Uthman when it was really your own help
while you forsook him when he was in need of help; and that is an end to
the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسُبْحَانَ الله! مَا أَشَدَّ لُزُومَكَ لِلاْهْوَاءِ الْمُبْتَدَعَةِ،
وَالْحَيْرَةِ الْمُتَّبَعَةِ، مَعَ تَضْيِيعِ الْحَقَائِقِ وَاطِّرَاحِ
الْوَثَائِقِ، الَّتِي هِيَ لله طِلْبَةٌ، وَعَلَى عِبَادِهِ حُجَّةٌ.
فَأَمَّا إِكْثَارُكَ الْحِجَاجَ فِي عُثْمانَ وَقَتَلَتِهِ، فَإِنَّكَ
إِنَّمَا نَصَرْتَ عُثْمانَ حَيْثُ كَانَ النَّصْرُ لَكَ، وَخَذَلْتَهُ
حَيْثُ كَانَ النَّصْرُ لَهُ، وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: There is no question of denying that Mu'awiyah claimed to help
'Uthman after he had been killed, although when he was surrounded and
clamoured for his help by writing letter after letter Mu'awiyah never
budged an inch. However, just to make a show he had sent a contingent
towards Medina under Yazid ibn Asad al-Qasri, but had ordered it to
remain in waiting in the valley of Dhu Khushub near Medina. Eventually,
'Uthman was murdered and he went back with his contingent.  No doubt
Mu'awiyah wished 'Uthman to be killed so that he should create confusion
in the name of his blood and through these disturbances clear the way
for allegiance to himself (as Caliph). That is why he neither helped him
when he was surrounded nor thought it necessary to trace the murderers
of 'Uthman after securing power.


