Letter 45: To `Uthman ibn Hunayf al-Ansari
==========================================

*To \`Uthman ibn Hunayf al-Ansari who was Amir al-mu' minin's Governor
of Basrah, when he came to know that the people of that place had
invited \`Uthman to a banquet and he had attended.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى عثمان بن حنيف الانصاري
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو عامله على البصرة، وقد بلغه أنه دعي إلى وليمة قوم من أهلها، فمضى
إليهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Ibn Hunayf, I have come to know that a young man of Basrah invited you
to a feast and you leapt towards it. Foods of different colours were
being chosen for you and big bowls were being given to you. I never
thought that you would accept the feast of a people who turn out the
beggars and invite the rich. Look at the morsels you take, leave out
that about which you are in doubt and take that about which you are sure
that it has been secured lawfully.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، يَابْنَ حُنَيْف، فَقَدْ بَلَغَنِي أَنَّ رَجُلاً مِنْ
فِتْيَةِ أَهْلِ الْبَصْرَةِ دَعَاكَ إلى مَأْدُبَة، فَأَسْرَعْتَ
إِلَيْهَا، تُسْتَطَابُ لَكَ الاْلْوَانُ، وَتُنْقَلُ إِلَيْكَ
الْجِفَانُ، وَمَا ظَنَنْتُ أَنَّكَ تُجِيبُ إِلى طَعَامِ قَوْم،
عَائِلُهُمْ مَجْفُوٌّ وَغَنِيُّهُمْ مَدْعُوٌّ. فَانْظُرْ إِلَى مَا
تَقْضَمُهُ مِنْ هذَ الْمَقْضَمِ، فَمَا اشْتَبَهَ عَلَيْكَ عِلْمُهُ
فَالْفِظْهُ، وَمَا أَيْقَنْتَ بِطِيبِ وُجُوهِهِ فَنَلْ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Remember that every follower has a leader whom he follows and from the
effulgence of whose knowledge he takes light. Realize that your Imam has
contented himself with two shabby pieces of cloth out of the (comforts
of the) world and two loaves for his meal. Certainly, you cannot do so
but at least support me in piety, exertion, chastity and uprightness,
because, by Allah, I have not treasured any gold out of your world nor
amassed plentiful wealth nor collected any clothes other than the two
shabby sheets.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ وَإِنَّ لِكُلِّ مَأمُوم إِمَاماً، يَقْتَدِي بِهِ، وَيَسْتَضِيءُ
بِنُورِ عِلْمِهِ. أَلاَ وَإِنَّ إِمَامَكُمْ قَدِ اكْتَفَى مِنْ
دُنْيَاهُ بِطِمْرَيْهِ، وَمِنْ طُعْمِهِ بِقُرْصَيْهِ. أَلاَ
وَإِنَّكُمْ لاَ تَقْدِرُونَ عَلَى ذلِكَ، وَلكِنْ أَعِينُوني بِوَرَع
وَاجْتِهَاد، وَعِفَّة وَسَدَاد فَوَاللهِ مَا كَنَزْتُ مِنْ دُنْيَاكُمْ
تِبْراً، وَلاَ ادَّخَرْتُ مِنْ غَنَائِمِهَا وَفْراً، وَلاَ أَعْدَدْتُ
لِبَالِي ثَوْبِي طِمْراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Of course, all that we had in our possession under this sky was Fadak,
but a group of people felt greedy for it and the other party withheld
themselves from it. Allah is, after all, the best arbiter. What shall I
do: Fadak, [^1] or no Fadak, while tomorrow this body is to go into the
grave in whose darkness its traces will be destroyed and (even) news of
it will disappear? It is a pit that, even if its width is widened or the
hands of the digger make it broad and open, the stones and clods of clay
will narrow it and the falling earth will close its aperture. I try to
keep myself engaged in piety so that on the day of great fear it will be
peaceful and steady in slippery places.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَى! كَانَتْ في أَيْدِينَا فَدَكٌ مِنْ كلِّ مَا أَظَلَّتْهُ
السَّماءُ، فَشَحَّتْ عَلَيْهَا نُفُوسُ قَوْم، وَسَخَتْ عَنْهَا نُفُوسُ
آخَرِينَ، وَنِعْمَ الْحَكَمُ اللهُ. وَمَا أَصْنَعُ بِفَدَك وَغَيْرِ
فَدَك، وَالنَّفْسُ مَظَانُّهَا فِي غَد جَدَثٌ، تَنْقَطِعُ فِي
ظُلْمَتِهِ آثَارُهَا، وَتَغِيبُ أَخْبَارُهَا، وَحُفْرَةٌ لَوْ زِيدَ
فِي فُسْحَتِهَا، وَأَوْسَعَتْ يَدَا حَافِرِهَا، لاَضْغَطَهَا الْحَجَرُ
وَالْمَدَرُ، وَسَدَّ فُرَجَهَا التُّرَابُ الْمُتَرَاكِمُ، وَإِنَّمَا
هِيَ نَفْسِي أَرُوضُهَا بِالتَّقْوَى لِتَأْتِيَ آمِنَةً يَوْمَ
الْخَوْفِ الاْكْبَرِ، وَتَثْبُتَ عَلَى جَوَانِبِ الْمَزْلَقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If I wished I could have taken the way leading towards (worldly
pleasures like) pure honey, fine wheat and silk clothes but it cannot be
that my passions lead me and greed take me to choosing good meals while
in the Hijaz or in Yamamah there may be people who have no hope of
getting bread or who do not have a full meal. Shall I lie with a
satiated belly while around me there may be hungry bellies and thirsty
livers? Or shall I be as the poet has said:

It is enough for you to have a disease that you lie with your belly full
while around you people may be badly yearning for dried leather.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شِئْتُ لاَهْتَدَيْتُ الطَّرِيقَ، إِلَى مُصَفَّى هذَا الْعَسَلِ،
وَلُبَابِ هذَا الْقَمْحِ، وَنَسَائِجِ هذَا الْقَزِّ، وَلكِنْ هَيْهَاتَ
أَنْ يَغْلِبَنِي هَوَايَ، وَيَقُودَنِي جَشَعِي إِلَى تَخَيُّرِ
الاْطْعِمَةِ ـ وَلَعَلَّ بِالْحِجَازِ أَوِ بِالْـيَمَامَةِ مَنْ
لاَطَمَعَ لَهُ فِي الْقُرْصِ، وَلاَ عَهْدَ لَهُ بِالشِّبَعِ ـ أَوْ
أَبِيتَ مِبْطَاناً وَحَوْلِي بُطُونٌ غَرْثَى وَأَكْبَادٌ حَرَّى، أَوْ
أَكُونَ كَمَا قَالَ الْقَائِلُ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَسْبُكَ دَاءً أَنْ تَبِيتَ بِبِطْنَة \* وَحَوْلَكَ أَكْبَادٌ
تَحِنُّ إِلَى الْقِدِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shall I be content with being called \`Amir al-mu 'minin' (The Commander
of the Believers), although I do not share with the people the hardships
of the world? Or shall I be an example for them in the distresses of
life? I have not been created to keep myself busy in eating good foods
like the tied animal whose only worry is his fodder or like a loose
animal whose activity is to swallow. It fills its belly with its feed
and forgets the purpose behind it. Shall I be left uncontrolled to
pasture freely, or draw the rope of misguidance or roam aimlessly in the
paths of bewilderment?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَأَقْنَعُ مِنْ نَفْسِي بِأَنْ يُقَالَ: أَمِيرُالْمُؤْمِنِينَ، وَلاَ
أُشَارِكُهُمْ فِي مَكَارِهِ الدَّهْرِ، أَوْ أَكُونَ أُسْوَةً لَهُمْ
فِي جُشُوبَةِ الْعَيْشِ! فَمَا خُلِقْتُ لِيَشْغَلَنِي أَكْلُ
الطَّيِّبَاتِ، كَالْبَهِيمَةِ الْمَرْبُوطَةِ هَمُّهَا عَلَفُهَا، أَوِ
الْمُرْسَلَةِ شُغُلُهَا تَقَمُّمُهَا، تَكْتَرِشُ مِنْ أَعْلاَفِهَا،
وَتَلْهُو عَمَّا يُرَادُ بِهَا، أَوْ أُتْرَكَ سُدىً، أَوْ أُهْمَلَ
عَابِثاً، أَوْ أَجُرَّ حَبْلَ الضَّلاَلَةِ، أَوْ أَعْتَسِفَ طَرِيقَ
الْمَتَاهَةِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

I see as if one of you would say that if this is what the son of Abi
Talib eats then weakness must have made him unfit to fight his foes and
encounter the brave. Remember that the tree of the forest is the best
for timber, while green twigs have soft bark, and the wild bushes are
very strong for burning and slow in dying off. My relation with the
Messenger of Allah is that of one branch with another, or of the forearm
with the upper arm. By Allah, if the Arabs join together to fight me I
will not run away from them and if I get the opportunity I will hasten
to catch them by their necks. I shall surely strive to relieve the earth
of this man of perverse mind and uncouth body, till the bits of earth
are removed from the grain.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَأَنِّي بِقَائِلِكُمْ يَقُولُ: إِذَا كَانَ هذَا قُوتُ ابْنِ أَبِي
طَالِب، فَقَدْ قَعَدَ بِهِ الضَّعْفُ عَنْ قِتَالِ الاْقْرَانِ
وَمُنَازَلَةِ الشُّجْعَانِ. أَلاَ وَإِنَّ الشَّجَرَةَ الْبَرِّيَّةَ
أَصْلَبُ عُوداً، وَالْرَّوَائِعَ الْخَضِرَةَ أَرَقُّ جُلُوداً،
وَالنَّابِتَاتِ العِذْيَةَ أَقْوَى وَقُوداً، وَأَبْطَأُ خُمُوداً،
وَأَنَا مِنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ (صلى الله عليه وآله) كَالصِّنْوِ مِنَ
الصِّنْوِ، وَالذِّرَاعِ مِنَ الْعَضُدِ. وَاللهِ لَوْ تَظَاهَرَتِ
الْعَرَبُ عَلَى قِتَالِي لَمَا وَلَّيْتُ عَنْهَا، وَلَوْ أَمْكَنَتِ
الْفُرَصُ مِنْ رِقَابِهَا لَسَارَعْتُ إِلَيْهَا، سَأَجْهَدُ فِي أَنْ
أُطَهِّرَ الاْرضَ مِنْ هذَا الشَّخْصِ الْمَعْكُوسِ، وَالْجِسْمِ
الْمَرْكُوسِ، حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ الْمَدَرَةُ مِنْ بَيْنِ حَبِّ الْحَصِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

A part of the same which is the end of the letter
-------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و من هذا الكتاب ، و هو آخره:
  </p>
</blockquote>

Get away from me, O world. Your rein is on your own shoulders as I have
released myself from your claws, removed myself of your snares and
avoided walking into your slippery places. Where are those whom you have
deceived by your jokes? Where are those communities whom you have
enticed with your embellishments? They are all confined to graves and
hidden in burial places.

By Allah, if you had been a visible personality aud a body capable of
feeling, I would have awarded you the penalties fixed by Allah because
of the people whom you received through desires and the communities whom
you threw into destruction and the rulers whom you consigned to ruin and
drove to places of distress after which there is neither going nor
returning. Indeed whoever stepped on your slippery place slipped,
whoever rode your waves was drowned, and whoever evaded your snares
received inward support. He who keeps himself safe from you does not
worry even though his affairs may be straitened and the world to him is
like a day which is near expiring.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَيْكَ عَنِّي يَا دُنْيَا، فَحَبْلُكِ عَلَى غَارِبِكِ، قَدِ
انْسَلَلْتُ مِنْ مَخَالِبِكِ، وَأَفْلَتُّ مِنْ حَبَائِلِكِ،
وَاجْتَنَبْتُ الذَّهَابَ فِي مَدَاحِضِكِ. أَيْنَ الْقُرُونُ الَّذِينَ
غَرَرْتِهِمْ بَمَدَاعِبِكَ؟! أَيْنَ الاْمَمُ الَّذِينَ فَتَنْتِهِمْ
بِزَخَارِفِكِ؟! هَاهُمْ رَهَائِنُ الْقُبُورِ، وَمَضَامِينُ اللُّحُودِ.
وَاللهِ لَوْ كُنْتِ شَخْصاً مَرْئِيّاً، وَقَالَباً حِسِّيّاً،
لاَقَمْتُ عَلَيْكِ حُدُودَ اللهِ فِي عِبَاد غَرَرْتِهِمْ بِالاْمَانِي،
وَأُمَم أَلْقَيْتِهِمْ فِي الْمَهَاوِي، وَمُلُوك أَسْلَمْتِهِمْ إِلَى
التَّلَفِ، وَأَوْرَدْتِهِمْ مَوَارِدَ الْبَلاَءِ، إِذْ لاَ وِرْدَ
وَلاَ صَدَرَ! هَيْهَاتَ! مَنْ وَطِىءَ دَحْضَكِ زَلِقَ، وَمَنْ رَكِبَ
لُجَجَكِ غَرِقَ، وَمَنِ ازْوَرَّ عَنْ حَبَائِلِكِ وُفِّقَ،
وَالسَّالِمُ مِنْكِ لاَيُبَالِي إِنْ ضَاقَ بِهِ مُنَاخُهُ وَالدُّنْيَا
عِنْدَهُ كَيَوْم حَانَ انْسِلاَخُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Get away from me, for, by Allah, I do not bow before you so that you may
humiliate me, nor do I let loose the reins for you so that you may drive
me away. I swear by Allah an oath wherein I, except for the will of
Allah, shall so train my self that it will feel joyful if it gets one
loaf for eating, and be content with only salt to season it. I shall let
my eyes empty themselves of tears like the stream whose water has flown
away. Should \`Ali eat whatever he has and fall asleep like the cattle
who fill their stomachs from the pasture land and lie down, or as the
goats (who) graze, eat the green grass and go into their pen! His eyes
may die if he, after long years, follows loose cattle and pasturing
animals.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْزُبِي عَنِّي! فَوَاللهِ لاَ أَذِلُّ لَكِ فَتَسْتَذِلِّينِي، وَلاَ
أَسْلَسُ لَكِ فَتَقُودِينِي. وَايْمُ اللهِ ـ يَمِيناً أسْتَثْنِي
فِيهَا بِمَشِيئَةِ اللهِ عَزَّوَجَلّ ـ لاَرُوضَنَّ نَفْسِي رِيَاضَةً
تَهشُّ مَعَها إِلَى الْقُرْصِ إِذَا قَدَرتْ عَلَيْهِ مَطْعُوماً،
وَتَقْنَعُ بِالْمِلْحِ مَأْدُوماً; وَلاَدَعَنَّ مُقْلَتِي كَعَيْنِ
مَاء، نَضَبَ مَعِينُهَا مُسْتَفْرِغَةً دُمُوعَهَا. أَتَمْتَلِىءُ
السَّائِمَةُ مِنْ رِعْيِهَا فَتَبْرُكَ؟ وَتَشْبَعُ الرَّبِيضَةُ مِنْ
عُشْبِهَا فَتَرْبِضَ؟ وَيَأْكُلُ عَلِيٌّ مِنْ زَادِهِ فَيَهْجَعَ؟
قَرَّتْ إِذاً عَيْنُهُ إِذَا اقْتَدَى بَعْدَ السِّنِينَ
الْمُتَطَاوِلَةِ بِالْبَهِيمَةِ الْهَامِلَةِ، وَالسَّائِمَةِ
الْمَرْعِيَّةِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

Blessed is he who discharges his obligations towards Allah and endures
his hardships, allows himself no sleep in the night but when sleep
overpowers him lies down on the ground using his hand as a pillow, along
with those who keep their eyes wakeful in fear of the Day of Judgement,
whose bodies are ever awav from beds, whose lips are humming in
remembrance of Allah and whose sins have been erased through their
prolonged beseechings for forgiveness.

***They are the party of Allah; be it known, verily the party of Allah
alone shall be the successful ones*** **(Qur'an, 58:22).**

Therefore, O, Ibn Hunayf, fear Allah and be content with your own loaves
so that you may escape Hell.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبَى لِنَفْس أَدَّتْ إِلَى رَبِّهَا فَرْضَهَا، وَعَرَكَتْ
بِجَنْبِهَا بُؤْسَهَا، وَهَجَرَتْ فِي اللَّيْلِ غُمْضَهَا، حَتَّى
إِذَا غَلَبَ الْكَرَى عَلَيْهَا افْتَرَشَتْ أَرْضَهَا، وَتَوَسَّدَتْ
كَفَّهَا، فِي مَعْشَر أَسْهَرَ عُيُونَهُمْ خَوْفُ مَعَادِهِمْ،
تَجَافَتْ عَنْ مَضَاجِعِهِمْ جُنُوبُهُمْ، وَهَمْهَمَتْ بِذِكْرِ
رَبِّهِم شِفَاهُهُمْ، وَتَقَشَّعَتْ بِطُولِ اسْتِغْفَارِهِم
ذُنُوبُهُمْ. ( أُولئِكَ حِزْبُ الله، أَلاَ إِنَّ حِزْبَ اللهِ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّقِ اللهَ يَابْنَ حُنَيْف، وَلْتَكْفُفْ أَقْرَاصُكَ، لِيَكُونَ
مِنْ النَّارِ خَلاَصُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Fadak was a green fertile village near Medina in the Hijaz and it
also had a fortress called ash-Shumrukh. (Mu \`jam al-buldan, vol.4,
p.238; Mu\`jam masta\`jam, al-Bakri, vol.3, p.l015; ar-Rawd al-mi\`tar,
al-Himyari, p.437; Wafa' al-wafa, vol.4, p. 1280). Fadak belonged to the
Jews and in the year 7 A. H. its ownership went from them to the Prophet
under the terms of a settlement for peace. The reason for this
settlement was that when after the fall of Khaybar the Jews realized the
real power of the Muslims, their martial aspirations were lowered, and
noting that the Prophet had spared some Jews on their seeking
protection, they also sent a message of peace to the Prophet and
expressed their wish that Fadak might be taken from them and their area
should not be made a battlefield. Consequently, the Prophet accepted
their request and allowed them an amnesty, and this land became his
personal property wherein no one else had any interest, nor could there
be any such interest; because the Muslims have a share only in those
properties which they might have acquired as booty after jihad, while
the property acquired without jihad is called fay' and the Prophet alone
is entitled to it. No other person has a share in it. Thus, Allah says:
And whatever hath Allah bestowed on His Apostle from them, ye pricked
not against it any horse or a camel, but Allah granteth authority unto
His apostles against whomsoever He willeth: And Allah over all things is
All-powerful. (Qur'an, 59:6) No one has ever disputed the fact that
Fadak was secured without battle. It was therefore the Prophet's
personal property to which no one else had any title. The Historians
write: Fadak was personal to the Prophet as the Muslims did not use
their horses or camels for it. (at-Tarikh, at-Tabari, vol.1,
pp.1582-1583, 1589; al-Kamil, Ibn al-Athir, vol.2, pp.224-225;as-Sirah,
Ibn Hisham, vol.3, p.368; at-Tarikh, Ibn Khaldum, vol.2, part 2, p.40;
Tarikh al-khamis, ad-Diyar'bakri, vol.2, p.58; as-Sirah al-Halabiyyah,
vol.3, p.50) The historian and geographical scholar Ahmad ibn Yahya
al-Baladhuri (d. 279/892) writes: Fadak was the personal property of the
Prophet as the Muslims had not used their horses or camels for it.
(Futuh al-buldan, vol.1, p.33) \`Umar ibn al-Khattab had himself
regarded Fadak as the unshared property of the Holy Prophet when he
declared: The property of Banu an-Nadir was among that which Allah has
bestowed on His Messenger; against them neither horses nor camels were
pricked but they belonged to the Messenger of Allah especially.
(as-Sahih, al-Bukhari, vol.4, p.46; vol.7, p.82; vol.9, pp.121-122;
as-Sahih, Muslim, vol.5, p.151; as-Sunan, Abu Dawud, vol.3, pp. 139-141;
as-Sunan, an-Nasa'i, vol.7, p.132; al-Musnad, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol.1,
pp.25.48.60,208: as-Sunan al-kubra, al-Bayhayqi, vol.6, pp.296-299) It
is also proved in the accepted way that the Prophet had in his lifetime
given this land (Fadak) to Fatimah as a gift. It is narrated through
al-Bazzar, Abu Ya\`la, Ibn Abi Hatim, Ibn Marduwayh and others from Abu
Sa'id al-Khudri and through Ibn Marduwayh from \`Abdullah ibn al-\`Abbas
that when the verse: "And give to the near of kin his due. . ." (Qur'an,
17:26) was revealed, the Holy Prophet called Fatimah' and gifted Fadak
to her. (ad-Durr al-manthur, as-Suyuti, vol.4, p.177; Majma\`
az-zawa'id, al-Haythami, vol.7, p.46; Kanz al-'ummal, al-Muttaqi, vol.3,
p.439; Ruh al-ma\`ani, al-Alusi, vol.15, p.62) When Abu Bakr assumed
power then in view of some benefits of State he turned out Fatimah from
Fadak and took it from her possession. Thus, the historians write:
Certainly, Abu Bakr snatched Fadak from Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) (Sharh Nahjul
Balaghah al-balaghah, Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.16, p. 219; Wafa' al-wafa,
as-Samhudi, vol.3, p.1OOO; as-Sawa\`iq al-muhriqah, Ibn Hajar, p.32)
Fatimah raised a voice against it. Protesting to Abu Bakr, she said,
"You have taken over possession of Fadak although the Prophet had gifted
it to me during his lifetime." On this Abu Bakr asked her to produce
witness of the gift. Consequently, Amir al-mu'minin and Umm Ayman gave
evidence in her favour. (Umm Ayman was the freed bond maid and the dry
nurse of the Holy Prophet. She was the mother of Usamah ibn Zayd ibn
al-Harithah. The Holy Prophet used to say "Umm Ayman is my mother after
my mother. [al-Mustadrak, vol.4, p.63; at-Tabari, vol.3, p. 3460;
al-Isti\`ab. vol.4, p. 1793; Usd al-ghabah, vol.5, p.567] The Holy
Prophet bore witness that she is among the people of Paradise. [Ibn
Sa\`d, vol.8, p.192; al-Isabah, vol.4, p.432]). But this evidence was
held inadmissible by Abu Bakr and Fatimah's claim was rejected as being
based on false statement. About this al-Baladhuri writes: Fatimah said
to Abu Bakr, "The Messenger of Allah had apportioned Fadak to me.
Therefore, give it to me." Then he asked her for another witness than
Umm Ayman, saying, "O' daughter of the Prophet, you know that evidence
is not admissible except by two men or one man and two women." After
these facts there remains no possibility of denying that Fadak was the
personal property of the Prophet and that he had completed its gifting
to her by handing over possession in his lifetime. But Abu Bakr took
over its possession and dislodged her from it. In this connection, he
rejected the evidence of \`Ali and Umm Ayman on the ground that the
requirement of evidence was not completed by the evidence of one man and
one woman. Besides them, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn gave evidence in
support of Fatimah, but their evidence was rejected too on the ground
that the evidence of the offspring and minors was not acceptable in
favour of their parents. Then Rabah, the slave of the Holy Prophet was
also produced as a witness in support of the claim of Fatimah but he was
rejected too. (Futuh al-buldan, al-Baladhuri, vol. 1, p.35: at-Tarikh,
al-Ya\`qubi, vol.3, p.195; Muruj adh-dhahab, al-Mas\`udi, vol.3, p.237;
al-Awa'il, Abu Hilal al-\`Askari, p.209; Wafa' al-wafa, vol.3, pp.999,
1000-1001; Mu\`jam al-buldan, Yaqut al-Hamawi, vol.4, p.239; Sharh, Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol.16, pp.216, 219 - 220,274; al-Muhalla, Ibn Hazm, vol.6,
p.507; as-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol.3, p.361 ; at-Tafsir, al-Fakhr
ar-Razi, vol.29, p.284). At this stage the question arises that when
Fatimah's possession over Fadak is admitted as Amir al-mu 'minin has
also clarified in this letter by saying, "We had Fadak in our
possession," what was the sense in asking Fatimah to produce evidence in
support of her claim, because the onus of proof does not lie on the
person in possession. The onus of proof lies on the person filing a
counter claim because possession itself constitutes a proof. As such it
was on Abu Bakr to produce a proof of the lawfulness of his taking over
the land, and in the case of his being unable to do so Fatimah's
possession would mean a proof for her lawful ownership. As such it would
be wrong to ask her to produce some more proof or evidence. It is
strange that when other claims of this nature came before Abu Bakr he
allowed them in favour of the claimant merely on the basis of the claim,
and the claimant is neither asked to furnish proof of his claim nor to
produce witnesses. In this connection, the traditionalists write: It is
related from Jabir ibn \`Abdillah al-Ansari that he said that the
Messenger of Allah had said that when the booty from Bahrain arrived he
would allow him such and such out of it, but the booty did not arrive
till the Prophet's death. When it arrived in the days of Abu Bakr he
went to him and Abu Bakr made the announcement that whoever had a claim
against the Messenger of Allah or to whomever he had made a promise
should come for his claim. So I went to him and told him that the
Prophet had promised to give me such and such property out of the booty
from Bahrain whereupon he gave me all that. (as-Sahih, al-Bukhari,
vol.3, pp.119,209,236; vol.4, p.110; vol.5, p.218; as- Sahih, Muslim,
vol.7, pp.75-76; al-Jami' as-sahih, at-Tirmidhi, vol.5, p.129;
al-Musnad, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol.3, pp.307-308; at-Tabaqat al-kabir, Ibn
Sa'd, vol.2, part 2, pp.88-89). In the annotations of this tradition,
Shihabu'd-Din Ahmad ibn \`Ali (Ibn Hajar) al-\`Asqalani ash-Shafi\`i
(773/1372 - 852/1449) and Badru'd- Din Mabmud ibn Ahmad al-\`Ayni
al-Hanafi (762/1361 - 855/1451) have written: This tradition leads to
the conclusion that the evidence of one just companion can also be
admitted as full evidence even though it may be in his own favour,
because Abu Bakr did not ask jabir to produce any witness in proof of
his claim. (Fath al-bari fi sharh sahih al-Bukhari, vol.5, p.380;
\`Umdatu'l-qari fi sharh sahih al-Bukhari, vol.12, p.121) If it was
lawful to allow property to Jabir on the basis of good
impression without calling for witness or evidence then what stopped
allowing Fatimah's claim on the basis of similar good impression. If
good impression could exist in the case of Jabir to such an effect that
he would not benefit by speaking a lie, then why should there not be the
good belief about Fatimah that she would not attribute a false saying to
the Prophet just for a piece of land. Firstly, her admitted truthfulness
and honesty was enough for holding her truthful in her claim and the
evidence of \`Ali and Umm Ayman in her favour was also available besides
other evidences. It has been said that the claim could not be decided in
favour of Fatimah on the basis of these two witnesses because the holy
Qur'an lays down the principle of evidence that: . . .then call to
witness two witnesses from among your men and if there not be two men,
then (take) a man and two women, (Qur'an, 2:282) If this principle is
universal and general then it should be taken into regard on every
occasion, but on some occasions it is found not to have been followed;
for example, when an Arab had a dispute with the Prophet about a camel,
Khuzaymah ibn Thabit al-Ansari gave evidence in favour of the Prophet
and this one evidence was deemed to be equal to two, because there was
no doubt in the honesty and truthfulness of the individual in whose
favour the evidence was led. It was for this reason that the Holy
Prophet granted him the title of Dhu'sh-Shahadatayn (i.e., one whose
evidence is equivalent to the evidence of two witnesses). (al-Bukhari,
vol.4, p.24; vol.6, p.146; Abu Dawud, vol.3, p.308; an-Nasa'i, vol.7,
p.302; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol.5, pp.188, 189,216; al-Isti\`ab, vol.2,
p.448; Usd al-ghabah, vol.2, p.114; al-Isabah,vol.1, pp.425 -426;
al-Musannaf, as-San\`ani, vol.8, pp.366 - 368). Consequently, neither
was the generality of the verse about evidence affected by this action
nor was it deemed to be against the cannons of evidence. So, if here in
view of the Prophet's truthfulness one evidence in his favour was deemed
to be equal to two, then could not the evidence of \`Ali and Umm Ayman
be regarded enough for Fatimah in view of her moral greatness and
truthfulness? Besides, this verse does not show that there can be no
other way of establishing a claim other than these two ways. In this
connection, al-Qadi Nuru'llah al-Mar'ashi at-Tustari (956/1549 - 1019/
1610) has written in Ihqaq al-haqq, chapter on al-Mata\`in: The view of
the objector that by Umm Ayman's evidence the requirement of evidence
remains incomplete is wrong, on the grounds that from certain traditions
it is seen that it is lawful to give a decision on the basis of one
witness and it does not necessarily mean that the injunction of the
Qur'an has been violated, because this verse means that a decision can
be given on the strength of the evidence of two men or one man and two
women, and that their evidence is enough. From this it does not appear
that if there are some other grounds besides evidence of witnesses that
are unacceptable, and that verdict cannot be given on its basis, unless
it is argued that this is the only sense of the verse. But since every
sense is not final argument, this sense can be brushed aside,
particularly because the tradition clearly points to a contrary sense,
and ignoring the sense does not necessarily mean violation of the verse.
Secondly, the verse allows a choice between the evidence of two men or
of one man and two women. If by virtue of the tradition a third choice
is added namely that a verdict can be passed by means of other evidence
as well, then how does it necessitate that the Qur'anic verse should
stand violated? In any case, from this reply it is clear that a claimant
is not obliged to produce the evidence of two men or one man and two
women in support of the claim because if there is one witness and the
claimant swears on oath, then he can be taken to have legitimacy in his
claim and a decision can be given in his favour. In this connection, it
has been narrated by more than twelve companions of the Holy Prophet
that: The Messenger of Allah used to decide cases on the strength of one
witness and the taking of oath. It has been explained by some companions
(of the Prophet) and some scholars ofjurisprudence that this decision is
specially related to rights, property and transactions and this decesion
was practised by the three Caliphs, Abu Bakr, \`Umar and \`Uthman.
(Muslim, vol.5, p.128; Abu Dawud, vol.3, pp.308-309; at-Tirmidhi, vol.3,
pp.627-629; Ibn Majah, vol.2, p.793; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol.1,
pp.248,315,323, vol.3, p.305; vol.5, p.285; Malik ibn Anas, al-Muwatta',
vol.2, pp.721-725; al-Bayhaqi, as-Sunan al-kubra, vol.10, pp.167 -
176;as-Sunan, ad-Dar'qutni, vol.4, pp.212 - 215; Majma\` az-zawa'id,
vol.4, p.202; Kanz al-'ummal, vol.7, p.13) When decisions were passed on
the strength of one witness and swearing, then even if in Abu Bakr's
view the requirement of evidence was incomplete, he should have asked
her to swear and given the judgement in her favour. But here the very
object was to tarnish the truthfulness of Fatimah so that in future the
question of her testimony should not arise. However, when Fatimah's
claim was rejected in this manner and Fadak was not accepted as the
Prophet's gift to her, she claimed it on the basis of inheritance
saying: "If you do not agree that the Prophet had gifted it to me, you
cannot at least deny that Fadak and the revenues of Khaybar as well as
the lands around Medina were the Prophet's personal properties, and I am
his only successor." But she was deprived of her inheritance on the
basis of a tradition related by Abu Bakr himself that the Holy Prophet
said: “We prophets have no successors and whatever we leave behind
constitutes charity." (al-Bukhari, vol.4, p. 96; vol.5, pp.25 -
26,115,117; vol.8, p.185; Muslim, vol.5, pp.153-l55; at-Tirmidhi, vol.4,
pp.157-158; Abu Dawud, vol.3, pp.l42-143; an-Nasa'i, vol.7, p.l32; Ahmad
ibn Hanbal, vol.1, pp.4,6,9,lO; al-Bayhaqi, vol.6, p.300; lbn Sa'd,
vol.2, part2, pp.86-87; at-Tabari, vol.1, p.1825; Tarikh al-khamis,
vol.2, pp.173-174). Besides Abu Bakr no one else had knowledge of this
saying which was shown to be a tradition of the Prophet nor had anyone
from among the companions heard it. Thus, Jalalu'd-Din \`Abd ar-Rahman
ibn Abi Bakr as-Suyuti ash-Shafi\`i (849/1445-911/1505) and
Shihabu'd-Din Ahmad ibn Muhammad (Ibn Hajar) al-Haytami ash-Shafi'i
(909/1504-974/ 1567) have written: After the death of the Prophet there
was a difference of view about the inheritance and no one had any
information in this matter. Then, Abu Bakr said that he had heard the
Messenger of Allah saying that: "We prophets leave no successors and
whatever we leave behind constitutes charity". (Tarikh al-khulafa',
p.73; as Sawa'iq al-muhriqah, p. 19) The mind refuses to believe that
the Prophet should not tell those individuals who could be deemed his
successors that they would not inherit, and inform a third party who had
not the remotest kinship that there would be no successor to him. Then
this story was made public only when the case for Fadak had been filed
in his court and he himself constituted the contesting party. In such
circumstances how can his presenting in his own support a tradition
which no one else had heard be deemed permissible. If it is argued that
this tradition should be relied upon in view of the greatness of
position of Ahu Bakr, then why cannot Fatimah's claim to the gift be
relied upon because of her honesty and truthfulness, more so when the
evidence of Amir al-mu'minin and Umm Ayman as well as others was also in
her favour. If necessity was felt to call more evidence in her case,
then evidence can also be called for about this tradition, particularly,
since this tradition hits against the general instructions of the Qur'an
on succession. How can a tradition which is weak in the manner of its
relating and altered and is questioned on the basis of facts be deemed
to particularize a generality of the Qur'anic injunction on succession,
because the question of the inheritance of the prophets is clearly
mentioned in the Qur'an. Thus, Allah says: And Solomon inherited David .
. . (Qur'an, 27:16) At another place it is stated through the words of
Prophet Zakariyya: So grant me from yourself an heir, who shall inherit
me and inherit from the family of Jacob. . . (Qur'an, 19:5-6) In these
verses succession refers to succession in estate and to take it in its
figurative meaning of succession in prophetic knowledge would not only
be obtuse but also against facts, because knowledge and prophethood are
not objects of succession, nor do they possess the quality of
transmission through inheritance, for in that case all the progeny of
the prophets would have been prophets. There is no sense in making a
distinction that the progeny of some prophets may inherit prophethood
while others should remain deprived of it. It is strange that the theory
of transmission of prophethood through inheritance is propagated by
those who have always laid the objection against the Shi'ahs that they
regard the Imamate and the caliphate as an object of inheritance and
confined to one family only. Will not prophethood become an object of
inheritance by taking succession in this verse to mean succession to the
prophethood? If in Abu Bakr's view by virtue of this tradition there
could be no successor of the Prophet then where was this tradition when
a document had been written admitting Fatimah's claim for succession?
Thus, Nuru'd- Din \`Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Halabi ash-Shafi'i (975/1567 -
1044/1635) quoting from Shamsu'd-Din Yusuf (Sibt ibn al-Jawzi) al-Hanafi
(581/1185 - 654/ 1256) narrated: Abu Bakr was on the pulpit when Fatimah
came to him and said, "O' Abu Bakr, the Qur'an should allow your
daughter to inherit you but I am not to inherit my father!" Abu Bakr
started weeping and alighted from the pulpit. Then he wrote for her
about Fadak. At that time \`Umar arrived and enquired what it was. Abu
Bakr replied, "It is a document I have written for Fatimah about her
inheritance from her father." \`Umar said, "What will you spend on the
Muslims while the Arabs are waging war against you, as you see?" Then,
\`Umar took the document and tore it. (as-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol.3,
pp. 361-362) Every sensible person who remarks this behaviour can easily
reach the conclusion that this tradition is concocted and wrong, and was
fabricated only to secure possession over Fadak and other inheritances.
Consequently, Fatimah refused to accept it and expressed her anger in
this way that she made a will about Abu Bakr and \`Umar that the two
should not join in her funeral prayer. \`A'ishah narrated: Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.), the daughter of the Holy Prophet (S) sent for Abu Bakr
(after he became Caliph after the death of the Holy Prophet) claiming
from him her inheritance left by the Messenger of Allah from what Allah
had bestowed (especially) upon him at Medina and Fadak and what was left
from one-fifth (khums) of the income (annually received) from Khaybar. .
., Abu Bakr refused to hand over anything from it to Fatimah. Then,
Fatimah became angry with Abu Bakr and forsook him and did not talk to
him until the end of her life...When she died, her husband, \`Ali ibn
Abi Talib buried her at night. He did not inform Abu Bakr about her
death and offered the funeral prayer over her himself. . . (al-Bukhari,
vol.5, p.177; vol.8; p.185; Muslim, vol.5, pp.153-155; al-Bayhari,
vol.4, p.29; vol.6, pp. 300-301; Ibn Sa'd, vol.2, part 2, p.86; Ahmad
ibn Hanbal ,vol.1,p.9; at-Tabari, vol.1, p.1825; Ibn Kathir, at-Tarikh,
vol.5, pp.285-286; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.6, p.46 and Wafa' al-wafa',
vol.3, p.995) In this connection, Umm Ja'far, the daughter of Muhammad
ibn Ja\`far, narrated about the request of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) to Asma'
bint \`Umays near her death that: When I die, I want you and \`Ali to
wash me, and do not allow anyone to go in to me (in my house). When she
died \`A'ishah came to enter, Asma' told her, "Do not enter." \`A'ishah
complained to Abu Bakr (her father) saying,"This Khath\`amiyyah (a woman
from the tribe of Kath'am, i.e. Asma') intervenes between us and the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah . . ." Then, Abu Bakr came and stood
at the door and said, "O' Asma', what makes you prevent the wives of the
Prophet from entering in to the daughter of the Messenger of Allah?"
Asma' replied, "She had herself ordered me not to allow anyone to enter
into her . . ." Abu Bakr said, "Do what she has ordered you." (Hilyah
al-awliya', vol.2, p.43; as-Sunan al-kubra, vol.3, p.396; vol.4, p.334;
Ansab al-ashraf, vol.1, p.405; al-Isti\`ab, vol.4, pp.1897-1898; Usd
al-ghabah, vol.5, p.524; al-Isabah, vol.4, pp.378-379) Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.) had also made a request to Amir al-mu'minin \`Ali that she
must be buried at night and that no one should come to her, that Abu
Bakr and \`Umar should not be notified about her death and burial, and
that Abu Bakr should not be allowed to say the prayer over her body.
When she died, \`Ali washed and buried her in the quietness of the
night, not notifying Abu Bakr and \`Umar. So, these two were not aware
of her burial. Muhammad ibn \`Umar al-Waqidi (130/747 - 207/823) said:
It has been proved to us that \`Ali (p.b.u.h.) performed her funeral
prayer and buried her by night, accompanied by al-\`Abbas (ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib) and (his son) al-Fadl, and did not notify anyone. it was
for this reason that the burial place of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) was hidden
and unknown, and no one is sure about it. (al-Mustadrak, vol.3,
pp.162-163; al-Musannaf, vol.4, p.141; Ansab al-ashraf, vol.1, pp.402,
405. al-Isti\`ab, vol.4, p.1898; Usd al-ghabah, vol.5, pp. 524-525:
al-Isabah, vol.4, pp.379-380; at-Tabari, vol.3, pp.2435-2436; Ibn Sa\`d,
vol.8, pp.19-20; Wafa' al-wafa, vol.3, pp.901-902,904,905; Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol.16, pp.279-281) To attribute this displeasure of
Fatimah to sentiments and thereby to lower its importance does not
evince a correct sentiment, because if this displeasure had been the
result of sentiments then Amir al-mu'minin would have stopped her from
this misplaced displeasure, but no history shows that Amir al-mu'minin
took this displeasure to be misplaced. Besides, how could her
displeasure be the result of personal feelings or sentiments since her
pleasure or displeasure always accord with Allah's will. The Prophet's
following saying is a proof of this: O' Fatimah, surely Allah is enraged
in your rage and is pleased in your pleasure. (al-Mustadrak, vol.3,
p.153; Usd al-ghabah, vol.5, p.522; al-Isabah, vol.4, p.366; Tahdhib
at-tahdhib, vol.12, p.441; al-Khasa'is al-kubra, vol.2, p.265; Kanz
al-\`ummal, vol.13, p.96; vol.16, p.280; Majma\` az-zawa'id, vol.9,
p.203) A short history of Fadak after the death of Fatimah The motive
which causes us to pursue the history of Fadak and to extract the
continuation of events after it for a period of three centuries from the
texts of historical books is to clarify three questions:- a. The rule of
annulment of inheritance from prophets made by the Holy Prophet, in
other words, that the property of the Holy Prophet is a part of the
public treasury and belongs to all Muslims. This was claimed by the
first caliph Abu Bakr, and was rejected by his successors, both by next
the two caliphs (Umar and Uthman) and by the Umayyads and the
\`Abbassids. We must consider that the lawfulness and rightfulness of
their caliphate depended upon the correctness and lawfulness of the
caliphate of the first Caliph and his actions. b. Amir al-mu'minin
(\`Ali p.b.u.h.) and the descendants of Fatimah never had any hesitation
regarding the rightfulness and justifiability of their claim. They
insisted and confirmed that Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) had always been right and
that Abu Bakr's claim had always been rejected, and they did not yield
to the false claim.  c. Whenever one of the Caliphs made a decision to
put into effect Allah's command, in regard to Fadak, to observe justice
and equity, and to restore the right to the entitled one in conformity
with Islamic rules, he used to return back the Fadak to the descendants
of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) and to hand it over to them. 1. \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab was the most harsh person in keeping Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) from
Fadak and her inheritance as he himself confessed: When the Messenger of
Allah died I came along with Abu Bakr to \`Ali ibn Abi Talib and said,
"What do you say about what has been left by the Messenger of Allah? "He
replied, "We have the most rights with the Holy Prophet." I (\`Umar)
said, "Even those properties of Khaybar?" He said, "Yes, even those of
Khaybar." I said, "Even those of Fadak?" He replied, "Yes, even those of
Fadak." Then, I said, "By Allah, we say no, even if you cut our necks
with saws." (Majma\` az-zawa'id, vol.9, pp.39-40) As it has been
mentioned before, \`Umar then took the document of Fadak and tore it up.
But when \`Umar became Caliph (13/634 - 23/644) he gave back the Fadak
to inheritors of the Holy Prophet. Yaqut al-Hamawi (574/1178 -
626/1229), the famous historian and geographer, following the event of
Fadak said: ...Then, when \`Umar ibn al-Khattab became caliph and gained
victories and the Muslims had secured abundant wealth (i.e. the public
treasury satisfied the Caliphate's needs) he made his judgement contrary
to that of his predecessor, and that was to give it (Fadak) back to the
Prophet's heirs. At that time \`Ali ibn Abi Talib and \`Abbas ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib disputed Fadak. \`Ali said that Holy Prophet (S) had
bestowed it on Fatimah during his lifetime. \`Abbas denied this and used
to say, "This was in the possession of the Holy Prophet (S) and I am
sharing with his heirs." They were disputing this\* among each other and
asked \`Umar to settle the case. He refused to judge between them and
said, "Both of you are more conscious and aware to your problem; but I
only give it to you..." (Mu\`jam al-buldan, vol.4, pp.238-239: Wafa'
al-wafa, vol.3, p.999; Tahdhib aL-lughah, vol.1O, p.124; Lisan
al-\`Arab,vol.10, p.473; Taj al-\`arus, vol.7, p.166) The reason that
\`Umar and Abu Bakr were trying to seize Fadak was an economic and
political reason, not merely a religious one as the previous episode
shows, for when the economic and political condition of the caliphate
improved, and there was no need of the income obtained from Fadak,
\`Umar's judgement changed also. The last part of this historic event
has been inserted afterwards to demonstrate the matter of inheritance by
the brother of the deceased or the paternal uncle of the deceased when
he has no sons. This problem is a matter of dispute between Islamic
sects. The judicial and jurisprudencial discussion is separate from our
goal. We are only discussing the matter historically. \`Abbas had no
claim in this case because he had not shown that he had a share in this
property nor did his descendants consider it to be among their own
assests even when they had became caliphs and were reigning. They owned
this estate either in their position as caliphs, or they used to return
it to the descendants of Fatimah when they had decided to be just
governors.2. When \`Uthman ibn Affan became caliph after the death of
\`Umar (23/644 - 35/656) he granted Fadak to Marwan ibn al-Hakam, his
cousin (as-Sunan al-kubra, vol.6, p.3O1; Wafa' al-wafa, vol.3, p. 1000;
Ibn Abi'l- Hadid, vol.1, p.198), and this was one of the causes of
vindictive feelings among the Muslims towards \`Uthman (al-Ma \`arif,
Ibn Qutaybah, p. 195; al-\`Iqd al-farid, vol.4, pp.283, 435; at-Tarikh,
Abu'l-Fida', vol.1, p.168; at-Tarikh, Ibn al-Wardi, vol.1, p.204) which
ended in the revolt against him and his murder. "While previously
Fatimah used to claim it. sometimes as her inheritance and sometimes as
a gift (from her father), she was driven away from it (Fadak)" as Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid said. (Sharh Nahjul Balaghah al-balaghah). In this way Fadak
fell into the possession of Marwan. He used to sell its crops and
products for at least ten thousand Dinars per year, and if in some years
its income decreased this drop was not very pronounced. This was its
usual profit until the time of the caliphate of \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-
\`Aziz (in 100/718). (Ibn Sa\`d. vol.5, pp.286, 287; Subh al-a\`sha,
vol.4, p.291) 3. When Mu\`awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan became caliph (41/661 -
60/ 680) he became a partner with Marwan and others in Fadak. He alloted
one third to Marwan and one third to \`Amr ibn \`Uthman ibn \`Affan and
one third to his son Yazid. This was after the death of al-Hasan ibn
\`Ali (p.b. u.h.). "To make angry the progeny of the Holy Prophet"
al-Ya\`qubi states: (at-Tarikh, vol.2, p.199) It was in the possession
of the three above mentioned persons until Marwan became caliph
(64/684 - 65/685) and he completely took over possession of it. Then he
donated it to his two sons, \`Abd al-Malik and \`Abd al-'Aziz. Then
\`Abd al-\`Aziz donated his share to his son (\`Umar ibn \`Abd
al.\`Aziz). 4. When \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz became caliph (99/717 -
101/ 720) he delivered a lecture and mentioned that: "Verily, Fadak was
among the things that Allah had bestowed on His Messenger, and no horse,
nor camel was pricked against it..." and mentioned the case of Fadak
during the past caliphates until He said: "Then Marwan gave it (Fadak)
to my father and to \`Abd al-Malik. It became mine and al-Walid's and
Sulayman's (two sons of \`Abd al-Malik). When al-Walid became caliph
(86/705 - 96/715)I asked him for his share and He gave it to me. I asked
also for Sulayman's share and he gave it to me. Then I gathered the
three parts and I possess no property more preferable to me than this.
Be witness that I returned it to its original state." He wrote this to
his governor of Medina (Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn \`Amr ibn Hazm) and
ordered him to carry out what he had declared in the speech he
delivered. Then Fadak came into the possession of the children of
Fatimah. "This was the first removal of oppression by returning it
(Fadak) to the children of \`Ali." (al-Awa'il, Abu Hilal al-\`Askari,
p.209). They possessed it during the reign of this caliph. 5. When Yazid
ibn \`Abd al-Malik became caliph (101/720 - 105/ 724) he seized Fadak
and they (the children of \`Ali) were dispossessed. It fell into the
possession of the Banu Marwan as it had been previously. They passed it
from hand to hand until their caliphate expired and passed away to the
Banu al-Abbas. 6. When Abu'l-\`Abbas Abdullah as-Saffah became the first
caliph of the \`Abbasid dynasty (132/749-136/754) he gave back Fadak to
the children of Fatimah and submitted it to\`Abdullah ibn al-Hasan ibn
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali ibn Abi Talib.  7. When Abu Ja\`far \`Abdullah
al-Mansur ad-Dawanaqi (136/754 - 158/775) became caliph, he seized Fadak
from the children of al-Hasan. 8. When Muhammad al-Mahdi ibn al-Mansur
became caliph (158/775 - 169/785) he returned Fadak to the children of
Fatimah. 9. Then Musa al-Hadi ibn al-Mahdi (169/785 - 170/786) and his
brother Harun ar-Rashid (170/786 - 193/809) seized it from the
descendants of Fatimah and it was in the possession of Banu al-\`Abbas
until the time that al-Ma'mun became caliph (198/813 - 218/833). 10.
al-Ma'mun al-\`Abbasi gave it back to the descendants of Fatimah
(210/826). It is narrated through al-Mahdi ibn Sabiq that: Al-Ma’mun one
day sat to hear the complaints of the people and to judge in cases. The
first utter of complaint which he received caused him to weep when he
looked at it. He asked where the attorney of Fatimah daughter of the
Holy Prophet was? An old man stood up and came forth, arguing with him
about Fadak and al-Ma'mun also argued with him until he overcame
al-Ma'mun. (al-Awa'il, p.209) Al-Ma’mun summoned the Islamic
jurisprudents (al-Fuqaha') and interrogated them about the claim of the
Banu Fatimah. They narrated to al-Ma'mun that the Holy Prophet gifted
Fadak to Fatimah and that after the death of the Holy Prophet, Fatimah
demanded Abu Bakr to return Fadak to her. He asked her to bring
witnesses to her claim regarding this gift. She brought \`Ali, al-Hasan,
al-Husayn and Umm Ayman as her witnesses. They witnessed the case in her
favour. Abu Bakr rejected their witness. Then al-Ma'mun asked the
Islamic jurisprudents: "What is your view about Umm Ayman?" They
replied, "She is a woman to whom the Holy Prophet bore witness that she
is an inhabitant of Paradise." al-Ma'mun disputed at length with them
and forced them to accept the argument by proofs till they confessed
that \`Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn and Umm Ayman had witnessed only the
truth. When they unanimously accepted this matter, he restored Fadak to
the descendants of Fatimah. (at-Tarikh, al-Ya\`qubi, vol.3, pp. 195 -
196) Then al-Ma'mun ordered that the estate (of Fadak) should be
registered among the property (of the descendants of Fatimah) and it was
registered and al-Ma'mun signed it. Then he wrote a letter to his
governor in Medina named Qutham ibn Ja\`far as follows: "Know that Amir
al-mu'minin, in exercise of the authority vested upon him by the divine
religion as the Caliph, successor and the kinsman of the Holy Prophet
has considered himself more deserving to follow the precedent of the
Holy Prophet (sunnatu'n-nabi) and to carry out his commands. And (the
chief is more entitled) to restore to the rightful persons any endowment
gifted by the Holy Prophet or thing which the Holy Prophet had gifted to
someone. The success and safeguard of Amir al-mu'minin is by Allah and
he is particularly anxious to act in a way which will win the pleasure
of the Almighty Allah for him. "Verily, the Holy Prophet had gifted the
estate of Fadak to his daughter Fatimah (p.b.u.h.). He had transferred
its ownership to her. It is a clear and established fact. None of the
kindred of the Holy Prophet have any difference of view. Fatimah always
claimed that which was more deserving (to be justified) than the person
(Abu Bakr) whose word was accepted. Amir al-mu'minin considers it right
and proper to restore Fadak to the heirs of Fatimah. He would hereby win
nearness to Almighty Allah by establishing His justice and right. It
would win the appreciation of the Holy Prophet by carrying into effect
his commandments. Amir al-mu'minin has commanded that this restoration
of Fadak should duly be registered. The commands should he transmitted
to all the officials. "Then, if, as it was, a custom to proclaim on
every hajj gathering (every year), following the death of the Holy
Prophet, that anyone to whom the Holy Prophet had promised (the
donation) of a gift or a present, should come forward, his statement
will be accepted and the promise will be fulfilled. Certainly, Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.) had a superior right to have her statements accepted in the
matter of the gifting of Fadak by the Holy Prophet (may Allah bless him
and his descendants) to her. "Verily, Amir al-mu'minin has commanded his
slave Mubarak at-Tabari to restore Fadak to the descendants of Fatimah
the daughter of the holy Prophet with all its borders, its rights and
all slaves attached thereto. cereal crops and other things. "The same
has been restored to Muhammad ibn Yahya ibn al-Hasan ibn Zayd ibn \`Ali
ibn al-Husayn ibn \`Ali ibn Abi Talib and Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah ibn
al-Hasan ibn \`Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn \`Ali ibn Abi Talib. "Amir
al-mu'minin has appointed the two of them as the agents representing the
owners of the lands - the heirs of Fatimah. Know then this is the view
of Amir al-mu'minin and that Allah has inspired him to obey the order of
Allah and to win His pleasure and the pleasure of the Holy Prophet. Let
also your subordinates know this. Behave towards Muhammad ibn Yahya and
Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah in the same manner as you used to behave towards
Mubarak at-Tabari. Help them both to everything which has to do with its
flourishing and prosperity and its improvement in abundance of cereals
by Allah's will; and that is an end to the matter." This is written this
Wednesday, two nights past Dhu'l-qi'dah, the year 210 (15/2/826). 11.
During the period of al-Ma'mun's caliphate Fadak was in the possession
of Fatimah's descendants, and this continued during the caliphate of
al-Mu'tasim (218/833 - 227/842) and al-Wathiq (227/842 - 232/ 847). 12.
When Ja\`far al-Mutawakkil became caliph (232/847 - 247/ 861), the one
among them who was marked as an archenemy of the progeny of the Holy
Prophet both of those alive and of those dead, gave the order to
recapture Fadak from the descendants of Fatimah. (He seized it and
granted it to Harmalah al-Hajjam or the Cupper), and after the death of
al-Hajjam he granted it to al-Bazyar or the Falconer, a native of
Tabaristan. (Kashf al-ghumnah, vol.2, pp.121 - 122; al-Bihar, [lst ed.],
vol.8., p.108; Safinah al-bihar, vol.2, p.351). Abu Hilal al-\`Askari-
mentioned that his name was \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar al-Bazyar and added:
"And there were in it (Fadak) eleven date-palm trees which the Holy
Prophet had planted by his own hands. The descendants of Abu Talib used
to gather these dates. When pilgrims (al-Hujjaj), entered Medina they
donated the dates to them. Through this they received a considerable
ruturn. This news reached al-Mu- tawakkil. He ordered \`Abdullah ibn
\`Umar to cut up the fruits and to squeeze the juice from them.
\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar sent a man named Bishr ibn Umayyah ath-Thaqafi who
squeezed the fruits. It was reported that he made it into wine. It had
not reached Basrah (on its way to the Caliph) before it decayed and
al-Mutawakkil was killed." (al-Awa'il, p.209). 13. When al-Mutawakkil
was killed and al-Muntasir (his son) succeeded him (247/861 - 248/862)
he gave the order to restore Fadak to the descendants of al-Hasan and
al-Husayn and delivered the donations of Abu Talib to them and this was
in 248/862. (Ref. for Nos.3-13-Futuh al-buldan, vol.1, pp.33-38; Mu\`jam
al-buldan, vol.4, pp.238-240; at-Tarikh, al-Ya\`qubi, vol.2, p.199;
vol.3, pp.48, 195-196; al-Kamil, Ibn al-Athir, vol.2, pp. 224-225;
vol.3, pp. 457,497; vol.5, p.63; vol.7, p.116; al-\`Iqd al-farid, vol.4,
PP:216,283, 435; Wafa' alwafa, vol.3, pp.999-1000; at-Tabaqat al-kabir,
vol.5, pp. 286-287; Tarikh al-Khulafa', pp.231-232, 356; Muruj
adh-dhahab, vol.4, p.82; Sirah \`Umar ibn \`Abd al-\`Aziz, Ibn al-Jawzi,
p.1l0;Subh al-a\`sha vol.4, p.291; Jamharah rasa'il al-\`Arab, vol.2,
pp.331-332; vol. 3, pp. 509-510; \`Alam an-nisa', vol.3, pp.1211 -1212;
Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol.16, pp.277- 278: al-Awa'il, p.209; Kashf
al-ghummah, vol.2, pp.120-122; al-Bihar, vol.8, pp.107-108). 14. It
seemed that Fadak was recaptured from the descendants of Fatimah after
the death of al-Muntasir (248/862), because Abu'l-Hasan, \`Ali ibn \`Isa
al-Irbili (d. 692/1293) mentioned, "al-Mu\`tadid (279/892 - 289/902)
returned Fadak to the descendants of Fatimah. Then he mentioned that
al-Muqtafi (289/902 - 295/908) seized it from them. It is said also that
al-Muqtadir (295/908 - 320/932) returned it to them (the descendants of
Fatimah)." (Kashf al-ghummah, vol.2, p.122; al-Bihar, vol.8, p.108:
Safinah, vol.2, p.351). 15. And after this long period of recapturing
and restoration, Fadak was returned to the possession of the usurpers
and their heirs as it seems, no further mention was made in history and
the curtain fell. Is it (then that) the judgement of (the times of
pagan) ignorance they desire? And who (else) can be better than Allah to
judge for a people of assured faith. (Qur'an, 5:50)


