Letter 4: To one of the officers of his army
============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب كتبه (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى بعض أُمراء جيشه
  </p>
</blockquote>

If they [^1] return to the umbrella of obedience then this is all that
we want. But if the condition of these people points out towards
disruption and disobedience then, taking with you those who obey you,
rush upon those who disobey you, and while you have those with you who
follow you do not worry about those who hold back from you, because the
absence of a halfhearted man is better than his presence, and his
sitting down is better than his rising up.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ عَادُوا إِلَى ظِلِّ الطَّاعَةِ فَذَاكَ الَّذِي نُحِبُّ، وَإِنْ
تَوَافَتِ الاْمُورُ بِالْقَوْمِ إِلَى الشِّقَاقِ وَالْعِصْيَانِ
فَانْهَدْ بِمَنْ أَطاعَكَ إِلَى مَنْ عَصَاكَ، وَاسْتَغْنِ بِمَنِ
انْقَادَ مَعَكَ عَمَّنْ تَقَاعَسَ عَنْكَ، فَإِنَّ الْمُتَكَارِهَ
مَغِيبُهُ خَيْرٌ مِنْ شُهُودِهِ، وَقُعُودُهُ أَغْنَى مِنْ نُهُوضِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When \`Uthman ibn Hunayf, the Governor of Basrah informed Amir
al-mu 'minin of the arrival of Talhah and az-Zubayr in Basrah and of
their intentions, Amir al-mu 'minin wrote this letter to him, wherein he
has instructed him that in case the enemy was bent on fighting, when
facing him he should not enlist on his side those who on the one hand
showed consideration for the personalities of \`A'ishah, Talhah and
az-Zubayr and who on the other hand had agreed to fight against them
merely by persuasion, because such people could not be expected to fight
steadfastly nor could they be depended upon. Rather, such people would
try to dishearten others too. Therefore, it was only good to leave aside
such people.


