Letter 54: To Talhah and az-Zubayr
==================================

*To Talhah and az-Zubayr (through \`Imran ibn al-Husayn al-Khuza\`i)*
[^1]

Abu Ja\`far al-Iskafi has mentioned this in his "Kitab al-maqamat" on
the excellent qualities (manaqib) of Amir al-mu'minin (peace be upon
him).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب كتبه (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى طلحة والزبير، مع عمران بن الحصين الخزاعي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد ذكره أبو جعفر الاسكافي في كتاب المقامات في مناقب أمير المؤمنين
عليه السلام
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, both of you know, although you conceal it, that I did not approach
the people till they approached me, and I did not ask them to swear
allegiance to me till they themselves swore allegiance to me, and both
of you were among those who approached me and swore me allegiance.
Certainly, the common people did not swear me allegiance under any force
put on them or for any money given to them.

If you two swore allegiance to me obediently, come back and offer
repentance to Allah soon, but if you swore allegiance to me reluctantly,
you have certainly given me cause for action, by showing your obedience
and concealing your disobedience. [^2] By my life, you were not more
entitled than other Muhajirun to conceal and hide the matter. Your
refusing allegiance before entering into it would have been easier than
getting out of it after having accepted it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَقَدْ عَلِمْتُما، وَإِنْ كَتَمْتُما، أَنِّي لَمْ
أُرِدِ النَّاسَ حَتَّى أَرَادُونِي، وَلَمْ أُبَايِعْهُمْ حَتَّى
بَايَعُونِي، وَإِنَّكُمَا مِمَّنْ أَرَادَنِي وَبَايَعَنِي، وَإِنَّ
العَامَّةَ لَمْ تُبَايِعْنِي لِسُلْطَان غَاصِب، وَلاَ لِعَرَض حَاضِر،
فَإِنْ كُنْتُما بَايَعْتُمانِي طَائِعَيْنِ، فارْجِعَا وَتُوبَا إِلَى
اللهِ مِنْ قَرِيب، وَإِنْ كُنْتُما بَايَعْتُمانِي كَارِهَيْنِ، فَقَدْ
جَعَلْتُما لِي عَلَيْكُمَا السَّبِيلَ بِإِظْهَارِكُمَا الطَّاعَةَ،
وَإِسْرَارِكُمَا الْمَعْصِيَةَ، وَلَعَمْرِي مَا كُنْتُما بِأَحَقِّ
الْمُهَاجِرِينَ بِالتَّقِيَّةِ وَالْكِتْمانِ، وَإِنَّ دَفْعَكُمَا هذَا
الاَْمْرَ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ تَدْخُلاَ فِيهِ، كَانَ أَوْسَعَ عَلَيْكُمَا
مِنْ خُرُوجِكُمَا مِنْهُ، بَعْدَ إِقْرَارِكُمَا بِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You have indicated that I killed \`Uthman; then let someone from among
the people of Medina who supported neither me nor you decide the matter
between me and you. Then one of us shall face (the command of law)
according to (their) involvement. You should give up your way now, O you
two elderly men, when the great question before you is only one of
shame, before you face the question of shame coupled with the Hell-fire;
and that is an end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ زَعَمْتُما أَنِّي قَتَلْتُ عُثْمانَ، فَبَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمَا
مَنْ تَخَلَّفَ عَنِّي وَعَنْكُمَا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْمَدِينَةِ، ثُمَّ
يُلْزَمُ كُلُّ امْرِىء بَقَدْرِ مَا احْتَمَلَ. فَارْجِعَا أَيُّهَا
الشَّيْخَانِ عَنْ رَأْيِكُمَا، فَإِنَّ الاْنَ أَعْظَمَ أَمْرِكُمَا
الْعَارُ، مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَجْتَمِعَ الْعَارُ وَالنَّارُ،السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: \`Imran ibn al-Husayn al-Khuza\`i was a high ranking companion
distinguished in learning and achievements and very cautious in relating
traditions. He accepted Islam in the year of Khaybar and participated in
jihad with the Prophet. Was honoured with the judicial position at Kufah
and died at Basrah in 52 A.H. One of the genuine traditions related by
\`Imran ibn al-Husayn about Amir al-mu'minin is: The Messenger of Allah
raised and sent an army under the command of \`Ali ibn Abi Talib. From
the khums (one-fifth) received by him \`Ali set aside a slave girl for
himself. This was distasteful to some of his men and four of them
decided to complain of this to the Prophet (S). On their return they
approached the Prophet, and one of them stood up and said: "O' Messenger
of Allah! Do you not see that \`Ali did so and so?" The Prophet turned
away his face from him. Another man stood up and made the same complaint
and the Prophet turned away his face from him. Still another man stood
up and repeated what his two colleagues had said and met the same
reaction. Then the fourth man stood up and spoke like his predecessors.
The Prophet (S) then turned to them with signs of anger on his face and
said: "What do you want me to do to \`Ali? (repeating thrice). Surely,
\`Ali is from me and I am from him, and after me he is the Master of all
the believers." (al-Jami\` as -sahih, at-Tirmidhi,vol.5,p.632;
al-Musnad, Abmad ibn Hanbal, vol.4, pp.437-438; al-Musnad, Abu Dawud
at-Tayalisi, p.111;al-Mustadrak, al-Hakim, vol.3, pp.110-111; Hilyah
al-awliya', Abu Nu\`aym, vol.6, p.294; Tarikh al-Islam, adh- Dhahabi,
vol.2, p.196; at-Tarikh, Ibn Kathir, vol.7, p.345; Usd al- ghabah, Ibn
al-Athir, vol.4, p.27, al-Isabah, Ibn Hajar, vol.2, p.509)

[^2]: That is you are men of riches and means having a large tribe and
community. What is the need to you to do for this double dealing of
concealing the real feelings of the heart, showing obedience and
swearing allegiance loathsomely and unwillingly? Of course, if someone
else, who was weak and helpless, said that he was obliged to swear
allegiance, his point could be accepted to some extent. But when no one
else has expressed his helplessness in the matter, why did this
helplessness befall you so that you now regard your swearing of
allegiance to be the result of your helplessness.


