Letter 5: To al-Ash'ath ibn Qays (al-Kindi), the Governor of Azarbaijan
=======================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى الاشعث بن قيس عامل أذربيجان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Certainly, your assignment [^1] is not a morsel for you, but it is a
trust round your neck, and you have been charged with the protection (of
the people) on behalf of your superiors. It is not for you to be
oppressive towards the ruled, nor to risk yourself save on strong
grounds. You have in your hands the funds which are the property of
Allah, to Whom belongs Might and Majesty, and you hold its charge till
you pass it on to me. Probably, I will not be one of the bad rulers for
you, and that is an end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ عَمَلَكَ لَيْسَ لَكَ بِطُعْمَة، وَلكِنَّهُ فِي عُنُقِكَ
أَمَانةٌ، وَأَنْتَ مُسْتَرْعىً لِمَنْ فَوْقَكَ، لَيْسَ لَكَ أَنْ
تَفتَاتَ فِي رَعِيَّة، وَلاَ تُخَاطِرَ إِلاَّ بِوَثِيقَة، وَفي
يَدَيْكَ مَالٌ مِنْ مَالِ اللهِ عَزَّوَجَلَّ، وَأَنْتَ مِنْ خُزَّانِهِ
حَتَّى تُسَلِّمَهُ إِلَيَّ، وَلَعَلِّي أَلاَّ أَكُونَ شَرَّ وُلاَتِكَ
لَكَ، وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When Amir al-mu'minin was free from the battle of Jamal he wrote
to al-Ash'ath ibn Qays (al-Kindi) who had been the Governor of
Azarbayjan from the days of \`Uthman, to send the revenue and levies of
his province. But since he had fears about the future of his position
and assignment, he intended to swallow all this money like other
officers of \`Uthman. Therefore, when this letter reached him he sent
for his chief associates and after mentioning this letter to them said:
"I fear that this money will be taken away from me; I therefore intend
to join Mu\`awiyah." Whereupon those people said that it was a matter of
shame to leave kith and kin and seek refuge with Mu'awiyah.
Consequently, on the advice of these people he postponed his idea to run
away but did not agree to part with the money. On getting this
information Amir al-mu'minin sent Hujr ibn \`Adi al-Kindi to bring him
to Kufah. He persuaded him and brought him to Kufah. On reaching there
his kit was found to contain four hundred thousand Dirhams out of which
Amir al-mu'minin left thirty thousand for him and deposited the rest in
the public treasury.


