Letter 62: To the people of Egypt sent through Malik al-Ashtar when he was made the Governor of that place
==========================================================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب كتبه (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى أهل مصر مع مالك الاشتر لما ولاّه إمارَتَها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, Allah the Glorified, deputed Muhammad (may Allah bless him and his
descendants) as a warner for all the worlds and a witness for all the
prophets. When the Prophet expired, the Muslims quarrelled about power
after him. By Allah, it never occurred to me, and I never imagined, that
after the Prophet the Arabs would snatch away the caliphate from his
Ahlul Bayt (the members of his house), nor that they would take it away
from me after him, but I suddenly noticed people surrounding the man to
swear him allegiance. [^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ سُبْحَانَهُ بَعَثَ مُحَمَّداً(صلى الله
عليه وآله) نَذِيراً لِلْعَالَمِينَ، وَمُهَيْمِناً عَلَى
الْمُرْسَلِينَ. فلمَّا مَضى(صلى الله عليه وآله) تنَازَعَ
الْمُسْلِمُونَ الاْمْرَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ، فَوَاللهِ مَا كَانَ يُلْقَى فِي
رُوعِي، وَلاَ يَخْطُرُ بِبَالِي، أَنَّ الْعَرَبَ تُزْعِجُ هذَا
الاْمْرَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ (صلى الله عليه وآله) عَنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ،
وَلاَ أَنَّهُمْ مُنَحُّوهُ عَنِّي مِنْ بَعْدِهِ! فَمَا رَاعَنِي إِلاَّ
انْثِيَالُ النَّاسِ عَلَى فُلاَن يُبَايِعُونَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

I therefore withheld my hand till I saw that many people were reverting
from Islam and trying to destroy the religion of Muhammad (may Allah
bless him and his descendants). I then feared that if I did not protect
Islam and its people and there occurred in it a breach or destruction,
it would mean a greater blow to me than the loss of power over you which
was, in any case, to last for a few days of which everything would pass
away as the mirage passes away, or as the cloud scuds away. Therefore,
in these happenings I rose till wrong was destroyed and disappeared, and
religion attained peace and safety.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمْسَكْتُ يَدِي حَتَّى رَأيْتُ رَاجِعَةَ النَّاسِ قَدْ رَجَعَتْ
عَنِ الاْسْلاَمِ، يَدْعُونَ إِلَى مَحْقِ دِينِ مُحَمَّد (صلى الله عليه
وآله) فَخَشِيتُ إِنْ لَمْ أَنْصُرِ الاْسْلاَمَ أَهْلَهُ أَنْ أَرَى
فِيهِ ثَلْماً أَوْ هَدْماً، تَكُونُ الْمُصِيبَةُ بِهِ عَلَيَّ أَعْظَمَ
مِنْ فَوْتِ وِلاَيَتِكُمُ الَّتِي إِنَّمَا هِيَ مَتَاعُ أَيَّام
قَلاَئِلَ، يَزُولُ مِنْهَا مَا كَانَ، كَمَا يَزُولُ السَّرَابُ، أَوْ
كَمَا يَتَقَشَّعُ السَّحَابُ، فَنَهَضْتُ فِي تِلْكَ الاْحْدَاثِ حَتَّى
زَاحَ الْبَاطِلُ وَزَهَقَ، وَاطْمَأَنَّ الدِّينُ وَتَنَهْنَهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**A part of the same letter**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن هذا الكتاب:
  </p>
</blockquote>

By Allah, if I had encountered them alone and they had been so numerous
as to fill the earth to the brim, I would not have worried or become
perplexed. I am clear in myself and possess conviction from Allah about
their misguidance and my guidance. I am hopeful and expectant that I
will meet Allah and get His good reward.

But I am worried that foolish and wicked people will control the affairs
of the entire community, with the result that they will grab the funds
of Allah as their own property and make His people slaves, [^2] fight
with the virtuous, and ally with the sinful. Indeed, there is among them
he who drank (wine) unlawfully [^3] and was whipped by way of punishment
fixed by Islam, and there is he who did not accept Islam until he had
secured financial gain through it. [^4]

If this had not been so I would not have insisted on gathering you,
reprehending you, mobilizing you and urging you (for jihad) but if you
refuse and show weakness I will leave you.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي وَاللهِ لَوْ لَقِيتُهُمْ وَاحِداً وَهُمْ طِلاَعُ الاْرْضِ
كُلِّهَا مَا بَالَيْتُ وَلاَ اسْتَوْحَشْتُ، وَإِنِّي مِنْ ضَلاَلِهِمُ
الَّذِي هُمْ فِيهِ وَالْهُدَى الَّذِي أَنَا عَلَيْهِ لَعَلى بَصِيرَة
مِنْ نَفْسِي وَيَقِين مِنْ رَبِّي. وَإِنِّي إِلَى لِقَاءِ اللهِ
لَمُشْتَاقٌ، وَلِحُسْنِ ثَوَابِهِ لَمُنْتَظِرٌ رَاج، وَلكِنَّنِي آسَى
أَنْ يَلِيَ أَمْرَ هذِهِ الاْمَّةِ سُفَهَاؤُهَا وَفُجَّارُهَا،
فَيَتَّخِذُوا مَالَ اللهِ دُوَلاً، وَعِبَادَهُ خَوَلاً،
وَالصَّالِحِينَ حَرْباً، وَالْفَاسِقِينَ حِزْباً، فَإِنَّ مِنْهُمُ
الَّذِي قَدْ شَرِبَ فِيكُمُ الْحَرَامَ، وَجُلِدَ حَدّاً فِي
الاْسْلاَمِ، وَإِنَّ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ لَمْ يُسْلِمْ حَتَّى رُضِخَتْ لَهُ
عَلَى الاْسْلاَمِ الرَّضَائِخُ، فَلَوْلاَ ذلِكَ مَا أَكْثَرْتُ
تَأْلِيبَكُمْ وَتَأنِيبَكُمْ، وَجَمْعَكُمْ وَتَحْرِيضَكُمْ،
وَلَتَرَكْتُكُمْ إِذْ أَبَيْتُمْ وَوَنَيْتُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do you not see that the boundaries of your cities have diminished, your
populated areas have been conquered, your possessions have been snatched
away and your cities and lands have been attacked? May Allah have mercy
on you, get up to fight your enemy and do not remain confined to the
earth, otherwise you will face oppression and suffer ignominy and your
fate will be the worst. The warrior should be wakeful because if he
sleeps the enemy does not sleep; and that is an end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ تَرَوْنَ إِلَى أَطْرَافِكُمْ قَدِ انْتَقَصَتْ، وَإِلَى
أَمْصَارِكُمْ قَدِ افْتُتِحَتْ، وَإِلَى مَمَالِكِكُمْ تُزْوَى، وَإِلَى
بِلاَدِكُمْ تُغْزَى! انْفِرُوا ـ رَحِمَكُمُ اللهُ ـ إِلَى قِتَالِ
عَدُوِّكُمْ، وَلاَ تَثَّاقلُوا إِلَى الاْرْضِ فَتُقِرُّوا بِالْخَسْفِ،
وَتَبُوؤُوا بِالذُّلِّ، وَيَكُونَ نَصِيبُكُمُ الاْخَسَّ، وَإِنَّ أَخَا
الْحَرْبِ الاْرِقُ، وَمَنْ نَامَ لَمْ يُنَمْ عنْهُ، وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: The Prophet's declarations about Amir al-mu'minin that "This is my
brother, my vicegerent and my caliph among you", and while returning
from his farewell hajj at Ghadir Khum that "For whosoever I am the
master, \`Ali is his master" had settled the issue of his own
replacement and succession after which there was no need at all for any
new election, nor could it be imagined that the people of Medina would
feel the need for an election. But some power-thirsty individuals so
ignored these clear injunctions as if their ears had never been
acquainted with them, and considered the election so necessary, that,
leaving the burial rites of the Prophet, they assembled in the Saqifah
of Banu Sa\`idah and elected Abu Bakr as Caliph with a show of
democracy. This was a very critical moment for Amir al-mu'minin. On one
side some interested persons declared that he should take up arms and on
the other hand he noticed that those Arabs who had accepted Islam by
dint of its military strength were leaving it and Musaylimah ibn
Thumamah al-Hanafi the liar (al-Kadhdhab) and Tulayhah ibn Khuwaylid
al-Asadi (the liar) were throwing tribe after tribe into misguidance. In
these circumstances, if there had been a civil war and the Muslims had
fought against the Muslims, the forces of heresy and hypocrisy would
have joined together and swept Islam off the surface of the globe.
Therefore, Amir al-mu'minin preferred to keep quiet rather than to
fight, and, with the purpose of maintaining the solidarity of Islam,
confined himself to protesting peacefully rather than taking up arms.
This was because formal power was not so dear to him as the good and
prosperity of the community. For stopping the machinations of the
hypocrites and defeating the aims of the mischief-mongers there was no
other course but that he should not fan the flames of war by giving up
his own claim. This was such a big act for the preservation of Islamic
polity that it is acknowledged by all the sects of Islam.

[^2]: This refers to the saying of the Holy Prophet about the children
of Umayyah and the children of Abi al-\`As ibn Umayyah (the grandfather
of \`Uthman ibn \`Affan and the dynasty of Marwan's caliphs) as related
by Abu Dharr al-Ghifari that the Holy Prophet said: When the number of
Banu (children of) Umayyah reaches forty men they will make Allah's
people their slaves, grab Allah's funds as their own property and make
the Book of Allah a cause of corruption. (al-Mustadrak, vol.4, p.479;
Kanz al-\`ummal, vol.11, p.149). About the children of Abi al-\`As it is
related by Abu Dharr, Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, Ibn \`Abbas, Abu Hurayrah and
others that the Holy Prophet said: When the number of Banu (children of)
Abi al-\`As reaches thirty men, they will grab the funds of Allah as
their own property, make Allah's people their slaves and make the
religion of Allah a cause of corruption. (al-Musnad, Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
vol.3, p.80; al-Mustadrak, al-Hakim, vol.4, p.480; al-Matalib
al-\`aliyah, lbn Hajar, vol.4, p.332; Majma\` az-zawa'id, al-Haytami,
vol.5, pp.241,243; Kanz al-\`ummal, al-Muttaqi, vol.11,
pp.148,149,351,354). The history of Islam (after the death of the Holy
Prophet) has enough evidence to prove this prophecy of the Holy Prophet;
and the fear of Amir al-mu'minin for the Muslim community was based on
this reason.

[^3]: The man who drank wine was al-Walid ibn \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu\`ayt.
He was of the same mother as Caliph \`Uthman and his Governor of Kufah.
al-Walid on an occasion in a state of intoxication led the morning
prayers in the Central mosque of Kufah with four units (raka\`ah)
instead of the usual two as prescribed by the Holy Prophet. The
congregation, which consisted of several pious persons like Ibn Mas\`ud,
was much incensed and still more irritated when, finishing the four
units, al-Walid said: What a pleasant morning! I would like to extend
the prayers further if you consent. Repeated complaints had already been
made to the Caliph against al-Walid on account of his debauchery, but as
often dismissed. People now reproached \`Uthman for not listening to
their grievances, and favouring such a scoundrel. By chance they
succeeded in taking off the signet ring from the hand of the Governor
while he lay senseless from the effects of a debauch, and carried it off
to Medina. Still the caliph was slow and hesitated to enforce punishment
upon his Governor (of the same mother) ; giving cause to be himself
reproachfully accused of ignoring the law; though at last he was
persuaded to have al-Walid scourged with forty strokes. He was
consequently deposed from his office. Sa\`id ibn al-\`As, a cousin of
\`Uthman was appointed to take his place, and this was a matter of great
reproach against \`Uthman. (Ansab al-ashraf, al-Baladhuri, vol.5,
pp.33-35; al-Aghani; Abu'l-Faraj al-Isfahani, vol.4, pp.174- 187;
al-Isti\`ab, vol.4, pp.1554-1557; Usd al-ghabah, vol.5, pp.91-92;
at-Tabari, vol.1, pp.2843-2850; Ibn al-Athir, vol.3, pp.1O5-1O7; lbn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol.17, pp.227-245)

[^4]: The man who accepted Islam after securing financial gain was
Mu\`awiyah who was adhering to Islam only for worldly benefits.


