Letter 63: To Abu Musa al-Ash`ari, when Amir al-mu'minin learned that he was dissuading the people from joining in the battle of Jamal
======================================================================================================================================

*To Abu Musa (\`Abdullah ibn Qays) al-Ash\`ari, the Governor of Kufah
when Amir al-mu'minin learned that he was dissuading the people of Kufah
from joining in the battle of Jamal when Amir al-mu'minin had called
them to fight along with him.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب كتبه (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى أبي موسى الاشعري
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو عامله على الكوفة، وقد بلغه عنه تثبيطُه الناسَ عن الخروج إليه لمّا
ندبهم لحرب أصحاب الجمل
  </p>
</blockquote>

From the servant of Allah, Amir al-mu'minin to \`Abdullah ibn Qays:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ عَبْدِ اللهِ عَلِيّ أَمِيرِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِلَى عَبْدِ اللهِ بْنِ
قَيْس.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, I have come to know of words uttered by you which go in your favour
as well as against you. [^1] So, when my messenger reaches you prepare
yourself and get ready, come out of your den and call those who are with
you. Then, if you are convinced of the truth get up but if you feel
cowardice go away. By Allah, you will be caught wherever you may be and
you will not be spared till you are completely upset and everything
about you is scattered and till you are shaken from your seat. Then, you
will fear from your front as you do from the rear.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَقَدْ بَلَغَنِي عَنْكَ قَوْلٌ هُوَ لَكَ وَعَلَيْكَ،
فإذَا قَدِمَ عَلَيْكَ رَسُولي فارْفَعْ ذَيْلَكَ، واشْدُدْ مِئْزَرَكَ،
واخْرُجْ مِنْ جُحْرِكَ، وَانْدُبْ مَنْ مَعَكَ، فَإِنْ حَقَّقْتَ
فَانْفُذْ، وَإِنْ تَفَشَّلْتَ فَابْعُدْ! وَايْمُ اللهِ لَتُؤْتَيَنَّ
حَيْثُ أَنْتَ، وَلاَ تُتْرَكُ حَتَّى يُخْلَطَ زُبْدُكَ بِخَاثِرِكَ،
وَذَائِبُكَ بِجَامِدِكَ، وَحَتَّى تُعْجَلَ عَنْ قِعْدَتِكَ، وَتَحْذَرَ
مِنْ أَمَامِكَ كَحَذَرِكَ مِنْ خَلْفِكَ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

What you hope is not a light matter, but it is serious calamity. We have
to ride its camels, overcome its difficulties and level its mountains.
Set your mind in order, take a grip on your affairs and acquire your
(lot and your) share. If you do not like it then go away to where
neither you are welcome nor can you escape from it. It is better that
you be left alone and lie sleeping. Then no one will enquire where
so-and-so is. By Allah, this is the case of right with the rightful
person and we do not care what the heretics do; and that is an end to
the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هِيَ بِالْهُوَيْنَى الَّتِي تَرْجُو، وَلكِنَّهَا الدَّاهِيةُ
الْكُبْرَى، يُرْكَبُ جَمَلُهَا، وَيُذَلُّ صَعْبُهَا، وَيُسَهَّلُ
جَبَلُهَا. فَاعْقِلْ عَقْلَكَ، وَامْلِكْ أَمْرَكَ، وَخُذْ نَصِيبَكَ
وَحَظَّكَ، فَإِنْ كَرِهْتَ فَتَنَحَّ إِلَى غَيْرِ رَحْب وَلاَ فِي
نَجَاة، فَبِالْحَرِيِّ لَتُكْفَيَنَّ وَأَنْتَ نَائِم، حَتَّى لاَ
يُقَالَ: أَيْنَ فُلاَنٌ؟ وَاللهِ إِنَّهُ لَحَقٌّ مَعَ مُحِقّ، وَمَا
أُبَالِي مَا صَنَعَ الْمُلْحِدُونَ، وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When Amir al-mu'minin had the idea of suppressing the revolt of
the people of Basrah he sent this letter through Imam al-Hasan to Abu
Musa (\`Abdullah ibn Qays) al-Ash\`ari, who had been appointed Governor
of Kufah by \`Uthman, wherein he has scolded him for his duplicitous and
contradictory behaviour and attempted to persuade him to jihad, because
on one side he used to say that Amir al-mu'minin was the true Imam and
allegiance to him was right and on the other he said that to support him
in fighting against the Muslims was not right; but it was a mischief and
it was necessary to keep off this mischief. Thus, Amir al-mu'minin has
referred to this contradictory view by the words "huwa laka wa \`alayka"
(which go in your favour as well as against you). The intention is that
when Amir al-mu'minin is the rightful Imam how can fighting his enemy
with him be wrong? And if fighting on his side is wrong then what is the
meaning of his being the rightful Imam. In any case, in spite of his
dissuading from fighting, the people of Kufah came out in large numbers
to join Amir al-mu'minin's army and took full part in the battle, giving
such a defeat to the people of Basrah that they never again dared to
revolt.


