Letter 64: In reply to Mu`awiyah
================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كتبه إلى معاوية، جواباً عن كتاب منه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now then, certainly, we and you were on amiable terms as you say but
difference arose between us and you the other day, when we accepted
belief (iman) and you rejected it. Today the position is that we are
steadfast (in the belief) but you are creating mischief. Those of you
who accepted Islam did so reluctantly and that too when all the chief
men had accepted Islam and joined the Messenger of Allah- (may Allah
bless him and his descendants).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَإِنَّا كُنَّا نَحْنُ وَأَنْتُمْ عَلَى مَا ذَكَرْتَ
مِنَ الاْلْفَةِ وَالْجَمَاعَةِ، فَفَرَّقَ بيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَمْسِ
أَنَّا آمَنَّا وَكَفَرْتُمْ، وَالْيَوْمَ أَنَّا اسْتَقَمْنَا
وَفُتِنْتُمْ، وَمَا أَسْلَمَ مُسْلِمُكُمْ إِلاَّ كَرْهاً، وَبَعْدَ
أَنْ كَانَ أَنْفُ الاْسْلاَمِ كُلُّهُ لِرَسُولِ اللهِ (صلى الله عليه
وآله) حرباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You have stated that I killed Talhah and az-Zubayr, forced \`A'ishah out
of her house and adopted residence between the two cities (Kufah and
Basrah). [^1] These are matters with which you have no concern nor do
they involve anything against you. Therefore, no explanation about them
is due to you. You also state that you are coming to me with a party of
Muhajirun and Ansar, but hijrah came to an end on the day your brother
was taken prisoner. If you are in a hurry, then wait a bit as I may come
to meet you and that would be more befitting as that would mean that
Allah has appointed me to punish you. But if you come to me it would be
as the poet of Banu Asad said:

They are advancing against summer winds which are hurling stones on them
in the highlands and lowlands.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَكَرْتَ أَنِّي قَتَلْتُ طَلْحَةَ وَالزُّبَيْرَ، وَشَرَّدْتُ
بِعَائِشَةَ، وَنَزَلْتُ بَيْنَ الْمِصْرَيْنِ! وَذلِكَ أَمْرٌ غِبْتَ
عَنْهُ، فَلاَ عَلَيْكَ، وَلاَ الْعُذْرُ فِيهِ إِلَيْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَكَرْتَ أَنَّكَ زَائِرِي فِي الْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالأنْصَارِ، وَقَدِ
انْقَطَعَتِ الْهِجْرَةُ يَوْمَ أُسِرَ أَخُوكَ، فَإِنْ كَانَ فِيكَ
عَجَلٌ فَاسْتَرْفِهْ، فَإِنِّي إِنْ أَزُرْكَ فَذلِكَ جَدِيرٌ أَنْ
يَكُونَ اللهُ إِنَّمَا بَعَثَنِي لِلنِّقْمَةِ مِنْكَ! وَإِنْ تَزُرْنِي
فَكَمَا قَالَ أَخُو بَنِي أَسَد:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُسْتَقْبِلِينَ رِيَاحَ الصَّيْفِ تَضْرِبُهُمْ \* بِحَاصِببَيْنَ
أَغْوَار وَجُلْمُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Remember) I have still the sword with which I dispatched your
grandfather, your mother's brother and your brother to one and the same
place. By Allah, I know what you are. Your heart is sheathed and your
intelligence is weak. It is better to say that you have ascended to
where you view a bad scene which is against you, not in your favour,
because you are searching a thing lost by someone else, you are tending
someone else's cattle and you are hankering after a thing which is not
yours, nor have you any attachment with it.

How remote are your words from your actions, and how closely you
resemble your paternal and maternal uncles who were led by their
wickedness and love for wrong to oppose Muhammad (may Allah bless him
and his descendants) and in consequence they were killed as you know.
They could not put up a defence against the calamity and could not
protect their place of safety from the striking of swords which abound
in the battle and which do not show weakness.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِنْدِيَ السَّيْفُ الَّذِي أَعْضَضْتُهُ بِجَدِّكَ وَخَالِكَ
وَأَخِيكَ فِي مَقَام وَاحِد، وَإِنَّكَ وَاللهِ مَا عَلِمْتُ الاْغْلَفُ
الْقَلْبِ، الْمُقارِبُ الْعَقْلِ، وَالاْوْلَى أَنْ يُقَالَ لَكَ:
إِنَّكَ رَقِيتَ سُلَّماً أَطْلَعَكَ مَطْلَعَ سُوء عَلَيْكَ لاَ لَكَ،
لاِنَّكَ نَشَدْتَ غَيْرَ ضَالَّتِكَ، وَرَعَيْتَ غَيْرَ سَائِـمَتِكَ،
وَطَلَبْتَ أَمْراً لَسْتَ مِنْ أَهْلِهِ وَلاَ فِي مَعْدِنِهِ، فَمَا
أَبْعَدَ قَوْلَكَ مِنْ فِعْلِكَ!! وَقَرِيبٌ مَا أَشْبَهْتَ مِنْ
أَعْمَام وَأَخْوَال! حَمَلَتْهُمُ الشَّقَاوَةُ، وَتَمَنِّي الْبَاطِلِ،
عَلَى الْجُحُودِ بِمُحَمَّد (صلى الله عليه وآله) فَصُرِعُوا
مَصَارِعَهُمْ حَيْثُ عَلِمْتَ، لَمْ يَدْفَعُوا عَظِيماً، وَلَمْ
يَمْنَعُوا حَرِيماً، بِوَقْعِ سُيُوف مَا خَلاَ مِنْهَا الْوَغَى،
وَلَمْ تُمَاشِهَا الْهُوَيْنَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

You have said a lot about killing of \`Uthman. You first join what the
people have joined (i.e., allegiance) then seek a verdict about (the
accused people) from me and I shall settle the matter between you and
them according to the Book of Allah, the Sublime. But what you are
aiming at is just the fake nipple given to a child in the first days of
stopping of nursing. Peace be on those who deserve it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ أَكْثَرْتَ فِي قَتَلَةِ عُثْمانَ، فَادْخُلْ فِيَما دَخَلَ فِيهِ
النَّاسُ، ثُمَّ حَاكِمِ الْقُوْمَ إِلَيَّ، أَحْمِلْكَ وَإِيَّاهُمْ
عَلَى كِتَابِ اللهِ. وَأَمَّا تِلْكَ الَّتِي تُرِيدُ فَإِنَّهَا
خُدْعَةُ الصَّبِيِّ عَنِ اللَّبَنِ فِي أَوَّلِ الْفِصَالِ،
وَالسَّلاَمُ لاِهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Mu\`awiyah had written a letter to Amir al-mu'minin in which after
recalling mutual unity and amicability he laid on him the blame of
killing Talhah and az-Zubayr and ousting \`A'ishah from her house and
objected to his adopting Kufah as his seat of government in place of
Medina. In the end, he gave a threat of war and said that he was about
to come out with a force of muhajirun and ansar to fight. Amir
al-mu'minin wrote this letter in reply to him, wherein commenting on
Mu\`awiyah's claim for unity he says that: "There might have been unity
between you and us but with the advent of Islam such a gulf has
developed between the two that it is not possible to bridge it, and such
a separation has occurred which cannot be removed. This was because we
responded to the call of the Prophet and hastened towards Islam but your
position was that you were still in the state of unbelief and ignorance
whereby we and you came to adopt separate ways. But when Islam secured
stability and the chiefs of Arabs entered its fold you too were obliged
to, and secured protection of your lives by putting the covering of
Islam on your faces, but continued secretly to fan the mischief intended
to shatter its foundations. Since we had accepted Islam of our own free
will and pleasure we adhered to the right path and at no stage did any
faltering occur in our steadfastness. Therefore, your acceptance of
Islam too could not make us agree with your views." As regards
Nlu\`awiyah's accusation that Amir al-mu'minin engineered the killing of
Talhah and az-Zubayr; then even if this blame is admitted as true, is it
not a fact that they had openly revolted against Amir al-mu'minin and
had risen for war after breaking the allegiance. Therefore, if they were
killed in connection with the revolt their blood would be wasted and no
blame would lie on the killer, because the penalty for him who revolts
against the rightful Imam is death, and fighting against him is
permissible, without doubt. The fact however, is that this accusation
has no reality because Talhah was killed by a man of his own party.
Thus, the historians write: Marwan ibn al-Hakam shot Talhah with an
arrow and turning to Aban ibn \`Uthman said: "We have killed a killer of
your father and relieved you of revenge." (Ibn Sa\`d, vol.3, part 1,
p.159; Ibn al-Athir, vol.3, p.244; al-Isti\`ab, vol.2, pp.766-769; Usd
aI-ghabah, vol.3, pp.60,61; al-Isabah, vol.2, p.230; Tahdhib,
at-tahdhib, vol.5, p.21). As for az-Zubayr, he was killed by \`Amr ibn
Jurmuz on his way back from Basrah, and there was no prompting by Amir
al-mu'minin in it. Similarly, \`A'ishah herself came out of her house as
the head of this rebellious group while Amir al-mu'minin counselled her
several times to realize her position and not to step out of her bounds
but these things had no effect on her. Of the same type was his
criticism that Amir al-mu'minin left Medina and adopted Kufah as the
seat of his government because Medina turns out bad people from itself
and throws away dirt. The reply to it is only this that Mu\`awiyah
himself too always retained Syria as his capital keeping away from
Medina. In this way, what right can he have to object to Amir
al-mu'minin changing his seat. Amir al-mu'minin left Medina because of
those rebellions which had cropped up from all sides. To suppress them
only the selection of such a place as capital from where military
assistance could be mobilized at any time could be useful. Thus, Amir
al-mu'minin had seen on the occasion of the battle of Jamal that a great
majority of the people of Kufah had supported him and that therefore by
making it a base for the army, defence against the enemy could be easily
managed, while Medina was not appropriate for military mobilization or
for supplies. Lastly, as for Mu'awiyah's threat that he would march with
muhajirun and ansar, Amir al-mu'minin gave a reply to this point in a
very subtle way, namely that, "How would you bring muhajirun now since
the door for hijrah was closed the day when your brother Yazid ibn Abi
Sufyan was taken prisoner." This man was taken prisoner on the day of
the fall of Mecca and there is no question of hijrah after the fall of
Mecca so as to enable any one to be called a muhajirun because of the
Prophet's saying: "There is no hijrah after the victory over Mecca."


