Letter 65: To Mu`awiyah
=======================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إليه أيضاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, this is the time [^1] that you should derive benefit by observing a
clear view of the main matters, because you have been treading in the
path of your forefathers in making wrong claims, spreading false and
untrue notions, claiming for yourself what is far above you and
demanding what is not meant for you, because you want to run away from
right and to revolt against what is more fastened to your flesh and
blood namely what has been heard by the depth of your ears and has
filled your chest. And after forsaking right there remains nothing
except clear misguidance, and after disregarding a (clear) statement
there is nothing except confusion. You should therefore guard (yourself)
against doubts and its ill-effects of confusion, because for a long time
mischief has spread its veils and its gloom has blinded your eyes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَقَدْ آنَ لَكَ أَنْ تَنْتَفِعَ بِالَّلمْحِ الْبَاصِرِ
مِنْ عِيَانِ الاْمُورِ، فَقَدْ سَلَكْتَ مَدَارِجَ أَسْلاَفِكَ
بِادِّعَائِكَ الاْباطِيلَ، وَإقْحَامِكَ غُرُورَ الْمَيْنِ
وَالاْكَاذِيبِ، وَبِانْتِحَالِكَ مَا قَدْ عَلاَ عَنْكَ، وَابْتِزَازِكَ
لِمَا قَدِ اخْتُزِنَ دُونَكَ، فِرَاراً مِنَ الْحَقِّ، وَجُحُوداً لِمَا
هُوَ أَلْزَمُ لَكَ مِنْ لَحْمِكَ وَدَمِكَ، مِمَّا قَدْ وَعَاهُ
سَمْعُكَ، وَمُلِىءَ بِهِ صَدْرُكَ، فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلاَّ
الضَّلاَلُ، وَبَعْدَ الْبَيَانِ إِلاَّ الَّلبْسُ؟ فَاحْذَرِ
الشُّبْهَةَ وَاشْتِمالَهَا عَلَى لَبْسَتِهَا، فَإِنَّ الْفِتْنَةَ
طَالَمَا أَغْدَفَتْ جَلاَبِيبَهَا، وَأَغْشَتِ الاْبْصَارَ ظُلْمَتُهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have received your letter which is full of uncouth utterances which
weaken the cause of peace and nonsensical expressions which have not
been prepared with knowledge and forbearance. By reason of these things
you have become like one who is sinking in a marsh or groping in a dark
place. You have raised yourself to a position which is difficult to
approach and devoid of any signs (to guide). Even the royal kite cannot
reach it. It is parallel to the \`Ayyuq (the star Capella), in height.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقدْ أَتَانِي كِتَابٌ مِنْكَ ذُو أَفانِينَ مِنَ الْقَوْلِ ضَعُفَتْ
قُوَاهَا عَنِ السِّلْمِ، وَأَسَاطِيرَ لَمْ يَحُكْهَا مِنْكَ عِلْمٌ
وَلاَ حِلْمٌ، أَصْبَحْتَ مِنْهَا كَالْخَائِضِ فِي الدَّهَاسِ،
وَالخَابِطِ فِي الدِّيمَاسِ، وَتَرَقَّيْتَ إِلَى مَرْقَبَة بَعِيدَةِ
الْمَرَامِ، نَازِحَةِ الاْعْلاَمِ، تَقْصُرُ دوُنَهَا الاْنُوقُ،
وَيُحَاذَى بَهَا الْعَيُّوقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May Allah forbid that you be in charge of people's affairs after my
assuming authority as Caliph, or that I issue an edict or document
granting you authority over any one of them. Therefore, from now onwards
guard yourself and be watchful, because if you recalcitrate till the
people of Allah (are forced to) rush upon you, then matters will be
closed for you and whatever can be accepted from you today will not be
accepted then; and that is an end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَاشَ لله أَنْ تَلِيَ لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ بَعْدِي صَدْراً أَوْ وِرْداً،
أَوْ أُجْرِيَ لَكَ عَلَى أَحَد مِنْهُمْ عَقْداً أَوْ عَهْداً!! فَمِنَ
الاْنَ فَتَدَارَكْ نَفْسَكَ، وَانْظُرْ لَهَا، فَإِنَّكَ إِنْ فَرَّطْتَ
حَتَّى يَنْهَدَ إِلَيْكَ عِبَادُ اللهِ أُرْتِجَتْ عَلَيْكَ
الاْمُورُ،مُنِعْتَ أَمْراً هُوَ مِنْكَ الْيَوْمَ مَقْبُولٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: At the end of the battle of the Kharijites, Mu\`awiyah wrote a
letter to Amir al-mu'minin wherein, as usual, he indulged in
mud-throwing. In reply, Amir al-mu'minin wrote this letter in which he
has tried to draw Mu\`awiyah's attention to the clear facts about this
very battle of the Kharijites, because this battle took place in
accordance with the prophecy of the Prophet while Amir al-mu'minin
himself too had said before the battle that besides the people of Jamal
and Siffin he had to fight against one more group and they were the
"deviators" from the religion, namely the Kharijites. The occurrence of
this battle and the killing of the man with breasts (Dhu'th- thudayyah)
was a clear proof of Amir al-mu'minin being in the right. If Mu'awiyah
had not been obsessed with self-advertisement and lust for conquests,
and had not shut his eyes against the right like his forefathers Abu
Sufyan and his brother \`Utbah he would have seen right and come on its
path. But compelled by his natural inclination he always evaded right
and truth and kept himself blind to those sayings of the Prophet which
threw light on Amir al-mu'minin's Imamate and vicegerency. Because of
being with the Prophet in the farewell pilgrimage the Prophet's saying:
"Of whomsoever I am the master, \`Ali is his master" was not hidden from
him, and neither was the Prophet's saying that: "O' \`Ali you are to me
as Harun was to Musa", because of his presence on the occasion of the
battle of Tabuk. In spite of all this, he passed his life in concealing
right and encouraging wrong. This was not due to any misunderstanding
but it was his lust for power that kept prompting him to suppress and
trample truth and justice.


