Letter 6: To Mu`awiyah (ibn Abi Sufyan)
=======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى معاوية
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, those who swore allegiance to Abu Bakr, \`Umar and \`Uthman have
sworn allegiance [^1] to me on the same basis on which they swore
allegiance to them. (On this basis) he who was present has no choice (to
consider), and he who was absent has no right to reject; and
consultation is confined to the muhajirun and the ansar. If they agree
on an individual and take him to be Caliph it will be deemed to mean
Allah's pleasure.

If any one keeps away by way of objection or innovation they will return
him to the position from where he kept away. If he refuses they will
fight him for following a course other than that of the believers and
Allah will put him back from where he had run away.

By my life, O Mu'awiyah, if you see with your intellect without any
passion you will find me the most innocent of all in respect of
\`Uthman's blood and you will surely know that I was in seclusion from
him, unless you conceal what is quite open to you (and accuse me of a
crime I have not committed). Then you may commit any outrage (on me) as
you wish and that is an end to the matter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ بَايَعَنِي الْقَوْمُ الَّذِينَ بَايَعُوا أَبَا بَكْر وَعُمَرَ
وَعُثْمانَ عَلَى مَا بَايَعُوهُمْ عَلَيْهِ، فَلَمْ يَكُنْ لِلشَّاهِدِ
أَنْ يَخْتَارَ، وَلاَ لِلغَائِبِ أَنْ يَرُدَّ، وَإنَّمَا الشُّورَى
لِلْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالاْنْصَارِ، فَإِنِ اجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى رَجُل
وَسَمَّوْهُ إِمَاماً كَانَ ذلِكَ لله رِضىً، فَإِنْ خَرَجَ عَنْ
أَمْرِهِمْ خَارِجٌ بِطَعْن أَوْبِدْعَة رَدُّوهُ إِلَى مَاخَرَجَ منه،
فَإِنْ أَبَى قَاتَلُوهُ عَلَى اتِّبَاعِهِ غَيْرَ سَبِيلِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ، وَوَلاَّهُ اللهُ مَا تَوَلَّى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَعَمْرِي، يَا مُعَاوِيَةُ، لَئِنْ نَظَرْتَ بِعَقْلِكَ دُونَ هَوَاكَ
لَتَجِدَ نِّي أَبْرَأَ النَّاسِ مِنْ دَمِ عُثْمانَ، وَلَتَعْلَمَنَّ
أَنِّي كُنْتُ فِي عُزْلَة عَنْهُ، إِلاَّ أَنْ تَتَجَنَّى ; فَتَجَنَّ
مَا بَدَا لَكَ! وَالسَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: When all the people of Medina unanimously swore allegiance to Amir
al-mu\`minin, Mu\`awiyah refused to acquiesce apprehending danger for
his own power, and in order to contest Amir al-mu'minin's caliphate he
concocted the excuse that it had not been agreed to unaulmously and that
there fore after cancelling it there should be another general election,
although the caliphate from which (the process of) election was started
was the result of a timely situation. There was no question of the
common vote therein so that it could be called the result of the
people's election. However, it was imposed on the people and assumed to
be their verdict. From then it became a principle that whomever the
nobles of Medina elected would be deemed to represent the entire world
of Islam and no person would be allowed to question it, whether he was
present at the time of election or not. In any case, after the
establishment of the principle, Mu\`awiyah had no right to propose a
re-election nor to refuse allegiance when he had in practice recognized
these caliphates which, it was alleged, had been settled by the
important people of Medina. That is why when he held this election to be
invalid and refused allegiance, Amir al-mu'minin pointed out to him the
(recognized) way of election and demolished his argument. It was a
method known as arguing with the adversary on the basis of his wrong
premises so as to demolish his argument, since Amir al-mu'minin never at
any state regarded consultation (with chiefs) or the common vote to be
the criterion of validity of the caliphate. Otherwise, in connection
with the caliphate about which it is alleged that they were based on the
unanimity of the muhajirun and the ansar, he would have regarded that
unanimity of vote as a good authority and held them as valid; but his
refusal for allegiance in the very first period, which cannot be denied
by anyone, is a proof of the fact that he did not regard these
self-concocted methods as the criterion of (validity of) the caliphate.
That is why at all times he continued pressing his own case for the
caliphate, which was also established on the basis of the Prophet's
saying and deeds. However, to place it before Mu\`awiyah meant opening
the door to questions and answers. He therefore attempted to convince
him with his own premises and beliefs so that there could be no scope
for interpretation or for confusing the matter, in fact Mu'awiyah's real
aim was to prolong the matter so that at some point his own authority
might get support.


