Letter 71: To al-Mundhir ibn Jarud al-`Abdi
===========================================

*To al-Mundhir ibn Jarud al-\`Abdi who had misappropriated certain
things given into his administrative charge*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن كتاب له (عليه السلام)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى المنذر بن الجارود العَبْدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد خان في بعض ما ولاّه من أعماله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Now, the good behaviour of your father deceived me about you and I
thought that you would follow his way and tread in his path. But
according to what has reached me about you, you are not giving up
following your passions and are not retaining any provision for the next
world. You are making this world by ruining your next life, and doing
good to your kinsmen by cutting yourself off from religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ، فَإِنَّ صَلاَحَ أَبِيكَ غَرَّنِي مِنْكَ، وَظَنَنْتُ
أَنَّكَ تَتَّبِعُ هَدْيَهُ، وَتَسْلُكُ سَبِيلَهُ، فَإِذَا أَنْتَ
فِيَما رُقِّيَ إِلَيَّ عَنْكَ لاَتَدَعُ لِهَوَاكَ انْقِيَاداً، وَلاَ
تُبْقِي لاِخِرَتِكَ عَتَاداً، تَعْمُرُ دُنْيَاكَ بَخَرَابِ آخِرَتِكَ،
وَتَصِلُ عَشِيرَتَكَ بِقَطِيعَةِ دِينِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

If what has reached me about you is correct, then the camel of your
family and the strap of your shoe is better than yourself. A man with
qualities like yours is not fit to close a hole in the ground, nor for
performing any deed, nor for increasing his position, nor for taking him
as a partner in any trust, nor for trusting him against
misappropriation. Therefore, proceed to me as soon as this letter of
mine reaches you if Allah so wills.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ كَانَ مَا بَلَغَنِي عَنْكَ حَقّاً، لَجَمَلُ أَهْلِكَ وَشِسْعُ
نَعْلِكَ خَيْرٌ مِنْكَ، وَمَنْ كَانَ بِصِفَتِكَ فَلَيْسَ بِأَهْل أَنْ
يُسَدَّ بِهِ ثَغْرٌ، أَوْ يُنْفَذَ بِهِ أَمْرٌ، أَوْ يُعْلَى لَهُ
قَدْرٌ، أَوْ يُشْرَكَ فِي أَمَانَة، أَوْ يُؤْمَنَ عَلَى خِيَانَة.
فَأقْبِلْ إِلَيَّ حِينَ يَصِلُ إِلَيْكَ كِتَابِي هذَا إِنْ شَاءَ
اللهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**As-Sayyid ar-Radi says:** al-Mundhir ibn Jarud al-\`Abdi is he about
whom Amir al-mu'minin (peace be upon him) said that:

He looks very often at his shoulders, feels proud in his garments
(appearance) and frequently blows away (dust) from his shoes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال السيد الرضي: وَالمنذر هذا هو الذي قال فيه أميرالمؤمنين (عليه
السلام): إنه لنظّارٌ في عِطْفَيْهِ، مُختالٌ في بُرْدَيْه، تَفّالٌ في
شِرَاكَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>


