Man's Evolutionary Dimensions
=============================

How has man and his society been affected in the past? Has there been an
evolution or at least some progress in all aspects of life? Or has there
been none of it? Or is there a third alternative, namely considerable
progress in some aspects and none or very little in others, not
proportionate with technical advance and social organization? It seems
that in social life, man has not made much advance, and if we assume
technical advance and social organization as the body of a society, and
man 1s social life as its spirit, we must say that while the body has
grown enormously, the spirit has advanced little.

For this reason, views concerning the future are bound to be different.

Man's Future Evolution
----------------------

Some people are doubtful about the future and wonder if there is a
future at all for man and whether he is not threatened with destruction.
This kind of doubt is mostly seen in Western men of learning.

Other groups go a step farther and are quite cynical about man's future
and destiny, They think that his animal nature prevails, showing such
qualities as lustfulness t egoism, selfishness, deceit, falsehood,
oppression etc. They say since the beginning of man's social life,
society has been a scene of evil and corruption, in both periods of
barbarism and civilization.

They believe that neither civilization has brought about any change in
his nature, nor has culture or any other factor. Thus, there is no
difference between the primitive man of early times and the civilized
man of to-day with regard to goals and objectives. The only difference
is the manner of work, and form and appearance.

The primitive man, because of lack of culture and civilization,
committed his crimes more openly and plainly, whereas in modern culture,
the same crimes are covered up by fine words and forms. There is no
difference in the deeds of either of them, except in form and
appearance.
What is the conclusion? They say it is despair and there is no remedy
for it. (Fortunately most of us think otherwise) Does the solution lie
in a collective suicide?

Suicide as a Wrong Logic
------------------------

It is strange to say that a human being who has attained cultural
maturity should commit suicide. This attitude is prevalent in Europe in
various shapes. Statistics show that in spite of all the comfort that
exists in the civilised world, the number of suicides is increasing.
Such statistics are published in newspapers from time to time.

This Hippiism, which is another social phenomenon, is a reaction against
civilisation, showing that civilisation has failed to serve and change
mankind. This Hippiism of the West should not be compared with ours, for
they have a philosophy of disgust with civilisation which has not been
able to solve any problem.

The reports of UNESCO about various places show how people resort to
narcotics in those countries as a result of cynicism towards and despair
of humanity.

When man reaches a stage where he finds no remedy even in reform and
revolution, and a change of governmental and economic system is only a
change of form and not of context and spirit, then he resorts to
deviation in his despair.

Scientific Theory
-----------------

The second theory is that man's future is not hopeless and science
resolves social problems. This theory is supported, not by advanced
countries, but by their newly progressed followers. This theory was
suggested by Bitten and others as a remedy for all human sufferings. It
is said that by building a school, you actually demolish a prison, and
by knowledge and freedom, all difficulties are removed.

What are man's difficulties? Ignorance, weakness against nature,
sickness, poverty, anxiety, oppression and greed.

In this theory, there is some truth, for knowledge removes ignorance and
man's weakness against nature and his poverty in so far as it is related
to nature. But not all of man's pains are connected with nature. The
greatest of these pains is due to the relation of man to man, such as
oppression and injustice, or related to man's inherent nature such as
the feeling of loneliness and worry and anxiety, which pains knowledge
has not been able to remedy.

This theory of knowledge as a remedy of all pains has become obsolete in
countries which have advanced in science, but in other countries they
still believe it, and do not realize that there are matters related to
the human aspects of man about which science can do nothing.

Learned men reach a conclusion that science is neutral and cannot offer
a goal for man and cannot elevate his goals. It only helps man acting as
an aid in the direction he has chosen.

Today we see that most of man's suffering from human beings comes from
learned men, not from ignorant men. Has it been the ignorant who
exploited the ignorant in these few centuries? Was it the ignorant who
exploited the learned or vice versa? Knowledge and culture give man an
underÂ­ standing of the world, but this is not enough. There are other
things necessary besides understanding to resolve man's difficulties.

Ideology and Religion Governing Man
-----------------------------------

The third theory is that man should not despair of the future? Why,
then, has he despaired in the past? This view claims that the reason for
it is inability to find the root-cause of human pains. The reason lies
not in ignorance and weakness etc., it lies in the kind of ideology
which rules over man,

According to this theory, in addition to science, culture and
technology, there are also ideology and religion which rule over man and
society. To enable man to combat against his weak points, a change of
ideology is necessary. In the opinion of adherents of this theory, since
man abandoned the early communal system and replaced it with private
ownership causing so much confusion throughout history, and has based
these ideologies on private ownership and class system creating social
systems on their basis, all these problems have existed as long as an
ideology which rules over man dominates him, an ideology which allows
him to exploit other human beings legally and legitimately, such
baseness, disquiet, losses, bloodshed, disputes, wars, homicide and
cruelties and every other kind of wickedness will exist.

All these will be removed only when this ideology is changed, and with a
collective unity all beings will become equal and brotherly. Then, there
will be no oppression, and no fear and anxiety. It is then that man,
parallel with his material and technical evolution, will also gradually
develop in his human dimensions, and with his physical growth he will
attain mental and spiritual growth as well.

Marxism considers all the sufferings to have their root in class
ideology and private ownership, and so an evolved society must be a
classless one.

There are many objections to this view and theory. One of them is
whether a ruling ideology is due to the nature of men, and of dominant
men. Or is it because of the nature of dominant men that ideology has
taken this form? Can you, who believe in objectivity as prior to
subjectivity, say that the ruling class has an oppressive ideology
because such a class has an oppressive nature? Or is it their sense of
profit seeking that causes this? There is this quality in man that he
seeks profit so far as possible. Thus, ideology is a tool in human hand,
and not man as a tool for the ideology created by himself.

If an ideology is changed, human beings remain unchanged and there are
other ways for them. Even with a human and anti-class ideology, man can
carry on the exploitation of other human beings. The point is that with
the changes in systems, man keeps on using his nature to play with those
systems and use them as tools. Do human beings have freedom in the
countries where there is followed a so-called anti-exploitation and
anti-class ideology? Does there exist any equality?

There is no equality in happiness, but there is an equality in
unhappiness. There are social classes but not in the form of economic
strata. Ten million out of two hundred million people hold the rein of
everything in the name of the Communist Party. Do they allow the
remaining one hundred and ninety million to be in the Communist Party?
If they do so, the privileges of the minority will be lost. (Or is it
that the majority dislikes Communism so much that it willingly foregoes
the membership of that Party at the cost of losing those privileges?

In fact, the worst types of suppressions and miseries take place in the
name of an anti-class ideology, whereas actually a new class is formed
without being called so.

Moreover, if an ideology is only a view or a philosophy, has this view
or philosophy the power to change human nature? Never!

Why is knowledge unable to change human nature? Because knowledge is
only understanding and awareness. An ideology whose elements are only
recognition without having an element of faith, namely inclination,
cannot affect human nature.

A view so long as it remains only a view or philosophy and is related to
human mind and understanding, has no effect on human nature. It is only
a way of distinguishing one's interests more clearly and becoming more
far-sighted.

But it cannot provide a higher understanding, and if human nature lacks
a higher goal, how can man find such a goal? When thought has no
genuineness, it cannot control man. Therefore, Marxism must necessarily
admit such realities as nature, faith, true morality etc. in order to
resolve the problem of inclination.

World Vision Concerning Man
---------------------------

To resolve this problem, Marxism has resorted to a view called
"Pensialism", which is similar to materialistic world vision, but with a
proposal to remove the defect in Marxism. As such things as humanism and
human values, and matters such as peace, justice and moral principles
are considered as idealistic and worthless in Marxism, "Pensialism"
attributes some importance to human values in order to create a basis of
inclination as something which would attract man and provide higher
goals for him than materialistic ones.

But what are these human values that they declare in a materialistic
world? You claim that the world is a mass of matter, material actions
and reactions, and there exists nothing else. Thus, man, too, is only
his physical side and has no other reality, and what can be related to
this material aspect is profit. For him food, clothes, dwelling, and
sexual matters are objective things. Where, then, have 'human values'
come from? The answer they give is that man himself has created them.
They are not independent entities, but as man possesses will power, he
can create values which have no existence of their own.

This is a most comical and stupid theory! How do you create these
values, when you consider man to lack generosity, chivalry,
self-sacrifice and service, and when such things have no meaning and
value in his own essence? If we say to a microphone 'I give you the
value of gold', will it become gold? Iron is iron and its reality cannot
be changed by man, Granting value in the sense of creating and giving
objective reality has no meaning; but as a credible reality it finds all
meaning.

This subject is not found in any oriental and occidental philosophy, and
is only discussed by scholar Tabatabai in his book, "Introduction to the
principles of philosophy method of realism," saying that credible
matters like hypothetical and conventional subjects can only be used as
tools.[^1]

Suppose a man from abroad has come to Iran. We can, by agreement, make
him Iranian and grant him all the rights of a citizen of Iran. This
agreement is based on credit which may be used as a tool, but not as a
goal. If a man wants his wife who is ugly to be beautiful, can he credit
her with beauty, and love her as a beautiful woman? This is like
creating an idol and then worshipping it. The Qur'an says in Chapter
Saffat (the Rangers) Verse 95:

***"What! Do you worship what you hew out?"***

Human goal must have a reality beyond credit and supposition. Thus,
saying that man creates his own values is nonsensical.

Here then the final school presents itself as a school which is not
cynical about human nature

It says that the testimony of man against human nature to the effect
that it is based on evil and corruption is the unjust and ignorant
testimony that the angels gave about man before his creation and which
God rejected as untrue. The Qur'an speaks about this as follows in
Chapter Baqarah (the cow) Verse 30:

***"And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the
earth a caliph (or viceroy), they said: What! Wilt Thou place in it such
as shall make mischief in 1t and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise
and extol Thy holiness? He said: Surely I know what you do not know."***

Thus God answers those who objected to the creation of man that they had
only noticed his natural and animal inclination while they were unaware
of his human and divine aspect. He said that we had placed in him love
of truth, desire to seek truth, endeavour, love of justice and freedom.
This being is a mixture of darkness and light.

Can an ideology which safeguards the interests of a group only, guide
man? Or an ideology which is only a philosophy lacking the reality of
man and his spiritual inclinations lead him?

They claim that man has no inclination towards anything and anywhere in
his essence, and is solely a materialistic creature; or that he assumes
a value for himself and then worships it, These are nonsense; man should
know himself. It is an insult to the position of humanity to consider
all the efforts of man in the past to be in the direction of individual,
group or national interests.

The Conflict of Right and Wrong throughout History
--------------------------------------------------

There are two natures of darkness and light inherent in man, and each
individual is engaged in a crusade within himself for the victory of one
of these two natures. Those who have placed their mental and scientific
powers form the group and flank of right in society and are supporters
of truth and justice. And those who have supported wrong constitute the
animal and decadent group. These two groups have had a perpetual clash
throughout history; and as the Qur'an says, the most magnificent
conflicts of human beings has been between the followers of right and
wrong.

What do followers of right and wrong mean? A man who is liberated from
outside nature, from other beings and from his own animal side, and has
attained divine faith and ideal, is a follower of right, and he is
different from a decadent, and mean seeker of profit who is a follower
of wrong.

The Qur'an beautifully expresses this difference and contrast in Chapter
Maidah (Food) Verses 26-30:

***"And relate to them the story of the two sons of Adam with truth when
they both offered an offering, but it was accepted from one of them and
was not accepted from the other. He said: I will most certainly slay
you. (The other) said: Allah only accepts from those who guard (against
evil). If you stretch forth your hand towards me to slay me, I am not
one to stretch forth my hand towards you to slay you surely I fear
Allah, the Lord of the worlds.... Then his mind facilitated to him the
slaying of his brother."***

Thus the slayer is enslaved by his own desire.

The story of Abel and Cain is one of the finest stories in the Qur'an,
showing how a man of faith and ideal and free from social and material
entanglements as well as those of the self becomes stronger and firmer
in his belief, while others turn to mischief and rebellion.

The dispute between Abel and Cain should not be mistaken for class wars,
for; it is not related to materialism. The Qur'an in showing the role of
the oppressors on the other indicates that many wars are the wars
between the followers of faith and profit-seekers. If man possesses
these two aspects, society, too, possesses them. A school which believes
in human values thinks of them as a reflection of divine attributes
inherent in man, which should be discovered by him.

If so, what is the future of man? Should we, like God's angels, be
cynical about it, and say that man has a wicked nature? Should man yield
to suicide, hippyism, narcotics etc.? Or should he wait for miracles
from a class ideology which says that class opposition is the agent of
movement in history and an ideal society is classless?

After man resolves contrasts and removes his defects, he falls on his
way to a higher course which has no limit and no end. Even a prophet has
room for the exaltation which we cannot imagine. It is then the victory
of the love of God over the love of Satan, and man becomes committed and
duty-bound as an intelligent and free being with option and will power.

The conflict between right and wrong continues and society advances to a
point foreseen by the Guardians of God's religion, leading to the rule
of justice which is interpreted to mean the rule of Imam Mahdi.

Thus question of the evolution of man in addition to devotions,
communions, recognition of God, abstention from sins and falsehood,
treason, oppression and slander and beside its social aspects, also
possesses an educational and human side which must be revived in order
to rise above these matters.

This becomes possible only when human struggle comes to possess a basis
of total faith, actual struggle, then, produces spiritual evolution, and
this struggle must begin from within. These are the teachings of
prophets and you cannot find them so magnificently elsewhere.

The Prophet sends an army against external forces and when his troops
return victoriously, the Prophet, welcoming and praising them addresses
them in the following manner:

"Praise be upon you for your victorious return, but there is still
another combat to engage in."

They wonder at this remark and ask him if there is still a greater war.
The Prophet says: (the Qur'an Chapter "Shams" (the Sun) Verses 9-10):

***"He will indeed be successful who purifies it, and he will indeed
fail who corrupts it."***

This call for the understanding of man by himself, and his combat with
the self does not find a place in the teachings of others, for they lack
the capacity for it.

[^1]: Vol. 2, Article 2.


