Preface
=======

***In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This is a survey of one of Prophet Muhammad’s (S.) companions’
biography. He narrated from the Prophet (S.) so many traditions until he
exceeded all the limits, and the Sunni books of Hadith quoted from him
until they exceeded the limits too. We didn’t have any way in front of
this large number of traditions narrated by this man (Abu Hurayra)
except to search for their sources because they concerned our religious
and psychological life directly; otherwise we would leave them and their
sources aside and look for something more important.

This large number of traditions narrated by this man spread in the
branches and fundamentals of the religion that made the Sunni
jurisprudents depend upon widely in dealing with the laws of Allah
(S.w.T.) and the Shari’ah.

It was not strange of them, for they thought that all the companions
were fair and just. And since there was no evidence to prove that, we
had no way save to research on this man and his traditions to be certain
about what concerned the branches and fundamentals of the laws made by
Allah (S.w.T.). This made us obliged to study with scrutiny the
biography of this man (Abu Hurayra) and his traditions. I went too far
in research until the truth appeared in this book and the sun of
certainty shone, thanks to Allah (S.w.T.) for that.

As to Abu Hurayra himself, we will let you see the history of his life
and his psychology as it was exactly. And as for his traditions, we
studied them thoughtfully as quantity and quality and it was not
possible for us, I swear by Allah (S.w.T.), except to deny them as what
his fellows did at his days. You will read that in details at its place
in this book, inshAllah (S.w.T.).

Was it possible for any wise man to accept this large number of
traditions narrated by this man, which were more than all what were
narrated by the four caliphs, the nine mother’s of believers wives of
the Prophet (S.) and all the Hashemites, men and women?

Could an illiterate man, lately became a Muslim and therefore the period
of his companionship with the Prophet (S.) was short, to comprehend from
the Prophet (S.) so much many traditions that the first Muslims and the
relatives of the Prophet (S.) could not?

The good sense and the scientific criterion would not accept a lot of
the plentifulness and the wonders narrated by this man.

The Sunna in its philosophy, its methods and its aspects has certain
characteristics that the wise, men of sense and the linguists know
clearly. When they hear or read something of the Sunna, they find it
distinct according to their common sense and criteria. They find its
aspects and signs distinct too without any doubt or suspect.

The Sunna was higher than to have thorny weeds, by which Abu Hurayra had
stung the good senses and had wounded the scientific criteria before he
distorted the exalted Shari’ah and wronged to the Prophet (S.) and his
umma.

In short, the Sunna was the method of Islam and the law of life,
according to which life must be typical in morals, beliefs, social
relationships, science and literature. So it was no logic to be silent
about this disgraceful intervention in the essence of Islam, which
called for being free from absurd beliefs and superstition, which mind
definitely denied.

So it was necessary to clear the books of Hadith by removing many
traditions narrated by this man that mind does not accept.

I say that and I may see some faces frown, and others shrink away from
me. They may, because of inheritance, upbringing and environment, shrink
away from a fact shone by research different from what they thought that
all the companions were just and fair without testing their deeds and
sayings according to the criteria the Prophet (S.) put for his umma.
Because companionship, in their point of view, was as sanctum and
whoever resorted to, could not be accused of anything whatever he did.
This was unacceptable, against the evidences and far away from
rightness.

In fact, companionship was a great virtue but it did not make the
Prophet’s (S.) companions infallible. Among the Prophet’s (S.)
companions, there were saints, veracious and honest men, as well as the
unknown ones. Also there were the hypocrites, who committed sins and
crimes. The holy Qur’an declared that clearly

***(..and from among the people of Medina (also); they are stubborn in
hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know them).9:101.***

So we can depend upon the just companions and research to be certain
about the unknown ones, whereas the guilty and criminals have no value,
neither they nor their traditions.

This was our point of view about whoever narrated a prophetic tradition.
The holy Qur’an and the Sunna were our guide.[^1] We never excused the
liars even if they were called companions, because it was disloyalty to
Allah (S.w.T.), His Apostle, and people. It was enough for us to depend
upon the jurisprudents, veracious, and virtuous of the great companions
of the Prophet (S.) and his family, whom he (S.) ordered to be at the
same rank with the holy Qur’an and to be the example for the wise.

As a result, we have agreed upon, even we were somehow different at the
beginnings, that the Sunni respected Abu Hurayra, Samara bin Jundub,
al-Magheera, Mu’awiya, Amr bin al-Aass, Marwan bin al-Hakam and the
likes because they (the Sunni) sanctified the Prophet (S.) and those,
who were among the Prophet’s (S.) companions. At the same time we
criticized them just to sanctify the Prophet (S.) and his Sunna just
like an open minded, who understood the meaning of holiness and
glorification.

Of course, after that, he, who denied whoever ascribed to the Prophet
(S.) something unbelievable, was worthier to honor the Prophet (S.) and
worthier to be in the way, which the Prophet wanted for his umma. The
Prophet (S.) had warned that there would be many liars fabricating lies
when narrating untrue traditions and he had threatened them to be in
Hell.

Here I publish this study in the book (Abu Hurayra) for showing the
truth and to purify the Sunna and its ascription to the great sacred
Prophet (S.), who

***(..never speaks out of desire) 53:3,***

to be sincere for the truth in good thinking and honest in consideration
and to be impartial for the sake of the truth according to the
scientific and mental bases, which deny to respect a liar fabricating
lies and ascribing them to the Prophet (S.) and to be exempted from
criticism just because he was one of the Prophet’s (S.) companions. We
deny submitting blindly to the traditions narrated by this man
concerning the prophetic Sunna, which was worthier to be honored because
it is the Prophet’s (S.) mission to the world until the Day of
Resurrection.

No one is to frown or to be depressed when we present this book with an
impartial study, for we respect free thinking and don’t let it be low
under the feet of superstitions and then to be surrounded by an illusory
wall of holiness

***(..with a wall having a door in it; (as for) the inside of it, there
shall be mercy in it, and (as for) the outside of it, before it there
shall be punishment) 57:13.***

We don’t want any face to frown or any one to be depressed, but in fact
we want every one who goes under the black cloud of traditions, that
reached him age after age, to be free from fanaticism and to read this
book thoughtfully

***(Those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it; those are
they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the men of
understanding) 39:18.***

We do not intend with this book, I swear by Allah (S.w.T.), to split the
unity between the different sects of Muslims, which is now going to be
active at these days of waking, but to strengthen it with freedom in
option and belief in order for this unity to be a clearer and better
guided goal. I ask Allah (S.w.T.) for tawfiq.

The mental dignity is the best of dignities that rational people seek
out even if it costs them their money or their lives because it is the
way to glory and the bridge for unity.

But if some of our Muslim brothers turn their face away in disdain, I
ask them just to listen to these simple notes and then to give their
suggestion. They will find us, inshAllah (S.w.T.), more determined to
strengthen the unity between the Muslims in spite of those thorns, which
prick the intellect and sting the conscience.

We will talk about different thoughts here; some of them dealt with mind
and its power and horizon, some touched the belief in its aspects and
meanings, some touched the natures, others were contradictory refuting
each other, some were away from the scientific bases derived from the
essence of the religion and many of them were adulation to the Umayyads
or to the public opinion at those days, and some were of imagination and
insanity. But all of them were away from rightness at all.

One of Abu Hurayra’s wonders is that the angel of death used to come to
people visibly, but when he came to Prophet Moses (a.s.) to take his
life, Moses (a.s.) slapped him, gouged his eye, and sent him back on his
sumpter to his God one-eyed. After this accident, the angel of death
went to people invisibly!

One other wonder of Abu Hurayra’s was the competition between Moses and
the rock. Moses (a.s.) put his cloths on the rock to swim in the sea
away from people. The rock ran away with Moses’ cloths in order to force
him to follow it nakedly as he was born in front of the Israelites in
order to refute the rumor saying that Moses had a hernia. Moses ran
after the rock shouting: “O, rock, my cloths. O rock, my cloths.” The
rock stopped after ending its task. Moses began beating the rock with
his stick severely until he made some scars in the rock. There were six
or seven scars in the rock.

The funniest thing in this tradition was the hesitation of Abu Hurayra
about the number of the scars in the rock, because his piety imposed
upon him not to narrate a tradition unless he was so certain as he was
certain of the sun’s light!

And: the gold locusts falling over Prophet Ayyub (Job) when he was
bathing and that he began to collect them in his cloths.

And: two newborn babies talking with reason and rationality about the
unseen where there was no cause to break the natural rules.

And: a cow and a wolf speaking eloquent Arabic showing that they had
reason, wisdom and knowledge about the unseen where there is no any
cause for challenge and miracles. Abu Hurayra narrated this tradition to
show the virtues of the first and the second caliphs.

And another wonderful superstition: that the Satan came to Abu Hurayra’s
house in three successive nights to steal some food for his hungry
children.

And: that an Israelite nation was lost and after looking for them they
found that they had been turned into mice. The evidence was that when
they were given camel’s milk they did not drink and when they were given
ewe’s milk they drank.

And: that he (Abu Hurayra) was with al-Ala’ with an army of four
thousand soldiers. They came to a bay, which had not been crossed before
them and would never be crossed after them. Al-Ala’ grasped the rein of
his horse and walked above the water! The army followed him without a
foot, a slipper or a hoof becoming wet!

And: his tradition about his haversack, which had a few dates, that he
fed all the army while the dates still as they were. He had been living
by this haversack along the period of the Prophet (S.), Abu Bakr, Omar,
and Othman until it was stolen during the revolution against Othman.

And: his tradition about Dawood (Prophet David), who finished reading
the holy Qur’an in a very short time. He ordered to saddle his horse and
before it was saddled, he had finished reading all the Qur’an. Is that
not like someone’s saying: He put the entire world inside an egg?

In some of his traditions, he dealt with Allah (S.w.T.), glory be to
Him. His imagination made some images for Allah (S.w.T.). Far it be from
Him!

He said that Allah (S.w.T.) had created Adam like His own shape. He was
sixty cubits height and seven cubits breadth. Abu Hurayra diversified in
this tradition. Sometimes he said: If one of you quarreled with another,
let avoid the face because Allah (S.w.T.) had created Adam according to
His image. Another time he said: if someone beat another, let avoid the
face and never say: what an ugly face you have, because Allah (S.w.T.)
had created Adam according to His image. Sometime he said: Adam had been
created according to the image of the Beneficent.

This man was fascinated by his imagination to draw such images for Allah
(S.w.T.) and Adam with skilled literature and instructions, which if we
ascribe to Islam, we will find many strange things that make us laugh
and cry at the same time.

He narrated another tradition saying that Allah (S.w.T.) comes to this
nation in the Day of Resurrection in a shape different from what they
know and says: I am your God. They say: God forbid! We will not move
from here until our God comes to us. If He comes we will know Him. Then
Allah (S.w.T.) comes in the shape that they know and says: I am your
god. They say: You are our God. Then they follow Him.

He narrated that in a long dark story full of imagination, showing Allah
(S.w.T.) in different shapes, disguising, coming and going in dramatic
actions with jokes, dialogues and deception. The tradition made fun of
Allah (S.w.T.) in a way that not only contradicted the Islamic beliefs
and the simplest bases of rationality but also the royal etiquette if we
accept-God forbid-the thought of embodiment, far be it from Allah
(S.w.T.), the Almighty.

And his tradition that Hell will not be full until Allah (S.w.T.) puts
His leg in it! In one of his wonders showing that Hell will be proud on
having the tyrants and disdainful people, while Paradise will be humble
to have poor and miserable people.

And his tradition that Allah (S.w.T.) comes down to the lower sky every
night and says: “Who prays to me, so that I grant him?”

And many others like that which were the cause for the thought of
embodiment to arise at the age of complexity of thoughts, and because of
which many kinds of heresies and errors came out.

\* \* \*

Abu Hurayra narrated many traditions about the prophets (a.s.). He
described them however he liked. In one of those traditions, he
described the terrors of the Day of Resurrection. People resort to Adam
(a.s.) then to Noah (a.s.) then to Abraham (a.s.) then to Moses (a.s.)
then to Jesus (a.s.) in useless clamor, for these prophets (as Abu
Hurayra pretended) are prevented to be intercessors by Allah (S.w.T.),
Who became very angry with them (before) to a degree that He didn’t
become so angry before that nor would be after that because they (the
prophets) had committed sins (invented by Abu Hurayra’s imagination).
Abu Hurayra did not find any way to prefer Prophet Muhammad (S.) except
to defame the other prophets (peace be upon them). Also his tradition
when he ascribed doubt to Prophet Abraham (a.s.) when he says (according
to the Qur’an):

***(And Ibrahim when he said: My Lord! Show me how Thou givest life to
the dead…) 2:260,***

in which Abu Hurayra made Prophet Muhammad (S.) worthier to be doubtful
than Abraham (a.s.) and made Prophet Joseph (a.s.) better than Prophet
Muhammad (S.) for he was patient. He criticized Prophet Lot when he
says:

***(Ah! that I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have recourse
to a strong support). 11:80.***

And his tradition which showed that prophet Solomon (a.s.) broke his
father’s verdict about a baby that two women pretended to be theirs, and
prophet David (a.s.) judged that the baby was the old woman’s. Solomon
(a.s.) said: “Bring me a knife to cut the baby into two halves, one half
for each of them.” The young woman cried: “Don’t do that.” So he judged
that the baby was hers. The contradiction between two prophets about one
of Allah (S.w.T.)’s verdict was unacceptable according to the Islamic
Shari’ah. The funniest part in this superstition was that Abu Hurayra
said that he had never heard of ***sikkeen*** (knife) in his life where
they used to call it ***midya***.

And his tradition that prophet Solomon (a.s.) said: “I will go to bed
with a hundred women tonight that every one of them will give birth to a
boy, who will fight for the sake of Allah (S.w.T.).” The angel asked him
to say ***inshAllah***. He did not say. So no one of his wives gave
birth to a baby save one, who gave birth to half a human being!

And another one about an ant that pinched prophet Moses (a.s.). Moses
(a.s.) ordered his followers to burn the village of the ants. Then Allah
(S.w.T.) inspired to him: “Because of an ant that pinched you, you burnt
a nation, which praised Allah (S.w.T.)!”

And his tradition about Prophet Muhammad (S.) that he harmed, abused,
cursed and whipped innocent ones just because of anger, therefore his
harming, abusing, cursing and whipping them would be a penance for their
sins.

If that was ascribed to Pharaoh, it would be shameful for him. How about
our infallible Prophet (S.)! Some people were cursed by the Prophet (S.)
and they did not deserve forgiveness, could Abu Hurayra force us to love
and respect them as virtuous people? What are the right criteria after
this funny criterion of Abu Hurayra?

In another tradition he said that the Satan came to the Prophet (S.) to
disturb his prayers. Prophet Muhammad (S.) strangled the Satan and
wanted to tie him to a column to let people look at him tied up, but he
remembered Solomon’s (a.s.) saying:

***(He said: My Lord! do Thou forgive me and grant me a kingdom which is
not fit for (being inherited by) anyone after me) 38:35,***

and set him free. And his tradition saying that Prophet Muhammad (S.)
was sleeping and missed the Fajr (dawn) prayer.

And many others, which opened the door to say that the prophets were not
infallible and they might make mistakes. This is unacceptable for it
cancels the real sense and essence of prophecy.

\* \* \*

There was another kind of his traditions showing you the contradiction
clearly. Notice the two traditions of Abu Salama, which he heard from
Abu Hurayra about infection. He denied it in the first one and proved it
in the second. Abu Salama asked him: “Didn’t you say that there is no
infection?” Abu Hurayra denied his first tradition and began to murmur
in Abyssinian.

See his tradition about Solomon (a.s.) and his wives. In one occasion he
said that they were one hundred. Other times he said they were ninety,
seventy, and sixty. All of that were mentioned in the Sahih books.

If you see his tradition about his migration, you will find clearly that
he was a poor hungry bare-footed servant. He served this and that for a
meal. How did he have a servant, about whom he talked in Sham[^2]
(Damascus)? He said (during the reign of Mu’awiya): “When I came to meet
the Prophet (S.), my servant escaped in the way. While I had been with
the Prophet (S.) to pay homage, my servant came in. the Prophet (S.)
said to me: “Is this your servant?” I said: “I set him free for the sake
of Allah (S.w.T.).”

Look at his traditions talking about himself during his living in the
(suffa) [^3] shelter. You will find that he was one of its destitute
inhabitants. He lived in it along the life of the Prophet (S.). It was
his abode day and night, for he neither had a clan nor a house in
Medina. He clothed himself with a woolen piece, which lice crept on. He
tied it around his neck to reach his legs. He gathered it with his hands
in order that his private parts not to be seen. Hunger threw him down
unconsciously between the minbar and the room of the mosque. So
wherefrom did he get a house that he pretended in the last days of his
life? It was a part of a tradition he told in Damascus about himself and
his mother who became Muslim by the Prophet’s (S.) praying for her and
her son-as he said.

Look at his protest against those, who denied his traditions. You will
find it contradictory and invalid that hearings turn away from for its
silliness and minds deny for its uselessness. Abu Hurayra’s evidence
against those, who condemned his traditions was a tradition narrated by
him saying that once he spread his garment in front of the Prophet (S.).

The Prophet (S.) began to ladle knowledge with his hands and put it into
the garment saying to Abu Hurayra: “Join it to your chest.” Abu Hurayra
joined it to his chest and became infallible from forgetting; therefore
he was the best of companions in keeping Sunna in mind and the most
aware of it.

What ridiculous evidence that served his opponents more than to serve
him! It confirmed that what they had ascribed to him was right that he
narrated traditions according to his temper without knowing what he was
saying. But we do not have save Allah (S.w.T.) to judge between us.

It was enough for us that he narrated traditions without seeing or
hearing and then he pretended that he saw and heard. Here is an example:

Abu Hurayra said that one day he entered the house of Ruqayya, the
daughter of the Prophet (S.) and the wife of Othman. She had a comb in
her hand. She said: “The Prophet (S.) was here and left a moment ago. I
combed his hair.”

It was certain that Ruqayya died in the third year of hijra after the
battle of Badr and Abu Hurayra came to Medina and became a Muslim in the
seventh year of hijra after the battle of Khaybar. So where could he
meet Ruqayya and her comb?

\* \* \*

Here is an example of his traditions, which were far away from the
scientific bases of Islam. He said: “Prophet Muhammad (S.) sent us in a
mission and said: “If you find that man and that man (he called them by
names) burn them both in fire.” When we wanted to set out he said: “I
had ordered you to burn those two men in fire, but it is only Allah
(S.w.T.) that may torture people with fire, so if you find them kill
them.”

It was an abrogation of a matter before its time to be achieved. It was
impossible for Allah (S.w.T.) and his Apostle.

He had many incredible and imaginative traditions. We mentioned six of
them at the end of his forty traditions in this book to be examples for
the others.

\* \* \*

He flattered the Umayyads and their assistants servilely. He also
flattered the public opinion at those days very much. We mentioned some
of his traditions in this concern in the later chapters. You may inspect
them impartially to find that he was hungry and wanted to fill his
stomach via inventing traditions for the sake of this and that. He
wanted to satisfy his imagination, an imagination of someone who was
deprived of the pleasures of an ordinary life. He, after that, confessed
that he was a foothold in an age that scorned and starved him and then
he was thrown to an age that satisfied his hunger just to invent
traditions. After that, do we trust in him and depend on him as
evidence? Do we throw our minds and beliefs under his feet
unthoughtfully?

If that was right according to mentality and the Shari’ah, then let Abu
Hurayra and his followers go to their sanctum, which politics erected
and put between traditions and inheritances.

And if that traditions and inheritances were a cause of separation or an
object of disagreement, let them be until the sun rises.

***(I desire nothing but reform so far as I am able, and with none but
Allah is the direction of my affair to a right issue; on Him do I rely
and to Him do I turn) 11:88.***

[^1]: But the Sunni went too far by putting a holy nimbus around whoever
called a companion until they became immoderate. They trusted every one
of them, good or bad. They imitated blindly the freed captives (whom the
Prophet (S.) set free when he conquered Mecca) and every one heard or
saw the Prophet (S.). They denied whoever contradicted them exceeding
all the limits. Refer to pg. 11-15 and pg.23 in our book (the answers of
Musa JarAllah (S.w.T.)).

[^2]: Now Syria, Jordan, Palestine, and Lebanon.

[^3]: A shelter made at a side of the mosque for the destitute and the
poor to live in.


