His Death and His Offspring
===========================

He died in his castle in al-Aqeeq.[^1] He was carried to Medina by the
sons of Othman bin Affan until they reached al-Baqee’ (graveyard) as
kind of gratitude in return for his good thought about their father.[^2]
Al-Waleed bin Otba bin Abu Sufyan, who was the goversor of Medina then,
offered the prayer for the dead instead of Marwan, who was deposed.[^3]
Al-Waleed advanced to offer the prayer, in spite of that ibn Omar, Abu
Sa’eed al-Khudari and other companions were there, to honor Abu Hurayra
in return for his great services for the Umayyads.

Al-Waleed sent his uncle Mu’awiya a letter telling him of the death of
Abu Hurayra. Mu’awiya wrote to his nephew: “Look for his inheritors and
pay them ten thousand dinars. Do them favors and let them be comfortable
in your neighborhood because Abu Hurayra supported Othman and was with
him in the house when he was killed.’’

He died in fifty-seven or (it was said) fifty-eight or fifty-nine of
hijra. He was seventy-eight years old.

As for his offspring, as we knew, he had a son called al-Muharrir and a
daughter. Al-Muharrir had a son called Na’eem, who narrated that his
grandfather Abu Hurayra had a thread with two thousand knots. He did not
sleep until he glorified Allah (S.w.T.) with his two thousand knots
thread.[^4]

Na’eem also narrated from his grandfather that someone had asked the
Prophet (S.): “What do you advise me to trade with? The Prophet (S.)
said to him: “Deal with cloth! Because the dealer of cloth wishes people
to be always in good and wealth.”

Ibn Sa’d mentioned al-Muharrir in his Tabaqat and said that he narrated
a little traditions and that he died during the reign of Omar bin Abdul
Aziz.

[^1]: It was mentioned by ibn Hajar in al-Issaba, ibn Abdul Birr in
al-Isstee’ab, ibnul Hakim in al-Mustadrak and other historians.

[^2]: Refer to ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol.4, pg.63 (Abu Hurayra’s
biography).

[^3]: Refer to Isstee’ab, Issaba, Tabaqat and al-Mustadrak (Abu
Hurayra’s biography).

[^4]: Refer to Hilyatul Awliya’, vol.1, pg.380 and 383.


