Conclusion
==========

Let us conclude our book with two words the Prophet (S.) had said wisely
as evidence to prove the aberration of those deviants in order to warn
people from them.

**The first word** concerned Abu Hurayra, ar-Rahhal bin Unfuwa and
al-Furat bin Hayyan. Once when they went out from the Prophet (S.)
meeting, he said referring to them: “The thirst of one of you in Hell is
greater than the other’s. He has a perfidious mind.”[^1]

Abu Hurayra and al-Furat often said after that[^2] that they didn’t feel
safe until ar-Rahhal renegaded and was killed with Musaylama the Liar.

As if they (Abu Hurayra and al-Furat) tried to interpret the Prophet’s
(S.) saying to refer to ***one*** of them only as ar-Rahhal renegaded
and joined Musaylama after the death of the Prophet (S.).

They confused the truth of the Prophet’s (S.) saying when he
generalized. It was like the sayings of Allah (S.w.T.):

***(Does one of you like that he should have a garden of palms and
vines) Baqara*** 2:266,

***(one of them loves that he should be granted a life of a thousand
years) Baqara*** 2:96,

***(And when one of them is given news of that of which he sets up as a
likeness for the Beneficent God) Zukhruf*** 43:17,

***(And when a daughter is announced to one of them his face becomes
black and he is full of wrath)*** ***Nahl*** 16:58

and many other examples in the Qur’an, the Sunna and the speech of the
Arabs. The Arabs said in their praise: (The hand of one of them rains
with gold. The heart of one of them overflows with compassion) and they
said in their dispraise: (The face of one of them is a symbol of
impudence. The heart of one of them is harder than the rocks). So the
Prophet’s (S.) saying didn’t concern a certain one of the two (Abu
Hurayra and al Furat) but it concerned all three. This was the fact of
the tradition.

If the Prophet (S.) wanted to refer to a certain one of those three, he
would show that clearly by mentioning his name or a distinguishing
aspect and wouldn’t say a confused tradition, which was not possible for
the Prophet (S.), because the innocent ones would be wronged. So if it
was known that one of them was perfidious and he would be in Hell
without knowing exactly who he was, the three of them would participate
in the verdict. After that it was not to trust or depend upon their
sayings or witnesses and not to entrust them with any of the Muslims’
affairs. They would be forbidden from the civil rights in Islam and the
umma had to avoid them in whatever concerned truthfulness and fairness
according to the Islamic rule about suspicions. That was enough evidence
to renounce the three of them.

Definitely the Prophet (S.) would define the perfidious one, who would
be in Hell, and wouldn’t let the innocent ones suffer his prediction as
long as they lived besides the bad thought of people about them.
Certainly he wouldn’t do that, unless the three of them were the same.

If you say: the Prophet (S.) might refer to ar-Rahhal by saying
something or pointing to him and that was unknown to us.

We say: if there was something of that, it would not be unknown for Abu
Hurayra and al-Furat, who didn’t find anything to make them feel safe
except when ar-Rahhal renegaded then they prostrated to thank Allah
(S.w.T.). After that they often said that they hadn’t felt safe until
ar-Rahal did so.[^3]

If you say: the Prophet (S.) said that in general before ar-Rahhal
renegaded and joined Musaylama the Liar and was killed with him. Hence,
after ar-Rahhal did so, it became clear that he himself, whom the
Prophet (S.) did mean by his tradition without the other two.

We say first: it was understood from the Prophet’s (S.) saying: “..one
of you..” that it referred to the all without exception as we explained
before and quoted some similar examples from the holy Qur’an. It had
nothing to do with the renegade of ar-Rahhal for he was bad before that.
So were his two friends.

Second: it was impossible for the prophets (a.s.) to hide the truth when
it was required or to delay it until its time elapsed. The time in this
case related to the same moment of uttering this word by the Prophet
(S.). If anyone of these three deserved any respect or regard, the
Prophet (S.) would declare the perfidious one of them by the name. In
fact since they became Muslims, they were suspected of their traditions,
witnesses and everything else. If it was not necessary to renounce the
three of them, the Prophet (S.) would show the name of one of them
before he died. He would not leave the matter for the renegade of
ar-Rahhal to explain his tradition!

Third: al-Furat bin Hayyan was a spy for the polytheist and an eye for
Abu Sufyan to spy on the Prophet (S.) and the Muslims. When the Muslims
wanted to kill him according to the Prophet’s (S.) order, he declared to
be a Muslim in order to spare his life. The Prophet (S.) said:[^4]
“There are some of you, I gift them to remain Muslims. One of them is
al-Furat bin Hayyan.” So he was as bad as ar-Rahhal. Then how could we
decide that the Prophet (S.) referred in his tradition to ar-Rahhal and
not to al-Furat, who became a Muslim just to spare his life or Abu
Hurayra, who had booked his ticket to Hell before his two friends
according to the Prophet (S.) saying: “Whoever ascribes a fabricated
tradition to me, is to occupy his seat in Hell.”

**The second word** concerned Abu Hurayra, Samara bin Jundub al-Fazari
and Abu Mahthoora al-Jumahi, whom the Prophet (S.) warned one day by
saying: “The last of you to die will be in Hell.”[^5]

It was a wise method of the Prophet (S.) to discard the polytheists from
participating in the Muslims’ affairs. Since the Prophet (S.) knew the
hidden reality of those three men, so he wanted to infuse into the minds
of his umma the doubt about them to avoid them in order not to entrust
any one of them with a task that had to be done by a trusty believer.

He said that one of them, who was to die the last, would be in Hell
without defining a certain one of the three of them. Days and nights
elapsed and the tradition remained as it was without any definition or
addition until the Prophet (S.) joined his Exalted Lover in the best
world. Then the umma had to discard them all from any position
concerning the believers and to prevent them the rights according to the
traditional and rational rule about suspicions. If the three were not
the same in this matter, the Prophet (S.) definitely would define one of
them.

If you say: there might be a definition about one of them but it became
unknown for us because of the long period.

We say: if it was so, not all of those three would be so afraid from
this warning.[^6]

There was no any difference in this matter if there was no definition or
it became unknown. All the three men shared the same verdict of the
Prophet (S.); therefore it had to be applied to anyone of them.

If you say: the Prophet (S.) said that in general before the first and
the second died. After their death it became clear that he, who remained
after them, was the intended one to be in Hell. So there was no any
problem.

We say first: you knew well as we had said before that it was impossible
for the prophets to hide the truth when it was required or to delay it
until its time elapsed. You knew, too, that its time was related to the
same moment of uttering this warning. If one of these three men was
virtuous or regardable, the Prophet (S.) would show that by defining one
of them in order not to wrong the other innocent ones. The Prophet (S.)
was far away from preventing someone his right or disgracing someone,
who was innocent and didn’t deserve to be disgraced and to remain
disgraced until he died without knowing his innocence except if he died,
according to this null supposition, before his two friends.

Second: we, by Allah (S.w.T.), tried our best in researching and
inspecting to know who was the last of them in dying but we couldn’t
because the sayings about the dates of their deaths were confused and
contradicted.[^7]

Third: the great characters and the high morals of the Prophet (S.), who
(became grievous when the believers fell into distress, excessively
solicitous about them and had compassion on them)[^8], would not face
those, whom he respected, with this severe saying (the last of you to
die will be in Hell). It was not possible for him, who had the sublime
morality, to overtake someone innocent and didn’t deserve to be
overtaken by such severe saying (the great thirst of one of you in
Hell.). If one of these three men (or those) was good, the Prophet (S.)
would not include him in this hard surprise and cruel defiance, but the
revelation obliged him to do so for the sake of Allah (S.w.T.) and the
umma because

***(Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is
revealed)*** 53:3.

It was enough for Abu Hurayra to be in his disgrace, which the prophetic
traditions put him in. Let you yourself decide when you see the crimes
committed by Samara; his horrible excessiveness in shedding the Muslims’
bloods,[^9] selling wine publicly,[^10] doing wrong to al-Ansari,
disobeying the Prophet (S.) when he invited him to reconcile between him
and a man in a case happened between them about Samara’s date-palm,
which was inside the house of that man. The Prophet (S.) promised him to
have one in Paradise instead of that but he refused in a way showing
that he wasn’t faithful.[^11] Once he wounded the head of the Prophet’s
(S.) she-camel disdainfully and scornfully, besides his many other bad
deeds.

As for Abu Mahthoora, he was one of the freed captives and one of those,
whom the Prophet (S.) gifted to attract them to Islam in order to be
safe from their plots against the Muslims. He became a Muslim after the
Prophet (S.) had conquered Mecca and after he had come back from the
Battle of Hunayn victoriously against the big tribe of Hawazin. At that
time no one was more hated to Abu Mahthoora than the Prophet (S.) and
his orders.

He often mocked at the Prophet’s (S.) caller, who announced azan, and
imitated him loudly in ridiculous manner. But the purse of silver, which
the Prophet (S.) used to give him, and the booties of Hunayn, which the
Prophet (S.) granted to the freed captives of his enemies, who fought
against him and his great morals that embraced whomever declared the
shahada, with his severity towards those, who didn’t declare it, all
that made the Arabs became Muslims group by group. And so Abu Mahthoora
and his likes were obliged unwillingly to become Muslims. He didn’t
immigrate to Medina until he died in Mecca.[^12] Allah (S.w.T.) knew
well this man’s hidden intentions!

One word remained that was said by ibn Abdul Birr about this warning
concerning these three men. He said in his book al-Istee’ab about Samara
bin Jundub: “He died in Basra during the reign of Mu’awiya in
fifty-eight of hijra. He fell into a pot full of hot water, which he was
to sit on as treatment because he suffered from bad tetanus, and died.
That confirmed the Prophet’s (S.) saying to him, Abu Hurayra and to a
third one with them: “The last of you to die will be in (fire) Hell.”

It was an odd interpretation, which the text didn’t mean. No one
understood it in this way even the three men, who were meant by this
tradition, didn’t doubt about its meaning, therefore each of them
wished, as it was mentioned by the historians, to die before his two
friends. It was not certain that Samara died after the other two. Ibn
Abdul Birr said that he died in fifty-eight of hijra whereas Abu
Hurayra, according to the sayings of al-Waqidi, ibn Numayr, ibn Obayd,
ibnul-Atheer and others, died in fifty-nine, in which Abu Mahthoora died
too. It was also said that Abu Mahthoora died in seventy-nine.
Ibnul-Kalbi said that Abu Mahthoora died after Samara. So the
justification of ibn Abdul Birr about this tradition was but nonsense.

This was the last of what we wanted to say in order to clarify the holy
Sunna from the disgraceful defects ascribed to the essence of Islam and
its high soul. Thanks to Allah (S.w.T.), who made us succeed to do this
simple work, which we pray Allah (S.w.T.) to be of use for the believers
and to make it as relic in the day of Resurrection.

Allah (S.w.T.)’s blessing and peace be upon the master and the last of
the prophets, his progeny and his auspicious companions.

This book was completed in Soor[^13] on Thursday, twenty-three of
Ramadan, 1362 AH, corresponding to twenty-three of September, 1943, by
the author, who looks forward to the mercy of Allah (S.w.T.), Abdul
Hussayn bin[^14] the sharif Yousuf bin the sharif Jawad bin the sharif
Isma’eel bin Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Sharafuddeen, whose name was
Ibrahim, bin Zein al-Aabideen bin Ali Nooruddeen bin Nooruddeen Ali bin
Izziddeen al-Hussayn bin Muhammad bin al-Hussayn bin Ali bin Muhammad
bin Tajuddeen, who was famous as Abul Hasan bin Muhammad, whose surname
was Shamsuddeen, bin Abdullah, whose surname was Jalaluddeen, bin Ahmed
bin Hamza bin Sa’dullah bin Hamza bin Abus-Sa’adat Muhammad bin Abu
Muhammad Abdullah, the head of the chiefs of the Talibites[^15] in
Baghdad, bin Abul Harth Muhammad bin Abul Hasan Ali, who was famous as
ibnud Daylamiyya, bin Abi Tahir Abdullah bin Abil Hasan Muhammad
al-Muhaddith bin Abit Tayyib Tahir bin al-Hassan al-Qat’ei bin Musa Abi
Sibha bin Ibrahim al-Murtadha bin Imam al-Kadhim bin Imam as-Sadiq bin
Imam al-Baqir bin Imam Zeinul Aabideen bin Imam Abi Abdullah al-Hussayn,
the Master of the martyrs, the grandson of the Prophet (S.) and the son
of Amirul Mu’mineen, the master of the guardians, Ali bin Abu Talib.
Allah (S.w.T.)’s blessing and peace be upon the Prophet (S.) and all of
his progeny.

[^1]: Refer to Saif bin Omar in his Futooh from Ahmad bin Furat bin
Hayyan, also refer to al-Issaba and al-Isstee’ab (biography of Furat).
Also it was mentioned by other historians.

[^2]: Refer to al-Issaba and al-Isstee’ab (al-Furat biography). It was
mentioned by other historians, too.

[^3]: Their prostration and saying such were mentioned in al-Isstee’ab,
al-Issaba and in other history books.

[^4]: Refer to al-Istee’ab and al-Issaba (Biography of Furat). Al-Hakem
in his Mustadrak, vol.4, pg.366 mentioned that al-Furat was a spy and an
ally of Abu Sufyan. The Prophet(s.a.w.) ordered to kill him. He passed
by some of the Ansar and said: “I am a Muslim.” They said to the
Prophet(S.) that he said he was a Muslim. The Prophet said: “There are
some of you that we consign them to their pretended faith. One of them
is al-Furat bin Hayyan.’’

[^5]: Refer to al-Issaba and al-Istee’ab (biography of Samara bin
Jundub).

[^6]: As it was clear for those, who inspected their affairs in this
concern in the historians’ books.

[^7]: One of the historians said that Samara had died in fifty-seven of
hijra and Abu Hurayra had died in fifty-nine. This was contradicted by
another saying that Abu Hurayra had died in fifty-seven of hijra and so
on for the rest of the historians’ sayings. But the more alike of the
sayings showed that all of the three had died in fifty-nine without
specifying the month and the day of their deaths.

[^8]: As Allah (S.w.T.) described him in the Qur’an.

[^9]: Refer to Sharh an-Nahj al-Hameedi, vol.1, pg.363 to see the
details of that. Refer to at-Tabari’s Tareekh, the events of the year
fifty of hijra and chapter eight in our book al-Fusool al-Muhimma.

[^10]: Refer to Ahmed’s Musnad, vol.1, pg.25.

[^11]: Refer to Sharh Nahjul Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.1, pg.363.

[^12]: Refer to al-Issaba (biography of Abu Mahthoora).

[^13]: The souther city Tyre in Lebanon.

[^14]: Bin and ibn mean the son of.

[^15]: Related to the progeny of Abu Talib.


