His Early Life, Becoming Muslim and His Companionship with the Prophet (S.)
===========================================================================

He was born in Yemen and grew up there until he was over thirty years
old.[^1] He was so ignorant that he had not a bit of insight, nor a
little perception. He was a pauper forgotten by the age, an orphan hit
by poverty, serving this and that, man or woman just to fill his
stomach,[^2] barefooted, naked, contented with this disgrace, comforted
with his condition.

But when Allah (S.w.T.) had confirmed His apostle’s mission in Medina
after the battles of Badr, Uhud and al-Ahzab and so and so, there was no
way for this miserable pauper to go in but that of Islam. He migrated to
pay homage to the Prophet Muhammad (S.) after the battle of Khaybar in
the seventh year of hijra according to all of the historians.

As for his companionship with the Prophet (S.), it was three years as he
declared in one of his traditions mentioned by al-Bukhari. [^3]

At The Time of The Prophet (S.)
-------------------------------

When Abu Hurayra became a Muslim, he joined the destitute of Suffa who,
as Abul-Fida’ said in his book at-Tareekh al-Mukhtassar (brief history),
were poor people with no houses or relatives. They slept in the mosque
and they stayed in it at the time of the Prophet (S.). Suffa was their
shelter, so they were called by that name (ahl us-suffa). When the
Prophet (S.) had his dinner, he invited some of them to dine with him
and sent some others to dine with his companions. One of the famous
inhabitants of suffa was Abu Hurayra. [^4]

Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani said in his book Hilyatul-Awliya’[^5] that Abu
Hurayra was the most famous inhabitant of suffa. He lived in it along
the life of the Prophet (S.) and he did not move out. He was the
introducer of the suffa

He told about himself that he was one of the destitute inhabitants of
the suffa, in a long tradition mentioned by al-Bukhari. [^6]

Abu Hurayra said as in al-Bukhari’s Sahih[^7]: “I saw seventy of the
inhabitants of suffa[^8], no one of them had a dress on him. They either
had loincloth or a piece of cloth tied to their necks, some reached half
of their legs and some reached their heels, which they gathered in order
that their private parts not to bee seen.

Al- Bukhari mentioned another long tradition[^9] that Abu Hurayra said
he had kept to the Prophet (S.) just for feed.

And another narrated by Ibnul-Musayyab and Abu Slama that Abu Hurayra
said[^10]: “I kept to the Prophet just for feed.”

In another tradition, he talked about himself[^11]: I was one of the
suffa inhabitants. Once I remained fasting. I suffered a stomachache. I
went to relieve myself and when I came back I found that the food was
eaten. The rich people of Quraysh used to send food to the suffa
inhabitants. I said: to whom should I go? I was told to go to Omar bin
al-Khattab. I went to him. I found him busy praising Allah (S.w.T.)
after the prayer. I waited until he finished. I said to him: Recite me
some of Qur’an, I do not want save food.

He recited some verses of sura (Aal Imran). He went in and left me at
the door. He was late. I thought he might change his cloths and then
bring me some food. There was nothing of that. I left to meet Prophet
Muhammad (S.). I went with him until we reached his house. He called a
black maid[^12] of his and said to her: “Bring us that bowl.” She
brought us a bowl with a little of eaten food remained at its sides. I
thought it was barley. I ate until I became satiate.”

He often described himself by saying[^13]: “I swear by Allah (S.w.T.),
who there is no God but Him that I slept on the ground and put a rock on
my abdomen because of hunger. Once I sat in their way, by which they
(Prophet’s (S.) companions) got out from the mosque. Abu Bakr passed by
me. I asked him about a Qur’anic verse just to give me some food. He
went away without giving me anything. Then Omar passed by me and I asked
him the same. He went away without giving me any food. Then the Prophet
Muhammad (S.) passed by me. He smiled when he saw me and knew what was
in my mind. He said: “Abu Hirr[^14].

I said: “Here I am.” He said: “Follow me.” He went and I followed him.
He went in his house and allowed me to go in. We found a cup of milk. He
asked: “Where is this milk from? They (household) said: “It is a gift
from someone.” He said: “Abu Hirr, go and invite the inhabitants of
suffa to come”. They were the guests of Islam. They did not have
relatives to live with. When the Prophet (S.) got some charities, he
sent all charities for them and when he got a gift he shared it with
them. I became disturbed. I thought that I was worthier than those of
suffa to have a drink from this milk. I thought that if they came the
Prophet (S.) would order me to give them from the milk. So what could I
get from this milk? I had to obey the Prophet. I went and invited them.

They came and asked permission. They were allowed to go in and take
their seats. The Prophet (S.) said: “Abu Hirr, take the cup of milk and
give them to drink.” I took the cup of milk and began to give one after
the other and they all became satiate until I came to the Prophet. He
took the cup, smiled and said: “Abu Hirr, no one remained except me and
you.” I said: “That’s right.” He said: “Sit and drink.” I sat and drank.
He asked me to drink, too. I drank. He kept asking me to drink until I
said: “I swear by Allah (S.w.T.), who has sent you with the rightness,
that I can’t drink more.” He said: “Show me it.” I gave him the cup. He
praised Allah (S.w.T.) and said, in the name of Allah (S.w.T.), and
drank the leftover.”[^15]

Also it was mentioned in al-Bukhari’s sahih[^16] that Abu Hurayra said:
“I often fainted between the minbar of the Prophet (S.) and the room of
Aa’isha. The comers put their feet on my neck thinking I was mad. But I
was not mad. It was just because of hunger.”

Thujjanahayn (two-winged) Ja’far bin Abu Talib was very charitable,
sympathetic and almsgiver to the poor. He often fed Abu Hurayra when
hungry. So Abu Hurayra supported him and considered him the best of
people after the Prophet (S.), as it was mentioned in al-Issaba
(Ja’far’s biography).

Al- Bukari mentioned[^17] that Abu Hurayra said: “People say that Abu
Hurayra narrated much many traditions. I kept to the Prophet (S.) just
to satisfy my hunger. I neither ate good food nor wore new cloths. I was
not served by anyone. I stuck my abdomen to the ground because of
hunger. I asked some people to recite me a Qur’anic verse, which I
already knew, that they might invite me for some food. The best one for
the poor was Ja’far bin Abu Talib. He took us with him to give us
whatever food was there in his house.[^18]

Al- Baghawi mentioned a tradition narrated by al-Maqbari[^19] that Abu
Hurayra had said: “Ja’far bin Abu Talib liked the poor and sat with
them. He served them and they served him. He talked to them and they
talked to him. Therefore the Prophet Muhammad (S.) called him father of
the poor.”[^20]

At-Tarmithi and an-Nassa’ei mentioned that Abu Hurayra had said: “No
one, who put on shoes, rode sumpters and trod on the ground, was better
than Ja’far bin Abu Talib after the Prophet Muhammad (S.).”[^21]

Suffa was Abu Hurayra’s home, day and night. He did not leave it to any
other place until the Prophet (S.) left this worldly evanescent life and
joined the Beneficent Companion. Before that Abu Hurayra did not achieve
anything that made him be able to fill his stomach save to sit in the
way of the passersby complaining his hunger. No great matter attracted
his attention. He was mentioned neither in war nor in peace. Yes! It was
mentioned that he fled from the army in the battle of Mu’ta.[^22]

He pretended that he was one of the delegation sent to Mecca by the
Prophet (S.) with Imam ´Ali (a.s.) carrying the sura of Bara’a, and that
he was announcing in the day of great hajj until his voice became
hoarse. He had two contradictory traditions about that. You will see
them in their certain chapter of this book, inshAllah (S.w.T.).  
 He pretended that the Prophet (S.) made him almoner to keep zakat of
Ramadan in a long tradition.[^23]

The Age of The First Two Caliphs
--------------------------------

We surveyed the age of the two caliphs, Abu Bakr and Omar bin al
Khattab, and investigated what had happened at their days but we didn’t
find any thing worth mentioning about Abu Hurayra except that Omar had
sent him to be the wali of Bahrain in the year twenty-one of hijra.[^24]
In the year twenty-three the caliph Omar deposed him and appointed
Othman bin Abul-Aass ath-Thaqafi[^25].

The caliph not only deposed him but also he saved from him ten thousand
dinars for the treasury, alleging that he had stolen them, which they
were of the Muslims. It was a famous case. Ibn Abd Rabbih al-Maliki
mentioned (in his book al-Aqd al-Fareed, in the first pages of vol. 1)
that the caliph Omar called for Abu Hurayra and said to him: “You know
well that I had appointed you as wali of Bahrain and you were barefooted
and now came to my ears that you have bought horses for one thousand and
six hundred dinars. Abu Hurayra said: “We had some horses that bore and
gifts that cumulated”.

The caliph said: “I counted your livelihood and income and I found that
it is over than yours and you have to return it”. Abu Hurayra said: “You
can’t do that”. Omar said: “Yes, I can and I will beat you on the back.”
Then Omar got up and beat him with his stick[^26] until he wounded him
and said to him: “Pay the money back.” Abu Hurayra said: “Exempt me for
the sake of Allah (S.w.T.).” Omar said: “That would be if it was halal
and that you paid it back obediently. Have you come from the farthest
lap of Bahrain with people’s taxes to be in your pocket, neither for
Allah (S.w.T.) nor for the Muslims? Omayma begot you just to graze
donkeys.”[^27]

Ibn Abd Rabbih mentioned that Abu Hurayra had said: “When Omar deposed
me in Bahrain, he said to me: “O enemy of Allah (S.w.T.) and enemy of
His Qur’an, did you steal the wealth of the Muslims?” Abu Hurayra said:
“I am not an enemy of Allah (S.w.T.) or His book, but I am an enemy of
your enemies. I did not steal the wealth of the Muslims. Omar said:
“Then how did you get ten thousand dinars?” He said: “We had some horses
that bore, gifts that cumulated and shares that multiplied.” Omar took
the money from me but when I offered the Fajr (dawn) prayer, I asked
Allah (S.w.T.) to forgive him.”

This tradition was also mentioned by Ibn Abul-Hadeed in his book Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, vol. 3[^28], and was mentioned by Ibn Sa’d in his book
at-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Abu Huraya’s biography)[^29]narrated by Muhammad
bin Seereen that Abu Hurayra had said: “Omar said to me: “O enemy of
Allah (S.w.T.) and enemy of his Qur’an, did you steal the wealth of the
Muslims…etc.” Ibn Hijr mentioned this tradition in his book al-Issaba
but he modified it and changed the truth in a way dissented from all the
others in order to purify the fame of Abu Hurayra. But he forgot that he
defamed the man, who beat Abu Hurayra on the back and took his money and
deposed him.

At The Age Of Othman
--------------------

Abu Hurayra became very sincere for the family of Abul-Aass and all the
Umayyads when Othman became the caliph. He adjoined Marwan bin al-Hakam
and flattered the family of Abu Ma’eet, therefore he became an important
person especially after the blockade of Othman’s house during the
revolution against him because that Abu Hurayra was with him in the
house. Hence he obtained bloom after fading and fame after obscurity.

He got an opportunity during that sedition to slip into Othman’s house
and did the family of Abul-Aass and the other Umayyads a favor that had
a great impression upon them and their assistants and it strengthened
their state later on. So they wiped the dust of obscurity from him and
praised him to be well-known. Although they knew that he did not slip
into the house of the caliph to be among the blockaded ones until the
caliph ordered his companions to be quiet and to stop fighting.

The caliph did that just to spare his and his companions’ blood. Abu
Hurayra knew well that the rebellious people did not want but Othman and
Marwan. That encouraged him to be among the blockaded ones.

Anyhow the man seized the opportunity, his deal gained m uch, and his
goods (traditions) sold well. Henceforth the Umayyads and their
supporters listened to his traditions carefully and tried their best to
spread them. At the same time, he told of traditions according to their
wishes.

For example, he narrated that the prophet Muhammad (S.) had said: “Every
prophet had a bosom friend and mine is Othman.”[^30]

He also said[^31]: “I heard the Prophet (S.) saying: “Othman is modest
so the angels become modest in front of him.”

He also said that Prophet Muhammad (S.) had said: “Every prophet has a
mate in Paradise. My mate in Paradise is Othman.”[^32]

Abu Hurayra also narrated that the Prophet (S.) had said: “Gabriel came
and said to me: Allah (S.w.T.) orders you to marry Othman with Um
Kulthoom (the Prophet’s (S.) step-daughter) with a dowry same as to that
of Ruqayya (the Prophet’s (S.) other step-daughter).”[^33]

Abu Hurayra said: “Once I entered the house of Ruqayya, the daughter of
the Prophet (S.) and wife of Othman. She had a comb in her hand. She
said: “The Prophet (S.) was here and just left a moment ago. I combed
his hair. He said to me: “How do you think of Abu Abdullah (Othman)?” I
said: “He is good.” He said: “Grace him, because he is the most similar
to me in morals among my companions.”

He might change the tradition as he did with the Prophet’s (S.) saying:
“There will be a sedition and disagreement after me.” They said: “What
do you order us to do then?” He (S.) said, pointing to Imam Ali (a.s.):
“Keep to the Amir and his companions.”

But Abu Hurayra preferred to flatter the family of Abul-Aass, Abu Ma’eet
and Abu Sufyan, therefore he turned this tradition to Othman[^34] and in
return for that they rewarded him for his favor.

At The Age of Imam Ali (a.s.)
-----------------------------

Abu Hurayra’s voice died down during the reign of Imam Ali (a.s.). He
was wrapped in obscurity again and was about to return to his first
condition. He turned away from Imam Ali (a.s.) and did not try to assist
him. In fact his destination was the laps of Imam Ali (a.s.)’s enemies.

Once Mu’awiya sent Abu Hurayra and an-Nu’man bin Basheer-they were in
Damascus-to Imam Ali (a.s.) asking him to send the killers of Othman to
Mu’awiya in order to punish them for killing Othman. Mu’awiya wanted by
doing so that when they come back to Damascus, they would excuse him and
blame Imam Ali (a.s.), although he knew that Imam Ali (a.s.) would not
send the killers of Othman to him. So he wanted to make Abu Hurayra and
an-Nu’man as evidence in front of people of Damascus to show them that
Mu’awiya had an excuse to fight Imam ´Ali (a.s.).

Mu’awiya said to Abu Hurayra and an-Nu’man: “Go to Ali and ask him to
send us the killers of Othman for he has sheltered them. If he did,
there would be no war between him and us. If he refused, you would be
witnesses against him. Then you come in front of people and tell them of
that”. They went to Imam Ali (a.s.). Abu Hurayra said to him: “O Abu
Hasan[^35], Allah (S.w.T.) has given you a virtue and honor in Islam,
for you are Prophet Muhammad’s cousin. Your cousin (Mu’awiya) has sent
us to you asking you for something to calm down this war and to end the
enmity between you that is to send him the killers of his cousin Othman
to kill them and may Allah (S.w.T.) reconcile you. Hence the nation will
be safe from sedition and disagreement”.

Then an-Nu’man said something like that. Imam Ali (a.s.) said to them:
“Let not talk about that. O Nu’man, tell me about you. Are you the best
of your people (Ansar)[^36] in guidance?” He said: “No.” Imam Ali (a.s.)
said: “All of your people have followed me except three or four deviants
of them. Are you one of the deviants?” An-Nu’man said: “Verily I came to
be with you and to keep to you, but Mu’awiya asked me to tell you that.
I hoped that it would be a cause for me to meet you and I hoped that
Allah (S.w.T.) may reconcile you. If you see other than that, I will be
with you and won’t leave you”.

Historians said that Imam Ali (a.s.) did not talk with Abu Hurayra a
word. He left to Damascus and told Mu’awiya about what happened.
Mu’awiya ordered him to tell people about that. He did and did many
things else that satisfied Mu’awiya.

An-Nu’man lived with Imam Ali (a.s.) and then fled to Damascus and told
its people about what happened…to the end of this incident.[^37]

When it became serious and the war began, the terror entered Abu
Hurayra’s heart to make his legs tremble. At the beginning of that
sedition he didn’t doubt that Ali would win the war, so he cowered to
the ground and disencouraged others in order not to help Imam Ali (a.s.)
by telling untrue prophetic traditions secretly. One of his traditions
then was that he said: “I heard the Prophet (S.) saying: “There will be
a sedition; the sitting is better than the standing and the standing is
better than the walking and the walking is better than the running. Any
one finds a shelter, let him resort to it”.[^38]

Abu Hurayra still as he was until the Kharijites rebelled against Imam
Ali (a.s.) and Mu’awiya became stronger. He occupied Egypt and killed
its wali Muhammad bin Abi Bakr, who was appointed by Imam ´Ali (a.s.).
He began to ravage and make raids against the state of Imam Ali (a.s.).
He sent secretly Bissr bin Arta’a with an army of three thousand
soldiers to Hijaz and Yemen ravaging and spoiling there. They killed,
burnt and tore people savagely. They profaned the laws of Allah
(S.w.T.). They disgraced the honor of women and captured boys and girls
of the Muslims there to blacken the face of history.

After all those atrocities, Bissr extorted homage to Mu’awiya from all
people of Hijaz and Yemen.[^39] Then Abu Hurayra spread what was hidden
in his heart to Bissr bin Arta’a. Bissr found that he was sincere to
Mu’awiya and loyal in taking homage to Mu’awiya from people. Bissr
appointed Abu Hurayra as wali of Medina when he left after ordering
people to obey him. He led people in prayers and thought he was the real
wali until Jariya bin Qudama as-Sa’di came to Medina with two thousand
knights sent by Imam Ali (a.s.). Abu Hurayra was leading people in
offering prayer. He fled. Jariya said:[^40] “If I found Abu
Sannour[^41], I would kill him.”

While Jariya was in Hijaz, he knew that Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred. He
took homage to Imam Hasan bin Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s.) and went back to
Kufa. Abu Hurayra came back to Medina leading prayers[^42] and became
stronger until Mu’awiya dominated.

At The Age of Mu’awiya
----------------------

Abu Hurayra lived the best days of his life during the reign of
Mu’awiya. Mu’awiya realized many of this man’s hopes, so he told
traditions as Mu’awiya liked. He told people incredible traditions about
the virtues of Mu’awiya and some others.

Fabricated traditions exceeded the limits in the state of Mu’awiya
according to what his media wanted and his policies needed to spite the
Hashimites. The state of Mu’awiya had many liars fabricating prophetic
traditions as the Prophet (S.) had warned of. They were advanced in
inventing traditions according to what they were inspired with by the
rulers. The first of them was Abu Hurayra. He told people of abominable
traditions talking about the virtues of Mu’awiya. One of those
traditions was mentioned by Ibn Assakir in two ways, Ibn Adiy in two
ways, Muhammad bin Aa’ith in a fifth way, Muhammad bin Abd as-Samarqandi
in a sixth way, Muhammad bin Mubarak as-Souri in a seventh way and
al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi in an eighth way that Abu Hurayra had said: “I
heard the Prophet (S.) saying: “Allah (S.w.T.) has entrusted three with
His inspiration; me, Gabriel and Mu’awiya!”

And another mentioned by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi that Abu Hurayra said:
“The Prophet (S.) gave Mu’awiya an arrow and said to him: “Take this
arrow until you meet me in Paradise!”

Another mentioned by Abul-Abbas al-Waleed bin Ahmad az-Zouzani in his
book Shajaratul-Aql, in two ways that Abu Hurayra had said: “I heard the
Prophet (S.) saying: “There will be a dome of white pearl with four
doors for Abu Bakr. The wind of mercy flows through it. Its outside is
Allah (S.w.T.)’s pardon and its inside is Allah (S.w.T.)’s contentment.
Whenever he longs for Allah (S.w.T.), a shutter opens to look at Allah
(S.w.T.) through it.”

Another mentioned by Ibn Habban that Abu Hurayra had said: “When the
Prophet (S.) came out from the cave towards Medina, Abu Bakr held his
stirrup. He said: O Abu Bakr, may I tell you good news? In the Day of
Resurrection, Allah (S.w.T.) appears to the creatures in general and
appears to you privately!”

And what was mentioned by Ibn Habban that Abu Hurayra said: “While
Gabriel was with the Prophet (S.), Abu Bakr passed by them. Gabriel
said: It is Abu Bakr. The Prophet (S.) said: O Gabriel, do you know him?
Gabriel said: He is in the heaven more famous than him on the earth. The
angels call him the discerner of Quraysh. He is your minister in your
life and the caliph after your death.”

Another tradition mentioned by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi that Abu Hurayra
said: “Prophet Muhammad (S.) said: The angels rejoiced at the birth of
Abu Bakr. Allah (S.w.T.) looked at the Garden of Eden and said: I swear
by My glory and loftiness that I will not enter anyone into it except
who loved this newborn baby.”

And another one mentioned by Ibn Adiy that Abu Hurayra said: “I heard
the Prophet saying: When I ascended the heaven, in each sky I passed by
I found that it was written; Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah (S.w.T.),
Abu Bakr is…”[^43]

Abul-Faraj ibn aj-Jawzi mentioned a tradition that Abu Hurayra had said:
“The Prophet (S.) told me that Paradise and Hell once prided. The Hell
said to the Paradise: I am better than you for I have the Pharaohs, the
tyrants, the kings and their progenies. Allah (S.w.T.) inspired to
Paradise to say: I am better than you because Allah (S.w.T.) had adorned
me for Abu Bakr.”

And another mentioned by al-Khateeb that Abu Hurayra had said: “One day
the Prophet got out leaning on Ali bin Abu Talib. They met Abu Bakr and
Omar. The Prophet said to Ali: Do you love these two men? Ali(a.s.)
said: yes, I do. The Prophet (S.) said to Ali (a.s.): Love them in order
to enter Paradise!”

Another one mentioned by al-Khateeb in his book History of Baghdad and
by Ibn Shahin in his Sunan in two ways that Abu Hurayra said: “I heard
the Prophet (S.) saying: “There are in the lower heaven eighty thousand
angels asking Allah (S.w.T.) to forgive whoever loves Abu Bakr and Omar
and in the second heaven there are eighty thousand angels cursing
whoever hates Abu Bakr and Omar.”

Another one mentioned by al-Khateeb that Abu Hurayra said: “I heard the
Prophet (S.) saying: Allah (S.w.T.) has seventy thousand angels in the
heaven cursing whoever curses Abu Bakr and Omar.”

All these traditions are untrue. All of those who mentioned them
declared unanimously that they were null.

As-Sayouti arranged all the fabricated traditions according to their
series of narrators and texts in his book al-La’ali al-Massnou’a. But
they always defended Abu Hurayra by blaming the others who narrated from
Abu Hurayra according to their point of view that every Muslim saw the
Prophet (S.) or narrated from him was infallible!

They did the same with all what Abu Hurayra’s imagination had invented,
like his saying: “I heard the Prophet (S.) saying: This is Gabriel
telling me, from Allah (S.w.T.), that whoever loves Abu Bakr and Omar is
a pious believer and whoever hates them is a rogue hypocrite.”[^44]

Abu Hurayra said: “The Prophet (S.) said: Allah (S.w.T.) had created me
of His light and created Abu Bakr of my light and created Omar of the
light of Abu Bakr and created my nation of Omar’s light. Omar is the
lamp of people in Paradise.”[^45]  
 He also said: “I heard the prophet saying: Abu Bakr and Omar are the
best of the first and the last Muslims.”[^46]

And his saying: “The prophet said: My companions are like the stars.
Whoever imitates some of them will be guided.”[^47]

And his saying: “The Prophet (S.) said: There was a chapter in the Bible
describing me and my companions; Abu Bakr, Omar, Othman and Ali… as
seed‑produce that puts forth its sprout…”[^48]

And many others that he let his imagination go here and there to invent.
Al-Bukhari and Muslim’s[^49] books of Hadith had many many of the likes.

The Umayyad’s Favors
--------------------

You will recognise easily the Umayyads’ gifts for this man if you think
of his two conditions; one before their state where he was mean and
subservient, looking at the lice creeping on his garment[^50] and his
condition during their reign where they pulled him out of the mud of
misery and clothed him with silk.[^51] They made him button his cloths
with silk and they clothed him with slender flax[^52]. They built him a
palace in al-Aqeeq[^53]. They surrounded him with their charity and
covered him with their gifts. They spread his mention and announced his
name. They made him wali on Medina, the town of the Prophet (S.)[^54]
and married him, during his rule, to Bissra bint Ghazwan bin Jabir bin
Wahab al-Maziniya, the sister of the Amir Otba bin Ghazwan[^55] and he
wouldn’t dream of that or his imagination would ever think of that,
because he strove to serve her barefooted just for feed.

Mudharib bin Jiz’ said:[^56] “I was walking at night and there was a man
exclaiming (Allah (S.w.T.)uAkbar-Allah (S.w.T.) is the greatest). I
followed him. I found that he was Abu Hurayra. I said: “What is this?”
He said: “I am thanking Allah (S.w.T.). I was employed by Bissra bint
Ghazwan just for my feed. I led their sumpters when they rode and served
them when they got down and now I became her husband. Now ***I*** ride
and when I get down, ***she*** serves me. Before that, when she reached
a plain, she got down and said: “I won’t leave unless you make me
porridge.” Now when I reach the same place I say to her: “I won’t leave
unless you make me porridge.”[^57]

He often said, during his emirate of Medina: “I grew up as an orphan.
When I emigrated I was poor. I was employed by Bissra bint Ghazwan jus
for feed. I led their sumpters when they rode and served them when they
got down and now Allah (S.w.T.) has married me to her. Thanks to Allah
(S.w.T.), Who made the religion as basis and made Abu Hurayra
imam.”[^58]

Once he said: “I was employed by Bissra bint Ghazwan for my feed. She
ordered me to ride erectly and to go barefooted. After that Allah
(S.w.T.) made her my wife. I ordered her to ride erectly and to go
barefooted.”[^59]

One day he led people in prayer and when he finished he said loudly:
“Praise be to Allah (S.w.T.), Who made religion as basis and made Abu
Hurayra imam after he was an employee for Bissra bint Ghazwan for his
feed and a sumpter to ride.”[^60]

One day he ascended the minbar of the Prophet (S.) and said: “Praise be
to Allah (S.w.T.), Who made me eat good food, wear silk cloths and marry
me to Bissra bint Ghazwan after I was her employee for my feed. She made
me carry her baggage and then I made her carry my baggage.”[^61]

Thanking The Favors of The Umayyads
-----------------------------------

The Umayyads enslaved Abu Hurayra by their favours. They appropriated
his hearing, sight and heart and made him tractable. So he was the media
of their policies. He changed according to their tendencies. Sometimes
he invented traditions to show their virtues and sometimes he fabricated
traditions showing the virtues of the two caliphs; Abu Bakr and Omar
according to the wish of Mu’awiya and his oppressive group. For they had
political purposes against Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Prophet’s progeny
(S.), which would not be realised-as they thought-except by preferring
the two caliphs. Hence he advanced in fabricating traditions, which we
mentioned some of.

There were many traditions we didn’t mention, for example, the tradition
about making Abu Bakr Amir of hajj in the ninth year of hijra, the year
when sura of Bara’a was revealed to the Prophet (S.), and the tradition
saying that the angels talked with Omar.

The Umayyad policy of subduing the Hashimites required certifying and
spreading these two traditions as possible as Mu’awiya and his
assistants could. They did by any means they could until all Sunni books
of Hadith (Sahih) mentioned them as true traditions.

Abu Hurayra, sometimes, cut off the traditions concerning Imam ´Ali
(a.s.) to distort their meaning, like his saying: “I heard the Prophet
saying: The sun hadn’t been withheld or returned for anyone except for
Prophet Usha’ bin Noon (Joshua) when he walked towards Jerusalem at
night.”[^62]  
 And his saying: “When the Qur’anic verse (***And warn your nearest
relations)*** 26:214, was revealed the prophet stood up and said: O
people of Quraysh,…” Abu Hurayra cut off the tradition and didn’t
mention all the text to distort it according to what the Umayyad policy
required. We don’t have but to say that there is no power save in Allah
(S.w.T.)!

And his saying: “The Prophet said: My heirs are not to inherit what I
have left.”

And: “Prophet Muhammad (S.) said to his uncle Abu Talib: Say there is no
god but Allah (S.w.T.)…until Allah (S.w.T.) revealed to the Prophet
(***Surely you cannot guide whom you love..)*** 28:56” and many other
fabricated traditions. They used to subdue Imam ´Ali (a.s.) and the
family of the Prophet (S.).

Imam Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi[^63] said: “Mu’awiya had forced some of the
Prophet’s (S.) companions and some of the companions’ successors to
narrate bad traditions about Ali to defame and disavow him. He gave them
bribes for that. So they fabricated what satisfied him. Among them were
Abu Hurayra, Amr bin al-Aass, and al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba. Among the
successors was Urwa bin az-Zubayr..”

Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi also said[^64]: “When Abu Hurayra came to Iraq with
Mu’awiya in the year of (Jama’a), he came to the mosque of Kufa. When he
saw that many people had come to receive him, he knelt on his knees and
hit his head with his hand many times and said: “O people of Iraq, you
say that I fabricate Allah (S.w.T.) and His apostle’s sayings to be in
Hell. I swear by Allah (S.w.T.) that I heard the Prophet saying: “Every
apostle had a sanctum. My sanctum is Medina. Whoever spoils in Medina,
will be cursed by Allah (S.w.T.), the angels and all the people.” I
swear by Allah (S.w.T.) that Ali has spoiled in it! When Mu’awiya heard
him saying that, he endorsed him, rewarded him and made him wali of
Medina.”[^65]

Sometimes he invented traditions defending the Umayyad hypocrites, whom
Allah (S.w.T.) and His apostle had cursed to protect the religion and
umma from their hypocrisy and ravage. But Abu Hurayra flattered Marwan
and Mu’awiya and their assistants by saying: “I heard the Prophet (S.)
saying: “O Allah (S.w.T.), Muhammad is but a human being. He becomes
angry like all the human beings. Every believer I have hurt, abused or
whipped, You may make that as a cause to forgive him and to bring him
closer to You in the Day of Resurrection.”

Marwan and his sons tried their best to spread this tradition in many
ways until the books of Hadith (Sahih, Sunan and Musnad) mentioned it as
true tradition.

The role of Marwan and his sons in raising Abu Hurayra to a high level
and preferring him to all the others in memorising, accuracy and piety,
had had its effect until nowadays.

They had done many things to satisfy people that Abu Hurayra was trustee
and pious.

One of them was that Marwan pretended that he had seated his clerk in a
secret place that he wouldn’t be seen by any one at all and called for
Abu Hurayra to come in. He began to ask him about many things. He asked
him too many questions. Abu Hurayra answered with the Prophet’s (S.)
traditions and the clerk, whose name was Zu’ayza’a, was writing down
without letting any one feel of him. He wrote down too many traditions.
Marwan waited for a year and then called for Abu Hurayra and asked him
the same questions. He answered with the same answers, no word more no
word less. Marwan and his clerk spread this lie among the people of
Damascus to reach everywhere until al-Hakim mentioned it in his book
al-Mustadrak, vol. 3, pg. 510.

And that when Marwan wanted to bring his knights and soldiers in order
not to let the Hashimites bury Imam Hasan beside his grandfather,
Prophet Muhammad’s tomb, he preconcerted with Abu Hurayra that the
latter would oppose Marwan and blame him hardly in front of people to
deceive them and to make them perceive that Abu Hurayra was a veracious
man. He didn’t fear anyone save Allah (S.w.T.) and His apostle and that
no one could stand against him when he became angry for the sake of
Allah (S.w.T.) and His apostle.

When Abu Hurayra did his opposition, Marwan showed his anger. There was
a false argument and untrue rage between them. Abu Hurayra protested
strongly against Marwan justifying that he (Abu Hurayra) had a special
position to the Prophet[^66] which no one of the Prophet’s (S.)
companions or relatives had and that he had an ability of perceiving and
memorising from the Prophet by which he surpassed the first Muslims like
Omar, Othman, Ali, Talha, az-Zubayr and the others. He let himself go
farther in describing his aspects, which imposed for him the highest
ranks of the close companions. So the disagreement between them ended
and Marwan submitted to the great position of Abu Hurayra in Islam and
his high rank of knowledge in Sunna. All that happened in front of
people. The plan succeeded and Marwan would use Abu Hurayra as a means
to fight Imam Hasan, Imam Hussayn, their father and their sons. It was
the most successful propaganda for their policies. *(Woe, then, to those
who write the book with their hands and then say: This is from Allah
(S.w.T.),* *so that they may take for it a small price; therefore woe to
them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they
earn).* 2:79.

[^1]: I came from (Yemen) while the Prophet (S.) was in Khaybar. I was,
then, more than thirty years old.

[^2]: Abu Hurayra told about himself and said as mentioned in his
biography in Issaba, Hilyatul-Awliya, and other books: “I was a servant
for ibn (son of) Affan and bint (daughter of) Ghazwan. I led their
sumpters when they rode and served them when they got down just for food
to stay alive.”

[^3]: In his Sahih, (pg.182 in author’s copy of Sahih), vol.2 section on
“Signs of prophethood in Islam”. Also mentioned in Abu Hurayra’s
biography in Issaba and Tabaqat.

[^4]: Refer to chap. (The last days of the Prophet’s life) on mentioning
the Prophet’s companions.

[^5]: Vol. 1, pg.376 (Abu Hurayra’s biography).

[^6]: Sahih, first page of vol. 2.

[^7]: Vol.1 chapter of “Prayer”, section on “Sleep of men in mosques”,
pg.60.

[^8]: These seventy of suffa were martyred in the day of (Ma’ouna well)
before Abu Hurayra came to be a Muslim. It was like his tradition when
he said: (I entered the house of Ruqayya and she had a comb in her
hand…) whereas she was dead before his coming to Medina.

[^9]: Sahih, vol.1 chapter of “Knowledge”, section on “Memorizing
knowledge”, pg.24. It was also mentioned by others like Abu Na’eem in
his book Hilyatul-Awliya’.

[^10]: Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.2, pg.1.

[^11]: Abu Na’eem’s Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.378.

[^12]: We never knew or heard that there was a black maid in the
Prophet’s house.

[^13]: Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.4 chapter of “Kind words”, section on
“How the Prophet(s.a.w.) and his companions lived”, pg. 81 and Abu
Na’eem in his book Hilyatul-Awliya’ (Abu Hurayra’s biography).

[^14]: Abu Hurayra: Hirr is cat, Hurayra is kitten .

[^15]: This tradition is mentioned in Al-Bukhari’s Sahih in many places
of the book, which he considered to be one of the miracles of the
prophecy-if it was true-.We don’t know why it was not narrated by any
other than Abu Hurayra, at least by one of those who participated Abu
Hurayra in drinking the milk. Was there any necessity for that challenge
and inimitability? Was it necessary to break the natural rules? Miracles
didn’t happen unless there was a necessity for them, though we believe
in inimitability of Allah (S.w.T.) and His apostles. It is apparent that
this tradition was invented by Abu Hurayra to fawn on ordinary people
especially after the death of the great companions and those whom Abu
Hurayra was feared.

[^16]: Vol.4, chapter of “Seeking Quran and Sunna”, section on “What the
Prophet (S.) has mentioned and encouraged ….”, pg.175.

[^17]: Sahih, vol.2 section on “Virtues of Jafar”, pg.197. It was also
mentioned by Abu Na’eem in his book Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.117.

[^18]: Ibn Abd Rabbuh al-Andalussi mentioned in his book al-Aqd
al-Fareed, vol.1 that Abu Hurayra said: “One day I followed Ja’far bin
Abu Talib and I was hungry. When he reached his house, he turned and saw
me. He asked me to come in. I came in. He thought for a while but he
didn’t find anything to eat except a sack having some butter. He brought
it from on a shelf and opened it between us. We began to lick what it
had while he was citing some poetry: Allah (S.w.T.) has not asked one
more than his ability and a hand doesn’t give generously except what it
has.

[^19]: Refer to al-Issaba by ibn Hajar (Ja’far’s biography).

[^20]: It was also mentioned by Abu Na’eem in his book Hilyatul-Awliya’,
vol.1, pg.117, narrated by al-Maqbari from Abu Hurayra.

[^21]: It was also mentioned by Ibn Abdul-Birr in his book al-Isstee’ab.

[^22]: Refer to al-Mustadrak, vol.3, pg.42, you will find that Abu
Hurayra was blamed for that and he didn’t know what to say.

[^23]: Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.2 chapter of Wikala, section on if a man
gives money to another and asks him to act on his behalf, pg.29.

[^24]: When the wali, al-Ala’ bin al-Hadhrami, who was appointed by the
Prophet (S.), Abu Bakr and Omar, died.

[^25]: It was mentioned in Ibnul-Atheer’s History and by others when
talking about the incidents of this year (23AH).

[^26]: A dry bunch of dates he used to hold in his hand.

[^27]: A proverb. Omayma was his mother’s name. This speech of the
caliph was the worst of abuse.

[^28]: Pg.104,Egypt Print.

[^29]: Vol.4, pg.90.

[^30]: All the intelligent people agreed that this tradition was untrue,
but Abu Hurayra’s friends acquitted him from the falseness by blaming
Iss-haq bin Najee’ al-Balti, who was one of the series of the narrators
of this tradition. Ath-Thahabi mentioned the tradition in his book Mizan
al-I’tidal confirming that it was untrue.

[^31]: Ibn Katheer in his book al-Bidaya wan-Nihaya, vol.7, pg.203.

[^32]: This tradition was false unanimously. But Abu Hurayra’s friends
turned the blame to Othman bin Khalid bin Omar bin Abdullah bin
al-Waleed bin Othman bin Affan who was one of the series of the
narrators of this tradition. Ath-Thahabi denied this tradition in his
book Mizan al-I’tidal.

[^33]: Ibn Munda mentioned this tradition and said that it was odd and
it was narrated by Othman bin Khalid al-Othmani only. Ibn Hajar
al-Assqalani in his book al-Issaba, vol.4 (Um Kulthoom’s biography) said
that it was odd and was not narrated except by Othman bin Khalid
al-Othmani.

[^34]: For this reason, al-Hakim in his book al-Mustadrak, vol.3, pg.99
mentioned this tradition under the subject of (Othman’s virtues). But
the truth was that it must be mentioned in Ali’s virtues, like the
Prophet’s (S.) saying: (There will be a separation and disagreement
among people, so this and his companions will be on the side of
rightness. He pointed to Ali). It was mentioned by at-Tabarani in his
book Kanzul-Ommal, narrated by Ka’b bin Ajra, tradition no. 2635, vol.6.
And the Prophet’s (S.) saying: (There will be a sedition after me (after
my death), so keep to Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s.), because he was the first
who believed in me (in Islam) and he will be the first to shake hands
with me in the Day of Resurrection. He is the great veracious and he is
the distinguisher of this nation). It was mentioned by Abu Ahmed, Ibn
Munda and others, narrated by Abu Layla al-Ghifari. It was also
mentioned by Ibn Abdul-Birr in his Isstee’ab, ibn Hajar in his Issaba
and by others in (Abu Layla’s biography). And the prophet’s saying to
Ammar bin Yassir: (O Ammar, if you see Ali going through a valley and
the rest of people going through another valley, follow Ali and leave
people because he neither leads you to a bad fate nor takes you away
from right guidance). It was mentioned by ad-Daylamy in his book
Kanzul-Ommal, vol.6, pg.155, tradition no.259, narrated by Ammar and Abu
Ayyoub. And also the prophet’s saying: (O Abu Rafi’, there will be after
my death a group of people fighting Ali. The duty will be to fight
them). It was mentioned by at-Tabarani in Kanzul-Ommal, vol.6, tradition
no.2589, narrated by Muhammad bin Obaydillah bin Abu Rafi’, from his
father, from his grandfather. There are many traditions like that but we
cannot mention them all here. It is enough for us the prophet’s saying:
(There is someone of you will fight for the interpretation of Qur’an as
I fought for its revelation. People looked up to that, among them were
Abu Bakr and Omar. Abu Bakr said: is it me? The Prophet said: No. Omar
said: Is it me? The Prophet said: No. But he is the mender of the
shoes). It was mentioned by al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.3, pg.122
saying that it was a true tradition according to al-Bukhari and Muslim.
It was also mentioned by at-Thahabi in his Talkheess and by Ahmed in his
Musnad, vol.3, pgs.33 & 82, narrated by Abu Sa’eed and by Abu Na’eem in
his book Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.67 in (Ali’s biography), and abu
Ya’la in his Sunan, and Sa’eed bin Mansour in his Kanz vol.6, pg.155,
tradition no.2585. The traditions talking about the necessity of
fighting the perfidious people (battle of the Camel) and the outlaws
(battle of Siffeen) and the apostates (the Kharijites) were certified
and each confirming the other. The prophetic traditions talking about
the sedition after his death were recurrent and they were of the signs
of the prophecy of Muhammad(S.). They were clear in urging to follow
Imam Ali (a.s.). The tradition mentioned by al-Hakim and narrated by Abu
Hurayra was one of them. What confirmed that was that the Prophet (S.)
hadn’t called anyone with Amir except Ali at all. And here is the
Prophet’s saying to Anass: (The first who enters from this door is
amirul-mu’mineen (commander of the believers) and the master of
guardians…). It was mentioned by al-Isfahani in his book
Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, (Ali’s biography). The Prophet (S.) ordered his
companions to call Ali with amirul-mu’mineen when saluting him. This was
certified by many traditions narrated by the Prophet’s progeny(a.s.).

[^35]: One of Imam Ali (a.s.)’s surnames.

[^36]: (helpers). The people of Medina who believed and assisted the
prophet and his companions when they migrated from Mecca to Medina.

[^37]: This incident was mentioned by Ibrahim bin Hilal ath-Thaqafi in
his book al-Gharat and by Ibn Abul-Hadeed in his book Sharh Nahj
al-Balagha, vol.1, pg.213. Let him who want to know the details refer to
it, to see Mu’awiya’s intentions and an-Nu’man’s malfunction in this
incident. Imam Ali (a.s.) turned away from Abu Hurayra and didn’t talk
to him because he saw that Abu Hurayra was very mean that he flattered
Mu’awiya and sold his faith to Mu’awiya for a short worldly life. Imam
Ali (a.s.) knew what Mu’awiya’s aim was by sending these two men, so he
didn’t answer them, neither positively nor negatively. In fact he turned
away from their demand and talked with an-Nu’man about something else.
It showed his compact policy.

[^38]: It was mentioned by Ahmed bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.2,
pg.282. It was untrue, because Allah (S.w.T.) says: (And if two parties
of the believers quarrel, make peace between them; but if one of them
acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which acts wrongfully
until it returns to Allah (S.w.T.)'s command..) 49:9.

[^39]: Refer to Sharh an-Nahj al-Hameedi, vol.1, pg.116-121 for details.
All the historians, who wrote about the incidents of the year forty of
hijra, mentioned this event committed by Mu’awiya. It is famous like
battles of Harra and at-Taff of his son Yazeed.

[^40]: Mentioned by Ibrahim bin Hilal ath-Thaqafi in his book al-Gharat
and Ibn Abul-Hadeed in his book Sharh Nahjul-Balagha , vol.1, pg.128.

[^41]: In Arabic (sannour) means cat. Jariya meant Abu Hurayra.

[^42]: Mentioned by Ibnul-Atheer in his book at-Tareekh al-Kamil, vol.3,
pg.153.

[^43]: Also mentioned by al-Khateeb in his book History of Baghdad,
vol.5, pg.445.

[^44]: This tradition was considered to be untrue unanimously.
Ath-Thahabi mentioned this tradition in his book Mizan al- I’tidal (in
Ibrahim bin Malik al-Ansari’s biography) and said that it was untrue.
Every one used nullity to fight the rightness, he, no doubt, would lose.

[^45]: This tradition was also considered to be untrue unanimously.
Ath-Thahabi mentioned it in his book Mizan al-I’tidal (biography of
Ahmed as-Samarqandi). Refer to it to see that it was untrue and that it
contradicted the holy Qur’an. And they lost, who wanted to hide the
clear rightness by the shameful nullity.

[^46]: This is like the two previous in nullity. Ath-Thahabi mentioned
it in Mizan al-I’tidal (Jeiroun bin Waqid’s biography) and said it was
null.

[^47]: Ath-Thahabi mentioned this tradition in his Mizan (biography of
the judge, Ja’far bin abdul-Wahid) and said it was one of Abu Hurayra’s
afflictions.

[^48]: It was mentioned in ath-Thahabi’s Mizan (biography of Muhammad
bin Musa bin Atta’ ad-Dimyatti) but they always blamed the others who
narrated from Abu Hurayra! The tradition included a Qur’anic verse,
48:29.

[^49]: Muslim, here, is a name of someone who collected the Hadith in a
book called Sahih.

[^50]: This was taken from Abu Hurayra’s saying: I took a garment off my
back and spread it between the Prophet and me while I was looking at the
lice creeping on it…It was mentioned by Abu Na’eem in his
Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.381.

[^51]: Ibn Sa’d mentioned in his Tabaqat (Abu Hurayra’s biography) from
Wahab bin Kaysan, Qatada and al-Mugheera that Abu Hurayra put on silk
cloths.

[^52]: Al-Bukhari in his Sahih, vol.4 chapter of “Seeking Quran and
Sunna”, section on “What the Prophet (S.) has mentioned and encouraged
….”, pg.175, mentioned that Muhammad bin Sireen said: We were at Abu
Hurayra’s and he was wearing two slender flax dresses.

[^53]: He died in this palace as mentioned by Ibn Hajar in his Issaba,
Ibn Qutayba’s Ma’arif and Ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat.

[^54]: Mentioned by imam Ahmed in his Musnad, vol.2, pg.430, narrated by
Muhammad bin Ziyad, Ibn Qutayba in his Ma’arif, narrated by Abu Rafi’
and imam Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi in his book Sharh an-Nahj al-Hameedi,
vol.1, pg.359, edition of Egypt.

[^55]: He was an ally of the tribe of Abd Shams. The caliph Omar (may
Allah (S.w.T.) be pleased with him) made him leader during the Islamic
conquests. He established the town of Basra and became its Amir. He
conquered many countries and was one of the famous Prophet’s companions
and one of the heroes. He died during the reign of Omar. But Abu Hurayra
got married to his sister after a long time of his death. Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani in his book al-Issaba mentioned Bissra and Abu Hurayra’s
story with her. He said that she had employed him at the time of the
Prophet (S.), then he got married to her when Marwan entrusted him with
the emirate of Medina during the reign of Mu’awiya.

[^56]: Mentioned by Abul-Abbas as-Sarraj in his History and Ibn Hajar in
his Issaba (biography of Abu Hurayra).

[^57]: Mentioned by Ibn Khuzayma and Ibn Hajar in his book al-Issaba
(Abu Hurayra’s biography).

[^58]: Ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, second part of vol.4, pg.53.

[^59]: Refer to Ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, second part of vol.4, pg.53.

[^60]: Refer to Abu Na’eem’s Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.379.

[^61]: Refer to Abu Na’eem, Hilyatul-Awliya’, vol.1, pg.384.

[^62]: Al-Khateeb in his book History of Baghdad, vol.7,pg.35,and vol.9,
pg.99.

[^63]: Sharh Nahj al-Balagha al-Hameedi, vol.1, pg.358.

[^64]: ibid,vol.1,pg.359.

[^65]: Sufyan ath-Thawri narrated from Abdur-Rahman bin Qassim from Omar
bin Abdul-Ghaffar that when Abu Hurayra came to Kufa with Mu’awiya, he
sat at the gate of Kinda in the night and people sat around him. One day
a young man from Kufa-he might be al-Asbagh bin Nabata-came and said to
him: “O Abu Hurayra, I ask you , by Allah (S.w.T.), if you had heard the
Prophet saying to Ali bin Abu Talib: “O Allah (S.w.T.), support whoever
supports him and be an enemy of whoever opposes him.” Abu Hurayra said:
“yes, I had.” The young man said: “I swear by Allah (S.w.T.) that you
have supported his enemies and opposed his assistants.” Then he left.

[^66]: In a tradition mentioned by Ibn Sa’d and Ibn Hajar in his Issaba.
We shall comment on this tradition in a next chapter of this book.


