Islamic Thought and Research Methods
====================================

The way in which a researcher schedules and performs his research work
has its own direct influence on the outcome of the scientific product.
Therefore, the research should be built on a solid ground of sound
methods and suitable to the subject in question that the researcher
probes into. So, the research will be more fruitful and positive,
besides leading along the lines of correct and accurate results; with
regard to the scientific side; moreover, it helps the discovery and
formation of scientific rules and principles.

Elsewhere, the scientific research methods have been defined as
follows: \`The approach that is utilized by scientists to plan the
scientific bases and draw a conclusion about the knowledge obtained in
light of those rules.'(2) The method of research has its own influence
and plays a great role in the originality of thought, as well as, in the
safety of contemplation, information, theories and deduced concepts.
Therefore, if the method of research and thinking is not an Islamic one
or does not, at least, go along with its tendency, the effects will be
too wrong to unite with the Islamic spirit.


The research methods of science and knowledge are in two parts due to
their nature:


1. All General Methods (logical ones):

These are general approaches, for scientific research, which deal with
all science and human knowledge that are in common.

2. All Private Methods (technical ones):

They are special styles, for scientific research, which specialize in a
certain science such as; history, physics, belief, philosophy,
jurisprudence principles, etc. It is obvious that there are some basic
principles in common use among all the sciences and human knowledge;
that is to say, the whole logical rules that the logic science deals
with. Therefore, logic science is defined as follows: \`A science for
teaching all the other general rules; on the basis of sound thinking'.

It is of great importance, among all the various research, that the
joint, scientific thinking methodology commence from the point where any
case has seemingly concluded until it can be proved by absolute
evidence, and to become a reason for agreeing with the causation
principle and justification based on human thinking which follows,
naturally, along the path of logical rules. When we use those
principles, in a case, (i.e., the logic rule and sound thinking) for
scientific research and in every science or any other field of thinking,
it means that the researches are being performed due to correct bases
and provide fruitful results.

It, also, becomes apparent that every science or knowledge has its own,
suitable research, which may be used by the scientists and researchers
to deal with a certain subject. So, the research methods that touch on
the material sciences, such as: medicine, physics and chemistry is quite
different from the one concerning history, sociology, philosophy,
belief, etc.

When we prepare to do research into Islamic thought; i.e., the creed,
jurisprudence principles, interpretation, policy, economy, sociology,
ethics, history and narration; we should first consider the
specification of the scientific basis for the research methods to reach
a strict, scientific conclusion and that it be sound with regard to the
Islamic characteristic. In other words, we should establish, in our
mind, that we are going to fulfill two criteria in performing research,
theories and Islamic studies as follows:

1. With Scientism and Realism

2. With Islamic Originality and Commitment

After this introduction, we will become quite sure, that there are
general, scientific principles that combine with all other research and
study or scientific theory, whether they are material ones; like
physics, medicine, astronomy and chemistry or human ones; such as,
economy, ethics, philosophy, creed, sociology, jurisprudence, law,
history, etc., in so much as all those sciences have worked,
reciprocally, due to key axioms and principles. For instance, the
agreement with the causality law and with non-contradiction, as well as,
setting aside any case until it can be proved correctly by evidence,
etc. Therefore, all the sciences and knowledge would start from those
axioms and bases; just like the physical research and belief in a
supreme creator, as well as, the other historical, jurisprudential,
geometrical, medical studies, etc.

The mentioned fact was approved by many scientists and researchers of
natural sciences; as well as, those in the human and divine sciences.
Let us put forward some of those views, thus:

As a fact, for the studied sciences, man has used the mechanism idea
and it is identified as one of his instruments and means. So, when he
talks, for example, about the mechanism of the body, he is going to
perform his research on the basis of the causality principle (i.e., a
cause and effect principle) that deals with the unity of the universe
along with its own order and regulation.

He is as any other human being in undertaking a certain decision or
even thinking about matters on the grounds of a causality principle.(3)
It leads to no astonishment, if you see that the causality law - which
is considered a main principle for understanding the material universe
phenomena; and is, also, the only law that has a lead control over the
plants and animals, as well as, the human mind - is the same law that
leads us to realize the values of the natural, moral law which are built
upon justice, mercy, rights, responsibilities and beauty, as it is,
itself, the law that leads us to the realization of Allah's
existence.(4)

It is appropriate, here, to draw your attention to the deduction method
that is used in mathematics, thus: Usually, when dealing with geometry,
we can reproduce abundant theories with regard to only a few fundamental
truths or those proved suppositions that we agree with, without
objection or debate, whatsoever, as to the degree of their correctness.
So, at first, the scientists would accept the axioms in line with
pursuing their requirements and the results that were caused by them.

For instance, when we approve a certain theory we find that its proof,
which goes without saying, finally depends on the axioms or concerns
involved. Thus, with regard to Allah's (Exalted be His Name) existence,
it is something axiomatic in respect to the philosophical view.
Therefore, the deduction, by the help of a few theories, regarding
Allah's existence - as in a geometric proving - does not lead to proving
the axioms,

but how to start them. So, if there was an agreement between this axiom
and those various facts, which we deal with about the cosmos and its
law, there would be an evidence on the trueness of the axiom we have
chosen...(5) This fact follows thus: The logical principles - which all
scientific deductions are based on being taken from either observation
or experience - are the same ones that the deduction about proving the
existence of the Creator and Administrator has relied on throughout the
whole management and wisdom phenomena, that this world is designated
with.

Therefore, this deduction is from other scientific ones - i.e., it is
inductive in nature - and it is as an application to the general method
that is preliminary to the inductive evidence known by us.

So, man is on either one of two sides: He is either refusing the
scientific deduction as a whole or agreeing with it by way of giving
inductive deduction the same level of value regarding proving the
existence of the Maker; the same being given to the scientific
deduction. Thus, we have proved that both science and faith are
connected at their logical and inductive base and cannot be - due to the
logical view of induction - separated.(6)

Here, we can understand that Islamic thought and research methods, in
all respects, have shared in all material and natural sciences, as well
as, with the general principles, and have been dependent upon them. So,
if the Islamic researcher, who intends to study the Islamic creed or
discover any theory, for example, in ethics, economy, art, sociology,
policy, behaviour, psychology, etc., should act in accordance with the
following:

1. The general principles of logical research methods.

2. The private principles of that science and, also, knowledge, such
as; interpretation, narration and belief. By coordinating the general
and private principles, the Islamic researcher will be able to provide
himself with a sound method of scientific and investigative research, as
well as, being able to plan the Islamic theory and thought on the basis
of correct and scientific principles.

The methodology of research and Islamic thought are based on two main
topics:

1. The approved mental axioms
2. The true Islamic wholeness and principles, such as; the Qur'anic
verses or the correct traditions of the Prophet (s.a.w.), etc. The
Islamic thinker and the researcher who delves into human knowledge and
sciences on the grounds of Islamic principles would deal with the
following themes and aspects:

1. The study of the human and social reality coupled with the
individual's needs in his personal and social life.

2. Religion (i.e., the Holy Qur'an, the Prophet's traditions and
aspects that are elicited from them). The researcher should depend, in
his studies, research and theories, on the Islamic view that is
mentioned in the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet's traditions which clearly
define the scientific fact of human life and its regulation.

When we think, deeply, about these facts and the way they are studied,
we shall see that religion is a set of laws, thoughts, values and
concepts that organize the direction of thought, self and society, as
well as, behaviour.

All Islamic thought, theories and studies, which touch on the social
and human reality, work within the limits of the circle of Islamic
religion and are due to the principles and contemplated decisions which
are determined by this supreme, great religion.

The Islamic scholars have designed the scientific methods, as well as,
the ways of research and thinking that lead to Islamic conclusions and
committed thoughts. Also, the scholars have used both methods of
induction and analogy as instruments for analyzing and deducing ideas
and results on an accurate and widespread basis. It is worth mentioning
that these two methods (induction and analogy) are in common use on all
levels of human material knowledge and sciences. Hereinafter, we would
mention some applied examples on the usage of the two (induction and
analogy) methods, by the Islamic researcher, to obtain some Islamic
concepts as follows:

1. Induction that relies on the basis of physical observation and
experience.

2. Discovering the carefully considered and scientific conclusion
(general law of discovery).

3. After the process of the general law of discovery has been
performed; the stage of employing the analogy method (i.e., the way of
applying the general law due to similar, partial states) will take place
next.

So, the first step is the induction, as was mentioned before, which is
the base method for proving Allah's (glory be to Him) existence; who is
the fundamental subject in Islamic thought and, of which, is as
follows:

1. If we take under discussion the matter of proving Allah's existence,
we can see that the proof depends on examining all the particulars of
the universe and creatures via observation and experience, and the same
induction leads to discovering a principal scientific conclusion called
the \`causality law', which is used to determine the link between causes
and effects (i.e., raison d'etre). So, by applying analogy (the analogy
of the world, as a whole,

on the basis of its particulars) we will come to the fact of
interpretation of the world's beginning due to that total law (i.e., the
causality law), then, we can prove, in this case, that there is only an
initial, original cause, in founding the world, that all the other
causes have met with and we call this \`Allah' (glory be to Him). 2. In
addition, the two (analogy and induction) methods are used in belief and
mental sciences, on the one hand, and on the other hand, they are
employed in the economic sciences theories studies and psychology, as

well as, to find out the psychological and social knowledge and
sciences so as to be able to analyze the societal history, human conduct
and so on.

If we want to discover, for example, the laws of political economics
and interpret the economic phenomena throughout the whole Islamic
society (the society that applies the Islamic system as a rule), we
would study the relationship law between supply and demand, production
and prices, as well as, wages and unemployment, etc.

It is quite useful, here, to study those economic phenomena existing in
the Islamic society which apply the Islamic economy theories, for we
find ourselves unable to discover the Islamic political economics
formulas except under the true Islamic application, because they are as
a result of the public situation of the society (i.e., the ethics and
Islamic verdicts) which is living under the Islamic system. So, we
should consider the movement of the market and factories along with the
relationship between the workers and the employers, besides the state of
the product,

prices and unemployment, etc., and, then, by our daily observation and
experience we will be able to discover the law of analogy, so that later
on, we will discover the laws that effect those matters. We, then,
specify the formulas of the Islamic political economics through applying
both scientific induction and analogy methods.

3. To study the Islamic society, for example, to plan a theory for
Islamic sociology and search the society and social activities to
detect, for instance, the civilized and social alteration; as well as,
the development and degradation of the society and civilizations with
the Islamic point of view. Therefore, the induction that is set up on
the basis of observation and to study the individual, partial and social
events is the real way that leads to discovering the sociology laws.
So,

in such a discovery attempt, we should study the social status that is
widespread in the society and which lives under the Islamic applied
social formulas. We should analyze the structure of that society,
together with the elements of its composition and formation with regard
to the phenomena, the life styles and the relationship that prevail in
it, by observation of specific events and practices along with the
social relation and phenomena depending on the inductive method which is
based on the grounds of observation, experience, statistics, deduction,
generalization and analogy. In this way, we can form the skeletal
structure and rules of the theory of Islamic sociology on the basis of
Islamic views and concepts.


**The Employment of Inductive Methods in Islamic Jurisprudence:**

Scientific induction and analogy methods have a great deal of active
participation in the deduction process. The induction is to pursue
several partial states to detect a general rule which is acceptable to
be applied in such similar states.

This methodology is applied in all sciences and knowledge, for
instance, in medicine, chemistry, physics and language. Also, it is
applied in proving Allah's existence, as well as, in jurisprudence and
its principles, and likewise, in the Islamic theories; such as, economy,
sociology, etc. Our aim in researching belief is to show how the
induction and the scientific analogy method has been employed in the
jurisprudence, justice, deduction, and Islamic thought theories, as well
as, to express its role in forming and building the Islamic theories
that are deduced by the Muslim intellectuals and jurists.

Thus, the scientific, methodical task should start with induction. That
is to say, the researcher and intellectual should obtain a general rule
and law to pursue many states and particular facts, then, he will shift
to the analogy stage soon after he has realized the general rule.
Therefore, analogy means \`the applying of the general rule to all its
evidence'.


