How To Obtain Benefit From Inductive Evidence
=============================================

The well-known, great Islamic thinker, Martyr Mohammad Baqir-al-Sadr
had defined induction in his book "The Logical Principles of Induction",
thus: "It is a deducing of the general law by pursuing a great deal of
the partial states, further."

Martyr Al-Sadr has mentioned some applications of the induction method
in the field of legal verdicts, quoting, in this regard, Al-Shaikh
Yousef al-Bahrani - one of the late jurists (Allah may bless him) - who
discovered a general juristic rule through justifiying many partial
states that declared, "The person who is unaware of the legal verdict is
in no way to be blamed by Allah (glory be to Him)"; i.e., "In all cases,
the one who is unaware of the legal verdicts is in no way to blame for
having carried out an action".

Moreover, Al-Shaikh al-Bahrani has found some partial verdicts about
pilgrimage (Hajj), fasting, marriage, wine-drinking and curtailing the
obligatory prayer. The following exemptions have been provided by
legitimate evidence:

First: Due to the legitimate evidence that deals with the Hajj
(pilgrimage) verdicts; the unaware one will be excused for having on a
unallowable dress during his presence in Mecca (when one is in a state
of ritual consecration).

Second: Due to the legitimate evidence that regards the verdicts on
fasting, the person who is unaware of the verdict, that fasting while
traveling is unallowable, will be excused and is in no way to blame if
he has fasted while traveling.

Third: Due to the legitimate evidence that deals with marriage
verdicts: if a man is unaware that marrying a woman during her \`iddat'
(a waiting period during which a widow or a divorcee may not remarry) is
forbidden; he will be excused and there is no marriage taboo that he
remarry her soon after her waiting period is over. Fourth: Due to the
legitimate evidence that deals with prohibition of wine-drinking, the
unaware person will be excused for having drank it, if he was unaware
that drinking wine is forbidden.

Fifth: Due to the legitimate evidence that deals with verdicts
regarding prayer; the unaware person will be excused for having
performed the four raka'at compulsory prayer in place of praying the
usual two raka'at prayer, that is to be performed in place of the four
raka'at prayer, when traveling. So, his prayer will be accepted and it
is not necessary for him to compensate for that prayer at another
time.

Therefore, every condition, in the above mentioned, has an \`evidence
of factual lack' with regard to the general rule that says that the
unaware person is legitimately in no way to blame in all cases. So, the
gathering of all these indications in the justist's mind will make the
general rule more trusted by him, which declares this: \`No penalty is
inflicted on the unaware person'.

Consequently, the jurist has deduced a common rule, which is thus:
\`Every person unaware of the verdicts is in no way to blame'.(7)

In this way, the martyr Al-Sadr has pursued the inductive evidence to
elicit a contemplative rule in Islamic economy that reads: \`Working
with natural wealth is a base for obtaining ownership'. This deduction
has arisen due to many particular states that he has dealt with in
Islamic jurisprudence, i.e.:

- Working on reviving the land resulted in ownership of it.
- Working in mining the earth for minerals resulted in ownership of
it.
- Working on possessing the water resulted in ownership of it.
- Working on hunting birds resulted in ownership of them.

The induction of those states has instigated him to deduce a general
rule in the Islamic economy which reads: \`Working with natural wealth
is the base for ownership'.( ) In this manner, the induction method has
taken part in discovering some of the verdicts, laws, concepts, and
other theories in various aspects of Islamic thought, such as; economy,
psychology, ethics, policy, sociology, commerce, etc.


**How to Obtain Benefit from Analogy Evidence in the Field of
Jurisprudence**

While discussing analogy and its employment, it is necessary to explain
a serious matter in this regard, that is; the use of analogy as a
foundation to be depended upon in juristic deduction.

The jurists who follow the doctrine of the family of the Prophet
(s.a.w.), do not rely on the partial analogy that is followed by the
Al-Hanafi sect (i.e., followers of Abu-Hanifa's doctrine), and other
jurists of some Islamic doctrines, as that kind of analogy does not
depend on the scientific analogy formula, for scientific analogy is
defined, thus: An application of public rule with regard to its
credibilities. It is also stipulated in juristic analogy that the cause
of legislation should be laid down in advance and not deduced by the
jurist himself.

An example follows on what is mentioned in the Islamic law: The
drunkenness caused by wine is the reason behind forbidding it. So, the
analogy, due to this case, is based on this cause which leads to the
taboo of every thing which causes drunkenness.

**Making Use of Analogy in Applications of Jurisprudence Principles**

It is obvious that the first stage of inductive reasoning entails the
application of the original principles on the facts which they fall
under. This is, of course, an analogy process which is founded on the
scientific analogy rules; and are too considerable, in number, for the
scholars to take time with. After the jusrist becomes quite sure that
the prohibition gives the meaning of taboo and at the same time when the
jurist or the Islamic political researcher faces any text which falls
under the prohibition found in the Qur'an, such as; "And do not incline
to those who are unjust, lest the fire touch you"( ), he would apply
some of the factual rules as follows:

A. Appearance of the evidence rule, that is to say, the useful, common
meaning; is a kind of obligatory evidence for both sides (the speaker
and listener).

B. Appearance of the rule of prohibition formula that deals with taboo:
i.e., the prohibition formula has the meaning of obligatory stoppage
(unless there is a related

sign used for giving permission to something being prohibited; in that
case, the prohibition assumes the meaning of abhorrence (it is better
not to do an act).

Therefore, when the deductive equation is in order with regard to the
analogy principles, the deducer and researcher would be able to obtain a
legitimate verdict with a moral, political status.

So, the operation is functioning due to the said holy verse that warns
us against being inclined to those who are unjust. Here, the prohibition
gives the meaning of taboo, so, as a result of this, the \`inclining to
the unjust' is a sort of taboo, because it is something prohibited in
the text of the said verse. In this way, applying the factual methods,
with regard to its themes, is due to the scientific analogy method. So,
some of the fundamental, great scholars, such as; Al-Na'ini, the book
investigator, has determined the following: \`The factual rule should be
the greatest when dealt with in the analogy of deduction for the
diligent task should naturally depend on that kind of analogy'.

The logical analogy has been employed as a practical method in applying
the jurisprudence principles, on the one hand, and as a deducing process
of the Islamic thought and verdicts, on the other.


**Some Prinicipal Supports in the Jursitic Deducing
Method????????????**

In order to study the method of deducing the laws and verdicts, besides
using the Islamic laws from their original sources (the Holy Book and
Traditions), as well as, to specify the duties of Islamic law, the
well-known, contemporary clergy ('Ulama) have designed a method and a
science for researching and deducing, in order to discover the laws and
systems, called \`the science of jurisprudence principles'. It is
considered the method that organizes the process of performing the
deductive thinking and to find out the Islamic laws according to their
sources, so, it is one of the most serious and complex of Islamic
sciences.

Of course, this science is a method that relies on legal postulates and
common, mental principles, as well as, on the linguistic philosophy,
then, is formed in an integral theory along with the applied principles
and laws which are intensely followed by the jurist in the deducing
process.

If we want to know, for example, if a verdict of a certain subject
applies to worship, family affairs, ownership and properties or
political relations, etc., the jurist will consult the Holy Qur'an and,
also, the sunnah found in the legal verdict. If he locates it easily
without much deductive or scientific effort, he will consider it to be
quite enough and will rely on it only as a restricted, ready verdict; as
the Qur'an states: "...Allah has allowed trading and forbidden
usury..."( ) and the Prophet's (s.a.w.) tradition that follows, thus:
"The loan has been repaid and the guarantor should be the debtor".
Otherwise, the jurist, then, turns to the deductive process and
concentrates on : A. How to understand the evidence and take benefit
from it by making use of the text, as a whole, and, then, to generalize
or employ the textual analogy (i.e., the cause), etc.

B. Going back to the practical roots, if an evidence of legal verdict
cannot be elicited, to specify the practical status of the Islamic law,
by fulfilling procedures for considering a person quilty at times and
innocent at other times.

With respect to the steps involved in the deduction and research
method, they are, in general, functioning due to the following stages:

1. It is necessary to prove the possibility of the deduction and
diligence process due to the Islamic mission, and to know whether all
the conclusions, which result, owing to the deduction process that the
jurists have depended on, are good enough to win the satisfaction of
Allah (glory be to Him) or not. Moreover, have they the power of legal
verdict that makes a person aquitted of responsibility with respect to
either accomplishing the task or being excused from it? Therefore, the
jurists have spared no efforts to dicuss that case and research it
carefully until they have formulated a possibility for the deduction
process of the legal verdicts, as well as, usually attributing all the
deductions to Islam.

2. Specifying the juristic deducing sources which is a must to be
accomplished by the deviser and discoverer of the laws along with the
Islamic verdicts and ideas. Are they based on the Holy Qur'an and
Traditions (sunnah), only, or on other sources? Which are more helpful
to be used in the deduction process; the mind, consensus, nonattributed
interests, analogy, acting on a personal opinion application of
discretion in legal matters, etc? What is the extent of those sources
which are admittedly reliable and have factual evidence or those
possible ones where the discussion revolves around the rightness of
their origins and are to be used as an offer of a plea or excuse?

3. Concerning the juristic deduction method, the well-known
contemporary clergy have distinguished between the approach of dealing
with the Holy Qur'an, and that which refers to Traditions, due to the
fact that the Holy Book surely is from Allah (be He exalted) with no
doubt or suspicion of this fact, and has reached us as a complete,
preserved book.

Therefore, the validity of the Qur'an being from Allah (glory be to
Him) is something which needs no proof on the part of the jurists. As
for Traditions, they have been subjected, over many years, to
interpolation and fabrication, so, they are still subject to speculation
that should be proved by evidence.

Owing to this fact, the jurist may begin to feel uncertain about the
truthfulness of a narration, first by asking himself this question: "Are
the traditions and narrations, in hand, attributed to the infallible
Imams?" They should be considered as a Tradition and a reliable source
for performing the task of approval and to make sure that the source has
reached us by the infallible Imams and with no room for doubt.

4. The jurist will, then, organize the deduction method on the basis of
\`no application ahead of the text' . If he finds a textual legal
verdict; as is in the Qur'an: "...and Allah has allowed trading and
forbidden usury...", there is no application, at all, to stand against
that text where it may prohibit the selling and allow the usury.

5. The jurist commences his deducing task about a matter that is in
need of a legal verdict, in any field of life and he will consult his
own proven sources, such as: the Qur'an, Traditions, logical reasoning
and, so on.

If he succeeds in getting the legal verdict from those said sources, he
will fulfill his scientific mission. Otherwise, he will shift his
attention in the direction of a legislator and restrict his search in
the field of practical principles by answering this question: \`What can
the legislator do in such a case, where the jurist does not arrrive at a
legal verdict after he has examined the text, as well as, the concepts
that the legal verdict is based on?'

Suppose that the subject we are going to search is this: \`Is smoking
permissible or is it a taboo?' The jurisprudent will initiate his
search, into this matter, along with the texts and evidence. If he does
not discover the evidence that such an act is taboo, then, he considers
the act, with regard to the origin, as a \`non-prohibited'

verdict ( i.e., a quittance of the legislation), for there is no
evidence of a taboo being mentioned in this regard. So, he makes a
decision about the non-prohibition verdict, regarding smoking, depending
on the origin of the legal or mental allowance.

6. The deduction process concentrates, basically, on the understanding
of the evidence and how to get benefit from it, (after approving the
validity of the evidence which the infallible Imams (al-Ma\`sum) have
given, if it was in the form of a narration).

In both actions: (a) the validity of the evidence which is given by the
infallible Imam (Ma\`sum), and (b) the understanding of the legislative
evidence (the Qur'an and sunnah) due to its methodology and principles,
for the text to be completely understood, the jurist must analyze and
grasp the meaning of the concepts according to the linguistic rules and
in light of all the conditions that exist from the text (i.e., the
connections and the social customs). This would occur when comprehending
the text with regard to its requirements and indirect suggestions, in
light of the mental rules and sound logic, by taking into account the
Islamic law terminology and their legal considerations.

7. The jurisprudence principles science forms the scientific methods
for juristic deduction; (it is an integral theory which is consulted by
the jurist when searching into deducing a verdict of any matter.
Therefore, the science of jurisprudence principles is defined as:
\`Having knowledge about the common elements used in legal verdict
deduction').(8)

Among the elements used in the deducing process is the element of
\`proving the truth of the saying'. The order, here, has the meaning of
compulsory unless there is a condition that may replace it with a more
agreeable

order. In the same light, forbiddance has the sense of taboo unless
there is a condition that changes it from the disagreeable order. Along
with other proofs, like the linguistic, literal one (i.e., the meaning
that has been understood by the literal expression), are the
accompanying evidences, which are basically used in deduction.

In all the complete and partial matters that result and are faced by
the Islamic jurist and scholar, with regard to the deducing process, a
method is found for dealing with and being confident of the originality
and purity, besides, discovering the legal verdict and Islamic thought
which should conform to correct, scientific methods. The fear is that
intensive contemplation might become abnormal or deviated from scientism
and legitimacy in the process of research and discovery.


