Lesson 11: Al-Sifat al-Salbiyah
===============================

The Negative Attributes which cannot be found in Allah because they are
below His dignity are called *Sifat al-Salbiyah*. They are many, but
like *Sifat al-Thubutiyah* only eight are listed generally. They are:

1. *Shareek*. The word "Shareek'" means a colleague or a partner. Allah
has neither a colleague nor a partner in His Divinity.

2. *Murakkab*. This word means "compound" or "mixed". Allah is neither
made, nor composed, of any material. He cannot be divided even in the
imagination.

3. *Makaan*. It means "place". Allah is not confined to a place for He
has no *jism* (body).

4. *Hulool*. It means "entering". Nothing enters Allah nor does He enter
anything or anybody. Therefore, the belief of Incarnation in any form is
abhorrent to the conception of Divinity.

5. *Mahall al-hawadith*. This means "subject to changes". Allah cannot
change.

6. *Mar’i*. It means "visible". Allah is not visible. He has not been
seen, is not seen and will never be seen, because He is not a body.

7. *Ihtiyaj*. It means "dependence" or "need". Allah is not deficient in
any virtue, so he does not need anything.

8. *Al-sifat al-zaa’id*. This means "added attributes". The attributes
of Allah are not separate from His Being. For example, we say that Allah
is ‘Alim, but it does not mean that His Knowledge is something separate
from His Existence. In fact, there has never been a time when he is less
‘Alim and then acquired more knowledge. His Knowledge, His Mercy, His
Justice and all His virtues and attributes are His Own Being.

It will thus be seen that according to Islam, Allah is the name of God
as perceived in the light of the above Positive and Negative Attributes.
In other words, Allah is the Creator of the universe, Self-Existent, the
source of all perfection and free from all defects.


