Lesson 18: Useful Explanations Part III
=======================================

1. *Ghasbi*: Anything taken by force from others without their consent;
likewise, anything taken from others in normal transaction with an
intention of not paying its price.

2. *Mubah*: legal; lawful; taken with consent of the owner.

3. *Hadath*: Those impurities (*najasah*) which require *niyyah*
(intention) for cleaning, like those things after which *wudhu* or
*ghusl* becomes necessary. *Hadath* is of two kinds: greater and
smaller.

4. The greater *Hadath*: Those things which require *ghusl* for being
clean, like *janabat*, *haidh*, *nifas*, *istihaza* and *mass
al-mayyit*.

5. The smaller *Hadath*: Those things which require *wudhu* for being
clean, like sleep etc.

6. *Khabath*: Those impurities (*najasat*) which do not require *niyyah*
for cleaning like all the *najasah* described in Lesson 19.

**Note:** The difference between *hadath* and *khabath* may be described
thus: *Khabath* is external impurity (*najasah*) and therefore there is
no need of *niyyah* for cleaning it, while *hadath* is not an external
but a spiritual uncleanliness, and therefore it requires the attention
and Intention of spirit to clean it.

**Note no 2**. To make the above point more clear it is advisable to
mention that, for example, when a person goes to the the toilet, he
acquires both kinds of *najasah* i.e. the *khabath* and *hadath -
khabath* is the external *najasah* which he cleanses without any
*niyyah*, and thus his body becomes *tahir*. But still, he cannot pray;
because the spiritual *najasah* i.e. *hadath* has not been removed. It
will be removed when he will perform *wudhu* (with *niyyah*) and then he
will be qualified spiritually to converse with Allah.

7. *Muwalat*: To perform any act, e.g. *wudhu,* without interruption; to
perform all parts of the act one after another without a gap.  
 8. *Tartib*: To perform every act in the same order that has been
approved in the Shariâ€™ah.


