Lesson 19: Najasah
==================

*Najasah* means the thing which is unclean in itself, and makes other
things unclean by contact. There are ten (10) *Najasah*:

1 and 2. Urine and stool of those living things whose meat is forbidden
(*haram*), and whose blood comes out with a gush, other than birds. For
example the urine of sheep is not *najis*, because its meat is not
*haraam* though its blood comes out with a gush. Likewise, the stool of
snake is not *najis* because its blood does not come out with a gush,
though its meat is *haraam*.

**Note:** Urine and stool of those animals are *najis* which eat refuse
of the human beings or have drunk milk of pig.

3 and 4. Blood and semen of those living things whose blood comes out
with a gush, whether they be *halal* or *haraam*. So all these things of
human beings are *najis*, and also those of cow are *najis*.

5. Dead body of those living things whose blood comes out with a gush.
But there are some details: Those parts which have no life in them
during life-time, like hair, nail, bone, teeth etc. are not *najis*. The
corpse of a Muslim is *najis* after being cold and before being washed.
Before being cold it is *tahir*; after being washed it is *tahir*. The
limbs which are cut from a living body (as in operation) are treated as
corpse. (Ivory is taken out from dead elephant; still it is not *najis*,
because it is a part which has no life in the life-time of the elephant
(You may think of other examples yourself).  
 6. The dog.  
 7. The pig.  
 8. Kafir.  
 9. Liquor (liquid intoxicant).  
 10. Fuqqa (mild beer).  
 Note: The sweat that comes out during or after becoming unlawfully
*'junub'*, and the sweat of the animal which eats refuse of human beings
are not *najis*; but prayer with such sweat on body or clothes is not
allowed.


