Lesson 20: Mutahhirat (I)
=========================

*Mutahhirat* i.e., the things which make a *najis* thing clean. These
are 12 in number:  
 (1) Water; (2) Earth; (3) Sun; (4) *Istihala*; (5) *Intiqal*; (6)
Islam; (7) *Taba’iyat*: (8) *Istibra*;  
 (9) *Ghaybah* (disappearance) of a Muslim; (10) *Zawal al-‘Ayn*; (11)
*Inqilab* and (12) Flowing of blood in normal quantity from a lawfully
slaughtered animal.

1. Water
--------

(a) According to purity or impurity, water is of two kinds: *mutlaq*
i.e., pure water; and *mudaf* i.e., mixed water. Mixed water cannot make
anything clean. Instead, it itself becomes unclean by coming into
contact with anything unclean.

(b) *Mutlaq* is of 5 kinds: (1) Rain water; (2) Running water; (3) Well
water; (4) Still water about a *kur* or more than a *kur*; (5) Still
water less than a *kur*.  
 Water cleanses a *najis* thing on condition that the water is (1)
*Mutlaq* and (2) Clean (*tahir*), and (3) Does not become *mudaf* by
coming into contact with that *najasah*, and (4) All the *najasah* is
washed away from that *najis* thing.

Rain water, running water (like sea, river, stream, spring etc.) and
well water make things clean if washed once after removing the
*najasah*. But if anything becomes *najis* by urine it must be washed
twice. It is better to wash it twice even in other *najasah*.

Clothes should be squeezed after every washing as described above.

Still water which is just a *kur* or more than a *kur*, also makes
things clean in the same way.  
 These waters cannot be unclean by mere contact with *najasah*. They
will be unclean if either their taste, color or smell is changed by that
contact.

*Kur* means water which takes 27 cubic span space (3x3x3). It is better
to make it 42 7/8 cubic span (3 1/2 x 3 1/2 x 31/2). 1 span = 9 in.

Still water which is less than a *kur* becomes unclean by just coming
into contact with a *najasah*. To cleanse with clean still water, it is
necessary to wash twice after removing the *najasah*, and it is better
to wash thrice.

The water running from the pipes in the houses is treated as river water
so long as it is running.  
 Pots must be cleansed three times with the water which is less than a
*kur*, and once if it is washed in *kur* or running water.

If a pig licks the pot, then it should be washed seven times whether the
water is running or *kur* or less than that.

The same is the rule if a rat dies in a pot.

If a dog licks the pot, it should be rubbed with wet clean earth
thoroughly; then, after washing away the earth, it should be washed
twice with the water which is less than a *kur*, or once in *kur* or
running water.

If a pot becomes *najis* by liquor, it must be washed three times,
whatever the kind of water.

2. Earth
--------

The earth makes clean the sole of the shoe or feet. But there are 4
conditions for it:  
 1. The *najasah* must have been contacted from walking on the earth;  
 2. It is removed by walking on the earth;  
 3. The earth is clean;  
 4. And dry.  
 Note: This rule does not apply to the end of the stick or wheels of car
or carts, etc.

3. Sun
------

The sun makes clean those things which cannot be moved like wall, tree,
earth etc. If the *najasah* is removed, and the place or tree etc. is
wet, and then it becomes dry by the direct rays of the sun, it becomes
clean. If it dries by hot air combined with the sun's rays, or just by
hot air, or by sun's heat without direct rays, it will not be clean.

4. Istihala
-----------

It means "change". If a *najis* thing is changed into a clean thing
(chemically), it will become clean. For example, if a dog after death is
changed into earth, that earth will be clean.

5. Inqilab
----------

It is similar to the *istihala*. The difference is that in *istihala*,
the shape and form, all are changed, while in *inqilab*, only the
properties are changed, but the shape is not entirely changed. Its only
example: If wine becomes vinegar, it is *inqilab*. By *inqilab*, it will
become clean.  
 Note: If grape-juice is fermented, either by fire or by itself, it is
*haraam* (unlawful) to drink. But if that fermented liquid is boiled on
fire and its two-thirds are evaporated… the remaining one-third will
become *halal*.

6. Intiqal
----------

It means to change place. If a mosquito sucks the blood of a man and
there is a gap of time, so that the blood is called the blood of
mosquito, it will become clean.

7. Islam
--------

A *Kafir* becomes clean after accepting Islam.


