Lesson 21: Mutahhirat (II)
==========================

In previous lesson we explained seven *mutahhirat*. Now the remaining
five are explained here:-

8. Taba’iyat:
-------------

*Taba’iyat* means to follow. The following things become clean by it:

1. When a *kafir* becomes Muslim, his minor children become clean
automatically.

2. If a well becomes *najis* and the water is taken out of it until it
becomes clean, then the wall of the well, the bucket and the rope will
become clean automatically.

3. While washing *najis* things our hands become unclean; but when that
thing becomes clean, our hands will become clean automatically.

4. If the wine becomes vinegar and thus becomes clean, the pot in which
it was will become clean automatically.

5. Wood-plank or cement stone slabs upon which the body of a dead Muslim
is washed, as well as the piece of clothes used to cover his hidden
parts, and also the hands of the person washing that body become clean
when the *ghusl al-mayyit* is completed.

9. Zawal Najis al-‘ayn (removal of the original impurity)
---------------------------------------------------------

If there is any *najasah* on the body of an animal, it will become clean
if that *najasah* is just removed or rubbed out from his body. Likewise,
the inner parts of human body, like mouth and stomach, become clean if
the *najasah* is just removed from them. Eyelids, lips and dentures are
not included in this rule.

10. Istibra’
------------

The urine and stool of the animal which eats the refuse of man are
*najis*; and the only way of its purification (*taharah)* is *istibra*;
i.e. guarding it from above-mentioned *najis* feed for a certain
prescribed period. This period is 40 days for camel; 30 days for cow; 10
days for sheep and goat; 5 or 7 days for duck; 3 days for hen.

If any of these animals is kept away from the refuse of man for the
prescribed period its urine and stool become clean (*tahir*), provided
that, at the end of that period, they are no more called ‘refuse-eating
animals.’

11. Ghaybat al-Muslim
---------------------

If there is a Muslim, who is a strict follower of the shari’ah; and any
of his clothes or things becomes *najis*; then he goes out of your sight
long enough to enable him to make it clean; then he comes back and you
see him using those clothes in prayer, for example, then you must
believe that he has cleansed the clothes; otherwise, he would not have
used it in prayer. It is called *ghaybat al-Muslim*, which means the
"absence of a Muslim."

12. Flowing of Blood
--------------------

When a halal animal is slaughtered according to the rules of shari’ah,
and its blood flows, out of its body in such a quantity which is normal
in that kind of animal, the blood which remains in its body becomes
*tahir* (clean). But that blood which remains in those organs of body
which are *haraam* (like spleen, bladder etc.) must be avoided.


