Lesson 22: Rules of the Toilet
==============================

The following rules must be observed when going to the toilet:

1. The place where one sits to urinate or to relieve bowels, must be
such as to hide one’s private parts from onlookers

2. It is haraam to urinate or relieve bowels in the following places:-  
 (a) In the property of another person without the permission of the
owner;  
 (b) In a place which is *waqf* for a certain group - for a person who
is not from that group;  
 (c) On the grave of a Mu’min and in all places which are sacred in the
religion, like a Mosque, Husayniyah, etc.

3. It is *haraam* to face qibla, or to sit with one’s back to the qibla
when urinating or relieving bowels.

4. After urinating, the part of the body concerned must be washed twice
(better, thrice) with water.

5. After relieving bowels, the part of the body concerned may be
cleansed by water or alternatively with clothes, paper, or clay,
provided the clothes, paper or clay itself is *tahir* and dry .It is
*wajib* to use three separate pieces even if the body becomes clean
before that. If after using the three pieces, the body is not clean,
extra pieces should be used till the body becomes clean.

6. If the stool was mixed by some other *najasah* (like blood), or the
stool had spread outside the body (more than normal), of if some
external *najasah* had reached the part of the body concerned, then the
only way of cleaning it is with water. Paper etc. cannot make it
*tahir*.

7. It is better to use water after relieving bowels even when using
paper etc. is allowed.

8. It is *haraam* to use sacred things in cleaning the body after
relieving bowels: for example, khak al-shifa or a paper having the names
of Allah or Ma’sumeen on it.

9. It is now allowed to use bone or dung in cleaning the body after
relieving bowels.


