Lesson 23: Wudhu (Ablution)
===========================

1. When is it required?
-----------------------

*Wudhu* is necessary for: (1) *Salat*, (2) *Tawaf* *wajib*, (3) Touching
the writings of the Qur’an and the names of Allah and 14 Ma’sumeen, (4)
*Qadha* of *sajdah* and *tashahhud*, (5) To wash a copy of the Qur’an
which has become *najis*, and (6) When it becomes obligatory because of
*nadhr*, ‘*ahd* or *qasam*.

2. What is Wudhu?
-----------------

*Wudhu* is two washings and two *masah* (wiping). It means that washing
of the face and two hands and wiping part of the head and feet.

1. Washing of the face. The face should first be washed from the place
where the hair normally starts growing to the place below the chin
lengthwise, and in breadth as much as is normally covered by the tip of
the thumb and that of the middle finger, by taking water and pouring the
over the face.

2. Washing of hands. After washing the face as above, wash the right
hand from a little above the elbow to the tips of fingers. Then wash the
left hand in the same way.

3. *Masah* (wiping). After washing the face and the hands, *masah* of
the head should be performed by drawing the wet fingers of the right
hand from the middle of the head up to the edge of the hair. Finally
*masah* of the feet should be performed by drawing the wet fingers of
the right hand over the upper part of the right foot from the tips of
the fingers to its junction with the ankles and then the wet fingers of
the left hand over the left foot in the same way.

3. Nawaqid al-Wudhu (things that invalidate Wudhu)
--------------------------------------------------

i.e. those things after which *wudhu* becomes necessary if anybody wants
to perform any ‘*ibadat* mentioned in No. 1 above. These are called the
smaller *hadath* as explained earlier. These are following: (1) Stool,
(2) Urine, (3) Gas which comes out of stomach, (4) Sleep, (5)
Unconsciousness, intoxication and all such things which effect the sense
of a man, (6) All things mentioned in the greater *hadath*, and (7)
*Istihaza* (for women). '

Note 1. If a. man is sure that his *wudhu* had been broken by any of the
above mentioned occurrences, but he is in doubt whether he performed
*wudhu* after .that or not it will be assumed that he has not done
*wudhu*.

Note 2. If a man is sure that he performed *wudhu* and is sure that any
of the above mentioned *nawaqid* has occurred, but he is not sure which
of the two was earlier and which was later, it will be assumed that his
*wudhu* was broken. He will have to perform *wudhu* for ‘*ibadat* as
mentioned in No.1.

Note 3. There is no need of *wudhu* after *Ghusl al-Janabat*.


