Lesson 24: Conditions of Wudhu
==============================

There are many conditions for *wudhu*, which are described here:

1. The water of *Wudhu* must be (1) *Tahir*, (2) *Mutlaq* and (3)
*Mubah*;

2. The place where *Wudhu* is being done must be *mubah*;

3. The pot in which the water of *wudhu* is kept must be *mubah* and
should not be made of silver or gold;

4. There must be time for *wudhu* and Salat. It means that if time of
Salat is so short that if you begin *wudhu*, the Salat will not be
performed in time, then you should not make *wudhu*; instead you are
required to do *tayammum*. But if the time needed for *tayammum* is the
same as that of *wudhu*, then *wudhu* should be done. .

5. The face, hands, head and feet (which are called Organs of *wudhu*)
must be *tahir* at the time of *wudhu*.

6. *Wudhu* must be performed with the intention of *qurbatan ilal-Laah*,
i.e. to obey the order of God, to become nearer to Allah. If you do
*wudhu* to keep cool or with any other intention the *wudhu* will be
*batil* (null and void);

7. *Tartib* should be maintained. It means that you should begin by
washing your face, then the right hand from elbow down to the fingers,
then the left hand accordingly, then you must do *masah* of a portion of
your head. then the *masah* of feet. It is better to do the *masah* of
the right foot, then of the left; though *masah* of both feet may be
done together;

8. *Muwalat*. It means that you must do all the above mentioned works in
*wudhu* without interruption;

9. You must do all the acts of *wudhu* yourself. It means that if you
tell another person to wash your face and hands etc. or to put water
upon your face or hands etc. the *wudhu* will be *batil* (invalid); but
if you are unable to do *wudhu* yourself (for. reason of illness), you
may seek help from others in *wudhu*.

10. There must not be any difficulty or danger in the use of water

11. There must not be anything on the organs of *wudhu* which may
prevent the water from reaching the organs e.g. ring or oil or nail
polish etc.

12. Washing must be done in the proper way. It means that face must be
washed beginning from the forehead up to the chin (not in opposite
direction), hands must be washed beginning from the elbow and ending up
to the tips of fingers (not vice versa).

13. *Masah* (wiping) must be done from the remaining wetness of the
water upon the hands. No other water should be mixed. Remember that if
your head or feet are already wet, the *masah* will be *batil*, and
accordingly *wudhu* will be wrong. Therefore, your head and feet must be
dry before *masah*.

Some people put some drops of water on head before starting *masah*.
This is absolutely wrong, because their head or hair becomes wet before
*masah*. Likewise, you should remember that while doing *masah* of head,
your hand should not touch your forehead. Otherwise the water of
forehead will mix with the water of hand. In that case the *masah* of
foot will become wrong. Some people, after washing the left hand, wipe
their right hand again by the left hand in the manner of washing. It is
wrong for two reasons:

1. It disturbs the *tartib*;  
 2. It puts extra water on the left hand, putting the validity of the
masah of the left foot in question.

Mustahab acts of wudhu
----------------------

There are many things *mustahab* (*sunnat*) in *wudhu*, washing the
hands twice; gargling three times; rinsing the nose three times, (all
these are before *wudhu*). Washing the face and hands during *wudhu*
twice, etc.


