Lesson 26: Times of Prayers
===========================

1. *Subh*: Beginning from *subh al-sadiq*, ending at sunrise;  
 2. *Zuhr*: Beginning from exact noon, ending when only four *rak’at*s
time remains to sunset;  
 3. ‘*Asr*: Beginning after lapsing of four *rak’at*s time from noon,
ending at sunset;  
 4. *Maghrib*: Beginning after sunset when the reddish color at east
vanishes, ending when only four *rak’at*s time remains to exact
mid-night.  
 5. ‘*Isha*: Beginning after lapsing of 3 *rak’at*s time from sunset,
ending at midnight,  
 Note 1 If any person did not pray Maghrib and Isha in time owing to
some appreciable difficulty, he should pray both prayers before Subh
without *niyyah* of *'ada'* or *'qadha'*  
 Note 2. Midnight is 12 hours after exact noon. .

Some Details About Time
-----------------------

### 1. Time of fadhilah (the most excellent time for prayer)

It is better to pray in the time of *fadhilah* when the prayers are more
greatly rewarded:  
 (a) *Subh*: From the *subh al-sadiq* up to the time when red color
appears on the horizon;  
 (b) *Zuhr*: From the noon up to the time when the shadow of a given
thing becomes equal to its length.  
 (c) *Asr*: After the time of *fadhilah* of Zuhr up to the time when the
shadow of a given thing becomes double of its length;  
 (d) *Maghrib*: After sunset up to the time when the red color on the
western horizon vanishes;  
 (e) ‘*Isha*: After the time of *fadhilah* of Maghrib.

### 2. Reserved and Joint times

(a) *Zuhr*: four rak’ats time after noon is the reserved time of *Zuhr*.
If anyone prays *Asr* in that time, it will be *batil* (invalid);  
 (b) *Asr*: four *rak’ats* time before the sunset is the reserved time
of *Asr*; if anyone prays *Zuhr* in that time, it will be *batil*, The
time between these two reserved times is the joint time of *Zuhr* and
Asr.  
 (c) *Maghrib*: three *rak’ats* time after sunset is reserved for
Maghrib. If anyone prays Isha in that time, it will be *batil*;  
 (d) *Isha*: four *rak’ats* time before midnight is reserved for Isha;
if anyone prays *Maghrib* in that time, it will be batil. The time
between the two reserved times is joint time of *Maghrib* and Isha.


