Lesson 32: Niyyah, Takbir and Qiyam
===================================

1. Niyyah
---------

The person starting prayer must have, just before starting, a clear
'intention' that the specific prayer is *‘qurbatan ilal-Laah'*, i.e. in
obedience to Allah. Thus three things are *wajib* in *niyyah*:-  
 (a) The prayer must be specified;  
 (b) It must be for the sake of God only, not for any other motive;  
 (c) That intention must remain unaltered up to the end.  
 Note: It is not necessary to say these things in words. The intention
and attention of mind is enough.

2. Takbiratul-Ihram
-------------------

The phrase *'Allahu Akbar'* is called *takbir*. *'Ihram'* means
'imposition of limits'. Thus the *'takbir'* just after *niyyah* is
called *'Takbiratul-Ihram'*, because it limits the man in his actions;
now he cannot do any work except prayer. There are 4 conditions in it:  
 (a) It must be in the approved form, i.e. *'Allahu Akbar*' without any
addition or change and without joining it with other wordings.  
 (b) It must be in correct Arabic.  
 (c) It must be said while standing (details will come afterwards).  
 (d) Body must be in *'tama’ninat'* (not moving, but still).  
 (e) *Muwalaat*: The letters and words should be recited one after
another without gap.

3. Qiyam (standing)
-------------------

It is *'rukn’* while reciting *'Takbiratul-Ihram*' and before going to
*'ruku'*: and is *wajib* (but not *rukn*) at the time of reciting Surahs
or *Tasbihat Arba’ah*. In *qiyam*, it is *wajib* that:  
 (a) The *musalli* (person praying) should stand erect and facing
qibla;  
 (b) He should be motionless (*tama’ninat*).  
 (c) Also he should not lean against anything unless he is unable to
stand without support.

### Substitutes of Qiyam

1. If a man cannot stand without support he should or may stand with
support;  
 2. If he cannot stand, even with support, he should sit without
support;  
 3. If he cannot sit without support, he may sit with support,  
 4. If he cannot sit even with support, he must lie on his right side,
facing qibla;  
 5. If it is not possible, he must lie on his left side facing qibla:  
 6. If even that is not possible, he should lie down on his back, his
feet towards the qibla.  
 In the last three alternatives, he should bow down for *ruku* and
*sajdah*; the bowing for *sajdah* should be more than that for the
*ruku*. If he cannot bow down, he should perform *ruku* and *sajdah*
with his eyelids.  
 If he can stand for a part of the prayer, he should stand up to that
time, and then should sit down.  
 This rule applies to the alternatives also.

### Sunnat (mustahab) differences between the qiyam of a man and of a woman

Man stands with his feet apart from 4 to 8 inches; woman stands with her
feet close to each other.  
 Man stretches his hands downwards resting on thighs; woman keeps her
hands on her breasts.  
 Man and woman both should keep their eyes (during *qiyam*) on the place
of *sajdah* (muhr).

Ruku’
-----

4. *Ruku’* (bowing): It is *wajib* in each *rak’at* once; except *Salat
al-Ayaat* which has 5 *rukus* in each rak’at.  
 There are 5 *wajibs* in *ruku’*:-  
 (a) To bend so low that the palms rest on the knees;  
 (b) To recite *'dhikr'* of *ruku’* after bending up to the approved
position. *Dhikr* of *Ruku’*:  
 '*Subhanallah*' (Glory be to Allah) 3 times, or *'Subhana Rabbiyal
‘Azeemi wa bi hamdih'*  
 (Glory and Praise be to my Lord Cherisher, the Great) once.  
 (c) While reciting the *dhikr*, one should remain motionless as far as
possible;  
 (d) Standing again after *ruku’*, raising the head first;  
 (e) *'Tama’ninat'* in the qiyam after *ruku’*.  
 These things are sunnat in *ruku’*;-  
 (a) Saying *takbir* before kneeling down;  
 (b) Keeping the eyes fixed between the feet during *ruku’*;  
 (c) Reciting *dhikr* 3, or 5, or 7 or more times;  
 (d) Reciting *salawat* after *dhikr*;  
 (e) Reciting *'Sami’allahu liman hamidah'* after standing erect after
*ruku’*.

### Sunnat (mustahab) differences between ruku’ of a man and of a woman:

(a) A man must keep his palms on his knees; a woman on her thighs above
the knees;  
 (b) A man should keep his fingers stretched on his knees; a woman
should keep them joined together;  
 (c) A man should keep his arms and elbows away from the body, a woman
should keep them joined to her body;  
 (d) A man should keep the knees stretched backwards, a woman should
keep them not so tight;  
 (e) A man should keep his back in such a horizontal level that even if
a drop of water is dropped on the back it does not move down; a woman
should keep her back in an arch fashion.


