Lesson 34: Sajdah (II)
======================

Mustahabbat (recommended acts) in sajdah
----------------------------------------

The following are *mustahab* (recommended) in *sajdah*:-

1. Keeping the nose also on earth.  
 2. During *sajdah*, the hands must be in level with the ears and should
point towards qibla. Fingers should be close to each other.  
 3. Eyes should see towards the nose.  
 4. Recitation of *dhikr* more than once, as already explained in case
of *Ruku’*.  
 5. Recitation of *salawat* after dhikr.  
 6. After rising from the first *sajdah*, to say, first *takbir* and
then *Astaghfirullah Rabbi wa atubu ilayh*. (I seek pardon from Allah,
my Lord and I turn towards Him).Then saying *takbir* again before the
2nd *sajdah*.  
 7. To say *takbir* after rising from second *sajdah* while sitting.  
 8. Hands should rest, after rising from every *sajdah*, on the
thighs.  
 9. Recitation of *Bi hawlillahi wa quwatihi aqumu wa aq'ud*, during the
process of rising for the next *rak'at*. Remember that it is the only
place in the prayer when recitation of a *dhikr* is prescribed during
the motion of the body. All the other Surahs and *dhikr* must be recited
when your body is motionless. (Meaning of this *dhikr*: Due to the power
given by Allah, and because of the strength given from Him, I stand and
sit).

Makruhat (disapproved acts) in Sajdah
-------------------------------------

1. Sitting on heels (for men).  
 2. Keeping the arms on the ground during *sajdah*.  
 3. Recitation of portions from the Qur'an in *sajdah*.

Sunnat (recommened) differences between sajdah of a man and a woman
-------------------------------------------------------------------

1. While bendiing down for *sajdah*, a man should lower his hands first
but a woman should lower her legs first.  
 2. On arising from *sajdah*, a man should sit on crossed feet, the back
of right foot resting on the sole of the left, both feet turned out
towards one side of the body. But a woman should sit on her hams with
the soles of the feet resting on the ground.  
 3. While rising for the next *rak'at*, a man should keep first his
hands on the ground, then rising the legs (before the hands) should
stand. A woman should keep her hands on her knees while sitting and
should stand up straight from that position.  
 4. A man, while in *sajdah*, should keep his arms apart from his body.
A woman should keep her arms close to her body.  
 These five *wajib* acts (*Niyyah*, *Takbiratul-Ihram*, *Qiyam*, *Ruku’*
and *Sajdah*) were *rukn*. It means that if anyone of them is left out
or added in prayer, though by mistake or unintentionally, the prayer is
*batil* (void).


