Lesson 38: Other wajib (obligatory) acts
========================================

7. Dhikr
--------

*Dhikr* means the *tasbeeh* of *ruku’* and *sajdah*.

8. Tashahhud
------------

*Tashahhud* is *wajib* after the second *sajdah* of the second *rak'at*
and that of the last *rak’at*.  
 Six things are *wajib* in it. They are:-  
 1. Reciting *shahadatayn*. It is *ahwat* to recite in the following
form: *Ash-hadu an la ilaha illal-lahu wahdahu la sharika lahu, wa
ash-hadu anna Muhammadan ‘abduhu wa rasuluh*."  
 2. Reciting *salawat* after *shahadatayn*.  
 3. *Tartib* in its sentences as explained above.  
 4. *Muwalat*.  
 5. Reciting *tashahhud* while remain sitting.  
 6. *Tama’ninat*.

### Meaning of tashahhud

I bear witness that there is no God but Allah; the only One; There is no
partner or equal to Him. And I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant
and His Apostle. O Lord! May Thy peace be on Muhammad and His
descendants.

9. Mustahabbat
--------------

It is *mustahab* in *tashahhud* that the hands of person rest on the
thighs. The fingers should remain close to each other pointing towards
qibla. Eyes should rest on the lap. The position of sitting for the man
and the woman has already been described In the description of *sajdah*.

### Salaam

*Salaam* is *wajib* after the *tashahhud* of the last *rak’at*. Four
things are *wajib* in it:  
 1. Reciting either of these two sentences: "*Assalarnu ‘alayna wa ‘ala
‘ibadillahis salihin*."(Peace be on us and on all righteous servants of
God). "*Assalaamu ‘alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.*" (Peace be on
all of you and the mercy of Allah and His blessings).  
 2. Remain sitting while reciting *salaam*.  
 3. Correct pronunciation.  
 4. *Tama’ninat*.

### Mustahabbat

1. Reciting both *salaams*.  
 2. Addition of "*Assalaarnu alayka ayyuhan Nabiyu wa rahma-tullahi wa
barakatuh*" (Peace be on thee, O Apostle, and the Mercy of Allah and His
Blessings).  
 3. Saying *takbir* three times after *Salaam*.

10. Tartib
----------

It is *wajib* to perform all the acts of prayer in the prescribed
sequence. Any change in that sequence will render the prayer invalid, if
done intentionally (and in case of a *rukn* sequence, even
unintentionally).

11. Muwalaat
------------

One act of *salaat* must be followed by the next act immediately. The
intervening time between two acts should not be so long as to give the
impression that the person concerned is not praying any more.


