Lesson 41: Valid (Sahih) Doubts
===============================

(Doubts that require remedial procedure).

Nine cases of doubts are such that the prayer is not rendered *batil*
(invalid), provided the remedial procedure as prescribed in each case is
carried out. It is not necessary to offer the prayer again.  
 1. Doubt during a four *rak'at* prayer after both the *sajdah*s whether
it was the second or the third *rak’at*. In such a case it should be
regarded as the third *rak'at* and the prayer is to be finished after
offering the fourth *rak'at*. Thereafter *Salat al-ihtiyat*
(precautionary prayer) of one *rak’at* by standing be offered. .  
 2. Doubt, after the two *sajdah*s, whether it was second the second,
third or the fourth *rak’at*. In such a case, the prayer should be
finished by considering it as the fourth *rak’at* and *Salat al-ihtiya*t
of two *rak’at* by standing is to be offered.  
 3. Doubt after the two *sajdah*s, whether it was the second, third or
the fourth *rak’at*. In such a case, prayer is to be be finished by
considering it as the fourth *rak’at* and *Salat al-ihtiyat* of two
*rak’at*s by standing and then another two *rak’at*s by sitting is to be
offered.  
 4. Doubt after two *sajdah*s whether it was the fourth or the fifth
*rak’at*. In a such case, the prayer should be completed then and there
and two *sajdah*s of *sahw* should be offered immediately.  
 Note: "After the two *sajdah*s", in above 4 cases, means after
completing the *dhikr* of 2nd *sajdah*.  
 5. Doubt whether it was the third or the fourth *rak’at*. In such a
case the prayer should be finished by considering it as the fourth
*rak’at* and *Salat al-ihtiyat* of one *rak’at* by standing or two
*rak’at* by sitting is to be offered.  
 6. Doubt while in *qiyam* (standing posture) whether it is fourth or
fifth *rak’at*. In such a case, sit down at once and finish the prayer.
Thereafter *Salat al-ihtiyat* of one *rak’at* by standing or two
*rak’at*s by sitting is to be offered.  
 7. Doubt while in *qiyam*, i.e. before *ruku’* whether it was the third
or the fifth *rak’at*. In such a case, at once sit down and after
finishing Prayer, offer two *rak’at*s of *Salat al-ihtiyat* by
standing.  
 8. Doubt while in *qiyam* whether it was the third, fourth or the fifth
*rak’at*. In such a case, at once sit down and after finishing the
prayer offer two *rak’at*s of *Salat al-ihtiyat* by standing and two
*rak’at*s by sitting.  
 9. Doubt while in *qiyam*, whether it was the fifth or the sixth
*rak’at*. In such a case, prayer should be finished at once and two
*sajdah*s of *sahw* will have to be done.  
 Note: In last the mentioned four cases, two *sajdah* of *sahw* should
be done for the unwanted *qiyam*.


