Lesson 43: Prayer of Ihtiyat and Sajdah al-Sahw
===============================================

Salat al-ihtiyat
----------------

You have been taught that in some doubts about the number of the
*rak’at*s of prayer you have to pray one or two *rak’at*s of *Salat
al-ihtiyat*. Here I am explaining how to pray that prayer.

Soon after finishing the prayer (in which the doubt had occurred and
which requires *Salat al-ihtiyat* for its completion and validation)
without looking away from qibla or doing anything which makes a prayer
invalid, you are to stand up and make the *niyyah*. (if the *Salat
al-ihtiyat* is to be performed sitting, then remain sitting after the
first prayer and make the *niyyah*). *Niyyah* is to be done in the
following way: "I pray *Salat al-ihtiyat* one (or two) *rak’at*(s)
*wajib qurbatan ilal- Laah*." Then say *Takbiratul-Ihram*. Recite only
Surah al-Hamd in whisper. Go to *ruku’* then do *sajdah*; recite
*tashahhud* and *salaam*. Your *Salat al-ihtiyat* is finished.

If you have to recite two rakats of *Salat al-ihtiyat*, then you should
stand up for the second *rak’at* just after the second *sajdah* of the
first *rak’at* in the usual way. Recite the second *rak’at* also with
just Surah al-Hamd, without even *qunut*, and then finish the prayer in
usual way.

Sajdah al-Sahw
--------------

*Sajdah al-sahw* is *wajib* when:-  
 1. One has talked by mistake in prayer; or  
 2. Has left one *sajdah* by mistake; or  
 3. Has forgotten *tashahhud* by mistake; or  
 4. Has recited *salaam* by mistake at a wrong place; or  
 5. Has added or omitted by mistake any such thing which is not *rukn*;
or  
 6. In the 4-*rak’at* prayer has doubt after the second *sajdah* whether
it was the fourth or the fifth *rak’at*.

### How to do Sajdah al-Sahw

Soon after finishing the prayer, *niyyah* should be done as follows: " I
do *sajdah al-sahw* in lieu of *tashahhud* (or *salaam* or *sajdah* or
*qiyam* etc.. as the case may be) *wajib qurbatan ilal-Laah*." Then
*sajdah* should be done. In *Sajdah* you have to say once "*Bismillahi
wa billahi Assalaamu alayka ayyuhan-Nabiyyu wa rahrnatullahi wa
barakatuh*." Then raise your head; sit properly; go to *sajdah* for the
second time; recite the above-mentioned *dhikr* once; sit down properly;
read *tashahhud* and *salaam*.

If you have forgotten *tashahhud* or one *sajdah* in the prayer, it is
*wajib* to do its *qada* at once after the prayer; then the *sajdah
al-sahw* is to be done just after the *qada tashahhud* or *sajdah*.  
 If after the prayer, but before the *qada* of the *sajdah* or the
*tashahhud*, if any of such actions are done which invalidate the prayer
(like turning away from qibla}, it is necessary to do the *qada* and the
*sajdah* *al-sahw* as required, and then to repeat the prayer.


