Lesson 44: Ghusl
================

1. Seven kinds of ghusl are wajib
---------------------------------

(1) *Janabat*, (2) *Haiz*, (3) *Nifas*. (4) *Istihaza* (5) *Mayyit*, (6)
*Mass al-Maiyit*. and (7) The *ghusl* of *nadhar*, *qasam* or â€˜*ahd*

2. How to do ghusl
------------------

There are two ways of doing ghusl: (1) *Tartibi* and (2) *Irtimasi*.

### Ghusl tartibi

In this way of *ghusl*, the body is washed in three stages. First, the
head down to the chamber-bone is washed including the face and neck;
second, the right side of the body is washed from the shoulders down to
the feet; third the left side of the body is washed likewise. This
*ghusl* is preferable, even if you are bathing in a pool or river or
sea. In a bath-room no method can be used other than the *tartibi*
*ghusl*.

### Ghusl Irtimasi

It can be done in pools or rivers only. In it the whole body is immersed
in the water at once after the *niyyah*, not gradually.

3. Conditions of ghusl:
-----------------------

All the conditions of *wudhu* (mentioned in lesson No. 20) apply to the
*ghusl* also, except conditions No: 5, 7, 8. 12 and 13.  
 The difference in these conditions are as follows:

5. The whole body must be *tahir* (clean);

7. *Tartib* is necessary in *ghusl* *tartibi* only. In *ghusl*
*irtimasi* there is no *tartib*.  
 8. There is no *muwalat* in *ghusl tartibi*. It means that if you wash
your head then you go out and come again after some time and wash your
right side and then left side, your *ghusl* is correct.  
 12. There is no fixed law as how should you wash the body. If you
maintain the *tartib*, i.e. if you wash your head first, then the right
side, then the left side, It is enough. There is no rule that you should
begin the washing of head, for example, from the upper side and then
come down; or wash the right side, for example, from shoulder and then
come down to the foot. You may begin from the foot and go above up to
the shoulder.  
 13. There is no *masah* (wiping) in *ghusl*.


