Lesson 46: Ghusl of haidh and nifas
===================================

(1) Haidh
---------

"*Haidh*" means "menstruation" generally known as monthly course' or
'period'. Every adult and healthy woman has her periods regularly.
Shari’ah has laid down some rules for this period, a summary of which is
given here:

1. Any blood seen before completion of 9 years or after 50 years of age
is not "*haidh*", It is called *'istihadha'*, rules of which will be
explained later on.

2. Duration of "*haidh*" is not less than 3 and not more than 10 days.
Blood which comes for less than 3 days, or which comes after 10 days, is
called *'istihadha'*.

3. There are detailed rules concerning woman which are based on whether
in condition of *haidh* she has regular date and/or number of days or
not; and whether she is having her period for the first time, or whether
she has forgotten her date and number of days.  
 But it is not possible to give all the details in this small booklet.

(2) Nifas
---------

The bleeding after child birth is called *nifas*. If blood appears
before the delivery is not *nifas*; it is *istihadha*.

The bleeding after 10 days from delivery is not *nifas*; it is
*istihadha*. But there is no minimum time for *nifas*. Even if it stops
5 minutes or less after delivery, it is *nifas*.

(3) Things which are haram in haidh and nifas
---------------------------------------------

1. All the things which are haram in the condition of *janabat*, are
haram in the condition of *haidh* and *nifas*, before doing the *ghusl*.
Likewise, all the things which are *makruh* in *janabat* are *makruh* in
*haidh* and *nifas* also.

2. In addition, it is *haraam* to give divorce to a woman in the period
of *haidh* or *nifas*. Some other things are also *haraam* in these
periods, but it is not the place to go into details.

4. The woman during *haidh* or *nifas* is exempted from prayers, and
every such *'ibadat'* which requires *ghusl*, *wudhu* or *tayammum*. But
she may recite *du’a* etc, (without touching the writings of the Qur’an
or the names of Allah, the Prophets or the Imams, which is *haram* for
her as mentioned earlier). She is not required to pray *qadha* of the
prayers left during the period of *haidh* and *nifas*.

5. A woman in *haidh* or *nifas* cannot fast; but she must fast its
*qadha* after that period.


