Lesson 51: Salat al-‘Eidayn
===========================

The Muslims observe two big festivals in a year. One as Eid-ul-Fitr and
the other is Eid-ul-Adha.  
 These two are the days of great festivity.  
 Eid-ul-Fitr is observed at the end of the holy month of Ramadan. The
fasting creates the feelings of faith, spirituality, patience,
contentment, and helping the poor. With a view to express our joy on
these feelings we observe Eid. The festivity of the Muslims is not akin
to dancing, singing vulgar songs or playing dirty games. We offer our
gratefulness to Allah and also offer the Salat al-‘Eid for those
religious, spiritual and moral gains which accrue to us in the holy
month of Ramadan.  
 The Muslims offer sacrifice on the day of Eid-ul-Adha. Thus they pledge
to give away their lives in the way of Allah and that of lslam. This is
a great month for the believer. This is the motto of a Muslim's life. In
happiness of this pledge, we offer prayer of Eid-ul-Adha. The prayer of
Eid is not obligatory (*wajib)* but recommended (*mustahab*) nowadays
when our present Imam is hidden from our eyes. The *niyyah* (intention)
of Salat al-Eid should be done as follows:-  
 "I pray two *rak’at* prayer of Eid-ul-Fitr or Eid-ul-Adha *sunnat
qurbatan ilal-Laah*.”  
 In the first *rak’at,* after Surah al-Hamd, Surah al-A'la is recited
then the hands are raised for *qunut*.

Du’a in the Qunut
-----------------

*"Allahumma ahl al-kibriya’i wa’l azamah wa ahl al-jud wa’l jabarut, wa
ahl al-‘afw war-rahmah, wa ahl at-taqwa wa’l maghfirah; asaluka bihaqqi
haadha’l yawm-illadhi ja'altahu li’l Muslimeen eidan, wa li Muhammadin
Salla’llahu ‘alayhi wa Aalihi dhukhran wa karamatan wa* *sharafan wa
mazeeda; an tusalli ‘ala Muhammdin wa Aali Mumammadin, wa an tudkhilani
fi kulli khayrin adkhalta fihi Muhammadan wa Aala Muhammadin wa an
tukhrijani min kulli su’in akhrajta minhu Muhammadan wa Aala Muhammadin,
salawatuka 'alayhi wa 'alayhim ajma'in. Allahumma, inni as'aluka khayra
ma sa’alaka bihi ‘ibadukas-salihun; wa a'udhu bika mimma ista'aza minhu
'ibaduka’l rnukhlisun."*  
 In first *rak’at*, the *qunut* is recited five times along with
*takbirs* (*AIlahu Akbar*). Then after the *ruku’* and *sajdah*, the
second *rak'at* begins  
 In the second *rak'at* Surah al-Shams is recited after Surah al-Hamd.  
 In Surah al-Shams, Allah has directed man to keep his self pure and to
protect himself from sins. After the recitation of this Surah, the
*qunut* is again recited but now only four times. Thereafter *ruku’*,
*sajdah*, *tashahhud* and *Salaam* are done in the usual way.


