Lesson 55: Muftirat & Kaffarah
==============================

Muftirat
--------

The things or actions which make a fast void (*batil*) are 10 in
number:-  
 1. and 2. Eating or drinking anything. 3. Sexual relation; 4 Speaking,
writing or conveying by sign any lie about Allah, the Prophets, the
Imams, or Bibi Fatima (S.A.); 5. Submerging the head in water; 6.
Conveying thick dust, smoke or steam up to throat; 7. Vomiting; 8. Doing
any such thing by which semen comes out; 9. Enema with liquid; 10.
Remaining in the condition of *janabat*, *haiz* or *nifas* up to *subh
al-sadiq* (true dawn).  
 Note 1. All these things break the fast if they are committed
intentionally. If a person forgets that he is fasting, and eats or
drinks, his fast is correct. Likewise, if he vomits involuntarily; or
speaks something about God or Imams which he thinks is correct (though
in fact it is wrong). or somebody else pushes him into water and his
head goes into water; or he sees a dust coming towards him and tries his
best to protect himself from it, but still inhales some of it
involuntarily, his fast is correct.  
 Note 2. Remaining in the condition of *janabat* makes a fast void in
the month of Ramadan and in its *qadha* only. Other fasts are not
affected by it.  
 Note 3. Not doing *ghusl* (or *tayammum*. if allowed) of *haiz*, or
*nifas* before *subh al-sadiq* (true dawn) makes the fast void in the
month of Ramadan only. Other fasts (including the *qadha* of Ramadan)
are not affected by it.  
 Note 4. When a fast is broken by any of the above-mentioned *muftirat*,
or when a person does not keep fast (without any excuse. i.e. illness or
travel), he has to pay *kaffarah*. in addition to its *qadha*.

Kaffarah
--------

The *kaffarah* of breaking the fast of one day of Ramadan is :  
 1. Emancipating a slave; 2.If that is not possible, then
two-months-fast consecutively; 3.And if that is also not possible, then
feeding 60 poor Mu’mins.  
*Kaffarah* of breaking the *qadha* of one day of Ramadan, if broken
after *zawal*, is: 1. Feeding 10 poor Mu’mins: 2. and if that is - not
possible, then fasting three days.  
*Kaffarah* of breaking the fast of specified *nadhr* is:  
 1. Emancipating a slave; 2. If that is not possible, then feeding 10
poor Mu’min; 3. Or clothing 10 poor Mu’min; 4. And if he cannot do any
of these then, fasting for three days.  
 Note 1. In feeding, it is enough to give each man 1 ½ pound of wheat or
rice.  
 Note 2. Whenever in a *kaffarah* a certain thing is prescribed, its
price is not acceptable. For instance, it is not allowed to give money
of 1 ½ pound of wheat, or the price of a shirt and trousers to a poor
man. It is obligatory to give him the grain or clothes.  
 Note 3. When a fast is broken by any *haram* thing, like wine etc. all
3 *kaffarah*s are to be paid (emancipation of slave, 60 days fast,
feeding 60 poor Mu’mins), as a punishment.  
 Note 4. In two-months-fast, at least 31 days should be fasted
consecutively. The remaining 29 days may be fasted with gaps.


