Lesson 56: Nadhr
================

*Nadhr* is a vow, a voluntary undertaking, of an act of virtue, as
binding one's self in gratitude for some special favor prayed for. It is
a solemn promise to God.

Types of Nadhr
--------------

(a) *Nadhr al-*-*bir* (*Shukr*, Thanks) - if a particular wish is
fulfilled then to undertake to do an act of virtue.  
 (b) *Nadhr* *istidfa’ al-baliyah* - for removal of a hardship or
difficulty.  
 (c) *Nadhr al-zajr wa al-tanbih* - *Nadhr* for reprimanding oneself on
committing a sin, e.g., If I backbite someone then I shall be bound to
pray two *rak’at* of prayer.  
 (d) *Nadhr al-tabarru*’, - It is a *Nadhr* without any of the above
conditions; e.g., to bind oneself to pray *Salat al-tahajjud* during the
month of *Ramadan* for the sake of Allah.

Conditions of Nadhr
-------------------

*Nadhr* should be performed In the following manner:-  
 (1) A *Nadhr* should be kept for the sake of Allah. It is essential to
say *"lil-Laahi ‘alayya*" (It is, for Allah, upon me to do so) whilst
doing *Nadhr*.  
 (2) A person doing *Nadhr* must be adult and sane; and should do
*Nadhr* with his own free will.  
 (3) If an extravagant person, or one who is prevented by Shari’ah to
deal in his property or wealth does any *Nadhr* involving money or
wealth it is not valid.  
 (4) If a husband asks his wife not to keep *Nadhr* and whilst
performing *Nadhr* the rights of the husband are likely to be encroached
upon, then the wife cannot possibly keep such a *Nadhr*. However, if the
husband has granted his permission then he cannot stop his wife from
performing the *Nadhr*.  
 (5) Whilst doing *niyyah* of a *Nadhr*, one should be capable of
performing the said *Nadhr*. Otherwise the *Nadhr* is void. For example,
if one does a *Nadhr* that he will go to Karbala on foot, and it is out
of his bounds, then such a *Nadhr* is void.  
 (6) A *Nadhr* cannot be kept to give up any obligatory or recommended
act or to carry out any  
*makruh* or *haraam* act because such a *Nadhr* is void.  
 (7) A *Nadhr* should always be performed according to the original
Intention. For instance, if one keeps a *Nadhr* to give charity or
recite prayers on a particular day, then it should be performed on that
very particular day and should not be postponed to any other day.  
 (8) If a person keeps a *Nadhr* to fast on a particular day and he
intentionally does not fast on that day, then he shall have to keep
*qadha* and at the same time pay *kaffarah*. However, if he is prevented
from fasting on that particular day because of a genuine reason, e.g. if
he falls sick, or travels for Hajj, then he shall have to keep *qadha*
only; there is no *kaffarah* on him.  
 (9) If one keeps a *Nadhr* to give some money for the shrine of an Imam
or a martyr or any other pious person, then it is *ihtiyat wajib* to use
it in its construction, light, etc.  
 (10) If the *Nadhr* is kept for an Imam or martyr or any Imam zada,
(e.g., if my patient becomes well, then I will give as *Nadhr*, for the
sake of Allah, shs. 100/-, to Imam Husain A.S.), then if he had a
*niyyah* to use that money in a particular purpose (e.g. construction of
an Imambargah}, then it must be used for that purpose.  
 And if at the time of doing *niyyah* of that *Nadhr* he did not specify
a particular use, then it is called "*Nadhr al--mutlaq*" (unspecified
*Nadhr*); and in this case the money should be used in a purpose which
has some connection with that Imam or martyr. For example, for the needy
pilgrims to his shrine, or the construction of his tomb, etc.  
 (11) The money of *Nadhr al-*-*mutlaq* may also be used for the purpose
of spreading and/or strengthening the religion, and for the help of poor
Shi’ah.  
 (12) When one wants to spend the money of *Nadhr* (mentioned in Nos. 10
and 11), it is better to do *niyyah* that one is using it on behalf of
the Imam or martyr concerned and that its reward is for that Imam or
martyr.


