Questions
=========

Lessons 2/3
-----------

1. State whether the following were Imam, Ahl al-Kisa’ or both:-  
 (a) Hasan al-Mujtaba. (b) Ali al-Murtaza (c) Musa al-Kadhim.  
 2: Name the Imam whose life was shortest and the one whose life is the
longest?

Lessons 4/7
-----------

1.Name the Books which were revealed to the *Ulu’l-Azm* Prophets.  
 2 Name the month of Fasting, the ninth month of Islam.

Lessons 8/13
------------

1. Prove in your own words the existence of God.  
 2. Give one verse from the Qur’an to prove the Oneness of Allah.  
 3. Why is *qiyamat* necessary? When will it come?  
 4. Name the Imam with whom you will be called on the Day of Judgment.

Lessons 14/16
-------------

1. At what age does a boy and a girl have to fulfill religious
obligations?  
 .2. Name the month in which Hajj is performed.  
 3. What will be the amount of *zakat* paid by a man who had kept 200
silver coins?  
 4. How much *khums* should be paid on a saving of shillings one hundred
fifty? How shall this money be divided?  
 5. When is Jihad obligatory? Would you call it Jihad if people without
the permission of Imam attack a country for worldly gains ?  
 6. What do you understand by *‘amr bi’l ma’ruf* and *nahy ‘an
al-munkar*?  
 7. Wtih whom is *tabarra* done?  
 8 What is the meaning of *a’lam*?

Lesson 17
---------

1. Give five examples of each of the following:-  
*Wajib* *Haram* *Makruh*.  
 2. Explain in brief the difference between a *mushrik* and a *munafiq*.

Lesson 18
---------

1. Give a single term:  
 (a) For a thing taken illegally. (b) For a thing taken lawfully.  
 2. What is the difference between *muwalat* and *tartib*? Explain
giving examples.

Lesson 19
---------

1. Explain with reason, whether the following things are *najis* or
*pak*:-  
 (a) Urine of human being.  
 (b) Dung of cow.  
 (c) Stool of snake.  
 (d) Hair of a dead man.  
 (e) Dead body of a Muslim when it is still warm.  
 (f) Sweat of a person lawfully *junub*.

Lesson 20
---------

Describe what is the effect of the following, giving reason of your
answer:  
 1. A dog drinks from a water which was exactly a *kur*.  
 2. *Najasah* is mixed with rose-water more than a *kur*.  
 3. A few drops of urine are mixed with water more than a *kur*.  
 4. A car splashes water on your clothes while it is heavily raining.  
 5. A pig licks a pot.  
 6. You walk bare-foot on a wet earth with *najasah* on your sole.  
 7. A *najasah* is dried by mere heat on an immovable thing.  
 8. A dead dog changes into earth.  
 9. You kill a mosquito which leaves blood on your hand.  
 10. A *kafir* accepts Islam.

Lesson 21
---------

1. When do wine and its container become clean?  
 2. Explain what is *istibra’*.  
 3. While visiting a Muslim (who deliberately ignores the laws of
shari'ah) you noticed a chair being *najis*. On your next visit, you
happened to sit on the same chair with your wet clothes. Are your
clothes pak or *najis*?

Lesson 22
---------

1. What is the method of *taharah* after urinating?  
 2. With which things can *taharah* be done after relieving bowels?  
 3. What are the conditions for *taharah* with paper, etc?

Lesson 23
---------

1. Which are the obligatory actions in *wudhu*?  
 2. Describe the *mustahab* acts of *wudhu*.

Lesson 24
---------

Explain briefly the effect of the following actions:-  
 1. A man performed *wudhu* at a place where a sign board says "No
admission without permission"  
 2. A man performed *wudhu* at a public park.  
 3. You helped your friend in performing *wudhu* by pouring water on his
hand.  
 4. A silver pot is used for performing *wudhu*.  
 5. You completed *wudhu* but did not cleanse the sole of your foot
which was *najis*.  
 6. A girl performs *wudhu* while her nails are covered with nail
polish.  
 7. A girl performs *wudhu* while having hina color on her palms.  
 8. You poured water on hand starting from fingers going towards the
elbow.

Lesson 25
---------

When do the following prayer becomes obligatory (*wajib)*?  
 1. *Salat al-Ayaat*.  
 2. *Salat al-Ijarah*.  
 3. *Salat al-Mayyit*.  
 4. *Salat al-‘Eidayn*.

Lesson 26
---------

1. A man takes one minute for one *rak’at*. The time is 6.26 p.m. The
sun is to set at 6.30 p.m. and he has not prayed Zuhr and Asr yet. Which
prayer should he pray first and why?  
 2. A man prays ‘Isha at 6.15 p.m. which is the exact starting time of
Maghrib? Is his ‘Isha prayer valid? Why?  
 3. Differentiate between *fadhilah* time and reserved time of prayer.

Lesson 27
---------

1. How will you find out the direction of qibla in a Muslim village?  
 2. How should a man pray when he is uncertain of direction of qibla?  
 3. In what direction should a man face while in the toilet?

Lesson 28
---------

Describe the effects of following actions, giving the reason of your
answers:-  
 1. (a) A prayer is performed in a *tahir* *ghasbi* clothes.  
 (b) A hair of a cat is on the clothes of a person praying.  
 (c) A belt made from a lawfully slaughtered cow is worn during
prayer.  
 (d) A woman is wearing a golden ring during her prayers.  
 (e) A man has a handkerchief of pure silk in a pocket during the
prayers.  
 (f) A man while praying is wearing clothes which have a few drops of
blood of a *Kafir* on it.  
 (g) A man prays in a dry *najis* place but the place of *sajdah* is
tahir.  
 2. Under what circumstances can a person pray without having clothes
on?

Lesson 29
---------

1. What is the reward of a prayer in Masjid al-Haram?  
 2. What is the reward of a prayer in Masjid Jami’?

Lesson 30
---------

1. Are *Adhan* and *Iqamah* obligatory?  
 2. Is "*ashhadu anna Ameeral Mu'minina ‘Aliy-yan Hujjatul-Laah*" a part
of *Adhan* or *Iqamah*?

Lessons 31/38
-------------

1. Are the following things *wajib al-rukni*, *wajib ghayr-rukni* or
*mustahab*?  
*ruku’* - *muwalaat* – *dhikr* of *sajdah* - *salawat* after *dhikr* of
*ruku’* - *tashahhud* - *niyyah* - *qiyam* at the time of
*Takbiratul-Ihram* - *salaam* – *Sami’ Allahu liman hamidah*- *qunut*-
*qira’at*- *tartib*.  
 2. What will be the effect of the following:-  
 (a) You intentionally did not recite *qunut* in prayer.  
 (b) In addition to the seven parts of your body, you also kept your
nose on the earth during  
*sajdah*. .  
 (c) You forgot *Takbiratul-ihram* after *niyyah*.  
 (d) You left out one *sajdah* in prayer by mistake.  
 (e) While reciting Surah al-Hamd you purposely kept your body moving.  
 3. What is the difference between *'wajib al-rukni*' and *'wajib ghayr
rukni*?'

Lesson 39
---------

Describe the actions which invalidate a prayer.

Lessons 40/41
-------------

What are you supposed to do in the following?  
 1. Doubt occurred in *ruku’* as to whether you had recited
Surah-al-Hamd.  
 2. In Maghrib prayer a doubt occurred whether it was the 2nd or the 3rd
*rak’at*.  
 3. You became doubtful in a four *rak’at* prayer, at the time of
*tashahhud*, whether you had prayed the 1st *rak’at*.  
 4. At the time of Maghrib you became doubtful whether you had prayed
your Asr prayer properly.  
 5. You became doubtful in a four *rak’at* prayer before the second
*sajdah* whether it was the 2nd or the 3rd *rak’at*.

Lesson 42
---------

State the remedial procedure for the following doubts:  
 1. In a four *rak’at* prayer, doubt occurred whether it was the 3rd or
the 4th *rak’at*.  
 2. A doubt occurred after both the *sajdah*s whether it was the 2nd,
the 3rd or the 4th *rak’at*.  
 3. Doubt occurred after the two *sajdah*s whether it was the 2nd or the
4th *rak’at*.  
 4. Doubt occurred while in *qiyam*, whether it was the 5th or the 6th
*rak’at*.

Lesson 43
---------

1. Explain with examples when *sajdah* *sahw* is *wajib*?  
 2. When does *Salat al-ihtiyat* become *wajib*?  
 3. How is *sajdah* *sahw* done?

Lesson 44/45
------------

1. Explain the difference between *ghusl tartibi* and *ghusl
irtimasi*.  
 2. Which are *wajib* *ghusl*s for a man?  
 3. Can a *junub* person enter a Hussayniya to hear majlis?  
 4. Can a *junub* person recite the Qur'an by memory?

Lesson 46
---------

1. What is the minimum period of *haidh* and *nifas*? What is the
maximum duration?  
 2. Which things are *haram* during the period of *haidh* and *nifas*?  
 3. Can *haidh* start before the age of 9 years?

Lesson 47
---------

1. What is *istihadha*?  
 2. Explain the difference between *istihadha* *mutawassita* and
*kathira*.  
 3. What should be done in *istihadha* *qalila*?

Lesson 48
---------

1. (a) At noon, you have no water; but there is possibility of getting
water long before sunset.  
 Are you allowed to do *tayammum* and pray Zuhr at noon?  
 (b) A person has been advised not to use cold water in any
circumstances for doing either  
*wudhu* or *ghusl*. Should he do *tayammum* for prayers?  
 (c) Water is sufficient for *wudhu* only if your horse or cow is denied
water. Should you use that  
 water for *wudhu*?  
 2. Name the things on which *tayammum* is allowed.

Lesson 49
---------

1. When is the Prayer of Ayaat obligatory?  
 2. What is the method of the Prayer of Ayaat?

Lesson 50
---------

1. What is the meaning of *wajib takhyiri*?  
 2. What are the conditions for the Friday prayer?

Lesson 51
---------

1. Is Eidayn prayer obligatory nowadays?  
 2. What is the method of Eidayn prayer?

Lesson 52
---------

1. Explain some social benefits of *jama’ah* prayer.  
 2. Give some spiritual benefits of *jama’ah* prayer.

Lesson 53
---------

1. What is the meaning of "*wajib kifa’i*"?  
 2. What is the method of *Salat al-mayyit*?  
 3. Is *wudhu* or *ghusl* obligatory for *Salat al-mayyit*?

Lesson 54
---------

1. What are the conditions of the validity of fasting?  
 2. Who are the persons exempted from fasting?

Lesson 55
---------

1. Explain the result of the following actions on Fast:  
 (a) A person gets into water up to his chest.  
 (b) Forgetting that he was fasting, he drank half a liter of water.  
 (c) Intentionally not doing *Ghusl janabat* up to *subh al-sadiq*.  
 2. What is *kaffarah* for an old aged person who cannot fast


