A Study of Sunni and Shii Traditions Concerning Tahrif Part 2
=============================================================

The Collection of the Qur'an and Tahrif
=======================================

Throughout the course of history, the Muslims' stand concern­ing the
Qur'an is characterized by the absence of doubt, regard­ing any of the
verses and their belief that it is in totally a revela­tion of God
Almighty which has remained secure from deletions and additions.

Despite this belief, some traditions narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah in
the Sihah and other books on tradition concerning the compilation of the
Qur'an appear to indicate the absence of tawatur of Quelinic verses and
claim their basis on khabar al-wahid.1 Here we shall men­tion some of
these traditions and later examine them critically. The following
tradition is narrated by al-Bukhari:

Zayd ibn Thabit narrates: "Abu Bakr called me after the battle of
Yamamah. Umar lbn al-Khattab was then also with him and Abu Bakr said to
me:' Umar had come to me and said: "The battle of Yamamah has taken a
heavy toll of the reciters of the Qur'in, and I fear that fighting in
other places would similarly result in a loss of reciters. This would
lead to the loss of many Quranic verses. I think it is advisable that
you should order the Qur'an to be collected."

I said to Umar: "How can we do something which the Prophet (S) did not?"
Umar replied: "It is, by God, a good thing," and he continued to remind
me of it until God opened my breast to the matter, and I appreci­ated
the advice of Umar: " Zayd said: "Abu Bakr said to me: 'you are an
intelligent young man, and I consider you free from any kind of blame,
for you have also written the Revelation for the Prophet. Search for the
Qur'an and collect it.'

I said, 'By God, if they had ordered me to move a mountain it would not
have been more difficult than what I have been asked to do concerning
the collection of the Qur'an.' Then I said to him: 'How will you do
something which the Prophet (S) did not do.' He replied: 'It is, by God,
a good thing.' Then Abu Bakr continued to remind me till God opened my
heart to that to which He had opened the breasts of Abu Bakr and \`Umar.

Then I searched for the Quran and collected it from palm leaves, stone
tablets and the people's memories. I found the concluding part of the
Surat al­Tawbah, from لقد جاءكم رسول.. until the end of al-Baraah, with
no one except Abu Khuzaymah al-'Ansari. These suhuf were with Abu Bakr
till his death, then with \`Umar as long as he was alive, and then with
his daughter Hafsah."2

Ibn Abi Dawad reports the following tradition transmitted through a
hasan chain:

\`Umar enquired about a certain Quranic verse and he was told that it
was with a person killed in the battle of Yamamah. Thereupon he said
"Inna lillah," and ordered the collection of the Qur'an. Thus he was the
first one to compile it in form of a mushaf (codex).3

Ibn Ashtah in al-Masahif, narrates the following from Ibn Buraydah:

Ibn Buraydah said: "The first person to collect the Qur'an in the form
of a mushaf was Salim, the mawla of Hudhayfah. He had taken an oath not
to put on his cloak (i.e. to leave his home) until he had collected the
Qur'an. Then they consulted as to what they would call it, and some of
them suggested that it be named 'al-sifr.' Salim observed that this name
was given by the Jews, (to their scripture), and therefore they did not
favour it. Then he said: 'I have seen the like of it being called
\`mushaf in Abyssinia.' Thereupon they concur­red on naming it
al-mushaf4

Al-Bukhari also reports the following tradition, which has also been
recorded by al-Tirmidhi:

Zayd ibn Thabit said: "When we wrote the masahif and I missed a verse I
used to hear from the Prophet (S). I found it later with Abu. Khuzayrnah
al­'Ansari: من المؤمنين رجال صدقوا... (33:23). \`Umar did not use to
accept a verse of the Book of God unless two men gave evidence of its
being so. A man belong­ing- to the Ansar came with two verses and \`Umar
said to him: 'I will not demand apart from yourself another witness for
it.' "5

Yahya ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman Hatib observes: " \`Umar decided to collect the
Qur'an and standing up among the people he said: 'Anyone who has
received anything of the Qur'an from the Prophet (S) should bring it to
us.' They had written it on paper, stone tablets and palm leaves, and
nothing used to be accepted from them unless two witnesses gave evidence
to this effect. Then Khuzaymah came and said: 'I see that you have not
included two verses and not written them.' Umar enquired: 'What are
those two?' He replied: 'I have received from the Prophet (S): لقد جاءكم
رسول.. (9:128):6

Anas ibn Malik said: "I was one of those who were being dictated the
Qur'an. At times when they differed regarding a verse, they would recall
someone who had heard it from the Prophet (S). At times that person
would be absent or in some remote place. Thereupon, they would write the
verses preceding and following that verse and leave a vacant place for
it until that person returned or was sent for."7

It is narrated from Ubayy ibn Kaab that: "They collected the Qur'an in
masahif during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, may God have mercy on him. Men
used to write on being dictated by Ubayy, and when they reached the
verse of the Surat al-Baraah, ثم انصرفوا صرف الله.. (9:127) they thought
that it was the last verse of the Qur'an to be revealed. Thereupon Ubayy
ibn Ka\`b said: 'After this, two more verses have been read to me: لقد
جاءكم رسول "8

Abü Dawud ibn al-Zubayr narrates that Abu Bakr said to \`Umar and Zayd:
"Sit at the door of the mosque and whoever comes to you with two
witnesses evidencing anything from the Book of Allah, write it "9

Ibn Sirin reports that both Abu Bakr and \`Umar died without the Qur'an
having been collected)10 . Ibn Sa\`d reports that \`Umar was the first
person to collect the Qur'an11

Similar traditions are present in a large number in the Sihah and other
works, and to accept what they say about the Qur'an implies negating the
tawatur of the Qur'an and accepting it as based on akhbar ahad, such as
the

story about incorporation of verses on the sole authority of Khuzaymah,
or on the evidencing of two witnesses, or on the narration of Ubayy ibn
Ka\`b, or on the word of a person who happened to be out in the desert
and who had to be called to recite to them. Some traditions - like the
one about a verse which was with a qari martyred in Yamamah - cast doubt
on the completeness of the Qur'an. Apart from this, other questionable
issues crop up which a person cannot disregard were he to accept the
traditions of the Sihah in this regard.

Al-Zarkashi was aware of this, and he has mentioned an alternative
interpretation in this regard which cannot possibly be accepted. He says
regarding the observation of Zayd concerning the acceptance of two
verses from Khuzaymah:

It does not imply that a Quranic text has been proved by khabar al-wahid
because Zayd, and similarly the other Companions, had assuredly heard it
and knew its place in the .Suat al-'Ahzab on the basis of the Prophet's
instruc­tion. Then Zayd had forgotten it, and on having heard it again
recollected it. His seeking the verses from other people was only a
means for recollecting and not for getting new knowledge12

But there is no proof to justify this kind of interpretation, because
even if we accept it the question remains whether tawatur stands on the
knowledge of only Zayd and Khuzaymah? Did all the other Companions
forget this verse? If this was so, couldn't all of them including
Khuzaymah forget some verses without there being anyone to remind and
help them to recollect?

A stranger interpretation of his concerns the last verses of Surat al­
Tawbah about which Zayd is reported to have said that he had found them
with none except Khuzaymah ibn Thabit. Here AlZarkashi says: "It
implies, (none) from those among Zayd's tabaqah (generation) who had not
collected the Qur'an.,13 This interpretation has no basis at all.

Others have also tried to rectify the problem posed by the story of
Khuzaymah by construing it to mean that the Sababah did not find that
verse in a written form with anyone except Khuzaymah.14 The mention of
its being written is not found in any tradition relating to this matter
and it is not possible to accept it without any evidence. Apart from
this, the condition of Khuzaymah's testimony being considered equal to
the evidence of two witnesses negates this supposition.

Simi­larly, the interpretation offered by others that it means that Zayd
sought to confirm that verse from someone who had heard it directly from
the Prophet (S),15 is again without any basis. The interpretation of Ibn
Hajar about the story of recording verses is incorrect regarding the
meaning of \`shahidayn' (two witnesses) because he does not rely on any
proof and the literal meaning of the word shahidayn also negates his
interpretation.'16

It appears that the main purpose of such traditions is to give credit to
the so-called compilers or those who ordered the alleged compilation and
collection. But the acceptance of such traditions results in a denial of
the tawattur of the Qur'anic text, in addition to laying blame on the
Holy Prophet (S) who is implicitly held responsible for neglecting a
most momentous duty in regard to the collection and ordering of the
Quranic text.

We, however, think that these traditions ought to be rejected on the
following grounds:

There is contradiction among the different traditions and it is not
possible to reconcile them. It is not known whether the collector was
Abu Bakr or \`Umar or Salim, the mawla of Hudhayfah or, as Ibn Sirin
observes, someone else.

It is said that the reason behind the collection of the Qur'an was the
martyrdom of reciters (qurra) at Yamamah. This is not accept­able
because the scribes of the revelation (kuttab) and those who had
memorized it (huffaz), such as 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, Ubayy ibn Kaab (about
whom the Prophet (S) had said: "Ubayy ibn Kaab is the best reciter among
them"),17 and similarly \`Abd Allah ibn Mas\`ud (about whom the Prophet
(S) had said: "Read the Qur'an the way it is read by Ibn Umum \`Abd)18
were all present in Madinah. In the presence of these persons in
Madinah, the alleged fears of Abu Bakr and \`Umar con­cerning the loss
of the Qur'an cannot be admitted.

We have already established in the preceding pages that the Qur'an had
been collected during the lifetime of the Prophet (S). Hence the stories
of its being collected during the reign of the Caliphs are untrue and
cast aspersion on the Prophet (S) by alleging that he neglected its
collection, considering that there was no more important task for him
than the compilation of the Qur'an and its preservation for the future
generations of Muslims. Therefore, when it is confirmed that the Qur'an
was collected during the lifetime of the Prophet (S), these traditions
cannot be accepted.

After accepting the presence of tawatur concerning all the verses of the
Qur'an and the absence of deletions from it and additions to it, as per
consensus, it becomes necessary to discard these traditions which entail
the Quran's basis on akhbar ahad.


