Tahrif and Shii Traditions
==========================

Shi'i narrators have also narrated traditions which apparently entail
the presence of tahrif in the Book of God. Some people who have a
shallow understanding of these issues have used these traditions to
accuse that the Shiah believe in tahrif. The following may be said in
answer to such accusations:

Inauthenticity of the Traditions Alleging Tahrif: The narration and
mention of such traditions in books does not imply a tacit acceptance of
their authenticity, especially by the majority of the Imamiyyah. The
position of the Ahl al-Sunnah is the same regarding such traditions in
their works, although they believe in the authenticity of all that has
been narrated in Sahih al-Bukhari & Sahih Muslim and the other Sihah.

How is it possible to accept the authenticity of all that which has been
mentioned in these books when we find in them contradictory traditions
concerning many doctrinal and legal Islamic issues, is a question to
which there is no credible answer? Even after the explicit claim of a
particular traditionalist that he has recorded only authentic
traditions, it is not possible to rely upon his word and consider all
that he has narrated as authentic.

The Shi\`ah do not believe in the authenticity of all traditions
recorded in their books. Consequently, they mention the chain of
narrators of traditions so that the researchers may be able to discern,
after scrutinizing the character and reliability of narrators, between
authentic and unreliable traditions. This principle applies to Al-Kafi
and all other Shia works of tradition.

As to the Tafsir al-Qummi which has mentioned some of these traditions,
what we have just said applies to this book as well. Apart from this,
the Tafsir al-Qummi has been mixed up with another exegesis named Tafsir
Abi Al-Jarud. Aqa Buzurg al-Tehrani has pointed out this fact in his
al-Dhariah.19

This tafsir of Abu al-Jarud, apart from having in its chain of
nar­rators Kathir ibn \`Ayyash, who is unreliable, belongs to Abu
al-Jitrad who had deviated from the path of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) and had
been cursed by al-Imam al-Sadiq (A) (as mentioned by Ibn al-Nadim) who
said about him and some others that they were liars. Traditions
negat­ing his veracity and confirming his unreliability have been
narrated from the Ahl al-Bayt (A).20

Al-Sayyid Al Khui’s tawthiq of Abu al-Jarud, due to his presence in the
chains of the narrators of Kamil al-ziyarat, the veracity of whose
chains of narrators has been testified by Muhammad ibn Qulawayh,21 is
not correct, because the negation of his veracity precedes his
establish­ment as a thiqah; the traditions condemning him were present
before his being considered a thiqah by Ibn Qulawayh. Apart from this,
his acceptance of the veracity of all the narrators of Kamil Al-Ziyarat
is not correct, and the words of Ibn Qulawayh do not convey such a
claim. Whatever the case may be, al-Mamaqani, after mentioning the
traditions negating Abu al-Jarud's veracity, observes: "This person has
in no way been considered a thiqah; rather he has strongly been
condemned and considered unreliable in al-Waitzah and other books."'22

As to the fact that some thiqah narrators narrated from him, this does
not necessitate his being considered thiqah, as expressly stated by
al-Sayyid al-Khui’s concerning Abu al-Jarud.23

As to al-Kafi, which was compiled by al-Shaykh al-Kulayni - may God have
mercy on him - during a span of twenty years, we do not accept the
authenticity of all its traditions, because some of them are considered
daif, mursal, etc., due to faults in their chains of transmis­sion. It
also contains traditions which do not agree with the Qur'an and others
which are defective from the viewpoint of text. Among such traditions
are those which entail the occurrence of tahrif.

Al-Kulayni, moreover, has placed a number of such traditions under the
head "al-nawadir," wherein he records nadir and shadhdh tradi­tions.'24

Thus al-Kafi, in the eyes of the Imamiyyah, is not like Sahih al­Bukhari
and Sahih Muslim and other such compilations of traditions in the eyes
of the Ahl al-Sunnah, who accept the authenticity of all the traditions
contained in these books, even if they are opposed to the Qur'an, going
to the extent of saying: السُنَّة قاضية على الكناب 'The Sunnah judges
the Qur'an.25

If one refers to Mir 'at ul uqul(a commentary on al-Kafi) of
al­\`Allamah al-Majlisi, one will observe what al-Majlisi has mentioned
about the traditions of al-Kafi concerning their chains of transmission,
and will see that he has classed a large number of them as daif, mursal,
or as possessing some other defect.

Al-Sayyid Hashim Maruf al-Husayni states: "The mutaqaddimun have not had
any ijma on relying on all the traditions of al-Kafi.,26 He also says:
"Al-Kafi contains 16199 traditions; among these 5072 are 144 hasan, 1128
muwaththaq, 302 qawi,, and 9480 daif."27 This break-up is based only on
the basis of scrutiny concerning the chains of transmission, not that of
the texts of the traditions.

It may be said that most of the traditions-entailing tahrif belong to
the class of daif traditions whose chains terminate at weak narrators
(du'afa)28 'and those who have been accused of ghuluww or professing
deviate doctrines.

The greater part of these traditions have at their source Ahmad ibn
Muhammad al-Sayyari. Al-Shaykh Mirza Mehdi al-Burujerdi observes: "I
have counted the traditions on tahrif and have found more than 188 of
them terminating at al-Sayyari." We have also counted these tradi­tions
and have found more than 300 of them coming from him.

Al-Shaykh al-Najashi in his book on rijal speaks about al-Sayyari: ضعيف
الحديث، فاسد المذهب، و .A weak narrator of traditions, of devious
beliefs. Al-Najashi's statement about him indicates that al-Sayyari had
been accused of ghuluww.29 Al-Shaykh al-Tusi has also considered him
daif in al-Istibsar after narrating a tradition from him.'30

Ibn Al-Ghadairi makes this statement about al-Sayyari: يُكَنَّى ابا عبيد
الله المعروف بالسياري، ضعيف متهالك غال منحرف". 'His sobriquet - Abu
Abadullah and popularly known as al-Sayyari; (is) za'if, weak, ghalli
and deviate.'31

Al-Shaykh al-Tusi describes al-Sayyari as:

ضعيف الحديث، فاسد المذهب، مَجفُو الرواية كثير المراسيل 'A daif narrator,
professing deviate doctrines, his traditions are not accepted, and most
of his traditions are mursal32

Another of the narrators of these traditions is Yunus ibn Zabyan about
whom al-Najashi remarks:ضعيف جدا، لا يلتفت الى ما رواه، كل كتبه تخليط '
Very daif; no attention is given to what he has narrated; all his books
are confused and delirious.' Ibn al- Ghada'iri says of him: ابن ظبيان
كوفي غال كذّاب وضَّاع الحديث Ibn Zabyan, a Kufi,a ghali,a liar,a
fabricator of traditions.33

Mankhal ibn Jamil al-Kufi is also one of these narrators and writers on
rijal have this to say about him: ضعيف فاسد الرواية! Daif and of corrupt
narration,' and add: انه من الغلاة المنحرفين "He is one of the devious
ghulat".34

Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Jumhur is also among these narrators, and
al-\`Allamah al-Hilli says about him:

<p dir="rtl">
كان ضعيفاً في الحديث، غاليا في المذهب، فاسداً في الرواية، لا يلتفت
الى حديثه، ولا يُعتَمد على ما يرويه.
</p>

He was daif in narrating traditions, a ghali by faith, corrupt in his
narrations; no significance is given to what he has narrated and it is
not relied upon.35

Al-Najashi has the same to say about him: ضعيف الحديث، فاسد المذهب

A daif narrator and professor of deviate doctrines.36

From this it becomes clear that these narrators were not accept­able to
the authorities on rijal, being considered by them as devious, ghulat,
etc. The narration of their traditions by some Akhbari writers is due to
their lack of precision and care, and unfortunately some writers have
relied on the traditions of these weak narrators in their belief in the
incompleteness of the Qur'an. But such writers are very few in number
and as al-Shaykh Abu Zuhrah says: "A very large number of Imami scholars
headed by al-Murtada, and others, oppose them."37

The late Ayatullah al-Sayyid al-Burijerdi states in this regard:

Logical necessity dictates against it (belief in tahrif), and the
traditions contradicting the purity of the Quranic text are extremely
unreliable, both from the viewpoint of sanad and content. Indeed some of
these traditions contradict what is certain and necessary and go against
the very purpose of Prophethood. Further, it is most amazing to see that
some people claim the preservation of traditions in books and through
oral transmission throughout a period exceeding thirteen centuries,
contending that had any deletion taken place therein it would have been
obvious, yet at the same time affirm the possibility of deletion taking
place in the Quran.38

Al-Allamah al-Shahshahani observes regarding the traditions entailing
tahrif: "These traditions deserve no attention on account of their amid.
Even those who have argued on their basis have not regarded even one of
them as

authentic (Sahih). They have been cast aside by the greatest of our
scholars." He adds: "These traditions contradict reliable traditions,
stronger than them in regard to their conformity with the Qur'an, the
Sunnah, reason and consensus."39

Traditions Related to Variance of Readings: A part of the traditions
narrated in this context are those which are related to the difference
in qira'at; only some of them are mentioned in Shi’i books while a very
large number of them, as said, are found in books of the Ahl al-Sunnah.
Most of what has been reported in Shi’i books is attributed to the Ahl
al-Bayt (A), especially to the mushaf of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A), while
in the books of Ahl al-Sunnah such differences are attributed to such
Sahabah as Ibn Mas\`ud, Ubayy, and others.

We may say that these traditions, in which the verses have been
mentioned in a form different from what is known through tawatur and is
popular among the people, are all alehbor cihdd and consequently
incapable of establishing anything as Quranic text. Further, it is also
not possible to forsake something mutawatir by relying on akhbar ahad.
Accordingly, the Imams (A) have ordered their followers to recite the
Qur'an as it is recited by the people.40

Dr. \`Abd al-Sabar Shahin observes: "All that which has been nar­rated
concerning differences of qira 'at, which delete from or add to the
Qur'an as we possess it, is undoubtedly of a shahdadh character and
incapable of proving something as part of the Qur'an, or is of mudraj
character in which commentary or explanation has found way into the text
without being part of the Quranic text."41

Accordingly, it is not valid to follow these shahaddh forms of qiraat of
the Qur'an, because they are based on akhbar ahad, in addi­tion to the
possibility of these readings being explanations of the Quranic text and
exegetic comments, as pointed out by Dr. \`Abd al­ Sabur. This is
further supported by Abu Hayyan's statement in his footnotes (taliqah)
on the reading of Ibn Masud: فوَسوَس له الشيطان in place of فأزَّلهما
الشيطان عنها "This reading is contrary to the Quranic text as accepted
by consensus and it is appropriate to consider it an exegetic remark.'42

The same applies to such traditions as have been narrated by the
Imamiyyah. The books of the Ahl al-Sunnah also contain traditions
regarding differences of readings and there are scores of books written
on the topic. One may refer in this context to al-Masahif of Ibn Abi
Dawud al-Sijistani, the exegeses of al-Zamakhshari, al­-Tabari and
others, and one would be surprised by what he finds)43

Most of these variations pertain to exegetic and explanatory remarks,
especially of those who accepted the validity of changing the words of
the Qur'an for clarification,'44 though with the passage of time it led
to lending support to claims of tahrif.

As to the tradition narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah that the Qur'an has
been revealed in seven different 'letters' ('ala sab\`at ahruf,45 which
was interpreted to imply the validity of the various readings of the
Qur'an), it is something which cannot be accepted, neither on the basis
of traditions nor logic. This is

because this tradition is contradicted by another tradition narrated by
them which regards the Qur'an as revealed in three ahruf ( ala thalathat
ahruf).46 Similarly, it is also opposed to what has been authentically
narrated by the Imamiyyah from al-Imam al-Sadiq (A), who while answering
the query of Fudayl ibn Yasar regarding the narration that the Qur'an
has been revealed in seven ahruf, said:

<p dir="rtl">
كَذَبوا- أعداء الله- لكنه نَزلَ على حرفِ واحد من عند الواحد
</p>

They lie, the enemies of God! Rather, it has been revealed in a single
harf by the One.47

The following tradition has been narrated from al-Imam al-Baqir (A):

<p dir="rtl">
إن القرآن واحد، نزل من عن الواحد، ولكن الاختلاف يجيء من قبل الرواة.
</p>

Verily, there is only one Qur'an, which has been revealed by the One,
and the differences have cropped up due to the narrators.48

Al-Shaykh al-Tusi states in this regard: "It should be noted that the
common view of our scholars and their position, well known from their
accounts and narrations, is that the Qur'an was sent down on one harf
and on one prophet."49

The idea of sab\`at ahruf implying seven permissible readings, is also
negated by the Imami tradition that the meaning of sab\`at ahruf is
seven rhetorical forms, which are amr (positive command), zajr
(pro­hibitory command), targhib (inducement), tarhib (warning), jadal
(polemics, argument), mat hal (allegory, parable), and qasas (story
telling).50

It has been narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah from Ibn Mas'ud that the
Qur'an has been revealed on khamsat ahruf: halal, haram, muhkam,
mutashabih , and amthal.51 It has also been narrated from 'Ali (A) that
the Qur'an has been revealed in four parts: a quarter concerning halal,
a quarter concerning haram , a quarter concerning ethical dis­courses
(mawaiz) and parables (mathal), and a quarter dealing with historical
narratives and accounts (qasas wa athar).52 many similar traditions have
been narrated by the Ahl al-Sunnah.53

Those among the Imamiyyah who have narrated that the Qur'an has been
revealed on seven ahruf are either those whose identity is unknown
(majhal),54 or those who are accused of ghuluww and doctrinal
deviation,55 or those who have meant by it something apart from the
validity of the different readings.

We also find traditions which negate the existence of different
readings, such as the tradition recorded by Atimad in his Musnad from
Zirr ibn Hubaysh, from Ibn Masud

<p dir="rtl">
أقرأني رسول الله سورة الاحقاف فخرجت الى المسجد فإذا رجل يقرأها على
غيرما أقرأني، فقلت، من أقرأك؟ فقال رسول الله. قال: قلت للآخر إقرأها،
فقرأها على غير قرآتي وقراءة صاحبي، فانطلقت بهما الى النبي (ص) فقلت: يا
رسول الله هذات يخالفاني في القرآءة فغضب وتعَمَّرَ وجهه وقال (ص)/ إنما
أهلك من كان قبلكم الاختلاف، قال زِرٌ: وعنده
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
(ص) قال: فقال: ان رسول الله يأمركم أن يقرأ كل رجل كما اُقريء، فإنما
أَهلَكَ من كان قبلكم الاختلاف.
</p>

The Prophet (S) taught the reading of the Surat al-'Ahqaf to me. When I
went to the mosque there I found a person reciting this surah
differently. I asked him, "Who taught you this reading?" He replied,
'The Prophet (S)." Then I asked another person to recite it and he
recited it in a manner which differed from that of me and that of my
companion. Then I went with both of them to the Prophet (S) and said,
"Both of them differ from me in their reading."

The Prophet's (S) face became red with anger and he said, "Surely it was
this difference which caused those who have gone before you to perish."

Zirr ibn Hubaysh says, “Ibn Masud proclaimed in the presence of the
Prophet (S), The Prophet (S) orders that each one of you should recite
the Qur'an as it has been recited to him. For, surely, it is such
difference which has caused those before you to perish.”56

This tradition expressly shows that the Prophet (S) prohibited
differences in reading and would be dismayed on coming across such
variance. It also highlights that the differences did not originate from
the Prophet (S); rather, it shows the Prophet (S) as emphasizing that
such variance caused the earlier nations to perish and that it should
not be present among Muslims.

The differences of reading between some Sahabah during the Prophet's (S)
time were due to the differences between their dialect and that of the
Prophet's (S) and his tribe, or these differences came into being after
the Prophet (S), especially after the spreading of the Com­panions to
different places and their reciting the Qur'an to the people, each with
his own peculiar rendering of certain verses of the Qur'an. The presence
of this variance was a cause of anxiety for some Compan­ions and they
urged \`Uthman to gather the people on the single reading which was
received in a mutawatir fashion from the Prophet (S). This is apparent
from the following traditions about Uthman's step:

Anas says: "Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman came to \`Uthman at a time when the
people of Syria and Iraq were fighting together in the conquest of
Armenia and Azarbaijan. Hudhayfah was worried about their differences of
reading, and he said to \`Uthman: "O Commander of the Faithful, save
this ummah before it starts differing about the Qur'an, like the Jews
and the Christians...." \`Uthman consequently ordered the collection of
the masahif (which were in the hands of the people)."57

Hudhayfah says: "I was fighting in the conquest of Armenia in which both
the people of Iraq and Syria took part. The Syrians would recite in
accordance with the reading of Ubayy ibn Ka\`b. They would recite in a
way which the Iraqis had not heard, and the Iraqis would accuse them of
apostasy. The Iraqis would recite in accordance with the reading of Ibn
Mas'ud. When they recited in a fashion which the Syrians had not heard,
they would accuse the Iraqis of apostasy." Zayd said: " \`Uthman ordered
me to collect the Qur'an."58

This is also supported by the following episode reported by Al
­Baladhuri:

They said to \`Uthman, "You have burnt the Book of God." \`Uthman
replied, "The people differed in their readings of the Qur'an, and one
would say to another, 'My Qur'an is better than your Qur'an,' and the
other one would claim, 'My Qur'an is better than yours.' Hudhayfah was
the first to dis­approve of it and he brought up the matter before me. I
gathered the people on the reading which was written in the Prophet's
presence." They said, "But why did you burn the masahif? Weren't their
contents in accordance with the reading on which you have brought
together the people? Why didn't you allow them to remain as they were?"
He replied, "I wanted that nothing should remain except that which had
been written in the Prophet's presence and recorded in a mushaf that was
with Hafsah, the Prophet's wife. I pray to God to forgive me."59

Now when the variance of readings could lead to accusations of tahrif,
the like of which had occurred among the Jews and Christians, is it
logical to believe that the Prophet (S) permitted it? The observation of
al-Tabari is strange where he says: "The Prophet's (S) command regarding
the reciting of the Qur'an in seven ahruf (something in accord­ance with
which \`Uthman did not act, but on the contrary made the people accept a
single reading) was a command indicating permissibility and
incumbence.”60

Neither can the tradition (about sab\`at ahruf) be interpreted to
imply - as interpreted by Dr. \`Abd al-.Sabur - the differing dialects
and accents, which were the result of differences of language and
educa­tion, nor can it imply the difference of some words and a change
in the sequence of sentences where the meanings remain unaffected,
because it obviously amounts to accepting tahrif, which angered the
Prophet (S), was a cause of consternation for Hudhayfah, and as a
measure against which \`Uthman took his step, which was approved by 'Ali
(A) who said: "Had I been in power, I would have done what he has
done."61

It is necessary to point out that if the tradition regarding the Qur'an
being revealed in sab\`at ahruf had been authentic, the Companions would
surely have argued on its basis and criticized Uthman's action, because
he had approved only a single reading. In this regard, it is the opinion
of my revered teacher al-\`Allamah al-Sayyid al-Murtada that the reasons
for the variant readings were: the absence of diacritical marks and
points, variations of the scripts used by the scribes of the Qur'an,
errors and slips made by the copyists, the exercise of personal
judge­ment in regard to reciting, the shortcomings in reciting, mistakes
in hearing, differences of dialect, and, sometimes, the inclusion of
exe­getical remarks while reciting the text.62

For instance, the verse is ان الله يغفر الذنوب جميعا was recited with
the addition ولا يبالي (and He will not care). Such examples are present
in large numbers. Similarly, some differences of reading were the result
of the belief held by some that the words of the Qur'an can be
substituted by their synonyms.63

This fact is evident to anyone conversant with Qur'anic studies.
There­fore, one who refers to books written on the variant readings will
find that the basis of these different readings is individual ijtihad
practised by their propounders in the areas of grammar and syntax. This
kind of ijtihad ,

apart from being based on shadhdh and weak traditions, is only a later
development, not seen in the earlier period. This form of ijtihad stands
condemned on the ground that it is in fact ijtihad in opposition to a
nag.

The Shiah concur that it is not valid to recite these shadhdh forms of
readings during salat, and this indicates that they do not attach any
weight to the traditions on which these readings are based.

Al-Sayyid al-Tabatabai says in this regard: "The basis of authority (in
regard to a Qur'anic verse) is the tawatur of its text and reading." He
adds: "Shadhdh traditions are not worthy of notice." Al-Mawla
al­Mazandarani observes: "That which has reached us through akhbar
ahad - such as the shadhdh forms of readings and that which Ibn Mas'ud
mentioned in his mushaf - is not part of the Qur'an, because there is no
proof of its being so." As Fadil al-Qummi observes in al­Qawanin:
"Shadhdh traditions not acted upon because there is no proof of their
contents being part of the Qur'an.”64

Traditions Implying the Presence of Certain Names: Of the traditions
wherein some verses are mentioned in a form differing from that received
through tawatur are those which relate to the particular historical
context of their revelation (sha'n al-nuzul) and contain the addition of
a few words to elucidate their meaning. These extra elements are either
the words of the Prophet (S) or have been incorporated by one of the
Companions in his mushaf, or are additions made by the Companions
themselves.

'Ali (A) states: "I had surely come to them with a book compris­ing both
the text of the revelation and its interpretation."65

We have already mentioned that 'Ali (A) had mentioned in his mushaf the
sha'n of the verses, and Ibn Skin had sought this mushaf for the sake of
the information it contained, but was unable to find it.

As to those traditions which entail that the name of 'Ali (A) had
occurred in some verses - aside from their possible inauthenticity on
the basis of their narrators' character - it is also possible to include
them in this class of traditions, considering that we have some
traditions which negate the presence of \`Ali's name in the Qur'an. The
following is one from al-Kafi from Abu Basir from al-Imam al-.Sadiq (A):

<p dir="rtl">
عن أبي بصير عن ابي عبدالله (ع) فقلت له أن الناس يقولون: فما له لم
يُسَمِّ علياً في القرآن و أهل بيته في كتاب الله؟ فقال: فقولوا لهم ان
رسول الله نزلت عليه الصلاة و لم يسم ثلاثاً و اربعاً حتى كان رسول الله هو
الَّذي فسر لهم ذلك.
</p>

Abu Basir says: "I said to him that people ask why God has not mentioned
the name of 'Ali (A) and his household in the Qur'an? The Imam replied:

'Tell them that the command of salat was delivered to the Prophet (S)
with­out God's mentioning specifically the number of rakat as three or
four, and it was the Prophet (S) who explained this to them.' "66

This tradition explicitly negates the presence of 'Ali's (A) name in the
Qur'an, and therefore those traditions which entail the mention of
'Ali's (A) name in some verses should be considered as furnishing
explanatory details.

Accordingly, al-Imam al-Sadiq (A) usually used to recite the verse: يا
ايها الرسول بلِّغ ما أُنزل اليك من ربك و ان لم تفعل فما بلَّغت رسالته ,
without adding to it the name of 'Ali ( ).67 The Ahl al-Sunnah have
narrated traditions regard­ing this verse which include 'Ali's (A) name
in it.68

Another tradition which confirms what has been said is narrated by
Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl from Aba al-Hasan al-Madi, i.e. al-Imam al-Kazim
(A):

<p dir="rtl">
قال: قلتُ هذا الذي كنتم تكذبون فقال الامام (ع) يعني أمير المؤمنين:
قلت تنزيل؟ قال: نعم.
</p>

(Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl says:) "I asked the Imam (A) regarding the verse
هذا الذي كنتم به تكذبون..; He replied: 'It implies Amir al-Mu'minin
(A).' I inquired: 'Is it tanzil?"Yes,' replied the Imam."69

This tradition clearly indicates that the name of 'Ali (A) was not
mentioned in the Quranic verse but was present in the exposition
revealed by God concerning the intent of the verse.70

Among the traditions of this kind is a tradition narrated by both the
Shia and Sunni works concerning the verse: وحافظوا على الصلوات والصلاة
الوسطى where they have added to it the words 'salat al-\`asr. ;71

It is obvious that the addition of the words salat al-'asr to the text
does not imply that it is a part of the verse; rather, it is an
explana­tion of the phrase al-salat al-asr in the verse. Therefore
al-Qadi, while refuting those who have ascribed to Ibn Mas'ud the
exclusion of the Mu\`awwidhatan (the last two surah s, al-Nas and
al-Falaq) from his mushaf and to Ubayy ibn Ka\`b the inclusion of two
additional siurahs, al-Hafd and al-Khal , in his mushaf, , says that it
is possible that Ubayy had recorded in his mushaf some interpretative
remarks and prayers. He states: "He had recorded in his mushaf
interpretations and prayers which are not parts of the Qur'an.,72

Al-Baqillani has also refuted this allegation saying, "The prayer
recited in qunat , which is narrated to have been recorded by Ubayy ibn
Ka\`b in his mushaf, has no proof for considering it a part of the
Qur'an. Rather, it is a kind of a prayer, and had it been a part of the
Qur'an it would have been transmitted to us and we would have the
knowledge of its authenticity."73

Regrettably, while Sunni scholars have tried to overcome the
dif­ficulties raised by the statements of their authorities and
explained them away, they have not adopted a similar attitude regarding
the traditions entailing tahrif narrated from the Imams of the Shiah nor
bothered to examine their authenticity. Rather some anti-Shii
pro­pagandists bent on the villification of the Shiah have taken the
sole presence of such traditions in Shii works as an evidence that the
Shiah believe in tahrif of the Holy Qur'an.

Al-Fayd al-Kashani states: "It would not be far-fetched if said that
some of the deletions were of the nature of exegetical clarifications
without being parts of the Qur'an. Thus any change that may have
occur­red is one of meaning, i.e. the charge of alteration and
corruption relates to exposition and interpretation. It implies that the
meaning ascribed was different from

the actual intent. Thus the import of the Imam's state­ment كَذا نزلت
(this is how it was revealed) is that its meaning has been altered; not
that the verse was revealed with such additional words and then they
were deleted from it.74

Al-Shaykh al-Mufid states: "...But the revealed expository and
exegetical matter recorded in the mushaf of Amir al-Mu'minin (A) was
deleted, even though it was an established revelation (thabitan
munzalan), although not part of the text of the kalam of God Almighty
which is the miraculous Qur'an. The ta 'wil of the Qur'an has also been
called 'Qur'an' ...and there is no difference of opinion among the
exegetes about this:75

Similarly, al-Shaykh al-Saduq has pointed out that some revelations are
not part of the Qur'an, such as the counsel given by Gabriel to the
Prophet (S) and to which the Prophet (S) refers in many of his
traditions. Al- Saduq says: "The like of it are many, all of which are
revelation without being a part of the Qur'an. For had it been part of
the Qur'an, it would have been joined to and combined with the Qur'an
instead of being separated from it."76

Traditions Explicitly Mentioning Tahrif : Other traditions which allude
to the presence of tahrif are those which speak of the Qur'an as
muhar­raf (altered, corrupted). It should be pointed that these
traditions men­tion the presence of tahrif in the meaning of verses and
not in their words. This is indicated by the following tradition
narrated by Al ­Kulayni in Rawdat al-Kafi. In a letter al-Imam al-Baqir
(A) writes to Sa'd al-Khayr:

<p dir="rtl">
... وكان مِن نَبْذِهِم الكتاب أن أقاموا حروفه و حرَّفوا حدوده فهم
يرونه، ولا يرعونه، والجهال يعجبهم حفظهم للرواية، والعلماء يحزنهم تركهم
للرعاية، وكان من نبذهم الكتاب ان ولوه الَّذين لا يعلمون فأوردوهم الهوى و
اصدروهم الى الردى وغيَّروا عُرى الدين ثم ورَّثوه في السَّفَهِ و الضِّبا.
</p>

### Endnotes

###

[^1]: Traditions are divided broadly into two categories: mutawatir and
Ahad (or wahid). A mutawatir tradition is that which has been reported
by such a number of narrators and through so many different chains of
transmitters that it is not possible to doubt its veracity. A tradition
which is not mutawatir is called khabar al-wahid. The ahad traditions
are divided into five main classes: sahih, qawi, hasan, muwaththaq and
daif, in accordance with the character of their narrators and
transmitters. When narrated by a single narrator, a tradition is
generally called mufrad, shahdadh or nadir. Mudarraj is a tradition in
which the narrator, or one of the transmitters, has indistinguishably
mixed the words of the narrator or a trans­mitter with the text.

[^2]: Al-Bukhhari, Sahih, kitab al-tafsir, bab jam' al-Quran; al-Itqan,
i, 57; Ta'rikh al-khulafa', 77, and Tafsir al-Tabari, i, 20.

[^3]: Al-Itqan, i, 58

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Tandzib Ta'rikh Dimashq, v, 136; al-Bukhari, Sahih, kitab
al-tafsir; al­Burhan, i, 234; see al-Qurtubi, Tafsir Al-Quran, 51.

[^6]: Tandzib Ta'rikh Dimashq, iv, 136

[^7]: Tafsir Al-Tabari I, 21

[^8]: Majma' al-zawa'id, vii, p. 35

[^9]: Irshad al-sari, vii, 447

[^10]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Musannaf, xiii, 90; al-Tabaqat al-kubra, iii,
211

[^11]: Al-Tabaqat al-kubra, iii, 281

[^12]: Al-Burhan, i, 236.

[^13]: Ibid., 239

[^14]: Manahil Al-Irfan i, 266

[^15]: Irshad al-sciri, vii, 448

[^16]: A1-Itqcin, i, 58

[^17]: Mustadrak al-Sahthayn, iii, 53; al-Tabaqat al-kubra, ii, 340;
Akhbar Isfahan, ii, 13

[^18]: Ibn Al Shaybah, al-Masannaf, x, 520, 521

[^19]: Al-Dhariah ila tasanif al-Shiah, iv, 303, 304

[^20]: Majma' Al-Rijal iii, 73; Qamus al-rijal, iv, 228, 230; Jami\`
al-ruwait, i, 339

[^21]: Mu 'jam rija1 al-hadith, vii, 325

[^22]: Tanqih al-maqal, i, 46

[^23]: Mujam rijal al-hadith, vii, 325

[^24]: See al-Vsal al-ammah li al-fiqh al-muqarin, 109

[^25]: Ta'wil mukhtalaf al-hadith, 199, Sunan i, 145; Maqalat al
Islamiyyin , 324, 251, Dala'il al-Nubuwwah, i, 26; and 'Awn al-Ma\`hud,
iv, 429. All the sources quoted are from Buhuth ma 'a Ahl al-Sunnah wa
al-Salafiyyah, 67,68

[^26]: D irascit al-hadith we al-muhaddithin, 132, 134

[^27]: Ibid., 138, from Rawdat al-jannah

[^28]: Majma' al-bayan, i, 15; Awa'il al-maqalat, 195, footnote; Bihar
al­'Anwar, vol.89, p.75

[^29]: Rijal al-Najashi, 58

[^30]: Qamus al-rijal, i, 403, 404 ;Mujam rijal al-hadith, iii, 290

[^31]: Qamus al-rijal, i, 403

[^32]: Mu jam rijal al-hadith, ii, 290

[^33]: Rijal al-Najashi, 838; al-cAllamah al-Hilli, Khuaisat al-rijal,
266. See also Ikhtiyar m'arifat al-rijal, 318, appendices

[^34]: Dirascit ft al-hadith wa al-muhaddithin, 198

[^35]: Khulasatal – Al Rijal 251

[^36]: Rijal Al-Najashi 238

[^37]: Al Imam Zayd bin Ali 350, 351

[^38]: Maa Al Khatib fi khutahi al-Aridah 49

[^39]: Al-Kafi I 219

[^40]: Al-Kafi, i, 219

[^41]: Ta'rikh al-Qur'an, 81

[^42]: Al-Bahr, i, 159, from Ta'rtkh al-Qur'an, 96

[^43]: For examples of such differences in readings see: Sunan Abi Dawad
31-38, Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Musannaf, ii, 504; Majma' al-zawaid, vii,
154-156; Sunan al-Daraqutni, ii, 192; 'Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, i,
578, 579; iii, 207; iv, 242; v, 75; vii, 312; viii, 305, 514, 560;
Ta'rikh Baghdad, i, 303, 372, 373; ii, 189; Hayat al-Sahabah, iii, 506,
from Kunz ii, 137; al-Tabaqat al-kubra, 371; al-Taratib al-'idairiyyah,
ii, 163; al-Majruhin, ii, 269

[^44]: Al-Musannaf, xi, 219

[^45]: Sahih Muslim, ii, 202-203; Sahih al-Bukhari, vi, 100, 111, and
iii, 90; 4014 al-Tirmidhi, xi, 60,62; Tafsir al-Tabari, i, 9-15, and
Tafsir al-Qurtubi, i,43

[^46]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Mu.sannaf, x, 517

[^47]: Al-Kafi, kitab fadl al-Qur'an, bab al-nawddir, tradition No.13

[^48]: Ibid., tradition No.12. A large number of such traditions have
been narrated by the Shilah. Refer Fusi al-khitab, 213

[^49]: Tafsir al-tibyan, i, 7

[^50]: Risalat al-Nu\`ani fi suruf ay al-Qur'an, see al-Tamhid fi 'ulam
al- Qur'an, ii, 94

[^51]: Tafsir al-Tabari, i, 24

[^52]: Musnad Zayd ibn 'Ali (A), 385

[^53]: Ala' al-Rahman, 30, 31, from al-Mustadrak, Ibn Jarir, Ibn
al-Mundhir and Ibn al-'Anbari, al-Basa'ir we al-dhakha'ir, p.130, from
Abu \`Ubaydah; Majma' al-zawa'id, vii, 153

[^54]: Al-Bayan

[^55]: Ibid

[^56]: Musnad Ahmad, i, 419, 421

[^57]: Sahih al-Bukhari, kitab al-tafsir, bab jam' al-Qur’an, vii, 226;
Tafsir al­ Tabarri, i, 23

[^58]: Tafsir al-Tabari, i, 21

[^59]: Ansaib al-'ashraf, v, 62, 63

[^60]: Tafsir al-Tabri, i, 22

[^61]: Al-Burhan fi al-Quran, i, 240; Mandhil i, 255; al-Zanjani,
Ta'rikh al-Qur'an, 45; S'ad al-su'ud, 278; al-Masahif, 12; Irshad
al-sdri, vii, 448

[^62]: Al-Itqan, i, 51

[^63]: Abd al-Razzaq, al-Musannaf, iii, 364

[^64]: Radd Fasl al-khitab, 62

[^65]: Ala Al-Rahman 257

[^66]: Usa kitab al-hujjah, bab nass Allah wa Rasalihi 'aid al-'A'immah.

[^67]: See the related traditions- in al-Kafi and al-Rahim (1381)
concerning the negation of tahrif in the Qur'an, 16

[^68]: Al-Durr al- manthar, ii, 298

[^69]: Usul al-Kafi, kitab al-hujjah, bab al-nukat min al-tanzil
al-wilayah

[^70]: In accordance with what has been narrated from some authorities
regarding the meaning of al-tanzil. This view is also supported by
traditions

[^71]: Tafsir i, 84; Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Musannaf, ii, 504. See
al­'Itqan, from 'A'ishah, and similarly, Ibn Abi Shaybah, ii, 506; and
Majma' al‑ zawa'id,vii, 154, whose author observes that its narrators
are thigat

[^72]: Al-Burhan fi 'ulam al-Qur'an, ii, 128

[^73]: Manahil i, 264, from al-'Intisar

[^74]: Tafsir al-safi, i, 52

[^75]: Awa'il al-maqalat, 54

[^76]: Idiqat al-Saduq, bab al-Itiqad mablagh al-Qur'an
