Foreword
========

It has been our intention for a long time to translate into English a
book that would narrate the lives of the fourteen ma\`sumin (sinless
ones) ‑ the Prophet, peace be upon him and the people of his household,
his righteous and pure daughter Fatimah az‑Zahra', peace be upon her,
and the Twelve Imams, peace be upon all of them.

Such a book would, it was hoped, discuss the circumstances of the
Prophet, his daughter Fatimah and the Imams of his descendants. It would
present proofs of their special favor with Allah, and the exalted status
with which He favored them. The book would also present proofs of the
obliga­tions with which Allah has charged all men to obey and follow
them.

When *Kitabul‑Irshad ila Hujaj* *Allah 'alal-'Ibad* (The Book of
Guidance to the Proofs of Allah over Mankind) of ash‑Shaykh al‑Mufid was
recently translated into English by I. K. Howard, we felt that it had
largely fulfilled our hopes for the author, Abu \`Abdillah Muhammad ibn
Muhammad ibn an‑Nu'man al‑\`Ukbari al‑Baghdadi, known as ash‑Shaykh
al‑Mufid (336‑413/948‑1022), was one of the foremost scholars of the
Imami Shi\`i community, and one of its greatest jurists and theologians.
We therefore decided to republish the book ourselves with a special
introduction, which is now in the process of being translated. As soon
as this introduction is ready, we shall, with Allah's help, proceed with
our task.

It is clear, however, that *Kitabul-Irshad* lacks two important sections
which are necessary for the purpose of giving an account of the fourteen
sinless ones. The first would be concerned with the most honored
Prophet, peace be upon him and the people of his household, and the
second would deal with the righteous and pure Fatimah az‑Zahra', peace
be upon her.

We have also explained in the introduction to our forthcoming edition of
*Kitabul-Irshad* that these two sections would not have been
ap­propriate for the purpose of the book of our ash‑Shaykh al‑Mufid, who
was only concerned in it with the Twelve Imams and the proofs of the
imamate. But they are crucial for the aim which we are seeking to
achieve here.

It is important to observe that the author of the book *I'Iamu 'l-Wara
bi A'lami 'l-Huda,* of which this volume is a partial translation, used,
in writing it the same methodology as *Kitabul-Irshad,* and was in fact
guided by it. In fact, most of the chapters of *I'Iamu 'l‑Wara* are
summaries of the chapters of *Kitabul-Irshad,* with important additions
which the author found suitable for the subject matter as he treated it.
More significant for our purpose, however, is the fact that the author
added the two sections which are absent from *Kitabul-Irshad.* Finally,
a translator was found who agreed to undertake the task of rendering
these two sections into English.

Here we must refer to an important matter which has been treated at
length in our introduction to *Kitabul-Irshad* ‑ namely that at
‑Tabrisi, like his predecessor al‑Mufid, relies, in many of the
discussions of his book, on the works of the historians and *hadith*
transmitters of our Sunni brothers. In our introduction also we discuss
in detail the reasons which compelled them, as well as others of our
worthy scholars, to do so. With regard to the book *I'lamu 'l-Wara,* the
author frequently cites his compatriot the famous traditionist and
learned Shafi\`i jurist Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn al‑Husayn al‑Bay­haqi (384‑
458/ 994 ‑1066) , while dealing with the biogra­phy of the Holy Prophet.

This is particularly the case with al‑Bayhaqi's book *Dala'ilu
'n‑Nubuwwah.* at‑Tabrisi's use of al‑Bayhaqi's work may lead to some
misunderstandings of the position of Imami Shi\`is on some of the
traditions cited from this book in *I'lamu 'l-Wara.* An example of this
is certain traditions which at‑Tabrisi quotes from al‑Bayhaqi asserting
that Abu Talib (the Prophet's uncle) died without believing in the
Muhammadan dispensation (see below, p. 81) .

Yet all the Imams have agreed on the falsity of this view, and were
followed in this by Imami Shi\`i, and even the entire Shi'i community.
The authenticity of yet another tradition concerning particular men
among the Prophet's companions spending of their wealth in provisioning
the army for the Battle of Tabuk (see below, p.188), which at‑Tabrisi
also quotes from al‑Bayhaqi, is questioned by non‑Shi'i tradi­tionists.
They held a different view of this event, which we omit to mention here
in order that we might not be accused of sectarian fanaticism.

As at‑Tabrisi himself says concerning the verse of the Cave (see
*at‑Tawbah,* 9:40): “The Shi'ahs have something to say in connection
with this verse concerning the Prophet (may the prayers of Allah and
peace be upon him and his family) and the *sakinah* (i.e., the peace or
tranquility which was sent down by Allah), which we have thought better
not to relate so as not to be accused of anything (i.e.,
fanaticism).”[^1]

The author of *I'lamu'l‑Wara bi A'lami'l‑Huda,* Ash-­Shaykh Aminu'd‑Din
Abu 'Ali al‑Fadl ibn al‑Hasan ibn al‑Fadl at ‑Tabrisi (c. 468 ‑ 548/1076
‑1154), was one of the foremost scholars, jurists and Qur'an
commentators of the Imami Shi\`i community. He is the author of the
well‑known commentary on the Qur'an, *Majma'u'l‑Bayan li \`Ulumi'l
Qur'an.*

The author studied with a large number of both Shi\`i and Sunni
scholars. His disciples and those who transmitted *ahadith* (traditions)
from him were likewise numerous, and all were well‑recognized scholars.
at ‑Tabrisi wrote books and treatises on many religious, scientific and
literary subjects.

A detailed account of at‑Tabrisi and of his life, teachers, students and
works (already written) will accompany the preface to a future complete
translation of this important work. of the author ‑ as it is our hope
that Allah, the Ex­alted, will soon provide us the means to complete
this work. Here, however, we will confine ourselves to what was said
concerning him by two figures prominent in the fields of,
*belles‑lettres,* and biography.

At‑Tabrisi's contemporary and townsman the well known historian, 'Ali
ibn Abi 'l-Qasim ibn Funduq al‑Bay­haqi (493 ‑ 565/ 1100 ‑1169 or 70)
says: “al‑Imam as‑Said Abu 'Ali, was originally from Tabris, a place
between Qashan and Isfahan. He then settled in Mashhad‑i Sanabad (i.e.,
present day Mashhad) at Tus, and his tomb is now to be found there near
the Qatlagah Mosque . . .

The Imam was unique in his age in the science of grammar . . . and had
expertise in the other sciences such that many were able to benefit and
learn from him. He moved to Bayhaq in 523/1129, and settled there, where
a school was founded for him in the quarter of Darwazah‑i \`Iraq (\`Iraq
Gate). He also composed a great quantity as well of poetry in his youth
. . ., and has many other words also. He was distin­guished in
arithmetic and algebra. He died in the capital city of Sabzawar (i.e.,
Bayhaq) on the night of al‑Adha, on the 10th Dhi'l‑Hijjah, 548 (26th
February, 1154), and was taken to his resting‑place in Mashhad
*(Tarikh‑i Bayhaq,* ed., Qari Sayyid Kalim Allah Husayni”.[^2]

Another learned and well‑known scholar, the Wazir Jamalu'd‑Din, Abu
'l‑Hasan 'Ali ibn Yusuf al‑Qifti (564 ‑646/1172‑1248), says: “He lived
in Bayhaq where he was a grammarian and exegete, and foremost teacher of
these sciences. Students flocked to him to benefit from his great
knowledge, and from his eloquence both in poetry and in prose.”

*I'lamu 'l‑Wara bi A'lami 'l‑Huda, is* divided into four parts. The
first part deals with the Prophet and Fatimah az-­Zahra', and the second
part deals with the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. The
third part narrates the lives of the rest of the Imams, except the
Twelfth. The fourth part discusses the imamate of the Twelve Imams, as
well as the birth and occultation of the Twelfth lmam.

The edition used for this translation (ed., \`Ali Akbar Ghifari, pub.
Dar al‑Ma'rifah, Beirut, 1399/1979), based on a manuscript in the
private collection of the well‑known traditionist as‑Sayyid Jalalu'd‑Din
al‑Urmawi, as well al-­Majlisi's *Biharu'l-Anwar,* where the entire book
is copied in various contexts in several volumes. Another important
source used in preparing the edition was *Kitabu'l‑Irshad,* which was
extensively used by at‑Tabrisi himself, used in this translation.
Finally, the editor consulted all the sources which at‑Tabrisi himself
cites in the book.

This small volume was translated and annotated by Dr. Mahmoud M. Ayoub,
research associate of the Centre of Religious Studies, and Lynda G.
Clarke, doctoral candidate of the Department of Middle East and Islamic
Studies, University of Toronto, Canada. It is our hope that the rest of
the book *I'lamu'l‑Wara bi A'lami'l‑Huda*, will be one day translated
into English by Dr. Ayoub and Mrs. Clarke, or that someone else
qualified would undertake this worthy task.

World Organization For Islamic Services,  
 (Board of Writing, Translation and Publication ).  
 17/ 3/1406 30/11/1985 Tehran ‑ IRAN.

[^1]: Majma'u 'l-Bayan, Matba'atu'l‑\`Irfan, Sayda (Lebanon), 1355/1936,
vol. 5, p. 32.

[^2]: Hyderabad, Deccan: Da'iratu'l‑Ma'arif al‑\`Uthmaniyyah,
1388/1968), pp. 420‑ 21.


