Be you all to him true supporters and loyal allies!"
====================================================

*There did lie pray: “O Allah, be a friend to his friend,*  
*And are enemy to anyone who shows Ali hostility!"And are enemy to
anyone who shows Ali hostility!"*

The Messenger of Allah said to Hassan, “You shall be fortified always
with the Holy Spirit (that is, Gabriel) so long as you render us support
with your tongue. The Messenger of Allah did not depart that spot until
Allah sent down to him:

***Today have I perfected your religion for you; I have completed my
favour unto you, acid leave chosen Islam as a religion for you***
**(Qur'an 5 :3) ;**

He concurred: “Praise be to Allah for the perfection of faith, the
fullness of His favor, His pleasure with my apostleship, and the
authority *(walayah)* of 'Ali after me.”

When the Messenger of Allah arrived in Medina from the farewell
pilgrimage, he appointed Usamah ibn Zayd a leader of a large army and
ordered him to set out for the spot wherein his father had been slain.
He said to him: “Let your horses reach the end of Syria and the
beginnings of the lands of Byzantium.” He included in Usamah's army the
notables of the Immigrants and the Ansar. Among them were Abu Bakr,
\`Umar, and Abu \`Ubaydah. Usamah set up camp in a place called al‑Jurf
(just at the outskirts of Medina). The Apostle of Allah, however, fell
ill; it was the illness of which he died. He repeated often during his
illness: “Send off Usamah's army.” He did so in order that there would
be no people remaining in Medina after his death who would show discord
concerning the imamate of the Muslims, or covet command. This position
(he hoped) would be assumed without opposition by its rightful claimant.

The Death of The Prophet
------------------------

It is reported that when the Prophet sensed the illness which had come
upon him, on a Saturday or Sunday towards the end of Safar the second
month of 10/632, he took 'Ali by the hand, and accompanied by a few of
his Companions, went to al‑Baqi\` (the graveyard of Medina). There he
ex­claimed: “Peace be upon you O people of the graves; be of good cheer
in what you have attained over (living) people. Seditions have come,
thick and dark as a black night; the beginnings of some follow quickly
upon the ends of others! ” He said further: “Gabriel used to review the
Qur'an with me once a year, but this year he reviewed it with me twice.

I see this as an indication of the coming of my end.” Then addressing
\`Ali, he continued: “I was, O 'Ali, given the choice of the treasures
of this world and eternal life besides, or Para­dise, but I chose
Paradise and meeting my Lord. When I die, you should wash me and cover
my nakedness, for no one shall look upon it except a man born blind.”

The Prophet then returned to his home, where he re­mained ill for three
days. On Wednesday, he went out to the mosque with his head tightly
bandaged with a cloth. He was leaning on 'Ali with his right hand, and
on al‑Fadl ibn al‑,\`Abbas with the other. He sat on the pulpit and
praised Allah repeatedly, then said: “O people, my term among you shall
soon come to an end. Let, therefore, anyone who has entrusted me with an
object of value, come to me that I may return it to him. Anyone to whom
I am in debt, let him come and declare it to me.” A man rose up and
said: “O Apostle of Allah, you owe me a promise; I married, and you
promised me three ounces of precious metal.” He said: “Give them to him,
O al Fadl.”

He remained thus Wednesday and Thursday, but on Fri­day, he again sat on
the pulpit and spoke to the people. He said: “O people, there is nothing
which can stand between Allah and anyone that could benefit a man or
ward off evil from him except good deeds. O people, let no ambitious man
claim anything, or one full of desires, desire anything! For by Him Who
sent me with the truth, only good deeds coupled with Allah's mercy can
lead to salvation. Even I, had I rebelled against Allah, would have
fallen. O Allah, I have thrice conveyed (that is, Allah's command
concerning \`Ali).” He then stepped down and led the people in prayer,
then entered his chamber. He was at the time in the house of Umm
Salamah. He remained there one or two days; then \`A'ishah came asking
him to move to her chamber in order that she might nurse him. He agreed
and moved to the house in which \`A'ishah lived.

His illness persisted for some days, until he became seriously ill.
Bilal then came at the time of the dawn prayers, while the Apostle of
Allah was over­whelmed by his illness, and called out: “Time for
prayers, may Allah have mercy upon you! ” The Prophet answered: “Let one
of the men lead the rest in prayers.” \`A'ishah added: “Order Abu Bakr
(i.e., her father) that he lead the people in prayers!” Hafsah said:
“Order \`Umar (i.e., her father)!” The Prophet retorted: “Cease, for you
two are like Joseph's little women! ”[^1]

He then rose, even though he was unable to stand because of weakness. He
leaned on \`Ali and al‑Fadl and went to the mosque dragging his feet
because of weak­ness. When he entered, he found that Abu Bakr had
already stood facing the niche. He beckoned to him, and Abu Bakr stepped
back. The Messenger of Allah stood up, and uttering the formula of
consecration (that is, *takbiratu'l‑ihram),* he began the prayers. When
he had done and returned to his chamber, he called for Abu Bakr and
\`Umar along with others who were present and said: “Have I not
commanded you to send off Usamah's army?” Abu Bakr replied: “I had
already set out, but I returned to see you.” \`Umar said: “I did not go
because I did not wish to be absent, and thus have to enquire of the
caravan to get news about you.” He repeated three times: “Send off
Usamah's army!”

He then fell into a swoon because of the fatigue which he suffered. He
remained thus unconscious for a while, so that the Muslims began to weep
and his wives and children began to wail loudly. But he regained
consciousness and said: “Bring me a pen and shoulder blade that I may
in­scribe for you a writ after which you shall never go astray! ” Again,
he lost consciousness. One of his Companions present was about to go and
fetch a pen and shoulder blade, but \`Umar said to him: “Come back, for
he is hallucinating!” When the Prophet again regained consciousness,
some of his Companions said: “O Apostle of Allah, should we not bring
you a pen and shoulder blade?” “No”, he said, “not after what you have
said! Rather, keep well my memory through kindness to the people of my
Household. Treat with kind­ness the people of *dhimmah* (that is, Jews
and Christians), and feed the poor. Observe regular prayers, and be kind
to the women whom your right hands possess.”

He continued to repeat these injunctions until he could endure no
longer, and turned his face away from the people. Everyone got up and
left except al‑\`Abbas, al‑Fadl, 'Ali and others of his close family;
they stayed by his side. al‑\`Abbas said: “O Apostle of Allah, if this
affair (that is, the succession) shall remain forever with us (that is,
the tribe of Hashim) after you, then announce to us the good news! If,
however, you know that we shall be forced to abandon it against our
will, then commend us to the people.” He said: “You are those who shall
be oppressed after me.”

He then fell silent. The people wept as they got up to leave. When they
had all gone, he demanded: “Let my brother \`Ali ibn Abi Talib and my
uncle return to me! ” When they had sat down, the Messenger of Allah
said: “O al‑\`Abbas, uncle of the Apostle of Allah, would you accept to
execute my will, carry out my funeral rites and remit my debts? ” He
replied: “Your uncle is an old man with many dependants, and you are
more powerful than a strong gale in generosity and bounteous giving!
There are incumbent upon you such expectations, that your uncle shall be
unable to fulfill.”  
 The Prophet then turned to 'Ali and put to him the same questions.
\`Ali replied: “Yes, O Messenger of Allah.” “Come close to me”, the
Prophet said. As 'Ali bent down, he embraced him and, taking his ring
from his finger, said: “Take it and put it on your finger! ”

The Prophet then called for his sword and suit of armour ‑ or according
to some reports Gabriel brought them down from heaven - and gave them to
the Commander of the Faithful saying: “Receive these during my life! ”
He also gave him his mule and saddle, and said: “Go to your home with
Allah's blessings.”

Next morning, he allowed no one to come in to see him because of his
grave illness. 'Ali, however, stayed beside him, not leaving him except
for necessary errands. As \`Ali left briefly for a special need, the
Prophet awoke and said: “Call my friend back to me.” He again was
overcome by weakness. \`A'ishah said: “Call Abu Bakr.” When he came, the
Prophet looked at him and turned away his face. He insisted: “Call back
for me my brother and friend! ” Hafsah said: “Call \`Umar for him! ”
When he came, the Prophet likewise turned his face away from him. Again
he demanded: “Call my bro­ther and friend to me!” Umm Salamah then said:
“Call 'Ali for him, for he wants no one else.”

When Ali came close to him, he bent down and the Messenger of Allah
spoke to him privately for a long time. \`Ali then went and sat a little
to the side. He dozed for a while until the Messenger of Allah fell
asleep. He then went out, and the people asked him: “O Abu 'I‑Hasan,
what did he confide to you?” He said: “The Messenger of Allah instructed
me in a thousand branches of knowledge. Each branch opened to, me a
thousand other branches. He also charged me with things which I shall,
if Allah wills, fulfill.”

The condition of the Messenger of Allah became grave, and lie was near
death. As his soul was about to depart, he said: “O 'Ali, place my head
in your lap, for Allah's com­mand is about to be fulfilled. When my soul
is released, take it in your hand and rub it on your face. Turn then my
face towards the *qiblah,* prepare me and be the first to offer the
funeral prayer over me. Do not leave me until you have put me in my
tomb. Seek Allah's help.”

'Ali placed the Prophet's head in his lap, whereupon he lost
consciousness. Fatimah bent over him, gazing at his face and raising the
dirge for him as she cried, and said:

*“A radiant face has he, for which the rain clouds pour down;*  
*sufficient help for orphans and a protection for widows was he! ”*

The Messenger of Allah opened his eyes and said in a feeble voice: “O
daughter, this was the saying of your uncle Abu Talib. Do not repeat it;
rather say,

***'Muhammad was only an apostle, before whom messengers came. Were he
to die or be slain, would you then turn back upon your heels?' ”***
**(Qur'an 3 :144) .**

She wept bitterly for a long time; then he beckoned to her to come
close. When she drew near to him, he whispered secret words in her ears,
and her face brightened with a smile.

The Prophet finally breathed his last, while the right hand of the
Commander of the Faithful rested beneath his jaw. As his soul flowed
forth, \`Ali lifted it up and rubbed his face with it. He then turned
him to the *qiblah,* closed his eyes, spread his garment over him and
looked after the rest of the burial preparations. Fatimah was later
asked: “What did the Messenger of Allah say to you that you became so
happy?” She replied: “He told me that I shall be the first of the people
of his Household to follow him, and that in a short time I shall see
him. This made me happy.”

It is related that Umm Salamah, the Prophet's wife, said: “I placed my
hand on the Messenger of Allah's breast on the day he died, and for a
long time, even though I ate and performed my ablutions, the fragrance
of musk did not leave my hand.” It is related on the authority of Anas
ibn Malik that Fatimah said: “When the Prophet's condition worsened and
the pain of death had covered his face, I mourned him saying:

*\`O my father whose death Gabriel has announced* (to creation);  
*O my father whose Lord has taken him close to His presence;*  
*O my father whose abode shall be the gardens of Paradise;*  
*O my father who has answered the summons of the Lord Who called him
forth!”'*

It is reported on the authority of (the fifth Imam) al-­Baqir that when
the Messenger of Allah was at the point of death, Gabriel came down to
him and asked: “Do you wish to return to this world?” “No”, he answered,
“I rather wish to be with the Lord Most High.” as‑Sadiq is said to have
reported that Gabriel came down to the Prophet and said: “This is the
last time I come down to this world, for you were my only object of
interest in it.”

It is reported that Fatimah and all the Muslims wailed in a loud voice
and threw dust over their heads. The Prophet died two nights before the
end of Safar in the tenth year of his migration. It is also reported
that it was on Monday, the twelfth of Rabi \`u 'l‑Awwal.

When 'Ali wished to wash the Prophet's body for burial, he called
al‑Fadl ibn al‑\`Abbas to pour the water for him, after he had him
blindfolded. 'Ali rent the Prophet's shirt from the top to his navel (so
as not to expose his nakedness) before he washed, embalmed and shrouded
him. Having finished with his washing and other preparations, \`Ali
prayed over the Prophet. Aban related on the authority of Abu Ja'far
(the fifth Imam al‑Baqir) that the people later asked 'Ali, “How should
the funeral prayer over the Prophet be performed?”

He answered: “The Messenger of Allah was our *imam* during his life, and
he remains our *imam* after his death. The people, therefore, both young
and old, went in groups of ten and prayed over him. This took all day
Mon­day and Tuesday. They all prayed, male and female of the inhabitants
of Medina and its neighbouring districts, with­out an *imam.*

The Muslims vehemently disputed as to where the Proph­et was to be
buried. \`Ali then observed: “Allah did not receive the soul of a
prophet in any place but that He chose that same place to be the spot of
his grave. I shall therefore bury him in the chamber in which he was
received. The Muslims all agreed with' this view. After the Muslims had
prayed over him, al‑\`Abbas sent a man to Abu \`Ubaydah al‑Jarrah, who
used to dig graves with a hollow in the middle *(darih)* for the people
of Mecca.

He also sent Zayd ibn Sahl to Abu Talhah, who used to dig graves with a
hollow in the side *(lahd)* for the people of Medina. al‑\`Abbas prayed:
“O Allah, choose which of the two you wish for your Prophet.” Abu Talhah
was found and was told to dig a grave for the Mess­enger of Allah. He
dug a *lahd* for him, and the Commander of the Faithful, al‑\`Abbas,
al‑Fadl and Usamah ibn Zayd went in to perform the burial rites of the
Messenger of Allah.

The Ansar called in from behind the house saying: “O \`Ali, we remind
you of Allah and our right to the Messenger of Allah, that it should not
be lost today. Let a man of us go in, so that we too may have a share in
the burial of the Messenger of Allah.” 'Ali answered: “Let Aws ibn
Khawli, who was a man of the \`Awf ibn al‑Khazraj tribe, come forth. He
was one of those who took part in the Battle of Badr. He entered the
house, and \`Ali told him to go into the grave.

He then placed the Messenger of Allah on the man's arms, who then
lowered him into his tomb. \`Ali then asked the man to come out, which
he did. \`Ali went down into the grave and un­covered the Prophet's face
and placed his cheek on the ground, facing the *qiblah,* and laid him on
his right side. He laid grave slabs and covered the tomb with earth.

The people took advantage of the preoccupation of the sons of Hashim
with the Apostle of Allah, and of 'Ali's self‑seclusion for mourning, to
decide the matter of the Prophet's succession. Abu Bakr won the day
because of the disagreement of the Ansar among themselves, and also
because the people did not wish to postpone the decision until the men
of Banu Hashim had completed all the funeral rites of the Apostle of
Allah. Had they done so, the matter would have been decided in the
proper manner. However, they gave allegiance *(bay ah)* to Abu Bakr
because he was present. This book is not the proper place to explain all
this; the subject is treated in its proper sources.  
 It is reported that Abu Sufyan came to the door of the Apostle of Allah
and declared in verses:

*O Sons of Hashim, Let not people take advantage of you;*  
*Especially the people of Taym ibn Murrah* (the clan of Abu Bakr) *and
Adiyy* (the clan of \`Umar).  
*This matter must remain with you, for with you must be its
determination;*  
*There is no one more appropriate for it (that is, the caliphate) than
Abu'l Hasan Ali.*

[^1]: The question of who led the prayers during the Prophet's illness
became crucial in choosing his successor. Shi'i sources have insisted
that Abu Bakr was not allowed to lead the prayers as long as the Prophet
lived. Thus the Prophet compared \`A'ishah, daughter of Abu Bakr, and
Hafsah, daughter of \`Umar, to the foolish women who jealously taunted
the wife of the Egyptian ruler for her in­fatuation with Joseph's
beauty. See Qur'an 12 : 30 ‑ 31.


