Abul Hasan, grasp it with the hand of a determined man!
=======================================================

*For you are most suitable for this much‑coveted office.*

He then cried with a loud voice: “O sons of Hashim, sons of \`Abd Manaf,
would you accept Abu Fasil (that is, Abu Bakr), a despicable man and son
of a despicable man, to rule over you? By Allah, if you so wish, I will
fill the place for you with horses and men! ” The Commander of the
Faithful called out to him: “Go away Abu Sufyan, for by Allah, you do
not mean what you say. Rather, you continue to plot against Islam and
its people. We are still preoccupied with the Apostle of Allah. To every
man shall belong what he has earned, and he alone shall be responsible
for what he has done.”

It is reported that the people of Quraysh sent for \`Ikri­mah ibn Abi
Jahl and his uncles al‑Harith ibn Hisham and others and appointed them
leaders of armies destined for Yemen and Syria, to which they were
dispatched on that same night. They likewise sent for Abu Sufyan, whom
they silenced by appointing Yazid ibn Abi Sufyan as a provincial
governor.

It is reported that when people pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr, he was
advised to recall Usamah's army and use it against any of the Arab
tribes which might rise up against him. Most of the Immigrants had
joined Usamah's army. Usamah asked Abu Bakr : “What would you yourself
say?” He answered: “You see what the people have decided! I request that
you exempt me and \`Umar.” Usamah assented: “I shall exempt you.”

It is reported that no sooner had Usamah reached Syria than Abu Bakr
dismissed him and appointed Yazid ibn~ Abi Sufyan as leader in his
place. Thus only forty days elapsed between Usamah's departure from
Medina and his return to it. When he arrived, he stood at the door of
the mosque and declared: “O Muslims, I marvel at a man over whom the
Messenger of Allah had set me as leader, yet who now sets himself up as
commander over me and dismisses me! ”


