Fatimah Az‑Zahra', Daughter of the Holy Prophet of Islam
========================================================

This chapter deals with Fatimah az‑Zahra' (the Radiant), the daughter of
the Messenger of Allah. It treats her birth, span of life and the time
of her death, as well as some of her excellences and characteristics. It
consists of three sections.

Her Birth, Names and Epithets
-----------------------------

The most predominant view in the traditions transmitted by our
traditionists is that Fatimah az‑Zahra' was born in Mecca, on the
twentieth of Jumada 'l-Akhirah, in the fifth year of the Prophet's
apostolic career. It is also asserted that when the Prophet died,
Fatimah was eighteen years and seven months old.

It is reported on the authority of Jabir ibn Yazid that (the fifth Imam)
al‑Baqir was asked: “How long did Fatimah live after the Messenger of
Allah?” He answered: “Four months; she died at the age of twenty‑three.”
This view is close to that reported by the traditionists of the (Sunni)
majority. They have asserted that she was born in the forty-first year
of the Messenger of Allah's life. This means that she was born one year
after the Prophet was sent by Allah as a messenger. The scholar Abu Said
al‑Hafiz relates in his book *Sharafu'n‑Nabiyy* that all the children of
the Messenger of Allah were born before Islam except Fatimah and
Ibrahim, who were born in Islam.[^1]

It is reported that the sixth Imam Ja'far as‑Sadiq said:  
 “Fatimah has nine names with Allah. They are: Fatimah, as‑Siddiqah (the
Righteous), al‑Mubarakah (the Blessed), at‑Tahirah (the Pure),
az‑Zakiyyah (the Unblemished), ar­Radiyah (the one content with Allah's
pleasure), al‑Mar­diyyah (the one pleasing to Allah), al‑Muhaddathah
(the one spoken to by angels) and az‑Zahirah (the Luminous).

In the *Musnad* (collection of transmitted *hadiths)* of the eighth Imam
ar‑Rid5, it is reported that the Prophet de­clared: “I named my daughter
Fatimah (the Weaned One) because Allah weaned her and those who love her
from the Fire.” The Prophet also called her al‑Batul (pure virgin), and
said to \`A'ishah: “O Humayra' (a redish white, a well‑known epithet of
\`A'ishah), Fatimah is not like the women of hu­man kind, nor does she
suffer the illness you (women) suf­fer! ”

This is explained in another prophetic tradition which asserts that she
never menstruated. It is likewise reported by Sunni traditionists on the
authority of Anas ibn Malik, who heard Umm Salim, the wife of Abu Talhah
al‑Ansari, say: “Fatimah never experienced the blood of menstruation or
parturition, for she was created from the waters of Para­dise.” This is
because when the Messenger of Allah was transported to heaven, he
entered Paradise, where he ate of its fruits and drank its water.

Proofs of her \`Ismah (Sinlessness), some of the Signs Proving her Status with Allah, and Traditions indicating her Excellence and Exalted Status
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the most incontrovertible proofs of Fatimah's sin­lessness is
Allah's saying:

***Surely Allah wishes to remove all abomination from you, O People of
the House, and*** **purify** ***you with a great purification*** **(our.
33 : 33) .**

The argument in favour of this, is that the Muslim community has
unanimously agreed that the \`People of the House' (i.e.,
*ahlu'l-bayt),* intended in this verse are the People of the Household
of the Messenger of Allah. Traditions *(ahadith)* of both the Shi\`i and
Sunni communities have asserted that this verse particu­larly refers to
'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn. The Prophet, moreover, spread over them
all one day a Khaybarite mantle and prayed: “O Allah, these are the
People of my House­hold, remove all abomination from them and purify
them with a great purification!” Umm Salamah said: “I too, O Apostle of
Allah, am of the People of your House!” He answered: “Your lot shall be
good!”

The Divine Will expressed in this verse must by necessity be either an
abstract will not implemented by an action, or a will accompanied by an
action. The first option is unten­able because it implies no particular
applicability to the People of the Prophet's House; such a will is
shared by all obligated *(mukallafin)* human beings. Nor is abstract
will by itself cause for praise. The entire community has concurred on
the view that this verse proclaims the excellence of the People of the
Prophet's House over all others, and that the verse refers to them
alone.

Thus the second option (that the Divine Will referred to in the verse is
a will accompanied by action) is true, and in it is clear proof of the
sinlessness of those who were intended in the verse. It implies further
that it is impossible for them to commit any evil action. Moreover, any
others whom we have not named here are no doubt not held by general
consensus as possessing \`ismah (protection from error). Thus since the
verse necessarily implies sinlessness it must apply to them (the People
of the Prophet's House), because it pertains to no other individuals.

Another proof of Fatimah's sinlessness is the Prophet's saying
concerning her: “Fatimah is part of me. Whatever causes her hurt, hurts
me.” He also said: “Whoever hurts Fatimah, hurts me, and whoever hurts
me, hurts Allah, exalted be His Majesty! ” The Prophet said further:
“Allah becomes wrathful for Fatimah's anger, and is pleased at her
pleasure.” Had she been one who was guilty of committing sins, it would
not be that anyone causing her hurt would by this cause the Prophet
himself hurt in any way. On the contrary, if anyone were to disgrace and
hurt her deservedly ‑ even if he were to inflict upon her the severest
punish­ment permitted by the limits set by Allah ‑ if her action
necessitated such retaliation, it would be pleasing to him.

Among the signs indicating Fatimah's exalted status with Allah is an
incident related by both Shi'i and Sunni tradition­ists on the authority
of Maymunah (the Prophet's wife), who reported that Fatimah was found
asleep one day, the hand­mill beside her turning of its own accord. She
informed the Apostle of Allah of this, and he said: “Allah knew the weak
condition of His handmaid; He thus inspired the handmill to turn by
itself, and so it did.” Among the reports asserting her excellence and
high distinction over all other women is the tradition reported on the
authority of \`A'ishah who said: “I never saw a man more beloved of the
Apostle of Allah than \`Ali, or a woman more dear to him than Fatimah.”

Sunni traditionists also reported on the authority of the Commander of
the Faithful who said: “I asked the Messen­ger of Allah, \`Who is more
beloved to you, Fatimah or I?' He answered, \`Fatimah is more beloved to
me, and you are dearer to me than she is.' ” These traditionists also
reported from Anas ibn Malik that: “Fatimah is the most excellent of all
the women of the world.” In another tradition it is reported that the
Prophet said: “The most excellent among the women of the world are:
Maryam daughter of \`Imran (that is, the virgin Mary), Asiyah daughter
of Muzahim (wife of Pharaoh), Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid and Fatimah
daughter of Muhammad.”

It is also related on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas who said: “The most
excel­lent of the women of Paradise are: Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid,
Fatimah daughter of Muhammad, Maryam daughter of \`Imran and Asiyah
daughter of Muzahim.” Traditionists report that \`Abdu 'r‑Rahman ibn
\`Awf said: “I heard the Apostle of Allah say, \`I am a tree, Fatimah is
its trunk and 'Ali is its pollen. Hasan and Husayn are its fruits, and
our followers (Shi'ah) are its leaves. The roots of the tree are in the
Garden of Eden, and its trunk, fruits and leaves are in Paradise.' ”

Traditionists further report on the authority of \`A'ishah that:
“Whenever Fatimah came to the Messenger of Allah, he would rise from his
seat, kiss her on the forehead, and make her sit with him.”
Traditionists have also reported on the authority of 'Ali ibn Ibrahim
al‑Qummi in his commentary of the Qur'an, as related on the authority of
the sixth Imam as‑Sadiq, Ja'far ibn Muhammad, who said: “We were told
that our forefathers said that the Messenger of Allah often indulged in
kissing the mouth of Fatimah the mistress of the women of the world, so
that \`A'ishah finally protested saying, \`O Messenger of Allah, I see
you indulge so often in kissing the mouth of Fatimah and placing your
tongue in her mouth.'

He answered, \`Yes, O \`A'ishah, when I was taken up to heaven, Gabriel
took me into Paradise and brought me near the tree of Tuba (beatitude).
He gave me an apple of its fruits which I ate, and which became a sperm
in my loins. Thus when I returned to earth, I laid with Khadijah, and
she conceived Fatimah. Whenever, therefore, I yearn for Paradise, I kiss
her and place my tongue in her mouth, for I find in her the fragrance of
Paradise. I also sense in her the fragrance of the tree of Tuba. Fatimah
is thus a celestial human being.' ”

The traditions which our Companions (that is, Shi'i *hadith*
transmitters), may Allah be pleased with them, have reported in proof of
Fatimah's special place among the children of the Apostle ‑ her honoured
status and distinction over all the women of humankind ‑ are beyond
number. We shall, therefore, limit ourselves to the reports which we
have already mentioned.

Among the things which Allah completed the great honour of the Commander
of the Faithful in this world and the world to come was His special
favour towards him in having him unite in marriage with the noble
daughter of the Messenger of Allah, who was the most beloved of all
creatures to him, the consolation of his eyes and mistress of the women
of the world. Among the many *ahadith* (tra­ditions) concerning this
event is the sound *hadith* reported on the authority of Anas ibn Malik,
who said: “As the Apostle of Allah was sitting one day, 'Ali came to see
him. He addressed him saying, \`O 'Ali, what brings you here?'

\`I came only to greet you with the salutation of peace', \`Ali replied.
The Prophet declared: \`Here comes Gabriel to tell me that Allah has
willed to unite you in marriage with Fatimah, peace be upon her. He has,
moreover, called as witnesses to her marriage a thousand angels. Allah
has revealed to the tree of Tuba, “Scatter your pearls and rubies! ”
Black‑eyed houris rushed to pick the precious stones up, which they
shall exchange as presents among them till the Day of Resurrection.' ”

It is related on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas, who said: “On the night
when Fatimah was married to 'Ali, the Mess­enger of Allah stood before
her. Gabriel stood at her right hand and Michael at her left. Seventy
thousand angels stood behind her, praising and sanctifying Allah. The
Commander of the Faithful prided himself on his marriage to her on
numerous occasions.” Abu Ishaq ath‑Thaqafi reported on the authority of
Hakim ibn Jubayr, who reported from al‑Hajari who related from his uncle
who said: “I heard \`Ali say one day, \`I shall utter words which no
other man would utter but that he would be a liar. I am \`Abdullah
(Allah's servant), and the brother of the Apostle of Allah. I am the one
whose guardian is the Prophet of mercy, for I have married the mistress
of all the women of the community. I am the best of the vicegerents.' ”
Numerous reports ex­pressing similar ideas have been transmitted.

Ath -Thaqafi reported on the authority of Buraydah, who said: “On the
nuptial night of \`Ali and Fatimah, the Prophet said to 'Ali, \`Do not
do anything until you see me.' He then brought water ‑ or the
traditionist reported that he called for water ‑ which he used to
perform his ablutions for prayers, pouring the rest over 'Ali. The
Prophet then prayed, \`O Allah, bless them! Shower your blessings over
them, and bless for them their two young lions (that is, their two sons
Hasan and Husayn).”' ath-­Thaqafi also related on the authority of
Shurahil ibn Abi Sa'd, who said: “On the morning after Fatimah's
wedding, the Prophet brought a skinful of milk, and said to Fatimah,
'Drink! May your father be a ransom for you.' He like­wise said to
\`Ali, 'Drink! May your cousin be a ransom for you.'”

The time of Fatimah's Death and the Spot of her Grave
-----------------------------------------------------

It is reported that Fatimah died on the third of Jumada 'l-Akhirah in
the eleventh year of the *hijrah.* She survived the Prophet by only
ninety‑five days. It is also reported that she survived him by four
months.

The Commander of the Faithful (\`Ali) himself took charge of her
washing. It is reported that Asma' daughter of \`Umays assisted him in
washing her. Asma' related: “Fatimah had stated in her will that no one
should wash her corpse except 'Ali and I. Thus we washed her together,
and the Commander of the Faithful prayed over her along with Hasan and
Husayn, \`Amman ibn Yasir, Miqdad, \`Aqil, az‑Zubayr, Abu Dharr, Salman,
Buraydah and a few men of Banu Hashim. They prayed over her in the
night, and in accordance with her own will 'Ali the Commander of the
Faithful buried her in secret.”

There is much disagreement among traditionists as to the exact spot of
her grave. Our own traditionists have asserted that she was buried in
the Baqi \`. Others said that she was buried in her own chamber, and
that when the Umayyad rulers enlarged the Mosque of Medina, her grave
came to be in the sanctuary. Still others argued that she was buried
between the grave and pulpit of the Prophet. It is to this that the
Prophet alluded in his saying: “There is between my grave and pulpit a
garden of the gardens of Paradise.” The first view is unlikely, while
the two other views are nearer to the truth. Thus, those who wish to
apply the principle of caution *(ihtiyat)* when performing *ziyarah,* or
pilgrimage, to her grave, should do so in all three places.

This is all that we wished to say concerning Muhammad, the Elect Prophet
(al‑Mustafa) and his daughter Fatimah, the Radiant (az‑Zahra'). From
Allah alone comes success.

[^1]: That is, Abu Sa'd or Said al‑Kharkushi; see note 12 above.
at­-Tabrisi' (or his editor) here calls him “al‑Hafiz”, but he seems
rather to be known as al‑Wa'iz. Despite al‑Kharkushi's statement as here
reported by at‑Tabrisi, traditionists have generally agreed that Fatimah
(a. s.) was born early in the Prophet's career.


