The Holy Prophet of Islam
=========================

This section deals with the Prophet Muhammad, may Allah's blessings be
upon him and the people of his house­hold: his lineage, birth, the time
of his call by Allah to apostleship, his age and the time of his death,
his epithets and characteristics, the proofs of his Prophethood, and his
mir­acles, his children and wives, and his paternal and maternal uncles.
It provides information concerning some of his battles and other events
of his life. It consists of six chapters; the first, divided into three
sections, deals with his lineage and birth, his age and the time of his
death.

His Birth And Lineage, And The Time Of His Death
------------------------------------------------

The Prophet Muhammad was born on Friday before sunrise on the 17th of
Rabi \`u 'l‑Awwal in the \`Year of the Elephant', 570/71.

According to Sunni tradition, he was born on Monday. Traditionists have,
however, differed concerning the date. Some said it was on the second
night of Rabi'u'l-Awwal, others on the tenth. This was after thirty‑four
years and eight months of the reign of Anushirwan son of Qubad, King of
Persia, who killed Mazdak and exterminated the Dualists.

It is to this that the *hadith* attributed to the Messenger of Allah
refers: “I was born during the reign of the just and righteous King.”
His birth occurred also after eight years and eight months of the reign
of \`Amr ibn Hind, King of the Arabs. His agnomen was Abu 'l‑Qasim. Anas
ibn Malik re­ported that, “When Ibrahim son of the Prophet was born,
Gabriel came to him and said, \`Peace be upon you, O Abu Ibrahim'. ”

His genealogy is as follows: Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah ibn \`Abdi
'l‑Muttalib ‑ whose name was Shaybatu'l-Hamd ‑ ibn Hashim ‑ whose name
was \`Amr ‑ ibn \`Abd Manaf ‑ whose name was al‑Mughirah ‑ ibn Qusayy ‑
whose name was Zayd ‑ ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy ibn
Ghalib ibn Fihr ibn Malik ibn an‑Nadr ‑ known as Quraysh ‑ ibn Kina­nah
ibn Khuzaynah ibn Mudrikah ibn Ilyas ibn Mudar ibn Nizar ibn Ma'add ibn
\`Adnan. It is reported that the Prophet said, “When my genealogy
reaches \`Adnan, then go no fur­ther”. It is also related on the
authority of Umm Salamah the wife of the Prophet, who said, “I heard the
Prophet say (recounting his own lineage), \`Ma'add ibn \`Adnan ibn Udad
ibn Zayd ibn Thara ibn A'raqu 'th‑Thara'.” Umm Salamah also said: “Zayd
is Hamaysa'; and Thara is Nabt; and A'raqu 'th Thara is Isma'il
(Ishmael) ibn Ibrahim (Abraham).” She continued: “Then the Apostle of
Allah recited,

**'** ***Ad,*** ***Thamud and the people of the well*** **(Rass)**
***and many gener­ations between'*** **(Qur'an. 25:38)** ,

which only Allah knows.”

Ash‑Shaykh Abu Ja'far ibn Babawayh, may Allah be pleased, with him,
reported another genealogy as follows: \`Adnan ibn Udd ibn Udad ibn
Yamin ibn Yashjub ibn Mun­har ibn Sabugh ibn Hamaysa\` ; or in another
version: \`Adnan ibn Udad ibn Zayd ibn Yaqdud ibn Yaqdum al‑Hamaysa\`
ibn Nabt ibn Qaydar ibn Isma'il ibn Ibrahim. It is generally believed by
most historians and genealogists that \`Adnan was Udd ibn Udad ibn
al.‑Yasa\` ibn al‑Hamaysa\` ibn Salaman ibn Nabt ibn Hamal ibn Qaydar
ibn Isma'il ibn lbrahim ibn Tarih ibn Takhar ibn Sarakh ibn Ar'awa' ibn
Faligh ibn \`Abir, who was the Prophet Bud. Had was the son of Shalikh
ibn Arfakhshadh ibn Sam (Shem) ibn Nah (Noah) ibn Lamk ibn Mattushalakh
(Methuselah) ibn Ukhnakh, who was the Prophet Idris (Enoch). Ukhnakh was
the son of Yarid ibn Mahla'il ibn Qaynan ibn Unash ibn Shith (Seth) ibn
Adam, the father of humankind.

The Prophet's mother was Aminah bint (daughter of) Wahb ibn \`Abd Manaf
ibn Zuhrah ibn Kilab ibn Murrah ibn Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib.

Halimah daughter of \`Abdullah ibn al‑Harith ibn Shijnah as‑Sa'diyyah of
the (tribe of) Bana Sa'd ibn Hawazin nursed him until he reached the age
of weaning. Thuwaybah, the servant of Aba Lahab ibn \`Abdi l-Muttalib,
also nursed him while nursing her own son Masrah. This was before
Halimah accepted the task. Thuwaybah died a Muslim in the seventh year
of the Hijrah, and her son died before her. She had also nursed Hamzah
ibn \`Abdi'I‑Muttalib, the Prophet's pater­nal uncle. Thus the Messenger
of Allah said of Hamzah's daughter: “She is the daughter of my nursing
brother.” Hamzah was four years older than the Apostle of Allah. As for
his grandmother, the mother of his father \`Abdullah, she was Fatimah
daughter of \`Amr ibn \`A'idh ibn \`Imran ibn Makhzum. The mother of
\`Abdu 'l‑Muttalib was Salma daughter of \`Amr of the tribe of
an‑Najjar. Hashim's mother was \`Atikah daughter of Murrah ibn Hilal of
the tribe of Sulaym. Qusayy and Zuhrah's mother was Fatimah daughter of
Sa'd of the tribe of Azdu 's‑Sarat.

The Prophet proclaimed his apostleship on the twenty-seventh of the
month of Rajab. He was then forty years of age, and died on Monday, two
nights before the end of Safar in the eleventh year of the Hijrah. He
was then sixty-three years old.

His Names, Epithets And Honorable Lineage
-----------------------------------------

Among his names are those which are in the Qur'an; they are as follows:
the Apostle, and the unlettered Prophet, as Allah says:

***They who*** **follow** ***the Apostle, the unlettered Prophet whom
they find inscribed in the Torah and the Gospel*** **(Qur'an. 7:157).**

Others are: *al‑muzammil* (enshrouded) and *al‑mudaththir* (enwrapped),
as in Allah's saying:

***O you*** **who are enshrouded,** ***and O you*** **who are
enwrapped** ***(see Qur'an. 73:1 and 74:1 ) .***

Still others are: *an‑nadhir al‑mubin* (the clear warner), as Allah
says:

***Say, I am the clear warner*** **(Qur'an. 15:89) ,**

and Ahmad, as Allah says:

***and announcing the coming of an apostle after me, whose name is
Ahmad*** **(Qur'an. 61:6) .**

His name Muhammad is also mentioned, where Allah says:

***Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah*** **(Qur'an. 48:29) ,**

and al‑Mustafa, as in Allah's saying:

***Allah elects Messengers from among angels and men*** **(Qur'an.
22:75).**

He is also called *karim* (noble), as in Allah's saying:

***It is surely the speech of a noble Messenger*** **(Qur'an. 69:40) .**

Allah called him *nur* (light), as in His saying:

***There have come to you from Allah a light and a clear Book***
**(Qur'an. 5:15 ) .**

He also called him *ni\`mah* (favor) in His saying:

***They know Allah's favor, yet they deny it*** **(Qur'an. 16:83 ) ,**

and *rahmah* (mercy), as He says:

***We have not sent you, except as a mercy to humankind*** **(Qur'an.
21:107 ) .**

He also called him *abd* (servant), as Allah says:

***It is He who sent down the criterion*** **(Furqan)** ***to His
servant*** **(Qur'an. 25:1 ) .**

He is called *ra\`uf rahim* (kindly and com­passionate), as in Allah's
saying:

***He is kindly and com­passionate toward the people of faith***
**(Qur'an. 9:128) .**

Allah called him *shahid* (witness), *mubashshir* (bearer of glad
tidings) *nadhir* (warner) and *da\`i* (summoner), as He says:

***We have sent you as a witness, bearer of glad tidings, warner, a
summoner to Allah by His leave, and a luminous lamp*** **(Qur'an. 33:45
‑ 6) .**

Allah also called him *mundhir* (warner), as in His saying:

***You*** ***are surely a warner*** **(Qur'an. 13:7).**

Allah called him *\`abd Allah* (God's servant) as in His saying:

***When the servant of Allah rose up to summon him, they nearly rushed
at him in crowds*** ***(Qur'an. 72:19) .***

Allah called him *mudhakkir* (reminder) in His saying:

***You*** ***are surely a reminder*** **(Qur'an. 88:21 ) .**

Allah also called him *Taha* and *Yasin.*[^1]

Others of the Prophet's names and epithets are re­ported in the
*hadith.* Thus Muhammad ibn Isma'il al‑Bukhari reported on the authority
of Jubayr ibn Mut'im that he heard the Apostle of Allah says: “I have
many names: I am Muhammad, I am Ahmad. I am *al‑mahi* (the effacer), for
through me Allah shall efface rejection of faith. I am *al‑hashir* (the
gatherer), for all men shall be gathered at my heels (on the last day).
I am *al‑aqib* (the last to follow), after whom there shall be no other
(prophet).”[^2]

In another tradition: “I am the effacer” is taken to mean, he through
whom the sins of those who follow him shall be effaced. In yet another
tradition he is called *al‑muqaffi* (that is he who followed all other
prophets), *nabiyyu't‑tawbah* (the prophet of penitence),
*nabiyyu'I‑malhamah* (the prophet of war), *al‑khatim* (the seal), *al
ghayth* (the succorer), and *al‑mutawakkil* (he who trusts in Allah).  
 The names of Muhammad in ancient scriptures are also numerous. Some of
these are: *ma'udh ma'udh,* which is in Hebrew in the Torah.[^3] In the
Psalms his name is Faruq (the one through whom falsehood is
distinguished from truth).

Ash‑Shaykh Abu Bakr Ahmad al‑Bayhaqi related in his book
*Dala'ilu'n‑Nubuwwah* on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas, who said that the
Messenger of Allah said, “Allah, exalted is He, divided creatures into
two groups, and placed me in the best group. Thus Allah speaks of the
people of the right and the people of the left (see Qur'an. 90:18‑19) ;
I am of the people of the right, and I am the best of the people of the
right. Allah then divided the two groups into three, and placed me in
the best third. This is clear from His saying:

***And the people of the right hand, who are the people of the right
hand? And the people of the left, who are the people of the left? And
those who precede, precede: they are the ones brought near*** **(Qur'an.
56:8‑10) .**

I am among those who precede, and I am the best of those who precede
(that is in accepting true faith and in the performance of good deeds).
Allah then divided these three groups into different tribes and placed
me in the best tribe. Thus He says: *We made you into nations and
tribes* (Qur.49:13). I am the most righteous of the children of Adam,
and the noblest of them in the sight of Allah. I do not boast. Allah
then made of the tribes different houses and placed me in the best
house. Thus He says:

***Surely Allah wishes to remove all abomination from you people of the
house and purify you with a great purification*** **(Qur'an. 33:33).**

I and the people of my household are therefore purified from all
sins.”[^4]

Al‑Hakim Abu \`Abdillah reported on the authority of Suf­yan ibn
\`Uyaynah who said: “The best verse which the Arabs recited is that
which Abu Talib recited concerning the Prophet

*And* (Allah) *derived for him a name from His name in order that He
might exalt him;*  
*The Lord of the Throne is Mahmud, and he is Muhammad.*[^5]

Others said that this verse was composed by Hassan ibn Thabit (the
famous poet of the Prophet) as part of a poem which begins with the
words:

*Do you not see that Allah sent His servant with His clear proof;*  
*For Allah is Most High and Most Glorious.*

Among the Prophet's epithets mentioned in the *hadith* are: \`the camel
rider', \`eater of the shoulder' [^6], \`prohibiter of the eating of
dead animals', \`he who accepts gifts',[^7] \`the seal of Prophethood',
\`holder of the thick staff' (as a sign of authority), and \`the
messenger of mercy'. It is said that his agnomen *(kunyah)* in the Torah
is Abu 'l‑Aramil (the man who cares for widows), and his name is the man
of the thick staff.

It is reported that the Prophet said: “I am *qutham,* \`the perfect one'
and \`the possessor of all goodness' ”. He also said, “I am the first
and the last, the first in Prophethood and the last to be sent by Allah
as a messenger.”

The Span Of His Life, Peace Be Upon Him
---------------------------------------

Muhammad lived to be sixty‑three years of age, two years and four months
of which he lived with his father. He lived with his grandfather \`Abdu
'l‑Muttalib for eight years. After the death of \`Abdu 'l‑Muttalib, his
uncle Abu Talib cared for the Prophet, greatly honoring and protecting
him. Abu Talib stood by the Prophet and supported him all his life. Ibn
Ishaq (the famous biographer of the Prophet) also reported that the
Prophet's father died before his birth. It is also ­related that he died
when the Prophet was seven months old.

Ibn Ishaq reported that Aminah, the Prophet's mother, took him to his
maternal uncles, the sons of \`Adiyy of an­-Najjar tribe, in Medina. On
her way back to Mecca, she died in a spot called al‑Abwa'. The Messenger
of Allah was then six years old. It is related on the authority of
Buraydah (al‑Aslami, one of the Prophet's Companions) that one day the
Prophet came to a grave. He sat at it, and all those who were with him
also sat down around him. He then began to turn his head, as though he
was talking to someone. Then he wept. He was asked, “What causes you to
weep O Mess­enger of Allah?” He answered, “This is the grave of Aminah
daughter of Wahb. I asked permission of my Lord to visit her grave, and
He permitted me. I felt compassion for her and wept.” (Buraydah
continued) “I never saw anyone weep so bitterly as he did at that time.”
In yet another tradition, it is reported by Muslim in his *as‑Sahih*
that the Prophet said: “I asked permission to visit the grave of my
mother, and it was granted me. Visit the graves, therefore, because they
remind you of death.”[^8]

The Prophet married Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid at the age of
twenty‑five. His uncle Abu Talib died when he was forty‑six years, eight
months and twenty‑four days old. Khadijah also passed away three days
after Abu Talib. Therefore, the Apostle of Allah called that year \`the
year of sorrow'. \`Urwah ibn az‑Zubayr (his father az‑Zubayr being a
cousin and close Companion of the Prophet) related from his father that
the Apostle of Allah said, “The people of Qu­raysh continued to stay
away from me until Abu Talib died.”

The Prophet remained in Mecca after his call to Prophethood for thirteen
years. Then he left it and migrated to Medina, after hiding in the cave
for three days. It is also reported that he hid for six days. He entered
Medina on Monday the 11th of Rabi \`u 'l‑Awwal, 1 A H., where he lived
for ten years. He died on Monday, two nights before the end of Safar
11/632. His relatives and Companions differed on where he was to be
buried. Then the Commander of the Faithful ('Ali) said: “Allah, be He
exalted, received the soul of His Prophet in the purest of spots; let
him, therefore, be buried there.” They accepted his advice and buried
the Prophet in the room where he died.

[^1]: See Qur'an 20:1 and 36:1. These are letters which appear at the
head of 29 surahs of the Qur'an. Muslim tradition has generally used
Taha and Yasin as names of the Prophet.

[^2]: al‑Bukhari, Muhammad ibn Isma'il, as‑Sahih, 8 vols. (Beirut:
Daru'l-Fikr, n.d.), vol. 4, p. 262.

[^3]: me'od me'od is a Hebrew phrase meaning 'exceedingly'. See Gen.
17:2, 6 and 20.

[^4]: al‑Bayhaqi, Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn al‑Husayn, Dala'ilu 'n‑Nubuw­wah,
ed. 'Abdu 'r‑Rahman Muhammad 'Uthman, 3 vols. (Cairo: Daru'n‑Nasr
li't‑Tiba\`ah, 1389/1969), vol.1, p.133.

[^5]: The words mahmud and muhammad are both derived from the root h‑m‑d
meaning to praise; hence Muhammad is derived from God's name Mahmud, the
All‑Praised.

[^6]: See al‑Hakim, Abu \`Abdillah Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah
an‑Naysa­buri, al‑Mustadrak 'ala Sahihayn, 4 vols. (Beirut: Daru'l-Fikr,
1398/ 1978), vol. 3, pp. 219 ‑ 20.

[^7]: It is held in Shi\`i tradition that neither the Prophet nor his
descend­ants can accept charity (sadaqah), but rather only the fifth
(khums) of a Muslim's savings, in money or in property. They can also
accept a gift (hadiyyah). See below, pp. 102.

[^8]: Muslim, Abu 'l-Husayn, Muslim ibn al‑Hajjaj al‑Qushayri
an‑Nay­saburi, as‑Sahih, with Nawawi's Commentary, 18 vols. (Beirut:
Daru'l-Fikr, 1389/1978), vol. 7, p.46.


