The Beginning of the Call
=========================

This chapter will present a brief account of the life of the Messenger
of Allah (Allah's blessings and peace be upon him and the people of his
household) from the time of his call until his migration to Medina. It
will indicate the time when he was commanded to fight, and will present
some of the signs and miracles which were wrought at his hands during
that period. It consists of eight sections.

The Beginning of his Call
-------------------------

'Ali ibn Ibrahim (al‑Qummi, who is one of our most respected
traditionists, related that when the Prophet was thirty‑seven years of
age, a person used to come to him in his dreams, addressing him and
saying: “O Apostle of Allah ! ”, but he used to ignore this. After a
long time had passed, and as he was among the hills grazing the sheep of
his uncle Abu Talib, he saw and heard a person addressing him: “O
Messen­ger of Allah ! ” He asked: “Who are you?” “I am Gabriel”, the
person answered; “Allah has sent me to you so that He may take you for a
messenger.” The Messenger of Allah told Khadijah of what happened.
Khadijah had already been informed of the accounts of the Jews and
Bahira', and what Muhammad's mother Aminah had also recounted.

Thus, she answered: “O Muhammad, I do hope that it is true!” The Prophet
used to hide all this, until one day Gabriel came to him with heavenly
water and said: “O Muhammad, rise and perform your ablutions for
prayers! ” Gabriel taught him the ablutions ‑ washing the face and the
two hands from the elbows down, rubbing the head and the two feet to the
two heels. He also taught him prostration *(sujud)* and kneel­ing
*(ruku').* When the Prophet attained his fortieth year, Gabriel
commanded him to perform the prayers and taught him their rites, except
their prescribed times. The Messenger of Allah used to pray two
*rak\`ahs* every time he prayed.

'Ali ibn Abi Talib was very much attached to the Prophet, accompanying
him wherever he went. One day he saw him praying. He asked: “O Abu
'l-Qasim, what is this that you are doing?” The Prophet answered: “It is
the prayer which Allah commanded me to perform.” He then called 'Ali to
Islam; he accepted, and used to pray with him. Khadijah also entered
into Islam. Thus at that time only the Messenger of Allah, 'Ali and
Khadijah used to pray.

After a few days, Abu Talib came in to see the Messenger of Allah,
accompanied by Ja'far (the Prophet's cousin). He saw the Prophet and
\`Ali standing beside him in prayer. Abu Talib said to Ja'far, “Stand by
the side of your cousin.” As he stood at the other side of the Prophet,
the Messenger of Allah stepped forward and stood in front of the two men
(as prayer leader). Seeing them, Abu Talib recited the fol­lowing
verses:

*In truth, Ali and Ja\`far are my trust,*  
*In times of hardship and sorrow.*  
*By Allah, I shall never abandon the Prophet,*

### Nor would any of my sons of high birth abandon him ‑

*Do not abandon, but rather support your cousin,*  
*The son of my brother from my mother as well as my father.*

Al‑Qummi related further that the Prophet used to trade for Khadijah
before he married her. When he was working for her, she sent him with a
caravan belonging to the people of Quraysh to Syria. He was accompanied
by a servant of hers called Maysarah. They encamped one day beneath a
hermitage belonging to one of the monks living in the area. The monk
came down from his cell and looked intently at the Messenger of Allah.
He then asked: “Who is this man?” The people answered: “He is the son of
\`Abdu'l-Muttalib.” The monk retorted: “His father could not be alive.”

Then looking at his eyes and between his shoulders, he exclaimed: “This
is the Prophet of the people! This is the Prophet sent with the sword!”
When Maysarah returned, he told Khadijah what hap­pened and what had
convinced her to offer herself to the Prophet in marriage. Khadijah
gained a thousand dinars from that caravan.

One day the Prophet went into a market of the Arabs where he saw Zayd
(ibn al‑Harithah). Zayd was a smart youth; the Prophet thus bought him
for Khadijah. When, however, the Prophet married her, she gave him Zayd
as a gift. When the Messenger of Allah received the call to Prophethood,
and 'Ali accepted Islam, Zayd also became a Muslim after him. Thus
\`Ali, Ja'far, Zayd and Khadijah used to pray behind the Messenger of
Allah.

Ash‑Shaykh Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn al‑Hasan al‑Bayhaqi reported in his book
*Dala'ilu'n‑Nubuwwah* on the authority of \`Ali, who said: “We were with
the Messenger of Allah in Mecca when he went out into its suburbs. He
did not pass by a tree or mountain but that it met him with the greeting
\`Peace be upon you O Apostle of Allah.' ”[^1] It is reported that 'Ali
said: “I remember when I used to go with the Prophet into the valley,
how he did not pass by a stone or tree but that it exclaimed, \`Peace be
upon you O Apostle of Allah', while I stood and listened.”

A man called \`Afif (al‑Kindi) related that, “I was a merchant; I came
to Mina one day during the *hajj (*pilgrimage) season. al‑\`Abbas ibn
\`Abdi'l-Muttalib was also a merchant. I therefore came to trade with
him.. As we were thus occupied, a man came out of a tent to pray: He
faced the Ka'bah, and soon a woman came out and likewise stood in
prayer. A youth also came out to pray with them. I exclaimed, \`O
\`Abbas, what is this religion? We do not know what this religion is.'
He answered, \`This is Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah, who claims that Allah
called him to be a messenger, and that the treasures of Kisra (Khusraw,
the Sasanid Persian Emperor) and Qaysar (Caesar, the Byzantine Emperor)
will be opened for him. This is his wife Khadijah, daughter of
Khuwaylid, who has believed in him. The youth is his cousin 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib, who also believed in him.' ” \`Afif then concluded: “Would that I
had believed in him on that day so that I would have been the second man
to follow him.” Ibn Ishaq reported that when the Prophet came out of the
tent he looked at the sky, and when he saw the sun had inclined, he rose
up to pray. Ibn Ishaq also mentioned Khadijah's standing in prayer
behind him.

It is related on the authority of Mujahid ibn Jabr ( a well‑known Qur'an
interpreter and traditionist), who said: “Among the favors which Allah
bestowed upon 'Ali ibn Abi Talib and the great good He willed for him,
was this: The people of Quraysh suffered a great shortage of food. Abu
Talib had many children. Thus the Messenger of Allah said one day to his
uncle \`Abbas, who was one of the wealth­iest men among the sons of
Hashim, \`O \`Abbas, your brother Abu Talib is a man with many children,
and you can see for yourself how people are suffering as a result of
this crisis. Come let us go and relieve him and his children.'

They thus went to him and discussed the matter. He answered: \`Leave
\`Aqil (a brother of 'Ali) .and take whomever you wish.' The Messenger
of Allah took . 'Ali into his home, and \`Ali remained with the
Messenger of Allah until Allah called him to be a prophet. \`Ali then
followed him, believed in him and assented to him.”

'Ali ibn Ibrahim (al‑Qummi) related that three years after this, Allah
revealed to the Apostle of Allah: *Declare openly what you have been
commanded and be not con­cerned with the Associators* (Quran S : 94) .
The Messenger of Allah therefore went out, stood up at al‑Hijr (that
space which encompasses the Ka'bah on the north) and pro­claimed: “O
people of Quraysh and you Arab people, I call you all to the worship of
Allah alone, and call you to reject all partners with Him, and all
idols. I call you all to bear witness that there is no god but Allah and
that I am the Messenger of Allah. Heed my call that you may through it
have dominion over all the Arabs. Through it also would non‑Arabs submit
to your authority. Through it you would be kings in Paradise.” But they
mocked and laughed at him, exclaiming: “Muhammad son of \`Abdullah has
gone mad!” They caused him much hurt with their tongues.

Abu Talib asked: “O son of my brother, what is this?” He answered:
“Uncle, this is Allah's religion which He chose for His angels and
prophets. It is the religion of Abraham and the prophets after him.
Allah has sent me also as a messenger to humankind.” Abu Talib said: “O
son of my brother, surely your people will not accept this from you!
Desist, therefore, from proclaiming it to them.” “I shall not do so”,
the Prophet answered, “because Allah has commanded me to call (people to
Islam).” Thus, Abu Talib left him alone. The Messenger of Allah
intensified his effort in calling the people and warning them at all
times.

Those among the People of the Book who heard the news accepted Islam.
When, however, the people of Quraysh saw people entering Islam, they
were alarmed. They thus went to Abu Talib and demanded: “Restrain your
nephew from us, for he has declared our mind to be foolish, and has
insulted our gods! He has corrupted our youths, and has dissolved our
unity!” Abu Talib then called him and said: “O my brother's son, the
people have come to me asking that you desist from insulting their
gods.”

The Prophet answered: “O uncle, I cannot disobey the command of my
Lord.” Thus he used to call them and warn them of the impending divine
punish­ment. The people of Quraysh gathered in assembly and enquired:
“To what does Muhammad call us?” He answered: “I call you to bear
witness that there is no god but Allah, and to reject all associates
with Him.” They protested: “Shall we then abandon three hundred and
sixty gods and worship only one God?” Thus Allah mentions in the Qur'an
their saying:

***They marvel that a warner from among them came to them, and the
rejecters of faith said, “He is a magician, a liar. Does he wish to
render all gods one? This, indeed is a strange thing”. . ., and*** **so
on to His saying, No!** ***But they have not yet tasted the torment***
**(Qur'an 38: 4 ‑ 8) .**

The people then came together to Abu Talib and said: “O Abu Talib, if
poverty is the cause of your nephew's action, then we will gather so
much wealth for him that he would be the wealthiest man of Quraysh.” Abu
Talib called him and informed him of their offer. The Messenger of
Allah, however, said: “Uncle, I have no need of wealth! Heed my call, so
that you may be kings in this world and in the world to come! Then will
both Arabs and non‑Arabs submit to your authority.” They dispersed, but
soon returned to Abu Talib and said: “O Abu Talib, you are one of our
foremost notables! You see that your nephew has declared us to be of
foolish mind. He has cursed our gods and dissolve our unity! Let us give
you \`Umarah ibn al‑Walid, the most hand­some and bright youth of
Quraysh, the freshest youth and the noblest of lineage to be your son ‑
on condition that you turn over Muhammad to us that we may kill him.” He
answered: “You have not dealt justly with me! Would you give me your son
that I may bring him up, and yet take my son to kill him?” Finally,
despairing of convincing him, they desisted.

Al‑Hafiz (al‑Bayhaqi) related in his book *Dala'ilu'n-*­*Nubuwwah* on
the authority of Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Talhah, that Talhah ibn
\`Ubaydillah said: “I was present one day at the market of Busra, where
I heard a monk who lived in a cell say: \`Enquire of the people of this
fair if there is anyone among them of the people of the Sanctuary (that
is, Mecca).' I replied: \`Yes, I am.' He asked: \`Has Ahmad come forth
yet?' \`Who is Ahmad?' I asked. He replied: \`The son of \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abdi 'l-Muttalib. This is the month in which he should come forth. He
is the last of the prophets. The place of his appearance is the
Sanctuary, and that of his migration is a place of date‑palms and black
stones (that is, Medina). Beware lest anyone accept him before you do.'
”

Talhah continued: “I kept what he said in my heart, and .hastened to
Mecca. I enquired if anything unusual had happened, and was told that,
'Muhammad ibn \`Abdillah al‑Amin has declared himself a prophet. Ibn Abi
Quhafah (that is, Abu Bakr) has followed him.' I thus went to Abu Bakr
and said: \`Have you really become a follower of this man?' \`Yes', he
answered. \`You too go to him and follow him, for he invites men to the
truth.' ”

Talhah then told Abu Bakr what the monk had said. Abu. Bakr took Talhah
to the Apostle of Allah, whereupon Talhah became a Muslim. He told the
Messenger of Allah what the monk had said, which gladdened the Apostle
of Allah.[^2]

When both Abu Bakr and Talhah had accepted Islam, a man called Nawfal
ibn Khuwaylid ibn al‑\`Adawiyyah took them and tied them together with
one rope. The people of Taym (the tribe to which Abu Bakr belonged) did
not protect them. Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid was known as the harshest man of
the Quraysh.

The Quraysh Admit the Miraculous Qualities of The Qur'an
--------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah never ceased to insult the gods of the
Associators, nor did he cease reciting the Qur'an to them. But they used
to say: “This is only the poetry of Muhammad.” Some of them also said:
“It is rather oratory discourse.”

There was an old man called al‑Walid ibn al‑Mughirah who was a judge
among the Arabs, whom they brought difficult cases. They likewise used
to recite their poems to him in order that he might judge among them.
What­ever he judged to be good, that was chosen by all. He had many
sons, who never left Mecca. He also possessed ten slaves, every one of
whom had one thousand dinars to use as capital in trade. At that time he
alone owned a *qintar,* (the skin of a bull filled with gold). al‑Walid
was one of those who mocked the Messenger of Allah and he was the uncle
of Abu Jahl ibn Hisham.

The people went to al‑Walid and asked: “O Abu \`Abd ash‑Shams, what is
this which Muhammad is uttering? Is it magic, soothsaying, or oratory?”
He replied: “Let me hear his words.” He thus came to the Messenger of
Allah while he was sitting in the Ka'bah and said: “O Muhammad, re­cite
for me some of your poetry! ” He answered: “It is not poetry, but rather
the word of Allah, with which He sent His prophets and apostles.”
al‑Walid insisted: “Recite some of it to me.” The Messenger of Allah
then recited:

***“In the name of Allah, the All‑merciful, the Compassionate. ”***

When al‑Walid heard the name ar‑Rahman (the All‑merciful), he mockingly
said: “Do you call us to follow a man of Yama­mah who is called
ar‑Rahman?” The Prophet answered: “No, rather I call men to Allah, Who
is the All‑merciful, the Compassionate.” He then recited the beginning
of

**”*****Ha*** ***mim: as‑Sajdah ”, (Surah 41)***

until he reached verse 13.

***But if they turn back, say: “I have warned you of a great catastrophe
like the catastrophe of Ad and Thamud. ”***

When al‑Walid heard this, he trembled and every hair on his head and in
his beard stood on end. He then rose and went to his home, and did not
return to the people of Quraysh. The people said to Abu Jahl, “O Abu
'l-Hakam, (that is, al‑Walid) has abandoned his religion for the
religion of Muhammad! Do you not see that he has not returned to us? He
must have, therefore, accepted his claim and gone to his home.” The
people of Quraysh became exceedingly saddened by this. Abu Jahl went to
al‑Walid the next day and said: “O uncle, you have brought low our heads
and disgraced us!” He answered: “How have I done that, O son of my
brother?” “Have you turned to the religion of Muhammad?” he asked. “No”,
answered al‑Walid, “I did not do so. Rather, I stand by the religion of
my people and my forefathers. I have, however, heard great words which
cause skins to shudder.” Abu Jahl asked: “Is it poetry?” “No, it is not
poetry”, answered his uncle. Abu Jahl asked further: “Is it oratory
discourse?” al‑Walid answered: “No, for oratory discourse is of
connected rhymed prose; yet this is free prose whose different parts do
not resemble one another. It is possessed of great beauty.” Abu Jahl
insisted: “So it is ora­tory.” “No”, answered his uncle. Abu Jahl asked:
“What is it then?” al‑Walid said: “Let me think about it for a while.”

The next day, the people asked al‑Walid: “O Abu \`Abd ash‑Shams, what do
you say?” He answered: “Say it is magic, for it has truly attracted the
hearts of the people.” Thus, Allah sent down concerning him in the
Qur'an *–*

***Leave me to deal with him whom I have alone created, and whom I have
granted great wealth and sons, constantly present with him . . . and***
**so on to Allah's saying:** ***Over it*** **(that is, Hell)** ***stand
nineteen*** **(angels) (Qur.74:11‑30).**

In a tradition related by Hammad ibn Zayd on the authority of \`Ikrimah
(a slave and pupil of Ibn \`Abb5s and a well‑known traditionist), he
reported that al‑Walid ibn al‑Mughirah came to the Messenger of Allah
and asked him to recite some verses of the Qur'an. He recited:

***“Allah surely commands justice and doing good, and giving*** **(of
one's wealth)** ***to near relatives. He likewise forbids lewdness,
indecency and insolence. He thus admonishes you, that perhaps you may***
***remember”*** **(Qur'an. 16:90) .**

al‑Walid said: “Recite the verse once more!” He did, and al‑Walid
ex­claimed: “By Allah, it indeed is possessed of great sweetness and
adorned with great beauty. Its top is indeed fruitful, and its bottom is
like a palm‑tree laden with fruits! Nor can any mortal utter such
speech.”

How Allah Protected Muhammad Against The Mockers
------------------------------------------------

It is related that those who mocked the Messenger of Allah were five:
al‑Walid ibn al‑Mughirah, al‑\`As ibn Wail as‑Sahmi, al‑Aswad ibn
al‑Muttalib, who was also known as Abu Zama'ah, al‑Aswad ibn \`Abd
Yaghuth of the tribe of Zuhrah and al‑Harith ibn at‑Tulatilah
al‑Khuza\`i. It is said that al‑Walid ibn al‑Mughirah passed one day by
the Messenger of Allah, while the angel Gabriel was with him. Gabriel
addressed the Prophet, saying: “Here comes al­-Walid ibn al‑Mughirah,
who is one of the mockers.” “Yes”, he answered. Then al‑Walid passed by
a man of the tribe of Khuza'ah, sharpening his arrows at the door of the
mosque. He accidentally stepped on some of them, a silver went into the
bottom of his foot, and blood gushed out.

Gabriel pointed to that spot, and blood continued to flow until it
stained the bed of his daughter. Frightened, the girl cried out: “O
maid, the mouth of the water skin has come untied! ” “This is not the
water of the water skin”, said al‑Walid, “it is the blood of your
father. Call together for me my sons and the sons of my brother, for I
am about to die.” When they all gathered, he made his will, and
im­mediately breathed his last.

Al‑Aswad ibn al‑Muttalib passed one day by the Mess­enger of Allah.
Gabriel pointed to his eyes and he became blind, and soon after died.
al‑Aswad ibn \`Abd Yaghuth also passed by the Prophet one day; Gabriel
pointed to his stomach, and he drank so much water that his belly
swelled until it burst. al‑\`As ibn Wail passed also by the Prophet, and
Gabriel pointed to his foot. Soon a splinter went into the bottom of his
foot and came out of the top. His foot swelled up, and soon he died.
at‑Tulatilah passed by the Prophet, and Gabriel spat in his face. The
man then went out into the Tihamah mountains (in the vicinity of Mecca),
where he was hit by a burning sand storm. He was burnt and turned black.
When he returned home. his family would not let him in, saying, “You are
not of this family.” He went away and was afflicted with great thirst.
He thus drank until his stomach burst, and he died. All this happened in
fulfilment of Allah's saying:

***We have surely protected you against the mockers*** **(Qur'an.**
***15:95).***

The Migration to Abyssinia and an‑Naiashi's assent to Muhammad's Prophethood
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

When the people of Quraysh intensified their harsh treatment of the
Messenger of Allah and his Companions, he ordered some of his Companions
to migrate to Abyssinia. He delegated Ja'far son of Abu Talib to take
charge of them, and he set out with seventy men until they took to sea.
When the people of Quraysh knew of their departure, they sent \`Amr ibn
al‑\`As as‑Sahmi and \`Umarah ibn al‑Walid to an‑Najashi (Negus) .of
Abyssinia, requesting him to return the men to the people of Quraysh.
They were also instructed to tell the King that these men had gone
against the wishes and traditions of their people.

\`Umarah was a handsome and wealthy man. \`Amr ibn al­\`As set out with
his wife. When they boarded the ship, they became intoxicated with wine.
\`Umarah then said to \`Amr ibn al‑\`As : “Tell your wife to kiss me!”
The latter answered: “Glorified be Allah! Is this possible?” \`Umarah
waited until \`Amr got drunk, then he pushed him overboard. \`Amr was on
the edge of the ship; thus he held on to the edge, and people rushed to
his rescue. When \`Amr saw what \`Umarah had done to him, he said to his
wife, “Kiss him! ”, which she did.

When they reached Abyssinia, they went straight to an-­Najashi bearing
presents for him. \`Amr addressed him saying: “O King, these people have
gone against our religion and sought refuge with you. Return them,
therefore, to us! ” The King sent for Ja'far and said to him: “These men
are requesting that I return you all to them.” He answered: “O King, ask
them, are we their slaves?” “No”, answered \`Amr, “rather they are free
and noble men.” “Ask them,” Ja'far continued, “do we then owe them debts
which they have come to claim from us?” \`Amr answered: “They owe us no
debts which we have come to claim.” Ja'far continued:

“Have they come then to avenge any blood of theirs that we had
wrongfully shed?” \`Amr answered: “They have shed no blood for which we
come to exact vengeance or blood money.” Ja'far asked: “What then do you
want from us?” \`Amr said: “They have opposed us in our religion and the
religion of our forefathers and insulted our gods. They have corrupted
our youths and spread dissension among us. Return them to us, therefore,
that our unity might be restored.”

Ja'far then addressed the King saying: “O King, we have opposed them in
order to follow a prophet whom Allah has raised among us. He commands us
to repudiate equals to Allah, and that we abandon chance games by means
of arrows. He enjoins prayers and almsgiving upon us. He has prohibited
wrongdoing, oppression and the unlawful shedding of blood. He has
prohibited adultery, usury, and eating the flesh of dead animals which
have not been properly slaughtered, as well as eating blood. He has
enjoined decency and good works upon us, and that we show kindness to
near relatives. He forbids grave immorality, indecency and insolence.”

The King said: “It is with such (teachings) that Allah also sent Jesus
son of Mary! ” Then addressing Ja\`far, he continued: “Do you know by
heart any of the revel­ations which Allah sent down to your prophet?”
“Yes”, he answered. “Recite then! ” the King demanded. Ja'far recited
the *Surah* of Maryam *(Surah 19).* When he reached the words *–*

***Shake down towards you the branch of the palm‑tree, and it shall drop
down before you ripened dates ready to be picked. Eat and drink,
therefore, and be of good cheer*** **(Qur'an.** ***19 : 25*** **‑ 26 )
–**

an‑Najashi wept and exclaimed: “By Allah this is the truth!” \`Amr
protested: “O King, this man has abandoned our religion; give him to us
that we may take him back to our country! ” an‑Najashi lifted his hand
and slapped him saying: “If you utter any evil against him, I will kill
you!” \`Amr finally said: “O King, if this is what you say, then we
shall not interfere with him.”

A young maid stood by an‑Najashi keeping flies away from him. She kept
her eyes on \`Umarah ibn al‑Walid, as he was a handsome young man. When
they went to their lodg­ings, \`Amr said to him: “Why do you not send a
message to the King's maid?” \`Umarah sent a message to her, and she
answered him. \`Amr said: “Tell her to bring you with her some of the
King's perfumes. She did so, and \`Amr ibn al­\`As took the perfume. He
had kept in his heart what \`Umarah had done to him when he attempted to
throw him overboard. Thus, he took the perfume and went to an‑Najashi,
and said to him: “O King, it is fitting that we take cognition of the
King's honour and magnanimity toward us, and that we do not betray him
in his own realm. Yet, my compan­ion who is with me has sent messages to
your maid and tempted her. She even brought him some of your perfumes.”

He then showed the King the perfume. an‑Najashi was exceedingly angry
and was about to kill \`Umarah. But he changed his mind and said: “It is
not right that I kill him, for they entered our realm under a pledge of
protection.” He thus called his magicians and said to them: “Do
some­thing to him that would be worse than death! ” They took him and
injected mercury into his generative organ. He lost his mind, so that he
lived with the wild beasts and shunned human company. [^3]

The people of Quraysh sent men to bring \`Umarah back home. The men lay
in wait for him until he came with wild beasts to drink at a spring.
Thus they caught him, but he continued to struggle and scream in their
hands until he expired. \`Amr, however, returned to the people of
Quraysh and recounted to them his story.

As for Ja'far, he remained in Abyssinia enjoying the best of hospitality
and honour. He remained there until he heard that the Messenger of Allah
had established a truce with the people of Quraysh and that peace had
prevailed between them and the Muslims. He then returned with a large
com­pany of people. He arrived to find that the Messenger of Allah had
conquered Khaybar (a Jewish settlement near Medina).

A son was born to Ja'far by Asma', daughter of \`Umays. an‑Najashi also
had a son, whom he called Muhammad. Asma' gave an‑Najashi's son of her
own milk to drink (thus making him a nursing brother of her own son).
Abu Talib recited these verses urging an‑Najashi to support the Prophet
and his followers:

*Know, O King of the Ethiopians, that Muhammad is a prophet like Moses
and Jesus son* of *Mary.*  
*He came with guidance such as they brought, for each of them was by
Allah's command well ‑protected.*

*Concerning him, you recite verses in your own scriptures; a true
account it is, not a fantastic tale.*  
*Do not, therefore, set up equals with Allah; rather be­come Muslims,
for the way of truth is not obscured in darkness.*

The traditionist Abu \`Abdillah (al‑Bayhaqi) transmitted on the
authority of Muhammad ibn Ishaq that the Messenger of Allah sent \`Amr
ibn Umayyah ad‑Damri to an‑Najashi regarding Ja'far ibn Abi Talib and
his Companions. He sent a letter with him which read thus:

“In the name of Allah, the All‑merciful, the Compassion­ate ‑ From
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah to the Negus, the King of Abyssinia ‑ I
convey to you the praises of Allah

***the King, the Holy, the Accepter of Faith, the Guardian***
**(Qur.59:23).**

I furthermore bear witness that Jesus son of Mary is the Spirit of Allah

***and His Word, which He sent down to Mary*** **(Qur'an. 4 : 171) ,**

the pure and chaste virgin who then conceived Jesus, whom Allah created
of His Spirit which he breathed into him ‑just as he created Adam with
His Hand and breathed of His Spirit into him. I thus call you to the
worship of the One and only Allah alone Who has no associate, and that
you obey Him, follow me and believe in me and the message which was
vouchsafed me. For I indeed am the Messenger of Allah. I have, moreover,
sent to you my cousin Ja'far with a company of the Muslims. When they
come to you, show hospitality to them and do not be arrogant. I call you
and your hosts to Allah! I have conveyed my message to you and given
good counsel. Peace be with those who follow true guidance.”

An‑Najashi wrote in answer to the Messenger of Allah:

“In the name of Allah, the All‑merciful, the Compassion­ate ‑ to
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah ‑ from the Negus al‑Ashamah ibn Abhar:
peace be upon you O Prophet of Allah and Allah's mercy and blessings ‑
there is no god but He Who guided me to Islam. I have received your
letter, O Messenger of Allah, concerning the importance you give in the
case of Jesus. By the Lord of the heaven and earth, Jesus does not
exceed what you have mentioned concerning him. We acknowledge what you
have written to us, and have thus shown hospitality to your cousin and
Companions. I bear witness that you are the Messenger of Allah truly and
that you tell the truth. I have, therefore, given allegiance *(bay
\`ah)* to you and your cousin. I have accepted Islam to Allah, the Lord
of all beings at his hands. I have sent to you, O Messenger of Allah,
Arijan ibn Ashamah ibn Abhar, I have‑indeed no authority except over
myself alone. If, therefore, you wish that I come to you, I would come,
O Messenger of Allah. For I bear witness that what you say is the
truth.”

An‑Najashi then sent presents to the Prophet. He sent him also Mariyah
the Copt, the mother of the Prophet's son Ibrahim. He sent him much
clothing and aromatics, and a mare. He also sent him thirty learned men
to hear his words and observe his conduct. When they arrived in Medina,
the Messenger of Allah called them to. Islam, and they accepted Islam
and returned to the Negus. Jabir ibn \`Abdillah al‑Ansari reported that,
“When an‑Najashi died, the Messenger of Allah prayed over Ashamah, the
Negus.”

The Prophet is Persecuted by the Associators and Hamzah accepts Islam
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The people of Quraysh redoubled their efforts in trou­bling the
Messenger of Allah. The harshest of men toward him was his uncle Abu
Lahab. One day the Prophet was sit­ting in the precincts of the Ka'bah,
when the people sent for a birth sack of a sheep and threw it at him.(
According to al‑Jazari, the well‑known lexicographer and tradi­tionist,
this happened while the Prophet was praying. *(ed. )*)  
 The Messenger of Allah was greatly saddened by this, and went to Abu
Talib to complain, saying: “O uncle, how is my status among you?” Abu
Talib asked: “What is the matter O son of my brother?” He replied: “The
people of Quraysh threw a birth sack at me.”

Abu Talib then said to Hamzah: “Take up the sword!” The people of
Quraysh were assembled in the Mosque. Both Hamzah and Abu Talib went in
with their swords. Abu Talib ordered Hamzah, saying: “Rub the birth sack
over their moustaches, and if anyone resists, cut off his head!” But no
one moved while he rubbed the birth sack over their moustaches.. He then
turned to the Messenger of Allah, and said: “O son of my brother, this
is your status among us!”

In the book *Dala'ilu'n‑Nubuwwah* (of al‑Bayhaqi),[^4] it is reported on
the authority of Abu Dawud who reported from Shu'bah who reported from
Abu Ishaq (as‑Sabi\`i), who heard \`Amr ibn Maymun relate on the
authority of \`Abdullah (ibn Mas'ud), who said: “While the Messenger of
Allah was prostrating in prayer one day, with some men of Quraysh
sit­ting all around him, and the birth sack of a she‑camel lying around,
some dared others men saying: \`Who would take this birth sack and throw
it at his back?' A man called \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt took up the birth
sack and threw it at the Prophet's back. Fatimah (the Prophet's
daughter) came and took the camel's birth sack off the Prophet's back,
and cursed those who did that to him.”

\`Abdullah continued: “I never saw the Messenger of Allah invoke Allah
against them except on that day. He said: “O Allah, I leave to you the
people of Quraysh! O Allah to you do I leave Abu Jahl ibn Hisham,
\`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah, Shaybah ibn Rabi \`ah, \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt,
Umayyah ibn Khalaf or Ubayy ibn Khalaf (Shu'bah was confused). The
Prophet enumerated seven men in all.” \`Abdullah went on: “I saw them
all slain in the Battle of Badr and thrown into a well. Umayyah ibn
Khalaf, however, was a very fat man. His body disintegrated as it was
dragged along before reaching the well.' ”[^5]

It is related on the authority of Khabbab (a well‑known Companion), who
said: “I came one day to the Messenger of Allah, while he lay in the
shade of the Ka\` bah using his mantle as a pillow. We had endured much
suffering at the hands of the people of Quraysh. Thus I asked: \`O
Messenger of Allah, would you not invoke Allah on our behalf?'

He sat up, red in the safe, and said: \`Those who were before you ‑often
were their flesh and nerves scraped with sharp iron combs. Yet they did
not turn away from their faith. A man would be sawed in half from his
head down, yet he would not be turned away from his faith. But Allah
shall indeed bring this affair to fruition, so that a horseman would
travel all the way between San'a and Hadramawt fearing no one but Allah,
or the wolf that may attack his sheep.' ”[^6]

It is also related on the authority of Jabir (son of the famous
Companion, \`Abdullah al‑Ansari) that the Messenger of Allah passed one
day by \`Ammar ibn Yasir and his family while they were being tortured
for Allah's sake. He said: “Be of good cheer, O family of \`Ammar, for
you shall soon enter Paradise! ” It is reported on the authority of
Mujahid ( ibn Jabr) (a well‑known traditionist of the second generation)
that the first martyr in Islam was Sumayyah, the mother of \`Ammar, whom
Abu Jahl stabbed in the heart.

'Ali ibn Ibrahim al‑Qummi reported that Abu Jahl met the Messenger of
Allah one day and spoke harsh words to him. All the men of the Hashimite
clan angrily assembled. Hamzah had just returned from hunting, when he
saw the crowd and enquired about the commotion. A woman called down to
him from one of the roof‑tops saying: “O Abu Ya'la, \`Amr ibn Hisham
(i.e., Abu Jahl) confronted Muham­mad and insulted him.” Hamzah enraged,
went to Abu Jahl hit him with his bow on the head and picked him up and
beat him hard against the ground. People crowded around them, and it was
feared that great conflict might ensue.

People then asked Hamzah: “O Abu Ya'la, have you then turned to the
religion of your nephew?” “Yes”, he answered: “I bear witness that there
is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah.” He said
this only as a result of anger and feeling of support for his nephew.
When, however, he returned to his home, he regretted his decision. Thus
he went to the Messenger of Allah and asked: “O son of my brother, is
what you say the truth?” The Messenger of Allah recited to him a *Surah*
of the Qur'an, and Hamzah saw the truth and stood firm in the faith of
Islam. The Messenger of Allah was exceedingly happy. Abu Talib also was
glad to learn of Hamzah's *Islam,* and recited the following verses:

*Be steadfast, O Abu Ya\`la in the faith of Ahmad;*  
*Show forth your faith; may you be strengthened inShow forth your faith;
may you be strengthened in*  
*your resolve!*  
*Follow the footsteps of him who came with true' faithFollow the
footsteps of him who came with true' faith*  
*from his Lord; Do not, O Hamzah, be a rejecter of faith!*  
*It made me glad when you said that you are a man of faith; Be then a
true supporter of the Messenger of Allah in Allah's cause.*  
*Call openly the people of Quraysh to that which youCall openly the
people of Quraysh to that which you*  
*yourself have been given; Proclaim to them that Ahmad is indeed not a
magician!*

The Prophet's Night Journey to Jerusalem and his Hiding in a Ravine Belonging to Abu Talib
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah was transported by Allah from Mecca to Jerusalem,
(see Qur'an. *17 :1) . Gabriel* carried him thither on al‑Buraq (a
celestial horse), and showed him the prayer chambers of the prophets
before him. After the Prophet had led them all in prayer, Gabriel
brought him back to Mecca. On his way back, the Prophet passed by a
caravan belonging to the people of Quraysh. They had with them water in
a vessel, from which he drank, and poured out the rest. They also lost
one of their camels and went out in search of it.

Next morning Muhammad recounted to the people of Quraysh: “Allah
transported me by night to Jerusalem where He showed me the signs and
stations of the prophets. I have also passed by a caravan in such and
such a place, where they lost one of their camels. I drank from a vessel
of water which they had, and poured out the rest of the water.” Abu Jahl
said: “You have now an opportune moment; ask him, therefore, how many
columns and lamps are in Jerusalem! ” They thus said to him: “O
Muhammad, here is someone who has been to Jerusalem! ” Describe for us
its columns, lamps, and prayer chambers! ” Gabriel came and suspended an
image of Jerusalem before the Prophet's eyes, and he told them whatever
they wished to know about the holy city. When he had informed them, they
said: “Let us wait until the caravan returns and we question the people
about what you have told us:” “The sign of the truth of what I have said
is that the caravan will appear at sunrise led by a red camel carrying
two white sacks”, the Prophet said.

Next morning, they went out looking towards the hill outside the city
and saying: “The sun shall soon rise.” As they were thus wondering, the
caravan appeared, led by a red camel, just as the disk of the sun was
becoming visible. They asked the men with the caravan about the things
which the Messenger of Allah had told them. The men answered: “It is
true, it was as he said. We lost a camel in such and such a place; we
left water by night, but when we woke up next morning, the water was all
poured out.” Yet, all this only increased the people of Quraysh in their
stubbornness.

They then all gathered in their assembly hall and pre­pared a written
pledge neither to share food with the sons of Hashim, nor to speak to
them. Nor would they transact any trade with them, or intermarry with
them. They would not even socialize with them in any way, until they
turned Muhammad over to them that they might kill him. They agreed to be
as one hand against Muhammad, either to assassinate him, or kill him
openly.

When Abu Talib learned of all this, he gathered the sons of Hashim,
forty men in all, and went into a secret ravine. Abu Talib swore to them
by the Ka'bah, the *haram,* the *rukn* and the station *(maqam of*
Abraham) that *if* even a thorn was to prick Muhammad, “I will
steadfastly fight against you all, 0 sons of Hashim.” Abu Talib
fortified the ravine and set up guards over it night and day. At night
he kept guard himself with his sword, while the Messenger of Allah
slept. Then he had him get up and sleep in another spot, guarded by his
own sons and the sons of his brother. They watched over the Prophet
during the day as well.

In the end, they endured much hardship. Thus it was that no one of the
Arabs entering Mecca dared buy from or sell anything to the family of
Hashim, for fear that his wealth would be seized. To that end, Abu Jahl,
al‑\`As ibn Wail as-Sahmi, an‑Nadr ibn al‑Harith ibn Kaladah and \`Uqbah
ibn Abi Mu'ayt used to go out to the roads leading to Mecca, and anyone
they saw carrying goods, they forbade to trade with the sons of Hashim.
Otherwise they threatened to seize his wealth. Khadijah, however, had
much wealth, which she spent in caring for the Messenger of Allah while
he was in the ravine. Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy ibn Nawfal ibn
\`Abdi'l­Muttalib refused to sign the pledge, saying: “This is
wrong­doing.” The document was, nonetheless, sealed with forty seals,
representing all the notables of Quraysh. They then hung it in the
Ka'bah. Abu Lahab also concurred with them in this action.

During the special seasons (when fighting was banned), the Messenger of
Allah would go around the Arab tribes and plead with them: “If you would
protect me, I would recite to you the Book of my Lord, and your reward
with Allah shall be Paradise.” Abu Lahab would follow close behind him
and say: “Do not accept his offer! He is my brother's son. He is a
magician and a liar.” Thus it went on, and the sons of Hashim remained
in the ravine for four years, having no security except during special
seasons, nor could they buy or sell anything except during these
seasons. There were two seasons held in Mecca every year: that of the
\`um­rah (lesser pilgrimage) during Rajab, and the pilgrimage season in
Dhi'l‑Hijjah (the 7th and 12th months respectively). Hence, only when
either of these two special seasons come did the sons of Hashim leave
their ravine to buy and sell. Then no one of them dared venture out till
the next season. They therefore suffered much hardship and hunger.

The people of Quraysh sent a message to Abu Talib, saying: “Turn
Muhammad over to us that we may kill him; then we would make you king
over us.” In response, Abu Talib recited a long poem, in which he says:

*When I saw that these people had no love,*  
*having cut off all ties and means of friendship;*  
*(I said): Do you not know that we do not regard our son as a liar,*  
*Nor does he utter vain words.*  
*Pure is he, that for the sake of his face prayers for rain are
answered;*  
*Generous towards orphans is he, and a protection for widows.*  
*The errant of the clan of Hashim crowd around him;*  
*For with him they find bounty and generous gifts.*  
*You lie, by Allah's house! We shall never abandon Muhammad;*  
*Rather we shall wield the sword and strive to protect him.*  
*We shall never betray him, until we fall slain before him;*  
*For his sake we shall neglect our sons and wives.*  
*By my life! I have been charged with great affection for Ahmad!By my
life! I have been charged with great affection for Ahmad!*  
*I loved him with the love of a faithful lover.*  
*I have sacrificed willingly my soul for him and protected him;*  
*I have defended him with all that is precious,*  
*Even the bones of my breast!*  
*He remains an object of beauty in this world for its inhabitants;*  
*A harsh match to anyone showing enmity toward him is he, and the
ornament of every assembly.*  
*He is clement, wise, unwavering and not foolish;*  
*Friend of the Lord of Truth, never indulging in vain disputation.*  
*Thus the Lord of human servants has strengthened him with His
victory;*  
*He caused a religion to prevail whose truth knows no falsehood.*

When they heard this poem, they despaired of convincing Abu Talib.  
 Abu 'l-\`As ibn Rabi', who was the Messenger of Allah's son‑in‑law,
used to bring by night camels laden with wheat and dates to the entrance
of the ravine and call out loudly to them, so that they would rush in,
and the sons of Hashim would have provisions. The Messenger of Allah
used to say: “Abu 'l-\`As has established a tie of marriage with us and
has honoured well this marriage relation. He brought laden camels to us
when we were besieged and delivered them to our ravine by night.”  
 When the Messenger of Allah had spent four years in the ravine, Allah
sent against the hostile document of the Quraysh an earthworm which
licked clean all words of un­kindness to next of kin, and all wrongdoing
and oppression. It only spared the name of Allah.

Gabriel came down to the Messenger of Allah and told him about it. The
Messenger of Allah then told Abu Talib, who went to the men of Quraysh
as they assembled in the mosque. When they saw him they said: “Abu Talib
has finally given in; he has now come to turn his nephew in.” He drew
near and greeted them with the salutation of peace. They all rose up and
received him with deference. They then said: “O Abu Talib, we know that
you wish our friendship and return to our society! You will turn your
nephew over to us.” He answered: “No, by Allah, it is not for this that
I have come to you. Rather my nephew tells me ‑ and he utters no lies ‑
that Allah has told him that He sent an earthworm against your hostile
document, which ate every word of unkindness to next of kin, of
wrongdoing and oppression. It only spared the name of Allah. Bring your
document, and if what he says is true, then fear Allah and abandon your
wrongdoing, oppression and unkindness toward blood relations. If, on the
other hand, what he says is false, I will turn him over to you. If you
wish, you may kill him, or if you wish you may spare his life.” They
brought the document down from the Ka'bah, still bearing forty seals.
When it was brought before them, every man saw his seal. When, however,
they .opened it, they found no letters except the phrase: \`in your
name, O Allah.' Abu Talib then pleaded with them saying: “O people, fear
Allah and desist from what you are doing! ” But the people dispersed,
and no one spoke a word. Abu Talib then returned to the ravine and
recited his poem rhyming with the letter \`b' and which begins as
follows:

*Who shall endure standing on guard till night's end,*  
*Or the retreat which your divided people have decreed.*  
*In the document there was indeed a lesson;*  
*Anyone knowing about it would surely marvel.*  
*Allah had Himself erased from it their rejection of faith and
insolence,*  
*As well as their hostility toward him who proclaimed the truth
openly.*  
*Thus what they said came to nought,*  
*For anyone inventing falsehood only tells lies.*  
*Yet the son of Abdullah has been truthful among us,*  
*in spite of our people's wrath.*  
*Do not think that we shall betray Muhammad; For neither our honour nor
fidelity would permit it!*  
*A strong Hashimite hand shall protect him;*  
*He whose deeds among men are the best of deeds.*

Then some of the sons of \`Abd Manaf and the sons of Qusayy, as well as
other men of Quraysh who were born to women of the sons of Hashim ‑
among whom was Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy ibn \`Amir ibn Lu'ayy, an old man of
great wealth and many children, and Abu 'l-Bakhtari ibn Hisham and
Zu­hayr ibn (Abi) Umayyah al‑Makhzumi and other of their no­tables ‑
said: “We dissociate ourselves from this document.” Abu Jahl likewise
said: “This is a matter which was decided in the dark.” Thus the Prophet
and those who were with him were able to leave the ravine.

Two months later, Abu Talib died. Khadijah also died soon after. These
were two grave occurrences which the Messenger of Allah had to endure,
and he was greatly sad­dened. He went in to see Abu Talib while he was
breathing his last. He said: “O uncle, you cared for a child until he
grew up. You supported him when he was a grown man, and cared for him as
an orphan. May Allah, therefore, reward you on my behalf with the best
reward. Give me a word (that is, the *shahadah)* that I may intercede
with it on your behalf with my Lord.” Abu Talib replied: “O son of my
brother, were I not to fear the reproach of people after me, I would
have gladdened your heart.” Saying this he died.

Muhammad ibn Ishaq reported that Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid, and Abu
Talib died in the same year.[^7] Thus afflictions followed one another
for the Messenger of Allah after the death of Khadijah and Abu Talib ‑
for she was a true helper (*wazir*) to him in Islam, and he found
comfort in her. Abu \`Abdillah ibn Mandah reported in the
*Kitabu'l-­Ma\`rifah* that Khadijah died three days after Abu Talib,[^8]
al‑Waqidi claimed that they all left the ravine three years before the
Migration. In that year Khadijah and Abu Talib died within the space
*of* thirty‑five nights.

The Prophet Offers Himself To Neighboring Arab Tribes. The Allegiance Of The Ansar To Him, And The Event Of Al‑\`Aqabah
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is reported in the book entitled *Dala'ilu'n‑Nubuw­wah* [^9] on the
authority of az‑Zuhri (a well‑known tradition­ist), that the Messenger
of Allah used to offer himself as a prophet to the Arab tribes every
year during the pilgrimage season. He used to speak to the chief of
every tribe, request­ing only that they give him shelter and protection.
He said: “I shall not ask anyone of you to do anything he does not wish
to do. For anyone of you who accepts what I have come to call you to, it
is well. But I shall not compel any­one who would refuse. I only ask
that you protect me from those who wish to kill me, so that I might
convey the mess­ages of my Lord ‑ and Allah decrees what He wills for me
and those who will follow him.” Yet no one of them ac­cepted him.
Everyone he spoke to of these tribes would say: “The people of this man
know best his claims. Do you think that a man can reform us when he has
corrupted his own people, and who have therefore, abandoned him? ”

When Abu Talib died, trials increased greatly as never before for the
Messenger of Allah. He thus turned to the tribe of Thaqif in the city of
at‑Ta'if in the hope that they might give him shelter. He sought three
men, who were the notables of Thaqif in those days. They were brothers:
\`Abd Yalayl ibn \`Amr, Habib ibn \`Amr and Mas'ud ibn \`Amr. He offered
himself to them and told them of the trials that had afflicted him at
the hands of his people. One of them exclaimed: “I swear that I would
even steal the curtains of the Ka'bah, if Allah had truly sent you with
anything! ” The other said: “Could not Allah send someone other than
you?” The third exclaimed: “By Allah, I shall never speak to you
henceforth. By Allah, if you are truly the Messenger of Allah, you would
be of too great honour for me even to speak to you. If, on the other
hand, you lie concerning Allah, you would be too evil for me to speak to
you.” They mocked him and revealed to their people their conversation
with him.

The men then placed people in two lines in his way. When the Messenger
of Allah passed between the two lines, he did not lift his feet or put
them down but that they pelted them with stones. They repeated this
until his feet bled. He escaped from them with his feet gushing blood,
and ran to one of their gardens and took shelter under a tree, sad and
suffering much pain.

\`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah and Shaybah ibn Rabi \`ah were in the garden. He
therefore did not wish to remain with them, as he knew their great
hostility to Allah and His Mess­enger. When they saw him, they sent to
him a servant of theirs called \`Addas who was of the people of Naynawa
(Nineveh), with grapes. When \`Addas came to him, the Messenger of Allah
asked: “From which land are you?” He answered: “I am of the people of
Nineveh.” He said to him: “So you are from the city of the righteous man
Yunus (Jonah) son of Mitts (Matthew).” \`Addas asked him: “How do you
know who Yunus was? ”

The Messenger of Allah, who never looked down at anyone so much as not
to convey to him the mess­age of his Lord, answered: “I am the Messenger
of Allah. Allah, exalted be He, informed me of the account of Yunus ibn
Mitts.” When he had told him what Allah had revealed to him concerning
Yunus ibn Mitts, \`Addas fell prostrate before Allah and began to kiss
the Prophet's feet while they continued to gush blood. When \`Utbah and
Shay­bah saw what their servant was doing, they kept silent. But when he
returned to them they asked: “Why did you prostrate yourself before
Muhammad and kiss his feet, while we never saw you do so to any of us?”

He answered: “He is a righteous man who told me things which I
recog­nized concerning a messenger whom Allah had sent to us, whose name
was Yunus ibn Mitts.” They laughed and said “Let him not tempt you away
from your Christianity, for he is a deceitful man.” The Messenger of
Allah then returned to Mecca.

\`Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim (al‑Qummi) reports that when the Messenger.
of Allah returned from the city of at­-Ta'if and approached Mecca with
the intention of performing the \`umrah (lesser pilgrimage), he did not
wish to enter Mecca where he had no protector. He saw a man of the
Quraysh who had secretly embraced Islam and said to him: “Go to
al‑Akhnas ibn Shurayq and tell him that Muhammad asks you to protect him
until he performs the circumambulations *( tawaf , around* the Ka'bah)
and the running (sa\`i) between the two hills of as‑Safa and al‑Marwa,
for he has come to per­form the *\`umrah.”* The man went to al‑Akhnas
and con­veyed to him what the Messenger of Allah had said.

Al‑Akh­nas answered: “I am not of the Quraysh, but only an ally, and an
ally cannot offer protection. I fear that they would violate my
protection, and that would be an insult.” The man returned to the
Messenger of Allah and told him. The Messenger of Allah was hiding in
the ravine of Harra' with Zayd ibn al‑Harithah. He said to the man: “Go
to Suhayl ibn \`Amr and ask him to protect me only until I
circum­ambulate the House (that is, the Ka'bah) and perform the sa\`i
(running between as‑Safa and al‑Marwa).”

The man went and told Suhayl, but he answered: “No, I will not.” The
Messenger of Allah sent the man to Mut'im ibn \`Adiyy (ibn \`Amir) to
make the same request. When the man went to him he asked: “Where is
Muhammad?” The man, however, did not wish to tell him where the Prophet
was. He rather answered: “He is nearby.” Mut'im said: “Go to him and say
that I shall give you protection. Come, therefore, and circum­ambulate
and run as you wish.”

The Messenger of Allah entered the city. Mut'im said to his sons, his
sister, and to his brother, who was called Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy: “Take
up your arms, for I have offered Muhammad protection! Stay around the
Ka'bah until he performs the circumambulation and running.” There were
ten men in all who took up arms. Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, then
came in to the mosque. Abu Jahl saw him and said: “O people of Quraysh,
here is Muhammad alone. His supporter has died; do with him, therefore,
as you please.” Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy said to him: “O uncle, do not
speak, for Abu Wahb (that is, Mut'im) has offered Muhammad protection.”
Abu Jahl went to Mut\`im and asked: “Are you a protector, or one who has
abandoned his religion for another?” He answered: “I am only a
protector.” Abu Jahl said: “In that case your protec­tion will not be
violated.”

When the Messenger of Allah had finished his circum­ambulation and
running, he came to Mut'im and said: “O Abu Wahb, you have protected and
done well! Release me now from your protection.” Mut'im replied: “What
would prevent you from remaining in my protection?” He answered: “I
detest remaining in the protection of an Associator for more than one
day.” Mut'im then exclaimed: “O people of Quraysh, Muhammad has released
himself from my protection! ”

'Ali ibn Ibrahim (al‑Qummi) reported that As'ad ibn Zurarah and Dhakwan
ibn \`Abd Qays, both of whom were of the Khazraj tribe of Medina, came
to Mecca during one of the pilgrimage seasons. At that time a state of
war, which had already lasted for a long time, existed between the Aws
and Khazraj (both of which were Medinan tribes). The people did not lay
down their arms by day or night.

In the last engagement between them on the day of Bu'ath (40), the Aws
tribe had prevailed over the Khazraj. As'ad ibn Zurarah and Dhakwan came
to Mecca for the \`umrah of the sacred month of Rajab seeking an
alliance against the Aws tribe. As'ad ibn Zurarah was a friend of
\`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah. He thus came to him as a guest and said: “A long
period of war has pre­vailed between us and our people. We have come,
therefore, seeking alliance against them.”

\`Utbah answered: “Your dwellings are far from ours, and we have an
important preoccupation which prevents us from undertaking any other.”
As'ad asked: “What is your preoccupation, when you live securely in your
sacred city? ” “A man has appeared among us who claims that he is the
Messenger of Allah”, answered \`Utbah. He continued: “This man has
declared our minds foolish, and insulted our gods. He has also
cor­rupted our youths and dissolved our unity.” “Who is he?”  
 As'ad asked.

\`Utbah replied: “He is the son of \`Abdullah son of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib.
He is of a family that is of high honour and status among us.” As'ad and
Dhakwan as well as all the people of the Aws and Khazraj tribes used to
hear from the Jews of an‑Nadir, Qurayzah and Qaynuqa' ‑ who lived among
them ‑ that: “The time has come when a prophet shall appear in Mecca,
whose migration shall be to Medina. With him we shall slay you all, O
people of the Arabs! ”

When As'ad heard all this from \`Utbah, the things which he had heard
from the Jews came back into his mind. He thus asked: “Where is he?”
\`Utbah answered: “He is sitting in the Ka'bah. They do not come out of
their ravine except during the pilgrimage season. As for you, do not
listen to him or speak to him, for he is a sorcerer who would bewitch
you with his words.” All this took place at the time when the men of
Hashim were besieged in the ravine. As'ad said: “What shall I do when I
have come for the \`umrah and it is necessary for me to circumambulate
the House? ” He answered: “Plug your ears up with cotton.”

As'ad then went into the sanctuary, having stuffed his ears with cotton.
He circumambulated the House while the Messenger of Allah was sitting in
the sanctuary with some of the men of Hashim. He looked at the Prophet
and passed him by. As he passed by, however, performing the second
circumambulation, he said to himself: “Truly, there is no one more
foolish than I ! Should all this occur in Mecca, and I know not what it
is so that I might go back to my people and tell them? ” He thus took
the cotton out of his ears, threw it away and addressed the Messenger of
Allah, saying: “Have a happy morning!” This was the greeting of the
Arabs before Islam. The Messenger of Allah turned to him and said:
“Allah has given us another greeting in­stead which is better than this
one; it is the greeting of the people of Paradise: *\`as‑Salamu
\`alaykum'* (peace be upon you) .” As'ad said: “You must have come
recently to this! What do you call men to, O Muhammad?”

He replied: “To the witness *(shahadah)* that there is no god but Allah,
and that I am the Messenger of Allah! I enjoin upon you that:

*\`You associate nothing with Him, and that you act kindly towards your
parents. Do not kill your children for fear of poverty, for We shall
provide both for you and them. Do not come near vile transgressions, be
they disclosed or hidden, and do not kill a soul, which Allah has made
unlawful except with justice. With all this you have been charged that
perhaps you may understand. Do not come near the wealth of an orphan
except in the fairest manner, until he reaches the age of discretion.
Give full and just measure and weight. Yet We do not charge a soul
except in accordance with its capacity. When you speak, speak justly,
even if it be against one who is nearest of kin. Fulfil Allah's
covenant. You are enjoined to all this, that perhaps you may
recollect.'* ” [^10]

When As'ad heard this, he exclaimed: “I bear witness that there is no
god but Allah alone, having no associate, and that you are the Messenger
of Allah! O Messenger of Allah, may my father and my mother be a ransom
for you! I am of the city of Yathrib (Medina), of the Khazraj tribe. All
relations between us and our brothers of the Aws tribe are cut off. If
Allah were to re‑establish them by means of you, I would find no one
more honoured than you. Another man of my people is accompanying me. I
trust that he too will enter into this matter, and that Allah will set
our affairs right through you. By Allah, 0 Messenger of Allah, we often
heard reports of you from the Jews. They used to announce to us your
coming forth and inform us of your character­istics. I trust that our
abode shall be the abode of your migration, and that with us shall be
your dwelling. The Jews have informed us of this. Praise be to Allah Who
led me to you! By Allah, I came only to seek some alliance against our
opponents. Yet Allah has given us something better than the purpose for
which I came.”

Dhakwan then came, and As'ad told him: “This is the Messenger of Allah
whom the Jews announced and of whose characteristics they informed us.
Come, therefore, and dec­lare your Islam.” Dhakwan thus accepted Islam
and said: “O Messenger of Allah, send with us a man who would teach us
the Qur'an and call the people to your message.” The Mess­enger of Allah
sent Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr, a youth who had lived in luxury with his
parents, who preferred him over all their other children, and who had
never left Mecca. But when Mus'ab became a Muslim, his parents disowned
him, and he remained with the Messenger of Allah in the ravine until the
signs of exhaustion were visible on his changed face. The Messenger of
Allah ordered him to go with As'ad, as he had learned much of the
Qur'an. Dhakwan then left for Medina with As'ad accompanied by Mus'ab
ibn \`Umayr.

When As'ad and Dhakwan came to their people, they told them about the
Messenger of Allah and his message. From every family one or two men
accepted Islam. Mus'ab lived with As'ad ibn Zurarah, and every day he
would go around the assemblies of the men of Khazraj calling them to
Islam, but only the youths would accept his call. There was a man called
\`Abdullah ibn Ubayy who was a notable of the Khazraj tribe. They all
agreed to appoint him as king over them because of his honourable status
and generosity. They had made a crown for him which they then presented
to him, seeking by this mediation in their long hostilities, for he had
not fought on the side of his people of the Khazraj in the war of
Bu'ath, nor had he supported them against the Aws tribe. He had said,
rather, “You commit wrongdoing towards the Aws tribe, and I will not
support wrongdoing.” Thus both the Aws and Khazraj accepted him.

When As'ad returned, \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy did not like what he and
Dhakwan brought back with them. He was, for this reason, indifferent.
As'ad then said to Mus'ab: “My maternal uncle Sa'd ibn Mu'adh is one of
the chiefs of the Aws tribe. He is a wise and honourable man, and is
well respected among the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf. If he were to enter
into Islam, our cause would triumph. Let us, therefore, go to their
dwellings.” Thus, Mus'ab went with As'ad to the quarter of Sa'd ibn
Mu'adh and sat at one of their wells. A number of their youths gathered
around him (Mus'ab), while he recited the Qur'an to them. When Sa'd ibn
Mu'adh learnt of this, he said to Usayd ibn Hudayr, who was also one of
their notables: “I have heard that Abu Umamah, As'ad ibn Zurarah has
returned with a man of Quraysh to corrupt our youths. Go, therefore, to
him and order him to desist.” Usayd ibn Hudayr went to them, and As'ad,
looking at him, said to Mus'ab: “This is an honourable man, and if he
joins our cause, I have hope that it will be strengthened. Exert
yourself with him in the cause of Allah.”

When Usayd came near them, he said: “O Abu Umamah, your uncle says that
you should not come to our assembly, nor should you corrupt our youths.
Beware of the men of the Aws, for your own safety! ” Mus'ab said: “Would
you not sit down that we may put before you a cause, which you may join
if you so wish; otherwise, we shall remove from you anything you may
dislike.” He sat down, and Mus'ab recited to him a Surah of the Qur'an.
Usayd asked: “What do you do when you join this cause? ” Mus\`ab
answered, “We purify ourselves, wear two clean garments, proclaim the
profession of faith *(shahadah)* and pray two *rak'ahs.*

Usayd threw himself with his clothes into the well; he came out, he
wrung his garments and said: “Put it before me!” Mus'ab thus taught him
the profession of faith that, “There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah.” Usayd repeated the *shahadah* and offered
two *rak'ahs* of prayers. He then said to As'ad: “O Abu Umamah, I shall
now send your uncle to you; I shall use every persuasion to make him
come to you.” Usayd then went back to Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, and when the
latter looked at him, he said: “I swear that Usayd has returned to us
with a different face from that with which he left us.”

Sa'd ibn Mu'adh then went to them, and Mus'ab re­cited to him:

**Ha mim,** ***a revelation from the All‑merciful, the Compassionate***
**(Qur'an 41:1‑ 2) . “**

By Allah,” the two men exclaimed, “we saw Islam in his face even before
he uttered a word! ” He sent for two clean garments from his home; he
proclaimed the two *shahadahs* and offered two *rak'ahs* of prayer. He
then rose, took Mus'ab by the hand and took him to his home. He said to
him: “Declare your cause and do not fear anyone!” Then Sa'd went and
stood before the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf and exclaimed: “O people of
\`Amr ibn \`Awf, let there be Do man, woman, virgin or married woman,
neither old man, nor youth but that they should come forth; this is not
a day of hiding or seclusion! ” When they had all gathered, he said:
“What is my status with you?” With one voice they said: “You are our
master who is obeyed among us, nor shall we‑oppose you in anything!
Command us then to do whatever you wish.”

He said: “It shall be unlawful for me to speak to your men, women or
children until you bear witness that, \`There is no god but Allah, and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.' Praise be to Allah Who has honoured
us with that (faith). He (Muhammad) is the one of whom the Jews informed
us.” There was not a house of the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf but that a
man or woman of its inhabitants then accepted Islam. He then said to
Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr: “Declare your cause and call the people openly to
it.” Thus, Islam spread widely in Medina. All the notables of the two
tribes (that is, the Aws and Khazraj) entered into Islam, because of
what they remembered of the reports of the Jews.

The Messenger of Allah was then informed of the coming of the Aws and
Khazraj into Islam, for Mus'ab had written to him concerning this
matter. But anyone of the Quraysh who had accepted Islam was beaten and
tortured by his people. For this reason the Messenger of Allah ordered
all such people to migrate to Medina. They used to escape secretly one
man at a time and when they arrived in Medina, the people of the Aws and
Khazraj opened their homes to them and received them with hospitality
and kindness.

It is reported that when the people of the Aws and Khazraj came to Mecca
(for the pilgrimage), the Messenger of Allah came to them and pleaded:
“Would you protect me so that I may recite to you the Book of your Lord,
and that your reward with Allah be Paradise? ” “Yes, O Messenger of
Allah”, they answered. “You shall have whatever you wish for yourself
and your Lord.”

He then said to them: “Your appointment with me shall be at the \`Aqabah
(a place outside Mecca) on the middle night of the nights of *tashriq*
(that is, the three days following the Day of Sacrifice, which concludes
the pilgrimage rites).” After they had performed the pilgrimage rites,
they returned to Mina (one of the stations of the pilgrimage), many of
them having accepted Islam, but the majority still adherents of their
old religion. Among them on that journey was \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy. The
Messenger of Allah said to them on the second day of the days of
*tashriq,* “Gather all of you in the house of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib, which
is in the \`Aqabah. Let each one come alone stealthily so that you wake
up no one who is asleep.”

The Messenger of Allah was staying in the house of \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib
along with Hamzah, \`Ali and al‑\`Abbas. Forty men of the people of the
Aws and Khazraj gathered together with him at the house of \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib. When they had all settled down, the Messenger of Allah
repeated his former plea: “Would you protect me so that I may recite to
you the Book of your Lord, and that your reward with Allah be Paradise?”
As'ad ibn Zurarah, al‑Bard' ibn Ma'rur and \`Abdullah ibn Hizam all
answered: “Yes, O Messenger of Allah, lay upon us whatever conditions
you wish for yourself and your Lord.” The Messenger of Allah went on:
“You shall protect me as you would protect yourselves, and protect my
family as you would your families and children.” They enquired: “What
shall be our benefit from all this?” He answered: “You shall have
Paradise. You shall also rule over the Arabs and non‑Arabs in this
world, and you shall be kings.” “We accept”, they all concurred.

Then al‑\`Abbas ibn Nadlah of the Aws tribe arose and spoke to the
people thus: “O people of the Aws and Khazraj, do you know full well
where are you going? You are indeed headed for warfare with peoples both
red and white (an expression indicating great scope and variety), as
well as with the kings of this world! If you think that you will abandon
him whenever calamity befalls you, then do not imperil him. For even
though the people of the Messenger of Allah have opposed him, still he
lives here in security and honour.” \`Abdullah ibn Hizam, As'ad ibn
Zurarah and Abu 'l-Haytham ibn at‑Tayyihan said: “Why should you be
dismayed by such words, O Messenger of Allah? Rather, we shall ransom
your blood with our blood and your soul with our souls. Lay down,
therefore, whatever conditions you wish both for yourself and for your
Lord! ”

The Messenger of Allah demanded: “Appoint for me twelve chiefs from
among you who would guarantee all this for me, just as Moses took from
among the Children of Israel twelve chiefs.[^11]  
 They said: “Rather, choose them yourself if you so wish.” Gabriel
pointed them out to him. Thus the Prophet, chose nine ‑of the Khazraj
pointing to each man: As'ad ibn Zurarah, al‑Bard' ibn Ma'rur, \`Abdullah
ibn Hizam, Abu Jabir ibn \`Abdillah, Rafi\` ibn Malik, Sa'd ibn
\`Ubadah, al‑Mundhir ibn \`Amr, \`Abdullah ibn Rawdhah, Sa'd ibn
ar‑Rabi\` and \`Ubadah ibn as‑Samit. Of the Aws tribe, he chose:
Abu'l­Haytham ibn at‑Tayyihan ‑ who was a man from Yemen and an ally of
the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf ‑ Usayd ibn Hudayr and Sad ibn Khaythamah.

When they had all come together to pledge allegiance to the Messenger of
Allah, Satan cried out among the people of Quraysh saying: “O people of
Quraysh and all you Arabs, behold Muhammad and the apostates with him at
\`Aqabah pledging their allegiance to him that they may wage war against
you! ” His voice was so loud that it was heard by all the pilgrims who
were in Mina. The people of Quraysh were greatly stirred up so that they
rushed to arms. The Messenger of Allah heard the clamour, and ordered
the Helpers (al‑Ansar) : “Disperse!” But they all said: “O Messenger of
Allah, if you were to command us to rush at them with our swords, we
would do so.” The Messenger of Allah replied: “I was not commanded to do
this. Allah has not permitted me to wage war against them.” They
persisted, saying: “O Messenger of Allah, would you then come out with
us? ” “I must wait for Allah's Com­mand”, he answered.

All the people of Quraysh to the last one came forth, heavily armed.
Hamzah went out with his sword, accom­panied by 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, and
stood at the \`Aqabah. When they saw Hamzah, they asked: “To what
purpose have you all gathered together?” He answered: “No, we have not
gathered together; nor is there anyone here. By Allah, no one shall go
through this \`Aqabah, but that I shall smite him with my sword! ”

They thus turned back and went to \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and said: “It has
reached us that your people have pledged allegiance to Muhammad that
they will wage war with him against us! ” But \`Abdullah swore to them
that his people had done nothing of the sort, that he had no knowledge
of it and that they had not in­formed him of any such intention. The
people of Quraysh believed him; the Ansar went their way, and the
Messenger of Allah returned to Mecca.

The Associators plot against the Prophet; the Prophet migrates to Medina; and the Jubilation of the Ansar at his Arrival.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Signs Which were Revealed Concerning His Prophethood, and Other Events of His Life Until He was Commanded to Fight.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Following these events, the people of Quraysh assembled in the House of
Assembly (*Daru'n‑Nadwah),* where forty of their notables were present.
It was the custom that no one was allowed to enter that house until he
was over forty years of age, except \`Utbah ibn Rabi \`ah, even though
he was less than forty years old.

The accursed Satan came to them in the image of an old man. The
door‑keeper asked him: “Who are you?” “I am an old man of Najd”, Satan
replied. He asked permission to enter, and was permitted to do so. He
then addressed the people saying: “I have come to know about your
meeting regarding that man (that is, Muhammad) and have therefore come
to advise you, so that you should not lose the oppor­tunity of having my
sound advice.”

When they had all taken their seats, Abu Jahl spoke and said: “O people
of Quraysh, there was once no one among the Arabs with more honour than
we had ‑ living as we were in the safety of Allah's sanctuary. The Arabs
came to us from far and wide twice a year. No one coveted our fortunes
until Muhammad grew up among us. Because of his good­ness, we called him
\`al‑Amin' (the Trustworthy). Then he claimed to be the Messenger of the
Lord of all beings. He insulted our gods and mocked us as men of foolish
mind. He corrupted our youth, and dissolved our unity. My opin­ion is
that we should send a man secretly to assassinate him. If the people of
Hashim demand the price of his blood, we will give them the blood price
of ten men.” Satan retorted: “This is bad advice, for the sons of Hashim
would never allow Muhammad's assassin to walk on the earth. Wars would
then be waged between you and them in your sanctuary.”

Another man said: “We should rather imprison him in a house, which he
would not be allowed to leave. We would provide him with essential food
until he dies, as did Zuhayr and an‑Nabighah. [^12]  
 Satan rejected this view: “The sons of Hashim would never agree to this
course of action”, he objected. He went on: “When the pilgrimage season
of the Arabs comes, they would all gather against you until they release
him. Then he would surely deceive them with his sorcery.”

Another man suggested: “We should rather expel him from our lands, and
thus be free to serve our gods.” Satan again said: “This view is even
worse than the two preceding. This is because you are dealing with one
who is of the fairest countenance, and the most eloquent of the Arabs.
You shall only be sending him out to the desert dwellings of the Arabs
that he may deceive them with his magic and eloquence. You will not have
long to wait until he overwhelms you with men and horses.” Thus were
they all bewildered.

Finally they asked Satan: “What do you advise?” He answered: “The only
way is that you bring one notable from every clan of the Quraysh; one
man of the sons of Hashim should also be included. They should each take
an iron bar or a sword and rush at him, dealing him altogether one
single blow! Then would the responsibility of his blood fall on all the
people of Quraysh. The sons of Hashim would be unable to demand revenge
for his blood, since they themselves would share in shedding it. Their
only recourse would be to accept the blood price. Give them blood money
for three ‑ or even ten ‑ men, if they so wish.” Then with one voice,
they all said: “The right opinion is that of the old man of Najd! ”

They thus chose fifteen men, among whom was Abu Lahab (the uncle of the
Prophet), and agreed that they would enter into the house of the
Messenger of Allah and kill him. Allah then sent down to His Apostle:

***Remember when those who rejected faith plotted against you: to
im­prison, kill or drive you out. . . (Qur'an*** **8:30) .**

Thus agreed, they dispersed with the plan to attack the Prophet by
night, keeping their plan secret. Abu Lahab suggested: “We should rather
keep watch over him till the morning, then go in to attack him! ” They
thus spent the night around the Messenger of Allah's house.

The Messenger of Allah asked that a bed be spread out for him. Then he
said to \`Ali: “O 'Ali, would you defend me with your own soul?” “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah”, he readily agreed. The Prophet continued: “Sleep in
my bed, and use my mantle as cover.” 'Ali then slept in the bed of the
Messenger of Allah and covered himself with his mantle. Gabriel came and
said to the Messenger of Allah, “Depart!”. The people gathered around
the house, and see­ing someone sleeping in his bed, they surmised that
it was the Messenger of Allah. The Messenger of Allah went away reciting
*Surah Yasin* till Allah's saying:

***Thus have We enveloped them, so that they do not see*** **(Qur'an
36:1‑9).**

He took a handful of dust and threw it at them while they slept, and
went on his way. Then Gabriel (directing the Messenger of Allah) said to
him: “O Muhammad, take the route of Thawr ‑ a mountain located on the
way to Mina, the shape of which resembles the hump of a bull (in Arabic:
\`thawr' ). Thus the Messenger of Allah continued on; Abu Bakr met him
on the way and the Prophet took hold of his hand and went with him. Then
when he reached the mountain of Thawr he entered the Cave.

Next morning, at the break of dawn, the people of Quraysh rushed into
the room and went for the bed. \`Ali jumped up, and facing them, asked:
“What do you want?” They demanded: “Where is your cousin Muhammad?” He
answered: “Did you set me as a guard over him! Did you not tell him to
depart your town? He is gone; what more do you want? ” They rushed at
\`Ali, beating and reviling him. Abu Lahab, however, restrained them,
saying: “It is you (\`Ali) who have been deceiving us since last night.”

They thus scattered themselves in the mountains (in search of the
Prophet). There was a man among them called Abu Kurz, of the tribe of
Khuza'ah, who was known for his ability in tracking. They said to him:
“Today is your day!” He continued to track the Messenger of Allah until
he stood with them at the door of his room. He said: “This is the
footprint of Muhammad, for it is, by Allah, a match of his footprint
which is in the Ka'bah. These also are the footprints of Abu Quhafah
(that is, Abu Bakr's father) and his son. He then said: “The son of Abu
Quhafah (that is, Abu Bakr) went this way!” He then went on with them
until they came to the entrance of the Cave, whereupon he said to them:
“They did not go beyond this spot. Either they went up to heaven, or
went into the ground.”

Allah, however, sent a spider which wove its web at the Cave's entrance
(as we have already mentioned). It is re­ported that an angel came down
in the image of a horseman and stood at the entrance of the Cave. He
said to them: “Look for him around these ravines, for he is not here.”
They began to search around in the countryside, while the Messenger of
Allah remained in the Cave for three days. Finally, Allah permitted him
to migrate.

It was revealed to the Messenger of Allah: “O Muham­mad, depart from
Mecca, for there is no longer a supporter in it after Abu Talib.” When
the Messenger of Allah left the Cave, he met a shepherd who worked for a
man of the Quraysh called \`Abdullah ibn Urayqit. The Messenger of Allah
called him and said: “O Ibn Urayqit, can I trust you with my life?” He
answered: “If you do, I would guard you, keep your trust and never tell
anyone of your whereabouts. Where do you wish to go, O Muhammad?” He
answered: “To Yathrib.” The shepherd exclaimed: “By Allah, I shall take
you through a way that no one will ever be able to find.” The Messenger
of Allah said: “Go to 'Ali and tell him that Allah has permitted me to
migrate, and that he should prepare for me provisions and a mount.”

Abu Bakr also said: “Go to my daughter Asma' and tell her to make ready
for me provisions and two mounts. Also, inform \`Amir ibn Fuhayrah of
our decision.” \`Amir was one of Abu Bakr's clients who had accepted
Islam. “Tell him”, Abu Bakr directed, “to bring us, the provisions and
two mounts.” Ibn Urayqit went to 'Ali and told him what the Prophet had
requested. 'Ali thus sent to the Messenger of Allah provisions and a
mount, and \`Amir ibn Fuhayrah sent provisions and two mounts.

The Messenger of Allah finally left the Cave and Ibn Urayqit took the
road to Nakhlah, a tortuous road between mountains. They did not join
the main road until they reached Qudayd, a place near Mecca. They came
as guests to Umm Ma'bad, the story of whose ewe and its miracle has
already been related. Likewise, the account of Suraqah ibn Malik ibn
Ju'shum al‑Mudliji and the sinking of the legs of his horse in the
ground has been related; hence there is no need to repeat them.

After Suraqah had, however, left the Prophet, the people of Quraysh saw
him. They asked if he knew where Muhammad was, and he answered: “I came
to know that he had departed from you, and I combed this whole area for
you, and saw no trace of anyone. Return, therefore; he is not here.”

News of the coming of the Messenger of Allah reached the Ansar, who
continued to expect his arrival. Men and women would go out every
morning to meet him, but when the heat grew stronger, they would return.
It is related on the authority of Ibn Shihab az‑Zuhri that between the
night of al‑\`Aqabah and the Migration of the Messenger of Allah there
were three months. The pledge of allegiance *(bay \`ah)* of the Ansar to
the Messenger of Allah took place on the night of al‑\`Aqabah in the
month of Dhi'l-Hijjah, and he arrived in Medina on the 12th of
Rabi\`u'l-Awwal, on Monday.  
 The Ansar used to go out seeking news of him. When, however, they
despaired of his arrival, they returned to their homes.

Finally, the Apostle of Allah did arrive. When he reached Dhu'l-Hulayfah
(a small village around six miles dis­tance from Medina), he asked the
way to the quarters of the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf, and people
directed him. The sun's glare showed his shadow clearly. A Jewish man
sitting on a hillock in his land, when he saw three riders coming
towards the quarter of Banu \`Amr ibn \`Awf, cried out: “O Muslims, here
is your companion; he has arrived.” A great clamour arose in Medina, and
men, women and children came out to meet him, overtaking one another in
their haste.

As soon as he arrived, the Messenger of Allah went straightway to the
Mosque of Quba, where he dismounted. The people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf
gathered around him rejoicing. He went as guest to the home of Kulthum
ibn al‑Hidm, an old and pious blind man. All the families of the Aws
tribe gathered, but because there were old hostilities between the Aws
and Khazraj tribes, they did not dare come to the Mess­enger of Allah.
The Messenger of Allah looked carefully at the faces of the assembled
people, but did not see among them any men of the Khazraj. A few men of
the Immigrants *(muhajirun)* had already come to Medina and settled at
the quarter of \`Amr ibn \`Awf. It is reported that when the Proph­et
arrived in Medina, women and children met him chanting:

*The full moon has arisen over us from Thaniyyatu'l- Wada\`.*  
*Gratitude is due from us so long as there is someone who invites to
Allah.*[^13]

Salman, the Persian (a well‑known Companion and an important personality
in Shi'i piety) was a slave of one of the Jews. He had left his home in
Persia in search of the pure *(hanif)* religion of which the people of
the scriptures (Jews and Christians) had informed him. He came one day
upon a Christian monk in Syria with whom he stayed for a while and whom
he questioned concerning this religion. The monk said: “Go look for him!
In Mecca shall be his appearance, and to Yathrib (Medina) shall be his
migration; seek him out there.” Salman thus set out for Yathrib, where
some Bedouins captured him and sold him to a Jew. He set him to work on
his date‑palm. As he was one day in the tree pruning it, another Jew
came to his master and said: “O father of so‑and‑so, are you aware that
the Prophet of these Muslims has come to them?” Salman exclaimed: “May I
be a ransom for you what is it that you say?” “What is it to you” ‑ his
master retorted, “that you ask concerning this? Go on with your work!”

Salman climbed down and filled a tray with the dates of that palm and
took it to the Messenger of Allah. The Messenger of Allah asked: “What
is this?” “It is only a freewill gift *(sadaqah)* of our dates”, Salman
answered. He continued: “We heard that you people are strangers who have
come to these lands. I wish, therefore, that you eat of our charitable
gift.” The Messenger of Allah said to his Companions: “Go ahead and
eat.” Salman said to himself in Persian and counted on his fingers,
“This is one (test).” Later, he brought the Prophet another tray of
dates. The Messenger of Allah again asked: “What is this?” Salman
answered: “I see that you do not eat of a freewill gift. This is,
therefore, a gift *(hadiyyah),* which I present to you.” The Prophet
said to his Companions: “Mention the name of Allah and eat.” He too ate.
Salman counted again on his fingers saying: “This is a second (test)”,
again muttering to himself in Persian.

Salman then went around to the back of the Prophet. The Messenger of
Allah took down his shirt off his shoulders, and Salman saw the seal of
Prophethood and the mole, which he began to kiss fervently. The
Messenger of Allah asked: “Who are you?” He answered: “I am a man of the
Persians. I left my home since such and such a time.” He then recounted
to him his long story.  
 Salman entered into Islam, and the Messenger of Allah gave him the glad
tidings: “Be patient and of good cheer, for Allah shall find a way of
relief from the yoke of this Jewish man.”

That evening, Abu Bakr left the Prophet and went to Medina where he
stayed with one of the Ansar. The Mess­enger of Allah, however, remained
in Quba, in the house of Kulthum ibn al‑Hidm. After the Messenger of
Allah had offered the sunset and night prayers, As'ad ibn Zurarah came
to him masked. He greeted the Messenger of Allah and was glad at his
coming. As'ad then said: “O Messenger of Allah, I would not hear that
you are in a place and stay so long away from you. It is rather because
of the things you know which exist between us and our brothers of the
Aws. For this reason, I did not wish to come to them. But I could no
longer bear to stay away from you.”

The Messenger of Allah cried out to the people of Aws: “Who among you
would give him protection?” They all answered: “O Mess­enger of Allah,
our protection is yours to grant; you grant him protection! ” “No”, he
replied, “rather let some of you take him into their protection.” Then
\`Uwaym ibn Sa'idah and Sa'd ibn Khaythamah said: “We shall do so, O
Messenger of Allah.” They thus took As'ad into their protection, and he
used to come daily to the Messenger of Allah, listening to his words and
praying behind him.

The Messenger of Allah remained there fifteen days. Abu Bakr then came
to him and said: “O Messenger of Allah, en­ter Medina, for the people
are eager for you to dwell among them.” He answered: “I shall not leave
this place until my brother 'Ali joins me.” The Messenger of Allah had
already sent to him saying: “Bring the family and come.” Abu Bakr said:
“I do not think that \`All would join you.” “Yes”, the Prophet said,
“soon he shall come, if Allah wills.”

After these fifteen days had passed, \`Ali came with his family. When he
arrived, Sa'd ibn ar‑Rabi\` and \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah were busy
smashing the idols of the Khazraj. Every man of high status had an idol
in his house, which he cleaned and perfumed. As well, every clan of the
Aws and Khazraj had their special idol in their house of assembly. They
honored such idols, covering them with a special cloth and offering to
them animal sacrifices. When, however, the twelve men of the Ansar (whom
the Prophet had chosen) came to the city, they cast out the idols from
their homes and the homes of those who heeded them. When later the
seventy (chosen men) came, Islam spread rapidly among the people, who
then began to break their own idols.

After \`Ali's arrival, the Messenger of Allah remained (in Quba) for one
or two days, after which he mounted his she‑camel and prepared to
depart. All the people of \`Amr ibn \`Awf came to him saying: “O
Messenger of Allah, stay with us, for we are indeed a people of serious
purpose and constant striving. We are a people of true alliance and
protection.” He answered: “Rather she (his mount) has been so
commanded.”

The tribes of the Aws and Khazraj heard of the coming of the Messenger
of Allah, and they took up arms and came running around him and his
she‑camel. He did not pass by any quarter of the Ansar but that they
jumped up before him and, taking hold of the rope of his she‑camel,
beseeched him to stay with them. All the while the Messenger of Allah
would say: “Let her go, for she is so commanded.” He went on until he
arrived at the quarter of the tribe of Salim.

The Messenger of Allah left Quba on Friday, and arrived at the quarter
of Banu Salim around noon. The men of the tribe of Salim came to him and
exclaimed: “Come O Mess­enger of Allah to men of serious purpose,
steadfastness, true allegiance and protection.” His she‑camel knelt down
at the door of their mosque ‑ they had in fact built a mosque before the
arrival of the Messenger of Allah. He dismounted at their mosque and
offered the noon prayer and delivered a sermon. This was the first
mosque in which the Messenger of Allah delivered a Friday sermon. He
prayed towards Jeru­salem, and the number of those who prayed behind him
on that day was around one hundred.

The Messenger of Allah rode his she‑camel and let loose her rope, and
she roamed freely until she halted at the dwelling of \`Abdullah ibn
Ubayy. The Prophet stopped, thinking that the latter would offer him
hospitality. As dust rose, \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy placed his sleeve over
his nose and said: “Go you to those who have beguiled and deceived you,
and brought you here. Go enjoy their hospitality, but do not impose
yourself on us in our homes.” Allah then sent against the people of Banu
l-Hubla small ants which destroyed their houses, so that they had to beg
hospitality of others. The people of Banul-Hubla were so called because
the grandfather of \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy was nicknamed \`Ibnu'l-Hubla'
(son of the pregnant woman).

Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah (a well‑known Companion of the Ansar) said: “O
Messenger of Allah, let not your heart be troubled by anything which
this man may say. For we had all agreed to set him up as king over us,
but now he sees that you have despoiled him of an opportunity which was
close at hand. Come and be my guest, O Messenger of Allah, for there is
no one in the Aws or Khazraj who owns as many wells as I do. We are
people of steadfastness and honour. Do not, therefore, bypass us, O
Messenger of Allah.”

The Messenger of Allah, however, let loose his she camel's rope, and she
trotted until she halted in the spot of the Mosque of Medina, which was
then not a mosque but a resting ground for animals, belong to two
orphans called Sahl and Suhayl. The two boys were in the protection of
As'ad ibn Zurarah. The she‑camel knelt down at the door of Abu Ayyub
Khalid ibn Yazid. The Messenger of Allah dismounted and immediately
people gathered around him offering their hospitality. The mother of Abu
Ayyub, how­ever, quickly ran and removed the she‑camel's saddle and took
it into her home. As the men continued to insist, the Messenger of Allah
asked: “Where is the saddle?”, and was told that Abu Ayyub's mother had
taken it into her home.

The Prophet said: “A man should always be with his goods.” As'ad took
hold of the she‑camel's rope and led her into his home. Abu Ayyub had a
room over his house, and he did not wish to be higher than the Messenger
of Allah. Thus he asked: “O Apostle of Allah, which is preferable to
you, an elevated house, or one at ground level?” He answered: “Ground
level is more suitable for us on account of the people who will come to
see us.” Abu Ayyub later recounted: “Thus my mother and I lived in the
upper room. But I was afraid any time I brought in a pail full of water
that a drop may fall on the Messenger of Allah. My mother and I,
moreover, used to go up to the room carefully in order that he might not
notice us, and we spoke in whispers. When he slept, we made no movement.
Whenever we cooked in our room, we used to close the door for fear that
the Messenger of Allah might be affected by the smoke. An earthenware
jug of water fell one day so that the water was spilled. The mother of
Abu Ayyub took a velvet garment which, by Allah, was the only one we
had, and used it to mop the water for fear that it might drip down over
the Messenger of Allah.”

Muslims of the Aws, Khazraj and the Immigrants *(muha­jirin)* used to
come to have audience with the Messenger of Allah. Abu Umamah (the
agnomen of) As'ad ibn Zurarah used to send every day to the Prophet a
large dish of *tharid* (that is, of sopped bread with broth), covered by
a large chunk of meat. All present would eat to satiation, but the dish
would be returned as though untouched. Likewise, Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah used
to send to the Prophet supper every day which he would share with
whomever was present. The dish was also returned full as it was brought.
As'ad ibn Zurarah, Sa'd ibn Khaythamah, al‑Mundhir ibn \`Amr, Sa'd ibn
ar‑Rabi \` and Usayd ibn Hudayr used to take turns in sending lunch and
supper to the Prophet. It is reported that one day Usayd cooked for him
a large earthenware pot full of food, which he himself carried to him
because he found no one else to do so. He was a noble man, chieftain.

He came to the Messenger of Allah just as the latter had returned from
offering prayers. “Did you yourself carry it?” asked the Prophet. “Yes”,
answered Usayd, “I found no one else to carry it.” The Prophet
exclaimed: “Allah's blessings be upon such a household! ”

It is reported in the book entitled *Dala'ilu'n‑Nubuw­wah* [^14] on the
authority of Anas ibn Malik who said: “The Messenger of Allah came to
Medina; as soon as he entered it, the men and women of the Ansar came to
him begging, \`Come stay with us, O Messenger of Allah!' He answered:
\`Let the she‑camel go, for she is so commanded.” The she camel finally
knelt down at the door of Abu Ayyub. There­upon, a few maidens of the
tribe of Banu'n‑Najjar came forth with tambourines which they beat as
they chanted: \`We are maidens of Banu'n‑Najjar! How we would love to
have Muhammad as a guest in our protection.' The Messenger of Allah came
out to them and asked, \`Do you love me?' They answered: \`Yes, by
Allah, O Messenger of Allah!' He repeated three times: \`I too love you
O Banu'n‑Najjar.' ”

'Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim reported that the Jews of the Qurayzah,
an‑Nadir and Qaynuqa\` tribes came to the Prophet and asked: “O
Muhammad, to what are you inviting people?” He answered: “I call men to
bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that I am the Apostle of
Allah, whom you find described in the Torah[^15] and of whom your own
learned men have already informed you ‑ my appearance shall be in Mecca,
and my migration shall be to this land. One of your own learned men who
came from Syria also spoke to you saying: \`I left both wine and
leavened bread and came to privation and a diet of dates, seeking a
prophet who shall be sent forth in this plain (that is, Medina).

His appearance shall be in Mecca and his migration to this city. He is
the last of the prophets and the most excellent of them. He shall ride a
donkey, wrap himself in an outer garment, and will be satisfied with a
piece of dry bread. In his eyes there is redness, and between his
shoulders is the seal of Prophethood. He shall carry his sword upon his
shoulder, and will not be dismayed by anyone he confronts. He shall be a
smiling man, but also a slayer. His authority shall spread to the
furthest regions that can be reached by the hoof of a camel or that of a
horse.' ”

They answered: “We have heard what you have to say, and have come to ask
for a truce between us, that we shall be neither with you, nor against
you. We would not support anyone against you. In return, you shall
neither trouble us, nor anyone of our coreligionists until we see how it
shall be with you and your people.” The Messenger of Allah. agreed with
them on these conditions. Thus, they drew up a written agreement that
they would not support anyone against the Messenger of Allah or anyone
of his Companions, be it with the tongue or hand, with arms or horses,
neither openly nor in secret, neither by night nor by day. “To all this,
Allah shall be an All‑knowing Witness. If they revoke this covenant,
then it shall be lawful for the Messenger of Allah to shed their blood,
capture their children and women and seize their wealth.” The Messenger
of Allah then wrote a pledge to each tribe separately.

The man who represented the tribe of Banu'n‑Nadir was Huyayy ibn Akhtab.
When he returned to his home, his brothers Judayy ibn Akhtab and Abu
Yasir ibn Akhtab asked: “What do you say?” He answered: “He is indeed
the one whom we find described in the Torah, and of whom our learned men
had informed us. Yet I shall continue to be his enemy, because
Prophethood has ceased to be in the progeny of Isaac and has instead
been established in the line of Ishmael. Nor should we ever become
followers of the descendants of Ishmael.”

The man who represented the tribe of Qurayzah was Ka'b ibn Asad. A man
called Mukhayriq represented the tribe of Banu Qaynuqa\`. He‑was the
wealthiest man among them, possessing much wealth and orchards. He said
to his people: “If you know for certain that he is the Prophet sent by
Allah, then let us believe in him. In this way, we would possess both
scriptures.” But the tribe of Qaynuqa\` did not agree with him on the
matter.

It is reported that the Messenger of Allah continued to pray with his
Companions in the animal fold. He said one day to As'ad ibn Zurarah: “Go
and buy this animal fold from its owners!” He thus went to purchase it
from the two orphans, .but they said: “Rather, we give 'it to the
Messenger of Allah.” The Messenger of Allah objected saying: “No, only
if you accept its price.” He bought it for ten dinars. There was a swamp
.of stagnant water in it which the Messenger of Allah ordered drained.
Then the Messenger of Allah had baked mud bricks prepared, which he used
to build it into a mosque. He dug the foundations and had stones carried
from al‑Harrah (at the outskirts of Medina). As the Muslims were
carrying them, the Messenger of Allah came carrying a stone on his
chest. Usayd ibn Hudayr met him and said: “O Messenger of Allah, give it
to me that I may carry it for you! ” “No”, he answered, “go and carry
another one.”

In this way, they carried the stones which they used to build the
foundations, until they reached ground level. The Prophet first used
regular mud bricks, one over the other. He then used samit, that is,
bricks equalling one and a half bricks each. Finally, he used two
alternate bricks at a time which fit into one another. Thus he raised up
the walls to the height of a man. The width of the Mosque in the back
was 100 cubits.

As the heat became intolerable, the people made a request of the
Prophet, saying: “O Messenger of Allah, would that you raise up some
shade over us! ” He thus raised up columns of wood as far as the
vestibule, over which he laid palm branches. They were then able to stay
in it. The people again suggested: “O Apostle of Allah, would that you
build an actual roof!” “No”, he replied, “rather an awning made of
branches like the booths of Moses. Matters are too urgent for all that.”

The Messenger of Allah then built his houses and those of his Companions
around the mosque. He plotted a space for his Companions wherein they
built their houses. Every one of them opened a door of his house into
the mosque. He plotted a space for Hamzah and had the door of his house
opened into the mosque. He plotted a similar space for \`All ibn Abi
Talib. They were all able to come out of their homes directly into the
mosque. Gabriel, however, came down to him and said: “O Muhammad, Allah
com­mands you to order everyone whose house opens out into the mosque to
close that door. Let no one have a door which opens out into the mosque
except you and \`All. This is because whatever is made lawful for you in
this matter, is also made lawful for \`Ali.”

The Prophet's Companions became angry because of this. Hamzah angrily
complained: “I am his uncle, yet he orders that my door be closed, and
leaves open the door of my nephew who is younger than me.” The Prophet
came to him and said: “O uncle, be not dismayed because your door was
closed, while 'Ali's door was left open. By Allah, it was not I who
ordered that; rather Allah commanded that all your doors be closed but
that \`All's door be left open.” Hamzah answered: “O Apostle of Allah, I
accept and willingly submit to Allah and His Apostle.”

It is reported that when the Messenger of Allah built his houses Fatimah
was with him; and that Abu Bakr asked for her hand in marriage, upon
which the Messenger of Allah said to him, “Wait for the command of
Allah, glorified and exalted be He.” Then \`Umar asked for her hand, and
the Prophet replied in a similar manner. It was asked of 'Ali, “Why do
you not ask for Fatimah's hand? ”, he answered, “By Allah, I have
nothing! ” He was told, “The Messenger of Allah will not ask for
anything.” He then came to the Prophet, but found himself shy to ask him
and thus left. He came another time the next day, but again was too shy
and left. Again he came a third day, and the Messenger of Allah said to
him, ” 'Ali, is there something you want?” “Yes, O Messenger of Allah”,
he answered. The Messenger of Allah said: “Perhaps you come as a
suitor?”, and 'Ali replied, “Yes, O Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet
then asked, “Do you have anything, \`All?” “I have nothing”, 'Ali
replied, “save my armour.”

Thus the Messenger of Allah married him for twelve and one‑half
*awqiyyahs* (that is, two hundred and fifty dirhams), for which \`All
sold his armour. Then the Messenger of Allah said to him, “Prepare a
house so that Fatimah can move into it”, to which 'Ali replied, “O
Messenger of Allah, there is no house here except a house of Harithah
ibn an‑Nu'man. And on the day the Commander of the Faithful consummated
his marriage with Fatimah she was nine years of age. But the Messenger
of Allah said, “By Allah, we are ashamed before Harithah, for we have
already taken almost all of his houses!” News of this reached Hari­thah,
and he came to the Messenger of Allah and said, “O Messenger of Allah, I
and my wealth belong to Allah and His Messenger, and by Allah there is
nothing which I would like more than that you take it (the house), for
what you take from me is then more dear than that which you leave.” The
Messenger of Allah thus blessed him and sent Fatimah to 'Ali in the
house of Harithah. And their bed was of the skin of a ram, the fleece of
which they placed facing up under them.

It is reported that the Messenger of Allah used to pray toward Jerusalem
during his stay in Mecca, and also during his Migration (to Medina) for
a period of seven months. When he had passed seven months there,
however, the Jews reproached him, saying, “You are our follower, praying
toward our *qiblah* (direction of pray) and we precede you in prayer!”

The Messenger of Allah was greatly troubled by this, and wished that
Allah would change his *qiblah* to the Ka'bah. He went out in the middle
of the night and gazed at the horizons of heaven, awaiting the command
of Allah. The next day he went to the Mosque of the Banu Salim, in which
the first commual Friday prayers in Medina had been held, and there he
prayed the afternoon *(zuhr)* prayers with them, two *rak'ahs* toward
Jerusalem and two toward Mecca. Thus was sent down:

***We have seen you turning your face to the heavens, and We shall
surely give you a*** **qiblah** ***with which you shall be pleased***
**(Qur'an 2 :144) .**

Then the Verse of Fighting *(ayatu'l‑qital)* was sent down to the
Messenger of Allah permitting him to fight against the Quraysh, as He
says:

***Sanction is given to those who fight because they have been wronged,
and Allah is well able to give them victory*** **(Qur'an 22:39) ,**

and

***to those who have been driven unjustly from their homes only because
they say, “Our Lord is Allah”. . .*** **(Qur'an 22:40).**

[^1]: See al‑Bayhaqi, vol. 1, p. 409.

[^2]: ibid., vol.1, pp. 418 ‑ 9.

[^3]: See for a detailed account of the migration to Abyssinia, Ibn
Hisham, vol.1, pp. 343 ‑ 63, and Guillaume, pp. 146 ‑ 55.

[^4]: See al‑Bayhaqi, vol. 2, pp. 53 ‑ 54.

[^5]: See the previous footnote. See also al‑Bukhari, vol. 5, pp. 8‑ 9.

[^6]: See al‑Bukhari, vol. 4, pp. 238 ‑ 9.

[^7]: That is, the Kitab Ma\`rifatu's‑Sahabah of the traditionist Ibn
Mandah, Abu \`Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya
al‑\`Abdi al‑Isfahani (d. 395/ 1005). The work remains in manuscript.
See Sezgin, Band I, pp. 214 ‑ 5.

[^8]: See al‑Bayhaqi, vol. 2, p. 158.

[^9]: Bu'ath was a fortress belonging to the Aws tribe. The Battle of
Bu'ath took place between the warring tribes of al‑Aws and al‑Khazraj
some years before the Migration.

[^10]: See Qur'an 6 :151 ‑ 2.

[^11]: See Qur'an 5:12.

[^12]: This apparently refers to the two well‑known poets: an‑Nabi­ghah
adh‑Dhubyani and Zuhayr as‑Sulami. Kitabu'l-Aghani of al‑Isfahani, and
other sources consulted, do not corroborate the incident alluded to in
this account.

[^13]: This poem has become a favorite chant in Muslim piety. Two more
lines have been added, which read: You who have been sent as a Messenger
from God to us, you come with a command worthy of obedience! You have
come honoring Medina, welcome to you, O best of those who invite to God!

[^14]: See al‑Bayhaqi, vol. 2, p. 234.

[^15]: See Qur'an 7:157.


