A General Account of the Prophet's Battles
==========================================

**A general account of the Prophet's battles in which he himself
participated, and for which he sent detachments. the main events of his
life until he departed this World, the Signs of His Prophethood Which
Occurred During That Time, and Proofs of His Veracity and Apostleship.**

Biographers of the Prophet and Qur'an commentators have reported that
the number of the battles: which the Messenger of Allah himself led was
twenty‑six. As for the detachments which he sent out for battle but in
which he himself did not take part, they were thirty‑six. In nine of his
battles, he himself took part in the fighting. These were: Badr, Uhud,
*al‑Khandaq* (the Trench), the battle against the Jewish tribe of Banu
Qurayzah, al‑Mustaliq, Khaybar, *al‑Fath* (the Conquest of Mecca),
Hunayn and the battle of at‑Ta'if.

The first detachment which the Prophet dispatched, consisting of thirty
horsemen, was led by Hamzah ibn \`Abdu'l‑Muttalib. The men travelled
until they reached the coast of the land of Juhaynah (a tribe), where
they encountered Abu Jahl ibn Hisham with one hundred and thirty
horsemen of the Associators. A man called Majdi ibn \`Amr al‑Juhani came
between the two groups, which then separated without any outbreak of
fighting.

The first engagement which the Messenger of Allah led took place in
Safar, the second month of the year 2/623, twelve months after he
arrived in Medina. He set out to attack the Quraysh and the tribe of
Banu Damrah but re­turned without encountering the enemy, having reached
al‑Abwa' (a mountain between Mecca and Medina). He remained in Medina
the rest of Safar and half of Rabi \`u 'l-Awwal (that is, the following
month).

During this time, he dispatched \`Ubaydah ibn al‑Harith with sixty
horsemen of the Immigrants; not even one of the Ansar was among them.
The first war standard which the Messenger of Allah raised was also in
that battle. He also met the Associators in battle at a spring called
Ahya. They exchanged arrows, the Associators being led by Abu Sufyan ibn
Harb. The Messenger of Allah also undertook another raid during the next
month of Rabi \`u 'l-Akhir. He set out seeking the men of Quraysh, going
as far as Buwat (a mountain range of Juhaynah a few dozen miles from
Medina), but he encoun­tered no hostilities.

After this, the Prophet led an engagement known as Ghazwatu'l-\`Ushayrah
(a place between Mecca and Medina) at the valley of Yanbu'. He also
sought the men of Quraysh, staying the rest of the month of Jumada'l‑Ula
and a few days of Jumada'l‑Akhirah. There he made a peace agree­ment
with the tribe of Banu Mudlij and their allies of the tribe of Banu
Damrah.

It is related. on the authority of \`Ammar ibn Yasir who said: “I was
with 'Ali, as we were companions during the raid of al‑\`Ushayrah. 'Ali
said to me: \`Would you like, O Abu Yaqzan, that we go and see the men
of Banu Mudlij working in their orchards near a spring of water
belonging to them?'

We went and observed them for a while until we were overcome by sleep.
Then we went to a but made of palm branches, in a barren spot, where we
slept. We did not wake up until the Messenger of Allah nudged us with
his foot. We sat up startled and covered with the soil of that barren
place. Seeing \`Ali thus, the Prophet called him, \`O Abu Turab (man of
the soil or dust)!' He then asked, \`Shall I tell you who is the most
miserable of humankind?' \`Yes, O Apostle of Allah', we said. He went
on: \`They are the Uhaymar of Thamud who slew the she‑camel,[^1] and he
who shall smite you, O 'Ali, here (and he placed his hand upon his head)
until this (and he placed his hand upon his beard) shall be soaked with
blood!' ”

The Messenger of Allah returned from al‑\`Ushayrah to Medina, where he
remained not more than ten nights before a man called Kurz ibn Jabir
al‑Fihri led an assault on a suburb of Medina. The Messenger of Allah
went out after him until he reached a valley called Safwan near Badr.
This was the first battle of Badr. The bearer of the Prophet's banner
was 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, and his representative in Medina was Zayd ibn
al‑Harithah. Kurz, however, escaped, and the Messenger of Allah returned
to Medina. He remained at home for the months of Jumada, Rajab and
Sha'ban. During this period he dispatched Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas with eight
men, but they encountered no hostilities.

After that the Messenger of Allah dispatched \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh to a
place called Nakhlah (on the road to Mecca), ordering him to remain
there until he returned with news of the Quraysh. But he did not command
him to fight, because it was the sacred month (that is, Rajab). He
handed him a letter and told him: “Set out with your Companions until
you have travelled a journey of two days; then open your letter and see
what it says, and execute my command.” After having travelled for two
days he opened the letter, which said: “Continue on until you arrive at
Nakhlah. Bring us back whatever news of the Quraysh may reach you.”

\`Abdullah exclaimed before his Companions, after having read the
letter, “I hear and obey! Let any one of you desiring martyrdom set out
with me.” The people accompanied him until they reached Nakhlah. A man
called \`Amr ibn al­-Hadrami passed by them with al‑Hakam ibn Kaysan,
and \`Uthman and al‑Mughirah ‑ the two sons of \`Abdullah ‑carrying
goods which they had bought in at‑Ta'if: raisins and condiments. When
the people saw them, Waqid ibn \`Abdillah came forth and stood before
them. He had pre­viously cut his hair (which was a sign of entering
into, or being released from, the state of consecration). Thus \`Amr and
his Companions said to one another: “These men are here to perform the
lesser pilgrimage; you have nothing to fear from them.”

The Companions of the Apostle of Allah consulted among themselves ‑ it
being the last day of Rajab ‑ saying: “If you kill them, you would have
killed during a sacred month. Yet if you were to let them go, they would
enter Mecca tonight and would be well protected against you.” They thus
agreed to kill them. Waqid ibn \`Abdillah shot \`Amr ibn al‑Hadrami with
an arrow and killed him. \`Uth­man ibn \`Abdillah and al‑Hakam ibn
Kaysan requested and obtained a pact of security. As for al‑Mughirah, he
escaped, and they were unable to capture him.

\`Abdullah ibn Jahsh and his Companions brought the camels and the two
captives to the Apostle of Allah. He said to them: “By Allah, I did not
command you to engage in any fighting during the sacred month! ” He then
withheld the two captives and the camel loads, and did not touch them.
The people themselves were filled with remorse. This is because they
thought that they would perish with their transgression. The people of
Quraysh also reproached the Muslims saying: “Muhammad has violated the
sanctity of the sacred month.” Allah, therefore, sent down the verse:

***They ask you concerning the sacred month, shall there be fighting in
it? . . . (Qur'an*** **2:217) .**

When this verse was revealed, the Messenger of Allah accepted the goods
and the ransom of the two captives. The Muslims said: “We can never hope
for the reward in the hereafter for this battle, but only for the
material reward of the booty.” Thus Allah sent down to console them:

***Those who have accepted faith and have migrated. . . until*** **He
says:** ***such are those who hope in Allah's mercy ( Q*****ur'an 2 218
) .**

This event took place two months before the Battle of Badr.

The Great Battle Of Badr
------------------------

The Battle of Badr took place as the Messenger of Allah learnt that Abu
Sufyan ibn Harb with a caravan of forty horsemen of the Quraysh carrying
goods from Syria was returning to Mecca. The Messenger of Allah went out
to meet them with three hundred and some men. The majority of his
Companions, however, went out on foot, having only one horse and eighty
camels. It is reported that the horse belonged to al‑Miqdad (a
well‑known Companion). Men took turns riding the few camels available.
The Messenger of Allah himself shared one camel with Marthad ibn Abi
Marthad al‑Ghanawi.

This great battle took place in the month of Ramadan 2 /624. When the
Prophet left Medina, Abu Sufyan, having heard the news, directed the
caravan to travel along the coast to Mecca to seek help from the people
of Quraysh. About one thousand men from the various clans of Quraysh
responded to his call and went out with him. They had with them two
hundred horses. They were also accompanied by young maidens singing
poems to the accompaniment of tambourines denigrating the Muslims.
al‑Akhnas ibn Shurayq ath‑Thaqafi who was an ally of the Quraysh, turned
back along the way taking with him Banu Zuhrah. So the Quraysh were left
with nine hundred and ninety fighters, among them al‑\`Abbas (the
Prophet's uncle), \`Aqil (son of Abu Talib ), and Nawfal ibn al‑Harith
ibn \`Abdi 'l‑Muttalib. These, how­ever, went out under duress. The most
honoured elders of the Quraysh were al‑\`Abbas ibn \`Abdi'l-Muttalib,
\`Utbah ibn Rabi'ah, Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy, Abu'l-Bakhtari ibn Hisham,
Umayyah ibn Khalaf, Hakim ibn Hizam, an‑Nadr ibn al‑Harith ibn Kaladah,
Abu Jahl ibn Hisham and Suhayl ibn \`Amr.

When the Prophet reached Badr, a well so called after a man of the tribe
of Ghifar by that name, he learnt of the escape of the caravan and the
coming of the army of Quraysh. He thus consulted with his Companions as
to whether they should encounter them or turn back, and they all said,
“We leave the decision to you. If you so wish, we shall confront the
people! ” He confronted the people of Quraysh at the well of Badr on the
seventeenth of Ramadan. The Apostle raised a white standard which was
carried by Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr. His banner was entrusted to \`Ali.

Allah strengthened the Muslims with five thousand angels. Moreover, He
made the Muslims look many more than their actual number to the
rejecters of faith, and diminished the number of the Associators in the
eyes of the people of faith. This He did in order that they might not
lose heart. The Messenger of Allah took a handful of dust and threw it
at them exclaiming: “Let these faces be disgraced!” There was not one
among them but that he was preoccupied with rubbing his eyes.

Allah caused approximately seventy of the Associators to be slain and
the same number to be captured. Among these were al‑\`Abbas ibn \`Abdu
'l‑Muttalib, \`Aqil ibn Abi Talib and Nawfal ibn al‑Harith, all of whom
accepted Islam. Two others \`Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt and an‑Nadr ibn
al‑Harith, the Mess­enger of Allah had slain in a nearby spot called
as‑Safra'. He said to al‑\`Abbas, “Ransom yourself, your two nephews
\`Aqil and Nawfal, your ally \`Utbah ibn \`Amr and the man of the tribe
of al‑Harith ibn Fihr, for you are a man of great wealth. al ‑\`Abbas
answered, “I was a Muslim, but the people coerced me! ” The Prophet
answered: “Allah knows best your Islam; if it were true, He shall reward
you for it. As for your mani­fest action, it was against us.” al
‑\`Abbas retorted: “I have no wealth! ”

The Prophet asked, “Where is the wealth which you entrusted to Umm
al‑Fadl in Mecca, when no one was with you? You then said to her, \`If I
shall be slain on this journey, this wealth shall be given to my sons
al‑Fadl, \`Abdullah and Qutham.' ” al‑\`Abbas exclaimed with amaze­ment:
“O Apostle of Allah, I now know that you are indeed the Messenger of
Allah ! For this is something which no one else besides me and Umm
al‑Fadl knew! Calculate then, O Apostle of Allah, the amount of wealth
which falls to you as booty from me. I had with me twenty ounces (of
precious metal).” The Messenger of Allah said: “May that which Allah has
granted us through you be never exhausted!” al ‑\`Abbas then ransomed
himself with one hundred ounces and each of the others with forty.

'Ali slew among the Associators in the Battle of Badr al‑Walid ibn
\`Utbah ibn Rabi\`ah, who was a brave warrior. He also killed al‑\`As
ibn Said ibn al‑\`As ibn Umayyah, the father of Said ibn al‑\`As and
Tu'aymah ibn \`Adiyy ibn Nawfal, whom he pierced with a spear. As he did
so, \`Ali exclaimed: “By Allah, this man shall never contend with us
concerning Allah after today!”

'Ali also killed Nawfal ibn Khuwaylid, who before the *hijrah* had tied
Abu Bakr and Talhah together with a rope and tortured them for a whole
day. Nawfal was the paternal uncle of az‑Zubayr ibn al­\`Awwam (the
well‑known Companion and relative of the Prophet). When the fighting
abated, the Prophet rose and exclaimed: “Praise be to Allah Who answered
my prayers concerning him.”  
 Jabir (ibn \`Abdillah al‑Ansari, a notable Companion and supporter of
\`Ali and his descendants) related on the auth­ority of \`Ali that he
said: “I marvelled at the bravery of the people on the day of Badr. No
sooner had I slain al‑Walid ibn \`Utbah then Hanzalah ibn Abi Sufyan
rushed at me. As he drew close to me, I struck him with my sword so that
his eyes ran down on his face and he fell dead on the ground. The people
who were with Hanzalah were also killed. They were Zam'ah ibn al‑Aswad,
al‑Harith ibn Zam'ah, \`Umayr ibn \`Uthman, Ka'b ibn Taym, the uncle of
Talhah ibn \`Ubay­dillah, and \`Uthman and Malik, who were the brothers
of Talhah. They had with them thirty‑six men.”

Hamzah ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttalib killed Shaybah ibn Rabi \`ah ibn \`Abd
Shams and al‑Aswad ibn \`Abd al‑Aswad al‑Makh­zumi. \`Amr ibn al‑Jamuh
killed Abu Jahl ibn Hisham. He struck him with his sword on his leg and
severed it. Then \`Abdullah ibn Mas'ud came and slew him with his sword,
and carried his head to the Apostle of Allah, saying: “I found him
breathing his last, and I recognized him. I then placed my foot on his
neck, and said: \`Has Allah not now disgraced you, O enemy of Allah?' He
answered: \`You little shepherd! You have now reached high status.' ”
Ibn Mas'ud continued: “I then cut off his head and brought it to the
Messenger of Allah and said: \`This is the head of the enemy of Allah,
Abu Jahl.' ” Also, \`Ammar ibn Yasir killed Umay­yah ibn Khalaf.

The Messenger of Allah ordered that those who were slain of the Quraysh
be thrown in the well of Badr. He then stood over them and called out to
them one by one by their names and the names of their fathers. He then
exclaimed: “We have indeed found what our Lord had promised us to be
true! Have you too found what your Lord had promised you to be true? ”
The Prophet then said to his Companions: “They hear as you hear, but
they have been prevented from uttering a response.”  
 Fourteen men among the Muslims were martyred in the Battle of Badr.
Among them were \`Ubaydah ibn al‑Harith ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttalib,
Dhu'sh‑Shimalayn \`Amr ibn Nadlah, the ally of Banu Zuhrah, Mihja\` (ibn
Salih) (The client of \`Umar (ibn al‑Khattab) was also killed by an
arrow; he was the first martyr of the Muslims. *(ed.)*), \`Umayr ibn Abi
Waqas and Safwan ibn Abi 'l-Bayda'. All these were of the Immigrants;
the rest were of the Ansar.

The Messenger of Allah returned to Medina where he rested only for seven
nights before he himself led a detach­ment against the tribe of Banu
Sulaym. When he arrived at one of their water springs called al‑Kudr, he
remained for three nights before returning to Medina. This mission met
with no resistance.

The Prophet remained in Medina the rest of Shawwal and Dhu'l-Qi'dah (the
tenth and eleventh month, which are sacred months during which no
fighting is allowed). During this respite, the Prophet ransomed most of
the Muslims captured by the men of Quraysh during the Battle of Badr.  
 The next military engagement of the Muslims with the people of Quraysh
was known as the Battle of Suwayq. This was provoked by Abu Sufyan who
had vowed after the defeat of Badr that he would never perform the
ritual wash­ing (after sexual intercourse) until he had waged war
against Muhammad.

He therefore set out with a hundred horsemen of the Quraysh in order to
fulfill his vow. When he was a short distance from Medina, he went by
night to the quarter of the tribe of Banu 'n‑Nadir, and knocked at the
door of Huyayy ibn Akhtab, who refused to let him in. He thus left him
and went to Sallam ibn Mishkam, who was the chief of Banu'n‑Nadir. He
requested and was granted permission to enter, and thus went in and
spoke secretly to him.

Abu Sufyan returned next morning to his men and sent a few men as
raiders to Medina. They came to a spot called al‑\`Arid, where they came
upon a man of the Ansar and his ally, both of whom they killed, and then
ran away. The men of Medina also vowed revenge. The Messenger of Allah
went out after them until he reached Qarqaratu'l-Kudr near the quarter
of the tribe of Sulaym, about eight miles from Medina. The Prophet,
however, returned without overtaking Abu Sufyan. The Muslims found some
provisions which Abu Sufyan and his men had left on the road in order
that they might lighten their load and thus run more swiftly to safety.
The Muslims asked the Apostle of Allah when they returned to Medina: “O
Apostle of Allah, do we deserve to consider this a battle (that is, an
act of *jihad* in Allah's way)?” “Yes”, he replied.

The Raid of Dhu Amarr
---------------------

This was followed by the raid of Dhu Amarr, which the Prophet undertook
after remaining in Medina for the months of Dhu 'l-Hijjah and Muharram
(the last and first months of the Muslim calendar, which are also sacred
months). He set out on this mission after hearing that a group of men of
the tribe of Ghatafan had assembled to launch a raid against the suburbs
of Medina. They were led by a man called Du'thur ibn al‑Harith ibn
Muharib. The Prophet set out with four hundred and fifty men with a
number of horses. But these Bedouins fled before him to neighbouring
moun­tain peaks. The Prophet then encamped with his men in the spot of
Dhu Amarr. It rained heavily while they were in that place. The
Messenger of Allah went out to answer the call of nature across the
valley from the camp. He took off his clothes and hung them on a tree to
dry out, having been soaked by the rain. He lay down under the tree,
while the Bedouins watched intently his every movement.

One of the men said to Du'thur, who was their chief and the bravest man
among them: “See now, Muhammad has given you control! He has separated
himself from his Companions, so that if he were to cry out for help,
they would not hear him. Go and kill him!” He thus chose a sharp sword
and hastened until he stood at the head of the Apostle of Allah with his
sword outstretched. He then exclaimed: “O Muham­mad, who shall protect
you against me today?” “Allah”, he answered. Gabriel struck the man in
the chest so that he fell back, dropping the sword from his hand. The
Messenger of Allah took up the sword and, standing at the man's head,
asked: “Who shall protect you against me now?” The Bedouin replied: “No
one! But I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, and that
Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah! By Allah, I shall never again join any
group against you! ” The Messenger of Allah returned his sword to him.
The man turned to go, but then turned back and said: “By Allah, you are
a better man than me!” The Messenger of Allah replied: “I am indeed
worthy of that.”

When the man returned to his people, they questioned him: “Where is all
your talk now ‑ he was unprotected before you, and you had a sword in
your hand!” He replied: “By Allah, this was the case! But I saw a bright
and tall man who struck me in the chest, and I fell flat on my back. I
knew that he was an angel. Thus I bore witness that Muhammad is the
Apostle of Allah ! By Allah, I shall never add to the number of any
group that would assemble against him.” The man then began to invite his
own people to Islam. Then Allah sent down the verse:

**O you** ***who have faith, remember the bounty of Allah towards you,
when some people intended to stretch out their hands against you; yet He
restrained their hands from harming you*** **(Qur'an 5 :111).**

The Raid Of Al‑Qaradah
----------------------

This was followed by the raid of al‑Qaradah. The Messen­ger of Allah
sent Zayd ibn al‑Harithah with a detachment, six months after his return
to Medina from Badr. At the well called al‑Qaradah, Zayd and his men
came upon a caravan of the Quraysh led by Abu Sufyan, who had much
silver. After the Battle of Badr, the Quraysh (of Mecca) did not feel
safe taking their usual route to Syria. They therefore travelled the
Iraq road, having hired as a guide a man of the tribe of Bakr ibn Wail
called Furat ibn Hayyan. Zayd ibn al‑Harithah was able to capture the
caravan, but the men eluded him and escaped. According to the report of
al‑Waqidi,[^2] the caravan was led by Safwan ibn Umayyah. The Muslims
captured one or two men, whom they brought with the caravan to the
Messenger of Allah. Furat was himself a captive. But he ac­cepted Islam,
and was thus spared.

The reprisal against the tribe of Banu Qaynuqa\` for this action took
place on Saturday, in mid‑Shawwal, twenty months after the Migration.
The Messenger of Allah assem­bled the people of the tribe in their
market and warned them saying: “Beware lest Allah afflict you with the
same punishments as those with which He afflicted the people of Quraysh!
Enter into Islam, for you know well the grace with which Allah has
favored me, and you recognize my characteristics, which are in your
scriptures.” They answered: “O Muhammad, be not deceived by the fact
that you met your own people in battle and defeated them. Yet if we were
to wage war against you, you would, by Allah, know that we are not like
them! ” They nearly came to blows. It was concerning the people of
Qaynuqa\` that the verse:

***There was a sign for*** **you (the Muslims)** ***in the two groups
which encountered one another: the one fighting in the way of Allah, the
other rejecting faith . . . (Qur'an*****. 3:13) , was sent down.**

It is reported that the Messenger of Allah besieged them for six days
until finally they surrendered to him. \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy came to him
and interceded on their behalf saying: “O Apostle of Allah, these are my
allies and clients who have defended me against the black and the red
(that is, against all kinds of people). They were three hundred armoured
soldiers and four hundred without armour. Would you now cut them down
all in one morning? By Allah, I can then find no security; rather I
dread the turns of for­tunes!” The people of Banu Qaynuqa\` were allies
of the Khazraj tribe only, and not of the Aws. \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy
persisted in his entreaties until the Prophet relented and granted him
their blood. But seeing the humiliation which they had suffered, the
people of Banu Qaynuqa\` left Medina altogether and settled in Adhri'at
in Syria. Then Allah sent down concerning \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and
others of the Khazraj tribe:

**O you** ***who have faith, take not the Jews or the Christians as
patrons . . . (Qur'an*****.** ***5 : 51‑ 52) .***

The Battle Of Uhud
------------------

Then the Battle of Uhud followed, a year after that of Badr. The leader
of the Associators in that battle was Abu Sufyan ibn Harb. The
Companions of the Apostle of Allah were on that day seven hundred and
the Associators numbered two thousand.

The Messenger of Allah set out for the battle after con­sulting with his
Companions. Although his own opinion was that the men should engage in
street fighting, while those who were not strong enough for fighting
should shoot arrows from the rooftops, yet they insisted on going out to
meet the Quraysh in the battle. But on the way they changed their minds
and asked to turn back. He refused saying: It is not fit for a prophet
to turn back once he has decided to set out to engage a group in the
battle.”

They were actually a thousand men. On the way, however, \`Abdullah ibn
Ubayy deserted with a third of the men. They said in justification of
their decision, “By Allah, we know not for what are we going to kill
ourselves, while the enemy are his own people! ” The men of Banu
Harithah and Banu Salmah likewise were at the point of deserting.
However, Allah, be He exalted, restrained them, as He says:

***When two groups of you had nearly lost heart; yet Allah was their
Master . . .*** **( Qur'an. 3 :123 ) .**

The Messenger of Allah woke up next morning ready for fighting. He
charged 'Ali with the banner of the Immigrants, and that of the Ansar,
Sa'd ibn \`Ubadah. The Messenger of Allah joined the banner of the
Ansar. He then went to inspect the archers, who were fifty men led by
\`Abdullah ibn Jubayr. He admonished them and reminded them of their
duty saying: “Fear Allah and be steadfast. Even if you see us snatched
by wild birds, do not leave your spot until I send you a word.” The
Prophet then stood at the top c: the valley. At first the Associators
were clearly defeated, so that the Muslims slew them with the sword.

The archers under the leadership of \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr, seeing this,
cried out, \`The booty! Your people have van­quished the enemy; what are
you waiting for!” \`Abdullah said to them, “Have you forgotten the words
of the Messen­ger of Allah? As for me, I shall never abandon the spot
which the Apostle of Allah assigned to me.” But they disregarded his
command and disobeyed him, when they saw what they had desired. They
thus hastened to the spoils of war. Khalid ibn al‑Walid, who lay in
ambush with other men of the Associators, rushed out at them, and Khalid
came to \`Abdullah and killed him.

The Muslims were put to the sword as men rushed at them from behind.
Satan cried out, “Muhammad has been slain!” In the meantime, the
Messenger of Allah called out to them as they turned back, “O people, I
am the Apostle of Allah! Allah has promised me victory; why are you
fleeing?” They heard the voice, but did not turn around. The outcry of
Satan went on until it was heard in the houses of‑Medina. Thus Fatimah
raised the wail; nor was there any Hashimite or Qurayshite woman but
that she placed her hand upon her head, wailing.

It is related on the authority of the sixth lmam Ja'far as‑Sadiq that as
people deserted the Apostle of Allah, he was filled with rage. Whenever
he became angry, sweat dripped from his face and forehead like pearls.
He looked around, and there was \`Ali by his side. He asked him: “Why
did you not run to the sons of your father?” 'Ali answered: “O Apostle
of Allah, should I reject faith after I have become a Muslim! Rather, I
shall stay with you and endure your fate.” “If it be so”, the Prophet
said, “then spare me the evil of these men! ” 'Ali rushed out at them,
and as he struck the first man he encountered, Gabriel exclaimed: “This
‑is indeed true consolation, O Muhammad! ” “He is of me, and I am of
him”, said the Apostle of Allah. Gabriel added ” I too am of you.”  
 A group of men then turned to the Messenger of Allah and gathered
around him. Seventy men of the Muslims were slain. Of these, four were
of the Immigrants: Hamzah ibn \`Abdi 'l-Muttalib, \`Abdullah ibn Jahsh,
Mus'ab ibn \`Umayr and Shammas ibn \`Uthman ibn ash‑Sharid; the rest
were of the Ansar.

It is reported that at that time Ubayy ibn Khalaf came on his horse to
the battlefield saying: “So this is the son of Abu Kabshah (meaning the
Prophet)! Turn back with your own misdeeds! May you never be saved, even
if you are spared (this time).” The Messenger of Allah was standing
between al‑Harith ibn as‑Simmah and Sahl ibn Hunayf, leaning upon them.
Ubayy rushed to attack him, but Mus\`ab ibn \`Umayr shielded him with
his body. Ubayy thus stabbed Mus'ab and killed him. The Messenger of
Allah then took a lance which was in the hand of Sahl ibn Hunayf and
struck Ubayy with it above the collar of his armour. Ubayy fell over his
horse embracing it, and ran to his camp lowing like a bull.

Abu Sufyan said to him: “Woe to you, what is it that frightens you? It
is only a scratch; it is nothing! ” He answered: “Woe to you O son of
Harb, do you know who stabbed me? It was Muhammad who stabbed me! He
said to me in Mecca, \`I shall kill you'. I thus knew that he would be
the one to kill me. By Allah, if all the people of the Hijaz were to
suffer what I am suffering, it would finish them all! ” The accursed man
continued to moan until he went to the Fire.

It is reported in the book of Aban ibn \`Uthman[^3] that when Fatimah
and Safiyyah (the Prophet's paternal aunt) came to the Messenger of
Allah, he said to \`All, “As for my aunt, keep her away from me, but let
Fatimah come.” When Fatimah came close to the Apostle of Allah and saw
that he had been wounded in the face, and that blood was gushing out of
his mouth, she began to wipe away the blood, weeping and saying: “May
Allah's wrath rage against those who caused the face of the Messenger of
Allah to bleed!” The Messenger of Allah took in his hand the blood that
ran down his face and threw it up in the air, and not one drop returned
to earth. The sixth Imam as‑Sadiq is said to have declared: “By Allah,
if one drop of that blood had come down to the ground, severe punishment
would have come down to earth.”

Aban ibn \`Uthman said: “This was told to me on his authority by
as‑Sabbah ibn Suyyabah. I asked him, “Were his upper interior teeth
broken, as these people claim?' He replied: \`No, by Allah, Allah always
protected him from all disfigurement. It was rather that he was wounded
in the face.' I asked: \`What about the cave on Mount Uhud to which they
claim that the Apostle of Allah fled?' He answered: \`By Allah, he did
not move from his spot.' ”

Someone said to the Prophet, “Would you not invoke Allah against them?”
He said: “O Allah, guide my people aright, for they do not know.” Ibn
Qami'ah threw a stone at the Messenger of Allah which hit him on the
palm so that the sword fell from his hand. The man exclaimed: “Take it
from me, for I am the son of Qami'ah ! ” The Messenger of Allah replied:
“May Allah humiliate and bring you low!” \`Utbah ibn Abi Waqqas struck
the Prophet with a sword so that blood gushed out of his mouth, and
\`Abdullah ibn Shihab threw a stone at him, hitting him on the wrist. No
one of these died a natural death. As for Ibn Qami'ah, a ram came to him
while he was sleeping in Najd and struck its horns in his stomach. The
man cried out with pain until the ram penetrated him with its horns to
the neck.

Wahshi (the man who killed Hamzah) reported: “Jubayr ibn Mut'im, whose
slave I was, said to me, \`All you know that \`Ali killed my uncle
Tu'aymah in the Battle of Badr. If you therefore kill Muhammad,
Muhammad's uncle, or Muhammad's cousin, you shall be free.' I thus went
with the army of Quraysh to Uhud with a lance, only seeking freedom. I
wished for nothing else, nor did I wish to kill Muhammad. I said to
myself, \`Perhaps I will meet with 'Ali or Hamzah at whom I would throw
my lance', I never missed in throwing lances, an art I learnt in
Abyssinia. Hamzah used to rush out on his attacks, after which he would
return to his spot.” Abu \`Abdillah (the sixth Imam) reported that
Wahshi struck Hamzah in the chest. He fell, and the men rushed at him
and killed him. Wahshi went to Hamzah and splitting his stomach, took
his liver and ran with it to Hind daughter of \`Utbah (and wife of Abu
Sufyan), who took it and began to chew it. But the flesh became as hard
as a knee bone, so that she spat it out.

It is reported that al‑Halls ibn \`Alqamah saw Abu Sufyan on a horse
stabbing Hamzah's corpse in the mouth with a spear. al‑Halls exclaimed:
“O people of Ban& Kinanah, look at this man who claims to be the chief
of Quraysh ‑ look at what he is doing to his cousin who has become dead
flesh!” Abu Sufyan repeated as he did so, “Taste death, you rebel! ” He
then said to al‑Hails: “You are right; it is a grave fault which I have
committed. Keep it a secret.”

Abu Sufyan stood up and called out to some of the Muslims: “Is Ibn Abi
Kabshah (that is, the Prophet) still alive? As for ( \`Ail) ibn Abi
Talib, we see him still standing in his spot.” 'Ali replied: “Yes, by
Him Who sent him with the truth, he hears your words!” Abu Sufyan said:
“In this battle with you, some mutilation has taken place. By Allah, I
neither ordered it nor did I prevent it. Our next appointment with you
shall be the time of Badr, next year.” The Messenger of Allah said to
\`Ali, “Say yes.” “Yes,” \`Ali repeated. Abu Sufyan then said to \`Ali:
“Ibn Qami'ah told me that he had killed Muhammad. But you are more
truth­ful and righteous in my sight.” He then went back to his
Companions and said: “Take the night as your camel (that is, travel
without stopping) and depart.”

The Messenger of Allah then called \`Ali and said to him, “Follow them.
See where they are going. If you see them riding their horses and
leading the camels, it means that they will go to Medina. But if they
are riding their camels and leading the horses, that means that they are
going to Mecca.” It is also reported that the Prophet sent Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas, who returned and said: “I saw the horses beating around with
their tails tied behind and being led by camels, and the men all riding
on camels” (i.e., readying for travel and not for war). The Muslims were
glad to see their enemies gone, and scattered about to look for their
dead.

Every corpse was mutilated except that of Hanzalah ibn Abi \`Amir whose
father was with the Associators; thus he was spared for him. They found
Hamzah with his stomach split open, his nose and ears cut off and his
liver taken away. When the Messenger of Allah saw him in this condition,
he was choked with tears and said: “I shall mutilate seventy men of
Quraysh ! ” But Allah sent down:

**If you** ***punish, then punish in the same manner as you were
punished*** **(Qur'an. 16:126) .**

The Prophet then said: “I would rather be patient.” He then asked: “Who
is that man whom the angels are washing on the side of the mountain?”
They answered: “Here is his wife”, and she said: “He left the house
impure through sexual intercourse.” This was Hanzalah ibn Abi \`Amir,
who was known thereafter as \`the washed one'.

Aban reported further on the authority of Abu Ja'far (the fifth Imam,
Muhammad al‑Baqir ‑ a. s.) who said: “A man called Quzman ibn al‑Harith
al‑\`Absi (the Hypocrite concerning whom the Messenger of Allah said,
\`Allah shall strengthen this religion with a reprobate man') was
men­tioned to the Apostle of Allah, who said, \`He is of the people of
the Fire.' Someone came to the Messenger of Allah and told him that
Quzman was martyred. He observed: \`Allah does whatever He wills.'
Again, someone came and told him that Quzman had killed himself. The
Prophet exclaimed: \`I bear witness that I am the Apostle of Allah.' ”

It is reported that Quzman fought valiantly and killed six or seven of
the Associators. When he was finally incapaci­tated by his wounds, he
was carried to the quarter of the tribe of Zafar. The Muslims said to
him: “Be of good cheer, O Quzman for you have done well today! ” He
replied: “Of what do you bring me such glad tidings? By Allah I did not
fight except for the sake of my people's noble genealogies; had it not
been for this, I would have never fought! ” Thus, when his wounds had
become too painful to bear, he took a sharp arrow from his quiver with
which he killed himself.

It is also reported that a woman of the Banu'n‑Najjar whose father,
husband and brother were killed with the Apostle of Allah, approached
the Messenger of Allah while the Muslims stood all around him. She asked
a man: “Can I greet the Messenger of Allah and gaze upon him?” “Yes”, he
answered. The people made room for her, and she came close to him and
said: “Every calamity is light since you have returned safe and sound;”
having said this, she went away.

After burying the dead, the Messenger returned to Medina. As he passed
the quarters of the \`Abdu'l-Ashhal and Zafar tribes, he heard the women
mourning their dead. The eyes of the Messenger of Allah were filled with
tears. He wept saying: “But there are no women mourning for Hamzah
today! ” When Sa'd ibn Mu'adh and Usayd ibn Hudayr heard this, they
said: “Let no woman mourn over her loved one until Fatimah comes and
aids her.” Thus when the Messenger of Allah heard the wail raised for
Hamzah, as he stood by Fatimah at the door of the Mosque he addressed
the women saying: “Return, may Allah have mercy upon you. You have
indeed consoled us with your grief.”

The Battle Of Hamra'u'l-Asad
----------------------------

The Battle of hamra'u'l‑Asad (a place about eight miles distance from
Medina) took place immediately after that of Uhud. Aban ibn \`Uthman
reported that the day after the Battle of Uhud, the Messenger of Allah
called upon the Muslims to prepare for battle. They all responded, even
though they had suffered much pain and many wounds in the previous
battle. 'Ali preceded him with the banner of the Immigrants until they
reached Hamra'u'l-Asad. But they all returned to Medina without
fighting. These were :

***Those who answered the call of Allah after they had been afflicted
with wounds*** **(Qur'an. 3:172) .**

Abu Sufyan departed and came to a place called ar­-Rawhd', where he
remained intending to return and again attack the Messenger of Allah. He
said: “Now that we have killed their great warriors, if we return we
shall be able to exterminate them!” He met a man called Ma'bad
al‑Khuza'i, whom he asked: “What news have you, O Ma'bad?” He answered:
“By Allah, I left Muhammad and his people burning with the passion of
war against you! 'Ali ibn Abi Talib has come leading the men. All those
who deserted him before have now rejoined his forces. This has inspired
me to compose some verses.” Abu Sufyan asked: “What did you recite?” “I
recited: ”, Ma'bad answered.

*My mount came, nigh collapsing from all the clamor,*  
*When the ground was covered with flocks of warring vultures.*  
*You shall fight with noble lions, not cowards,*

[^1]: See Qur'an 7:73 ‑ 78; .54:23 ‑ 31 and 91:11‑15.

[^2]: Al‑Waqidi, Muhammad ibn \`Umar ibn Waqid, Kitabu 'l-Maghazi, ed.
B. Marsten Jones, 3 vols. (London: Oxford University Press, 1966), vol.
1, pp. 197‑8.

[^3]: Aban ibn \`Uthman (commonly known as “al‑Ahmar”), was a
traditionist contemporary with the sixth and seventh Imams and resident
in Kufah and Basrah. See as‑Sayyid Abu 'l-Qasim al‑Musawi al‑Khui,
Mu'jam Rijali 'l-Hadith, 23 vols., 3rd ed. (Beirut, 1403/1983), vol. 1,
pp. 157 ‑ 64; al‑A'lam, 10 vols. 3rd ed. (Beirut, 1389/1969), vol. 1, p.
21.


