Background Information
======================

Greek philosophy was the major formative influence on the later
philosophical traditions of Judaism, Islam, and Christianity. In all
three, the theories of the Greeks, particularly Plato and Aristotle,
were employed to clarify and develop the basic beliefs of the religious
traditions.

In the Islamic tradition the starting point was the work of Plato and
Aristotle. The 9th-century Neoplatonist al- Kindi was followed by
al-Farabi, who drew on both Plato and Aristotle to create a universal
Islamic philosophy.

The most important of the medieval Muslim philosophers, however, was
Avicenna (ibn Sina). Starting from the distinction between essence and
existence, Avicenna developed a metaphysics in which God, the necessary
being, is the source of created nature through emanation. Both his
metaphysics and his intuitionist theory of knowledge were influential in
the later Middle Ages as well as in the later history of Islamic
thought.

The philosophical tradition did not go unchallenged, however. The
11th-century theologian and mystic al-Ghazali mounted a critique of
philosophy, specifically Avicenna's, that is rich in argument and
insight. Al-Ghazali's Incoherence of the Philosophers provoked a
response by Averroes ibn Rushd entitled the Incoherence of the
Incoherence, in which al-Ghazali's arguments are countered point for
point. Averroes was best known, however, as an interpreter of Aristotle
and excited great influence on all subsequent thinkers in the
Aristotelian tradition.

In the later Middle Ages the historian and philosopher Ibn Khaldun
produced a trenchant critique of culture, and the elaboration of
metaphysics and epistemology was carried on in the theosophical schools
of Islamic mysticism.


**Introduction**

Relative to Western philosophy, the field of Islamic philosophy has
remained largely dormant for the past few hundred years. The rigor of
intellectual thought in Islam has been lost and contemporary Muslim
thinkers are faced with the enormous challenge of reinterpreting and
integrating the tremendous intellectual achievements of the West with
that of earlier Islamic thinkers and the Quran (the Muslim holy book).

This endeavor is of crucial importance to any new Islamic intellectual
renaissance. With the rise of Western science and philosophy, serious
new challenges have been posed to the very fundamental principles of
epistemology, metaphysics, and ethics, espoused by the classical
thinkers of Islam. These issues need to be addressed, as Muhammad Iqbal,
perhaps the first modern Muslim philosopher to deal with these problems
in any comprehensive manner, writes:

With the reawakening of Islam, therefore, it is necessary to examine,
in an independent spirit, what Europe has thought and how far the
conclusions reached by her can help us in the revision and if necessary,
reconstruction, of theological thought in Islam. [Iqbal, p. 6]

The current undertaking will by no means meet the challenge put forth
by Iqbal. It will, however, attempt to at least lay out some of the
issues in Islamic epistemology, metaphysics and philosophy of religion.
The difficulty of studies in this field, is compounded by the fact that
there is very little academic material available on Islamic philosophy,
and much of it remains to be translated from their original languages.

Even if translated, many of the issues in modern philosophy have
changed over time and it is not clear how to relate the medieval debates
with the modern ones. In short, there is a significant period of
intellectual lapse on the Islamic side, between the middle ages and
today.

Despite these problems, there is a need to present intellectual thought
in Islam in an easy to understand yet rigorous manner, that maybe
contribute towards enhancing further studies between western and Islamic
philosophy. Both traditions have much to gain from each other.

It is important to understand the basic framework and essentials tools
used by Islamic philosophers in order to critique and build upon their
works. Modern western philosophy has already dismissed many of the
claims of medieval thinkers. It is now worth evaluating if the earlier
claims are worth of a reexamination.

It is peculiar that many of the modern western arguments have close
analogues in the earlier Islamic thinkers. Some have suggested that
perhaps, this shows the influence of Islamic thought on European
thought.

Many of the classic works of Islamic philosophy were translated into
Latin from Arabic at the beginning of the European renaissance. These
along with translated Greek manuscripts greatly impacted the development
of western thought. This influence is best seen in the works of the
likes of, Descartes and Aquinas. In any case, I think, the material is
best viewed as a progression of thought from the Greeks onto the Muslims
and then to Europe, and not as two different and opposed points of
view.

There are three major, purely rational, arguments for the existence of
God that have had a significant influence on the history of philosophy
of religion. These are namely, the Cosmological, Teleological and
Ontological arguments. Other arguments put forth for the existence of
God are the arguments from morality and probability.

This paper will examine the three major arguments as they are presented
in modern philosophy and compare them with arguments for the existence
of God presented by ancient and modern Islamic philosophers. It will
also attempt to clarify the role of philosophy in Islamic thought, and
how Muslim philosophers have attempted to reconcile faith and reason.

The main argument against the existence of God, has been the problem of
evil. This has posed many problems to the theist, and Islamic philosophy
is only beginning to tackle the problem in western terms. Another stream
of arguments for God's existence, recently proposed in contemporary
western philosophy are the proofs from religious experience. This is a
theme also present in Islamic philosophy and the second part of this
project will examine this issue.


**Philosophy and Islam**

Philosophy is concerned with the fundamental questions about nature and
reality. Al-Kindi called philosophy the most exalted science, since it
dealt with issues which are universal. Al-Kindi (Alkindus, 800 &endash;
873 CE) is recognized as the first Arab or Muslim philosopher. He
defines philosophy as the love of wisdom, from the Greek words philo
(friend) and sophia (wisdom) [Kindi, pp.18-19].

Ibn Rushd (Averroes) goes a step further and states that the Quran
makes the study of philosophy obligatory upon all believers. Ibn Rushd
(Averroes, 1128 &endash; 1198 CE) is considered a major Aristotelian
Muslim and Spanish philosopher. He states that philosophy is nothing
more than the study of beings and reflection upon them.

The Quran encourages mankind to "Reflect, you have vision." At another
place it states, "have they not studied the kingdom of the heavens and
the earth and whatever things God has created?" Here God is urging the
readers to study the world and how and why objects and beings exist. Ibn
Rushd concludes that God requires man to try to obtain demonstrative
knowledge of His existence. But prior to having demonstrative knowledge,
Man must be able to have dialectical, theoretical and logical knowledge.
That is for man to learn he must know the basis of reasoning. Hence,
philosophy is not only necessary but also commanded by the divine [Ibn
Rusd, pp. 44-46].

Al-Ghazzali finds serious problems with the philosophers of his era. He
writes, "they have abandoned all the religious duties of Islam imposes
on its followers." He thinks that the kind of reasoning used by
philosophers would never result in the proof of the existence of God.
Al-Ghazzali (Algazel, 1058 &endash; 1111 CE) was an extremely
influential orthodox Muslim thinker who rebuffed many of the claims of
the 'philosophers' who claimed they could proof God by reason alone.

Ibn Rushd admits that philosophy may have its harms as a discipline,
but these harms are no greater than those resulting from the study of
medicine or law. Since, the study of philosophy is commanded by God
Himself, it is obligatory, although it is possible to misuse the science
for other purposes [Ibn Rushd. pp. 47].

As Al-Kindi and most Muslim philosophers agree philosophy cannot reach
as far as revelation can. Hence, the basis of our actions should be
based upon Islam, whereas philosophy ought to be considered as an
independent discipline. It should also be noted that the thrust of
Ghazzali's argument is not against philosophy, but rather its use.

His main concern is that the philosophers are drawing conclusions from
their 'arguments' that are not valid. Muhammad Iqbal sees no
contradiction between faith and reason. Iqbal (1877-1938 CE) in this
century is considered the poet-philosopher of Islam,

his works have been extremely influential in the revival of Islamic
thought. He was born in (what is now) Pakistan but studied in Britain
and Germany, thus providing insight into both philosophical traditions.
He thinks that both thought and intuition arise from the same source and
don't oppose each other, but rather are complimentary.

Reason aims at understanding the physical world and existence, whereas
religious experience aims at transcending this world and achieving the
knowledge of the ultimate. Iqbal then thinks that it is necessary for
Muslims to engage themselves in the study and science of philosophy in
order to redefine Islamic culture, which is now confronted with a more
advanced western civilization. If Muslim thinkers fail in this
challenge, then Muslim thought may be absorbed by Western philosophy, as
the two cultures begin to integrate further.

This debate is not uniquely Islamic, similar debates have persisted in
Christian thought as well. While religious tensions in Europe were
hindering analytical thought, it was flourishing in Muslim lands. As the
Churches influenced decreased a more dynamic movement emerged in Europe
brining with it a whole new worldview moving towards reason and away
from dogma.

Today many Christian theologians also use philosophy to justify their
positions, as is similar among certain Muslim groups. The irritating
problem, however, is to uphold the conclusion of these theists on purely
philosophical grounds, in the face of a challenge from radical
skepticism.


**Analytical Arguments**

**Cosmological Arguments**

The cosmological argument was first introduced by Aristotle and later
refined in western Europe by the celebrated Christian theologian, Thomas
Aquinas (d.1274 CE). In the Islamic tradition, it was adopted by
Al-Kindi, and Ibn Rushd (Averroes). The argument has several forms, the
basic first-cause argument runs as follows. Every event must have a
cause, and each cause must in turn have its own cause, and so forth.
Hence, there must either be an infinite regress of causes or there must
be a starting point or first cause. Aquinas and Al-Kindi reject the
notion of an infinite regress and insist that there must be a first
cause, and the first cause must be God, the only uncaused being.

Another form of this argument is based on the concept of a prime-mover.
This is the Aristotelian form of the argument also propounded by
Averroes. The premise being that, every motion must be caused by another
motion, and the earlier motion must in turn be a result of another
motion and so on. The conclusion thus follows that there must be an
initial prime-mover, a mover that could cause motion without any other
mover.

Two kinds of Islamic perspectives may be considered with regard to the
cosmological argument. A positive Aristotelian response strongly
supporting the argument and a negative response which is quite critical
of it. Among the Aristotelian thinkers are Al-Kindi, and Averroes.
Al-Ghazzali and Iqbal maybe seen as being in opposition to this sort of
an argument.

Al-Kindi is one of the many major and first Islamic philosophers who
attempt to introduce an argument for the existence of God based upon
purely empirical premises. In fact, his chief contribution is the
cosmological argument (dalil al-huduth) for the existence of God, in his
On First Philosophy [Nasr, p. 168]. He presents four different versions
of this argument, all are variation of the cosmological argument which
require a cause.

One of the arguments revolves around the principle of determination
(tarjjih), that is prior to the existence of the universe it was equally
likely for it to exist or not to exist. The fact that it exists, implies
that it required a determining principle which would cause its existence
to prevail over nonexistence. This principle of determination is God
[Kindi, p. 58].

This is similar to Leibniz's principle of sufficient reason [Russell,
p. 568; Cassirer, p. 73]. Leibniz argues that everything in the world is
contingent: that it may or may not have existed. Something will not
exist unless there is a reason for its existence. This rests on his
premise that the actual world is the best possible world, as such we can
account for everything in it as being there for a specific reason. But
the universe as a whole, requires a further reason for existence, and
that reason for Liebniz is God.

It should be noted that Liebniz' theory of the best possible world is
flawed. We can conceive of a better world than any possible 'best' world
that can be created. An additional unit of pleasure or goodness can be
added to it to make it better. Therefore, it seems implausible to think
that a 'best possible world' could ever exist.

There are difficulties with this kind of an account of the universe. It
seems to lead to the conclusion that all truths are necessary. That is,
if everything exists because the reasons for its existence supersede the
reasons for it nonexistence, then it will necessarily exist. Everything
and anything with a sufficient reason to exist will exist. Therefore,
the universe and everything in it, must necessarily exist. Since, the
superiority of its potential existence over its nonexistence provides
the required determining principle (of Kindi) or sufficient reason (of
Liebniz), for it to exist.

It appears now that the bringing into being of the universe is not
contingent upon the will of God, rather it is something that is as
necessary as the existence of God Himself. This seems implausible. In
response Liebniz argues that its existence is only theoretically
necessary and God may or may not implement it. However, if God is all
good, He would clearly be obliged to bring into being the best possible
world [Sosa, p. 515].

A second argument of his draws its inspiration from Islamic and
Aristotelian sciences. He argues that only God is indivisible, and
everything other than God is in some way composite or multiple. Kindi
describes his concept of God: He has no matter, no form, no quantity, no
quality, no relation; nor is He qualified by any of the remaining
categories (al-maqulat). He has no genus, no differentia, no species, no
proprium, no accident. He is immutable He is, therefore, absolute
oneness, nothing but oneness (wahdah). Everything else must be multiple
[Sharif, p. 429].

This for Kindi was a crucial distinction upon which he rested some of
his main arguments for God's existence. In Kindi's theory only God's
oneness is necessary whereas that of all others is contingent upon God.
Hence all other beings single or multiple must emanate from the ultimate
essential being. In addition this first being must be uncaused, since it
is the cause of everything else [Fakhry, p. 78].

The material world cannot exist ad infinitum because of the
impossibility of an actual infinite (a concept borrowed from Aristotle).
The material world can also not be eo ipso eternal, because of the
impossibility of an infinite duration of time, since the existence of
time is contingent upon the existence of bodies and motion, which have
been shown to be finite. As such the world requires a creator, or rather
a generator (mudhith) in Kindi's scheme, who could generate the world ex
nihilo [Fakhry, pp. 74-79].

The other arguments he presents are similar versions of the first cause
argument, and hence are subject to the same criticisms that apply to any
cosmological argument. These criticisms come not only from western
scholars but also Islamic ones. Ghazzali is unconvinced by the
first-cause arguments of Kindi.

In response to them he writes, According to the hypothesis under
consideration, it has been established that all the beings in the world
have a cause. Now, let the cause itself have a cause, and the cause of
the cause have yet another cause, and so on ad infinitum. It does not
behoove you to say that an infinite regress of causes is impossible.
[Tahafut, pp. 90-91]

Ghazzali thought that it is at least theoretically possible for there
to be an infinite regress, and that there is nothing that necessitates a
first-cause simply by pure deductive reason. He thus undermines one of
the essential premises of the first-cause argument.

Muhammad Iqbal also rejects the argument stating, "Logically speaking,
then, the movement from the finite to the infinite as embodied in the
cosmological argument is quite illegitimate; and the argument fails in
toto." For Iqbal the concept of the first uncaused cause is absurd; he
continues:

It is, however, obvious that a finite effect can give only a finite
cause, or at most an infinite series of such causes. To finish the
series at a certain point, and to elevate one member of the series to
the dignity of an uncaused first cause, is to set at naught the very law
of causation on which the whole argument proceeds.

It is for these reasons that modern philosophers almost unanimously
reject the cosmological argument as a legitimate proof for the existence
of God. Kant for example also rejects any cosmological proof on the
grounds that it is nothing more than an ontological proof in disguise.
He argued that any necessary object's essence must involve existence,
hence reason alone can define such a being, and the argument becomes
quite similar to the ontological one in form, devoid of any empirical
premises.

Al-Kindi's argument has been taken up by some contemporary western
philosophers and dubbed the Kalam Cosmological Argument. Kalam being the
Islamic science of dialectical reasoning. Among its chief proponents
today is Dr. William Craig [Ramey]. It proposes to show, contrary to
what Ghazzali thought, that the universe must have necessarily had a
beginning. A contrast is drawn between two concepts, the "potential
infinite" and an "actual infinite."

A potential infinite is a concept of an infinite series, to which more
things can be added. For example, there maybe and infinite number of
integers, however in any one set there will be a finite number of them.
An "actual infinite" would be a set which would contain all possible
integers.

This would be impossible, since there are an infinite number of
integers. Once a set is defined, another integer can always be found to
add to it. They can never actually exist. Ramey quotes a famous
mathematician, David Hilbert:

the actual infinite is nowhere to be found in reality. It neither
exists in nature nor provides a legitimate basis for rational thought --
a remarkable harmony between being and thought.

This forms an essential part of the argument, it demonstrates that an
infinite regress could not exist, and that the universe can not possibly
be actually infinite, in and of itself. The argument goes on to show
that if the universe could not be actually infinite or eternal, given
the principle of causality, it must have a first-cause or creator, which
is God.

Now, it maybe argued, that if an actual infinite cannot exist, then how
can God exist? Since the concept of God, is one of an uncaused and
infinite being. Al-Kindi's answer is quite interesting. He states that
it is not fair to ask this question of God, since God is not an "actual
infinite." God is not a set or collection of things, He is one. God is
an absolute unity, and hence on Al-Kindi's scheme God should not be
thought of as an 'infinite' [Fakhry, p. 77].

It is not clear, however, if the Kalam argument successfully shows the
impossibility of an infinite, a common response (which is also offered
by Avicenna) has been to point out that there is no problem imagining an
infinite that begins at the present and continues into the future, so it
follows that it is entirely conceivable for the same infinity to
continue in the past as well [Sharif, p. 503].

Contemporary supporters of this argument have reformulated the
first-cause argument to take away the difficulty of explaining why an
infinite regress would be impossible. Hick explains, "they interpret the
endless series that it excludes, not as a regress of events back in
time, but as an endless and therefore eternally inconclusive regress of
explanations." Thus a move is made from an infinite regress of events to
an infinite regress of explanations.

That is, if events can be explained with reference to other events
there must be an ultimate reality of self-explanatory events behind this
complex that would make the collective set comprehendible. Hence, no
longer is a creator being sought, rather given the creation an ultimate
reality is being sought which would explain, or make sense of, the
complex and plethora of phenomena in the world. Even here, the
non-theistic skeptic will ask what reason do we have to think that the
universe is not simply an "unintelligible brute fact"? [Hick, p. 21].


