Teleological Arguments
======================

The version of the argument from design is best known in contemporary
philosophy as presented by William Paley (1805) in his Natural Theology.
He presents us with an analogy of a watch. Suppose that while walking in
a deserted remote location one comes across a watch. Upon examining this
device one may ask themselves how did this object come into existence.

Surely it could not be by pure chance, it is composed of intricate and
complex internal design. We are likely to think that it was a product of
an intelligent designer, i.e. there must be a watchmaker.

In the same way Paley argues that the universe is much more complex and
manifestly designed. The extraordinary design is evident from planets
and galaxies at the cosmic level to human cells and atoms at the quantum
level. Therefore this world must have an intelligent creator.

This form of the argument can be seen as an inference to the best
explanation. That is given the remarkable phenomena of the universe, the
best possible explanation for this, must be the existence of God. Elliot
Sober explains this in terms of the Likelihood Principle, which he
defines as: "O" strongly favors "H1" over "H2" if and only if "H1"
assigns to "O" a probability that is much bigger than the probability
that "H2" assigns to "O" [Sober, pp. 31-33].

Here "O" is an observation, and "H" is a hypothesis. The likelihood may
be mathematically written as [P (O/H)]: the probability of the
observation given the hypothesis. The principle in probability theory
form would state that "O" strongly favors "H1" over "H2" if and only if
"P(O/H1) \>\> P(O/H2)." This Sober makes clear is not to be confused
with the Probability Principle which states can be written as "[P
(H/O)]."

These are two important distinct principles. Sober gives an example of
the observation (O) that while sitting in a cabin one hears rumblings in
the attic. On the basis of this one forms the hypothesis (H) that there
are gremlins in the attic and they are bowling. Now it is clear that the
P (O/H) is very high, that is, if there were gremlin's bowling (H) the
likelihood of the rumbling noise (O) would be quite high.

But P (H/O) in this case is very low. Since given the rumbling noise
(O), the probability of the explanation being bowling gremlins (H) is
small. "The gremlin hypothesis has a high likelihood but a low
probability given the noises we hear" [Sober, p. 32].

The Likelihood Principle a much better way to understand the inference
to the best explanation, since in the case of God a hypothesis is being
formed on the basis of observations, in the teleological sense.

Paley, according to Sober, is attempting to apply the Likelihood
Principle to the watch example. That is, given that the watch is
intricate and well-designed for timekeeping (O), the inference that it
was designed by an intelligent creator (H1) is higher than the
conclusion that it came into being via random natural processes.
Symbolically written it would be stated: P(O/H1) \>\> P(O/H2).

Paley next argues that if one accepts the above reasoning one is then
obliged to accept the reasoning he gives for the universe as a whole,
which is as follows:

O - The world is intricate and well-designed for the purpose of
supporting life. H1 - The world is the product of an intelligent
designer. H2 - The world is the product of random physical processes.

Given the above, again Paley's claim would be that P(O/H1) \>\>
P(O/H2). Both of the above are inferences to the best explanation on the
basis of the Likelihood Principle outlined earlier [Sober, p. 33]. Sober
later rejects the notion presented by Paley, and argues that the
likelihood of an evolutionary hypothesis supersedes the likelihood of a
creationist hypothesis.

Al-Kindi also attempts to make reference to the teleological proof
(dalil al-'indyah) for the existence of God. He argues that "the orderly
and wonderful phenomena of nature could not be purposeless and
accidental" [Kindi, p. 61]. This is consistent with the Quranic verse
"Not for (idle) sport did We create the heavens and the earth and all
that is between!" [Yusuf Ali, Quran 21:16].

The teleological argument analyses the material world and infers from
it an Artificer or a creator, a self-conscious being of unlimited
intelligence and power, who created this extremely complex world for a
purpose and that creator is God. Muhammad Iqbal once again criticizes
this argument in the following terms:

At best, it [teleological proof] gives us a skillful external contriver
working on a pre-existing dead and intractable material the elements of
which are, by their own nature, incapable of orderly structures and
combinations. The argument gives us a contriver only and not a creator;
and even if we suppose him to be also the creator of his material, it
does no credit to his wisdom to create his own difficulties by first
creating intractable material, and then overcoming its resistance by the
application of methods alien to its original nature. The designer
regarded as external to his material must always remain limited by his
material and hence a finite designer ... . [Iqbal, p. 24]

Iqbal is pointing out that any argument from design rests on the
extraordinary complexity and almost perfect arrangement of the universe,
so as to compel the observer to infer that there must be an intelligent
designer. This is consistent with the watchmaker example presented by
Paley. The two cases, the watch and the universe, are however,
different.

Unlike the case of the watch, where its builder put the complex machine
together given pre-existing material, the universe and its material
itself created by God also. That is, there is no point in finding it
extraordinary that God would be able to organize pre-existing
"intractable" material in such an elegant fashion.

The only reason we would have of thinking so, would be if it was a
difficult task to design the universe. But then why would God, first
create a difficult task for Himself and then go on resolve the
difficulty by arranging into a sophisticated pattern? In addition, God
would be limited in what He could create by this pre-existing
material.

This, to Iqbal, does not seem consistent with the Islamic concept of an
omnipotent God. Iqbal writes, perhaps in response to Paley, "There is
really no analogy between the work of the human artificer and the
phenomena of Nature" [Iqbal, p. 24].

Bertrand Russell joins in this criticism, commenting on the
teleological explanation, he professes, but if a man is so obstinately
teleological as to continue to ask what purpose is served by the
creator, it becomes obvious that his question is impious. It is,
moreover, unmeaning, since, to make it significant, we should have to
suppose the Creator created by some super-Creator whose purposes He
served. [Russell, p. 85]

Both Iqbal and Russell point out that it is inappropriate for a person
who believes in God to put forth an argument for His existence on
teleological grounds.

The British philosopher David Hume also rejected the teleological
argument, for different reasons. For him the argument from the best
explanation is an inductive argument, and Hume had argued that inductive
knowledge and causation is not possible. Hume rejected all theological
works and claimed that they fail certain philosophical tests. He
contended that metaphysical knowledge was not possible by either
abstract or experimental reasoning. The problem of induction argues that
it is impossible to make a justified inference from the observed to the
unobserved. This is applicable to all such inferences.

An example of such an inference is the following: we observe that "the
sun rises everyday and has risen everyday for over several thousand
years" on the basis of this observation we make an inference that:
"Hence that the sun will rise tomorrow". Hume claims that we are not at
all justified in such an assumption.

He asks what makes such an inference justifiable? Hume recognizes that
we spontaneously make such an inference and that perhaps we have no
control over it. But he is asking what is our justification for this
supposed causal relationship? He asserts where is the causal glue that
links the rising of the sun yesterday to the rising of the sun
tomorrow?

The only argument that can be made in support of it is that "Nature is
uniform," i.e. Nature has been uniform and will remain uniform thus we
are justified in making inferences to unobserved events on the basis of
what we have been observing. However, it must be noted that this
argument in itself is an inductive one and begs the question.

This is similar to the argument for the existence of God from
induction, since the argument is being made that we can use
empirical/inductive proofs, i.e. we can make inferences based upon what
we observe (empirical) to the unobserved (God, Metaphysical). Hume
denies that any such inference is at all logically justifiable.

Bertrand Russell in response to this attitude states, it is therefore
important to discover whether there is any answer to Hume within the
framework of a philosophy that is wholly or mainly empirical. If not,
there is no intellectual difference between sanity and insanity ... .
This is a desperate point of view, and it must be hoped that there is
some way of escaping from it. [Russell, p. 646]

Most Muslim philosophers have attempted to get around this vexatious
problem by simply recognizing the Quranic emphasis on the uniformity of
nature, accepting it as such and thus avoiding this problem. The above
problem of induction gave rise to modern skepticism and remains a
fascinating unsolved puzzle.


**Kant's Critique of Empirical Evidence**

Kant raises a powerful objection to any theory that claims to grasp
knowledge of God. He claims that in terms of knowledge there can be no
jump from the physical to the metaphysical. Kant distinguishes between
noumanal and phenomenal objects. The noumena are objects that lie beyond
all possible experience, and the phenomena are the ones we directly
experience.

Hence, for him the metaphysical is the noumenal realm. He argues that
there can be no possible relation between two realms that have no
connection between them. How can we prove that a certain noumanal object
exists from phenomenal premises?, he asks.

Ernst Cassirer, in his book Kant's Life and Thought, comments:

It is especially discordant for Kant on the one hand to consign reason
in its determination of actuality completely to the data of experience,
and on the other to entrust to it the power of bringing us to
unconditional certainty regarding an infinite being lying beyond all
possibility of experience. [Cassirer, p. 76]

Although he does not deny that there are metaphysical objects (in fact
he argues for their existence from practical reason), he rejects this
particular avenue for arriving at what he calls synthetic and a priori
objects.

Iqbal responds to Kant's criticism of metaphysical existence from
empirical experience as follows: "Kant's verdict can be accepted only if
we start with the assumption that all experience other than the normal
level of experience is impossible. The only question, therefore, is
whether the normal level is the only level of knowledge-yielding
experience." He will argue, as we will see later, that there are other
levels of experience that can bear knowledge as well.


**Ontological Arguments**

The modern form of the ontological argument in modern western
philosophy was made famous by Anselm and Descartes. The argument rests
on the premise that existence is a predicate that a being could have or
lack. A summary of Anselm's argument is as follows:

P1) God is a being than which nothing greater can be conceived. P2) A
being than which nothing greater can be conceived to exist in our
thought. P3) Either a being than which nothing greater can be conceived
exists in thought alone and not in reality or a being than which nothing
greater can be conceived exists both in thought and in reality. P4)

If the greatest conceivable being existed in thought alone we could
think of another being existing in both thought and reality. P5)
Existing in thought and reality is greater than existing in thought
alone. C) Therefore: A being than which nothing greater can be conceived
(God) exists in thought and in reality.

Simply by pure reason, without any reference to the world, Anselm
argues for God. A key feature of these kind of arguments is that they
try to show not only that God exists, but that he necessarily exists.
That is, He cannot, not exist.

The existence of God is an essential feature of its being just like the
angles of a triangle always add up to 180 degrees. It would be
impossible to think of God without it existing. Descartes writes, from
the fact that I cannot think of a mountain without a valley, it does not
follow that a mountain and a valley exist anywhere, but simply that a
mountain and a valley, whether they exist or not are mutually
inseparable. But from the fact that I cannot think of God except as
existing, it follows that existence is inseparable from God.

Hence, the very essence of God, to even make the concept of God
intelligible it must exist. This argument has been widely criticized.

Kant criticized the argument from two perspectives. First he points out
that, although, the concept that all three sides of the triangle add up
to 180 is an analytical concept, there is still nothing that shows that
it must exist. Similarly the idea that existence analytically belongs to
the concept of God is an illegitimate inference.

He writes, To posit a triangle, and yet to reject its three angles, is
self-contradictory; but there is no self-contradiction in rejecting the
triangle together with its three angles. The same holds true of the
concept of an absolutely necessary being. [Kant 3:4]

Secondly, he rejects Descartes argument on the grounds that existence
is not a predicate that can be added or taken away from a concept. That
is, existence is not like any of the other properties that are
associated with 'things.' To say that something exists, is simply to say
that the concept is instantiated in the world. He claims this on the
basis of his distinction between analytic and synthetic statements.

An analytic statement is one of the kind, "all bachelors are unmarried
males," or "the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180." In these
statements the predicates, "unmarried males" or "sum of angles is 180"
does not add any new information to the concept of "bachelors" or
"triangle." Analytic statements are true by virtue of their meaning
alone.

A synthetic statement is something that adds more information about the
object in question. For example, "all ravens are black," is synthetic.
The predicate "are black" tells us more information about the subject
"ravens." Kant's claim is that statements of the sort, "X exists" are
analytic. It does not add anything additional to the concept. Hence the
inference that existing in reality is greater than existence in thought
alone is false. The reductio ad absurdum from pure thought to God, of
Anselm and Descartes thus fails according to Kant.

The closest form of parallel thought to this can be found in the
thought of Avicenna (981 &endash; 1037 CE). He also shared Descartes
methodological doubt and proposed a somewhat similar ontological
argument for the existence of God [Shiekh, p. 77]. Avicenna also
propounded that God is a necessary being, however, his argument unlike
Descartes is not a purely rational one.

Avicenna believed that we possess a direct intuitive apprehension of
the reality and existence of this necessary being. He believed that it
would be impossible to think concretely without the existence of such a
being. Averroes, however, insists that there can be no rational proof
for God's existence and it can only be grasped via the medium of
intuition.

The God that Avicenna argues for is a Necessary Being. A being that
necessarily exists, and everything else besides it is contingent and
depends upon it for its existence. God has no other essence besides his
existence. His essence (mahiyah: quidditas), just is His existence.
Since, God is the only being in which the essence and existence are to
be found together, the essence of all other beings precedes their
existence. Thus He is absolutely simple, and no has no further
attributes [Sharif, p. 501].

In his book al-Shifa Avicenna explains that since the Necessary Being
has no genus or differentia it is both indefinable and indemonstrable.
As such "neither its being or its actions can be an object of discursive
thought, since it is without cause, quality, position or time" [Fakhry,
pp. 153-154].

All other entities do not exist necessarily or essentially, rather they
are merely contingent beings (per accidens). The characteristics of God
offered by Avicenna drew major criticisms from the contemporary Muslim
orthodoxy, who found his definition incompatible with Islamic doctrine.
"not a particle remains hidden from God in the heavens or on the earth"
[Quran]. How can God be omniscient if He has no attributes.

He does try to explain, however, how his description would be
compatible with God having knowledge of the world. In knowing Himself,
God is capable of knowing everything that emanated from Him. Since God
does not have sense-perceptual knowledge He cannot know the particulars,
but rather only the essences or universal principles.

But according to Avicenna this does not exclude him knowing the
specifics of any given event. Knowing all the antecedents and
consequences in the causal chain, allows God to place the event
temporally and differentiate it from all other events.

Hence, his theory does not preclude God's knowledge of the specifics.
Al-Ghazzali was not satisfied with this account and criticized Avicenna
stating that the theory being presented would not allow for change in
divine knowledge with the introduction of the time factor [Sharif. p.
502].

Another important characteristic of Avicenna's ontology was the fact
that he believed that the universe is eternal. This was another belief,
which was not acceptable to the Islamic orthodoxy. He thought the
creative ability of God was linked to His intellectual nature and thus
flowed eternally of rational necessity from Him.

Although the universe exists as an independent body, its existence is
still contingent upon God. God and the world are different, but the
existence of the world depends upon God. This can be seen as refinement,
or rather 'islamization' of the Aristotelian view that God and the
universe were two distinct beings which did not interact with each
other.


**Arguments against the Existence of God**

**The Problem of Evil**

One of the major arguments proposed against the existence of God in
contemporary western philosophy is the problem of evil. It is based upon
the inability to reconcile the magnitude of evil in the world with the
all-loving nature of God. John Hick describes the problem from the
perspective of its proponent: "If God is perfectly loving, God must wish
to abolish all evil; and if God is all-powerful, God must be able to
abolish all evil.

But evil exists; therefore God cannot be both omnipotent and perfectly
loving." This thus causes difficulty for the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God
who possess both qualities of being all-loving and omnipotent. David
Hume is a proponent of this view and argues that the sheer amount of
evil, which may outweigh the good, in the world makes dubious that a
deity exists [Pojman , p.167].

The main response to this kind of an argument is known as the free-will
defense. It is based on the premise that for God to create self-directly
and independent agents like humans, he had to grant a certain amount of
freedom to them, and this freedom would inevitably result in
human-to-human evil. It has been proposed that there need not be a
contradiction between God creating morally free agents and making it the
case that all their actions turn out to be good.

But it can be argued that in that case, are the beings really as free
as humans? If all our actions were predestined in this way, there would
be a sense in which we would not be free and only an allusion be created
thereof. Although God could have created beings of this sort, they would
have amounted to mere puppets and not vibrant beings as envisioned by
God [Hick, pp. 39-41].


**The Free Will Defense**

The primary difficulty with the problem of evil is resolving the
apparent conflict between the reality of evil in the world and the claim
that God is:

Omniscient -- All knowing Omnipotent &endash; All powerful and Wholly
Good

One version of the free will defense is to compare the current state of
the world with a world in which all actions were good and no evil was
possible. It is important here to point out that the good that is being
referred to is 'moral good.' That is, it is good that is a result of the
conscious actions of people.

This is distinct from 'natural good' or 'natural evil' which maybe
result from non-human causes. The free will defense (FWD) theorist
points out that in order for man to be in a position to do 'moral good'
he must be 'significantly free.

' That is, he must be in a position to make a choice between making a
morally good or evil action. Given that in the current world (World-1)
human agents are given this freedom, a certain level of moral evil is
unavoidable. This world would still be more preferable to a possible
World-2 in which there were no free actions (thus no freedom) but all
actions performed were entirely good.

A critic of this defense will point out that if God is all-powerful
(omnipotent) then it ought to be in His capacity to create a World-3 in
which humans had freedom, yet all their actions turned out to be good.
Thus their actions would be predetermined to be good, yet they would
still have the free option of choosing between morally good or bad
actions.

The agent would have the freedom to chose any action they like, it
would just be that whatever choice they made it would turn out to be
good. This would entirely be within God's power since He is omnipotent
and is only limited by logical impossibilities.

The challenge for the FWD theorist is to show that Freedom and Causal
Determinism are both mutually inconsistent. It can't both be the case
that humans are free agents, and that their actions are causally
predetermined [Pojman, p. 203]. The crucial question is, can God can
create any world?

Alvin Plantinga attempts to answer this question. First, he points out
that Leibniz was mistaken in thinking that God would have to, and thus
did, create the best possible world. Plantinga argues that there can be
no such thing as the best possible world, since to any world one more
unit of pleasure or goodness can be added to make it even better.

Thus it seems implausible to think of the best possible world as
existing. This then is one instance when God cannot create any world.
Secondly, he argues that God cannot create a world in which Man is both
significantly free, yet his actions are already determined. His proof on
this premise has to do with a thought experiment.

We can imagine a case in the present world in which we know given
certain conditions person A would hypothetically engage in a morally
evil action. It would no be impossible for God to create a world that
were almost identical the present world, except that the person would
then not engage in the evil. Since, to do so would deny him the freedom
of individuality and his personality. That is, for God to ensure that he
not engage in the evil would deny his freedom.

The only other solution is for God to not create the world at all. He
argues that for any world God could create, which included freedom,
there is at least one action on which Man would go wrong, or else he
could not create any world at all. This phenomenon he calls transworld
depravity. Therefore, for God to create a world in which humans had
moral freedom, the existence of both Good and Evil is necessary
[Platinga, p. 211].


**Islamic Reaction to the Problem of Evil**

Islamic philosophers of the middle ages did not address this problem in
any direct fashion. This maybe because in the context of Muslim thought,
the existence of God was a prerequisite. In fact, the aim of the
philosophers was to prove the existence of God using Aristotelian logic.
So we do not find Muslim philosophers arguing against the existence of
God, on the contrary they are attempting to justify the qualities of God
from a philosophical perspective.

The Muslim philosophers did, however, tackle a different but somewhat
similar issue concerning the unity of God. The central problem facing
them was how to reconcile the absolute unity and perfection of God with
the fact that there exists in the world such great amounts of
imperfections. If God is all perfect and the world is a result of divine
will, we are then faced with the problem of duality between God and His
will. Yet it is this very difference (i.e. the imperfection of the
world) that sets it apart from God (who is perfect).

How is this consistent with the absolute unity (tawhid) of God which is
so central to Islamic doctrine? This issue had been one of the major
issues of Muslim thought, and was a subject of great debate between
Al-Ghazzali, and other neo-platonic Muslim thinkers [Landau, p. 17].

It is, however, difficult to find any direct analogue to the problem of
evil in medieval Islamic philosophy. However, some positions held by
early Muslim thinkers maybe relevant to the free will defense. Early
Muslim Aristotelian thinkers like Ibn Sina held that God is a necessary
being, who had no other attributes besides His existence, and that all
other beings emanated from the divine by necessity. Despite holding this
position, they attempted to reconcile it with Islamic doctrines.

Ghazzali points out that this is not possible. That is, to say that
whatever proceeds from God does so by necessity denies God agency, i.e.
it denies Him Free Will. If God has no will, since he has no attributes,
then God has no free choice to decide which world to create. It seems
that Ghazzali's criticism can be equally applied to advocate of the
problem of evil who states that God by necessity must always in a way
that will ensure that its consequences are wholly good.

This would then break down the dilemma posed by trying to reconcile the
divine attributes of omniscience, omnipotence, wholly goodness versus
the reality of evil in the world. Since, now God would not be obliged to
abide by the condition of wholly goodness [Ghazzali, p. 63].

Another stream of thought in Islam, advocated by Ghazzali, Ibn Arabi,
Al-Attas and Islamic mystical traditions, is to argue that the only true
way to grasp the ultimate reality, and thus resolve this problem is
through a "direct awareness of Reality," unencumbered by intellectual
interference (Laudau 20). This aspect will be discussed at length in the
Arguments from Religious Experience section.

The lack of intense debate on the problem of evil maybe because the
problem was not formulated at the time, or that Muslim thinkers were
preoccupied by other issues. In modern times, the 20th century Islamic
philosopher Muhammad Iqbal does attempt to address this problem.

He suggests that Goodness would not be possible without the resistance
of evil. The evil in the world is meant to be overcome. Whoever asks why
must there be evil when God can remove it is missing the point. Iqbal
insists that without evil there could be no moral or spiritual
development. He sites a simile used by Kant in which he refers to birds
who resent the resistance of air, yet it is the very air that allows
them to fly high, they would be unable to do so in a vacuum.

Likewise, a certain amount of evil is necessary for the inner growth of
humans, so that they may be able to overcome it [Sharif, p. 1628]. As
the Quran states, "And for trial will We test you with evil and with
Good" [21:35].

Iqbal could here be subject to criticism, since he has ignored the
victims of evil. What about those people who suffered so the rest of
mankind could build itself? Iqbal's answer here would be consistent with
his philosophy of self. Like Nietzche, Iqbal believed that ultimately
the self, the individual is the only thing of utmost importance. That is
we have no concrete knowledge of the external world and factors
therein.

What we can be sure of is only ourselves, hence, we must view
happenings to beings other than ourselves only in the capacity in which
they help to build ourselves. The fact that the suffering of an innocent
victim serves to bolster our personality is sufficient. The independent
suffering of the external individual cannot be verified.

Nietzche has criticized Christian theology for placing mankind in a
state of guilt for the original sin, Iqbal had pointed out that this
concept of original sin is absent in Islam, and that the Quran
encouraged a positive self image of the self or man. Many modern
Christian theologians also adopt this view.


