Arguments From Religious Experience
===================================

There have been arguments presented for the existence of God which are
non-analytical, and do not rely an purely logical or empirical premises.
There is a strong strand within classical Islamic philosophy, beginning
with Al-Ghazzali, to strongly put forth this view, and at the same time
deny the legitimacy of the purely theoretical arguments for God's
existence. Muhammad Iqbal will also defend this view, however, he
attempts to provide reconciliatory possibilities of reason with
religious experience in concert with his organic world-view.

The principles for an Islamic epistemology are laid out in the Quran as
it defines three avenues for knowledge [Wan Daud, p. 65]. These are
namely, 1. Certainty by Sense-Perception (ain al-yaqin) or empirically
derived knowledge; 2. Cognitive Certainty (ilm al-yaqin) or knowledge by
pure reason; 3. Absolute Experienced Certainty (haqq al-yaqin) or
knowledge by intuition.

These are sometimes called modes of knowledge. A Muslim Sufi (mystic)
philosopher explains: The sensory mode is experienced through we eat and
smell, the cognitive is through knowledge, whether self-evident or
acquired, while the intuitive is similarly divided: It can either be
self-evident or acquired.

However, he who has access to intuitive, which is to say divine
knowledge, knows instinctively what other must acquire through the
exercise of their cognitive faculties. [Awliya, pp. 160-161]

It is this last form of knowledge, the intuitive, that the arguments
from religious experience aim at. There is some disagreement on the
significance of intuitive knowledge and even if it is necessary, is it
sufficient for an Islamic epistemology of metaphysics? Ghazzali argues
in the affirmative, however modern philosophers Iqbal and Al-Attas
assert that intuitive knowledge must work in concert with other 'modes'
of knowledge as well.


**al-Ghazzali**

The first major critic of philosophy in the Islamic tradition was Abu
Hamid ibn Muhammad al-Ghazzali (1058-1111 CE). Ghazzali felt that no
formulation of an epistemology based on human reason could possibly
account reasonably for the metaphysical existence of God.

He was an influential Islamic scholar and became interested in
philosophy after studying various quarreling Muslim intellectual
movements. He then decided to embark on a project to determine, what is
certain knowledge? And is it possible by humans? [Fakhry, p. 218,
Sheikh, p. 85, Sharif, p. 583].

To accomplish his goal Ghazzali, much like Descartes, engages in a
methodological doubt. Unlike Descartes, however, Ghazzali reaches a much
more radical conclusion about our ability to have "certain knowledge."
He begins by defining what he means by "certain knowledge." He writes:

The search after truth being the aim which I propose to myself, I ought
in the first place to ascertain what are the bases of certitude. In the
second place I ought to recognize that certitude is the clear and
complete knowledge of things, such knowledge as leave no room for doubt,
nor any possibility of error. [Sharif, p. 588]

Thus, the kind of knowledge Ghazzali is seeking is such that the object
of knowledge is known in a manner which precludes all possibilities of
doubt [Fakhry, p. 218].

There are only two sources of knowledge that are available to us, and
those, according to Ghazzali, are sense-perception and pure reason. He
writes: We cannot hope to find truth except in matters which carry their
evidence in themselves, i.e. in sense-perception and necessary
principles of thought; we must, therefore first of all establish these
two on a firm basis. [Sharif, p. 589]

As a first step he concludes that the only knowledge that could qualify
as "certain" would be of the kind that would fit the above description,
i.e. knowledge of sense-perception or self-evident or necessary truths
[Ghazzali, Freedom and Fulfillment]. Next Ghazzali examines the extent
of knowledge allowed via these avenues.

He quickly realizes that sense-perception cannot be a source of certain
knowledge since it is often not trustworthy. For example, he observes
shadows appear to be stationary, whereas they move, and planets appear
to be coin-sized whereas astronomical evidence points to the contrary.

Having discarded knowledge of the senses, Ghazzali now moves towards
knowledge of necessary truths. He thinks that this is not a credible
source of knowledge either. If he could not trust one kind of knowledge,
why should he trust the other? He thought he had no reason to prefer one
over the other [Fakhry, p. 219].

One of the issues that made him doubt the utility of necessary
principles were questions such as, is 10 more than 3? Can something be
and not be at the same time? Can something be both necessary and
impossible? He thought reason alone, could not provide a satisfactory
answer to these questions [Sharif, p. 589]. Hence, making an analogy
between the two, Ghazzali denies knowledge of necessary proposition as
well [Fakhry, p. 219]. His argument here is quite controversial, and
Iqbal strongly criticizes Ghazzali on this count.

Ghazzali is now in a position where he has convinced himself, that the
only two avenues of knowledge open to him are not reliable. He is
confused and considers the possibility that life could be a dream. He
was in a state of continuos doubt and unable to ground anything in truth
and existence, he suffered from this like a real sickness.

Until he realized a "light which God infused into his heart, which is
the key to most species of knowledge" [Fakhry, p. 219]. This he
considers similar to how the Prophet Muhammad (saw) describes it, "the
dilation of the heart, whereby it becomes prone to the reception of
Islam." He, therefore was able to transcend everyday experience and
realize the ultimate reality via a spiritual experience.

What Ghazzali is suggesting is a "possibility of a form of apprehension
higher than rational apprehension, that is, apprehension as the mystic's
inspiration or the prophet's revelation" [Sharif, p. 590]. This new form
of knowledge is what he calls intuition. It is distinct from knowledge
by the senses or the intellect, in that in intuitive knowledge is only
possible via divine facilitation.

Ghazzali and Descartes both agree that knowledge by sense-perception is
unreliable, but Ghazzali makes the further claim that knowledge by pure
theoretical reason alone is also unreliable. Descartes, on the other
hand, had built his entire epistemology on the basis of the viability of
knowledge by pure reason.


**Iqbal's Critique of Ghazzali**

Muhammad Iqbal is also critical of Ghazzali's characterization of
knowledge. He thought that Ghazzali was mistaken in giving up reason and
thought and embracing mystic experience as the only exclusive way the
totally infinite could be revealed to an individual. Iqbal writes:

He failed to see that thought and intuition are organically related and
that thought must necessarily simulate finitude and inconclusiveness
because of its alliance with serial time. The idea that thought is
essentially finite, and for this reason unable to capture the Infinite,
is based on a mistaken notion of the movement of thought in knowledge.
[Iqbal, p. 5]

For Iqbal, there is no inherent difficulty in a finite being grasping
the reality of an infinite one. Thought is dynamic and is revealed via a
temporal vision over time. He further explains how the infinite can come
into the comprehension of a finite being. Using a Quranic metaphor, the
infinite according to Iqbal is "'a kind of 'Preserved Tablet', which
holds up the entire undermined possibilities of knowledge as a present
reality, revealing itself in serial time as a succession of finite
concepts appearing to reach a unity which is already present in them. It
is in fact the presence of the total Infinite in the movement of
knowledge that makes finite thinking possible."

Thus, the continuos revealing of the infinite over a temporal period
allows the finite to grasp the essence of the infinite God. It is not
that at any point the finite intellect will be able to fully comprehend
the limitless and infinite, but rather that it is the potential of
thought to be itself without limit, that allows it to have an
understanding of the limitless, at least in principle. Dr. Naquib
Al-Attas, a contemporary Muslim philosopher and disciple of
Al-Ghazzali's school, explains the concept of intuition as understood by
him:

We maintain that all knowledge of reality and of truth, and the
projection of a true vision of the ultimate nature of things is
originally derived through the medium of intuition. The intuition that
we mean cannot simply be reduced to that which operates solely at the
physical level of discursive reason based upon sense-experience,

for since we affirm in man the possession of physical as well as
intelligential or spiritual powers and faculties which refer back to the
spiritual entity, sometimes called intellect, or heart, or soul, or
self, it follows that man's rational, imaginable and empirical existence
must involve both the physical and spiritual levels.

Here he reaffirms both physical (material) and spiritual (metaphysical)
levels as necessary for intuition. However, special emphasis is placed
upon the spiritual. This concept of intuition is a major theme both
within higher Islamic philosophy and mysticism. It holds that the
ultimate reality can be directly and spontaneously experienced and truth
can become self-evident with complete clarity.

Iqbal is trying to point out that, intellectual reason and intuition
are inseparable, and that in the act of comprehending something by
intuition, the intellect plays an indispensable role, which cannot be
discounted. He thus thinks that Ghazzali was mistaken in his claim that
reason and intuition could not interact and were incompatible. Iqbal saw
both of these avenues as complimentary, towards ultimate knowledge.

**Muhammad Iqbal**

Iqbal gives his account of the possibility of religion in the last
lecture in the reconstruction entitled "Is Religion Possible?"

For Iqbal, religion is not something that is isolated from philosophy.
He advocates an integration of the two, sometimes suggesting that the
science of psychology has not reached an advanced enough level to be
able to incorporate spiritual experience as part of a scientific theory
of knowledge. Iqbal thinks, given adequate methods, the ultimate reality
is within human grasp. He writes,

The truth is that the religious and the scientific processes, though
involving different methods, are identical in their final aim. Both aim
at reaching the most real. In fact, religion is far more anxious to
reach the ultimately real than science." [Iqbal, p. 155]

One of the major objections to proofs from religious experience has
been that, religious experience is incommunicable and as such has no
value as 'evidence' since it is not transferable from one person to the
other. That is, person A may see the truth of a proposition whereas
person B may not, and there is no way for person A to demonstrate to
person B, how he came to believe a certain thing.

Iqbal does not think that this is a problem. Rather precisely this
"problem" is the foundation of his worldview. He had an organic view
about the universe as a whole and people as we encounter them. In our
everyday life we see other individuals as mere functions, and only deal
with them in so far as their conceptual relation to us is concerned.

We do not pursue them any further for any ultimate reality. Thus when
seeking the divine we cannot and do not rely upon "others." The clue to
the ultimate reality must be contained within the ego (person). The
individual self must then be the only way to certain knowledge.

It maybe that what we call the external world is only an intellectual
construction, and that there are other levels of human experience
capable of being systematized by other orders of space and time --
levels in which concept and analysis do not play the same role as they
do in the case of our normal experience. [Iqbal, p. 144]

The incommunicability of religious experience is an essential part of
what makes it different from 'normal experience.' Strictly speaking, the
experience which leads to this discovery is not a conceptually
manageable intellectual fact; it is a vital fact, an attitude consequent
on an inner biological transformation which cannot be captured in the
net of logical categories [Iqbal, p. 145].

Intuition then is a valid form of knowledge yielding experience. This
does not, however, mean that it is divorced from reason. Iqbal explains,
although real, we do not have the tools at our disposal to evaluate this
process of "inner biological transformation." The scientific method we
have today is not sufficient to apply to these kinds of experiences,
since scientific "concept and analysis" may not be applicable to this
sort of experience as they are to physics. Dr. Al-Attas advocating a
similar view states,

Belief has cognitive content; and one of the main points of divergence
between true religion and secular philosophy and science is the way in
which the sources and methods of knowledge are understood. [Anees]

At this level of experience, "the act of knowledge is a constitutive
element in the objective reality" [Baharuddin]. He thought God could not
be removed from his creation. Not in the pantheistic sense, but in that
the ultimate reality cannot stand as an 'other' to the universe or
person (as Avicenna thought).

Rather, they are interlinked, and in looking within ourselves for this
higher level of experience, the ultimate reality would be revealed unto
the individual. As Iqbal explains, this higher level of experience is
not at the sensational or representational level, rather it is better
described as a feeling rather than concepts. He writes,

It is rather a mode of dealing with Reality in which sensation, in the
physiological sense of the word, does not play any part. [Maruf] This
for Iqbal is the mystic experience that leads to ultimate certain
knowledge. This knowledge is irresistible and like bright sunshine
forces itself immediately to be perceived as soon as the mind turns its
attention to it and leaves no room for hesitation, doubt or examination,
but the mind is perfectly filled with the clear light of it [Hasan].

It should be mentioned that, although Iqbal offers the above
explanation of the way in which an individual may access the ultimate,
he draws his inspiration from Einstein and Nietzsche. Einstein's theory
of relativity gave him hope, that his theory about the way the finite
and the infinite are related is possible.

Relativity shattered traditional notions of space, time and thus
matter. The line between the physical and metaphysical had been blurred
or rather interconnected. Hence, there is great philosophical debate at
the frontiers of modern physics over what happens in extreme situations
on the cosmological scale.

Nietzsche's emphasis on individuality deeply impressed Iqbal, who
thought that Neitzsche was on the right track, if only he had not been
distracted by naturalistic theories of Schopenhaur, Darwin and Lange
mistakenly explaining away the existence of God. Hence, Nietzche was a
failure. But he had realized an essential truth. That is, ultimately
what matters is the ego, self, and nothing else. Thus it is not
significant if reality is not transferable from one to another.

What matters is the "me" and not the "other."

It is also significant that Iqbal thought, that if a sufficient
understanding of the 'mental' was achieved it would indeed be (at least
theoretically) possible within the science of psychology to gain a
better sense of the kind of deeper experience Iqbal is referring too.
This maybe relevant to the concept in philosophy of Mind known as
Anamolousness of the Mental.

It states that there are no causal laws that relate to mental events.
This explains the difficulty of science and psychology in grasping these
concepts. Iqbal, however, thinks that it is at least theoretically
possible to be able to achieve a working understanding of mental
events.

The theories of knowledge advocated by the proofs from religious
experience may be considered externalist accounts.

Externalism is the view that some of the justifying factors of belief
need not be cognitively accessible and maybe external to the mind of the
individual. That is, a person can be justified in holding a belief even
if they are not aware that they are in possession of all the reasons
that make the position justified. Iqbal is advocating a similar view, in
that the reasons, although they may objectively exist, are difficult to
determine by the individual.

Externalism often rests on the premise of reliablism. That is, one way
to know that something is true, without knowing all the reasons, is if
the knowledge is received from a reliable source. For example, we may
consider our vision and senses to be a reliable source to affirm the
existence of the external world.

In the same way Iqbal and Ghazzali describe the experience of the
divine in terms of the sense. If this experience is reliable and
originating from God, then we could affirm the knowledge without knowing
all the reasons that justify God's existence. It appears, however, that
what Iqbal wants to say is that the reasons for the justification of God
are in theory accessible to humans, but in practice are much more
difficult to determine compared to the direct mystic experience of the
divine entity.

This is consistent with the views of Al-Ghazzali and Ibn Arabi on this
issue. Iqbal also advocates another proof for the existence of God based
upon the Quranic emphasis upon history. This can also be considered a
reliablist account, however it has not been considered in this paper.

**Conclusion**

There is a strong tradition of rigorous Islamic thought on
philosophical issues. Issues in Islamic metaphysics and epistemology are
varied and complex. There are strong and useful similarities of thought
within Muslim and Western thought. Western philosophers have expanded
upon many of the debates originating within the Islamic world, as the
Muslims had done earlier with the Greek scholars.

It would be a mistake, however, to consider Islamic thought a relic of
the past. Islamic philosophy is showing signs of significant recovery
and with the emergence of an integrated worldview, it will be a viable
discipline.

The consensus among modern Muslim philosophers seems to be moving away
from the purely empirical arguments for God's existence. The recent
consensus of Islamic thinkers like Ghazzali, Al-Attas and Iqbal seem to
prefer arguments from religious experience over the rational
arguments.

Apart from the basic question of how faith and reason interact in
epistemology, there are significant other issues in philosophy that need
study. For instance, is there an Islamic response to the mind-body
problem? Are we to reject the concept of the soul as Kant did since it
is an obscure concept? Or can it be reinterpreted to be read as the
mind? If so, what constitutes the mind? Does Islam provide its own
ethical framework?

If so, what are its principles and does it resolve the problems with
Western ethical theories (of Aristotle, Kant, Mill or Nietzche)? How
does Islam tackle the radical existentialism of Sartre or Heidegger?
These are just some of the other problems, besides those in epistemology
and metaphysics that will face future Muslim philosophers.

Resolving these problems will have profound implications on the Islamic
worldview and values. It is also a prerequisite to any tangible and
independent Islamic academic philosophy.

In the modern context it is important, for Islamic thought at least, to
reassert itself clearly and define its parameters upon which a modern
Islamic epistemology can be built. The work of European and American
philosophers cannot be ignored, and their criticism should be used to
recreate the vigor of Islamic philosophy which has been lost over the
past few centuries.

**Bibliography**

Ali, Abdullah Yusuf, The Holy Qur'an: Text, Translation and Commentary
[Brentwood: Amana Corp., 1989]

Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib, Prolegomena to the Metaphysics of Islam
[Kuala Lumpur: International Institute of Islamic Thought and
Civilization, 1995]

Al-Ghazzali Tahafut Al-Falasifah, The Incoherence of Philosophers,
translated by Sabih Ahmad Kamali. [Lahore: Pakistan Philosophical
Congress, 1963]

Al-Ghazzali, Freedom and Fulfillment [Boston: Twayne Publications,
1980]

Anees, Munawar, "Islam and Scientific Fundamentalism." New Perspectives
Quarterly (Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions), Vol 10 -
No. 3, 1993, p. 61.

Atiyeh, George N., Al-Kindi: The Philosopher of the Arabs [Islamabad:
Islamic Research Institute, 1985]

Averroes (Ibn Rushd), The Incoherence of the Incoherence (Tahafut
al-Tahafut) [London: Luzac, 1954]

Awliya, Nizam Ad-Din, Morals for the Heart, translated by Bruce B.
Lawrence. [New York: Paulist Press, 1992]

Baharuddin, Azizan, "Iqbal's Relationship to Mysticism: His
Reconciliation of Science and Religion" [Institute of Policy Research.
Seminar on Muhammad Iqbal and the Asian Renaissance, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, 1997]

Cassirer, Ernst, Kant's Life and Thought [New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1981]

Corbin, Henry, History of Islamic Philosophy [London: New York: Kegan
Paul International, 1993]

Craig, William Lane Graham, Oppy on the Kalam Cosmological Argument
[New York: Barnes and Nobles, 1979]

Dancy, Jonathan and Ernest Sosa, A Companian to Epistemology [Malden:
Blackwell Publishers, 1997]

DeBoer, T. J., The History of Philosophy in Islam, translated by Edward
R. Jones [New Delhi: Cosmo, 1983]

Fakhry, Majid, A History of Islamic Philosophy [New York: Columbia
University Press, Longman, 1983]

Hasan, R., The Main Philosophical Ideas in Iqbal's Writings [University
of Durham, 1968]

Hick, John, Philosophy of Religion [Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
Hall, 1990]

Hourani, George F., Averroes: On the Harmony of Religion and Philosophy
[London: Lowe & Byrondone, 1976]

Iqbal, Muhammad, The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam
[Lahore: Institute of Islamic Culture, 1986]

Landau, Rom, The philosophy of Ibn Arabi [London: Allen & Unwin,
1959]

Leaman, Oliver, An Introduction to Medieval Islamic Philosophy [New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1985]

Marmura, Micheal (ed.), Islamic Theology and Philosophy [Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1984]

Maruf, Mohammed, Iqbal's Philosophy of Religion [Lahore: Islamic Book
Service, 1988]

McDonough, Sheila, "Iqbal: His Metaphysical Ideas" [Concordia
University, China. Seminar on Muhammad Iqbal and the Asian Renaissance,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 1997]

Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, An introduction to Islamic cosmological doctrines
[Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993]

Paley, William, Natural Theology [Boston: Lincoln and Edmands, 1831]

Platinga, Alvin, God, Freedom and Evil [Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977]

Pojman, Louis P., Philosophy of Religion: An Anthology [Belmont:
Wadsworth Pub. Co., 1994]

Qadir, C. A., Philosophy and Science in the Islamic World [New York:
Croom Helm, 1988]

Ramey, Bill, "The Kalam Cosmological Argument: A Summary," 1998

Russell, Bertrand, A History of Western Philosophy [New York, Simon and
Schuster, 1945]

Sharif, M. M., A History of Muslim Philosophy [Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
1966]

Sheikh, Saeed M., "Studies in Muslim Philosophy" [Lahore, Pakistan
Philosophical Congress, 1962]

Sheikh, Saeed M., Islamic Philosophy [London: Octagon Press, 1982]

Sober, Elliott, Philosophy of Biology [Boulder: Westview Press, 1993]

Wan Daud, Wan Mohd. Nor, The Concept of Knowledge in Islam [London:
Mansell, 1989


