The Second Discussion
=====================

The leadership belonging to the Prophetic Household and to Imam Ali,
played out in the “natural phenomenon” so far alluded to consists of two
types of authority.

The first is intellectual authority; the second, authority associated
with governing and societal activity. Both were embodied in the person
of the Prophet. In the light of what we have learned with respect to
circumstances, the Prophet had had to determine the most fitting
extension of his rule which could sustain each of these two authorities,
in order that intellectual authority might fill any lacunae to be faced
by the Muslim mind. A proper notion needs to be advanced - i.e. the
Islamic viewpoint - on any intellectual or life issues evoked. It must
explicate what appears ambiguous and obscure in the Holy Book.[^1]

The Qur'an constitutes the primary source for intellectual authority in
Islam. Finally, the purpose is for socio-political authority to resume
its course and to lead the trek of Islam along a societal path.

These two types of authority are combined within the Household of the
Prophet by force of those circumstances we considered earlier. Prophetic
traditions have always confirmed this. The prime example of a tradition
dealing with intellectual authority is the *hadith* of the “Two Weights”
(*hadith al-thaqlayn*)*,* where the Prophet proclaims:

I am about to be summoned [before my Lord], and must comply. I leave
with ye two weighty things: God's Book, a rope from Heaven to Earth; and
my progeny, the members of my Household. God the Gracious, the
All-Knowing has informed me that they shall separate not to the day when
they will be restored to me at the Basin. You behold how, you do by them
after I am gone![^2]

The chief example of a Prophetic stipulation concerning authority in the
exercise of leadership over society is *hadith al-Ghadir.* It is
presented by Tabarani, on the grounds of its universally-accepted
soundness, through Zayd b. Arqam's words:

The Messenger of God gave his sermon at Ghadir Khum beneath some trees,
declaring. “O People, I am about to be summoned [before my Lord], and
must comply. I shall be held to account and ye shall be held to account.
But what will you say?” They replied, “We shall testify that you have
delivered [the Message], striven and counseled. May God reward you for
it!”

He then told them, “Would you not testify that there is no god but God
[*Allah*], and that Muhammad is his Servant and Messenger that His
Paradise is real and His Hell-Fire real; that death is real; that the
resurrection after death is real; that the Hour shall without a doubt
come; that God resurrects all those who lie in their graves?” They said:
“Nay, we shall testify to all this!” To which he replied, “O God be Thee
Witness! O People God is my Guardian and I guardian of the faithful. I
am more so than their own selves. For whomsoever I am a guardian, he too
[i.e. \`Ali] is his guardian. Lord, guard over the one who guards over
him, and be a foe to his foe.”[^3]

Thus, of a considerable number of like traditions, these two outstanding
Prophetic *hadiths* provide for the embodiment of both kinds of
authority in the Prophet's Household. The Islamic current upholding the
devotional act based on the Prophet's full stipulations believed in
these authorities, and comprised those Muslims who were the benevolent
friends of the Household.

But whereas the socio-political authority belonging to every Imam
implies the exercise of power while he lives, intellectual authority is
a permanent, unconditional reality unconfined to the period of his
lifetime. Therefore, it has a living, practical meaning for every
period. So long as the Muslims needed a definitive understanding of
Islam, an acquaintance with its provisions, legality, prohibitions,
concepts and moral values, there will be need for an intellectual
Divinely-defined authority epitomized, firstly, by the Book of God;
secondly, by the Prophet's Tradition (*sunnat rasulihi*) and that of the
immaculate descendents, if the Household, who never have and never would
diverge from the Books as indeed the Prophet himself has stipulated.[^4]

Fronts they very outset, the second tendency, which upholds independent
legal judgement rather than the devotional act according to the text,
had decided. with the death of the Prophet on transferring the authority
for exercising political power to some leading personalities of the
*Muhajirin,* thereby conforming with shifting and rather maleable
considerations.

Immediately following the Prophet's death, the transfer of power to Abu
Bakr was based on what came out of the limited discussions at the
Saqifah session.[^5] \`Umar later ascended to the Caliphate after being
appointed by Abu Bakr[^6]; \`Uthman followed suit through an
undesignated appointment by \`Umar.[^7] Accommodation, a third of a
century after the Prophet's passing, led to the infiltration to
positions of power by the offspring of all those Meccans who had held
out to the last (*al-Tulaqa*)[^8] and who just yesterday had been
fighting Islam.

All that relates to political authority in its exercise of power.
Intellectual authority, on the other hand, was difficult to institute in
the members of the Household. Independent legal judgement therewith led
to dispossession of their political authority, since the latter's
institution entailed the creation of objective conditions for a transfer
of power to them and a merging of the two kinds of authority.

However, it was equally difficult to acknowledge intellectual authority
in a power-wielding Caliph, the requirements of intellectual authority
being different from those of the exercise of power. The feeling that a
person is qualified to exercise power did not automatically imply that
his installation as intellectual leader - the highest authority after
the Qur'an and Prophetic Tradition in matters of theoretical
understanding - was thought feasible. This kind of leadership required a
high degree of refinement and theoretical comprehension, and clearly
none of the Companions was more adequately endowed with it than the
rest, if the members of the Household are excluded.[^9]

The result was that the balance of intellectual authority continued to
swing for some time. The Caliphs, in many instances, dealt with Imam
\`Ali on the basis of his intellectual authority, or something
approaching that. So much so that the Second Caliph repeated many times
that “If not for 'Ali, \`Umar would surely have perished.

God forbid that there be a problem and no Abu Hasan to [solve]
it...”[^10] Nevertheless, after the Prophet's passing, the Muslims in
time became accustomed to see Imam \`Ali and the Household as ordinary
subjects, whose intellectual authority was not indispensable, but
transferable to some reasonable substitute. That substitute was rot to
be the Caliph himself, but the Prophet's Companions.

The principle of the Companions' collective authority was gradually
postulated thus, in place of the authority of the Household. The
substitute became palatable once the properly appointed authority was
passed over, because the Companions' generation was said to have kept
close company with the Prophet, thrived while he lived, embraced his
experience, heeded his words and practice.[^11]

For all practical purposes, the members of the Household lost their
God-given distinction to form part of the intellectual authority merely
as Companions. But the Companions themselves were apt to experience
sharp differences and conflicts, which sometimes reached the point of
hostilities, with each party drawing the other's blood, impugning his
honour, hurling accusations of deviation and betrayal.[^12]

These differences and accusations, occurring as they did inside the
intellectual leadership and doctrinal authority itself, engendered all
manner of intellectual and doctrinal conflict[^13] within the body of
the Islamic community. The latter reflected the conflictual dimensions
of the intellectual leadership established by independent judgement.

[^1]: Please refer to what we have tried to establish in the Appendix
concerning this question: that is, the scope of Imam \`Ali's power; his
comprehension of God's Book; his grasp of the “particular” and the
“general” (of its various applications); of the abrogating and abrogated
verses, its provisions and laws, the text's explicit and implicit
senses. See, for example, Suyuti's al-Ittiqan IV:234.

[^2]: Al-Hakim al-Nisaburi, al-Mustadrak \`ala al-Sah'ih III:119, where
the author says, “It was corrected according to conditions set by
al-Shaykhayn [i.e. al-Bukhari and Muslim] and presented by al-Muslim
accordingly (cf. IV:1874. See Sahih al-Tirmidhi's I:130 ; al-Nassa'i,
al-Sunan al-kubra V:622; Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal's Musnad IV:217,
III:14-7 - Imam. See also Sunan al-Darimi II:432 (Ch. “Fazia'il al
Qur'an”? (Dar Ihya al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah).

[^3]: On the margins, Imam Baqir al-Sadr points out the following:
Hadith al-Ghadir is widely reported in books on traditions by both
Shiites and Sunnis. The experts reckon the number of Companions who
reported this hadith to be over a hundred. Those belonging to the
following generation [al-tabi'in] who relate it number over eighty;
those in the second century Hijri who committed the Qur'an and the
traditions to memory nearly sixty individuals. Cf al-\`Allamah al-Amini,
Kitab al-Ghadir. In this book, the \`Allamah al-Amini offers a number of
hadiths reported by Zayd b. Arqam in their different version. It appears
that Imam al-Sadr collected these accounts in exactly the same form.
(Cf. “al-Ghadir” I:31-6; also, in the Appendix, see how the hadith in
question was presented, including in Sunan Ibn Majah I:11 (of the
Introduction)). See Musnad Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal IV:281, 368 (Dar Sadir).

[^4]: The famous hadith al-thaqlayn, about which we have already given
explanation.

[^5]: Cf Tarikh al-Tabari, “Nusus al-Saqifah” II:234.

[^6]: Ibid; see the description of \`Umar's investiture.

[^7]: See the description of the six consultative members involved in
\`Uthman's investiture, see Ta'rikh al-Tabari II:580. Cf Imam Ali's
“Shaqshaqiyyah Address,” Sermon No. 3, Nahj al-balaghah, edited by Dr.
Subhi al-Salih, p. 48. Also, Ibn Abi al­ Hadid's commentary on it I:151
ff (ed. Abu al-Fadl Ibrahim; and \`Abd al-Fattah \`Abd al-Maqsud),
al-Saqifah wal khilafah, p. 264.

[^8]: Al-tulaqa is a term used to describe those who embraced Islam only
at the moment when Mecca was gained over, including Abu Sufyan and his
son Muawiyah (Tarikh al-Tabari II:161), this with the knowledge that
they were both among those referred to as “al-muallafat qullubuhum” (cf.
Tarikh al-Tabari II:175).

[^9]: Their need for Imam \`Ali's authority, according to many textual
sources showing their open admission to this effect (cf. Suyuti's Tarikh
al-khulafa, p. 171); whereas Imam 'Ali never had to seek the authority
of any one of them in matters of law or its provisions.

[^10]: Al-Tabaqat al-kubra II:339.

[^11]: Imam Baqir al-Sadr's appraisal of the first generation of
Companions reveals the extent of objectivity maintained in his treatment
of both the Muslims' history and the role of those who began teaming
around Islam. Secondly, substituting the Companions for the Household
was hardly accepted by many prominent Companions, such as Salman,
\`Ammar, Abu Dharr, al-Miqdad and others - they all remained loyal to
the Household. Thirdly, although the ways of the Companions or their
utterances prevailed, there was not complete acceptance that their views
were defensible. It suffices to say that the way of the two Elders (i.e.
Caliphs) was proposed to Imam \`Ali the day of consultation, but was not
accepted. See the knowledgeable and quite satisfactory discussion in
al-\`Allamah Muhammad Taqi al-Hakim, al-Usul al-\`ammah lil ­fiqh
al-muqaran, pp. 133-42.

[^12]: Note the accusation by \`Umar b. Khattab, the second Caliph,
against Khalid b. al-Walid of having killed a Muslim and then turned on
his wife (Ta'rikh al-Tabar'i II:274 [Beirut: Dar al-Kutub
al-\`Ilmiyyah).

[^13]: Cf Dr. Muhammad Salaam Madkur, Manahij al-ijtihad concerning the
emergence of theological (kalamiyyah) and legal (fiqhiyyah) factions and
schools in Islam, along with the disputes that erupted among them. See
also Shahrastani, al-Milal wal-nihal I:15ff.


