Introduction
============

Initiated by the Prophet, the intellectual and moral preparation for
'Ali b. Abi Talib's Guardianship and Succession proceeded along two
parallel but complementary lines: the preparation of Ali and of the
*Ummah,* both at the same time. While the Prophet, as Leader, was
committed to a special intellectual and doctrinal education for \`Ali
that conformed to a rigorous daily schedule, he also took charge of the
Muslim *Ummah's* mental adjustment.

He undertook to educate it intellectually and doctrinally in order
firmly to establish \`Ali's Guardianship. He wanted to ensure that \`Ali
was qualified to lead the journey, the whole experience, of Islam
immediately after he departs. According to numerous sources, as we shall
see, direct Revelation was another interposing factor pointing in this
direction.

Invariably, the Qur'an comes down sometimes lauding Ali's virtues and
other times pointing to his special qualities. It identifies him as
being unique, to the point of making the delivery of God's Message
conditional upon the announcement of his Guardianship or its
proclamation to the *Ummah.* We shall be seeking to establish this in
our appendix to Imam al-Sadr's already deep and original inquiry.

We shall arrange our own study into three discussions. The first
discussion will present 'Ali's intellectual and moral preparation for
the task of leading after the Prophet. The second will deal with the
intellectual and moral preparation of the Muslim *Ummah* for the sake of
this task. The third will demonstrate the pertinence of \`Ali's unique
and special knowledge of the Qur'an to this task.

In this summary essay, we shall try to shed light on these facts by
relying on the accepted rules and principles of scholarly investigation,
without exaggeration or artifice. The study will be based on *had'ith*
and exegetical works written by scholars, traditionists, renowned
researchers and prominent Sunnis. We pray that God may extend His
assistance.


