The Second Discussion: The Preparation and Adaptation of the Ummah to 'Ali's Succession
=======================================================================================

The task of educating the *Ummah* to receive \`Ali's Caliphate and
direction over the advance of Islam after the Prophet, began early
on -when the Prophet was first commanded (by God) to give admonition and
to communicate his Message:

***“Divulge what ye have been commanded and turn away from the
idol-worshippers” (Qur'an 25:94 “al-Hajar'').***

According to al-Tabari, \`Before this, in the three years prior to his
being sent forth and commanded to come out openly with the call to God,
he had been concealing his [God-given] command; then this was revealed
to him: \`And admonish thy nearest kinsfolk”' (Qur'an 26:214
*“al-Shu'ara”*)*.* In this connection, al-Tabari transmitted \`Abd Allah
b. Abbas' statement about \`Ali b. Abi Talib, who said:

When that verse was revealed to God's Messenger ...he called upon me,
saying, “O \`Ali God hath commanded me to admonish my nearest kinsfolk.
But I am uneasy, for I know: when I divulge this Command, what I shall
face from them will be to my utter dismay.

I held my silence on it, until [the Archangel] Gabriel came to me and
said: \`O Muhammad, if ye do not make good what you have been ordered to
do, your Lord shall punish thee.' So bring forth a bit of nourishment,
add to it a cut of leg, fill our jars with milk and bring together Banu
\`Abd al-Mutallib that I may speak and convey to them what I have been
commanded. With that, I shall have done what He has ordered me to do: to
call them to God.' On that day they were forty strong, more or less,
including his uncles Abu Talib, al-Hamzah, al-\`Abbas, Abu Lahab...

So the attempt was made. After they had drunk and eaten, al­ Tabari goes
on,

The Messenger of God spoke: “O Banu \`Abd al-Mutallib, I know of no
younger man among the Arabs, who has brought his people something better
than what I am bringing to you [now]. I come to you with the best of
this world and of the next. God has commanded me to call you to Him. And
so, which of you will help me with this matter, becoming a brother,
caretaker and successor to me.”

[\`Alil explained, “Everyone recoiled from this. Although I was not
their equal to age and still the most bleary-eyed of the lot, I called
out: I will, O Prophet of God, I shall be your aid in that. He took me
by the nape, declaring, \`This shalt be my brother, caretaker and
successor - among ye all. So hearken and obey (' The people, he
continued, then took to laughing, saying to Abu T-alibi “He orders you
to hearken and to obey, your son!”

This narrative makes it clear that the first act of mental preparation
for the acceptance of \`Ali, as Guardian and Successor, occurred in a
private milieu (that of the nearest kinsfolk). It took place alongside
the announcement of Muhammad's calling and the declaration of his
prophethood.

However, the preparation of the *Ummah* had another aim. Barely was the
Qur'an being gradually revealed, certainly far from complete, when 'Ali
began fighting alongside the Prophet. Qur'anic verses were thus revealed
which praised 'Ali's excellence and virtues - all in the same vein.
Based on al-Suyuti's account, Ibn \`Asakir has written that “Nothing has
been revealed in God's Book on a person as much as on \`Ali...”[^1]

He cited Ibn \`Abbas as saying that “About \`Ali there are 300
[Qur'anic] verses.”[^2] We shall adduce some of the verses, or ayat
(sing., *ayah*)*,* which are noted by more than one person as having
been revealed about \`Ali. Falling within our purview, they mark the
reality of the *Ummah's* preparation and education in this respect.

i) There are these words of God:

***“To those who have faith and perform deeds of righteousness the
All-Merciful shall bring Love” (Qur'an 19:96 “Maryam”).***

According to various chains of transmission (*asanid*)*,* several of
those who had memorized the Qur'an stated that these verses were
revealed about 'Ali, on the grounds that “there is no Muslim who does
not have love for \`Ali...”[^3]

It is related that al-Barra' b. \`Azib has asserted that the Prophet
said to \`Ali b. Abi Tahb, “O \`Ali, say, \`Grant me, Lord, Thy keep
and, in the hearts of the faithful, Love.' And so God revealed, \`Truly,
those faithful...' - which is about \`Ali.”[^4]

ii) God says: “These two adversaries quarrel over their Lord...” 'Ali is
recorded as saying, “On the day of Resurrection, I shall be the first to
fall on my, knees before the All-Merciful on account of the disputes.”
Qay s explains that “About them was revealed \`These two adversaries
quarrel over their Lord...,' they being those who disputed on the Day of
Badr: 'Ali, Hamzah, \`Ubaydah, Shaybah b. Rabi'ah...”[^5]

iii) God says:

***“And God turned back the faithless, for all their rage; they availed
themselves of naught. God suffices for the faithful in their fight”
(Qur'an 33:25 “alAhzab”).***

More than one authority has related that \`Abd Allah b. Mas\`ud read
\`Ali into the phrase “God suffices for the faithful in their
fight.”[^6]

iv) God says:

***“O ye who have faith, heed God and be amongst those who are true”
(Qur'an 9:119 “al-Tawbah”).***

More than one memorizer and traditionist has related Ibn \`Abbas' remark
that “that was [a reference] especially to 'Ali b. Abi Talib.”[^7]

v) God says:

***“Those who harm the men and women of faith for no reason are wont to
bear with clear calumny and offense” (Qur'an 33:58 “al-Ahzab”).***

The view transmitted through various channels is that it has to do with
\`Ali, as a number of “Hypocrites” used to bring harm to and tell lies
about him.[^8]

Thus established is that these verses were revealed in order to show the
position of \`Ali, the greatness of his personality, his large role in
the life of the Prophet and of the Mission. The faithful needed to be
adverted of these realities and to comply with them. This is confirmed
by Prophetic *hadiths* that proffer these senses. The Companion Sa\`d b.
Abi Waqqas declared,

Mu'awiyah ordered me to curse Abu al-Turab. I replied that so long as I
can recall the three things said to him by the Prophet, I shall not
curse him. For me to possess just one of them would be dearer than the
rarest of cattle: the Prophet had made him vicegerent during one of his
expeditions. \`Ali said, “O Prophet of God, you have left me behind with
the children and the women.”

I heard God's Messenger answer, “But you do consent to be related to me
in the same station that Aaron was to Moses, save that there shalt be no
prophethood after me.”[^9] I heard him say also on the Day of Khaybar,
“Truly, I shall give the standard to a man who loves God and His
Messenger, and whom ? d and His Messenger love in return.” We strained
toward it then.[^10] [And the Messenger] said, \`Bring \`Ali to me!”
[With this] his eyes were sore; so he put spittle in, them and handed
the standard over to [\`Ali]. God then granted him victory.

Then the following verse was revealed,

***If anyone disputes with you over this, now that you have received
knowledge, say, “Come, let us call upon all our sons and all your sons,
all our women and all your women, ourselves and yourselves; and humbly
make our supplication, invoking God's curse upon all those who lie!”
(Qur an 3:61 \` Al \`Umraan” ).***

And the Messenger called on 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, declaring,
“Lord, these are my family!” This is related by Muslim[^11] and
Tirmidhi.[^12] In this account given by Sa\`d, certain things need to be
emphasized:

A) The revelation of the verse called ayat al-mubahalab (“Verse of
Imprecation”), mentioned in his account above, concerns \`Ali, his wife
al-Batul, his two sons Hasan and Husayn.

B) These are, exclusively, all the Members of the Household.[^13]
Accordingly, it is understood that they are the ones intended by the
ayat *al-tathir* (“Verse of Putification”) - namely, where God says:

***“And God only wishes to remove all sully from thee, ye Members of the
Household, to make thee wholly pure” (Qur'an 33:33 “al-Ahzab”)***

And in this verse \`Ali's inculpability, trustworthiness, eminence -
indeed, impeccancy (*ismah*) - become evident.

Thus begins the question of entitlement, since \`Ali occupies the rank
of Successor, Guardian and the one who was to steer the course of the
community. As al-Raghib al-Isfahani said,

None is more eligible to be God's Vicegerent nor apt to complete his
worship of God and clear His land than the pure of spirit, from whom all
defilement has vanished. Just like the body, the soul has its
defilement; although the former can be directly seen, whereas that of
the soul is perceived only through insight. No one is equal to the
Caliphate who is not pure of spirit because to be Caliph is to emulate
God according to what is humanly possible. As for the impure in both
word and deed, every- vessel that carries him leaks...[^14]

It is evident from this that, after lauding \`Ali's excellence and
virtues, the Qur'an elevates him to a chastened level of absolute
“purification,” and then to a level that is of the greatest consequence,
since it likens his soul to that of the Prophet Muhammad, as is clear
from the “Verse of Imprecation.” It was on this basis that the Prophet
had time and again declared, \`Ali is of me and I am of \`Alt.”[^15]

When certain persons tried to complain about \`Ali, hoping to upset his
station and position, the Prophet returned, “What do you want with
\`Ali?” repeating this three times; and then, “'Ali is of me and I am of
him.”[^16] In order to thwart those sceptical of the exalted position
accorded to 'Ali by the Prophet to ensure his *waliyyah*
(“guardianship”) and successorship (*khilafah*) in everything of
consequence to the Muslims, God declared:

***“Your Guardian [wakiyukum] is God, His Messenger and those faithful
who establish regular prayer and regular charity - these are wont to bow
down [in worship]” (Qur'an 5:58 “al-Ma'idah”).***

Al ­Zamakhshari pointed out that this blessed verse was revealed about
\`Ali when a beggar gestured the Prophet who, though bent over in
prayer, surrendered his ring to him.[^17] To remove the ambiguity and to
preempt all speculation about what was intended by the term *Waliyy* or
was meant to be designated in these texts, the Prophet on more than one
occasion stated that “Ali-is of me and I am of 'Ali. And after me, he
shall be the Guardian [*wali*] of every believer...”[^18]

In order to confirm \`Ali's Guardianship and momentous role in relation
to the Call of Islam, the Prophet stated: “\`Ali is of me and I am of
\`Ali. And no one can carry out my task [that is, in his capacity of
messenger and prophet] but myself and \`Ali...”[^19] This notion was
finely established in practice, publicly and in the light of day, in
connection with the matter concerning the delivery of *“Surat
al­Bara'ah,”*[^20] Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal transmits in his *Musnad* from
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq. Abd Bakr said that,

the Prophet had sent him with *Surat al Baraa'ah* to the Meccans. He had
trecked for three days, when the Prophet told \`Ali, “Catch up to him!”
\`Ali returned Abu Bakr and delivered the *surah* himself. When Abu Bakr
arrived before the Messenger, he said, “O Messenger, has anything
[unseemly] come to light in me? He answered, “I have seen nothing but
goodness from you But I was told that no one but myself or someone of my
kin shall ...”[^21]

In the *Kashsha*, it is related that after Abu Bakr had travelled part
of the way - in order to deliver *Surat al-Bara'ah* - Gabriel descended
to say: “O Muhammad, only someone of your kin shall deliver thy Message.
So send \`Ali.[^22]

The Qur'an puts the seal on the vitally important theme of intellectual
and moral preparation with this last thing revealed in *ayat al-tabligh*
(“V'erse of the Delivery”), and again with *ayat al-ikmal* (“Verse of
Perfection'''), which followed the *haidth* of al-Ghadir. With that,
there should be no difficulty.

The story of Ghadir handed down by the transmitters, with some
differences, is as follows. When the Prophet returned from his
Pilgrimage of Farewell, he received this insistent revelation:

***“O Messenger, convey what has been revealed unto thee from thy Lord;
if not, ye shall fail to deliver His Message. And God will protect thee
from men” (Qur'an, 5:70 “al-Ma'idah”***)[^23]

He halted the caravan at Ghadir Khum, gathering the people at midday in
the intense heat to address them.

I am about to be summoned [before my Lord], with which I must comply. I
leave thee two weighty things one of which is the rater: God's Book and
my progeny and (according to Muslim's account, [^24]“the members of my
householdl”]. Ye behold how you do by them after I am gone! They shall
separate not to the day when they will be restored to me at the Basin.

He then uttered, “Truly, God is my Guardian and I am guardian for every
believer.” He took \`Ali's hand and proclaimed:

The one for whom I have been guardian:[^25] here is his friend, his
guardian. Lord, be the Friend of whomever befriends him, foe to whomever
is inimical to him, disappoint the one discontented with him, assist the
one who assists him,[^26] and wherever he roams let Truth roam with
him...'[^27]

This important event was followed by one more revelation:

***“This day have I perfected for you thy religion, completed my favour
upon you and countenanced Islam [\`the Submission to God] as your
religion...” (Qur'an 5:4 “al-Ma'idah”).***

In some reports, the Prophet's statement after receiving revelation or,
that memorable day of Ghadir - namely, the 18 Dhu al-Hujjah[^28] - was:
“God is Greater! Praise be to God that religion has been perfected and
His Favour completed.

He has countenanced my mission and the Guardianship of \`Ali after
me.”[^29] According to Ahmad's account, “\`Umar b. al-Khattab met him
[i.e. Ali] and, after offering his felicitations, said to him, \`You are
Guardian to every man and woman of faith, morning and night!”[^30]

What is regretable is that some people begrudged \`Ali for being given
such rank and distinction. Some became increasingly clamorous and
argumentative when the Prophet singled him out for this honour. The
Prophet was, therefore, compelled to remind them that he was a Messenger
sent by the Lord of all creation, that he must fulfil what he has been
commanded to do –

***\` And he does not speak from whim; it is but a revelation revealed”
(Qur'an 53:3-4 “al-Najm”).***

This is evidenced by what Tirmidhi reported from Jabir b. \`Abd Allah:
“The 'Messenger called on \`Ali on the Day of Ta'if, and whispered to
him in secret. People then said, \`His whispering to his uncle's son has
lasted long.' The Prophet said, \`It was not I who whispered to him, but
God...”[^31]

Maymun, based on Zayd b. Arqam, related that a number of the Prophet's
Companions had doors leading to the place of worship [*masjid*]*.* One
day, the Messenger barred them, with the exception of \`Ali's. He spoke
about all these persons; rose, praised and extolled God. “Now, I have
been commanded to bar all these doors except \`Ali's.” About this he
declared \`But I say to you, I have neither barred nor gfned anything. I
have been commanded something and complied...”[^32]

In this manner, whenever the Prophet used to single \`Ali out for
distinction, thereby excluding others, he made it clear to the *Ummah*
that it was by God's command. It took place when \`Ali was dispatched,
in place of Abu Bakr, to deliver *Surat al-Bara'ah;* and again on the
“Day of Whispering” at Ta'if, on the “Day of Ghadir,” and so on.

What is noteworthy about the most decisive moments in Islamic history
and in the life of the Prophet - insofar as they helped safeguard the
Islamic experience and its future - is that the Prophet used to send off
and to call for \`Ali as he did no other person. He used to do this on
account of the critical nature of these situations, in order to ward off
unexpected dangers.

This occurred during the great Battle of Badr, while \`Ali carried the
standard and slew some leading personalities among the Idolaters. It was
repeated on the Day of Uhud, when he slew Talhah b. \`Utbman, the banner
bearer of the Idolaters.

Al-Tabari reported that, after 'Ali b. Abi Talib had slain the banner
beaters [i.e. the “brigade commanders'], the Prophet caught sight of a
group of Idolaters, and asked 'Ali to move against them. So he did,
dispersing them all and killing \`Amr al Jamhi. Then [the Prophet]
noticed [another) gr oup of Idolaters, and told 'Ali to move against
them. He dispersed them and killed Shaybah b. Malik. Thence, Gabriel
asked: “This, O Prophet, is consolation”; whereupon the Prophet
announced, “He is of me and I am of him.” And Gabriel said: “And I am of
both of you.”

Al-Tabari adds that they then heard a rejoicing voice, “No sword is
there like Dhu al-Fiqar, no vigorous youth like \`Ali.”[^33]

Based on al-Bukhari and Muslim, it is sufficient just to refer to what
Sa\`d b. Abi Waqqas has reported concerning the Day of Khaybar.”[^34]
Al-Tabarani and Ibn Abi Hatim related about Ibn \`Abbas that he uttered:
“God censured the Companions of God's Messenger in places but spoke of
\`Ali only well.”[^35]

[^1]: Tar'ikh al-khulafa, p. 171; al-Sawaiq al-muhriqah by Ibn Hajar, p.
127.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Cf. Ibn Na\`im al-Isbahani, Ma nazala min al Qur'an fi Ali,
compiled by Shaykh al-Mahmudi, p. 130ff.

[^4]: al-Haskani, Shawahid al-tanzil I:360-61, First Edition.

[^5]: al-Tajj al jami lil-usul IV:181. Also related by al-Bukhari and
Muslim in Kitab-al ­tafsir.

[^6]: Ibn Na'im, Ma nazala min al Qur'an fi Ali, ed. Mahmudi, p. 172.

[^7]: Abu Na'im, Ma nazala min al Qur'an fi Ali, p. 104. Cf the notes
where he relates accounts which have different chains of transmission.
See also Ibn Hajar, al-Sawaiq al-muhriqah, p. 152.

[^8]: Cf. Tafsir al-kashshaf III:559.

[^9]: Hadith al-Manzilah, already cited above. Cf. al-Tajj al jami
lil-usul III:332 (recounted also by al-Bukhari, Muslim and al-Tirmidhi).

[^10]: Cf. Abu Hurayrah's account, where \`Umar says, “I have never
desired to command as I did that day, I leapt toward it” (al-Tajj al
jami lil-usul III:331; recounted by al-Bukhari and Muslim).

[^11]: Sahih Muslim, IV: 1873.

[^12]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi V:596. Cf. Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq al-muhriqah,
p. 143; cf. the account al-Tajj al jami lil-usul III:333.

[^13]: al-Tajj al jami lil-usul IV:207. Two narrators, al-Tirmidhi and
Muslim, relate that \`Umar b. Umm Salamah, the Prophet's stepson, had
said, When the verse on “purificatio” (tathir) was revealed in the house
of Umm Salamah the Prophet called on Fatimah, Hasan, Husayn and \`Ali He
then draped them in a shroud, saying: “Lord these are the members of my
household. So remove all sully and wholly purify them.” Umm. Salamah
asked, “Am I not among them, O Prophet, He answered, “Do not change your
place, as you are fortunate.”

[^14]: Ibn al-Mufaddal al-Raghib al-Isfahani, al-Dhariah ila makarim
al-Shariah, First Edition, edited and annotated by Taha \`Abd al-Ra'uf
Sad (Cairo: Maktabat al­ Kulliyyah al-Azhariyyah, 1393 Al-1), p. 29. For
the meaning of al-\`ismah (“impeccancy'“), see Muhammad Taqi al-Hakim,
al-sul al-\`Aammah lil-fiqh al-muqarin, p. 174.

[^15]: Nasif, al-Tajj al jami lil-usul, III:334; see also al-Suyuti's
Tarikh al-khulafa ; p. 169.

[^16]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi V:594.

[^17]: Al-Kashshaf I:649, where al-Zamakhshari says in a note on the
history of the hadith, “It was recounted by Ibn Abi Hatim through
Salamah b. Kahil, who said, \`He gave me his ring in alms while bent
over [in prayer], and it was revealed”' - i.e. the Qur'anic verse;
similarly related by Ibn Mardawayh, through Sufyan al-Thawri through Ibn
Sunan, through al-Dahhak, through Ibn 'Abbas. Cf. also Asbab al-nuzul,
p. 134, where al-Wahidi says it was revealed about \`Ali

[^18]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, Ch. “Fada'il al-Imam Ali'; cf. al-Tajj al jami
lil-usul III:335.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: The ninth surat, otherwise called Surat al-Tawbah.

[^21]: Musnad al-Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal I:3 (Dar nadir); Tafsir
al-Kashshaf al-Zamakhshari II:243; also the account given in Sahih
al-Tirmidhi V:594.

[^22]: Al-Kashshaf

[^23]: Al-Wahidi stated that the verse came down at Ghadir Khum (Asbab
al nuzul, p. 135).

[^24]: Sahih Muslim IV:1874.

[^25]: al-Tajj al jami lil-usul, III:333. This is reported by Zay d b.
Arqam about the Prophet, and is also found in Sahih al-Tirmidhi (V:591).

[^26]: Musnad al-Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal, IV:271, 368 (Dar Sadir). Cf,
Tafsir Ibn Kathir I:22; “Introduction,” Sunan Ibn Majah I, Ch. 11. See
also the full and satisfactory investigations in Asanid al-Hadith
al-Ghadir by al-Allamah al-Amini; and also Ibn Kathirs al-Bidayah wa
al-nihayah VII:360-61, where it is reported through several lines of
transmission.

[^27]: al-Tajj al jami lil-usul III:337. It is separated reported here:
“May God have mercy on \`Ali. Wherever he roams let Truth roam with
him...”

[^28]: On the report concerning the revelation of the Verse of Ghadir
and the fact that it was on 18 Dhu al-Hujjah, see al-Suyuti, al-Ittiqan
I:75. Cf. also al-Wahidi, Asbab al ­nuzul, p. 135.

[^29]: Mananaqib Amir al-muminin I:119, by al-Hafiz Muhammad b. Salman
al-Kufi al­Qadi (one of the eminent figures of the third century),
edited by al-Shaykh al ­Mahmudi. Majma\` ihya' al-thaqafah al-istamiyyah
(Qum, 1412 A H).

[^30]: Musnad al-Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal IV:281. When \`Ali called for
witnesses from the crowd, thirty persons attested that they heard this
utterance from the Prophet. Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah
VII:360.

[^31]: Cf. Sahih al-Tirmidhi, p. V:597. See also Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah
wa al-nihayah VII:369; al-Tajj al jami lil-usul , III:336.

[^32]: Musnad al-Imam Ahmad IV:369; cf. Ta'rikh Ibn Kathir VII:355.

[^33]: Ta'rikh al-Tabari II:25, 65-6 (Beirut: al-Maktabah
al-\`ilmiyyah).

[^34]: Sa\`d's account as given by al-Bukhari and Muslim - see ns. 54
and 55 .

[^35]: Al-Suyuti, Ta'rikh al-khulafa; p. 171.


