Part 1:The Emergence of Shi'ism
===============================

Preliminary Remarks
-------------------

With respect to the first question - “What is the origin of
Shi\`ism?” -one may safely regard Shi'ism as a consequence that is
natural to Islam, representing a thesis whose realization is imperative
for the Call (or Mission of Islam[^1]) if the latter's sound progress is
to be assured.

It is possible for us logically to infer this thesis from the Call of
Islam, led by the Prophet, because its formation was natural and due to
particular circumstances. The Prophet had put into practice a
revolutionary leadership, and drove for a comprehensive change of
society, its conventions, structures and ideas. But the road to such a
change was not to be a short one. It was long, extending the length of
that deep spiritual chasm separating pre-Islam from Islam. The calling
pursued by the Prophet had to begin with the man of pre-Islam in order
to create a new being out of him; it was from the pre-Islamic world that
the man of Islam would issue, carrying the new light to the rest of the
world. This Mission had to extirpate every last root and vestige in him
of pre-Islam.[^2]

Within a short period of time, this remarkable leader was able to make
quite amazing progress in the drive for change. But this drive had also
to continue its lengthy path even after his death. The Prophet had known
for some time that his term was nearing an end. He openly announced it
at the “Farewell Pilgrimage.”[^3] Death hardly took him by surprise.
That means that he had ample opportunity to ponder the fate of the
Mission beyond his lifetime, even if we disregard the element of a
liaison with the hidden world, or for that matter the direct Grace of
God evinced by the Message revealed to him.[^4]

In the light of this, we may note that the Prophet had before him three
possible paths to choose from with respect to the future. First, the
path of denial; second, the affirmative path (for example,
consultation); third, appointment.[^5] These will constitute the three
discussions to be taken up below.

[^1]: These two terms, “Call” and “Mission” of Islam, are used
interchangeably in this translation - Translator.

[^2]: The Qur'an affirms that “He is the one who sends down to His
servants the clear signs, that He may bring ye out of the veils of
darkness and unto the Light” (57:9 “al­Had”).

[^3]: This was done at the formal address of the Farewell Pilgrimage,
where he declared: “I am about to be summoned forth, and am about to
reply.” And in another account: “It is as if I am being summoned forth
and am answering. Verily, I leave thee two weighty things...” (Sahih
Muslim, IV4:1874). \`Abd Allah b. Mas\`ud, is reported as saying, \`We
were with the Prophet [May God Bless him and his household] one night,
when he sighed. So, I asked him, \`What ails you, O Messenger of God?'
He said: \`My death has been announced to me”' (Mukhtasar Ta'r'ikh Ibn
Asakir XVIII:32).

[^4]: That is, if we suppose the Prophet to have been so keen to have
his blessed calling go the full length set for it - as indeed it was his
nature to be - and to have striven to take it to the rest of the world,
it could only be that he took it upon himself to reckon the future.

[^5]: That is, of a successor - Translator.


