The First Discussion: The Genesis of Two Main Currents during the Prophet's Lifetime
====================================================================================

The two chief tendencies closely associated, from the start, with the
emergence of the Islamic *Ummah* during the Prophet's lifetime are:

One, the current representing a belief in the devotional acts of
religion, its arbitral power and the unconditional acceptance of
religious stipulations for every aspect of life.[^1]

The second is a current which sees religious faith as eliciting
devotional deed only within the special scope of overt and covert acts
of worship. It believes in the possibility of independent legal
Judgement (*ijtihad*) and free discretion for the amendment and
improvement of religious stipulations according to benefits (*masalih*)
which might accrue in other domains of life.[^2]

The Companions, being foremost in faith and enlightenment, were the best
fit to create an apostolic community (*Ummah risaliyyyah*); so much so
that in all of human history no doctrinally-cohesive generation has been
nobler, more magnificent or unsullied than the one brought up by the
Prophet. Despite this, one must accept the existence of a wider
tendency - beginning while the Prophet was still alive - proffering
independent legal judgement as a way of determining “benefit” and
inferring it from the circumstances. It emphasized, on the other hand,
devotional acts in strict accordance with the letter, religiously
stipulated.

The Prophet on many occasions suffered indignation on account of this
tendency, even in his last hours, as he lay on his deathbed (as we shall
see).[^3] But there is the other tendency, which consists in a belief in
and acceptance of the arbitral power of religion, such that devotional
acts accord with both the religious stipulations and every aspect of
life.

One of the reasons behind the spread among Muslims of the tendency
toward independent legal judgement is that it seemed to cohere with
man's natural inclination to exercise his discretion, especially in view
of a perceived or valued benefit rather than of some resolution whose
significance he can hardly fathom.

This current counted several bold representatives from among the more
well-placed Companions. One case in point is \`Umar b. al-Khattab, who
used to argue with the Prophet and to exercise independent legal
judgement on a number of issues in a way that was at variance with the
provisions of the law. He believed this to be permissible so long as he
thought his judgement did not impugn “benefit.” In this respect, one may
note his position regarding the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah and his
protestations against it.[^4]

It is observable in regard to several other issues, including the call
to ritual prayer (*al-adhan*)*,* where he exercised his free discretion
by omitting the phrase, “Come to the best of deeds” (*hayya* *\`ala
khayr amal*)[^5]; his position concerning the Prophet's legalization of
*mut'at al-hajj* (“marriage during the pilgrimage”)[^6]; and other
positions on independent legal Judgement.[^7]

These two currents were both reflected in the assembly called by the
Prophet on the last day of his life. Al-Bukhari related in his *Sahih*
the words of Ibn \`Abbas:

When death was upon God's Messenger, and at [his] house were men who
included \`Umar b. al-Khattab, the Prophet said, “Come! let me write you
an epistle by which you will never go astray...” \`Umar then said, “The
Prophet is overcome with pain, but we [still] have the *Qur'an*. We
count on God's Book.” Those present at the house disagreed and quarreled
with each other. And one of them said, “Approach that the Prophet may
write you a letter by which you shall never go astray.” Another repeated
what \`Umar had said. When the inanities and the disputing persisted,
the Prophet told them, “Leave!'[^8]

This event alone suffices to show the chasm that separated the two
currents, the true extent of their incompatibility and rivalry. In order
to depict the deeprootedness of independent legal judgement as a
current, one may compare this event to the disagreement that erupted
among the Companions over Usamah b. Zayd's installation as army
commander, despite the Prophet's explicit ordinance to that effect.

The Prophet finally stepped outside to address the crowd: “O People!
what is this talk surrounding my appointment of Usamah as commander. You
contest his appointment now just as you previously did his father's. But
by God, the latter was as fit to command then as his son surely is
now!”[^9]

The two currents, whose rivalry began in earnest during the Prophet's
own lifetime, were reflected in the Muslims' position regarding the
thesis of the Imam's preeminence in the Mission after the Prophet. Those
representing the devotional tendency (as opposed to the one for
independent legal judgement) found in the Prophet's stipulation the
reason for accepting this thesis without hesitation or readjustment.

The advocacy of independent legal judgement was viewed as offering the
possibility of release from the pattern established by the Prophet,
whenever a judgement imagined to be more harmonious with the
circumstances was called for. By the same token, one observes that
Shi\`ites arose immediately after the Prophet's death, representing the
Muslims who adhered in practice to the thesis of the Imam's preeminence
and leadership, the first steps of whose implementation the Prophet had
declared obligatory right after his departure. The Shi'ite current
embodied, from the first, a repudiation of the Saqifah Council's attempt
to paralyze the thesis for Imam \`Ali's preeminence and to transfer
authority to someone else.

In his *Ihtijaj,* Tabarsi related Aban b. Taghlab's words:

I told Ja\`far b. Muhammad al-Sadiq, “May I be offered in sacrifice for
you! Is there anyone among the Companions of God's Messenger who
disclaims Abu Bakr's action?” He replied “Indeed. Twelve men repudiated
it. Among the *Muhajirin* were Khalid b. Said, Ibn Abi al­\`Asi, Salman
al-Farisi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari al-Miqdad b. al-Aswad, \`Ammar b. Yasir
and Buraydah al-Aslami. Among the *Ansar* were Abu al-Haytham b.
al-Tayhan, \`Uthman b. Hanif, Khuzayma b. Thabit Dhu al-Shahadatayn,
Ubayy b. Ka'b, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari.[^10]

It may be argued that the Shi\`ite current stood for religious devotion
according to the text, while the tendency that opposed it represented
independent legal judgement, with the implication that the Shi'ites had
rejected independent legal judgement and did not allow themselves any
right to exercise it. Yet observably, Shi'ites do make use of it
constantly in legal practice.

The answer is that the kind of independent legal judgement practised by
Shi\`ites, and which they deem permissible - indeed, obligatory in a
collective sense (*wajiban kifa'iyyan*) *- is* the one used to derive a
juridical ruling from the legal text. It is not judgement applied to the
legal text by virtue of either an opinion held by the practitioner or
some conjectured benefit.” That is not permissible.

The Shi'ite current disallowed the exercise of independent legal
judgement in any such sense. Whenever we speak of the rise of two
currents at the beginning of Islam, one often intends the following.
One, where the devotion act is based on the explicit text; two, a
tendency toward independent legal judgement But by independent legal
judgement one could mean either the rejection or the acceptance of the
explicit text.[^11]

The rise of these two tendencies is natural to every mission of
comprehensive change seeking alteration at the root, where corruption
prevails. It can have various kinds of effects, depending on the
surviving vestiges of the past; and it may vary according to the extent
to which the individual becomes immersed in the moral values of the new
Message and according to his attachment to it.

Hence, we know that the current which stood for the devotional act based
on the explicit text represented the greatest degree of adherence to,
and the most complete acceptance of, the Divine Message. But it did not
reject independent legal judgment within the framework of the text nor
the effort to derive a legal ruling (*hukm*) there from.[^12]

What is important to note in this regard also is that the devotional act
based on the explicit text does not imply a rigidity or inflexibility
incompatible with the exigencies of evolution or any kind of initiative
for renewal in the life of man. Devotion so based means, rather, as we
now know, devotion through religion. It means embracing it in its
entirety without leaving anything out. Such a religion carries within it
all the elements that make for resilience and the ability to adjust to
the times. It embraces all kinds of change and evolution. Devotion
through religion based on the stipulated text is devotion through all
these elements, but with every fiber of one's ability to create, invent
and renew.[^13]

These are general features aimed at expounding Shi'ism in its definition
as a “natural phenomenon” within the fold of the Islamic Call and of its
appearance as a (self-conscious) response to this natural phenomenon.

[^1]: This is the tendency of the school of those who uphold the rights
of the Prophetic Household and of Shi ism.

[^2]: This is the tendency of the remaining, Sunni schools. For details
see al-'Allamah al-Sayyid Murtada al-\`Askari, Ma\`allim al-madrasatayn;
cf. Dr. Muhammad Salam Madkur, Manahij al-ijtihad (Kuwait: Matba\`at
jami\`ah).

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari VIII:161 (“Kitab al-i\`tisam”) Note the
situations where their devotional acts do not accord with the text. For
example, upon failing to send Usamah's detachment and their objection to
it; or the time when a letter was intended to be written, as the Prophet
was uttering, “Come! Let me write you a letter that you may never go
astray after I am gone...” Observe also the situation surrounding the
Hudaybiyyah Treaty. See the books in history and hadiths referred to so
far. For a more detailed discussion, see al-Sayyid al-\`Allamah \`Abd
al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din, al ­Muraja'at, edited and annotated by Husayn
al-Radi and introduced by Dr. Hamid al ­Hafni and Shaykh Muhammad Fikri
Abu al-Nasr (Mu'assasat Dar al-Kitab al-Islami)

[^4]: Cf. Ibn Hashim, al-Sirah al-nabawiyyah, Second Part, ed. Mustafa
al-Saqqa et al. (Beirut: Dar al-Kunuz al-Adabiyyah), pp. 316-17. See
also Tarikh al-Tabari II:122.

[^5]: See al-Qawshaji, Sharh al-tajrid, towards the end of the
discussion on the “imamah,” where he contends that “Me tasks of those in
charge were devoted to spreading the Call of Islam, and triumph over
East and West. But triumphing over kingdoms cannot be done without
motivating the soldiery to endure peril on the way, that they might
drink deep of the struggle for Islam, until they believe that theirs is
that best of deeds they shall look to on the Day of Judgement. The
omission of this part of the adhan [i.e. “hayya\`ala khayr al-\`amal],
in their view, had to do with giving priority to the benefit of those
tasks over and above devotion in the manner foreseen by the Holiest Law.
The second Caliph thus declared from his minbar that \`Three things
existed at the time of the Prophet which I interdicted, forbade and
punished: temporary marriage [mutat al-nisa], marriage during the
pilgrimage [mutat al-hajj] and \`Come to the best of deeds!'.”

[^6]: See al-Tajj al-jami lil-usul fi ahadith al-Rasul by Shaykh Mansur
'Ali Nasif (a noted \`alim from al-Azhar University) II:124, “Kit-al
hajj” on Abi jamrah al-Dab\`i, who said: “I entered a temporary marriage
but was forbidden by some people. And so I asked Ibn \`Abbas, who
sanctioned it. I went to the Ka\`bah to sleep, whereupon a protagonist
came to me. He said, \`May the minor pilgrimage [\`umrah] be accepted
and the greater one [hajj] valid' [Abu Jamrah al-Dab'!] went on: So I
went to Ibn \`Abbas to inform him about what I had dreamed. \`God is
Great! God is Great! ' he said, \`It is the practice of Abu al-Qasim's
[i.e. the Prophet].”' It is equally narrated by Muslim and Bukhari. It
is said of \`Umran b. Husayn that he stated, “A verse [ayah] on the
temporary marriage was sent down in God's Book, and so we acted upon it
with His Messenger. The Qur'an did not prohibit it, and the [Messenger]
did not forbid it to the day he died. Likewise with the two Shaykhs:
Shaykh Nasif says on the margins that “The mutah was interdicted by
\`Umar, \`Uthman and Mu\`awiyah.”

[^7]: For more details, see al Allamah \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din,
al-Nass wal i­jtihad, pp. 169, 243.

[^8]: Cf Sahih al-Bukhari (“Kirab al-ilm”) I:37 (Beirut: Dar
al-Fikr,1981); cf. also Ibn Sa\`d, al-Tabaqat al- al-kubra II:242.

[^9]: Cf. Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqat al-kubra II:248; see also Ibn Athir,
al-Kamil fi al-ta'rikh II:318-19.

[^10]: Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj I:75 (Beirut: Nashr Mu assasah al-A\`lami,
1983) - Imam. Cf. Tarikh al-Yaqub'i II:103.

[^11]: Cf Imam Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, al-Ma'alim al jadidah
lil-usul, p. 23ff. It contains ample details concerning the evolution of
the master concept of independent legal judgement. The latter had been
avoided because it used to mean: “Mat principle of jurisprudence which
takes individual reasoning as one of the sources for arriving at
judgements. But there was a concerted drive against this jurisprudential
principle at the phase when traditions were being collected in the time
of the Imams and those who transmitted their deeds (to posterity)...”
The kind of independent legal judgement enunciated by many Sunni schools
of jurisprudence (like that of Abu Hanifah) regarded as one of the
jurist's proofs and sources for inferences where there is not plenty of
textual support, stands rejected. As Tusi said: “Neither the syllogism
nor independent legal judgment for me is a proof. In fact, they are not
to be used in legal matters.” Nevertheless, as the concept of
independent legal judgement developed and came to consist in the
inference of a juridical decision (al-hukm) from the text - that is,
synonymously with the inferential operation - it was accepted and put to
use. For the divisions, types and scope of independent legal judgement,
see \`Allamah Muhammad Taqi al-Haki's al-Usul al-\`ammah lil-fiqh
al-muqaran, p. 56ff

[^12]: Muhammad Taqi al-Hakim, al-Usul al-\`ammah lil-fiqh al-muqaran,
p. 563.

[^13]: Cf. al-Ma'alim al jadidah lil-usul, p. 40.


