Epitomes of Life
================

We should learn the history of the lives of the infallible Imams, not
only as "glorious and invaluable memories", but also as "paragons and
lessons". It is not possible to do so without paying due attention to
the precept and political strategy of these honorable figures.

I have personally developed an interest in this aspect of the infallible
Imams' lives and it is pertinent here to submit that for the first time
this idea occurred to me during a crucible and an ordeal test.

Although I had already been acquainted with the infallible Imams as
figures who struggled in the way of the sublimation of the word of
"Tawhid" (monotheism) and those who devoted for the establishment of a
divine government, what became clear to me at that stage was that the
lives of these honorable figures - despite their superficial and
sometimes contradictory differences - were all and all a continuous,
prolonged movement which began in 11 hijra, continued until 250 and
ended in 260 hijra which is the commencement of the Minor Occultation
[of Imam Mahdi (May Allah Hasten His Reappearance)].

Without any doubt these honorable figures performed their duties like a
single personality, following a single goal towards a single direction.
Hence, instead of studying the lives of Imam Hassan Mujtaba (as), Imam
Hussein (as), and Imam Sajjad (as) individually, we should perceive them
as an individual who lived for 250 years, launching his movement in 11
hijra and continuing it until 260. This approach will prevent wrong
inferences drawn from the superficial differences in the precepts of the
Imams that sometimes even look contradictory. All the stances and
movements of this great infallible Imam are comprehendible on the basis
of this approach.

Any wise, sagacious human being, even if not infallible, would have his
"situational" tactics and stances in a long-term movement. He may move
fast on some occasions, while in other occasions he may move slowly; he
may even tactically withdraw, while those who are aware of his
knowledge, sagacity and goal-oriented movement, consider his tactical
withdrawal as a step forward. According to this approach, the life of
Imam Ali (as) is part of a continuous movement, which was followed by
Imam Hassan Mujtaba (as), Imam Hussein (as) and other eight Imams until
260 hijra.

I realized this point that year and tried to study the lives of these
honorable figures on the basis of this approach. The more I delved into
the issue, the more this point was acknowledged.


