Imam Sadiq (as) during Mansurs Era
==================================

What was discussed above is related to the first stage of Imam Sadiq's
(as) life. There are a number of clues that indicate those developments
belonged to this period. The second stage begins when Mansur comes to
power. After Mansur assumes power, the restrictions and repression are
once again imposed and the conditions similar to those of Imam Baqir's
(as) era prevail. Various pressures are exerted on his holiness and the
Imam is frequently exiled to Hireh, Vaset, Romailah, and other places.
He is also summoned several times. The Caliph takes outrageous measures
against him and addresses him angrily. Once the Caliph says: "God May
kill me if I do not kill you."[^1]

Once the Caliph asked the ruler of Medina: "set the house of Ja'far ibn
Muhammad on fire." But the Imam passed through the flames safely and
through his pounding remarks demonstrated a strange scene: "I am the son
of a mighty Imam; I am the son of Abraham, the Friend of God (who also
passed through the flames safely)."[^2]

The Imam's remarks frustrated most of the opponents. The confrontations
between Imam Sadiq (as) and Mansur were often harsh. Mansur frequently
threatened the Imam. Of course there are a number of traditions implying
that his holiness had expressed his humbleness and meekness to Mansur!
Without any doubt none of these traditions are correct. I have conducted
research on these traditions and come to the conclusion that none of
them are authentic.

These traditions are often traced back to Rabi' Hajeb who is definitely
a corrupt figure and a close ally of Mansur. Ironically, some people
have said that Rabi' was a Shiite and a lover of the Ahl-ul-Bayt (the
Progeny of the Holy Prophet)!

How can Rabi' be a Shiite? Rabi' was a servant, subservient, and a
bondman of Mansur. He is one who had entered the Abbasside system in his
childhood, served them and had become the confidante of Mansur. He had
served them a lot and attained the rank of minister in the Abbasside
system.

Had not it been for Rabi's efforts, the Caliphate would not have
remained in Mansur's family after his death and most probably his uncles
would have inherited it. Rabi', who was the only person on Mansur's
bedside at the time of his death, counterfeited a will and testament for
him in which Mansur's son Mahdi was named as his successor. Fazl ibn
Rabi', who became a minister in the administrations of Harun and Amin,
was son of this man (Rabiâ€™). Of course there are a number of traditions
implying that his holiness had expressed his humbleness and meekness to
Mansur!

Without any doubt none of these traditions are correct. I have conducted
research on these traditions and come to the conclusion that none of
them are authentic. These traditions are often traced back to Rabi'
Hajeb who is definitely a corrupt figure and a close ally of Mansur.
Ironically, some people have said that Rabi' was a Shiite and a lover of
the Ahl-ul-Bayt (the Progeny of the Holy Prophet)!

How can Rabi' be a Shiite? Rabi' was a servant, subservient, and a
bondman of Mansur. He is one who had entered the Abbasside system in his
childhood, served them and had become the confidante of Mansur. He had
served them a lot and attained the rank of minister in the Abbasside
system.

Had not it been for Rabi's efforts, the Caliphate would not have
remained in Mansur's family after his death and most probably his uncles
would have inherited it. Rabi', who was the only person on Mansur's
bedside at the time of his death, counterfeited a will and testament for
him in which Mansur's son Mahdi was named as his successor. Fazl ibn
Rabi', who became a minister in the administrations of Harun and Amin,
was son of this man (Rabi').

The members of this family are well known for their loyalty to the
Abbasside. They were not loyal to the Progeny of holy Prophet (S) at
all, and what Rabi' has said about the Imam are all lies and fabricated.
The objective of these fabrications was to project the Imam as a person
who expressed his humbleness to the Caliph so that other people also be
frightened and obey the tyrant caliph Mansur. However, the Imam's
confrontations with Mansur were very harsh until they led to the Imam's
martyrdom in 148 hijra.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, P. 174, Tradition 21

[^2]: Ibid, p. 136, Tradition 186


