Imam Kadhims (as) Era
=====================

The continuation of the general movement of the Imams during the time of
Imam Kadhim (Musa ibn Ja'far AS) is very venturesome and exiting. In my
opinion, this era marks the apogee of the struggles of the infallible
Imams. Unfortunately we do not have a proper, illuminating report on the
life of Imam Kadhim (as).

There are certain events in his life that astonishes human beings. For
instance, some traditions indicate that for sometimes the Imam went
underground and conducted a clandestine life to rescue his life from the
agents of the ruling system. Although Harun's government tried to find
him, it could not discover his hideout. The Caliph even tortured a
number of people to disclose the hideout of the Imam. This is
unprecedented in the lives of the infallible Imams.

There is another tradition about Imam Kadhim (as), similar to which we
have not seen about other Imams: Ibn Shahr Ashub narrates a tradition in
"Manaqib": "Musa ibn Ja'far arrived in a village of Damascus in disguise
while running away." These facts are some sparks in Imam Musa's life,
which can explain the reasons for his frequent imprisonment and torture
by the ruling system. At the beginning of Harun's caliphate the
conditions was not so harsh.

When Harun came to power, he went to Medina and as you have heard he
cherished and respected the Imam. Mamun narrated: "Imam Kadhim (as) was
coming on a horseback when he arrived the area Harun was sitting. Imam
decided to get down, but Harun pledged that the Imam should go to his
site mounted on the horse. He respected the Imam and exchanged views
with him. When the Imam decided to leave, Harun asked me [Mamun] and
Amin to help the Imam mount his horse."

Interestingly, according to this tradition, Mamun says: "my father
presented 5,000 or 10,000 dinars or drachmas to everybody, but 200
drachmas to Musa bin Ja'far." This is while he had asked about Imam's
condition, and the Imam complained' about his difficulties, harsh
condition of life and great number of children.

Such statements and remarks of Imam Kadhim (as) in front of Harun are
very interesting and understandable, particularly for those who have
experienced precautionary dissimulation during the struggles at our
time. Imam tells a person like Harun that his condition is not good and
adds that he cannot make both ends meet.

There is no humbleness or loss of face in such statements of the Imam,
because you as the combatants at the period of Shah of Iran - have made
such remarks during the repression and oppression of the tyranny of
Shah. It is but natural for activists to deceit the enemy about their
activities, conditions and works.

Given these remarks, Harun should have given the Imam some 50,000
drachmas to overcome his economic difficulties, but he gives the Imam
only 200 drachmas. Mamun says: "when I asked the reason from my father,
he said, if I had paid him the large amount, possibly he would recruit
hundred thousand swordmen of his Shiites and friends to fight against
me."

Harun's conclusion was right. I think he had understood the Imam
correctly.

Some thinkers argue that Harun's conclusion was based on aspersion
against the Imam, but the fact is that he had realized the intention and
contention of the Imam. When Imam Musa was fighting against Harun, there
were a number of people who were ready to stand on his side, but the
Imam could not finance his struggle.

We have observed such armed struggles in the case of the sons and
grandsons of the infallible Imams. Definitely, the Imams could mobilize
the people better than their sons. Hence, the era of Musa ibn Ja'far
(as) is the peak of struggle, which finally leads to his imprisonment.


