Fierce Political Struggles
==========================

Of course it is not possible to study this issue in a single session.
However, given the fact that the lives of the infallible Imams and the
Ahl-ul-Bait (the Progeny of the Holy Prophet (S)) had always been
politically oriented, I would shed some light on this aspect of their
lives today. I would like to discuss this aspect in details.

The first question that is to be addressed in this regard is: What is
the political struggle or fierce political struggle in the lives of the
infallible Imams (as)? It means that the struggles which were launched
by the infallible Imams (as) were not merely scientific, intellectual,
or theological. Their struggles were not similar to the theological
struggles we observe in the history of Islam during this period.

Contrary to the sects of "Mu'tazilites" and "Asharites", the objective
of the Imams in holding the educative sessions, debates, classes, as
well as the narration of traditions, and teaching of Islamic doctrines
and decrees was not to confirm the stance of their own theological
school of thought. Their struggle was not an armed movement either. It
was neither similar to that of Zaid and his survivors, nor like that of
Bani al-Hassan, nor the struggles of some members of Aal-e-Ja'far and
others in the history of the infallible Imams.

They did not launch this kind of struggle either. It is pertinent here
to state that the Imams did not denunciate the struggle of these
figures. Although they denunciate some of them, their denunciation was
not due to the nature of armed struggle. They also acknowledged some of
them and even supported and contributed to some of these struggles.

The following tradition, attributed to Imam Sadiq (as), is an example
which supports this idea: "I would like the insurgents of the Progeny of
Muhammad (S) to rise; in this case I would provide them with the
required finance to run their houses (financial assistance, protecting
their prestige, accommodating them, providing them with a hide-out, and
so on).[^1] But the Imams themselves did not launch nor did they join
the armed struggle.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol. 46, P. 172, Tradition No. 2


