Intellectual Decadence
======================

Besides this atmosphere of horror, another feature of this era was
intellectual decadence of the people throughout the Islamic world. This
intellectual depravity stemmed from the neglect of the religious
teachings during the preceding two decades.

Since the religious teachings, exegesis of the holy Quran, and
traditions of the Prophet (S) had been strictly forbidden between 40 and
60 H., the pillars of the people's faith had been weakened seriously.
When we study the conditions of those days among the lines of the books
and traditions, this issue becomes quite transparent.

Of course, the clerics, religious scholars, exegetes, transmitters of
tradition, and pious people were there, but the public was inflicted
with faithlessness, indolence and weakness. The situation had so
aggravated that even some staff of the Caliphate system dared to
question the issue of Prophethood!

A mean, dirty stooge of the Umayyad, Khalid ibn Abdullah Qasri has been
quoted as saying: "Caliphate is superior to the Prophethood." In order
to support his argument, he gave the following reason: "When you appoint
someone as your representative in your family, is he closer to you, or
someone whom you send as a messenger to take a message for you?"

"Apparently," he argued, "the one whom you appoint as your
representative in your home." "Hence," he would conclude, "the Caliph of
God [he would not say the Caliph of the Prophet] is superior to the
messenger of God"!

This statement was made by Khalid ibn Qasri; probably others subscribed
to his viewpoint. I have noticed that in the poems composed during the
Umayyad and Abbasside eras, from Abdul Malik onward, the concept of
Khalifatullah (the caliph or representative of God) has been so
frequently repeated that one forgets that the Caliph was the Caliph of
the Prophet as well.

This trend continued until the Abbasside era. This concept was used in a
poem of Bashar ibn Bard who satirized Yaqub ibn Davoud and Mansur: "O
people, your caliphate has been destroyed; try to find the Caliph of God
between wood and skin."[^1]

Even when he wanted to satirize the Caliph, he would say the Caliph of
God! The renowned poets of this period, like Jarir, Farazdaq, Nasib and
others, used to call the ruler, "the Caliph of God" in the eulogies they
composed in the praise of the caliph! This example demonstrates the
feebleness of people's faith in the foundations of religion.

The people's morality was not in a good shape either. When I was
studying a book of Aghani Abu-l-Faraj, I came across a fact, that is,
from 80s H. until five or six decades later, the greatest singers,
musicians, and revelers came from Medina or Mecca. Whenever the Caliph
in Damascus felt like organizing a party, renowned signers and
entertainers would be sent to him from Medina. Moreover, the worst
satirists and vulgar poets were raised in Mecca and Medina.

The site of the Divine Revelation and the birthplace of Islam had been
turned into a center of licentiousness and corruption. It is necessary
to have knowledge of these facts about Mecca and Medina. Unfortunately,
there is no information about these issues in the lives of caliphs in
the existing history books.

There was a poet in Mecca, Umar ibn Abi Rabi'a, who, despite having
attained the apogee of poetic mastery, was extremely frank and unabashed
in his poems. His account and that of some other poets constitute a
shameful chapter in the tragic history of this period. Even Tawaaf
(circumambulation around holy Ka'bah), pelting stones at the Satanic
Pillars (Ramy al-Jamarat) and other holy sites were subject to their
corruption and licentiousness. One of his couplets in the book "Mughni"
is as follows:

"When I was pelting stones at Satan in Rami al-Jamarat Site, suddenly I
saw her neck, chest and her hands on which she had applied henna. I was
so attracted to her that I do not know whether I pelted seven stones or
eight."

This couplet explains the prevailing conditions of the era. An
eyewitness narrates his observations in Medina after the death of Umar
Ibn Abi Rabi'a: when Umar Ibn Abi Rabi'a passed away, a public mourning
was announced on his death and the people were weeping in the streets of
Medina(!) In every corner, the youth would express sorrow on his death.
I saw a sweeper who was weeping while proceeding her way until she
reached a group of the youth. They asked her: why are you crying? She
said, because of the loss of this man(!)

One of them said: Do not worry, there is another poet in Mecca, namely,
Harith Ibn Khalid Makhzumi, who composes similar poems to those of Umar
Ibn Abi Rabi'a. He recited one of his poems. Upon hearing his poem, the
sweeper wiped out her tears, saying: thanks be to Allah Who has not left
His sanctuary vacant!

This reflects the ethical condition of the people in Medina. There are
several accounts of the parties held not only by the high and low
classes, but also by the masses in Medina. People like Ash'ab, a greedy,
miserable, beggar, who is at the same time a poet and a clown, the
ordinary people, sons of luminaries of Quraish, and even the descendents
of the Bani Hashem - I would not mention their names - including men and
women were among these very people who were deeply involved in
licentiousness.

Harith ibn Khalid, the Emir of Mecca, had a soft corner for Ayisha b.
Talha. One day Ayesha was performing circumambulation around the House
of God. It was the time of "Azan" or "Call to Prayers". She passed a
message to the emir, requesting the postponement of the Call to Prayers
in order to complete her circumambulation. Harith complied with her
request, but she was criticized by the people who castigated him for
postponing the Call to Prayers to appease a women. He replied: Swear by
God, even if her circumambulation had prolonged until the morning
prayers, I would have stopped the Call to Prayers (!)

[^1]: Al-Aghani, Vol. 3, P. 243


