The Objective of the Imams' Struggles
=====================================

Political struggle is neither a theological debate nor is it an armed
struggle, rather it is a struggle with a political objective. What is
the political objective of this struggle? The political objective of
this struggle is the establishment of an Islamic or an ALAWI government
(a righteously government similar to that of Imam ALI's).

From the departure of the Prophet of Islam until 260 hijra the Imams
tried to establish a divine government in the Islamic society. This was
their main contention. However, it does not mean that every Imam tried
to establish an Islamic government in his own time. They had an eye on
the long-term, amid-term and short-term opportunities to accomplish this
goal. For instance, Imam Mujtaba (as) tried to establish an Islamic
government in a short-term span.

The answer of Imam Mujtaba to the questions of people like Musayib and
Ibn Najbah who used to ask the reason for his silence, indicated that he
had planned for the establishment of an Islamic government in the
future. He used to tell them: "We do not know; it might be a test for
you and a promise for the future." While in my opinion, Imam Sajjad's
(as) struggles were planned in a manner to achieve their goal within the
framework of an amid-term plan.

There are certain clues and evidences that underline this issue. Most
probably Imam Baqir's struggles were designed in a way to attain their
objectives in the short run. After the martyrdom of the Eighth Imam, the
struggles of the Imams aimed to accomplish their objectives in the long
run. In sum, although the question of setting up an Islamic government
varied from time to time, this issue had always been present in the
struggles of the Imams.

Except the spiritual activities of the Imams which are related to man's
self-perfection and his proximity to God, their other activities,
including their teaching, traditions, theology, debates with the
scientific contenders, support and acknowledgment of certain groups, or
rejection of a group, etc. were all directed towards this goal, that is,
the establishment of an Islamic government. This was the bone of
contention.

Of course, this issue has been, and will remain, controversial and I do
not insist that my understanding of this issue must be accepted by
others. But, I insist that this clue should be carefully followed and
the issue should be studied from this perspective while reviewing the
history of the Imams' lives. We have tried over the past few years to
prepare a reasonable, rational history of the lives of the Imams - both,
their lives as a continuous stream and the life of every individual
Imam.

Of course some of the proofs are general ones. For instance, we know
well that Imamate (Islamic leadership) is the continuation of Nubuwat
(Prophethood), and that the Prophet is an Imam as well. Imam Sadiq (as)
has been quoted as saying: "Verily, the holy prophet of Islam was an
Imam..." The Messenger of God rose in order to set up a system based on
the divine teachings and justice through his continuous struggles. He
safeguarded the system as long as he was alive. Hence, the Imam, whose
leadership is the continuation of the Prophet's leadership, does not
neglect the system, which had been established by the Prophet (S).

This is a general argument, which can be followed through lengthy
discussions and careful attention to its various aspects. Some other
arguments are inferred from the statements of the infallible Imams, or
are based on their precept and lifestyles. In fact, a thorough study of
the prevailing conditions of the Imams' time would decisively help the
understanding of their eras.

When imprisoned in the dark cell of a jail, one can easily understand
the following statement, which is said about Imam Musa Al-Kadhim (the
7th Imam of Shiites): "One who was tortured in the depth of cells and
darkness of dungeons and his legs carried the wounds of shackles."[^1]
However, this is the direction and the line I would like to discuss and
offer my own understanding in this honorable meeting.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol. 102, P. 17


