The Nature of the Imams' Struggles
==================================

The nature of the Imams' struggles differed from that of the theological
debates and armed struggles. Those who are acquainted with the history
of the second century hijra, and those who have studied the activities
of the Abbasside Dynasty (Bani Abbas) before the first century hijra
until 132 hijra when they came to power, may well appreciate that the
fierce political struggle of the Imams can be compared to those of the
Abbasside during this period.

Of course, this comparison will not be clear and impressive for those
who have not studied the Abbasside struggles and the methods of their
call. Similar features are found in the struggle of our Imams, but with
essential differences in their goals, objectives, methods and
personalities. Nevertheless, the plans and form of their activities are
almost similar. Hence, we observe that sometime these two currents are
intermingled, that is, due to the similarity of their methods,
propagation and call, the Abbasside in the far away places like Hijaz
and Iraq pretended to be the followers of the path of the Family of Imam
Ali (as).

Following the style of "Musawwadah", who used to wear "black" shirt in
the beginning of the call of the Abbasside in Khurassan and Raiâ€™, the
Abbasside used to wear black shirts. But they used to tell the people:
our black shirt marks our mourning for the martyrs of Karbala, Zaid, and
Yahya.[^1] Some of their leaders even imagined that they are working for
the Family of Imam Ali (as).

The Imams launched such a movement, but with marked differences in three
areas: their objectives, methods, and personalities. This is the nature
and meaning of the political struggle in the lives of the infallible
Imams.

The Broad Outlines of the Struggles of the Infallible Imams

I deem it pertinent here to draw a broad outline of the struggles of the
infallible Imams and then discuss some features of their struggles
during their lifetime.

At this stage, I am not touching the outlines of the struggle during the
time of the first three Imams, that is, the Commander of the Faithful
Imam Ali (as), Imam Mujtaba (as), and the Master of the Martyrs Imam
Husayn (as). There are ample materials on their struggles and no one
doubts that their movement had a political orientation.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol. 42, P. 61


