Various Stages of the Struggle
==============================

I begin this issue with alluding to the era of Imam Sajjad (as). In my
opinion, the entire struggles, from the era of Imam Sajjad (as), that
is, the year 61, until 260 hijra, can be divided into three stages.

The First Stage, 61-135 hijra (H.) -- The struggle in this stage
gradually intensifies, deepens, expands and reaches its peak until 135
H. when Saffah passes away and is succeeded by Mansur Abbasi. When
Mansur comes to power, some difficulties are created and as a result the
progress of the struggle is to a great extent retarded. Such
developments are natural in a political struggle. We have observed
similar developments in our own struggle.

The Second Stage, 135-202 (or 203) hijra -- This year marks the
martyrdom of Imam Ridha (as). During this stage the intensity of the
struggles is higher than that in 61 H.; they are more widespread and
deeper, but at the same time they face new difficulties. They gradually
spread and step by step get closer to the victory until the year of the
martyrdom of the Eighth Imam (as). At this stage the struggles are once
again stopped.

After Mamun had gone to Baghdad and began his rule in 204 H., one of the
most difficult phases on the life of the infallible Imams began. The new
phase is the era of the difficulties for the infallible Imams. Although
Shiism spread more than ever during this period, in my opinion the
difficulties the Imams faced were also more than ever during those days.

During this period the Imams launched their struggle to achieve their
goal in the long run, that is, the Imams did not struggle to achieve
their goals before the Minor Occultation of Imam Mahdi (May Allah Hasten
His Reappearance), rather they prepared the ground for the ensuing
period. This period, which began in 204, continued until 260 H. when
Imam Askari (as) was martyred and the Minor Occultation of Imam Mahdi
(as) began. Each of these three periods has certain characteristics,
which I am going to touch briefly.


