The First Stage
===============

The struggles during the first stage begin with great difficulties. This
stage covers the eras of Imam Sajjad (as), Imam Baqir (as) and some part
of the era of Imam Sadiq (as). The event of Karbala not only had greatly
shaken the pillars of Shiism, but also the foundations of the world of
Islam in general.

Although assassination, persecution, torture and oppression were not
unprecedented, the assassination of the sons of the Prophet, taking the
members of the Progeny of the Messenger of God as captives, taking them
from one city to another, and raising the head of the dear son of Zahra
(sa) on a sword - at a time when there were still many people who
remembered the Prophet kissing his lips - in effect, astonished the
world of Islam.

No one could imagine that the unfolding of events would go that far. A
couplet attributed to Hazrat Zaynab (SA) in fact underlines this public
astonishment "O my dearest, I could never imagine that such a destiny
would await you."[^1]

All of a sudden a sea change was felt in the political landscape. The
restrictions went beyond the imagination. Unconceivable events unfolded
and as a result, horror engulfed the entire world of Islam, except Kufa,
thanks to the presence of the Tawwabun (repentant people) and Mukhtar's
upheaval. Despite the fact that Abdullah ibn Zubair led an insurgency in
Mecca sometime after the episode of Karbala, the horror engulfing Medina
and other places due to the event of Karbala was unprecedented in the
world of Islam.

Although the movement of Tawwabun and the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (as)
and his companions -- apparently in 64-65 H. -- injected a fresh blood
into the muffled atmosphere of struggle in Kufa and Iraq, the martyrdom
of all the members of this movement once again caused the
intensification of the atmosphere of suppression and horror.

Thereafter, the enemies of the Umayyad System, that is, "Mukhtar" and
"Musab ibn Zubair" waged wars against each other, while Abdullah ibn
Zubair from Mecca could not even tolerate Mukhtar who was a supporter of
the Progeny of the Prophet of Islam in Kufa and finally Mukhtar was
killed by Musab. Consequently, the atmosphere of fear intensified and
disappointment spread in every nook and cranny. Shortly after Abdul
Malik had come to power, the entire world of Islam came under the
control of the Umayyad. Abdul Malik ruled powerfully for 21 years.

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol. 45, P. 115


