Political Corruption
====================

These issues reflect the condition of those days; in addition to
"intellectual" and "moral" decadence, "political" corruption was another
characteristic of this period. Most of the luminaries were deeply
involved in fulfilling their own material desires, which was possible
through establishing links with the government officials. A great
personality like Muhammad ibn Shahab Zuhri who was earlier a disciple of
Imam Sajjad (as), had so deteriorated that Imam Sajjad (as) writes a
letter to him, reminding him of his attachment to undesirable things.

There were a number of people like him. The late Allameh Majlesi quotes
Jabir as saying: Imam Sajjad (as) said: "WE do not know how to behave
these people: when we narrate what we have heard from the Prophet (S)
for the people, they laugh; if we decide to keep silent, we cannot."
Then quoting Ibn Abi al-Hadid, the late Majlesi says that one day Imam
Sajjad narrated a tradition for a group of people. One of them ridiculed
and did not accept it.

He then explains the accounts of Sa’id ibn Musayib and Zuhri, calling
them among the depraved figures -- of course, I do not agree that Sa’id
ibn Musayib was depraved; there are certain reasons indicating that he
was among the disciples of the Imam. However, his idea about Zuhri and
many others is correct.

Then he says: Ibn Abi al-Hadid has named a number of the luminaries and
officials of the time who had turned their back to the Ahl-ul-Bayt (the
Progeny of the Prophet Muhammad (S)). He also quotes a tradition
attributed to Imam Sajjad (as), saying: "There are not even twenty
people in Mecca and Medina who are our cordial friends."

This was the situation when Imam Sajjad decided to undertake his great
task. Describing this period later, Imam Sadiq (as) said: After the
episode of Karbala only three persons remained [faithful]; Abu Khalid
al-Kabuli, Yahya ibn Umm al-Tawil, Jubair ibn Mut’am.

However, Allama Shushtari believes that the third one was not Jubair ibn
Mut’am, rather he was Hakim ibn Jubair ibn Mut’am. Some historians have
mentioned Muhammad ibn Jubair Ibn Mut’am as the third person. However,
there are some traditions in Bihar-ul-Anwar mentioning names of four to
five persons. Imam Sajjad (as) started his task in such a bare desert.


