Lesson 6: The Role of the Quraysh in the Event of Saqifah
=========================================================

In spite of the event in Ghadir Khumm and the efforts of the Prophet (S)
for the succession of ‘Ali (*‘a*), the gathering in Saqifah took place.
The command of God was not executed and the family of the Prophet (S)
was confined at home. In this event, the role of the Quraysh must be
pointed out. It is because the Quraysh were the people who wanted and
succeeded in trampling upon the right of the Prophet’s (S) progeny.

On many occasions, the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) emphasizes
the acts of oppression and injustice of the Quraysh and their endeavors
in gaining access to the caliphate.[^1] In one of his correspondence
with Mu‘awiyah, Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) also described in detail the role
of the Quraysh in the Saqifah event, saying:

After the demise of the Prophet (S), the Quraysh considered themselves
as the tribe and the most nearest to him, and with this proof, they
sidetracked the other Arabs and took hold of the affair of caliphate.
When we, the *Ahl al-Bayt* of Muhammad (S), advanced the proposition to
them, they did not behave justly with us and they deprived us of our
right.[^2]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) thus also says to one of his companions:

What should we say about the oppression and injustice of the Quraysh
against us, and our Shi‘ah and supporters? The Messenger of Allah (S)
passed away while the people were asked, “Who are the most preeminent of
people?” Yet, the Quraysh turned away from us to such an extent that
they changed the course of caliphate. They utilized our argument against
the *Ansar* and assumed the caliphate one after the other. When it was
returned to us, they broke their oath of allegiance and waged war
against us…[^3]

Yes, the Quraysh had behaved this way since long time ago, so much so
that the people knew they would take possession of the caliphate. For
this reason, the *Ansar* rushed to the Saqifah so as to prevent the
Quraysh from obtaining power because they were a monopolistic people.

The Reasons behind the Quraysh’s Enmity toward the Family of the Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, this question is posed: Why did the Quraysh have enmity toward the
family of the Prophet (S)? Did they not owe their religion and the
worldly life to this family? Was it not through the blessings of this
family that they had attained salvation from perdition? In answering
these questions, we shall indicate some points:

### 1. The Quraysh’s Ambition for Leadership

During the period of *jahiliyyah* {pre-Islamic ignorance} the Quraysh
had an excellent position among the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula. In
this regard, Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani says: “The Arab tribes used to
consider the Quraysh as superior in everything except poetry.”[^4] This
status was attained through two means:

#### a. Economic Clout

From the time of Hashim, the great grandfather of the Prophet (S),
Quraysh had already started trading with neighboring lands such as
Yemen, Sham, Palestine, Iraq, and Abyssinia. The Quraysh nobles had
amassed legendary wealth under the aegis of this trade.[^5] God, the
Exalted, described this commerce as the source of the Quraysh’s welfare
and comfort, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لإيلافِ قُرَيْشٍ ٭ إِيلافِهِمْ رِحْلَةَ الشِّتَاءِ وَالصَّيْفِ ٭
فَلْيَعْبُدُوا رَبَّ هَذَا الْبَيْتِ ٭ الَّذِي أَطْعَمَهُمْ مِنْ جُوعٍ
وَآمَنَهُمْ مِنْ خَوْفٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“{In gratitude} for solidarity among Quraysh, their solidarity during
winter and summer journeys, let them worship the Lord of this House, who
has fed them {and saved them} from hunger, and secured them from
fear.”***[^6]

#### b. Spiritual Position

Due to the existence of the *Ka‘bah*, the pilgrimage site of the Arab
tribes in their territory, the Quraysh occupied a special spiritual
position among the Arabs. Especially after the event of the Companions
of the Elephant and the defeat of Abrahah[^7] the honor of the Quraysh,
the custodians of the *Ka‘bah*, was further enhanced and this event
turned to be in their favor.

They called themselves as *Al Allah* {Family of Allah}, *Jiran Allah*
{Neighbors of Allah} and *Sakkan* *Haram Allah* {Residents of the House
of Allah} and in doing so, they consolidated their religious
position.[^8]

As such, on account of sense of power, the Quraysh were inclined to
exclusivity and they tried to prove their superiority. Since Mecca was a
sort of capital for the Arabs, owing to the presence of the *Ka‘bah*,
and most of the denizens of the Arabian Peninsula used to come and go
there, the Quraysh imposed their customs and traditions to those who
came to Mecca.

One example regards the garment used when circumambulating the *Ka‘bah*
{*tawaf*}, which the pilgrims were required to purchased from them.[^9]
Therefore, whenever they sensed, during the advent of the Most Noble
Messenger (S), that teachings of Islam are not compatible with their
sense of exclusivity and superiority, they refrained from accepting the
teachings vehemently opposing these precepts with all their might and
utilizing all their power to annihilate Islam.

But the will of God was something else, and in the end, He made His
prophet (S) prevail over them. From the 8th year after *hijrah*, a
number of the Quraysh nobles went to Medina and joined the ranks of
Muslims, but they did not desist from their hostility.

For instance, Hakam ibn Abi’l-‘As used to ridicule the Prophet (S) and
on account of which the Messenger of Allah (S) exiled him to Ta’if.[^10]
As the Quraysh were not able to confront the Prophet (S), they conceived
a new plot and that was to confront his successor.

Time and again, ‘Umar said to ‘Abbas: “The Arabs did not want
prophethood {*nubuwwah*} and caliphate {*khilafah*} to be confined to
the Banu Hashim.”[^11]  
 The Quraysh also said:

If anyone from the Banu Hashim took the reign of caliphate, caliphate
will never slip out of this family and it will never be relinquished to
us. But if a non-member of the Banu Hashim assumed it, it will move
around us and be assigned to all of us.[^12]

The people at that time were also aware of this mentality of the
Quraysh. As narrated by Bara’ ibn ‘Azib, “I was sympathetic toward the
Banu Hashim. When the Holy Prophet (S) passed away, I was afraid that
the Quraysh was thinking of taking the caliphate out of the Banu Hashim
and I was at a loss to understand.”[^13]

The Quraysh’s approval of the caliphate of Abubakr and ‘Umar was
motivated by their own benefits. For, at the time of his death, Abubakr
said a number of Quraysh who have come to his support: “I know that each
of you imagines that the caliphate shall belong to him, but I chose the
best among you.”[^14]

Ibn Abi’l-Hadid says: “Quraysh was displeased by the prolongation of the
caliphate of ‘Umar, and ‘Umar was aware of this issue and he was not
permitting them to go out of Medina.”[^15]

### 2. Tribal Rivalry and Envy

One of the dire spin-offs of the tribal structure was intense struggle
among the tribes, and God, the Exalted, points to this issue in some
*surah*s of the Qur’an such as *Surah at-Takathur*[^16] and *Surah
as-Saba’*.[^17]

Since the period of *jahiliyyah*, there had been a power struggle
between the Banu Hashim and the rest of Quraysh tribes. On the event of
digging the Zamzam well by ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the entire Quraysh tribes
rallied together against the Banu Hashim and they were not ready to
allow the honor of digging the Zamzam well to go to ‘Abd al-Muttalib
alone.[^18] Therefore, Abu Jahl used to say:

We used to compete with the Banu Hashim over the possession of nobility.
They fed people; we fed them too. They gave riding animals to people; we
also gave. They gave money; we also gave. It was to such an extent that
we closely competed with each other, and we became like two racing
horses. Then, they said: “There emerged from among us a prophet who
receives revelation from heaven.” Now, how could we compete with him? By
God! We shall never believe in him or recognize him.[^19]

Umayyah ibn Abi’s-Salt, one of the nobles and great men of Ta’if and one
of the *Hunafa*,[^20] did not embrace Islam for the same reason. For
many years, he had been waiting for the promised prophet to come. But he
had been waiting as such so as to acquire this position himself. After
becoming aware of the beginning of the Prophet’s (S) mission, he
refrained from following him identifying the reason for this as shame of
the women of Thaqif, saying: “For a long time, I was telling them: ‘I
shall be the promised prophet.’ Now, how could I bear for them to see me
following a youngster of Banu ‘Abd al-Manaf (referring to the Prophet
(S))?”[^21]

Yet, despite their will and envy, God lead His Prophet (S) to triumph
crushing their pomp. After the 8th year *hijrah*, when most Quraysh
nobles had emigrated to Medina, their irritation and envy toward the
family of the Prophet (S) were mostly the result of instigation of these
“new Muslims”.  
 Ibn Sa‘d has narrated thus:

One of the *Muhajirun* said many times to ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib:
“Your father ‘Abd al-Muttalib and Ghaytalah, Banu Sahm’s female
fortune-teller, were both in the fire. Finally, ‘Abbas was infuriated
and slapped him. As a result, his nose bled. That person came to the
Prophet (S) and made a complaint against ‘Abbas. The Messenger of Allah
(S) asked his uncle ‘Abbas to explain and ‘Abbas complied. Thereafter,
the Prophet (S) said to that man: “Why are you annoying ‘Abbas?”[^22]

Due to his special position, ‘Ali (*‘a*) was the most envied by them.
Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) says: “Whenever the Holy Prophet (S) mentioned the
virtues of ‘Ali (*‘a*) or recited a verse of the Qur’an which was
revealed concerning him, some of those who were in the assembly would
stand up and leave.”[^23]

As such, the Holy Prophet (S) has been reported many times to have said:
“He who is envious of ‘Ali is envious of me and he who is envious of me
is an infidel {*kafir*}.”[^24]

Even during the time of the Prophet (S), some would even express their
envy and would actively annoy and disturb ‘Ali (*‘a*). Along this line,
Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas has thus narrated: “Another person and I were in the
mosque and we were abusing ‘Ali. While furious, the Prophet came to us
and said: ‘Why do you annoy me? He who annoys ‘Ali annoys me’.”[^25]

### 3. The Quraysh’s Enmity toward ‘Ali (‘a)

Finally, the most important reason for depriving ‘Ali (*‘a*) was
Quraysh’s opposition and enmity toward him as they had suffered heavy
losses from him, for, in battles during the time of the Prophet (*‘a*),
‘Ali (*‘a*) had killed their unbelieving fathers, brothers and
relatives. As Ya‘qubi writes concerning the events on the initial days
of the caliphate of ‘Ali (*‘a*):

All the people paid allegiance to him except three persons from among
the Quraysh: Marwan ibn al-Hakam, Sa‘id ibn al-‘As and Walid ibn ‘Uqbah.
On their behalf, Walid said to Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*): “You
have inflicted a blow to all of us. You slaughtered my father after (the
Battle of) Badr. You killed the father of Sa‘id in the battle and as
Marwan’s father returned to Medina,[^26] you complained to
‘Uthman.”[^27]

Similarly, during ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) caliphate ‘Ubayd Allah ibn ‘Umar
requested Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) to visit him and he has appointment with
him. When Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) paid him a visit he said: “Your father
has inflicted a blow to the first and last person of Quraysh and the
people are hostile to him. Help me to depose of him and let you come in
his stead.”[^28]

When Ibn al-‘Abbas was asked why the Quraysh are hostile to ‘Ali (*‘a*),
he said: “It is because ‘Ali sent the first among them to the fire {of
hell} (by killing them in battles while in a state of unbelief {*kufr*})
and put to shame the last among them.”[^29]

The rivals of ‘Ali (*‘a*) also kindled the fire of this displeasure of
Quraysh toward him thus taking advantage of it. For instance, ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab said to Sa‘d ibn al-‘As: “You are staring at me in such a
manner as if I killed your father, but I did not. It is ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib who has killed him!”[^30]

After receiving a fatal blow at Ibn al-Muljim’s hand, ‘Ali (*‘a*)
himself pointed out the magnitude of Quraysh’s enmity toward him in a
poetical line:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكم قريش تمناى لتقتلني فلا و ربّك مافازوا و ما ظفروا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Quraysh wished to kill me, but they did not succeed to do so.”[^31]

Lesson 6: Summary
-----------------

The role of the Quraysh in the event of Saqifah cannot be overlooked. It
is because the Quraysh were the only people who could appropriate from
themselves the right of the Prophet’s (S) progeny. On many occasions,
the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) points to the wrongdoings he
experienced from Quraysh. Quraysh’s enmity toward the family of the
Prophet (S) was motivated by the following:

1. Quraysh’s ambition for leadership which prompted them to refuse to
accept his invitation as such an acceptance was inconsistent with their
leadership.

2. The existence of rivalry between Banu Hashim and the rest of Quraysh
tribes and the latter’s envy toward the former.

3. Quraysh’s enmity toward ‘Ali (*‘a*) for inflicting major blows to
them.

Lesson 6: Questions
-------------------

1. What was the role of the Quraysh in the event of Saqifah?

2. What were the reasons behind Quraysh’s enmity toward the family of
the Prophet (S)?

3. Explain the tribal rivalry and envy.

4. What was the nature of Quraysh’s enmity toward ‘Ali (*‘a*)?

[^1]: For instance, in Sermon 170 of Nahj al-Balaghah, Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
says: “O my Allah! I seek Thy succor against the Quraysh and those who
are assisting them, because they are denying me (the rights of) kinship,
have lowered my high position, and are united in opposing me in the
matter (of the caliphate) which is my right, and then they said, “Know
that the rightful thing is that you have it and also that you may leave
it.” Nahj al-Balaghah (Faydh al-Islam), p. 555. Similarly, in his reply
to the letter of his brother ‘Aqil, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) says: “Do not take to
heart the behavior of Quraysh. To talk about their skepticism, their
enmity of Islam, their revolt against the cause of Allah and their
desire to bring harm to me are a waste of time. They now are as much
bent upon doing me injustice and fighting against me, as they were
unanimously against the Holy Prophet (S). May Allah punish them for
their sins! They have not even paid any consideration to the
relationship that existed between them and me. They have deprived me of
the estate of my mother’s son.” Ibid., Letter 36, p. 974.

[^2]: Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radhi, 1416 AH), p. 65.

[^3]: Kitab Salim ibn Qays al-‘Amiri (Beirut: Mansurat Dar al-Funun,
1400 AH), p. 108; As-Sayyid ‘Ali Khan ash-Shirazi, Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah
fi Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Mu’assasah al-Wafa’, n.d.), p. 5.

[^4]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Al-Aghani (Beirut: Dar
Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 1, p. 74.

[^5]: Mahdi Pishva’i, Tarikh-e Islam az Jahiliyyat ta Hajjah al-Wida‘
(1) (Arak: Islamic Azad University (Arak Branch), n.d.), pp. 50-51.

[^6]: Surah al-Quraysh 106:1-4.

[^7]: See Surah al-Fil 105 and its commentary. {Trans.}

[^8]: Mahdi Pishva’i, Tarikh-e Islam az Jahiliyyat ta Hajjah al-Wida‘
(1), p. 52.

[^9]: Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d, At-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar Sadir, 1405
AH) vol. 1, p. 72.

[^10]: ‘Izz ad-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad Abi’l-Kiram Ibn Athir,
Asad al-Ghabah fi Ma‘rifah as-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 2, p. 34.

[^11]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1378 AH), vol. 1, p. 194.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 51.

[^14]: Ibid., vol. 1, p. 310.

[^15]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 159.

[^16]: Surah at-Takathur 102:1-2: ﴿ أَلْهَاكُمُ التَّكَاثُرُ ٭ حَتَّى
زُرْتُمُ الْمَقَابِرَ ﴾ “Rivalry {and vainglory} distracted you until
you visited {even} the graves.”

[^17]: Surah as-Saba’ 34:35-37: ﴿ وَقَالُوا نَحْنُ أَكْثَرُ أَمْوَالا
وَأَوْلادًا وَمَا نَحْنُ بِمُعَذَّبِينَ ٭ قُلْ إِنَّ رَبِّي يَبْسُطُ
الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا
يَعْلَمُونَ ٭ وَمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَلا أَوْلادُكُمْ بِالَّتِي
تُقَرِّبُكُمْ عِنْدَنَا زُلْفَى إِلا مَنْ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا ﴾ “And
they say, ‘We have greater wealth and more children, and we will not be
punished!’ Say, ‘Indeed my Lord expands the provision for whomever He
wishes and He tightens it, but most people do not know.’ It is not your
wealth, nor your children, that will bring you close to Us in nearness,
except those who have faith and act righteously.”

[^18]: Ibn Hashim, As-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah,
n.d.), vol. 1, pp. 143-144.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Hunafa (sing. Hanif): those Arabs during the period of
pre-Islamic ignorance {jahiliyyah} who were not worshipping idols.
{Trans.}

[^21]: Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah ibn Muslim ibn al-Qutaybah, Al-Ma‘arif,
1st edition (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Rida, 1415 AH), 60; Mahdi
Pishva’i, Tarikh-e Islam az Jahiliyyat ta Hajjah al-Wida‘ (Arak: Islamic
Azad University (Arak Branch), n.d.), p. 88.

[^22]: Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d, At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 4, p. 24.

[^23]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib (Qum:
Mu’assasah Intisharat-e ‘Allameh, n.d.), vol. 3, p. 214.

[^24]: Ibid., pp. 213-214.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 211.

[^26]: Due to certain grave offenses, Marwan’s father, Hakam ibn al-‘As,
was among the people of Banu Umayyah who were banished from Medina at
the Prophet’s (S) orders. During the ‘Uthman’s caliphate, a relative of
his, he was allowed to return to Medina and rally around him. For
details, see inter alia Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol. 4, p. 481; Tafsir
al-Qurtubi, vol. 16, p. 197; Tafsir al-Fa‘iq Zamakhshari, vol. 2, p.
352; Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. 4, p. 159; Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. 7, p. 491;
Asad al-Ghabah of Ibn Athir, vol. 2, p. 34, An-Nihayah of Ibn Athir
(Egypt), vol. 3, p. 23; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 2, p. 55; Tafsir
Nayshaburi on the marginal note of Tabari, vol. 26, p. 13, Sawa‘iq
al-Muhriqah, p. 108. {Trans.}

[^27]: Ahmad ibn Abi Ya‘qub ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 178.

[^28]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 1, p. 498.

[^29]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol. 3, p.
220.

[^30]: Muhammad Ibn Sa‘d, At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 31.

[^31]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol. 3, p.
312.


