Lesson 9: The Periods of Historical Development of the Shi‘ah
=============================================================

1. The Shi‘ah during the Period of the First Four Caliphs
---------------------------------------------------------

The Shi‘ah during the reigns of the first three caliphs, viz. Abubakr,
Umar and ‘Uthman, has distinctive features which can be expressed in the
following manner:

1. During the reigns of these three caliphs, the Shi‘ah were subjected
to many pressures with the exception of the initial days after the event
of Saqifah. It can even be said that many of the Shi‘ah were deprived of
key positions on account of their being Shi‘ah.[^1]

2. After the event of Saqifah which brought about dichotomy on the issue
of leadership over the Muslims and led to the division of Muslims into
two main groups, the Ahl as-Sunnah were referring to the caliphs of the
time on the scientific, jurisprudential, ideological, and other
problems, whereas the Shi‘ah were referring to ‘Ali (*‘a*).

The Shi‘ah’s practice of referring to ‘Ali (*‘a*) regarding scientific
issues, jurisprudence and other Islamic sciences in general, continued
with the pure Imams (*‘a*) after the martyrdom of ‘Ali (*‘a*).

The reason behind the Sunni-Shi‘ah difference in jurisprudence {*fiqh*},
*hadith*, *tafsir* {exegesis of the Qur’an}, *kalam* {scholastic
theology}, among others is this very fact that the reference authorities
of these two groups were different and distinct from each other.

3. Just as ‘Ali (*‘a*) had unofficial political and military cooperation
from afar with the caliphs of the time as far as protection of the lofty
interests of Islam was concerned,[^2] a number of distinguished Shi‘ah
among the Companions also assumed military and political positions with
the consent of Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*). For example, Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas—‘Ali’s
(*‘a*) cousin and defender during the event in Saqifah—held a military
position in the army of Sham and passed away in 18 AH in Palestine.[^3]

Hudhayfah and Salman became the governors of Mada’in one after the
other.[^4] ‘Ammar ibn Yasir was appointed by the second caliph as the
governor of Kufah after the tenure of Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas.[^5]

Hashim Mirqal, who was one of the sincere Shi‘ah of the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) and was martyred in the Battle of Siffin on the side of
the Imam (*‘a*),[^6] was one of the outstanding commanders during the
periods of the three caliphs and conquered Azerbaijan in 22 AH.[^7]
‘Uthman ibn Hunayf and Hudhayfah ibn Yaman were commissioned by ‘Umar to
measure the lands of Iraq.[^8]

‘Abd Allah ibn Badil ibn Waraqa’ al-Khaza‘i, one of the Commander of the
Faithful’s (*‘a*) Shi‘ah whose son was one of the first martyrs in the
Battle of Jamal (Camel),[^9] was one of the military commanders and
conquered Isfahan and Hamedan.[^10]

Similarly, individuals such as Jarir ibn ‘Abd Allah Bajalli[^11] and
Qurzah ibn Ka‘b al-Ansari[^12] who were among the Commander of the
Faithful’s (*‘a*) distinguished men during his caliphate, held
administrative and military positions during the periods of the three
caliphs. Jarir conquered the territory of Kufah[^13] and became the
governor of Hamedan during ‘Uthman’s reign.[^14] Qurzah ibn Ka‘b
al-Ansari also conquered Shahr-e Rey during the period of ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab.[^15]

### Manifestation of Shi‘ism during the Caliphate of ‘Ali (‘a)

Although the root of Shi‘ism can be traced back to the time of the
Prophet (S), its manifestation came after ‘Uthman’s assassination and
‘Ali’s (*‘a*) caliphate. During this period the demarcating line became
clear as ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) supporters and followers openly declared and
expressed their Shi‘ism. Shaykh al-Mufid narrates, thus:

A group of people came to ‘Ali (*‘a*) and said: “O Commander of the
Faithful! We are among your Shi‘ah.” The Imam (*‘a*) looked carefully at
their faces and said: “But why can’t I see the countenances of the
Shi‘ah in you?” They asked: “O Commander of the Faithful! How should
countenances of the Shi‘ah be?”

He (*‘a*) said: “Their faces are pale from excessive acts of worship at
night; their eyes are weak from weeping profusely; their backs have
curvature for standing for long time in prayer; their stomachs can reach
their backs for fasting a lot; and the dust of humility and lowliness
has settled in them.”[^16]

Also, poems were recited during the caliphate of Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) in
which ‘Ali (*‘a*) has been described as the rightful Imam and successor,
and the leader after the Prophet (S). As Qays ibn Sa‘d was saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و عليّ إمامنا و إمام لسوانا أتى به التنـزيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*‘Ali is our Imam and that of others. The Qur’an has been revealed for
this purpose.*[^17]

Khuzaymah ibn Thabit Dhu’sh-Shahadatayn used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فديت عليّاً إمام الورى سراج البريّة مأوى التّقى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصيّ الرّسول و زوج البتول إمام البريّة شمس الضّحى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تصدق خاتمه راكعاً فاحسن بفعل إمام الورى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ففضّله الله ربّ العباد و أنزل في شأنه هل أتى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May I be the ransom of ‘Ali! He is the Imam of the people, the light of
creation and the asylum of the God-conscious ones.*

*He is the successor {wasi} of the Prophet, the husband of Batul
(Fatimah), the Imam of creation, and radiant sun.*

*He is the Imam of creation and gave in alms {sadaqah} his ring while he
was in the state of bowing {ruku‘}, and what a good deed he performed!*

*God, the Exalted, made him superior to others and revealed the Surah
“Hal ata” about him*.[^18]

In some poems, the Imam’s (*‘a*) Shi‘ah also introduced themselves to
the religion of ‘Ali (*‘a*). For example, while engaged in a fight
against a person named ‘Amru ibn Yathribi from among the army of *Jamal*
{camel} during the Battle of Jamal, ‘Ammar ibn Yasir recited thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تبرح العرصة يا ابن يثربي حتى اقاتلك علىٰ دين علي نحن و بيت الله
اولى بالنّبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Ibn Yathribi! Leave not the battlefront so that we could fight
against you over the religion of ‘Ali. I swear to the House of God that
we are the foremost ones to the Prophet*.[^19]

Even the enemies and adversaries were using the same descriptions for
the Shi‘ah. For example, in a poem, proud of killing the supporters of
‘Ali (*‘a*), ‘Amru ibn Yathribi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان تنكروني فانا ابن يثربي قاتل عِلباء و هِند الجملى ثمّ ابن صوحان علىٰ
دين عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you do not know me, I am Ibn Yathribi, the killer of ‘Ilba’ and Hind
al-Jamali.*[^20] *I am also the killer of Ibn* *Sawhan for the crime of
following the religion of ‘Ali.*

2. The Shi‘ah during the Period of the Umayyad Caliphate
--------------------------------------------------------

The period of the Umayyad caliphate was the most difficult time for the
Shi‘ah, starting from 40 AH up to 132 AH. All the Umayyad caliphs with
the exception of ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz were sworn enemies of the
Shi‘ah. Of course, after caliph Hisham the Umayyads were preoccupied
with the campaign against internal revolts and the ‘Abbasid movement and
the past harsh treatments of Shi‘ah were lessened.

The Umayyad caliphs were living in Sham, the capital of the Umayyad
rule, and in most cases, the rulers adopted the policy of bloodshed with
respect to the Shi‘ah-populated territories, exerted pressure on the
Shi‘ah.  
 Among all the enemies, it was the Umayyad rulers who focused most on
the Shi‘ah relentlessly annoying and disturbing them, with ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad and Hajjaj ibn Yusuf being most notorious among them.

Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, the well-known scholar in the Sunni world, thus writes:

The Shi‘ah were being killed wherever they were. The Umayyads used to
mutilate the hands and feet of individuals for being suspected as
Shi‘ah. Anyone who was noted for his love and attachment to the family
of the Prophet would either be imprisoned, his possessions be plundered,
or his house be demolished. The pressure and restrictions imposed upon
the Shi‘ah reached a point where the charge of friendship with ‘Ali
(*‘a*) was considered as worse than the accusation of disbelief {*kufr*}
and infidelity, entailing severer punishments.

In adopting this violent policy, living conditions for the people of
Kufah was the worst because Kufah was the Shi‘ah capital of the time.

Mu‘awiyah designated Ziyad ibn Sumayyah as the ruler of Kufah and later
on assigned the governorship of Basrah to him. Ziyad was once in the
rank of the supporters of ‘Ali and he knew them all very well. He
pursued the Shi‘ah and found them in whatever nook and corner they would
hide. He killed them; threatened them; mutilated their hands and feet;
blinded them; hung them on palm trees; and expelled them from Iraq so
much so that not a single well-known Shi‘ah remained in Iraq.[^21]

Abu’l-Faraj ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Ali ibn al-Jawzi has said:

When a number of the Shi‘ah protested against Ziyad, who was then
delivering sermons from the pulpit, he ordered the mutilation of the
hands and feet of eighty persons. He used to gather the people in the
mosque and ask them to curse ‘Ali and if anyone refused to do so, Ziyad
would order that his house be demolished.[^22]

Ziyad, who ruled alternately for six months in Kufah and the next six
months in Basrah, appointed Samurah ibn Jundab as his deputy in Basrah
so that he could administer the city during his absence. During that
period Samurah killed 8,000 people. Ziyad once asked him: “Are you not
afraid that you might have killed one innocent person among them?” He
replied: “Even if I have to kill two times that figure, I am not afraid
of such a thing.”[^23]

Abu Suwar ‘Adwi says: “One morning, Samurah {killed} 47 persons from
among relatives, all of whom were memorizers of the Qur’an
{*hufaz*}.”[^24]

Mu‘awiyah, in a directive to his officials and workers, wrote that they
should not accept the testimony of even one of ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) Shi‘ah or
family members. In another directive, he thus wrote:

If two individuals would give testimony that a certain person is among
the friends of ‘Ali and his family, his name should be erased from the
record of the public treasury {*bayt al-mal*} and his salary and stipend
should be cut off.[^25]

After subjugating Mecca and Medina,Hajjaj ibn Yusuf, the bloodthirsty
and cruel Umayyad agent, was appointed as the governor of Iraq, the
center of the Shi‘ah gathering, in 75 AH by the Umayyad caliph ‘Abd
al-Malik ibn Marwan. Having covered his head and face, Hajjaj entered
the mosque of Kufah *incognito*. He passed by the line of people and
mounted the pulpit.

He remained silent for a long moment. Murmuring among the people started
as to who he is. One person said, “He is the new ruler.” The other one
said, “Let us pelt him with stone.” Many others said, “No, let us listen
to what he will say.” When the crowd silenced, he uncovered his face and
uttering a few sentences, he terrified the people so much so that the
small stones in the hands of those who were ready to pelt him fell on
the ground spontaneously. At the beginning of his speech, he thus said:

O people of Kufah! It has been for many years that you have taken chaos,
sedition {*fitnah*} and insubordination as your slogan. I can see heads
similar to ripe fruits that must be separated from the body. I shall
strike on your heads to such an extent that you would find the way to
submission.[^26]

Hajjaj implemented a rule of terror throughout Iraq and the eastern
districts and unjustly killed many prominent figures of Kufah and pious
people.

Mas‘udi thus writes about the crimes of Hajjaj:

Hajjaj ruled for twenty years and the number of those who were killed
during this period by the swords of his headsmen or torturers exceeded
120,000 people. This figure does not include those who were killed by
Hajjaj’s forces in the war against him.[^27]

At the time of Hajjaj’s death, 50,000 men and 30,000 women were
languishing in his infamous prison. Among them 11,000 were naked. Hajjaj
used to imprison men and women in one cell. His prison cells were
roofless. As such, the prisoners were not secure from the summer heat or
the winter rain and cold.[^28]

The Shi‘ah were usually victims of Hajjaj’s prison, torture,
persecution, and murder. The best evidence that reflects the miserable
plight of the Shi‘ah during the Umayyad period and the intensity of the
Umayyad policy of strangulation is the complaint of the Shi‘ah to Imam
as-Sajjad (*‘a*) about the oppression and tyranny perpetrated against
them. The late Majlisi has narrates:

The Shi‘ah came to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (*‘a*) complaining about the
pressure and strangulation, saying: “O son of the Messenger of Allah! We
were expelled from our cities and eliminated by atrocious killing. They
cursed the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) in the cities as well as in
the mosque of the Messenger of Allah (S), on top of his pulpit.

No one prevented it and if any of us would protest, they would say,
“This is a *turabi* (i.e. Shi‘ah); they would report it to the ruler,
writing to him that so-and-so has said something good about Abu Turab
(Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*)). The ruler would order them to beat that person,
imprison him and finally kill him.”[^29]

Lesson 9: Summary
-----------------

After the event of Saqifah, the Shi‘ah would refer to the pure Imams
(*‘a*) with respect to scientific, jurisprudential and ideological
issues. Although they were cooperating with the caliphs of the time in
line with the interests of Islam, most of them were deprived of
administrative positions.

During the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), expression
of Shi‘ism was one of the distinctive features of the Shi‘ah.

The period of the Umayyad rule was one of the most difficult times for
the Shi‘ah. All the caliphs, with the exception of ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz, were sworn enemies of the Shi‘ah, and the Shi‘ah-populated
regions the bloodthirsty and cruel governors were ruling over.

Lesson 9: Questions
-------------------

1. What were the distinctive features of the Shi‘ah during the reign of
the first three caliphs?

2. What was the salient feature of the Shi‘ah during the caliphate of
‘Ali (*‘a*)?

3. What was the condition of the Shi‘ah during the Umayyad rule?

[^1]: For example, when Abubakr initially appointed Khalid ibn Sa‘id as
the commander in the Battle of Sham, ‘Umar said to him: “Have you
forgotten Khalid’s refusal to pay allegiance to you and his solidarity
with the Banu Hashim? I do not think it’s appropriate for him to be
appointed as commander.” As such, Abubakr withdrew his appointment of
Khalid as the commander and appointed another person in his stead. Ahmad
ibn Abi Ya‘qub ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum:
Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 133.

[^2]: For instance, we may cite the recommendation of ‘Ali (‘a) to
Abubakr concerning the dispatch of army to Sham (Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh
al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 133) and his instructions to ‘Umar when he was
consulted by the caliph about his plan for himself to go to the battle
against the Byzantines. The Imam (‘a) said: “If you yourself will
proceed towards the enemy and clash with them and fall into some
trouble, there will be no place of refuge for the Muslims other than
their remote cities, nor any place they would return to. Therefore, you
should send an experienced man and send with him people of good
performance who are well-intentioned. If Allah grants you victory, then
this is what you want. If it is otherwise, you would serve as a support
for the people and a returning place for the Muslims.” (Nahj
al-Balaghah, Sermon 134) Also, when ‘Umar consulted the Imam (‘a) about
the caliph himself partaking in the Battle of Persia, he (‘a) said: “You
should remain like the axis for them (Arabs), and rotate the mill (of
government) with (the help of) the Arabs, and be their root. Avoid
battle, because if you leave this place the Arabs will attack you from
all sides and directions till the unguarded places left behind by you
will become more important than those before you. If the Persians see
you tomorrow they will say, “He is the root (chief) of Arabia. If we do
away with him we will be in peace.” In this way this will heighten their
eagerness against you and their keenness to aim at you.” (Nahj
al-Balaghah, Sermon 146)

[^3]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 151.

[^4]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 2, p. 323.

[^5]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 155.

[^6]: Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 401.

[^7]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 156.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 152.

[^9]: Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn an-Nu‘man Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Jamal, 2nd
edition (Qum: Maktab al-A‘lam al-Islami (Publication Center), 1416 AH),
p. 342.

[^10]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 157.

[^11]: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1394 AH), vol. 2, p. 275.

[^12]: ‘Izz ad-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad Abi’l-Kiram Ibn Athir,
Asad al-Ghabah fi Ma‘rifah as-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 4, p. 202.

[^13]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 143.

[^14]: Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah ibn Muslim ibn al-Qutaybah, Al-Ma‘arif,
1st edition (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1415 AH), p. 586.

[^15]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 154.

[^16]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, trans. Muhammad Baqir Sa‘idi
Khurasani, 2nd edition (Tehran: Kitabfurushi-ye Islamiyyeh, 1376 AHS),
pp. 227-228.

[^17]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib (Qum:
Mu’assasah Intisharat-e ‘Allameh, n.d.), vol. 3, p. 28.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 6.

[^19]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Jamal, 2nd edition (Qum: Maktab al-A‘lam
al-Islami (Publication Center), 1416 AH), p. 346.

[^20]: ‘Ilba’ and Hind al-Jamali were among the supporters and Shi‘ah of
‘Ali (‘a).

[^21]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Cairo: Dar Ihya’
al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, 1961), pp. 43-45.

[^22]: Abu’l-Faraj ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Jawzi, Al-Muntazim fi
Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk, 1st edition (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1412 AH), vol. 5, p. 227.

[^23]: Muhammad ibn Jarir at-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk (Beirut:
Dar al-Qamus al-Hadith, n.d.), vol. 6, p. 132.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 1, p. 45.

[^26]: Zubayr ibn Bakkar, Al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyyat (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 99; Ja‘far Shahidi, Tarikh Tahlili-ye
Islam ta Payan-e Umawi {An Analytical History of Islam till the End of
the Umayyad Rule} (Tehran: University Press Center, 1363 AHS), p. 184;
Mahdi Pishva’i, Sireh-ye Pishvayan, 8th Edition. Qum: Mu’assaseh-ye
Tahqiqati va Ta‘limati-ye Imam Sadiq (‘a), 1378 AHS), p. 246.

[^27]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 3, p. 187.

[^28]: Ibid.

[^29]: Muhammad Baqir (‘Allamah) Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 2nd edition
(Tehran: Al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah, 1394 AH), vol. 46, p. 275.


