Lesson 14: The Reasons behind the Burgeoning of the Shi‘ah during the Period of ‘Abbasid Caliphate
==================================================================================================

Shi‘ism experienced ever-increasing expansion during the period of the
‘Abbasid caliphate. This fact had some reasons and factors, some of
which are the following:

1. The Hashimis and ‘Alawis during the Period of Umayyad Caliphate
------------------------------------------------------------------

During the Umayyad period, the Hashimis—including both the ‘Abbasids and
the ‘Alawis—were united, and from the time of Hashim when the ‘Abbasid
campaigns started and coordination with the uprising of Zayd and his
son, Yahya, they commenced their tasks based on Shi‘ism. As Abu’l-Faraj
al-Isfahani says:

When Walid ibn Yazid, the Umayyad caliph, was killed, and there was
disagreement among the Marwanis, the Hashimite propagators and
campaigners went to the districts (rural areas) and the first thing they
expressed was the superiority of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and his progeny as
well as their being oppressed.

The ‘Abbasid caliph Mansur was one of the first narrators of the
*hadith* on Ghadir.[^1] As such, when some of the ‘Abbasid forces saw
that ‘Abbasid policy turned against the ‘Alawis, they did not accept it
and opposed the ‘Abbasids. For example, Abu Salmah Khalal, who was a
leading campaigner of the ‘Abbasids in Iraq,[^2] was killed by the
‘Abbasids on account of his inclination toward the ‘Alawis.[^3]

Although this person was not a Shi‘ah ideologically, his inclination
toward the progeny of the Prophet (S) cannot be denied especially that
he belonged to the tribe of Hamdan and was a resident of Kufah.[^4]

Among the Qahtani tribes, the tribe of Hamdan was preeminent in terms of
inclination toward Shi‘ism. As such, Sayyid Muhsin Amin has considered
him (Abu Salmah) one of the Shi‘ah viziers.[^5] Even the ‘Abbasids
themselves did not refrain initially from expressing love toward the
progeny of the Prophet (S):

When the head of Marwan ibn Muhammad, the last Umayyad caliph, was
brought in front of Abu’l-‘Abbas as-Safah, he performed a long
prostration. He then rose up and said: “Praise be to God who made us
victorious over you. Now, I do not worry when I shall die because on
behalf of Husayn, his brothers and companions, I killed two hundred
Umayyads. On behalf of my cousin, Zayd ibn ‘Ali, I burned the bones of
Hashim. On behalf of my brother, Ibrahim, I killed Marwan.[^6]

After the stabilization of the ‘Abbasid rule, on the one hand a gap
emerged between them, and the progeny of the Prophet (S) and their
Shi‘ah on the other. From the time of the ‘Abbasid caliph Mansur, the
‘Abbasids adopted the attitude and policy of the Umayyads toward the
progeny of the Prophet (S). In fact, they exceeded the Umayyads in their
enmity toward the Prophet’s progeny.

2. The End of the Umayyad Caliphate and the Succession to Power of the ‘Abbasids
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The end of the Umayyad period, the ascension to power of the ‘Abbasids,
and the disputes and conflicts between them were a good opportunity for
Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) to propagate the fundamentals of
Shi‘ism considerably and to a great extent. This was especially true in
the case of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) who trained students in different
fields and sciences.

Many outstanding scholars such as Hashim ibn al-Hakam, Muhammad ibn
Muslim, Aban ibn Taghlib, Hisham ibn Salim, Mu’min Taq, Mufadhdhal ibn
‘Umar, Jabir ibn Hayyan, and others were trained by the Imam. According
to Shaykh al-Mufid, their companions all together totaled four thousand
approximately in number.[^7]

They used to come to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) from the different parts of
the vast Muslim territory, bringing bounty and removing their doubts and
skepticism. The Imam’s students were scattered across various cities and
regions and it is natural that they played an important role in the
spread of Shi‘ism to the various regions that they reached.

3. The Migration of the ‘Alawis
-------------------------------

One of the most important factors involved in the spread of Shi‘ism
during the ‘Abbasid period was the migration and scattering of the
*sadat* and ‘Alawis across the different parts of the Muslim
territories. Most of them had no faith other than Shi‘ism. Although some
of them had Zaydi inclination so much so that, according to some
sources, some of the *sadat* were even Nasibis,[^8] it can certainly be
stated that most of the *sadat* had been Shi‘ah, their suffering at the
hands of anti-Shi‘ah governments clearly substantiate this contention.

The *sadat* were scattered in many regions of the Muslim territories
stretching from Transoxiana and India to Africa. Although these
migrations had started during the time of Hajjaj (ibn Yusuf), they were
accelerated during the ‘Abbasid period owing to the uprisings of the
‘Alawis that mostly ended in failure. The north of Iran and the
difficult to reach regions of Gilan and Mazandaran as well as the
mountainous places and far-flung lands of Khurasan were considered
secure places for the ‘Alawis.

For the first time, during the time of Harun ar-Rashid, Yahya ibn ‘Abd
Allah al-Hasani went to Mazandaran which was then called Tabaristan.
Although he held power and flourished in his work, through his vizier
Fadhl ibn Yahya who brought a letter, Harun was able to convince him to
conclude a peace treaty.[^9] Many ‘Alawis settled there after him and
Shi‘ism spread there day by day.

The people there embraced Islam through the ‘Alawis so much so that
during the second half of the third century AH, the ‘Alawi rule in
Tabaristan was established by Hasan ibn Zayd al-‘Alawi. At the time, it
is regarded as a conducive place for the *sadat* just as Ibn Asfandiyar
says,  
 …At the time, so many ‘Alawi and Hashimite *sadat* from Hijaz, suburbs
of Sham, and Iraq went to him. Verily, he had so much authority there
that whenever he would ride, three hundred ‘Alawis armed with swords
were around him.[^10]

When Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) was appointed by Ma’mun as his heir-apparent,
the brothers and relatives of the Imam went to Iran. As Mar‘ashi writes:

Because of the rumor of the heir-apparency spread by Ma’mun about the
Imam (*‘a*), many *sadat* came here (Iran) and the Imam had twenty one
brothers. This group of the Imam’s brothers and {their} sons consisting
of Hasani and Husayni *sadat* arrived in the villages of Rey (old
Tehran) and Iraq.

And as they heard of the treachery Ma’mun committed against Hadhrat
Ridha, they took refuge in the mountainous Daylamistan and Tabaristan.
Some of them were martyred and their tombs and shrines are famous and
since the people of Mazandaran were directly Shi‘ah when they embraced
Islam and believed in the goodness of the descendants of the Prophet
(S), *sadat* were held in high esteem there.[^11]

After the failure of the uprising of Shahid Fakh, Husayn ibn ‘Ali
al-Hasani during the time of ‘Abbasid caliph Hadi, Idris ibn ‘Abd Allah,
brother of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah went to Africa. The people there
rallied around him and he set up the rule of the Idrisis in Maghrib.
Although he was poisoned soon after that by ‘Abbasid agents, his sons
ruled there for a period of about one century.[^12]

As such, the *sadat* became familiar with the mentioned settlement. It
was for this reason that the ‘Abbasid caliph, Mutawakkil, wrote a letter
to the governor of Egypt asking him to expel the ‘Alawi *sadat* with the
payment of 30 dinars for every male and 15 dinars for every female. They
were transferred to Iraq and from there they were sent to Medina.[^13]

Muntasir also wrote the following to the governor of Egypt: “No ‘Alawi
could own property; he could not ride on horse; he could not move away
from the capital; and he could not have more than one attendant.”[^14]

‘Alawis could easily occupy a distinguished status among the people to
such an extent that they could assume an air of dignity vis-à-vis the
ruling authority. As Mas‘udi narrates, “Around 270 AH, one of the
Talibis named Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allah staged an uprising in the Sa‘id
region of Egypt. But he was finally defeated and killed by Ahmad ibn
Tulun.”[^15]

In this manner, the ‘Alawis were considered to have constituted the most
important challenge for the ‘Abbasid caliphate. In 284 AH the ‘Abbasid
caliph Mu‘tadhad decided to issue an order for Mu‘awiyah to be cursed on
the pulpits. In this regard, he wrote an order but his vizier warned him
of the public commotion. Mu‘tadhad said: “I will brandish my sword in
their midst.” The vizier replied:

Then, what shall we do with the Talibis who are present everywhere, and
with whom the people are sympathetic on account of love for the progeny
of the Prophet (S)? This order of yours will praise and accept them, and
as the people will hear it, they will tend to be more sympathetic with
them (the Talibis).[^16]

The ‘Alawis were respected by the people in every region they were
residing. It was for this reason that after their deaths, the people
used to build mausoleums and shrines on their graves as they used to
gather around them (‘Alawis) during their lifetime. When Muhammad ibn
Qasim al-‘Alawi went to Khurasan during the caliphate of Mu‘tasim, about
four thousand people gathered around him after only a short period and
housed him inside a very formidable stronghold.[^17]

On one hand, the ‘Alawis were generally good and pious people while the
transgression of the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid rulers were known to the
people. On the other hand, the oppression experienced by the ‘Alawis
made them occupy a special place in people’s hearts. As Mas‘udi has
narrated, “During the year when Yahya ibn Zayd was martyred, every baby
that was born in Khurasan was named either Yahya or Zayd.”[^18]

The Reasons behind the Emigration of the Sadat
----------------------------------------------

Three factors can be identified with respect to the migration and
scattering of the *sadat* in the different parts of the Muslim
territories: (a) the defeat of the ‘Alawi uprisings; (b) the pressure
exerted by the agents of the government; and (c) the existence of good
opportunities for migration.

### a. The Defeat of the ‘Alawi Uprisings

As a result of the defeat of the uprisings staged by the ‘Alawis, they
could not stay in Iraq and Hijaz which were accessible to the capital of
the caliphate, and they were forced to go to far-flung places and thus
save their lives. As Mas‘udi says about the scattering of the brothers
of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah,

The brothers and children of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah were spread
across diverse lands and called on the people to accept his leadership.
His son, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, went to Egypt where he was killed. His other
son, ‘Abd Allah went to Khurasan where he was imprisoned and later died
in prison. His third son, Hasan, went to Yemen where he was also put
behind bars and died there. His brother, Musa, went to Mesopotamia. His
brother, Yahya, went to Rey and then proceeded to Tabaristan. Another
brother of his, Idris, went to Maghrib and the people rallied behind
him…[^19]

### b. Pressure Exerted by Governments Agents

In the regions of Hijaz and Iraq which were near the capital, the
‘Alawis were constantly under pressure exerted by government agents. As
narrated by Mas‘udi, Muhammad ibn Qasim al-‘Alawi’s travel from Kufah to
Khurasan prompted the pressure exerted by the agents of the ‘Abbasid
caliph Mu‘tasim.[^20]

### c. Existence of Favorable Circumstances

Another factor for the migration of the ‘Alawis was the existence of
pleasant opportunities and their good social standing in the regions
such as Qum and Tabaristan.

Lesson 14: Summary
------------------

The reasons and factors behind the spread of Shi‘ism during the ‘Abbasid
period are as follows:

1. The Hashimis—including both the ‘Abbasids and the ‘Alawis—were united
up to the period of Mansur and the first thing expressed by the ‘Abbasid
campaigners was the superiority of ‘Ali (*‘a*).

2. During the time of the bloody confrontations between the Umayyads and
the ‘Abbasids, it was a good opportunity for Imam al-Baqir and Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) to undertake considerable activities in propagate the
fundamentals of Shi‘ism.

3. One of the most important factors for the spread of Shi‘ism was the
migration of *sadat* and ‘Alawis and their scattering across diverse
parts of Muslim territories. The *sadat* were spread in most parts of
the Muslim territories extending from Transoxiana and India to Africa.  
 The people of Tabaristan were among those who embraced Islam through
the Husayni *sadat* and were Shi‘ah from the very beginning.

**Lesson 14: Questions**

1. Enumerate the factors for the increase in the Shi‘ah numbers during
the ‘Abbasid period.

2. What is the impact of the migration of the ‘Alawis upon the spread of
Shi‘ism?

3. What were the reasons behind the migration of the ‘Alawis?

[^1]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 207.

[^2]: Khatib Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, 1st edition (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1417 AH), vol. 12, p. 340.

[^3]: After the death of Ibrahim Imam, Abu Salmah Khalal who was a
leading campaigner in Iraq and later became a vizier of Safah turned
against the ‘Abbasids. Thus, he wrote letters to the three prominent
figures of the ‘Alawis: Ja‘far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (‘a), ‘Abd Allah
ibn Hasan ibn Hasan ibn ‘Ali (‘a), and ‘Amr ibn al-Ashraf ibn Zayd
al-‘Abidin and entrusted these letters to one of his friends with this
instruction: “Go first to Ja‘far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (‘a) and should
he accept it, then give the other two letters. And if he does not
accept, you meet ‘Abd Allah Mahdh, and if does not accept too, you have
to approach ‘Amr. The messenger of Abu Salmah first went to Imam Ja‘far
ibn Muhammad (‘a) and gave the letter of Abu Salmah to the Imam. Hadhrat
Sadiq (‘a) said: “What is our business with Abu Salmah who is a follower
{shi‘ah} of others?” The messenger replied: “Kindly read the letter.”
Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) asked his attendant to give him a lamp. The Imam then
placed the letter just above the lamp and it burned! The messenger
asked: “Will you not give a reply?” The Imam retorted: “The reply for it
is what you saw!” Thereafter, the messenger of Abu Salmah went to ‘Abd
Allah ibn Hasan and handed to him the letter. As soon as ‘Abd Allah
finished reading the letter, he kissed it and immediately went to Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a) and said: “This letter received through one of our Shi‘ah
from Khurasan is from Abu Salmah who is inviting us to the caliphate.
The Imam said to ‘Abd Allah: “Since when have the people of Khurasan
become your Shi‘ah? Have you sent Abu Muslim to them? Do you know any of
them? You don’t know them and they don’t know you, how did they become
your Shi‘ah?” ‘Abd Allah said: “Your statement indicates your opinion
regarding this matter!” The Imam said: “God knows that I regard it
incumbent upon myself to wish well for every Muslim; how could it be
that I would not do so toward you? O ‘Abd Allah! Keep aloof from these
false ambitions, and you should know that this state will remain in the
hands of the ‘Abbasids and that a similar letter has been sent to me.
Being displeased, ‘Abd Allah left Imam as-Sadiq (‘a). ‘Amr ibn Zayd
al-‘Abidin also acted negatively toward the letter of Abu Salmah. He
refused to accept it and said: “I do not know the sender of the letter
to whom I should reply.” See Ibn Taqtaqa, Al-Fakhri (Beirut: Dar Sadir,
1368 AH), p. 154; ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab
(Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 4,
p. 280.

[^4]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), vol. 1, p. 190.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, pp. 283-284.

[^7]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, trans. Muhammad Baqir Sa‘idi Khurasani
(n.p.: Kitabfurushi-ye Islamiyyeh, 1367 AHS), p. 525.

[^8]: Ibn ‘Anbah, ‘Umdah at-Talib (Najaf: Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah,
1961), pp. 71, 200, 253.

[^9]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 389-395.

[^10]: Mar‘ashi, Tarikh Tabaristan wa Rawayan (Tehran: Nashr-e Kostareh,
1363 AHS), p. 290.

[^11]: Ibid., pp. 277-278.

[^12]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 406, 409.

[^13]: Adam Mitch (?), Tamaddun-e Islami dar Qarn-e Chaharum-e Hijri
{Islamic Civilization in the Fourth Century Hijri}, trans. ‘Ali Rida
Dhakawati Qaragzelu (Tehran: Mu’assaseh-ye Intisharat-e Amir Kabir, 1364
AHS), p. 83, citing Kandi, Al-Walah wa’l-Qadhah, p. 198.

[^14]: Ibid., quoting from Al-Walah wa’l-Qadhah, pp. 203-204.

[^15]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, p. 326.

[^16]: Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir ibn Rustam at-Tabari, Tarikh
at-Tabari, 2nd edition (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1408 AH),
vol. 5, p. 620-625.

[^17]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, p. 60.

[^18]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 236.

[^19]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 326.

[^20]: Ibid., vol. 4, p. 60.


