Lesson 15: The Shi‘ah and ‘Alawi Uprisings during the Period of Umayyad Caliphate
=================================================================================

The Shi‘ah uprisings and armed confrontations commence at Karbala’ and
the ‘Ashura’ movement, but we shall not touch on the topic of Karbala’
for the meantime.

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) in the 60s AH, two Shi‘ah
uprisings—that of the *Tawwabun* and Mukhtar—took place whose leaders
were not ‘Alawis but rather common pious Shi‘ah. (We discussed them at
length earlier.)

As these two uprisings were staged by Shi‘ah, they boasted a completely
Shi‘i nature. There is no difference of opinion concerning the leaders
of the *Tawwabun* that they were from among the companions of the
Prophet (*‘a*) and Shi‘ah of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).[^1]
We have also stated in detail the view of leading Shi‘ah figures and
*rijal* scholars who unanimously believed in his good intention and the
authentic narrations identified the slander against him coined by his
opponents.

With respect to the impact of the movements in the spread of Shi‘ism, it
must be said that the *Tawwabun* movement was short-lived and as such,
it had no opportunity to propagate Shi‘ism though it was important in
terms of the qualitative spread of the Shi‘ah faith, deepening the love
for the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) in the hearts making the Shi‘ah more
devoted and firm in their beliefs.

The uprising of Mukhtar, however, was effective in the spread of Shi‘ism
and Mukhtar was able to add non-Arabs in the ranks of the Shi‘ah as it
was not like that earlier.[^2] Since that time, Shi‘ism spread in the
eastern part of the Muslim territories, and we could see its peak in the
movement of the black-wearing ones and the ‘Abbasids.

The chain of ‘Alawi uprisings which took place during the latter part of
the Umayyad rule had a sort of relationship with the movement of the
‘Abbasids because Banu Hashim—including both the ‘Alawis and the
‘Abbasids—were united during the period of the Umayyad caliphate and
there was no conflict between them. In fact, the first two ‘Abbasid
caliphs, Safah and Mansur, had earlier paid allegiance to Muhammad Nafs
az-Zakiyyah who was one of the descendants of Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*).

After the victory of the ‘Abbasids, however, the same Muhammad along
with a number of his family members was killed by the ‘Abbasid caliph
Mansur. Throughout the second century AH, the ‘Alawi uprisings were
related to one another more on the basis of the Zaydi ideology though
the ‘Abbasids capitalized greatly on the uprising of Zayd. As Amir ‘Ali,
one of the contemporary historians, says in this regard:

The death of Zayd strengthened the ‘Abbasid campaigners and confirmed
the campaigns in full swing at the time for the caliphate of the
descendants of ‘Abbas. That barrier of probable competition was removed
from their way and it turned well suitable with the trend of the events
related to Abu Muslim such that it was built for the overthrow of the
Umayyads.[^3]

a. The Uprising of Zayd
-----------------------

Zayd, the noble son of Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) and brother of Imam
al-Baqir (*‘a*) rose up and staged an uprising against the cruelties of
the Umayyad caliph Hashim and his agents. Zayd who went to Damascus to
complain against Yusuf ibn ‘Amru, the then governor of Iraq, was
belittled and reproached by Hashim, and upon his return from Sham, he
was surrounded by the Shi‘ah in Kufah, urging him to rise up against the
Umayyads. But because of the wound he suffered at the heat of his fight,
his uprising did not succeed and he himself attained martyrdom.[^4]

Regarding the personality and uprising of Zayd, various narrations have
been transmitted with a group of narrators who reproach him. The Shi‘ah
scholars and authorities, however, are of the opinion that Zayd was a
noble and meritorious man and strong evidence fails to prove his
deviation. Shaykh al-Mufid has this to say concerning him:

Many of the Shi‘ah regard him as Imam and the reason for this is that
Zayd rose up and called on the people for the pleasure of Muhammad’s
progeny. The people thought that he was referring to himself though it
was not the case because he knew that his brother, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*),
was the rightful Imam and the Imam also introduced to him the Imamate
{*imamah*} of his son, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).[^5]

After reporting the narrations related to Zayd, ‘Allamah Majlisi also
writes, thus:  
 Be it known that the reports concerning the status of Zayd are varied
and contradictory but there are more reports expressing his dignity,
grandeur and merit and that he had no incorrect assertions and most of
the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* have praised him. Therefore, it is appropriate for
us to regard him positively and avoid reproaching him.[^6]

Ayatullah al-Khu’i thus says about Zayd: “The narrations praising Zayd
and indicating his dignity and grandeur and that he rose up to enjoin
what is good and forbid what is evil are much benefited while the
narrations vilifying him are weak {*dha‘if*}.”[^7]

Ample proof and evidence bear witness to the fact that Zayd’s uprising
had the secret permission and tacit approval of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).
One of these proofs was the statement of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) in
response to Ma’mun, when the Imam said:

My father Musa ibn Ja‘far narrated that he heard his father Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad to have said: “…Zayd consulted me about his uprising and I said
to him, ‘My dear uncle, if you like to be that person who shall be hung
in Kinasah,[^8] then that is your way’.” When Zayd left Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad, Ja‘far said: “Woe to him who will hear the call of Zayd but
will not respond to it.”[^9]

Yes, Zayd was a true Shi‘ah and one of those who believed in the Imamate
of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*). As he used to say,

In every period, one person from among us, *Ahl al-Bayt*, is the proof
{*hujjah*} of God and the proof at our time is my nephew, Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad. He who follows him shall never be misled and he who opposes
him shall never be guided.[^10]

Concerning the fact that Zayd was not regarding himself the Imam and not
calling the people toward himself, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says:  
 May God have mercy upon my uncle Zayd. If he only emerged victorious,
he would remain faithful (to his promise). My uncle Zayd was calling the
people toward the leadership of the person chosen from among the progeny
of Muhammad and I am that person.[^11]

In particular, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) assumed the guardianship of the
family of Zayd after his martyrdom,[^12] and he used to attend to the
families of those who were martyred alongside Zayd and once distributed
one thousand dinars among them.[^13]

It can be said, therefore, that Zayd’s uprising, like that of the
*Tawwabun* and Mukhtar, was completely Shi‘i and justifiable; that it
was against oppression and for the purpose of enjoining that which is
good and forbidding that which is evil; and that his method was separate
from that of the Zaydi sect.

b. The Uprising of Yahya ibn Zayd
---------------------------------

After Zayd’s martyrdom in 121 AH, his son Yahya continued his father’s
struggle. He went to Khurasan through Mada’in and remained in disguise
for sometime in the city of Balkh until he was arrested by Nasr ibn
Sayyar.

He was imprisoned for sometime until he was able to escape after the
death of the Umayyad caliph Hashim, and many people from among the
Shi‘ah of Khurasan gathered around him. He headed toward Nayshabur and
engaged in a battle with its governor, ‘Umar ibn Zurarah al-Qasri and
defeated him. But, at last, in 125 AH at Jawzjan, he was wounded in the
forehead and was killed at the battle arena while his forces
dispersed.[^14]

In contrast to Zayd’s uprising, his son Yahya’s uprising was tainted by
Zaydism. This fact can be discerned from the dialogue that took place
between him and Mutawakkil ibn Harun, one of the companions of Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*), in which he somehow expressed his belief in the Imamate
of his father while regarding himself as his father’s successor. In
addition to other requisites, he considered fighting by sword as a
requisite of Imamate.[^15]

It is at this point that the Zaydi sect takes form and its way becomes
separate from that of the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah and Ithna Ash‘ari. The
followers of the Zaydi sect do not even refer to the infallible Imams
(*‘a*) on juristic questions {*masa’il al-fiqhiyyah*}.

Lesson 15: Summary
------------------

The uprisings of the Shi‘ah begun with the movement of ‘Ashura’. The
uprisings of the *Tawwabun* and that of Mukhtar were obviously staged to
take vengeance for the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). None of the
leaders of these two uprisings was an ‘Alawi. Rather, they were
distinguished Shi‘ah and they had a great impact on the spread of
Shi‘ism.

The uprising of Zayd ibn ‘Ali was against the cruelties of Hashim, the
tyrant Umayyad caliph. Zayd was a noble and meritorious person, and he
rose up in order to enjoin what is good and forbid what is wrong. Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) has validated him.

Yahya ibn Zayd went to Khurasan after the martyrdom of his father and
rose up there against the Umayyads, but he, like his father, was wounded
in the battle and died. The uprising of Yahya, in contrast to that of
his father, was completely Zaydi in nature.

Lesson 15: Questions
--------------------

1. When did the Shi‘ah uprisings commence?

2. What motivated the uprising of Zayd?

3. How did the uprising of Yahya differ with that of Zayd?

[^1]: See Dr. Sayyid Husayn Ja‘fari, Tashayyu‘ dar Masir-e Tarikh,
trans. Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Ayatullahi, 9th edition (Tehran: Daftar-e
Nashr-e Farhang-e Islami, 1378 AHS), pp. 268-273.

[^2]: Rasul Ja‘fariyan, Tarikh-e Tashuyyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta Qarn-e
Hashtum-e Hijri, 5th edition (Qum: Shirkat-e Chap wa Nashr-e Sazman-e
Tablighat-e Islami, 1377 AHS), p. 76.

[^3]: Amir ‘Ali, Tarikh-e Gharb va Islam {History of the West and
Islam}, trans. Fakhr Da‘i Gilani, 3rd edition (Tehran: Intisharat-e
Ganjineh, 1366 AHS), pp. 162-163.

[^4]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut: Manshurat
Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 3, pp. 228, 230.

[^5]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, trans. Muhammad Baqir Sa‘idi Khurasani
(n.p.: Kitabfurushi-ye Islamiyyeh, 1367 AHS), p. 520.

[^6]: Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 2nd edition (Tehran:
Al-Maktabah al-Islamiyyah, 1394 AH), vol. 46, p. 205.

[^7]: Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu’i, Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith (Beirut: Dar
Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), pp. 102-103.

[^8]: Kinasah had been one of the places in Kufah. See Yaqut ibn ‘Abd
Allah, Mu‘jam al-Buldan, 1st edition (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-‘Arabi, 1417 AH), vol. 4, p. 153.

[^9]: Shaykh as-Saduq, ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, 1st edition (Beirut:
Ma’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 225, section
{bab} 25, hadith 1.

[^10]: Shaykh as-Saduq, Al-Amali (Qum: Al-Matba‘ah, 1373 AH), p. 325.

[^11]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), p. 2 and see Mahdi Pishva’i, Sireh-ye Pishvayan, 8th edition
(Qum: Mu’assaseh-ye Tahqiqati va Ta‘limati-ye Imam Sadiq (‘a), 1378
AHS), pp. 407-409.

[^12]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 331.

[^13]: Al-Irshad, p. 345.

[^14]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, pp. 326-327, 332.

[^15]: Mutawakkil ibn Harun says: “I paid a visit to Yahya ibn Zayd when
he went to Khurasan after his father was killed. I greeted him and he
asked where I come from and I replied that I come from Hajj pilgrimage.
Then he asked about the condition of his relatives and cousins in Medina
and he particularly asked about the condition of Ja‘far ibn Muhammad
(‘a). I also told him about the condition of the Imam and his
lamentation for his (Yahya’s) father Zayd. He then said: ‘My uncle,
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali prevented my father from waging war against the
Umayyads and relayed to him the would-be end of my father’s plan. Did
you pay a visit to my cousin, Ja‘far ibn Muhammad?’ ‘Yes,’ I retorted.
He asked, ‘Did you hear him telling something about my activity?’ ‘Yes,’
I responded. He said, ‘What did he say about me? Please inform me.’ I
said: ‘May I be your ransom! I do not like to tell you that which I have
heard from him.’ He said, ‘Are you frightening me with death? You tell
whatever you have heard.’ I said: ‘I heard the Imam saying that you
shall be killed and be hung in the same manner that your father was
killed and hanged.’ So, the color of his face changed and said:
‘Yamhu’llah ma yasha’ wa yuthabbit wa ‘inda umm al-kitab. O Mutawakkil!
God, the Exalted, confirmed His religion through us and gave us
knowledge and sword, and we possess both of them. But our cousins
possess knowledge only.’ I said: ‘May I be your ransom! The people
incline more toward your cousin Ja‘far than you.’ He said: ‘My uncle,
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali and his son, Ja‘far, are calling the people toward
life while we call them toward death.’ I said: ‘O son of the Messenger
of Allah! Who is more knowledgeable, you or he?’ He lowered his head for
sometime and then raised it, saying: ‘All of us have knowledge. The only
difference is that that which we know is also known to them and that
which they know is not known to us.’ He then asked me: ‘Have you
recorded something from my cousin?’ ‘Yes,’ I replied. He said: ‘Show
(them) to me.’ I showed to him some of the hadiths of Imam as-Sadiq to
him and some of the supplications in Sahifah as-Sajjadiyyah…” Sahifah
al-Kamilah as-Sajjadiyyah, trans. ‘Ali-Naqi Faydh al-Islam (n.p.:
Intisharat-e Faydh Islam, n.d.), pp. 9-12.


