Lesson 16: The Shi‘ah and ‘Alawi Uprisings during the Period of ‘Abbasid Caliphate
==================================================================================

The uprisings during the period of the ‘Abbasid caliphate up to the
first half of the fourth century AH can be divided into two—the
well-organized and programmed Zaydiyyah uprisings and the earlier
unplanned and sporadic uprisings.

The Uprisings of the Zaydis
---------------------------

The Zaydis who constituted a large portion of the Shi‘ah population
during the first, second and three centuries AH and regarded the right
to caliphate and Imamate as belonging to the descendants of Fatimah
(*‘a*) and the ‘Abbasids as usurpers, staged well-organized, cohesive
and preplanned uprisings some of which had led to the establishment of
governments in places such as Tabaristan, Maghrib and Yemen.

The Zaydis regarded Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah and Ibrahim as among the
Zaydi Imams because Yahya ibn Zayd had designated them as his
successors. It is here that close relationship emerged between the
Zaydis and the descendants of Zayd, on the one hand, and the offspring
of Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*), the so-called Banu al-Hasan, on the other.

Ibrahim ibn ‘Abd Allah, who was his brother’s successor, Muhammad Nafs
az-Zakiyyah and hoisted the banner of revolution against the ‘Abbasids
in Basrah, introduced another son of Zayd, ‘Isa, as his successor. ‘Isa
fled after the assassination of Ibrahim and died in secrecy during the
caliphate of the ‘Abbasid caliph Mahdi.[^1]

After the death of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah and Ibrahim, the Zaydis
failed to agree on the leadership of a particular person and they were
always looking for a brave and pugnacious Imam from the descendants of
Fatimah (*‘a*) who could lead them. But until 301 AH they were not able
to agree on the identity of the Imam until such time that Hasan ibn ‘Ali
al-Hasani, known as Atrush, staged an uprising in Khurasan in that year,
went to the regions of Gilan and Mazandaran, and succeeded in settling
the task of the Zaydis.[^2]

It is for this reason that the ‘Abbasids were harsh against the Zaydis
and were trying to eliminate the individuals who were capable of leading
them, particularly the descendants of Zayd among them. To this end, the
‘Abbasids hired spies and set up rewards for the capture of such
individuals.[^3] For instance, when ‘Isa ibn Zayd passed away secretly,
Harun arrested and imprisoned his son, Ahmad ibn ‘Isa merely on the
basis of suspicion.[^4]

Of course, the distinguished men among the Banu al-Hasan who were
regarded as leaders of uprisings did not follow the Zaydi way and modus
operandi and were not much attached to Zaydiyyah fundamental beliefs.
For this reason, when conditions during battles became unfavorable and
defeat seemed probable, the Zaydis would abandon their leaders in the
battle arena and ending their uprisings in failure (similar to what
happened to Yahya ibn ‘Abd Allah).

Idris, Yahya’s brother, was the only one among them who was able to
achieve relative victory[^5] and that was because he fled to Africa
which was far from the ‘Abbasids’ reach. He campaigned against the
Abbasids there and succeeded in forming a government.[^6]

Among the leaders of the uprisings who did not accept the fundamentals
of the Zaydi belief and follow the way and method of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) was Yahya ibn ‘Abd Allah, brother of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah,
who went to Khurasan after Muhammad’s defeat and from there he headed
toward the land of Daylam— present day Gilan and Mazandaran—but the
ruler there, who was not a Muslim yet, wanted to arrest Yahya and turn
him over to the agents of Harun on account of his threats.

At the time, Yahya was compelled to seek the protection of Fadhl
Barmaki, Harun’s vizier. Fadhl also offered him protection, but instead
of protection and security, he was imprisoned in Baghdad until his
death.[^7] He was one of the students trained by Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
and whenever narrating a *hadith* from the Imam, he would say: “My dear
Ja‘far ibn Muhammad thus said…”[^8]

Finally, since he was following the way and method of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) in terms of jurisprudence {*fiqh*}, the Zaydis opposed him and
distanced themselves from him. So, he was forced to surrender himself to
Fadhl ibn Yahya, Harun’s vizier.[^9]

The Uprising of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah
-----------------------------------------

The zenith of the ‘Alawi uprising was during the second century AH. One
of the most noted of these uprisings was during the time of the ‘Abbasid
caliph Mansur which was led by Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah. His activity
had started prior to the victory of the ‘Abbasids and with the exception
of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*), the Banu Hashim generally pledged allegiance to
him.

Even the Sunni scholars and jurists such as Abu Hanifah, Muhammad ibn
‘Ajlan, the jurist of Medina, Abu Bakr ibn Abi Sabrah, ‘Abd Allah ibn
Ja‘far, Hashim ibn ‘Urwah, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar, Wasil ibn ‘Ata’, ‘Amru
ibn ‘Ubayd, among others swore allegiance to him, attributing to him the
transmitted Prophetic sayings about the uprising of al-Mahdi
(*‘a*).[^10]

But his uprising during the period of the ‘Abbasids was defeated because
it was launched prematurely. In Basrah his brother Ibrahim’s uprising
also ended in failure due to the treachery of the Zaydis, but his
brothers were scattered and this state of affairs continued up to the
time of Harun. Idris ibn ‘Abd Allah fled to Maghrib and he was accepted
there by the people.

Yet, he was in the end poisoned by the agents of Harun. After him, his
followers installed his young child to replace him naming him “Idris
ath-Thani”. For sometime, the government of the Idrisis flourished in
North Africa. Yahya, another one of Muhammad’s brother, went to
Tabaristan after his death.

Yet another one of Muhammad’s brother named Musa ibn ‘Abd Allah fled to
the north of Iraq and Mesopotamia. Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah’s sons,
named ‘Ali, ‘Abd Allah and Hasan, went to Egypt, India and Yemen,
respectively, and were for some time the source of concern for the
‘Abbasid caliphate.[^11]

The Uprising of Ibn Tabataba’i al-Hasani
----------------------------------------

After the death of Harun and the conflict over the issue of succession
between his two sons, Amin and Ma’mun, the Shi‘ah taking advantage of
this opportunity staged more uprisings with the uprisings of the ‘Alawis
reaching their climax at this time. During that period, the whole of
Iraq (with the exception of Baghdad), Hijaz, Yemen, and south of Iran
were detached from the ‘Abbasid control owing to the existence of
competent military commanders such as Abu’s-Saraya on the side of the
‘Alawis.[^12]

The army of Abu’s-Saraya shattered every contingent they encountered and
overrun every city they visited. It is said that in the battle fought by
Abu’s-Saraya two hundred thousand soldiers of the ‘Abbasid caliph were
killed although the interval between the day of the uprising and the day
when he was beheaded was not more than 10 months.

Even in Basrah which was the demographic concentration of the Uthmanis,
the ‘Alawis earned support such that Zayd an-Nar staged an uprising in
the mentioned city. In Mecca and the districts of Hijaz, Muhammad ibn
Ja‘far known as Dibaj who was called “*Amir al-Mu’minin*” {Commander of
the Faithful} staged an uprising. In Yemen Ibrahim ibn Musa ibn Ja‘far
revolted against the ‘Abbasid caliph.

Muhammad ibn Sulayman ibn Dawud ibn Hasan rose up in Medina. In Wasit
where most of the people inclined toward the ‘Uthmanis, there was the
uprising of Ja‘far ibn Zayd ibn ‘Ali as well as that of Husayn ibn
Ibrahim ibn Hasan ibn ‘Ali.

In Mada’in Muhammad ibn Isma‘il ibn Muhammad launched a rebellion. In
sum, there was no place (in the Muslim territories) where the ‘Alawis by
their own initiatives or at the request of the people did not revolt
against the ‘Abbasids. It went to the extent that the people of
Mesopotamia and Sham, who were known for having cooperation with the
Umayyads and the descendants of Marwan, gathered around Muhammad ibn
Muhammad al-‘Alawi, the intimate friend of Abu’s-Saraya, and in a letter
to him they wrote that they have been waiting for his envoy to deliver
his message.[^13]

The Uprising of Hasan ibn Zayd
------------------------------

In the year 250 AH during the caliphate of Musta‘in, an ‘Abbasid caliph,
Hasan ibn Zayd, who was formerly residing in Rey, went to the districts
of Tabaristan, called on the people to seek the pleasure of Prophet
Muhammad’s (*‘a*) progeny, took control of the regions in Tabaristan and
Jurjan after a series of skirmishes,[^14] and founded the government of
the ‘Alawis in Tabaristan which lasted up to 345 AH.[^15]

Throughout his two decades of rule, Hasan ibn Zayd overran the regions
of Rey, Zanjan and Qazwin many times. During the same year of his
uprising, he dispatched one of the ‘Alawis named Muhammad ibn Ja‘far to
Rey who after sometime was captured by the Tahiris.[^16] In 251 AH he
sent Husayn Ahmad al-‘Alawi who rose up in Qazwin and expelled the
agents of the Tahiris.[^17]

Similarly, Hasan ibn Zayd’s brother, Husayn ibn Zayd overran the regions
of Larijan and Qasran, north of present day Tehran, and earned the
allegiance of the people there for his brother.[^18] As Tabari says
regarding the events in 50 AH, “In addition to the government in
Tabaristan, the government of the region of Rey extending roughly as far
as Hamedan was under the control of Hasan ibn Zayd.”[^19]

As such, in addition to the northern regions of Iran which were near the
sphere of influence of Hasan ibn Zayd and in which uprisings took place
in his name, the ‘Alawis in Iraq,[^20] Sham[^21] and Egypt[^22] found
courage too, gathering the people around them and staging uprisings,
until such time that in 270 AH Hasan ibn Zayd passed away.

After his death his brother, Muhammad ibn Zayd succeeded him and ruled
Saman until 287 AH. Finally, in that year (287 AH) he attained martyrdom
in a battle between him and Muhammad ibn Harun, a Samanide
commander.[^23]

In 287 AH, after the martyrdom of Muhammad ibn Zayd, Nasir Kabir know as
Atrush in the region of Gilan and Daylam rose up in the midst of the
people, calling them to Islam and ruled there for 14 years[^24] until
such time that he went to Tabaristan in 301 AH and took control of
government there.[^25]

The Uprising of Yahya ibn al-Husayn
-----------------------------------

In 288 AH Yahya ibn Husayn al-‘Alawi, known as “*Al-Hadi ila’l-Haqq*”
{The Guide toward the Truth}, staged an uprising in Hijaz and the Zaydis
gathered around him. On the same year he entered San‘a with the
cooperation of Yemeni tribes, and was addressed as the Zaydi Imam.

Although he had skirmishes with Yemeni tribes, in the end he was able to
take control of the region and establish a government. Yet, in 298 AH he
died from poisoning. He had been remembered as one of the greatest Zaydi
figures. In terms of knowledge and learning, he also had an excellent
station. As such, the Zaydi sect in Yemen became known with his name:
“Hadawiyyah”.[^26]

His sons were Zaydi Imams and rulers of Yemen.[^27] The leadership and
rule of Zaydiyyah in Yemen continued through the children and
grandchildren of “Al-Hadi ila’l-Haqq” until 1382 AH when Arab
republicanism in Yemen was established.

Lesson 16: Summary
------------------

The Zaydis during the first three centuries AH constituted a large
number of the Shi‘ah, and they staged regional uprisings which led to
the formation of governments.

The leadership of the Zaydis was transferred from the line of Yahya ibn
Zayd to the grandchildren of Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*). As such, they were
always leading the uprisings in spite of the fact that they did not
believe in the Zaydi fundamental beliefs.

One of the highlights of the ‘Alawi uprisings took place during the time
of the ‘Abbasid caliph Mansur and was led by Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah.
The second one was during the time of Ma’mun when on account of the
existence of military commanders such as Abu’s-Saraya, the ‘Alawis
attained success after success. The third one was after 250 AH when the
‘Alawis of Tabaristan were able to set up a government, with which other
‘Alawis found courage to stage uprisings in various regions.

Lesson 16: Questions
--------------------

1. Describe the Zaydi uprisings.

2. What is the basis of the uprising of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah?

3. When did the uprising of Ibn Tabataba’i take place?

4. In what year did the uprising of the ‘Alawis of Tabaristan happen?

[^1]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 345.

[^2]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut: Manshurat
Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 4, pp. 393, 394;
Shahristani, Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 139.

[^3]: For example, after receiving the news of Ahmad ibn ‘Isa’s escape
from prison, Harun (ar-Rashid) commissioned a certain person named Ibn
Kurdiyyah to go to the districts of Kufah and Basrah, to feign Shi‘ism,
and distribute money among the Shi‘ah and Zaydis so as to become
informed of Ahmad ibn ‘Isa’s hiding place. He was able to identify this
hiding place through much effort and distribution of large amounts of
money, but in the end, Ahmad was not arrested. Maqatil at-Talibiyyin,
pp. 492, 496.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Idris ibn ‘Abd Allah, brother of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah,
participated in the uprising of Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Hasani Shahid Fakh
which took place during the time of the ‘Abbasid caliph Hadi. After
Husayn’s defeat, he went to Egypt disguised among Hajj pilgrims (on
their way back home) and from there he proceeded toward Maghrib. In
Maghrib people gathered around him, and thus he acquired power and set
up a government, but a certain person poisoned him at the order of the
‘Abbasid caliph Harun. Thereafter, people named his small child “Idris”.
When Idris II grew up, he ruled there and the Idrisi rule in Maghrib
lasted for about one century. Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 326.

[^6]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 406-408.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 393.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid., pp. 392-393.

[^10]: Ibid., pp. 251, 254-255, 347.

[^11]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 326.

[^12]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 445.

[^13]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 435-436.

[^14]: Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir ibn Rustam Tabari, Tarikh
at-Tabari, 2nd edition (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1408 AH),
vol. 5, p. 364.

[^15]: Jalal ad-Din ‘Abd ar-Rahman Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa’ (Qum:
Intisharat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1411 AH), p. 525.

[^16]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 5, p. 365.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Ibid., pp. 36, 395, 430.

[^21]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, p. 327.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 326.

[^23]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 542.

[^24]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, p. 283.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 327.

[^26]: See ‘Ali Rabbani Gulpaygani, Firq va Madhahib-e Kalami, 1st
edition (Qum: Markaz-e Jahani-ye ‘Ulum-e Islami, 1377 AHS), vol. 1, p.
134.

[^27]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 525.


