Lesson 17: Sporadic Uprisings
=============================

Most of these uprisings were staged without prior organization and based
on individual decisions against the tyranny of caliphs and rulers toward
the Shi‘ah and ‘Alawis. Mostly reactionary and intransigent in nature,
the most important of these uprisings were the following:

a. The Uprising of Shahid Fakh
------------------------------

It was Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Hasani (known as Shahid Fakh) who revolted
during the caliphate of the ‘Abbasid caliph Hadi. His uprising was
against the extreme cruelties of the caliph of the time vis-à-vis the
Shi‘ah and ‘Alawis. Narrates Ya‘qubi, “The ‘Abbasid caliph Musa al-Hadi
was pursuing the Talibis. He seriously threatened them, curtailing their
stipends and grants, and wrote to {the rulers of} the different regions
and districts to be harsh toward the Talibis.”[^1]

‘Abbasid caliph Hadi had also appointed as ruler of Medina a person from
among the descendants of ‘Umar who was very harsh against the Talibis,
interrogating them daily. It was in protest of these cruelties that
Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Hasani rose up and ordered the recital of “*hayya
‘ala khayri’l-‘amal*” {“Come to the best of deeds”} in the *adhan* {call
to prayer} in Medina, asking the people to give their allegiance on the
basis of the Book of God and the *Sunnah* of the Prophet (S), and called
on them to the leadership of the chosen one from the progeny of Prophet
Muhammad (S).

His policy was agreed upon by Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) though the Imam said
that he will be killed.[^2] For this reason, the Zaydis kept aloof from
him and he along with less than 500 men stood against the ‘Abbasid army
under the command of Sulayman ibn Abi Ja‘far, and in the end, he and a
number of his companions attained martyrdom in a place between Mecca and
Medina called “Fakh”.[^3]

Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) said, “besides Karbala’ there was no tragedy more
severe and tragic than {the tragedy in} Fakh.”[^4]

In general, ‘Alawis leaders, with the exception of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd
Allah Nafs az-Zakiyyah, did not possess popularity. The Imami Shi‘ah and
companions of the pure Imams (*‘a*), with the exception of only a few,
did not participate in those uprisings.

b. The Uprising of Muhammad ibn al-Qasim
----------------------------------------

Muhammad ibn al-Qasim’s revolt had taken place in 219 AH. He was a
descendant of Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*), a resident of Kufah, and had been
regarded as one of the ascetic, devoted and pious ‘Alawis and *sadat*.
The reason behind his uprising was the pressure exerted by Mu‘tasim
against him and as such, he was compelled to leave Kufah for Khurasan.
As Mas‘udi says,

In this year, that is, 219 AH, Mu‘tasim threatened Muhammad ibn
al-Qasim. He was truly ascetic and pious and when Mu‘tasim threatened
him, he went to Khurasan. He stayed in the cities of Khurasan such as
Marv, Sarkhis, Taleqan, and Nasa.[^5]

As narrated by Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, a population of around forty
thousand men gathered around him. In spite of this, his uprising did not
succeed and this huge population deserted him and in the end, he was
arrested by the Tahiris, sent to Samarra and imprisoned.[^6] Of course,
he was freed by the Shi‘ah and his followers, but after that there was
no news of him and he passed away secretly.[^7]

c. The Uprising of Yahya ibn ‘Umar at-Talibi
--------------------------------------------

Yahya ibn ‘Umar at-Talibi, a descendant of Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib
at-Tayyar, enjoyed an unprecedented position among the people of Kufah
on account of his asceticism and piety. Because of the cruelty and
belittlement of the ‘Abbasid caliph Mutawakkil and the Turkish soldiers
against him, he was forced to rise up in Kufah against them and when he
was taking control of the helm of affairs, he implemented justice and
equity. As such, he earned extraordinary popularity in Kufah, but his
uprising was thwarted by Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Tahir. The people
were in commotion when they were mourning for him.[^8] As Mas‘udi says,
“People from near and far recited elegies for him, and the young and old
cried for him.”[^9]

And as narrated by Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, in terms of elegy, none of
the ‘Alawis who had attained martyrdom during the ‘Abbasid period
equaled him in the number of poems recited for him.[^10]

Factors behind the Failure of the Uprisings
-------------------------------------------

Two factors behind the failure of these uprisings can be identified:
weakness in leadership and lack of coordination and cohesion of the
forces. In most cases, the leaders of these movements had no proper plan
or program and their activity was not based on the correct Islamic
standards. As such, most of these revolts were not endorsed by the
infallible Imams (*‘a*).

If ever some other uprisings whose leaders were competent figures ended
in failure, it was because their plan and program were such that their
defeat was predictable. Therefore, if the infallible Imam of the time
would openly endorse them, in case of the failure of the uprising, the
basis of Shi‘ism and Imamate and the principal nucleus of the Shi‘ah
forces will be in jeopardy.

On the other hand, the forces of the uprisings generally lacked
coordination and cohesion. Although there were sincere and true Shi‘ah
among them who remained faithful to the objective up to the point of
death, most of these people did not believe in their objective, or they
did not agree with the leaders of the ‘Alawis, and most of them
abandoned their commander and leader at the scene of the battle. In this
regard, ‘Allamah Ja‘far Murtadha writes:

The reason behind these failures is nothing except that the Zaydi
uprisings were political movements par excellence, and their only
peculiarity was that they were campaigning to follow anyone from among
the descendants of the Prophet (S) who would brandish his sword against
the government, and they lack the intellectual purity and ideologically
strong beliefs emanating from the profundity of the soul and depth of
conscience.

These (uprisings) were based on such a stupid feeling and shallow
cultural awareness which are not even an amalgamation of emotion with
reasoning and conscience that could constitute a firm foundation of
commitment and mission. On account of this, these (uprisings) were
sucked down into the whirlpool (of breakdown) and many lives were wasted
along their path. Rather, contrary to the factors of defeat which stem
from within the revolutionary forces, relying on such an emotional and
intellectual force is like the thirty one’s reliance on a mirage.

And it is exactly this point that clearly shows how a people would
seriously and decisively encounter events and when the water was already
turning the wheels of mill and the time for harvest nigh, they would
incline toward “peaceful” and “quiet” life.[^11]

Lesson 17: Summary
------------------

The sporadic uprisings were mostly without any prior planning, and were
undertaken with one individual’s decision. They were usually staged as a
form of reaction to the cruelties of the tyrant caliphs and rulers.
Among these uprising was that of Husayn ibn ‘Ali al-Hasani known as
Shahid Fakh which was against the extreme harshness and cruelties of the
‘Abbasid caliph Hadi.

On account of the pressure exerted on him by the ‘Abbasid caliph
Mu‘tasim, Muhammad ibn al-Qasim who was one of the ascetic and pious
‘Alawis, was compelled to go to Khurasan and stage an uprising there.

The revolt of Yahya ibn ‘Umar at-Talibi was also the results of the
tyranny of the agents of the ‘Abbasid caliph Mutawakkil.

And as to why most of the uprisings of the ‘Alawis ended in failure, one
must seek the reasons behind this in the weakness of leadership and the
lack of cohesion of the forces.

Lesson 17: Questions
--------------------

1. Briefly describe the sporadic uprisings.

2. What are the reasons behind the failures of these uprisings?

[^1]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 404.

[^2]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 372.

[^3]: Ibid., pp. 380-381.

[^4]: Sayyid Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd ar-Rahman Kiya’i-Gilani, Siraj
al-Ansab (Qum: Manshurat Maktabah Ayatullah al-‘Uzma al-Mar‘ashi
an-Najafi, 1409 AH), p. 66.

[^5]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut: Manshurat
Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 4, p. 60.

[^6]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 464-467.

[^7]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, p. 60.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 160.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 511.

[^11]: Sayyid Ja‘far Murtada al-Amili, Zindigani-ye Siyasi-ye Imam Jawad
(‘a), trans. Sayyid Muhammad Husayni, 8th edition (Qum: Islamic
Publications Office affiliated to the Society of Teachers of the Islamic
Seminary in Qum, 1375 AHS), p. 19.


