Lesson 18: The Geographical Expansion of Shi‘ism
================================================

It is certain that the first center of Shi‘ism had been the city of
Medina and the pioneering Shi‘ah among the companions {*sahabah*} of the
Prophet (S) lived in that city. During the reign of the first three
caliphs, the Shi‘ah *sahabah* were scattered in the different cities and
regions, with some of them holding political and military positions.

In this regard, ‘Allamah Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah writes:  
 The Shi‘ah *sahabah* played a pivotal role in the propagation and
spread of Shi‘ism. Wherever they went, they were calling on the people
toward Shi‘ism within the framework of the Qur’an and the Sunnah and
through patience and fortitude, and on account of their companionship
with the Prophet (S), they were held in high esteem and regard by the
people, and their speech had tremendous impact.[^1]

Even the place like Jabal ‘Amil (in present day Lebanon) which was part
of Sham, Mu‘awiyah’s sphere of influence, would become one of the most
important centers of Shi‘ism by the grace of the presence of the great
companion of the Prophet (S), Abu Dharr (al-Ghiffari).[^2]

During the latter part of the caliphate of ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, many
Shi‘ah were living in the Muslim territories such that the name of ‘Ali
(*‘a*) was always mentioned for caliphate. For this reason, ‘Uthman used
to send requests to ‘Ali (*‘a*) during rebel gatherings in Madina,
asking him to stay out of Medina for sometime and to go to his farm in
Yanbu‘ with the hope that the rebels would be motivated less.[^3]

There were many Shi‘ah in Iraq especially during the time of ‘Uthman.
For example, when the Shi‘ah of Basrah—in spite of the fact that the
city was under the occupation and influenced by the *Jamal* {camel} Army
propaganda—heard the news that the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*)
along with *Muhajirun* and *Ansar* was heading toward them, three
thousand men only from the tribe of Rabi‘ah joined the Imam in
Dhiqar.[^4] Their decision to join ‘Ali (*‘a*) was ideologically
motivated, regarding the Imam as the caliph appointed by the Prophet (S)
just as Baladhuri has this to say: “Among the Shi‘ah of ‘Ali were those
from the tribe of Rabi‘ah.”[^5]

After ‘Ali (*‘a*) himself took control of the helm of government and
went to Iraq, there was an extraordinary impact upon the spread of
Shi‘ism in the region. Similarly, the rulers and governors of the Imam,
most of whom were appointed from among the Shi‘ah, had remarkable
contribution in the spread of Shi‘ism in other places. As Sayyid Muhsin
Amin says, “Wherever the trustees of ‘Ali (*‘a*) went, the people there
would become Shi‘ah.”[^6]

Of course, during that period, in addition to Sham which was totally
under the influence of the Umayyads, other regions, such as Basrah and
north of Iraq, also had inclinations toward ‘Uthman. The people in those
places were inclined toward ‘Uthman[^7] on account of the settlement of
‘Uthman’s relatives there, and this inclination in the north of Iraq
continued till the end of the second century AH.

Mecca also had anti-Hashimi and anti-‘Alawi tendencies since the Age of
Ignorance {*yamw al-jahiliyyah*}. Similarly, both during the Age of
Ignorance and the Islamic period, Ta’if was the same as Mecca. The other
tribes of Quraysh were always competing with Banu Hashim and not willing
to accept the leadership of Banu Hashim, and this is one of the reasons
for Quraysh’s opposition to the Holy Prophet (S). The people of Ta’if,
too, like that of Mecca, rejected the Prophet’s (S) invitation although
they submitted after Islam’s acquisition of power.

From the time of Hajjaj, Shi‘ism was extended beyond the realm of Iraq
and Hijaz. During that period, as a result of the extreme pressure and
harshness of Hajjaj, Shi‘ah went out of Iraq and settled in other Muslim
territories. Especially in the eastern part of the Muslim lands at the
end of the first century AH, the Shi‘ah centers in Iran were gradually
formed. In Khurasan, the ‘Abbasids took advantage of the people’s love
for the descendants of the Prophet (S) and through the slogan, “the
appointed one from among the progeny of Prophet Muhammad (S),” they
gathered the people around themselves and utilized them in the struggle
against the Umayyads.

The scattering of the Shi‘ah during the ‘Abbasid period was very
obvious. In the east, in addition to Iran, the Shi‘ah went to Central
Asia, India and the Caucasus, among others, and with the collapse of the
Umayyad dynasty, the Shi‘ah were also able to exert influence in the
west, especially in Africa where a Shi‘ah government of the Idrisis was
established during the second century AH. Although their government was
a Zaydi one, it can be regarded as a ground for the efforts of the
Shi‘ah. Of course, their contact with the capital (Baghdad) and Medina
had been less due to the existence of the Aghlabi government in Egypt
which was formed to counter them.[^8]

In this manner, Shi‘ism during the second century AH was spread in both
the eastern and western parts of the Muslim world, and in addition to
Khuzestan, the mountainous region {*jabal*} (the regions around the
Zagros mountain ranges) and central Iran, Shi‘ism was also spread in
far-flung regions such as Central Asia, present day Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, Maghrib (Morocco), India, and Tabaristan.[^9]

Lesson 18: Summary
------------------

The first center of Shi‘ism is Medina and the pioneering Shi‘ah used to
live in this city. During the period of the first three caliphs, the
Shi‘ah *sahabah* (companions of the Prophet (S)) was scattered in the
different cities and regions and calling people toward Shi‘ism on the
basis of the Qur’an. The transfer of ‘Ali (*‘a*) to Iraq had a
tremendous impact on Shi‘ism in Iraq.

From the time of Hajjaj, Shi‘ism was extended beyond the realm of Iraq
and Hijaz. During the ‘Abbasid period, the Shi‘ah in the east, in
addition to Iran, also found their way into Central Asia, India, and the
Caucasus, and in the west also, with the establishment of the Idrisi
government in Maghrib, a fertile ground was paved for the influence of
Shi‘ism.

The Shi‘ah-populated regions during the first century AH were confined
to Hijaz and Iraq. Owing to the residence of the pure Imams (*‘a*) and
Banu Hashim there, Medina was the first city where the Shi‘ah gathered
together.

The second Shi‘ah-concentrated region next to Medina was Yemen because
the people embraced Islam through ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) hand.

Lesson 18: Questions
--------------------

1. Where was the first center of Shi‘ism? Whom is the initial spread of
Shi‘ism associated to?

2. Which regions were Shi‘ah-populated during the first century AH?

3. What was the reason behind the inclination of the Yemenis toward
Shi‘ism?

[^1]: Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah, Ash-Shi‘ah fi’l-Mizan (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1413 AH), pp. 26-28.

[^2]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), vol. 1, p. 25.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Faydh al-Islam, Sermon 235.

[^4]: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, researched
by Muhammad Baqir Mahmudi (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami
Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1394 AH), vol. 2, p. 237.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 25.

[^7]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 178.

[^8]: Amir ‘Ali, Tarikh-e Gharb va Islam {History of the West and
Islam}, trans. Fakhr Da‘i Gilani, 3rd edition (Tehran: Intisharat-e
Ganjineh, 1366 AHS), pp. 241, 245; ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj
al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi,
1416 AH), p. 408.

[^9]: Among the companions of the pure Imams (‘a), we can find people
from cities and regions such as Halab, Egypt, Mada’in, Qazwin, Rey,
Kashan, Armenia, Sabat, Isfahan, Hamedan, Samarqand, and Kabul. Rijal
Najashi (Qum: Islamic Publications Office affiliated to the Society of
Teachers of the Islamic Seminary in Qum, n.d.), pp. 8-9, 66, 130, 161,
208, 233, 236, 290, 344, 367; Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Ma‘alim
al-‘Ulama’ (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1380 AH), p.
31.


