Lesson 19: The Demographic Concentration of the Shi‘ah
======================================================

As stated earlier, during the first three centuries AH, the Shi‘ah were
scattered across and living in many parts of the Muslim lands. Yet, the
demographic concentration and center of the Shi‘ah were in certain
regions, which during the first century AH were places such as Medina,
Yemen, Kufah, Basrah, Mada’in, and Jabal ‘Amil.

During the second century AH, in addition to these regions, places such
as Qum, Khurasan, Tabaristan, Baghdad, Jabal, and Africa became among
the regions where the Shi‘ah were demographically concentrated. Now we
shall explain these regions one by one.

The Shi‘ah-Populated Places during the First Century Hijri
----------------------------------------------------------

During the first century AH, Shi‘ah-populated places were confined to
Hijaz, Yemen and Iraq. The residents of these regions were Arabs and
considered to be the pioneering Muslims. Shi‘ism in Hijaz and Yemen was
traceable back to the period of the Holy Prophet (S). Iraq which was
conquered after the demise of the Prophet (S) also became the residence
place of Yemeni tribes and the government of Hadhrat ‘Ali (*‘a*)
accelerated the spread of Shi‘ism in that place.[^1]

### a. Medina

The name of Medina {Madinah} was “Yathrib” before the *hijrah* and the
people there consisted of two Yemeni tribes, the Aws and Khazraj,
re-named “*Ansar*” after the advent of Islam (after the *hijrah* to be
exact), and three Jewish tribes, namely the Banu Qaynuqa‘, Banu Nadhir
and Banu Quraydhah. When the Noble Messenger (S) migrated there, its
name was changed into “*Madinah an-Nabi*” {the City of the Prophet} and
on account of the constant mention of the word “*Madinah*” {Medina} it
was called as such.

Medina was the political capital of the first three caliphs (Abu Bakr,
‘Umar and ‘Uthman), and Quraysh who were the staunchest adversaries of
the Prophet’s Household {*ahl al-bayt*} lived there. Despite this, the
*Ansar* still constituted the majority of the inhabitants of Medina who
were always sympathetic to the descendants of the Prophet (S) and during
the political squabbles, they took *Ahl al-Bayt*’s (*‘a*) the side. The
distinguished Shi‘ah *sahabah* living in the mentioned city were
constantly telling the truth to the people. Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah
al-Ansari, a great companion of the Prophet (S), while leaning on his
staff, used to roam around the alleys of Medina and say,

‘Ali is the best of people. Whoever would not accept him will become an
infidel {*kafir*}. O the assembly of *Ansar*! Train your children to
love ‘Ali. Anyone of them who does not accept this love, then you have
to ask his mother concerning the fetus.[^2]

The same Jabir used to sit in Masjid an-Nabi and say, “O *Baqir
al-‘Ulum* {He who cleaves asunder all knowledge}! Where are you?” The
people were saying, “Jabir, you are talking nonsense.” Jabir would
reply, “No, I am not talking nonsense. In fact, the Messenger of Allah
(S) said to me: ‘After me, you shall meet a person from among my
descendants whose name will be the same as mine and whose facial
appearance will be the same as mine. He shall open to the people tens of
knowledge’.”[^3]

When he met Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) for the first time, he visited the Imam
twice everyday.[^4] Abu Dharr al-Ghiffari used to stand by the door of
Masjid an-Nabi and say,

Anyone who recognizes me has recognized me, and he who does not
recognize should know that I am Abu Dharr al-Ghiffari, Jundab ibn
Junadah… Muhammad is the heir of the knowledge of Adam (Adam) and all
the virtues of the prophets, and ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib is the executor of
will {*wasi*} of Muhammad and heir of his knowledge.[^5]

Meanwhile, most members of Banu Hashim lived in that city and were held
in high esteem. The infallible Imams (*‘a*) lived in the same city and
people benefited from their teachings. In particular, the study circles
of Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) extended to as far as Masjid
an-Nabi.

Narrates Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali:  
 I was sitting in the Masjid an-Nabi when a man approached and greeted
me, and asked about Abu Ja‘far (Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*)). I asked, “What is
your business (with him)?” He replied, “I listed down forty questions I
wanted to ask Abu Ja‘far.” He hardly finished his statement when Imam
al-Baqir (*‘a*) entered the mosque. A number of people from Khurasan
gathered around him and asked the Imam about the rituals of *Hajj*.[^6]

Some of the students of these two personages such as Aban ibn Tughlab
also gave lessons in Masjid an-Nabi. Whenever Aban would enter the
Masjid an-Nabi, he would sit at the place of the Prophet (S), give
lessons to the people, and narrate *hadith*s to them. Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*) used to tell him, “Sit at the Mosque of Medina and give edicts
{*fatawa*} to the people because I want persons like you to be seen
among my Shi‘ah.”[^7]

### b. Yemen

Prior to the conquest of Iraq and the founding of Kufah, Shi‘ah were
living in Yemen. Next to Medina, Yemen was the second place where the
Shi‘ah of ‘Ali (*‘a*) were located after the demise of the Prophet (S)
because the people there embraced Islam through ‘Ali (*‘a*). Writes Ibn
Shahr Ashub, thus:

The Noble Messenger (S) dispatched Khalid ibn Walid to Yemen to invite
the people there to Islam and it so happened that Bara’ ibn ‘Azib was
also included in the forces of Khalid. Khalid stayed there for six
months but he was not able to convince a single person to become Muslim.
The Messenger of Allah (S) was not happy about this state of affairs and
recalled Khalid, and instead the Prophet (S) sent the Commander of the
Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*).

When the Imam arrived there, he performed the dawn {*subh*} prayer and
read to the people of Yemen the letter of the Prophet (S). All members
of the tribe of Hamdan became Muslim in one day and after Hamdan the
rest of the tribes in Yemen embraced Islam. When this news was relayed
to the Holy Prophet (S), he performed prostration of gratitude {*sujud
shukr*}.[^8]

The first house where ‘Ali (*‘a*) stayed while in Yemen was the house of
a woman called Umm Sa‘ad Barzakhiyyah where the Imam gave Qur’an
lessons. The said house was converted into a mosque later and it was
named as “Masjid ‘Ali”.

Particularly at the last moments of the Prophet (S), people from the
different tribes of Yemen went to Medina to meet the Prophet (S), and in
their conversation the Prophet (S) introduced to them ‘Ali (*‘a*) as his
successor[^9] and thus, this fact remained in their memory.[^10] And
after the demise of the Prophet (S), they did not officially recognize
the government in Medina and refrain from remitting their *zakat* to Abu
Bakr, the caliph of the time.[^11] As stated in one of their poems,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطَعْنا رَسولَ الله ما دام وسطنا فيا قوم ما شأني وَ شأنُ أبي بكر؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيورثها بكراً إذا كانَ بَعْدَه فتلك لعمر الله قاصمة الظُّهر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When the Messenger of Allah was in our midst, we obeyed him.*  
*O people! Where are we and where is Abu Bakr?*  
*If Abu Bakr had a son named Bakr, shall he inherit the caliphate after
him?!*  
*I swear to my soul! This is backbreaking.*[^12]

During the caliphate of ‘Ali (*‘a*), in addition to the hundreds of
thousands of Yemenis who were residing in Iraq[^13] and thousands of
whom were considered part of the Imam’s army, most of the people of
Yemen were also Shi‘ah. The ‘Uthmanis and sympathizers of the Umayyads
living there were very small in number and the evidence of it is the
treatment of Busr ibn Artat, as per instruction of Mu‘awiyah, toward
them.[^14]

While Busr was with the people of the regions sympathetic to the Quraysh
and the Umayyads, he did nothing. For example, he passed by Mecca and
Ta’if, he did nothing against these two cities.[^15] But when he arrived
in the cities of Yemen such as Arhab, San‘a and Hadhramawt, he engaged
in mass murder. In San‘a he beheaded a hundred Iranian nobles. He had no
mercy toward the representatives of Ma’rab who had come to conquer Oman
as he killed them all. When he arrived in Hadhramawt, he said: “I want
to slaughter one fourth of the people of this city.”[^16]

In Jayshan in particular, which according to Ya‘qubi, all its
inhabitants were Shi‘ah, Busr committed widespread massacre.[^17] Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid had estimated the number of those killed by Busr to have
exceeded thirty thousand people most of whom were Yemenis.[^18] This
shows that the population of the Shi‘ah at the time had been
considerable. At any rate, following the devastation made by Busr in
Yemen, Hadhrat Amir (*‘a*) sent Jariyah ibn Qudamah (as-Sa‘di) and Busr
fled from Yemen. The people of Yemen and the Shi‘ah there then killed
‘Uthmanis and sympathizers of the Umayyads wherever they found
them.[^19]

After the martyrdom of ‘Ali (*‘a*), Yemen still remained a place where
the Shi‘ah were demographically concentrated, and when Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*) was setting off from Mecca to Kufah, Ibn ‘Abbas suggested to the
Imam not to go to Iraq, but to proceed instead to Yemen “where there are
Shi‘ah of your father.”[^20]

It must be noted that with the beginning of victories and expansion of
the Muslim domain, Yemen (and the Arabian Peninsula in general) had
reached its geographical limit and played a secondary role in the
political and military matters. Although the two cities of Mecca and
Medina had some social impact on account of their religious standing,
Yemen, which during the time of the Prophet (S) was considered one of
the most important parts of the Islamic domain, was located
approximately in one corner of the Muslim territories and their southern
tip after the victories of the Muslims in the neighboring countries. In
view of this, the spirit of Shi‘ism was dominant there.

During the uprising of Abu’s-Saraya at the end of the second century,
Ibrahim ibn Musa entered there without encountering any local resistance
and occupied it.[^21] And in the end, the Zaydi sect prevailed in Yemen.
Even now, many of its residents are Zaydis.[^22]

### c. Kufah

Kufah is a city that had been founded after the advent of Islam by the
Muslims there. The ancient city of Hirah near Kufah was always ruled by
the Lakhmiyan.[^23]

In 17 AH Sa‘ad ibn Abi Waqqas, the commander of the Iranian front,
founded this city at the order of the second caliph (‘Umar) and
thereafter, eighty of the *sahabah* resided there.[^24] At the
beginning, the city of Kufah was more of a military camp and
accommodation for the forces of the eastern front. Most of its
inhabitants were Muslim *mujahidun* who were mostly from the Qahtani and
Yemeni tribes. For this reason, Kufah always had the Qahtani and Yemeni
atmosphere.[^25]

Among the companions of the Prophet (S), *Ansar* with Yemeni root were
residing there mostly. The Khazraj, one of the two tribes of *Ansar*,
had a particular district there. Yaqut Hamawi says, “During the time of
Ziyad (ibn ‘Ubayd Allah), most of the houses made of bricks were houses
of (the tribes of) Khazraj and Murad.[^26]

Of course, a number of non-Arabs and Iranians were also living in Kufah
who, during the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), were
busy trading in the Kufah market.[^27] It was the same non-Arabs who
constituted most of the force during Mukhtar’s uprising.[^28]

Concerning the merit of Kufah, there are many pertinent *hadith*s
transmitted, one of which is from ‘Ali (*‘a*) when he said:

What a good city Kufah is! The soil there loves us and we love it also.
On the Day of Resurrection, seventy thousand people whose faces are like
the moon in radiance shall be raised at the outside of Kufah (the
cemetery of Kufah which was located outside the city). Kufah is our city
and the place and residence of our Shi‘ah.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says, “O God! Be inimical to him who shall be
inimical to Kufah.”[^29]

The record of Shi‘ism in Kufah is traceable to the time even prior to
the transfer of ‘Ali (*‘a*) there. The two factors that can be
identified for this is first, the residence of the Yemeni tribes there,
most of whom, as we have said earlier, were sympathetic to the
descendants of the Prophet (S), and the other one is the existence of
distinguished Shi‘ah *sahabah* such as ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud and ‘Ammar
Yasir.

‘Ammar was sent by ‘Umar there as governor and Ibn Mas‘ud as Qur’an
teacher. For many years, Ibn Mas‘ud was busy teaching jurisprudence
{*fiqh*} and the Qur’an to the people there.[^30]

We can observe the impact of the teachings of these distinguished men at
the beginning of the caliphate of ‘Ali (*‘a*). The sermon of Malik
al-Ashtar when the people pledged their allegiance to the Imam shows the
spirit of Shi‘ism among the people, when Malik says:

O people! This successor of the successors and heir to the knowledge of
the prophets… is a person to whose faith the Book of Allah gives
testimony and the Prophet to his being a dweller of paradise. He is the
one the virtues about whom are perfected; with regard to his precedence
in knowledge and merit, the latter ones and the pioneering ones have not
cast doubt.[^31]

When ‘Ali (*‘a*) dispatched his son Hasan (*‘a*) and ‘Ammar to ask the
assistance of the people of Kufah in the battle against the *Nakithun*
{those who broke their allegiance} (in the Battle of *Jamal* {Camel}),
nine thousand men joined the ranks of the Imam even despite a person
like Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari, the ruler there, who prevented people from
assisting the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).[^32]  
 With ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) migration to Kufah, this city had become the most
important Shi‘ah-populated city up to the end of the third century AH.
Dr. Sayyid Husayn Ja‘fari thus says in this regard:

Since the time when ‘Ali (*‘a*) transferred to Kufah in 36 AH and even
earlier than that, this city had become the main center of the
movements, inspirations, hopes, and at times, coordinated struggles of
the Shi‘ah. Inside and around Kufah, tumultuous events that construct
the early history of Shi‘ism took place.

The events such as the preparation of the forces of ‘Ali (*‘a*) for the
battles of Jamal and Siffin; the appointment and stepping down from
caliphate of Hasan ibn ‘Ali (*‘a*); the uprising of Hujr ibn ‘Uday
al-Kindi; the killing of Husayn (*‘a*) and his votaries; and the
*Tawwabun* movement and the uprising of Mukhtar are among these events.
Given this, Kufah is the place of hopelessness, deprivations, and even
treachery and failure in the attainment of goals of the Shi‘ah on the
part of those who do not want to seen the descendants of ‘Ali in the
stewardship of the Muslim society.[^33]

Although the killers of Imam al-Husayn were Kufans,[^34] the
distinguished Shi‘ah at the time were languishing in the prison of Ibn
Ziyad.[^35] Besides, with the martyrdom of Muslim and Hani, the Shi‘ah
were left without commander against a tough enemy such as Ibn Ziyad and
had no match for his power. After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*), however, the Shi‘ah came to their senses and launched the
*Tawwabun* movement and the uprising of Mukhtar.

Kufah had been known for friendship and love of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)
and enmity toward the Umayyads. Even Mus‘ab ibn az-Zubayr feigned love
for the descendants of the Prophet (S) in order to win the hearts of the
Kufans. As such, he married a daughter of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*).[^36] By
the end of the first century AH, although there were then new
Shi‘ah-populated centers, Kufah was still considered the most important
Shi‘ah-populated city.

While advising his supporters during the initial stage of the uprising
against the Umayyads, for example, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn
al-‘Abbas, the leader of the ‘Abbasid uprising, said: “But (the people
of) Kufah and its districts are Shi‘ah of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.”[^37]

During the second and third centuries AH, the uprisings of some Talibis
also took place in Kufah. Notwithstanding the existence of an important
city such as Baghdad during the ‘Abbasid period, Kufah did not lose its
political importance and the most noted uprising of the ‘Alawis during
the second half of the second century AH, i.e. the uprising of Ibn
Tabataba under the military commandership of Abu’s-Saraya was staged in
the same city.[^38]

As such, the Umayyads monitored Kufah closely and bloodthirsty
individuals such as Ziyad, Ibn Ziyad and Hajjaj would be designated to
rule there. The rulers there were always supposed to be inimical to the
‘Alawis, and in the event that a ruler like Khalid ibn ‘Abd Allah
al-Qasri had little compassion for the Shi‘ah, he would immediately be
dismissed and even be imprisoned.[^39]

Apart from its political aspect, Kufah was also regarded as the most
important Shi‘ah-populated city in terms of knowledge and the Shi‘ah
culture was dominant there. The majority of students of the pure Imams
(*‘a*) were Shi‘ah of this city. Great Shi‘ah clans were living in
Kufah. They offered remarkable services to the Shi‘ah culture. For
example, from the time of Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) up to the minor
occultation {*ghaybah as-sughra*} men of the House of A‘yan were among
the companions of the pure Imams (*‘a*).

Sixty prominent scholars of *hadith* {*muhaddithun*} emerged from this
clan. It had stalwarts such as Zurarah ibn A‘yan, Hamran ibn A‘yan,
Bakir ibn A‘yan, Hamzah ibn Hamran, Muhammad ibn Hamran, and ‘Ubayd ibn
Zurarah—the same ‘Ubayd who went to Medina as the representative of the
people of Kufah after the demise of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) to dispel any
skepticism regarding the matter of Imamate, before going back to
Kufah.[^40]

The House of Abi Shu‘bah was another great Shi‘ah clan in Kufah whose
forefather, Abu Shu‘bah, had narrated *hadith* from Imam al-Hasan and
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). Najashi claims that all of those narrations are
reliable.[^41]  
 Similarly, the House of Nahik is also one of the great Shi‘ah clans in
Kufah from which ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad and ‘Abd ar-Rahman Samari
belong.[^42]

In the mosques of Kufah, particularly in its central mosque, *hadith*s
of the pure Imams (*‘a*) used to be taught there. Hasan ibn ‘Ali
Washsha’, a companion of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*), says: “I saw in Masjid
Kufah nine hundred people who were transmitting *hadith*s from Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*).”[^43]

### d. Basrah

Basrah is a city founded by the Muslims in 17 AH simultaneous with the
founding of Kufah.[^44] Although the people of Basrah were known for
inclination toward ‘Uthman for supporting A’ishah, Talhah and Zubayr, at
the same time that the *Jamal* {Camel} Army was in Basrah, the Shi‘ah
there fought against it and a large number of them attained martyrdom.
As narrated by Shaykh al-Mufid, from (the tribe of) ‘Abd al-Qays alone,
five hundred of the Shi‘ah of ‘Ali (*‘a*) were martyred.[^45]

According to Baladhuri, three thousand men from among the Shi‘ah of the
tribe of Rabi‘ah joined the ranks of the Imam at Dhiqar.[^46] After the
Battle of Jamal, notwithstanding the atmosphere of inclination to
‘Uthman in Basrah, many Shi‘ah were still living there. As such, when
Mu‘awiyah dispatched Ibn Hadhrami to create unrest there, he informed
him that some people in Basrah are Shi‘ah and advised him to avoid some
tribes such as that of Rabi‘ah notwithstanding the great number of the
‘Uthmanis, and if ‘Ali (*‘a*) would not send off any force from Kufah,
by means of unrests he would take control of Basrah through the
‘Uthmanis.[^47]

During the event of Karbala’, Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) also wrote a letter
to some distinguished men of Basrah. Among them, Yazid ibn Mas‘ud
Nahshali accepted the invitation of the Imam, responded positively to
him, gathered the tribes of Banu Tamim, Banu Sa‘ad and Banu Hanzalah,
and called on them to assist Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). He then wrote a
letter to the Imam, informing him of these tribes’ readiness. But when
they were already to join the ranks of the Imam, they heard the news of
his martyrdom.[^48]

During the uprising of the *Tawwabun*, as narrated by Mas‘udi, a number
of the Shi‘ah of Basrah together with the Shi‘ah of Mada’in had also
joined the army of the *Tawwabun*. Of course, when they arrived at the
scene, the battle was over.[^49]

During the Umayyad period, the Shi‘ah of Basrah experienced sufferings
at the hands of cruel and bloodthirsty rulers such as Ziyad and Samarah
ibn Jundab. Ziyad came to Basrah in 45 AH and delivered the
*Batra’*[^50] Sermon saying:  
 I swear to God that I shall call to account the guardian for the fault
of the guarded one; the resident for the crime of the traveler; and the
healthy one for the sin of the sick one to such as extent that when one
of you would see another, he will say that his own Sa‘ad is the proof
that Sa‘id is guilty. From then on, beware lest somebody went out at
night as I will shed his blood… Keep your tongues and hands away from me
so as for you to remain safe from my tongue and hands.[^51]

Later on, Kufah also became under the governorship and administration of
Ziyad, and he would stay for six months in Kufah and the next six months
in Basrah. Every time he was in Kufah, he would designate Samarah ibn
Jundab to administer Basrah on his behalf. Samarah was an atrocious man
and never desisted from shedding blood. During the absence of Ziyad, he
butchered eight thousand people.[^52]

With the passage of time, the spirit of Shi‘ism in Basrah became
stronger so much so that during the beginning of the ‘Abbasid rule, the
second ‘Alawi uprising—the uprising of Ibrahim, brother of Muhammad Nafs
az-Zakiyyah—took place there.[^53]

### e. Mada’in

In contrast to Kufah and Basrah, Mada’in is a city which has been
existing even prior to the advent of Islam and conquered by Sa‘d ibn Abi
Waqqas in 16 AH during the caliphate of ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab. It is said
that Anushirawan founded this city and its Persian name was Tisfun which
was considered one of the capitals of the Sassanid Empire. *Taq-e
Kisra*[^54] was also located there.

For the reason that it was composed of seven large places each of which
was as large as a city, the Arabs called it “Mada’in” which is the
plural form of “*madinah*” {city} (its other plural form being
“*mudun*”). Of course, by founding new cities such as Kufah, Basrah,
Wasit, Baghdad, and Samarra, this city was gradually abandoned.[^55]  
 Mada’in had been one of the Shi‘ah-populated cities during the first,
second and third centuries AH, and the reason behind it was the rule of
distinguished Shi‘ah *sahabah* such as Salman al-Farsi and Hudhayfah ibn
Yaman there. And as such, the people of Mada’in, from the beginning, had
accepted Islam through the hands of Shi‘ah *sahabah*. In the uprising of
the *Tawwabun*, names of Shi‘ah from Mada’in can be noticed. Mas‘udi
says:

After the martyrdom of Sulayman ibn Sard Khaza‘i and Musayyab ibn Najbah
Fazari ‘Abd Allah ibn Sa‘d ibn Nufayl assumed the commandership of the
*Tawwabun*. Given this, the Shi‘ah of Basrah and Mada’in, who were
approximately five hundred people and whose commanders were Muthanna ibn
Mukharramah and Sa‘d ibn Hudhayfah, quickly came to the front and
personally tried to join the *Tawwabun* but they failed.[^56]

Shi‘ism had always been dominant in this city. In this regard,Yaqut
Hamawi says, “Most of the people of Mada’in are Shi‘ah Imamiyyah.”[^57]

### f. Jabal ‘Amil

Jabal ‘Amil was another Shi‘ah-populated region during the first century
AH. Shi‘ism of the people of this place started when Abu Dharr was
exiled by ‘Uthman ibn al-‘Affan to Sham. The late Sayyid Muhsin Amin
says,

Mu‘awiyah also banished Abu Dharr to the villages of Jabal ‘Amil. Abu
Dharr engaged in guiding the people. Thus, the people there became
Shi‘ah. In the villages of Sarfand and Mays of Jabal ‘Amil, there are
two mosques named “Abu Dharr Masjid”. Even during the time of the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), {the inhabitants of} a certain village
called “As‘ar” were Shi‘ah.[^58]

With regard to Shi‘ism there, the late Muzaffar had also said: “The
origin of Shi‘ism in Jabal ‘Amil is traceable to the call of the
*mujahid* {struggler} in the path of Allah, Abu Dharr al-Ghiffari.”[^59]
Kird-‘Ali also says that the record of Shi‘ism in Damascus, Jabal ‘Amil
and north of Lebanon can be traced back to the first century AH.[^60]

Lesson 19: Summary
------------------

The root of Shi‘ism in Kufah is traceable even prior to the transfer of
‘Ali (*‘a*) because most of the residents there belonged to Yemeni
tribes most of whom were Shi‘ah. Besides, distinguished Shi‘ah *sahabah*
lived there.

With the transfer of ‘Ali (*‘a*) to this city toward the end of the
third century AH, Kufah became the most important Shi‘ah-dominated city.
As such, during the second and third centuries AH, the uprisings of a
number of Talibis were launched there, and the Shi‘ah culture was always
dominant there.

Notwithstanding the spirit of inclination toward ‘Uthman in the city of
Basrah, there were also Shi‘ah of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)
such as the tribe of Rabi‘ah living there and they fought against the
Companions of the Camel (forces of Talhah, Zubayr and ‘A’ishah). With
the passage of time, the influence of Shi‘ism in the city of Basrah
became stronger.

On account of the rule there of great Shi‘ah *sahabah* such as Salman
al-Farsi and Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, Mada’in was considered one of the
Shi‘ah-populated cities.

With the banishment of Abu Dharr to Sham, the seed of Shi‘ism was
planted in the region of Jabal ‘Amil.

Lesson 19: Questions
--------------------

1. How did Kufah become a Shi‘ah-dominated city?

2. Were there Shi‘ah living in Basrah?

3. The root of Shi‘ism in Jabal ‘Amil can be traced back to which
period?

[^1]: See Sayyid Ja‘far Shahidi, Tarikh-e Tahlili-ye Islam ta Payan-e
Umawi {An Analytical History of Islam till the End of the Umayyad Rule},
6th edition (Tehran: Markaz-e Nashr-e Daneshgahi, 1365 AHS), vol. 2, pp.
137-138.

[^2]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 237.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 218.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 222.

[^5]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 171.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 357.

[^7]: Abu’l-‘Abbas Ahmad ibn ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn al-‘Abbas Najashi,
Fihrist Asma’ Musanfa ash-Shi‘ah (Rijal Najashi) (Qum: Islamic
Publications Office affiliated to the Society of Teachers of the Islamic
Seminary in Qum, 1407 AH), p. 10.

[^8]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib (Qum: Mu’assasah
Intisharat-e ‘Allameh, n.d.), vol. 2, p. 129.

[^9]: Muhammad Husayn Muzaffar, Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat
Maktabah Basirati, n.d.), p. 122.

[^10]: Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari narrates: “A number of the various
tribes of Yemen came to the Holy Prophet (S). The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: ‘There shall be a softhearted people with strong faith Mansur (one
of the companions of Imam al-Mahdi (‘a)) along with seventy thousand
from whom shall rise up to help my successor and the successor of my
executor of will {wasi} even while their swords carried (diagonally
across the body) with the staple of palm-tree!’ They asked: ‘O Messenger
of Allah! Who is the executor of your will?’ He retorted: ‘It is he to
whom God, the Exalted, ordered (the people) to hold fast when He said,
“Hold fast to the rope of Allah and be not divided among yourselves”
(Surah Al ‘Imran 3:103).’ They asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah! Tell us
what this ‘rope’ {habl} is.’ He said: ‘This rope is exactly the
statement of God when He says, “…save (where they grasp) a rope from
Allah and a rope from men” (Surah Al ‘Imran 3:112). The rope from Allah
is the Qur’an while the rope from men is the executor of my will!’ They
asked: ‘O Messenger of Allah! Who is the executor of your will?’ He
answered: ‘It is he about whom God, the Exalted, says, “Lest any soul
should say, ‘Alas, my grief that I was unmindful of Allah’” (Surah
az-Zumar 39:56).’ They inquired: ‘What is this command of God?’ He
responded: ‘He is the executor of my will and the guide of the people
toward me after I depart!’ They said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! By He who
has sent you down in truth! Point him to us as we are indeed eager to
see and know him!’ He said: ‘God has appointed him for the faithful. If
you would look at him with the vision of the heart, you shall know that
he is indeed the wasi {executor of will} just in the same manner that
you recognized your Prophet. Thus, go and check within the ranks of the
people in the mosque. Anyone who shall draw your hearts toward him is
the wasi; for, God, the Exalted, says: “So incline some hearts of men
that they may yearn toward them” (Surah Ibrahim 14:37).’ As such, Abu
‘Amir Ash‘ari from the tribe of Ash‘ariyyin, Abu ‘Izzah Khawlani from
among the Khawlaniyan, Uthman ibn Qays from Banu Qays, Gharyah Dawsi
from the tribe of Daws, and Lahiq ibn ‘Alafah rose up and they checked
the ranks of the people in the mosque. They took ‘Ali (‘a) by the hand
and presented him to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: ‘O Messenger of
Allah! This is the person who drew our hearts toward him and inclined
toward him.’ The Holy Prophet (S) said: ‘All praise is due to Allah! You
recognized the executor of will of the Prophet even before seeing him.’
So, the Yemenis wept and said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! We looked at the
people, but our hearts did not get calm with them; when we saw him our
hearts experienced tranquility as if we have seen our respective
fathers’.” Muhammad Husayn Muzaffar, Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat
Maktabah Basirati, n.d.), pp. 124-125.

[^11]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 132.

[^12]: Shahab ad-Din Abi ‘Abd Allah Yaqut Hamawi, Mu‘jam al-Buldan, 1st
edition (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1417 AH), vol. 3, p.
158.

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 7, p. 161.

[^14]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 197.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Muhammad Thaqafi Kufi, Al-Gharat, trans.
Muhammad Baqir Kamare’i (n.p.: Farhang-e Islam, n.d.), pp. 325, 331.

[^17]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 199.

[^18]: ‘Abd al-Hamid ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Cairo: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah, 1961), vol. 2, p. 17.

[^19]: Al-Gharat, p. 333.

[^20]: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, researched
by Muhammad Baqir Mahmudi (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami
Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1394 AH), vol. 3, p. 161.

[^21]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 435.

[^22]: Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah, p. 132.

[^23]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, p. 162.

[^24]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 150.

[^25]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, p. 161.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 126.

[^28]: Rasul Ja‘fariyan, Tarikh-e Tashuyyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta Qarn-e
Hashtum-e Hijri, 5th edition (Qum: Shirkat-e Chap wa Nashr-e Sazman-e
Tablighat-e Islami, 1377 AHS), p. 71.

[^29]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 3, p. 198.

[^30]: ‘Izz ad-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad Abi’l-Kiram Ibn Athir,
Asad al-Ghabah fi Ma‘rifah as-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 3, p. 258.

[^31]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 189.

[^32]: Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 262.

[^33]: Sayyid Husayn Ja‘fari, Tashayyu‘ dar Masir-e Tarikh, trans.
Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Ayatullahi, 9th edition (Tehran: Daftar-e Nashr-e
Farhang-e Islami, 1378 AHS), p. 125..

[^34]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab, 1st
edition (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH),
vol. 3, p. 73.

[^35]: Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah, p. 67.

[^36]: Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah ibn Muslim ibn al-Qutaybah, Al-Ma‘arif,
researched by Tharwah ‘Akkashah, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1415 AH), p. 214.

[^37]: Fakhri has narrated that Muhammad ibn ‘Ali said to his supporters
and campaigners: “But there are Shi‘ah of ‘Ali ibn Talib in Kufah and
its districts. The people of Basrah gave their loyalty to an ‘Uthmani
group, but the people of Mesopotamia were not yet Muslims then. The
people of Sham would not recognize anyone except the descendants of Abu
Sufyan and not obey anyone except Marwan. But the people of Mecca and
Medina were more on following the line of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Therefore,
it should not be forgotten that from among the people of Khurasan there
were many individuals who were active, pure-hearted and had peace of
mind. They were neither inclined to this group nor that group, and
neither did they adhere to the different sects nor attach to peity. Ibn
Tabataba, Al-Fukhara fi Adab as-Saltaniyyah (Egypt), p. 104.

[^38]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, pp. 424-431.

[^39]: Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 3, p. 233.

[^40]: Abu Ghalib Zurari, Risalah fi Al A‘yan (Isfahan: Matba‘ah
Rabbani, n.d.), pp. 2-18.

[^41]: Fihrist Asma’ Musanfa ash-Shi‘ah (Rijal Najashi), p. 230.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 232.

[^43]: Ibid., p. 39-40.

[^44]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 2, p. 340.

[^45]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Jamal, 2nd edition (Qum: Maktab al-A‘lam
al-Islami (Publication Center), 1416 AH), p. 279.

[^46]: Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 237.

[^47]: Al-Gharat, p. 166.

[^48]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), vol. 1, p. 590.

[^49]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 109.

[^50]: Batra’ is the feminine form of abtar which means ‘defective’ and
‘incomplete’. According to the hadith, every statement which does not
begin with the name of Allah is called abtar {defective and incomplete}.
Since Ziyad began to deliver the said sermon without invoking the name
of Allah, it became known thereafter as batra’.

[^51]: Tarikh-e Tahlili-ye Islam ta Payan-e Umawi, p. 156.

[^52]: Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Jarir ibn Rustam Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk (Beirut: Dar al-Qamus al-Hadith, n.d.), vol. 6, p. 132.

[^53]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 292.

[^54]: Taq-e Kisra: the most famous construction that the Sassanid
kings built and it is rumored that this palace was built by Khosroe I
and still others believe that it was one among other palaces built by
Shahpur, the first Sassanid king. {Trans.}

[^55]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 7, pp. 221-222; Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol.
1, p. 267.

[^56]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 109.

[^57]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 7, pp. 222.

[^58]: A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 25.

[^59]: Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah, p. 149.

[^60]: Kird-‘Ali, Muhammad. Khatat ash-Sham, 3rd edition (Damascus:
Maktabah an-Nuri, 1403 AH/1983), vol. 6, p. 246.


