Lesson 22: The Rifts within Shi‘ism
===================================

There were major rifts within Shi‘ism during the first and second
centuries AH, and at the end of the second century remarkable splits
among the Shi‘ah had emerged. As such, members of the different nations
and religions, in dealing with Waqifiyyah, have called the Shi‘ah
Imamiyyah who believed in the Imamate of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) as
Qat‘iyyah and Ithna ‘Ashariyyah for believing in Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*)
and the Imams after him up to the Imam of the Time (*‘a*).[^1]

Of course, during the first century AH up to 61 AH (i.e. up to the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*)) these splits had not occurred within
Shi‘ism, although Shahristani regards the Ghulat Saba’iyyah sect that
emerged during the time of Hadhrat Amir (*‘a*) as Shi‘ah.[^2]

This is while there is doubt concerning the existence of a person named
‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’.[^3] At any rate, according to *Rijal Kashi*, there
had been some *Ghali*s during the time of ‘Ali (*‘a*) who were asked by
him to repent, and since they had not repented, he ordered for their
execution.[^4]

Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) had excellent positions in the
sight of Muslims and have been considered as progeny of the Prophet (S).
Apart from the Shi‘ah, other Muslims also regard them worthy of the
caliphate. As such, there was no doubt concerning the matter of the
Imamate and no rift whatsoever had ever occurred during the lifetime of
these two personages. After Imam al-Husayn’s (*‘a*) martyrdom, we
witness rifts within Shi‘ism, and some of those sects that split from
mainstream Shi‘ism are the following:

• **Kaysaniyyah:** They believe in the Imamate of Muhammad
al-Hanafiyyah.

• **Zaydiyyah:** They believe in the Imamate of Zayd ibn ‘Ali.

• **Nawusiyyah:** They believe in the occultation {*ghaybah*} of Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and in his being the Mahdi.

• **Fathiyyah:** They believe in the Imamate of ‘Abd Allah ibn Aftah,
son of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

• **Samtiyyah:** They believe in the Imamate of Muhammad Dibaj, another
son of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

• **Isma‘iliyyah:** They believe in the Imamate of Isma‘il, yet another
son of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

• **Tafiyyah:** They believe that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) entrusted the
Imamate to Musa ibn Taffi.

• **Aqmasiyyah:** They believe that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) entrusted the
Imamate to Musa ibn ‘Umran al-Aqmas.

• **Yarma‘iyyah:** They believe that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) entrusted the
Imamate to Yarma‘ ibn Musa.

• **Tamimiyyah:** They believe that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) entrusted the
Imamate to ‘Abd Allah ibn Sa‘d at-Tamimi.

• **Ju‘diyyah:** They believe that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) entrusted the
Imamate to a person named Abu Ju‘dah.

• **Ya‘qubiyyah:** They reject the Imamate of Musa ibn Ja‘far (*‘a*),
saying that Imamate could be entrusted to other than the sons of Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*), and their leading figure is a person named Abu Ya‘qub.

• **Mamturah:** They suspend their judgment concerning Imam al-Kazim
(*‘a*), saying that they are not sure if the Imam really passed away or
not.[^5]

• **Waqifiyyah:** They believe that Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) did not die and
that he shall remain alive till the Day of Resurrection (*‘a*).[^6]

Of course, some of these sects had also split into smaller sects. For
example, Kaysaniyyah has two groups regarding the Imamate of Muhammad
al-Hanafiyyah:

Some believed that Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah was the Imam after Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) while another group was of the opinion that he was
supposed to be the Imam after his father, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*), and
after ascribing the Imamate to pass to his son, Abu Hashim after him,
they were again divided into some groups:

A group believed that Abu Hashim had entrusted the Imamate to Muhammad
ibn ‘Ali al-‘Abbasi. The second group maintained that Abu Hashim had
entrusted the Imamate to his brother, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah.
The third group opined that Abu Hashim had entrusted the Imamate to his
nephew, Hasan ibn ‘Ali. The fourth group held that Abu Hashim had
entrusted the Imamate to ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Amru al-Kindi.[^7]

Zaydiyyah is also divided into three main groups:

**Jarudiyyah:**[^8] They believe that after the Holy Prophet (*‘a*),
‘Ali (*‘a*) was the one worthy of the caliphate but the Prophet (*‘a*)
introduced him to the people for the caliphate only by descriptions and
not by name, and that due to the people’s failure to recognize him
correctly, they chose Abu Bakr and for doing so, the people became
infidels {*kuffar*}.

**Sulaymaniyyah:**[^9] They believe that Imamate is determined through
consultation {*shura*} and that the Imamate of ‘a deserving one’
{*mafdhul*} while ‘the most deserving one’ {*afdhal*} is present is
permissible. It is by means of this notion that they are proving the
legitimacy of the caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar and that the *ummah*
erred in not choosing ‘the most deserving one’ (viz., ‘Ali (*‘a*)) but
their error does not reach the level of transgression {*fisq*}. Also,
they declare ‘Uthman as an infidel {*kafir*}.

**Batriyyah:**[^10] Their beliefs are similar to that of Sulaymaniyyah
with the only difference that they suspend their judgment concerning
‘Uthman.[^11]

Isma‘iliyyah is also divided into three groups:

One group is of the opinion that the Imam after Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) is
Isma‘il who did not die as he is alive and the promised Mahdi.

The second group believes that Isma‘il died and the Imamate transferred
to his son, Muhammad, who is in occultation {*ghaybah*} and shall appear
and fill the world with justice and equity.

The third group, like the second one, believes in the Imamate of
Muhammad ibn Isma‘il with the only difference that Muhammad died and the
Imamate has remained in his offspring.[^12]

Of course, most of these sects did not last long, and they could hardly
be called “sects”. Rather, they were groups that faded away with the
death of their respective leaders, and they had no appearance in the
sociopolitical scenes. Among these sects, Kaysaniyyah, Zaydiyyah and
Isma‘iliyyah emerged and remained in the first, second and third
centuries AH. Of course, although during the second century AH and after
the martyrdom of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) the Isma‘ili sect was separated
from the body of Shi‘ism, it had no appearance up to the middle of the
third century AH, and in a sense, their Imams were in hiding.[^13]

During the first century AH, next to the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah and prior to
the emergence of Zaydiyyah, Kaysaniyyah had been the most influential
Shi‘ah sect. Kaysaniyyah emerged and made its appearance in the uprising
of Mukhtar. Although we do not regard Mukhtar himself as a Kaysani, many
of his forces were adhering to Kaysaniyyah.[^14]

This sect struggled politically until the end of the first century AH,
and Abu Hashim, ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad al-Hanafiyyah, who was the
leader of this sect, had for the first time used the terms “*da‘i*”
{propagator} and “*hujjat*” {proof} for his preachers. Later on, these
terms were used by other groups such as the ‘Abbasids, Zaydis and
Isma‘ilis. He was also the one who founded the “office of propagation”
which was later imitated by the ‘Abbasids.[^15]

When the Umayyad caliph Sulayman ibn ‘Abd al-Malik felt threatened by
Abu Hashim, he invited him to Sham and poisoned him. When Abu Hashim
realized that that was his end, he went to Hamimah, the living place of
his ‘Abbasid cousins, declared Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-‘Abbasi as his
successor, and introduced to his successor his preachers and
forces.[^16] From then on, the Banu ‘Abbas assumed the leadership of the
followers of Kaysaniyyah and focused their activities in Khurasan. As
Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani says,

The people of Khurasan believed that Abu Hashim was the successor of his
father and that his father inherited the right of succession {*wasayah*}
from his father (viz., ‘Ali (*‘a*)). He in turn appointed Muhammad ibn
‘Ali al-‘Abbasi as his successor and who, in turn, designated his own
son, Ibrahim, as the Imam. In this manner, they were proving the right
of succession of Banu ‘Abbas.[^17]

Even Shahristani believes that Abu Muslim al-Khurasani had been a
Kaysani at the beginning but after the triumph of the ‘Abbasids, they
established their legitimacy based on the alleged right of succession of
their forefather, ‘Abbas, from the Messenger of Allah (S) himself.

In retrospect, the sociopolitical appearance of the Kaysanis can be
found in the uprising of ‘Abd Allah ibn Mu‘awiyah, a descendant of
Ja‘far ibn Abi Talib at-Tayyar. As Shahristani says,

A number of the Kaysanis believed in the right of succession of ‘Abd
Allah ibn ‘Amru al-Kindi and when they found him committing treachery
and making lies, they believed in the Imamate of ‘Abd Allah ibn
Mu‘awiyah ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far at-Tayyar… There was a serious
difference over the issue of Imamate between the companions of ‘Abd
Allah ibn Mu‘awiyah and the companions and followers of Muhammad ibn
‘Ali.[^18]

Besides the Kaysaniyyah, the second sect that was active in the
sociopolitical scene, was the Zaydiyyah, which emerged after the
uprising of Zayd and the most politicized Shi‘ah sect. Of all the Shi‘ah
sects, it is the closest to the principles of Ahl as-Sunnah. For
example, in addition to acknowledging the caliphate of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar
and ‘Uthman, Batriyyah Zaydiyyah was not also considering Talhah, Zubayr
and ‘A’ishah as infidels.[^19]

For this reason, many of the Sunni jurists {*fuqaha*} used to approve
the uprising of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah who was a Zaydi.[^20] Mas‘ar
ibn Kudam, a leading Murjite {*murja’ah*} figure, had written to
Ibrahim, brother of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah, to come to Kufah.[^21]
Abu Hanifah, the Imam of the Hanifi school of thought {*madhhab*}
participated in Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah’s uprising, encouraging the
people to support the leader of the uprising.[^22]

Regarding the Zaydiyyah Batriyyah sect, Sa‘d ibn ‘Abd Allah Ash‘ari
al-Qummi thus says, “They mix together the guardianship {*wilayah*} of
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.”[^23] In particular, regarding the roots of religion
{*usul ad-din*}, they follow Mu‘tazilism {*mu‘tazilah*} and concerning
the branches of religion {*furu‘ ad-din*}, they follow Abu Hanifah while
some follow Shafi‘i.[^24]

The Zaydi school of thought, that is Shi‘ism in a general sense, does
not differ much from the Sunni beliefs. It is for this reason that in
some Zaydi uprisings, such as that of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah and his
brother Ibrahim, a number of the Sunni *‘ulama’* and prominent figures
had participated. Similarly, the Shi‘ah who had participated in the
Zaydi uprisings were probably of the opinion that the ‘Alawi leaders of
the uprisings were designated by the infallible Imams and perhaps the
scattering of Shi‘ah and their being away from the Imam of the time were
the reasons behind it. In the end, only the Zaydis had remained with
their leaders. For example, as narrated by Mas‘udi, Ibrahim ibn ‘Abd
Allah, Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah’s brother, had fought in the end with
only four hundred Zaydis on his side who were all killed.[^25]

The third sect which had presence and been active in the sociopolitical
scenes is the Isma‘ili sect. This sect separated from the body of
Shi‘ism during the second half of the second century AH. Yet, until the
end of the third century AH, they did not have much public appearance
and their leaders remained in hiding until 296 AH, i.e. the year of
appearance of ‘Abd Allah al-Mahdi, the first Fatimid caliph in North
Africa. For this reason, the evolutionary phases of this sect remained
completely unknown. Nawbakhti who lived during the third century AH used
to link their initial activities with the *Ghulat* and followers of
Abi’l-Khattab.[^26]

Their beliefs have also remained in the halo of ambiguity. In this
regard, Mas‘udi thus writes:

The scholastic theologians {*mutakallimun*} of the various sects—Shi‘ah,
Mu‘tazilah, Murja’ah, and Khawarij—have written about the sect and
reputation of the objections against it… But none of them has expressed
opposition against the doctrines of the Qaramatah (Isma‘ili) sect. There
are also those who have written against them such as Qudamah ibn Yazid
an-Nu‘mani, Ibn ‘Abdak al-Jurjani, Abi’l-Hasan Zakariyya al-Jurjani, Abi
‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn ar-Razzaq at-Ta’i al-Kufi, and Abu
Ja‘far al-Kalabi. Each of them had described the creeds of the people of
falsehood. Yet, others have not discussed those matters. Besides, the
followers of this sect disregarded the claims of these writers, not
confirming them.[^27]

This is the reason why the followers of this sect have been referred to
by diverse names in the different regions. In this regard, Khwajah Nizam
al-Mulk has thus written:  
 They had been called by different names in every city and every
province; “Isma‘ili” in Halab and Egypt; “Saba‘i” in Qum, Kashan,
Tabaristan, and Sabzewar; “Qarmati” in Baghdad and Mesopotamia;
“Khalafi” in Rey; and in Isfahan…[^28]

Prior to the establishment of the Fatimid state, the Isma‘ilis were less
engaged in political struggles, and instead focused on drawing people’s
attention toward them, propagation, training and education. As such, we
are witnesses to the travel of the Isma‘ili leaders, such as Muhammad
ibn Isma‘il, ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allah, and Husayn
ibn Ahmad, to the regions such as Rey, Nahavand, Damavand, Syria, Jabal
Qandahar, Nayshabur, Daylam, Yemen, Hamedan, Istanbul, and Azerbaijan
where they dispatched their preachers and propagators.[^29]

It was by considering these grounds that the Qarmatis {*qarmatiyan*}
designated “Isma‘iliyyah” for themselves. Given such an expansion, they
used to try their best for the ‘Abbasid not to be able to extinguish the
fire of their sedition.[^30]

In 296 AH the Fatimid state, based on the Isma‘ili sect, was established
in North Africa and a vast part of the Muslim territories was detached
from the ‘Abbasid sphere of influence.

Lesson 22: Summary
------------------

The most prominent Shi‘ah sects emerged during the first and second
centuries AH, and notable rifts within Shi‘ism had occurred after the
end of the second century AH. As such, in contrast to Waqifiyyah, the
Shi‘ah Imami who believed in the Imamate of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) were
called Qati‘ah and Ithna ‘Ashariyyah.

No rift within Shi‘ism occurred during the time of Imam al-Hasan and
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) on account of their towering station.

Most sects mentioned in the books about nations and religions could
hardly be called “sects”. Rather, they were groups that eventually faded
away with the death of their respective leaders and founders.

But the sects that have appeared in the sociopolitical scenes are the
Kaysaniyyah, Zaydiyyah and Isma‘iliyyah.

Lesson 22: Questions
--------------------

1. From which period up to which period did sects emerge within Shi‘ism?

2. Name the sects that had a presence in the sociopolitical scenes?

3. In terms of the roots {*usul*} and branches {*furu‘*} of religion,
which way and method does the Zaydiyyah sect follow?

[^1]: Shahristani, Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 150.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 155.

[^3]: See Sayyid Murtadha al-‘Askari, ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’ wa Asatir
Ukhra, 6th edition (1413 AH/1993), vol. 2, pp. 328-375. Its abridged
English version is Sayyid Murtadha al-‘Askari, ‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ and
Other Myths, trans. M.J. Muqaddas (Tehran: World Organization for
Islamic Services, 1984). {Trans.}

[^4]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 325.

[^5]: Maytham ibn ‘Ali ibn Maytham al-Bahrani, An-Najah fi’l-Qiyamah fi
Tahqiq al-Imamah, 1st edition (Qum: Majma‘ al-Fikr al-Islami, 1417 AH),
pp. 172-174.

[^6]: Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, p. 150.

[^7]: Ibid., pp. 131-135.

[^8]: They were the companions of Ziyad ibn Abi Ziyad, better known as
Abi’l-Jarud. Hence, their group was called “Jarudiyyah”.

[^9]: Their leader was a person named Sulayman ibn Jarir. Thus, their
group was known as “Sulaymaniyyah”.

[^10]: Their leader was a person named Kaythar an-Nawi Abtar. So, their
group was labeled as “Batriyyah”.

[^11]: Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, pp. 140-142.

[^12]: Muhammad Karim Khurasani, Tarikh va ‘Aqa’id-e Ferqeh-ye
Aqakhaniyyeh, abridged and compiled by Husayn Husayni (Qum: Nashr
al-Huda, 1377 AHS), pp. 2-3.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 43.

[^14]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab, 1st
edition (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH),
vol. 3, p. 91.

[^15]: Dr. Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi, Jihad ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar
al-Jayl, 1396 AH), p. 87.

[^16]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 124; Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn ‘Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi, Al-‘Aqd al-Farid (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1409 AH), vol. 4, p. 438.

[^17]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 123.

[^18]: Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, p. 135.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 142.

[^20]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 247.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 314.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Sa‘d ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Qummi Ash‘ari, Al-Maqalat wa’l-Firaq, 2nd
edition (Tehran: Markaz-e Intisharat-e ‘Ilmi va Farhangi, 1360 AHS) p.
10.

[^24]: Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 143.

[^25]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 326.

[^26]: Abi Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Musa Nawbakhti, Firq ash-Shi‘ah (Najaf:
Al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1936), p. 71.

[^27]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, At-Tanbiyyah wa’l-Ashraf
(Cairo: Dar as-Sawi Li’t-Tab‘ wa’n-Nashr wa’t-Ta’lif, n.d.), p. 341.

[^28]: Siyasatnameh (Tehran: Intisharat-e ‘Ilmi va Farhangi, 1364 AHS),
p. 311.

[^29]: See Rasul Ja‘fariyan, Tarikh-e Tashuyyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta
Qarn-e Hashtum-e Hijri, 5th edition (Qum: Shirkat-e Chap wa Nashr-e
Sazman-e Tablighat-e Islami, 1377 AHS), pp. 207-209.

[^30]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, p. 297.


