Lesson 23: Factors behind the Rifts within Shi‘ism
==================================================

The blessed names of the twelve Imams (*‘a*) have been recorded in the
Prophetic traditions and Shi‘ah had learned of their names before
personally seeing them. As Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah, a devoted companion of
the Prophet (S) narrates: When the verse,

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you,”***[^1]

was revealed, I asked: “O Messenger of Allah! We know Allah and His
Apostle and we do obey them, but who are ‘those vested with authority’
{*uli’l-amr*} obedience to whom has been mentioned by God alongside the
obedience to Himself and obedience to you?”

He said: “‘Those vested with authority’ are my successors and the
leaders after me. The first of whom is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib; after him,
Hasan and then Husayn; after him, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn; and after him is
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali who is known in the Torah {*tawrat*} as “Baqir” {he
who cleaves something asunder} and you shall see him. Once you meet him,
extend my salutations to him.

After him is as-Sadiq, Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, and then Musa ibn Ja‘far
followed by ‘Ali ibn Musa; after him is Muhammad ibn ‘Ali; after him is
‘Ali ibn Muhammad and then Hasan ibn ‘Ali, and after him is his son who
shall have the same name and epithet as mine. It is he who shall conquer
the east and west of the world. He shall be hidden from the visible
ones—a long occultation on account of which the people will doubt his
Imamate except those whose hearts shall be endowed with untainted faith
by God…[^2]

The same Jabir used to sit at the Masjid an-Nabi and say: “O Baqir
al-‘Ilm {he who cleaves knowledge asunder}! Where are you?” People who
heard him would say: “Jabir, you are talking nonsense.” He would reply,
“I am not talking nonsense. Rather, the Holy Prophet (S) has informed me
that “You shall meet a man from my descendants whose name and physical
appearance is like that of mine who will cleave knowledge asunder.”[^3]

The infallible Imams (*‘a*) also used to prove their rightfulness by
showing manifest miracles and wonders. In spite of this, a series of
reasons and factors caused some Shi‘ah to commit error concerning the
matter (of Imamate) and a number of them deviated from the straight
path. These factors can be stated as follows:

1. Repression
-------------

After 40 AH intense persecution and repression of the descendants of the
Prophet (*‘a*) and their followers prevailed. This suppression hindered
some Shi‘ah from establishing a link with their Imams to have enough
acquaintanceship with them.

During the second half of the first century, in particular after 72 AH
and the defeat of ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr who was anti-Shi‘ah, Hajjaj ibn
Yusuf ruled over Iraq and Hijaz for twenty years, brutally suppressed,
killed and imprisoned the Shi‘ah, expelling them from Iraq and
Hijaz.[^4]

Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) was exercising dissimulation {*taqiyyah*} and he
could express the Shi‘ah teachings only within the framework of
supplication {*du‘a*}. The Kaysaniyyah sect emerged during that time.

Although Imam al-Baqir and Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) enjoyed relative freedom
and were able to propagate the Shi‘ah fundamentals and teachings, when
the ‘Abbasid caliph assumed power, he focused his attention on the
Shi‘ah. And when he heard the news of the martyrdom of Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*), he wrote a letter to his governor in Medina instructing him to
identify and behead the successor of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) designated five persons as his “successors”—Abu
Ja‘far al-Mansur, Muhammad ibn Sulayman, ‘Abd Allah, Musa, and
Hamidah.[^5] Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) languished in prison for a long time.

Initially, the ‘Abbasid caliph Musa al-Hadi imprisoned the Imam and
released him after sometime. Harun arrested the Imam four times and
prevented the Shi‘ah from visiting him.[^6] The Shi‘ah remained in limbo
and without a guardian paving the way for Isma‘iliyyah and Fathiyyah
preachers. At the time, the Shi‘ah had nobody to clarify their doubts.
The ‘Abbasid rule’s control and surveillance over Imam al-Kazim’s (*‘a*)
activities were such that even ‘Ali ibn Isma‘il, the Imam’s nephew, was
relaying information regarding him.[^7]

Yes, most of the Shi‘ah at the time were not sure whether Imam al-Kazim
(*‘a*) was alive or not. As Yahya ibn Khalid Barmaki used to say,  
 I uprooted the religion of the *rafidhi*s {dissidents} (pejoratively
referring to the Shi‘ah) because they were thinking that religion
without the Imam will not survive and remain alive, while today they do
not know whether their Imam is alive or not.”[^8]

During the moment of Imam al-Kazim’s (*‘a*) martyrdom, none of the
Shi‘ah were present on the scene. This matter seems to be the reason why
the Waqifiyyah would deny the death of the Imam though financial issues
contributed more to the emergence of this sect.

Yes, the infallible Imams (*‘a*) were under constant ‘Abbasid
surveillance. They even coerced Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-‘Askari (*‘a*)
to live in the military city of Samarra so as to keep them under
constant surveillance. After the martyrdom of Imam al-‘Askari (*‘a*),
the ‘Abbasids imprisoned his spouses and bondwomen with the aim of
identifying the Imam’s successor (the Master of the Age, Imam al-Mahdi
(*‘a*)). Even Ja‘far ibn ‘Ali, known as Ja‘far al-Kadhdhab (Ja‘far the
Liar) used to act against his brother Imam al-‘Askari (*‘a*). As such,
the *Ghulat* doctrines were spread through Nasiriyyah founded by
Muhammad ibn Nasir Fihri. A number of them gathered around Ja‘far and
then he started claiming for the Imamate.[^9]

2. Taqiyyah {Dissimulation}
---------------------------

*Taqiyyah* {dissimulation} means expression of what is contrary to the
truth when there is fear for the life of a Muslim. It is adopted in
following previous laws and the law of Islam as dictated by both the
text and reason.

For example, ‘the believer among the family of Pharaoh’ {*mu’min* *al
fir‘awn*} kept his faith in secret out of fear of Pharaoh and his men.
Among the companions of the Messenger of Allah (S), ‘Ammar also
exercised *taqiyyah* on account of torture and persecution perpetuated
against him by the polytheists {*mushrikun*} (of Mecca). When he was
crying (for repentance) beside the Prophet (S) for doing so, the Prophet
(S) said to him: “You have to do the same if they torture you
again.”[^10]

Since the Shi‘ah have always been few in numbers, they practiced
*taqiyyah* in a bid to survive and save their lives. This method was
responsible for the preservation of the school of Shi‘ism. As Dr.
Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi writes,  
 Among the contributory factors for the perpetuation of the Shi‘ah
movement are *taqiyyah* and the clandestine propagation, which gave
opportunity to the nascent Shi‘ah movement to advance away from the
attention of the ‘Abbasid caliphs and their governors.[^11]

But on the other hand, *taqiyyah* has been one of the causes of rifts
within Shi‘ism because the Shi‘ah used to conceal their beliefs out of
fear of the tyrants of the day. Even the Imams (*‘a*) used to do so. On
account of the atmosphere of strangulation, the infallible Imams (*‘a*)
somehow refrained from explicitly declaring their Imamate. This matter
is indicated clearly in a dialogue between Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) and some
followers of Waqifiyyah:

‘Ali ibn Abi Hamzah who was a Waqifi asked Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*): “What
happened to your father?” The Imam replied: “He passed away.” Ibn Abi
Hamzah said: “Whom did he appoint as the successor after him?” The Imam
answered: “It is me.” He said: “So, are you the Imam ought to be
obeyed?”

The Imam responded: “Yes.” Ibn Siraj and Ibn Makari (two other Waqifis)
inquired: “Has your father determined it for you?” Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*):
“Woe to you! There is no need for me to say, ‘He has designated me.’ Do
you like me to go to Baghdad and say to Harun, ‘I am the Imam ought to
be obeyed’? By God! I do not have such a duty.”

Ibn Abi Hamzah said: “You expressed something which had never been
expressed by any of your forefathers.” The Imam said: “By God! My best
grandfather, namely, the Prophet, expressed it when the verse was
revealed and God commanded him to convey the message to his nearest of
kin.”[^12]

During the time of Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*), a number of the Shi‘ah
abandoned their belief in his Imamate, on account of his exercise of
*taqiyyah* in dealing with some issues, and embraced Zaydiyyah
Batriyyah.[^13]

Meanwhile, some people who could not grasp the expediency of *taqiyyah*
accused the pure Imams (*‘a*) of error for not explicitly expressing
their Imamate. They were in a sense radical and extremist. This motive
had far-reaching contribution in the emergence of Zaydiyyah.

As such, when the pressure and repression were lessened and there were
some opportunity for the pure Imams (*‘a*) to prove their Imamate,
sprouting of Shi‘ah groups were minimal. During the time of Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) when there was good opportunity and the Imam had freedom
of action due to the conflicts between the Umayyads and the ‘Abbasids,
we witnessed the least number of rifts that take place, but after his
martyrdom when the pressure and persecution of the ‘Abbasid caliph
Mansur prevailed, the Nawusiyyah, Isma‘iliyyah, Khatabiyyah, Qaramatah,
Samtiyyah, and Fathiyyah sects emerged.[^14]

During the time of Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*), the condition was again
favorable and even during the caliphate of Harun, the Imam enjoyed
relative freedom of action. At the time, a number of the leading figures
of Waqifiyyah such as ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Hajjaj, Rafa‘ah ibn Musa, Yunus
ibn Ya‘qub, Jamil ibn Dibaj, Hamad ibn ‘Isa, and others abandoned their
faith and believed in the Imamate of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*).

Similarly, after the martyrdom of the Imam, notwithstanding the young
age of Imam al-Jawad (*‘a*), less rifts within Shi‘ism took place due to
the efforts of Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) in introducing his son as his
successor.

3. Ambition for Leadership
--------------------------

Whenever repression was prevalent and the pure Imams (*‘a*) were
practicing *taqiyyah* for the preservation of the foundation of Shi‘ism
and protecting the lives of the Shi‘ah, opportunist and power-greedy
individuals within the ranks of the Shi‘ah, though without much belief
in religion, used to take advantage of this condition. For example, in
reply to one of his companions who asked about the contradiction of
*hadith*s, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “There are those who want to
possess the world and acquire leadership by means of personally
interpreting {*ta’wil*} our *hadith*s.”[^15]

For this reason, during the second century AH and after the spread of
Shi‘ism as well as after the martyrdom of Imam as-Sadiq, Imam al-Kazim
and Imam al-‘Askari (*‘a*), such opportunist and leadership-greedy
individuals multiplied in the midst of the Shi‘ah and founded different
sects for financial and political motives. After Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*)
Mughayrah ibn Sa‘id claimed that he is the Imam and he has been
designated by Imam as-Sajjad and Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*). Hence, his
supporters were called followers of Mughayriyyah.

After the martyrdom of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) the Nawusiyyah and
Khatabiyyah sects came into existence whose founders used to utilize the
names of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and his son Isma‘il in a bid to draw the
people’s attention toward themselves. Ibn Nawus was the founder of
Nawusiyyah; his followers denied Imam as-Sadiq’s (*‘a*) death and
pointed to him as the Mahdi. The followers of Khatabiyyah rejected the
death of Isma‘il, Imam as-Sadiq’s (*‘a*) son, and introduced their
leader as the Imam after these two personages.[^16]

The peak of financial motives in founding a certain sect was after the
martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*). Yunus who was one of the companions
of Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) narrated that when Abu’l-Hasan Imam al-Kazim
(*‘a*) passed away, each of his deputies acquired abundant possessions
and wealth. As such, they suspended their judgment concerning the Imam
and denied his death. For example, Ziyad Qanadi had a deposit of seventy
thousand dinars while ‘Ali ibn Hamzah had three thousand dinars. Yunus
thus wrote:

When I saw that condition and the truth became clear to me and also, I
learned of the issue of Imamate of Hadhrat Ridha (*‘a*), I started
relaying the truths and inviting the people toward the Imam. Those two
persons pursued me, asking: “Why are you are calling on the people
toward the Imamate of Ridha? If your motive is to acquire money, we
shall make you rich” and they offered ten thousand dinars to me but I
refused. They became angry with me and expressed enmity and hostility
toward me.[^17]

Sa‘d ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ash‘ari also says:  
 After the martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*), the followers of
Hasmawiyyah sect believed that Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) did not die and was
never imprisoned rather he was in occultation and he is the Mahdi. Their
leader was Muhammad ibn Bashir who claimed that the seventh Imam
appointed him as the successor; that rings and all things that the
people need in the affairs of the religion and the world had been
granted to him; that all prerogatives had been given to him; and that he
assumed the position of the Imam.

Then, he was allegedly the Imam after Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) and at the
time that this Muhammad ibn Bashir was about to die he designated his
son, Sami‘ ibn Muhammad, as his successor, alleging that obedience to
him is obligatory till the appearance of al-Kazim (*‘a*). He also urged
people to give to Sami‘ ibn Muhammad whatever they want to offer in the
way of God. These people were labeled as “*mamturah*”.[^18]

4. The Existence of Mentally Weak Individuals
---------------------------------------------

There were coward individuals among the Shi‘ah who, when they would see
a miracle from the Imam of their time, their intellect could not digest
it and they would start expressing extreme beliefs notwithstanding the
fact that the pure Imams (*‘a*) themselves used to strongly combat such
beliefs. As narrated in *Rijal Kashi*, seventy black-skinned persons
residing in Basrah expressed extreme beliefs about ‘Ali (*‘a*) after the
Battle of Jamal.[^19]

Opportunist and leadership-greedy elements also exploited the spirit of
these people, misguiding them and letting them do things for their own
benefit. For example, Abi’l-Khattab founded the Khattabiyyah sect,
introduced Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) in the position of prophethood,
allegedly bestowed on him by God, and claimed himself to be the Imam and
successor of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).[^20]

Also, during the minor occultation {*ghaybah as-sughrah*} of the Imam of
the Time (*‘a*), Ibn Nasir initially introduced himself as the ‘door’
(medium) {*bab*} and deputy {*wakil*} of the Imam in explaining the
religions laws and collecting the religious funds. Later on, he started
claiming prophethood and finally went to the extent of claiming
divinity.[^21] His followers also accepted him as such. As a matter of
fact, it was on account of such a mentality of his followers that he
made such claims. In essence, extremist sects were founded under such
grounds.

The Infallible Imams’ (‘a) Campaign against Extreme Views
---------------------------------------------------------

One of the potent dangers that threatened the Shi‘ah throughout history
is the issue of the extremists {*ghali*s} and the attribution of their
views to the Shi‘ah. The state of affairs is such that the adversaries
and enemies of the Shi‘ah have always accused them of committing
extremism and fanaticism with respect to their Imams.

At this juncture, we shall not engage in talking about the different
extremist {*ghullah*} sects, discussing their views and beliefs. Of
course, it must be noted that the most salient feature and point of
convergence of all the extremist sects is their extremism with respect
to the right of the Imams by blasphemously elevating their station to
the station of divinity.

The existence of the extremists {*ghullat*} among the Muslims is caused
more by external factors than internal ones. Through direct and
face-to-face confrontations and encounters, the enemies of Islam were
not able to strike a blow to Islam while Islam enlightened their lands
and defeated its enemies. As such, they decided to strike a blow to
Islam from within. So, they targeted the principal principles of Islam.

The political establishments were also not disinterested in encouraging,
or at least tolerating, such individuals to emerge from among the Shi‘ah
and followers of the *Ahl al-Bayt* of the Prophet (S) so as to attribute
these individuals’ views to the Shi‘ah, and in so doing, the followers
of the *Ahl al-Bayt* could be presented as extremists and outside the
community of Muslims.

Although this trend had started since the caliphate of the Commander of
the Faithful (*‘a*) and a number of mentally weak elements held extreme
views regarding him (who were executed for not recanting their deviant
views),[^22] ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’ is a fictitious and imaginary figure.
The first person to have mentioned him is Tabari the historian. He, in
turn, has taken the account of this Ibn Saba’ from Sayf ibn ‘Umar, whose
being known as a liar has been unanimously agreed upon by the scholars
of *rijal*.[^23]

The pure Imams (*‘a*) had always faced this problem and strongly
combated it, constantly cursing the extremists and informing the people
of the danger posed by these extremists. The Imams (*‘a*) used to order
the Shi‘ah not to socialize with them nor establish relationship with
them.[^24] Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) had mentioned the names of a number of
chief extremists {*ghali*s} such as Mughayrah ibn Sa‘id, Bayan, Sa’id
Nahdi, Harith Shami, ‘Abd Allah ibn Harith, Hamzah ibn ‘Ammar Barbari,
and Abu’l-Khattab, and cursed them.[^25]

As the effect of the pure Imams’ (*‘a*) curse, they suffered from pain
and torment and were killed under terrible conditions. As Imam ar-Ridha
(*‘a*) says,  
 Banan used to tell lies about Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*); God made him taste
the sharpness of the sword. Mughayrah ibn Sa‘id used to tell lies about
Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) and he also tasted the sharpness of the sword.
Muhammad ibn Bashir used to lie about Abu’l-Hasan al-Kazim (*‘a*) and
God, the Exalted, also made him perish via the sword. Abu’l-Khattab used
to lie about Abu ‘Abd Allah Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and he was also killed
via the sword. And the one telling lies about me is Muhammad ibn
Furat.[^26]

The period of Imam Hasan al-‘Askari had been one of the periods when the
trend of extremism {*ghullah*} gained optimal momentum. It is for this
reason that the Imam had cursed individuals such as Qasim Yaqtini, ‘Ali
ibn Haskah Qummi, Ibn Baba Qummi Fihri, Muhammad ibn Nasir Numayri, and
Fars ibn Hatam Qazwini who were considered among the chiefs and leaders
of extremism.[^27]

Therefore, in Shi‘ah-populated regions such as Qum there had always been
an anti-extremism {*ghullah*} atmosphere and the extremists were not
permitted to reside there. For this reason, in describing the personal
characters of Husayn ibn ‘Abd Allah Muharrar, Ibn Dawud has said: “It is
reported that he always expelled from the city of Qum those who were
accused of extremism.”[^28]

As narrated by Ibn Hajm, Abu’l-Hasan Muhammad ibn Ahmad, a son of Imam
al-Kazim (*‘a*) who, during the third century AH, lived in Azerbaijan
where he was held in high esteem, was so strict against the preachers of
extremist sects that they provided the means for his murder and they
persuaded Mufallah Ghulam ibn Abi’s-Saj, the governor of Azerbaijan, to
kill him.[^29]

Lesson 23: Summary
------------------

Although the blessed names of the twelve Imams (*‘a*) are recorded in
the Prophetic traditions and the Shi‘ah were familiar with their names
prior to meeting them, a series of reasons and factors caused some
Shi‘ah to commit error with respect to the matter (Imamate) and to
deviate from the straight path. Among these factors are the following:

1. Repression: After 40 AH when the Umayyads assumed power, repression
of the Shi‘ah community was the order of the day. The same state of
affairs prevailed during the ‘Abbasid period, and this condition caused
the Shi‘ah not to be able to acquire the necessary knowledge about their
Imams.

2. *Taqiyyah* {dissimulation}: *Taqiyyah* contributed to the
preservation of the Shi‘ah school. Yet, it has also been one of the
factors for the emergence of rifts within Shi‘ism because the pure Imams
(*‘a*) used to avoid explicitly declaring their Imamate.

3. Ambition for leadership and love of the world: There were always
opportunist individuals in the ranks of the Shi‘ah who used to take
advantage of the atmosphere of strangulation prevalent in the Shi‘ah
community and create sects to advance their personal interests.

4. The existence of mentally weak individuals: There were mentally weak
individuals among the Shi‘ah whose minds could not properly grasp the
miracles that they witnessed from the Imams and would start to hold
extreme views.

The issue of extremism {*ghullah*} was one of the most serious dangers
that had threatened the Shi‘ah. The pure Imams (*‘a*) always confronted
this matter, intensely informing the people of its peril.

Lesson 23: Questions
--------------------

1. What were the reasons behind the rifts within Shi‘ism?

2. How did the Imams (*‘a*) combat extremist trends?

[^1]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^2]: Mahdi Pishva’i, Shakhsiyyat-ha-ye Islami-ye Shi‘eh, 1st edition
(Qum: Intisharat-e Tawhid, 1359 AHS), p. 63 as quoted from Tafsir Safi,
vol. 1, p. 366; Kamal ad-Din wa Tamam an-Ni‘mah with Persian translation
(Tehran), vol. 1, p. 365.

[^3]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 218.

[^4]: Muhammad Husayn Zayn ‘Amili, Ash-Shi‘ah fi’t-Tarikh, trans.
Muhammad-Rida ‘Ata’i, 2nd edition (Mashhad: Bunyad-e Pazhuhesh-ha-ye
Islami-ye Astan-e Quds-e Radhawi, 1375 AHS), p 120.

[^5]: Abi ‘Ali al-Fadhl ibn al-Hasan Tabarsi, I‘lam al-Wara bi A‘lam
al-Huda (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt Li Ihya’ at-Turath, 1417 AH), vol.
2, p. 13.

[^6]: Muhammad Husayn Muzaffar, Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat
Maktabah Basirati, n.d.), p. 47.

[^7]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 414.

[^8]: Ash-Shi‘ah fi’t-Tarikh, p. 123.

[^9]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 325.

[^10]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), p. 199.

[^11]: Dr. Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi, Jihad ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar
al-Jayl, 1396 AH), p. 394.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 763.

[^13]: Sa‘d ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Qummi Ash‘ari, Al-Maqalat wa’l-Firaq, 2nd
edition (Tehran: Markaz-e Intisharat-e ‘Ilmi va Farhangi, 1360 AHS), p.
75.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 79.

[^15]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 1, p. 374.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^17]: Ash-Shi‘ah fi’t-Tarikh, p. 123 as quoted from Shaykh at-Tusi,
Al-Ghaybah, p. 46.

[^18]: Al-Maqalat wa’l-Firaq, p. 91.

[^19]: When the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was relieved of the
Battle of the Jamal, seventy black-skinned persons residing in Basrah
came to the Imam and talked to him in their vernacular. ‘Ali (‘a) talked
to them in their vernacular, too. Hence, they started expressing extreme
views about the Imam. ‘Ali (‘a) told them, “I am a servant of God and
His creature.” They did not believe and even insisted that the Imam is
equal to God. So, the Imam asked them to repent to God for holding such
a deviant view, but they violently refused to repent. As such, they had
been executed. Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 1, p. 325.

[^20]: Shahristani, Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 160.

[^21]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 2, p. 805.

[^22]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 1, p. 325.

[^23]: See Sayyid Murtadha al-‘Askari, ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’ wa Asatir
Ukhra, 6th edition (1413 AH/1993), vol. 2, pp. 328-375. Its abridged
English version is Sayyid Murtadha al-‘Askari, ‘Abdullah ibn Saba’ and
Other Myths, trans. M.J. Muqaddas (Tehran: World Organization for
Islamic Services, 1984). {Trans.}

[^24]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 2, p. 586.

[^25]: Ibid., p. 577.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 591.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 805.

[^28]: Rijal ibn Dawud (Qum: Manshurat ar-Radhi, n.d.), p. 240.

[^29]: Abu Muhammad ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn Sa‘id ibn Hazm al-Andalusi,
Jumhazah Insab al-‘Arab, 1st edition (Beirut: n.p., 1403 AH), p. 63.


