Lesson 25: The Science of Jurisprudence
=======================================

The totality of man’s actions, which is his relationship with God and
fellow men, is in need of rules that embrace the science of
jurisprudence. The laws of Islam have a divine origin emanating from the
will of God. Of course, the will of God is never dependent upon contract
and consent. It is rather based on intrinsic and true felicity and
adversity. The Noble Messenger (S) is the messenger of God and his
decree is the decree of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ ما يَنْطِقُ عَنِ ٱلْهَوَى إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ وَحْيٌ يُوْحى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nor doth he speak of (his own) desire. It is naught save an
inspiration that is inspired.”***[^1]

And it is based on the verse, ***“Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and
those vested with authority among you”***[^2] that obedience to ‘those
vested with authority’ {*uli’l-amr*}—the true successors of the Prophet
(S)—has been placed along with obedience to God and the Messenger (S).
The statements of the infallible Imams (*‘a*) are nothing but an
inspiration from God, and like the statements of the Prophet (S),
obedience to them is obligatory.

The State of Jurisprudence during the Period of the Companions and the Followers {tabi‘un}
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

But after the demise of the Prophet (S) when the true path of Islam was
changed and people were kept away from the rightful successors of the
Prophet (S), they refer to the companions {*sahabah*} of the Prophet (S)
concerning religious issues and problems. Of course, a number of the
*sahabah* were forerunners in this matter. As Ibn Sa‘d says, during the
caliphate of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, ‘Ali, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf,
Mu‘adh ibn Jabal, Ubayy ibn Ka‘b, and Zayd ibn Thabit issued religious
edicts {*fatawa*}.[^3]

The pure Imams (*‘a*) and a number of the Shi‘ah among the *sahabah*
such as ‘Abd Allah ibn al-‘Abbas and Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri were also
recognized generally by the Ahl as-Sunnah as jurists and well-informed
of the laws of Islam, and were referred by them.[^4]

Of course, during that period, the Shi‘ah used to refer to the
infallible Imams (*‘a*) and leaders of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) in
matters of jurisprudence and Islamic teachings in general. So,
jurisprudence and *ijtihad*[^5], as they are applied today, were not
existent then. But after the end of the period of the *sahabah*, on
account of the emergence of new issues in jurisprudence, a number of the
Followers {*tabi‘un*} (the generation succeeding the *sahabah*) had
engaged in matters of jurisprudence {*fiqh*} and the term *faqih*
{jurist or jurisprudent} was applied to them. Among them were the “seven
jurists” of Medina.[^6]

The State of Jurisprudence among the Shi‘ah
-------------------------------------------

The state of jurisprudence among the Shi‘ah was different owing to the
presence of the infallible Imams (*‘a*) and *ijtihad*, then discussed
among the Ahl as-Sunnah, was not developed among the Shi‘ah.

It can be said in general that the Shi‘ah jurisprudence during the
periods of the presence of the infallible Imams (*‘a*) up to the end of
the minor occultation {*ghaybah as-sughra*} has been at the period of
settlement and preparation for *ijtihad*.[^7] With the presence of the
infallible Imams (*‘a*), keeping open the door of knowledge and
accessibility of the textual sources, the need for *ijtihad*, which
largely depends on intellectual bases, had not been much felt then.

Shi‘ah jurisprudence on the basis of *ijtihad* was first founded by Ibn
Abi ‘Aqil ‘Ummani (died in the first part of the fourth century AH), a
contemporary of al-Kulayni. After him, Muhammad ibn Junayd Askafi (died
mid-fourth century AH) continued his way and fortified the edifices of
*ijtihad* and juristic deduction {*istinbat*}.

They are known as the “*Qadimayn*” {the two seniors}. Shaykh al-Mufid
(died 413 AH) and Sayyid Murtadha ‘Alam al-Huda (died 436 AH) also
followed the path of *ijtihad* until it was the turn of Shaykh at-Tusi
(460 AH). The Shi‘ah jurisprudence attained a glorious stage through
this great man. Apart from writing reliable books on *hadith*,
*At-Tahdhib* and *Al-Istibsar*, he also strived to collect books on
jurisprudence and *ijtihad*, authoring such books on jurisprudence as
*An-Nihayah*, *Mabsut* and *Khilaf*.

Of course, it does not mean that *ijtihad* and jurisprudence had never
been discussed during the presence of the pure Imams (*‘a*). As a matter
of fact, some people had no direct access to the pure Imams (*‘a*) due
to location and peculiar conditions.

So, in this regard, the pure Imams (*‘a*) presented to the people the
criteria by which to identify the jurists to whom they could refer in
case of necessity, dealing in a sense with the preliminary *ijtihad* as
well as answering the inquiries of people. For example, it is stated in
the *Maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah that he asked Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
about two persons from among the Shi‘ah who were in conflict over
religious issues such as liability and debt {*dayn*} and inheritance
{*mirath*}.

The Imam said, “They have to look for a person who could narrate our
*hadith*s, give opinion about what we declared lawful {*halal*} and
unlawful {*haram*}, and know our decrees {*ahkam*} for I declare such a
person as the judge and arbiter for you.”[^8]

Sometimes also the pure Imams (*‘a*) would appoint certain persons to
whom the Shi‘ah refer in matters of jurisprudence and religious laws.
For instance, according to Shaykh at-Tusi, ‘Ali ibn Musayyab said to
Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*): “There is a long way and I cannot come to you
whenever I want. From whom should I ask about your religious decrees?”

The Imam replied: “{You may ask} from Zakariyya ibn Adam as he is
trustworthy in {matters of} religion and the world.”[^9] Similarly, Imam
al-Baqir (*‘a*) commanded Aban ibn Taghlib to sit in the mosque and
issue religious edicts {*fatawa*} for the people.[^10]

The Beginning of Ijtihad
------------------------

During the period of the pure Imams (*‘a*), they used to teach their
students the principles of jurisprudence {*usul al-fiqh*} and the rules
of deducing them. For this reason, books attributed to the infallible
Imams (*‘a*) have been written by Shi‘ah scholars; for example, the book
*Usul* *Al ar-Rasul* written by Hashim Khwansari; *Usul Asliyyah*
authored by Sayyid ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad-Ridha Husayn; and the book
*Fusul al-Muhimmah* on the principles of the Imams (*‘a*) penned by
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan Hurr al-‘Amili.[^11]

In the books on *rijal*, some of the great companions of the pure Imams
(*‘a*) have been described as jurists {*fuqaha*}. For example, Najashi
thus says about Fadhl ibn Shadhan: “…He was one of our reliable
companions among the jurists {*fuqaha*} and scholastic theologians
{*mutakallimun*}.”[^12]

The Jurists among the Companions of the Imams (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------

Shaykh at-Tusi has introduced eighteen persons from among the companions
of Imam al-Baqir, Imam as-Sadiq, Imam al-Kazim, and Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*)
as the Imams’ jurist-companions, describing them as “jurists among the
companions of Abu Ja‘far (*‘a*),” “jurists among the companions of Abu
‘Abd Allah (*‘a*),” ),” and “jurists among the companions of Abu Ibrahim
and Abu’l-Hasan ar-Ridha (*‘a*).”

In continuation, Shaykh at-Tusi has added that the Shi‘ah have consensus
of opinion regarding the authenticity of their narrations and
acknowledge their expertise in jurisprudence among the companions of the
pure Imams (*‘a*). He then introduced them in three categories.

**First category:** The jurists among the companions of Imam al-Baqir
(*‘a*) such as Zurarah known as Kharbud, Barid, Abu Basir Asadi, Fadhil
ibn Yasar, and Muhammad ibn Muslim at-Ta’ifi, among whom Zurarah was the
most learned. The six were also considered among the companions of Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

**Second category:** The jurists among the companions of Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*) such as Jamil ibn Darraj, ‘Abd Allah ibn Maskan, ‘Abd Allah ibn
Bakir, Hammad ibn ‘Isa, and Hammad ibn ‘Uthman.

**Third category:** The jurists among the companions of Imam al-Kazim
and Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*) such as Yunus ibn ‘Abd ar-Rahman, Safwan ibn
Yahya, Biya‘ as-Sabiri Muhammad ibn Abi ‘Umayr, ‘Abd Allah ibn
al-Mughayrah, Hasan ibn Mahbub, and Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi
Nasr.[^13]

In the section about the reports {*akhbar*} of the Shi‘ah jurists and
their written books, Ibn Nadim has also mentioned a number of the
jurists among the companions of the pure Imams (*‘a*), saying: “They are
sheikhs who have narrated *fiqh* from the Imams.” He has then mentioned
them, viz. Salih ibn Abu’l-Aswad, ‘Ali ibn Ghurrab, Abu Yahya Layth
Muradi, Zurayq ibn Zubayr, Abu Salmah al-Basri, Isma‘il ibn Ziyad, Abu
Ahmad ‘Umar ibn ar-Radhi‘, Dawud ibn Farqad, ‘Ali ibn Ri’ab,

‘Ali ibn Ibrahim Mu‘alli, Hisham ibn Salim, Muhammad ibn Hasan
al-‘Attar, ‘Abd al-Mu’min ibn Qasim al-Ansari, Sayf ibn ‘Umayrah
Nakha‘i, Ibrahim ibn ‘Umar San‘ani, ‘Abd Allah ibn Maymun, Qadah, Rabi‘
ibn Madrak, ‘Umar ibn Abi Ziyad Abzari, Zaykar ibn Yahya Wasiti, Abu
Khalid ibn ‘Amru ibn Khalid Wasiti,

Hariz ibn ‘Abd Allah Azadi Sijistani, ‘Abd Allah Halabi, Zakariyya
Mu’min, Thabit Ḍarari, Mathna ibn Asad Khayyat, ‘Umar ibn Adhinah,
‘Ammar ibn Mu‘awiyah Dahni ‘Abdi Kufi, Mu‘awiyah ibn ‘Ammar Dahani, and
Hasan ibn Mahbub Sarad, for each of whom one book has been
mentioned.[^14]

Lesson 25: Summary
------------------

The totality of actions of man is in need of rules which embrace the
science of jurisprudence.

After the Holy Prophet (S) when the people were kept away from the
rightful successors, they referred to the companions {*sahabah*} of the
Prophet (S).

By the end of the period of the *sahabah*, a number of jurists
{*fuqaha*} emerged from among the Ahl as-Sunnah.

But the condition of jurisprudence {*fiqh*} among the Shi‘ah was
different because the Infallibles (*‘a*) were present and the need for
*ijtihad* was not so much felt. Jurisprudence during these periods was
at the stage of preparation for *ijitihad*. In fact, jurisprudence base
on *ijtihad* was first discussed at the time of Ibn Abi ‘Aqil ‘Ummani
during the fourth century AH.

Of course, during the periods of the Imams (*‘a*) a sort of *ijtihad*
was also discussed. At times, the pure Imams (*‘a*) would teach the way
and method of *ijtihad* to their companions. For this reason, books on
the principles of jurisprudence {*usul al-fiqh*} attributed to those
personages were written.

Shaykh at-Tusi has introduced eighteen persons from among the companions
of Imam al-Baqir, Imam as-Sadiq, Imam al-Kazim, and Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*)
as “jurists among the companions of the Imams (*‘a*)”.

Lesson 25: Questions
--------------------

1. What was the condition of jurisprudence during the period of the
*sahabah*, and who did the Shi‘ah refer to in matters of jurisprudence?

2. What was the condition of jurisprudence among the Shi‘ah during the
presence of the Infallible Imams (*‘a*)?

3. How has the initiation of jurisprudence taken place among the Shi‘ah?

4. How many were the jurists {*fuqaha*} among the companions of the pure
Imams (*‘a*)?

[^1]: Surah al-Najm 53:3-4.

[^2]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^3]: Muhammad ibn Sa‘d, At-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1410 AH), vol. 2, p. 267.

[^4]: Ibid., pp. 279, 285.

[^5]: Ijtihad: juristic derivation of laws applicable to new conditions
on the basis of the general principles laid down in the Qur’an and the
Sunnah. {Trans.}

[^6]: Ibn Sa‘d has said: “Those who were referred to by the people in
Medina and whose statements were trusted by the people were Sa‘id ibn
Musayyab, Abu Bakr ibn ‘Abd ar-Rahman, ‘Urwah ibn Zubayr, ‘Abd Allah ibn
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Utbah, Qasim ibn Muhammad, Kharijah ibn Zayd, and
Sulayman ibn Sayyar. Ibid., p. 23.

[^7]: Ayatullah Ibrahim Jannati believes that the Shi‘ah jurisprudence
from the advent of Islam up to the present has passed through eight
periods: First period: the period of the emergence of the elements of
ijtihad starting from the migration {hijrah} of the Prophet (S) to
Medina up to 11 AH. Second period: the period of contrivance and
preparation for the application of ijtihad starting from the demise of
the Prophet (S) up to the end of the minor occultation {ghaybah
as-sughra}. Third period: the period of conceiving the fundamental rules
and common elements of ijtihad beginning with the time of Ibn Abi ‘Aqil
(died 329 AH) up to the time of Shaykh at-Tusi (died 460 AH). Fourth
period: the period of application of the common elements of ijtihad in
the textual sources commencing from the time of Shaykh at-Tusi up to the
time of Nawadah Aw Ibn Idris (died 598 AH). Fifth period: The period of
expansion of the argument concerning issues on ijtihad starting from the
time of Ibn Idris up to the time of Wahid Behbahani (died 1205 AH).
Sixth period: The evolutionary period of ijtihad beginning with the time
of Wahid Bahbahani up to the time of Shaykh al-Ansari (died 1281 AH).
Seventh period: The period of profound thinking in matters of ijtihad
commencing from the time of Shaykh al-Ansari up to the time of Imam
Khomeini. Eight period: The period of general application of ijtihad
with modern methodology started by Imam Khomeini. Ayatullah Ibrahim
Jannati, Idwar-e Ijtihad, 1st edition (Tehran: Sazman-e Intisharat-e
Kayhan, 1372 AHS), starting from chapter 2.

[^8]: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hurr al-‘Amili, Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, 6th
edition (Tehran: Maktabah al-Islamiyyah, 1403 AH), vol. 18, p. 99, kitab
al-qadha’, abwab sifat al-qadhi, bab 11, hadith 1.

[^9]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi),
researched by Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i (Qum: Mu’assasah Al al-Bayt at-Turath,
1404 AH), vol. 2, p. 857.

[^10]: Abu’l-‘Abbas Ahmad ibn ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn al-‘Abbas Najashi,
Fihrist Asma’ Musanfa ash-Shi‘ah (Rijal Najashi) (Qum: Islamic
Publications Office affiliated to the Society of Teachers of the Islamic
Seminary in Qum, 1407 AH), p. 10.

[^11]: Sayyid Hasan Sadr, Ta’sis ash-Shi‘ah Li ‘Ulum al-Islam (Tehran:
Manshurat al-A‘lami, n.d.), p. 310.

[^12]: Fihrist Asma’ Musanfa ash-Shi‘ah (Rijal Najashi), p. 307.

[^13]: Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Rijal Kashi), vol. 2, pp. 376, 507,
830.

[^14]: Ibn Nadim, Al-Fihrist (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah Li’t-Taba‘ah
wa’n-Nashr, n.d.), p. 308.


