Lesson 26: The Science of Scholastic Theology {‘ilm al-kalam}
=============================================================

The science of scholastic theology {*‘ilm al-kalam*} is the science
about the totality of doctrines that every Muslim must believe. In other
words, it is the science that deals with the discussion and study of the
principles of religion {*usul ad-din*}.

The first difference in the principles of religion over the issue of
Imamate {*imamah*} emerged immediately after the demise of the Holy
Prophet (S). Shahristani says, “The most significant difference in Islam
is the difference over the Imamate, and over none of the other
principles of religion was swords unsheathed.”[^1]

Nawbakhti also says:  
 The Messenger of Allah (S) passed away in Rabi‘ al-Awwal[^2] ten years
after the migration {*hijrah*} at the age of 63 and with 23 years of
apostolic mission… At the time, the *ummah* of Islam was divided into
three groups: A group was called “Shi‘ah” which was composed of the
followers {*shi‘ah*} of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) from which all the
Shi‘ah subgroups separated. The second group claiming leadership and
rule were the “*Ansar*” and the third group was inclined toward Abu Bakr
ibn Abi Quhafah, saying: “The Holy Prophet (S) did not specified a
certain person as the successor, and left the decision for it to the
*ummah*.”[^3]

As such, there have always been discussions and debates between the
Shi‘ah and other Muslims over the issue of Imamate.

Yet, the difference on other principles and fundamentals of the religion
emerged during the latter part of the first century and early second
century AH.

As Shahristani says:  
 Difference on the principles emerged during the last days of the
*sahabah* such as Ma‘bad Jahanni, Ghilan Damishqi and Yunus Aswari
regarding predestination {*qadr*}, the relationship of good {*khayr*}
and evil {*sharr*} to predestination. Wasil ibn ‘Ata’, a student of
Hasan al-Basri and ‘Amru ibn ‘Ubayd, had added things to the questions
of predestination.[^4]

Among the scholastic {*kalami*} sects during those periods were the
Wa‘idiyyah, Khawarij, Murji’ah, and Jabariyyah.

Of course, the scholastic discussion had reached its optimal point when
Wasil ibn ‘Ata’ separated from the assembly of Hasan al-Basri and
founded the Mu‘tazilah sect.[^5] In this manner, the Mu‘tazilah school,
based mainly on rational deductions, was against the Ahl al-Hadith which
was called “Hashawiyyah”.

It was so until such time that at the end of the third century AH,
Abu’l-Hasan al-Ash‘ari separated from the Mu‘tazilah school and engaged
in defending the Ahl al-Hadith school of thought within rational
frameworks, and his school became known later as the Ash‘ari school.[^6]
After that, the Mu‘tazilah made no progress, and kept on withdrawing in
face of the Ahl al-Hadith so much so that now, the official scholastic
theology of the Ahl as-Sunnah is the Ash‘ari scholasticism.

The Shi‘ah scholastic theology is the oldest of all Muslim scholastic
shools. ‘Ali (*‘a*), the first infallible Imam acknowledged by the
Shi‘ah has discussed the questions on beliefs such as monotheism
{*tawhid*}, predestination and freewill, and Attributes of God, and this
kind of discussions has been recorded in *Nahj al-Balaghah* in the
language of the Imam himself.

The scholastic discussions about Imamate among the Shi‘ah, however,
commenced immediately after the demise of the Holy Prophet (S) in
defending the right of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) (over the
issue of Imamate and caliphate). As narrated by Shaykh as-Saduq, the
first to defend the right of ‘Ali (*‘a*) vis-à-vis the architects of
Saqifah were twelve persons from among the great companions of the
Prophet (S).

Few days after the event of Saqifah, they debated with Abu Bakr at the
Mosque of the Prophet (S) and cornered him.[^7] After them, a person
such as Abu Dharr al-Ghiffari had also not remained silent vis-à-vis the
usurpers of the right of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) to such an
extent that ‘Uthman ibn al-‘Affan was finally convinced to banish him to
Sham and Rabdhah.

‘Abd Allah ibn al-‘Abbas, the Prophet’s (*‘a*) cousin, a student of ‘Ali
(*‘a*), exegete {*mufassir*} of the Qur’an, scholar, and an outstanding
Hashimite statesman, was one of the defenders of the Shi‘ah school and
always championing the rightfulness of ‘Ali (*‘a*) to such an extent
that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab found fault with him for always saying, “Our
right has been usurped.”

Ibn al-‘Abbas became blind in his old age and one day he heard some
people in a certain place uttering abusive language against the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). He said to his son ‘Ali: “Hold my hand
and take me there.” When he was near them, he addressed them, saying:
“Which of you was abusing God?!” They replied, “None.” He asked, “Which
is you was abusing the Prophet?” “None,” they answered.

He inquired, “Which of you was abusing ‘Ali?” This time they responded,
“All of us.” He said, “Bear witness that I heard the Messenger of Allah
(S) saying: “He who abuses ‘Ali abuses me, and he who abuses me abuses
God, and he who abuses God shall be thrown in an inverted position by
God to the hellfire.” He then returned and while walking, he asked his
son, “How do you see them?” His son recited this poem:

**  
**
نظروا اليك باعين محمّره نظر التيوس الى شفار الجازر

*They are looking at you with a ‘reddish look’ like the gaze of the
animal to be slaughtered to the lancet of the slaughterer.*

Ibn al-‘Abbas said, “You continue.” His son said:

**  
**
خزر الحواجب ناكسي اذقانهم نظر الذّليل إلى العزيز القادر

*They were humiliated and disgraced; they are looking at you like that
of the subject to his master.*

Ibn al-‘Abbas said, “You continue!” His son answered, “I can say nothing
more.” Ibn al-‘Abbas himself recited this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احياؤهم خزى على أمواتهم و الميتون فضيحة للغابر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Their living ones are the source of abjectness for their dead ones
while their dead ones were the source of disgrace for their
ancestors.*[^8]

Among the companions of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*), prominent
figures such as Sa‘sa‘ah ibn Sawhan, Maytham at-Tammar, Kumayl ibn
Ziyad, Awis Qarni, Salim ibn Qays, Harith Hamdani, and Asbagh ibn
Nabatah also engaged in defending the right of ‘Ali (*‘a*), debating
with the enemies of the Imam in this regard.

Meanwhile, concerning the first person among the Shi‘ah to have written
a book about scholastic theology, Ibn Nadim and Ibn Shahr Ashub regard
Isma‘il ibn Maytham at-Tammar to be the first author on Shi‘ah
scholastic theology as he has written the books *Al-Imamah* and
*Al-Istihqaq* on this subject.[^9] The late Sayyid Hasan Sadr, however,
considers ‘Isa ibn Rawdhah as the first Shi‘ah writer on scholastic
theology.[^10] Of course, the oldest existing book on Shi‘ah *kalam* is
the book *Al-Aydhah* of Fadhl ibn Shadhan an-Nayshaburi (died 260 AH)
who was among the companions of Imam al-Hadi and Imam al-‘Askari (*‘a*).

During the period of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*), this science, like other
sciences, also flourished tremendously and a number of his students such
as Hisham ibn Hakam, Hisham ibn Salim, Mu’min Taq, Fadhal ibn Hasan, and
Jabir ibn Yazid Ju‘fi, among others, excelled in this field writing many
books and treatises in this regard. They had discussions and debates
with the scholars of other schools.

Fadhl ibn Shadhan an-Nayshaburi has been among the most outstanding
Shi‘ah scholastic theologians {*mutakallimun*}. He met Imam ar-Ridha,
Imam al-Jawad and Imam al-Hadi (*‘a*), and has written many book on the
subjects of *kalam*, beliefs and deviant schools of thought.[^11]

Hasan ibn Nawbakhti (died 310 AH) was one of the Shi‘ah *mutakallimun*
and among his books is *Firq ash-Shi‘ah*.[^12]

Lesson 26: Summary
------------------

Scholastic theology {*kalam*} deals with the discussion about the
principles of religion {*usul ad-din*}. The first difference in religion
was over the question of Imamate {*imamah*} which emerged immediately
after the demise of the Prophet (S) and the event of Saqifah. But the
difference on other principles and fundamentals is related to the end of
the first century AH.

Scholastic {*kalami*} discussions reached their optimal point after the
founding of the Mu‘tazilah school of thought.

The Shi‘ah *kalam* is the oldest Muslim scholastic school because the
scholastic discussions about the Imamate started immediately after the
demise of the Prophet (S) on account of defending the rightfulness of
‘Ali (*‘a*).

The first book on *kalam* among the Shi‘ah was written by ‘Isa ibn
Rawdhah while the oldest existing book on *kalam* is *Al-Aydhah* of
Fadhl ibn Shadhan.

The Shi‘ah *kalam* flourished much during the period of Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*) and some of his companions excelled in it.

Lesson 26: Questions
--------------------

1. The first difference among the Muslim has been over which principle?

2. When did the scholastic discussions among the Shi‘ah commence?

3. The first Shi‘ah book on *kalam* has been written by whom?

[^1]: Shahristani, Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 30.

[^2]: What is more popular is that the Messenger of Allah (S) passed
away on the 27th of the lunar month of Safar.

[^3]: Nawbakhti, Abi Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Musa. Firq ash-Shi‘ah. Najaf:
Al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1355 AH/1936.

[^4]: Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, p. 35.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 500.

[^6]: Ibid., pp. 85-86.

[^7]: Shaykh as-Saduq, Al-Khisal (Qum: Manshurat Jami‘ah al-Mudarrisin
fi al-Hawzah al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1403 AH), pp. 461-465.

[^8]: Sayyid ‘Ali Khan ash-Shirazi, Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat
ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat Maktabah Basirati, n.d.), p. 127.

[^9]: Ibn Nadim, Al-Fihrist (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah Li’t-Taba‘ah
wa’n-Nashr, n.d.), p. 249; Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Ma‘alim
al-‘Ulama’ (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1380 AH/1961),
p. 62.

[^10]: Sayyid Hasan Sadr, Ta’sis ash-Shi‘ah Li ‘Ulum al-Islam (Tehran:
Manshurat al-A‘lami, n.d.), p. 350.

[^11]: Abu’l-‘Abbas Ahmad ibn ‘Ali ibn Ahmad ibn al-‘Abbas Najashi,
Fihrist Asma’ Musanfa ash-Shi‘ah (Rijal Najashi) (Qum: Islamic
Publications Office affiliated to the Society of Teachers of the Islamic
Seminary in Qum, 1407 AH), p. 306.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 63.


