Lesson 28: The Subjects of the Poems of the Shi‘ah Poets
========================================================

The Shi‘ah poets have recited poetry in various arenas and diverse
themes, which may be classified into the following:

1. Argumentation against the Usurpers of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (‘a) Rights
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Shi‘ah poets and orators, believing in the guardianship {*wilayah*}
of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and his progeny, spoke out immediately after the event of
Saqifah and the oppression against ‘Ali (*‘a*), defending the right of
the Imam and trying to describe the course the Holy Prophet (S)
specified with respect to the Imamate and guardianship through the
language of poetry. In this regard, it was known that Kumayt al-Asadi
was the first to open the gate of argumentation for the Shi‘ah poets.

‘Allamah Amini attributes this fact to Jahiz and then continues thus:  
 Long before the fetus of Kumayt was to be formed, a number of the great
*sahabah* and *tabi‘un* such as Khuzaymah ibn Thabit Dhu’sh-Shahadatayn,
‘Abd Allah ibn al-‘Abbas, Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas, ‘Ammar ibn Yasir, Abu
Dharr al-Ghiffari, Qays ibn Sa‘d al-Ansari, Rabi‘ah ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Sufyan ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib,
Zafar ibn Zayd ibn Hudhayfah, Najashi ibn Harith ibn Ka‘b, Jarir ibn
‘Abd Allah Bajli, and ‘Abd Allah ibn Janbal had defended the right of
the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) through their poems.[^1]

Among the first persons to have recited poetry in defence of ‘Ali (*‘a*)
was ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Sufyan ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib. Shaykh
al-Mufid says, “When the Prophet (S) passed away, ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi
Sufyan was not in Medina. When he arrived in Medina, I saw that the
people had pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr. As such, he stood at the
middle of the mosque and recited this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كنت احسب أن الأمر منصرف عن هاشم ثم منها عن أبي حسن!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أليس اولى من صلى لقبلتكم و أعلم الناس بالقرآن و السنن؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I did not imagine that they would take away the matter of caliphate
from the Banu* *Hashim and among whom from Abu’l-Hasan (‘Ali)!*

*Is he not the first person to pray toward your qiblah and the most
learned of people about the Qur’an and the Sunnah?*[^2]

Similarly, a number of other Hashimite poets from among the *sahabah*
and *tabi‘un* had also recited poetry in defence of the right of ‘Ali
(*‘a*). For instance, while reciting poetry Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas has thus
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا ان خير الناس بعد محمد وصي النبي المصطفى عند ذي الذكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اول من صلّی و صنونبيه و اول من اردى الغواة لدى بدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Be aware that the best of people after Muhammad in the sight of God is
the successor of Prophet al-Mustafa* *(S).*

*He is the first performer of prayer, the brother of the Prophet, and
the first person to drive away the tyrants in (the Battle of) Badr.*[^3]

Mughayrah ibn Nawfal ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib addressed the
supporters of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) during the Battle of
Siffin and poetically said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيكم وصي رسول الله قائدكم و صهره و كتاب الله قد نشرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among you is the successor of the Messenger of Allah (S)—your
commander—and his son-in-law, and the Book of Allah is scattered.*[^4]

Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Utbah ibn Abi Lahab has been one of the famous
poets at the end of the first century AH. Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih has narrated:
“When Walid ibn ‘Abd al-Malik was circumambulating {*tawaf*} the
*Ka‘bah*, Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas was reciting this poem while getting water
from the well of Zamzam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يأيها السائل عن عليّ تسأل عن بدرٍ لنا بدريٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُرَدَّدٍ في المجد ابطحي سائلةٍ غرّه مضيٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O he who is asking from ‘Ali! You are asking from the moon of Banu*
*Hashim and the one present at the Battle of Badr.*

*Are you doubtful in praising the greatness of the ‘abtahi’* *man, or
asking about his precedence in Islam?*[^5]

Among the first persons to have recited poetry in defending the right of
the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) was a woman named Umm Mastah
ibn Athathah. Historians have narrated, thus:  
 After Abu Bakr and ‘Umar treated ‘Ali harshly to acquire his allegiance
by force, Umm Mastah came to the mosque, stood in front of the grave of
the Prophet and recited this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان بعدك انباء هنبثةً لو كنت شاهدها لم تكثر الخطب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا فقدناك فقد الأرض و ابلها فاختل قومك فاشهدهم و لا تغب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After you, an event and differences have occurred that would never
happen if you were present.*

*We lost you just as the soil would lose water. Your community is going
astray. Be witness and neglect not.*[^6]

Among the poets who used to engage in argumentation and defend the right
of ‘Ali (*‘a*) was the great Arab poet and man of letter, Abu’l-Aswad
Daw’ili who lived in Basrah at the place of the tribe of Banu Qashir
that were sympathetic to ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan. None of them could surpass
Abu’l-Aswad in speech. So, they instead persecuted and harassed him,
throwing stones at his house every night. He gave this reply to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول الأرذلون بنوقشير طوال الدهر لا تنسى عليّاً!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقلت لهم و كيف يكون تركي من الأعمال مفروضاً عليّاً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحب محمداً حبّاً شديداً و عباساً و حمزة و الوصيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بني عم النبي و اقربيه أحب الناس كُلهم إلينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان يك حُبُّهم رشداً اصبه و لست بمخطىء ان كان غياً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هم اهل النصيحة غير شك و اهل مودتي ما دمت حيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رايت الله خالق كل شى هداهم واجتبی منهم نبيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و لم يخصص بها احداً سواهم هنيئاً ما اصطفاه لهم مريّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The vile people such as Banu* *Qashir say, “With the passage of time,
why have you not forgotten ‘Ali?”*

*I said to them, “How could I abandon deeds that are incumbent upon
me?”*

*I love Muhammad so much, and ‘Abbas,* *Hamzah and the successor {wasi}
(i.e. ‘Ali) as well.*

*The cousins and nearest of kin of the Prophet are the most beloved of
people for me.*

*If love for them is guidance, I have attained it then, and if this love
is useless, then I have lost nothing.*

*Undoubtedly, they are the people of admonition and my beloved ones so
long as I live.*

*I regard God as the Creator of everything. He has guided them and
appointed the Prophet from among them.*

*Except them, nobody is worthy of it. May this God’s choice of them be
pleasant!*[^7]

This continued until finally, at the end of the Umayyad rule, great and
famous poets such as Kumayt al-Asadi, Kuthayyir ‘Azzah and Sayyid
Humayri who thawed themselves in the guardianship {*wilayah*}, have
recited more poems in defense of ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) right.

2. The Shi‘ah Poets’ Confrontation with the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid Poets
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The second subject about which Shi‘ah poets have recited poetry is the
poems they have composed to counter the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid poets.
After 35 AH when ‘Uthman ibn al-‘Affan was murdered, the Umayyads used
to utilize the weapon of poetry to attain their wicked objectives and
incite people against the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).

Among those who had recited poetry against the Imam was Walid ibn
‘Uqbah, maternal brother of ‘Uthman, who has been described by the
Qur’an as *fasiq* {transgressor}.[^8] He had accused Banu Hashim, the
head of which was ‘Ali (*‘a*), of killing ‘Uthman, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنى هاشم ردوا سلاح ابن اختکم و لا تنهبوه لا تحل نهائبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنى هاشم كيف الهوادة بيننا و عند على درعه و نجائبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنى هاشم كيف التودد منكم ودم ابن اروى فيكم و حرائبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Banu* *Hashim! Return the weapon of your maternal cousin and do not
usurp his property as his property is not lawful for you.*

*O Banu* *Hashim! How could harmony be established between you and us
while the chain mail and camels of ‘Uthman are with ‘Ali?*

*O Banu* *Hashim! How could I accept your friendship while the spears of
Ibn Arwa* *(‘Uthman) are with you?*[^9]

Then, ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Sufyan ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib answered
him, saying thus poetically:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلاتسألونا سيفكم ان سيفكم اضيع و القاه لدى الروع صاحبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و شبهته كسرى و قد كان مثله شبيهاً بكسرى هديه و ضرائبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منا عليٌّ الخير صاحب خيبر و صاحب بدر يوم سالت كتائبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كان ولى الأمر بعد محمد عليّ و في كل المواطن صاحبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصي النبي المصطفى و ابن عمه وأول من صلى و من لان جانبه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may not get your sword from us because when its owner was
frightened, he threw it and it was lost.*

*You likened him to Khosroe, and in fact he was like him. And his horses
and properties were like that of his (Khosroe).*

*‘Ali, the good, is from us; the victor of Khaybar and Badr when the
hostile army came.*

*‘Ali* *is the one vested with authority after Muhammad and the
companion of the Prophet in all the wars.*

*He is the successor of Prophet al-Mustafa* *and his cousin. He is the
first person to perform prayer and the one who is so
well-mannered.*[^10]

Walid ibn ‘Uqbah composed his next poem against the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) when he wrote a letter to his brother, ‘Umarah ibn
‘Uqbah who was then living in Kufah, inciting him to be inimical to the
Imam, saying thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان يك ظنّي في عمارة صادقاً ينم و لا يطلب بذحل و لا وتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يبيت و اوتار ابن عفان عنده مُخيمةً بين الخورنق و القصر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تمشى رخىّ البال متشزر القوى كانك لم تسمع بقتل ابى عمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا إِنَّ خير الناس بعد ثلاثة قتبل النجيبى الذي جاء من مصر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If my guess is ever correct about ‘Umarah, he is sleeping and does not
take revenge!*

*He is sleeping comfortably while the murderers of ‘Uthman are near him
encamping between the Khawarnaq {magnificent building} and the Palace!*

*He is walking with a peace of mind and sound body, as if he has not
heard of the killing of Abu* *‘Amru* *(‘Uthman).*

*Be aware that the best of people after the three persons*[^11] *is the
one who has been killed by the ‘tajibi’* *who came from Egypt.*[^12]

Then, Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib replied to him reciting
thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتطلب ثاراً لست منه و لاله و مالابن ذكران الصفورى و الوتر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كما افتخرت بنت الحمار بامّها و تنسى اباها إذا تسامى او لوالفخر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا ان خير الناس بعد نبيهم وصي النبي المصطفى عند ذي الذكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و اول من صلى و صفونبيّه و اول من اردى الغواة لدى بدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Are you taking revenge for a person who has no relationship with you?
Ibn Dhakran* *Safuri* *is one thing while taking revenge for ‘Uthman is
another.*

*You can still remember that you were suffering from poverty, he forgot
the father of his donkey while taking pride in the mother of his horse.*

*Be aware that the best of people after the Prophet in the sight of God
is the successor of Prophet Mustafa.*

*He is the first to have performed the prayer, the brother of the
Prophet, and the first person to have driven away the oppressive
contingent in (the Battle of) Badr.*[^13]

Sometime during the Battle of Jamal when the supporters of the Umayyads
and the so-called ‘Uthmanis were reciting *rajaz*-metered[^14] verses in
affirming their movement and inciting their supporters, the companions
of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) were also answering them in
return. Among these persons were ‘Ammar ibn Yasir and Malik al-Ashtar.
For example, some members of the tribe of Banu Ḍabbah who had surrounded
the camel of ‘A’ishah would take the reins of camel and would be killed.
The last person to have taken the bridle of camel said, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نحن بنو ضبّة أصحاب الجمل ننعى ابن عفّان باطراف الاسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رُدّوا علينا شيخنا ثم بجل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We are the Banu* *Ḍabbah, supporters of (the Army of) Jamal, and are
taking ‘Uthman’s revenge with our spears.*

*Return to us our sheikh in safety.*[^15]

Malik al-Ashtar rushed to confront him and said, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كيف نَرُدُّ نعثلاً و قد قخل سارت به أُمُّ المنايا و رَحَل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*How could we return Na‘thal (‘Uthman) while he is enshrouded, swords
having penetrated his body, and is dead?!*

Then, Malik al-Ashtar gave a strike to him and killed him.[^16]

During the Battle of Siffin, due to the prolongation of the battle, in
addition to military combat and confrontation, there was also
confrontation in poetry in its broadest sense between the two
belligerent armies. Nasr ibn Muzahim has mentioned great poets such as
Malik al-Ashtar, Khuzaymah ibn Thabit, Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas, Qays ibn
Sa‘d ‘Udayy ibn Hatam, ‘Amru ibn Hamq al-Khaza‘i, Hujr ibn ‘Udayy
al-Kindi, Nu‘man ibn ‘Ajlan al-Ansari, Muhammad ibn Abi Sabrah Qurayshi,
Mughayrah ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, Jundab ibn Zuhayr, Abu Zubayd
at-Ta’i, Ahmar (an Iraqi poet), Abu Habbah ibn Ghuzayyah al-Ansari, and
others who had recited poetry in countering the poets of the people of
Sham. The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) himself had been giving
replies to individuals such as ‘Amr ibn al-‘As.

Ibn Abi’l-Hadid thus says: “Najashi was one of the Iraqi poets in (the
Battle of) Siffin who had been ordered by ‘Ali to confront the poets of
the people of Sham such as Ka‘b ibn Ju‘ayl and others.”[^17]

Lesson 28: Summary
------------------

The Shi‘ah poets had recited poetry in various arenas:

1. Argumentation: After the event of Saqifah, the truth-speaking Shi‘ah
poets spoke out in defense of the Commander of the Faithful’s (*‘a*)
right, among whom were the leading orators of the Banu Hashim such as
‘Abd Allah ibn Abi Sufyan ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and Mughayrah
ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib.

2. Confronting the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid poets: After ‘Uthman’s murder in
35 AH, the Umayyads used to recite poetry against the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*). From then on, the Shi‘ah poets responded through
poetry.

For example, during the Battle of Siffin there was also a battle of
poetry between the two warring parties.

Lesson 28: Questions
--------------------

1. What does ‘Allamah Amini say about the argumentation of the Shi‘ah
poets?

2. Since when did the Shi‘ah poets’ confrontation with the poets
affiliated to the enemies of the Shi‘ah start?

[^1]: ‘Allamah Amini, Al-Ghadir fi’l-Kitab wa’s-Sunnah wa’l-Adab
(Tehran: Dar al-Kitab al-Islamiyyah, 1366 AHS), vol. 1, p. 191.

[^2]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Jamal, 2nd edition (Qum: Maktab al-A‘lam
al-Islami (Publication Center), 1416 AH), p. 118. The identity of the
one who recited this poem is a source of disagreement among historians
and writers. Shaykh al-Mufid has attributed this poem to ‘Abd Allah ibn
Abi Sufyan ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib. In Al-Isabah, Ibn Hajar has regarded
Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Utbah ibn Abi Lahab as the one who recited it.
In the book Al-Manaqib, Muwayyid ad-Din Khwarazmi has identified ‘Abbas
ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet’s (S) uncle, as the composer of this
poem. In the book Al-Majalis, Sharif ar-Radhi has attributed it to
Rabi‘ah ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib. Qadhi Baydhawi, in his exegeses
{tafasir} of the Qur’an, has considered it belonging to Hassan ibn
Thabit. Zubayr ibn Bakkar has said, “One of the children of Abu Lahab
had recited this poem.” Finally, Qadhi Nur Allah has rejected the view
of Ibn Hajar, saying that the one who recited must be prior to the event
of Saqifah and he could not be Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Utbah because he
was born later. So, the one who recited it bore the name of Fadhl;
hence, Fadhl ibn ‘Utbah ibn Abi Lahab. Sayyid ‘Ali Khan ash-Shirazi,
Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat Maktabah
Basirati, n.d.), p. 193. At any rate, this difference in opinion has no
contrary effect on our discussion because it is obvious that the one who
recited it had been one of the Shi‘ah.

[^3]: Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah, p. 143.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 187.

[^5]: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi, Al-‘Aqd al-Farid
(Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1409 AH), vol. 5, p. 75.

[^6]: ‘Abd al-Hamid ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Cairo: Dar
Ihya’ al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, 1961), vol. 6, p. 43.

[^7]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Al-Aghani (Beirut: Dar
Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 12, p. 321.

[^8]: Surah 32:18: “Is he then who is a believer like he who is a
transgressor {fasiq}? They are not equal.” For the commentary of this
verse, see the following Sunni references: Al-Qurtubi, Tafsir (Cairo,
1947), vol. 14, p. 105; At-Tabari, Tafsir Jami‘ al-Bayan, under
commentary for this verse; Al-Wahidi, Asbab an-Nuzul (Dar ad-Diyan
Li’t-Turath edition), p. 291. {Trans.}

[^9]: Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah, p. 188.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 189.

[^11]: It alludes to the Prophet (S), Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. {Trans.}

[^12]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 2, p. 114.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Rajaz: name of several meters, two of which are the most
important. {Trans.}

[^15]: Al-Jamal, p. 118.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 4, p. 87.


