Lesson 29: Elegy-Recitation
===========================

Another important arena about which the Shi‘ah poets have recited poetry
and delivered speeches extensively is the commemoration of the tragedy
experienced by the descendants of the Prophet (S) and elegy-recitation
for the martyrs among them. This arena came into being after the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) in 61 AH. In this regard, two parts
may be discussed and examined:

Elegies for Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and the Other Martyrs in Karbala’
-----------------------------------------------------------------

From the beginning of Islam, no tragedy more serious and painful than
the event of Karbala’ has happened in the history of Islam, and after
the lapse of one thousand and four hundred years, it still has the
greatest impact upon the hearts of the devotees of the Prophet’s (*‘a*)
descendents. Since then, anyone who has the love of the Prophet’s (S)
*Ahl al-Bayt* and talent in composing poetry has recited poetry in this
regard.

The pioneering poems pertaining to the event of Karbala’ have been
recited from the end of the first century AH and the commencement of the
Umayyad decline. As Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani says:

Many of the latter poets have recited poetry in mourning for Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) about which we do not tend to complain as we are fond
of long speech. Yet, on account of the harshness of the Umayyad’s
atmosphere of strangulation, the earlier poets during the Umayyad period
have recited fewer elegies about the tribulation of Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*).[^1]

For example, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Hurr was chased by ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad
for reciting elegy for Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and was forced to flee.[^2]
Of course, many poems have been composed during the first century AH
about the tribulation of the Doyen of the Martyrs (*‘a*) though they are
lesser in number compared to the quantity of poems that have been
recited since the second century AH.

The bereaved women of Banu Hashim were among the pioneering people who
have recited elegies in lamentation of their lost loved ones. When the
news of the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) reached Medina, Zaynab
bint ‘Aqil came out wailing amidst the women of Banu Hashim while
reciting the following poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماذا تقولون إذ قال النبي لكم ماذا فعلتم و انتم آخر الامم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعترتى و باهلي بعد مُفُتَقَدى نصف اسارى و نصف ضُرِّ جُوا بدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كان هذا جزائي إذ نصحت لكم أن تخلفوني بشرِّ في ذوى رَحِمي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What shall you say in reply to the Prophet when he will ask from you,
“O the latter ones of the ummah! What have you done?”*

*“{What did you do} with my descendants and Household after I passed
away? Half of them were taken as captives while the other half was
weltered in blood.”*

*“It was not my reward for my admonition to you that you would do the
worst treatment to my nearest of kin.”*[^3]

Among the most heartrending elegies ever recited for the martyrs of
Karbala’ are the elegies of Umm al-Banin, the mother of Hadhrat
Abu’l-Fadhl. Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani has narrated that Umm al-Banin was
holding the hand of ‘Ubayd Allah, son of Hadhrat al-‘Abbas and going to
the Baqi‘ Cemetery while the people of Medina were gathering around her
and weeping because of her elegies. Even an enemy such as Marwan ibn
al-Hakam used to weep with of her elegies.[^4] Umm al-Banin was thus
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا من رأى العباس كر على جماهير النقد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وورائه من أبناء حيدر كل ليث ذي لبد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انبئت أن ابنى اصيب براسه مقطوع يد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويل على شبلى اما ل براسه ضرب العمد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لوكان سيفك في يد يك لمادنا منك احد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I wished I saw (with my own eyes) how ‘Abbas was assaulting the groups
of vile people!*

*Behind him were the sons of* *Haydar (Imam ‘Ali* *(‘a)) standing like
lions.*

*I have been informed that his hands have been amputated while his head
has received a blow.*

*Woe to my son whose head has received a strong blow!*

*If your sword were in your hand, no one could have ever come near
you.*[^5]

When the caravan of the captives of Karbala’ was heading toward Medina
and arrived near the city, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (*‘a*) dispatched Bashir
ibn Jadhlam to Medina ahead of them, and Bashir informed the people of
their arrival in the city through this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا اهل يثرب لامقام لكم بها قتل الحسين فادمعى مدرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجسم منه بكربلاء مضرّج و الرأس منه على القناة يدار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people of Yathrib! No more opportunity for you to stay there.*
*Husayn was killed; shed your tears.*

*His corpse has been weltering in blood in Karbala’ and his head is
placed on top of spear.*[^6]

Khalid ibn Ma‘dan, ‘Uqbah ibn ‘Amru, Abu’r-Ramih al-Khaza‘i, Sulayman
ibn Quttah al-‘Adawi, ‘Awf ibn ‘Abd Allah Ahmar al-Azdi, and ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Hurr were among the elegists of the first century AH who have
recited poetry about the tribulation of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). It has
been narrated that when Khalid ibn Ma‘dan saw in Sham the Imam’s head on
top of the spear, he recited this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جاؤا برأسك يا ابن بنت محمد مترملاً بدمائه ترميلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كانّما بك يا ابن بنت محمد قتلوا جهاراً عامدين رسولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قتلوك عطشاناً و لم يترقبوا في قتلك التنـزيل و التأويلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و يكبرون بان قتلت و أنّما قتلوا بك التكبير و التهليلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O son of the daughter of Muhammad! They have made your head weltering
in blood.*

*O son of the daughter of Muhammad! By overtly killing you, as if they
wanted to take revenge from the Prophet!*

*They have killed you while thirsty and they have not observed the
interpretation and injunction of the Qur’an about killing.*

*And that they have killed you, they are uttering “Allahu akbar” {Allah
is the greatest} while uttering “Allahu akbar,” they have also killed
your companions!*[^7]

Among the first poets to have recited poetry in lamentation for Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) is ‘Ubayd Allah in Hurr whose ode starts with the
following couplet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول امر غادر اى غادر ألاكنت قاتلت الشهيد بن فاطمه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The treacherous chief, son of a traitor asks {me}: “Did you not fight
against the martyr, the son of Fatimah?”*

When Ibn Ziyad heard this poem, he chased ‘Ubayd Allah who immediately
rode on a horse and escaped, thus saving his life.[^8]

Sulayman ibn Quttah al-‘Adawi has been one of the most prominent
elegists for the tribulation of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). The following
poem is attributed to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مررتُ على أبيات آل محمّد فلم أرها كعهدها يوم حُلَّتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كانوا رجاءً ثم صاروا رزيَّةً و قد عظمت تلك الرزايا و جَلَّت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألم تر أن الشمس اضحت مريضة لفقد حسين و البلاد اقشعرت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قد اعولت تبكي السماء لفقدة و انجمها ناحت عليه و صلَّت
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I roamed around the house of Muhammad’s progeny and I saw them not
fully occupied as before.*

*They were the House of hope and later became the House of
tribulation—grave and serious tribulations.*

*Can you not see that due to the loss of* *Husayn the sun turned
lackluster and the cities melancholic?!*

*Can you not see that owing to the loss of* *Husayn the sky has wept and
wailed and its stars lamented and invoked salutations?*[^9]

But after the end of the first century AH when the repression of the
Umayyad rulers diminished because of their confrontation with the
‘Abbasid movement and other revolts and were finally defeated by the
‘Abbasids, the pure Imams (*‘a*) revived the recitation of elegies for
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and great poets such as Kumayt al-Asadi, Sayyid
Humayri, Sufyan ibn Mus‘ab ‘Abdi, Mansur Namri, and Da‘bal al-Khaza‘i
used to recite poetry in their presence for the tribulation of Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*). As Sufyan ibn Mus‘ab ‘Abdi narrates:

I visited Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and the Imam said to his attendant, “Tell
Umm Farwah to come and listen to what happened to his (great)
grandfather.” Umm Farwah came and sat behind a curtain. Then, Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said to me: “You recite.” I started reciting an elegy
which commences with this couplet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فرو جودي بدمعك المسكوب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Umm Farwah!* *Render tears to your eyes.*

At this point, Umm Farwah and other ladies burst into tears.[^10]

Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani also narrates from Isma‘il at-Tamimi, thus:  
 I was with Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) when Sayyid Hamayri asked for
permission and entered. The Imam asked the members of his household to
sit behind a curtain. He then asked Sayyid Humayri to recite poetry in
lamentation for Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). Sayyid recited this poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
امرر على جدث الحسين فقل لاعظمة الزكية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا اعظماً لازلت من وظفا و ساكبة رويّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاذا مررت بقبره فاطل به وقف المطيّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ابك المطهَّر للمطهَّر و المطهرة النقية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كبكاء معوله اتت يوماً لواحدها المنيّة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You pass by the grave of* *Husayn and tell to his pure bones:*

*“O bones! Be always sound and glutted.”*

*As you pass by his grave, make a long stopover as the camels do.*

*Let the pure {mutahhar} Imam weep for the pure* *Husayn.*

*Your cry must be like the cry and lamentation of the mother of a dead
son.*

The narrator says, “I saw the tears of the Imam fall on his cheek and
weeping reigned in the house.”[^11]

Sometimes also others such as Fadhil Rasan and Abu Harun Makfuf would
recite the poems of Sayyid Humayri in lamentation for Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*) near Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and make the Imam cry. As reported by
Ibn Qawlawiyyah, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) asked one of his companions named
Abu ‘Ammar to recite for him the poems of ‘Abdi in lamentation for Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*).[^12]

Poet such as Da‘bal al-Khaza‘i who recited many poems in lamentation for
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) also engaged in reciting elegies near Imam
ar-Ridha (*‘a*) for his great grandfather.[^13]

Elegies for the Other Martyrs among the Descendants of the Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

--As a deeply touched Shi‘ah poet is witnessing the scene of martyrdom
of Muslim ibn ‘Aqil and Hani ibn ‘Urwah, he recites this poem and this
poem is thereafter recited by many:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا كنت لا تدرين ما الموت فانظري إلى هاني في السوق و ابن عقيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلى بطل قد هشَّمَ السيف وجهه و آخر يهوي في طمار قتيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اصابهما أمر الأمير قأصبحا أحاديث من يسعى بكل سبيل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ايترك أسماء المهايج آمِناً و قد طلبته مذحج بذحول
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you do not know what is meant by death, look at Ibn ‘Aqil and Hani*
*at the market.*

*His (Ibn ‘Aqil’s) face was heroically cut into pieces by swords while
the other one (Hani) was thrown from the top (of palace) and was
killed.*

*By the order of the emir, this happened to them on this day and the
news about them was relayed by the travelers.*

*You can see a corpse whose color has been changed by death and every
part of which has been weltering in blood.*

*Will the names of Mahayij be in safety? This is while the tribe of
Madhhaj is about to be punished.*[^14]

While reciting a long elegy in lamentation for the martyrs of the
*Tawabun* {the Penitents}, a certain poet named A‘sha Hamdan thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
توجه من دون ثنية سائراً إلى ابن زياد في الجموع الكتائب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فياخير جيش للعراق و اهله سقيتم روايا كل اسحم ساكب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*From that direction, soldiers rushed toward Ibn Ziyad.*

*O the best of Iraqi army! You filled every gutter for rainwater.*[^15]

The Shi‘ah poets also used to recite poetry in mourning for Zayd ibn
‘Ali, his son Yahya, and the descendants of Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) who
staged uprisings during the ‘Abbasid period and attained martyrdom.

The poets such ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Khawafi, Mashi‘ Madani, Ashja‘ ibn
‘Amru Salmi, and Abu Talib al-Qummi have also recited poetry in mourning
for Imam ar-Ridha (*‘a*).[^16]

But after Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*), among the murdered descendants of Abu
Talib, the greatest number of elegies has been recited in mourning for
Yahya ibn ‘Umar at-Talibi. He staged an uprising in 248 AH and was
killed by Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Tahir.[^17] Mas‘udi says, “People
from near and far recited elegies for him while young and old wept for
him.”[^18]

Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani says, “Of all the descendants of Abu Talib
killed during the ‘Abbasid period, I do not find anyone about whom poems
and elegies have been recited as much as what has been done to Yahya ibn
‘Umar at-Talibi.”[^19]

The Virtues and Merits of the Descendants of the Prophet (S)
------------------------------------------------------------

Since the second century AH, the Shi‘ah poets used to recite poetry more
about the virtues and merits of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*),
and in this manner, engaging in the information drive and spread of the
school of Shi‘ism whose basic foundation is the succession and Imamate
of ‘Ali (*‘a*). The great poets such as Kumayt al-Asadi, Humayri, Sufyan
ibn Mus‘ab ‘Abdi, and Da‘bal al-Khaza‘i were forerunners in this affair.

Sayyid Humayri spent his time expressing the merits of the Commander of
the Faithful, and he was one of the prominent preachers of the school of
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) during his time. As narrated by Abu’l-Faraj
al-Isfahani, he recited two thousand three hundred odes in praise of
Banu Hashim, while none of his poems has been devoid of praise for Banu
Hashim and reproach for their enemies.

Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani has also said that in Kufah, Sayyid Humayri used
to go to the house of Sulayman ibn Mihran known as A‘mash from whom he
would learn about and write the virtues of the Commander of the Faithful
‘Ali (*‘a*), and thereafter, he would express them in poetry.

Ibn Mu‘taz says:  
 Sayyid Humayri has transformed into poetry all the virtues of ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib (*‘a*) and he would easily become tired sitting at any
assembly where the progeny of Muhammad was not pleasantly mentioned. For
example, someone has thus narrated: “We were sitting beside ‘Amru ibn
‘Ala’ when Sayyid Humayri came. And we were then busy talking about
common affairs such as farming and date palms. Sayyid stood up as he
wanted to go. When we asked for the reason why he wanted to leave, he
gave this reply to us:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنّي لاكره أن اطيل بمجلس لا ذكر فيه لفضل آل محمّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا ذكر فيه لاحمد و وصيه و بنيه ذلك مجلس نطف ردى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الذي ينساهم في مجلس حتى يفارقه لغير مسدد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I abhor sitting at an assembly in which none of the virtues of the
progeny of Muhammad is ever mentioned.*

*Any assembly in which there is no mention of Ahmad, his successor and
his offspring is a worthless assembly.*

*Anyone who shall not mention them in the assembly shall leave that
assembly without gaining any benefit.*[^20]

Similarly, one day, one of the chiefs of Kufah gave a horse and a gift
to Sayyid Humayri. He mounted the horse and took the gift, and went to
the working place of Kufah. He then addressed the Shi‘ah, saying: “O
Kufans! If anyone could mention any of the virtues of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
about which I have not expressed in poetry yet, I shall give this horse
and gift to him.”

People from every direction would mention each of the superiorities of
the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) and in return he would recite the
poem he composed about it. Finally, someone said:

One day, ‘Ali (*‘a*) wanted to wear his shoes and go out. He had already
worn one pair of his shoes when an eagle came, picked up the other pair
of shoes and brought it up. But it suddenly abandoned as a black snake
went out of the shoe and entered into a ground hole. ‘Ali (*‘a*) then
wore the other pair of his shoes.

At this point, Sayyid Humayri thought for sometime and then said, “I
have not composed a poem about it so far.” As such, he gave the horse
and the gift to the man, and recited the following poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا يا قوم للعجب العجب لخفّ ابى الحسن و للحباب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدوٌ من عداة الجن وغدٌ بعيد في المراد من صواب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتى خفاً له انساب فيه لينهش رجله منه بناب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لينهش خير من ركب المطايا أمير المؤمنين أباتراب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فخرَّ من السَّما له عقاب من العقبان او شبه العقاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و دوفع عن ابي حسن علي نقيع سمامه بعد انسياب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Be aware O people that there is a miracle in the shoe of Abu’l-Hasan.*

*One of the hostile jinns among the imprudent and strayed from the path*

*Hid in the shoe of ‘Ali* *himself so as to bite him with its fangs—*

*So as to bite the one who rides on four-footed animals—the Commander of
the Faithful, Abu* *Turab.*

*At that moment, one of the eagles of the sky or a bird that looks like
an eagle descended upon his head.*

*In this manner, its (the hostile jinn’s) venom and wickedness were
warded off.*[^21]

Sufyan ibn Mus‘ab ‘Abdi is among the poets who have spent their time in
mentioning the merits of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). ‘Allamah
Amini says, thus: “I never found any poem of his that was in praise of
other than the progeny of Muhammad (S).”

He used to learn the *hadith*s about the merits and virtues of the
progeny of the Prophet (S) from Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and immediately
composed pertinent poems.[^22] For this reason, Ibn Shahr Ashub narrates
that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says, “O assembly of the Shi‘ah! Teach the
poetry of ‘Abdi to your children as he is with the religion of God.”

The Demerits of the Enemies of the Prophet’s (S) Descendants
------------------------------------------------------------

One of the ways of fighting the enemies is propaganda war, which is
tremendously rampant today through the mass media. In the past, the
demerits of the enemies in the context of poetry also had a very
significant propaganda impact.

In defending the school of Shi‘ism, the Shi‘ah poets used to also deal
with the demerits of the enemies of *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*). At any
opportune time, they could destroy an enemy and break his back through
some couplets. Persons such as Mu‘awiyah, Walid ibn ‘Uqbah and ‘Amr ibn
al-‘As who were enemies of God and the Messenger (S) have been
dispraised many times by the poets of Banu Hashim, and the supporters
and poets of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*).

Without revealing his name and thus be pursued by the Umayyads, a
certain poet has soothed the hearts of the Shi‘ah by dispraising Yazid
after his death by saying, thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيّها القبر بحوّارينا ضممت شرَّ النّاس أجمعينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O grave which is in “hawarin”! The worst of all people is in your
bosom.*[^23]

One of the best satires about the Umayyads is a poem which has been
recited by Kumayt ibn Zayd al-Asadi concerning them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقل لبني أميّة حيث حلُّوا و إن خِفْتَ المهندَّ و القطيعا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اجاع الله من اشبعتموه و اشبع من بجوركم اجيعا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بمرضيَّ السياسة هاشمىٍ يكون حياً لامّته ربيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Tell the Umayyads wherever they are, if you are afraid of sword and
scourge.*

*May God make him hungry he who has satiated you and satiate him he who
has remained hungry because of your tyranny.*

*With the pleasant Hashimi* *policy, there shall be the spring of life
for the ummah.*[^24]

Dr. Shawqi Ḍayf says: “The Shi‘ah in Iraq, Khurasan and Hijaz used to
transmit to one another the poems of Kumayt. For this reason, the
Umayyads and their governor in Iraq, Yusuf ibn ‘Umar ath-Thaqafi, felt
seriously threatened by Kumayt.”[^25]

Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani has thus said about Kumayt:  
 Kumayt al-Asadi, the great Shi‘ah poet during the Umayyad period of
repression would not hesitate to reply in whatever form to the poets
inimical to ‘Ali (*‘a*), affiliated to the Umayyads and were reciting
poetry against the descendants of the Prophet (S). For example, a
certain poet named Hakim ibn al-‘Abbas al-Kalbi who was considered one
of the Qahtanis had dispraised ‘Ali (*‘a*). Kumayt seriously assaulted
him and in his poems he placed Hakim vis-à-vis the notables of Quraysh
and ‘Adnanis. In this way, Kumayt dispraised and defeated him.[^26]

Sometimes also, without divulging their names, poets used to reply to
the court poets, dispraising and crushing them. For example, Sa‘id ibn
Hamid who was one of the enemies of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)
and the descendants of the Prophet (S) during the rule of Musta‘in had
been humiliated by the Shi‘ah poets on various occasions.

On the same period, a certain poet named ‘Ali ibn Jahm who had been one
of the Nasibis and enemies of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) has
been dispraised by the Shi‘ah poet, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ja‘far
al-‘Alawi. He had rejected the genealogy of ‘Ali ibn Jahm, regarding him
connected to Samah ibn Lawi.

In dispraising Ibn Ziyad, Abu’l-Aswad Da’uli has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقول و ذاك من جَزَع و وَجْدٍ ازال الله ملك بني زياد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ابعدهم بما غدروا و خانوا كما بَعدتْ ثمود و قوم عاد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Out of agony and anguish I am saying that may God destroy the dominion
of the offspring of Ziyad!*

*And cause them to perish for their deceit and treason just as the
people of Thamud and* *Ad have been ruined!*[^27]

Sayyid Humayri has humiliated one of the ‘Abbasid judges who had
dismissed his testimony on account of his faith in Shi‘ism, and he has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابوك ابن سارق عنـزالنبي و انت ابن بنت أبي جحدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و نحن على رغمك الرافضون لاهل الضلالة و المنكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Your father steals the sheep of the Prophet while you are maternal
grandchild of Abu* *Jahdar!*

*And notwithstanding your whim, we shall abandon the people of
misguidance and deviation.*[^28]

Abu Nu‘amah Daqiqi al-Kufi, one of the poets during the third century
AH, had dispraised the notables of the ‘Abbasid rule, attributing to
them the commission of abominable acts until such time that he had been
killed by one of the ‘Abbasid Turkish commanders named Mufallah.[^29]

Lesson 29: Summary
------------------

3. One of the most important areas about which the Shi‘ah poets have
recited poetry was the elegy-recitation for the martyrs of the progeny
of the Prophet (S). This area can be divided into two parts:  
 a. Elegies for Imam al-Husayn

The first persons to have recited poetry in mourning for the martyrs of
Karbala’ were the bereaved women of the Banu Hashim.

Among them was Lady Umm al-Banin, the mother of Hadhrat Abu’l-Fadhl. He
used to recite elegies for her sons at the Baqi‘ Cemetery while the
people of Medina gathered around her and wept. Due to the Umayyad policy
of repression, the elegists of the martyrs of Karbala’ were lesser in
number during the Umayyad period compared to that of the ‘Abbasid period
except during the time of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) when the condition was
conducive for the Imam to revive the elegy for Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*).

b. Elegies for the martyrs among the descendants of the Prophet (S)  
 The descendants of the Prophet (S) were oppressed and have always been
killed by the tyrants. Poets used to recite poems in lamentation for
them. Next to the martyrs of Karbala’, among the offspring of Abu Talib,
the most number of poems has been recited in mourning for Yahya ibn
‘Umar at-Talibi.

4. The merits and virtues of the descendants of the Prophet (S)  
 The poets such as Farazdaq, Kumayt, Sayyid Humayri, and Da‘bal
al-Khaza‘i used to recite poetry to express the virtues of the
descendants of the Prophet (S).

5. Dispraising the enemies of the descendants of the Prophet (S)  
 Shi‘ah poets used to engage in dispraising the enemies of *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) in defending the school of Shi‘ism.

Lesson 29: Questions
--------------------

1. When did the recitation of elegies start?

2. Who were the poets who recited poetry regarding the event of
Karbala’?

3. After the end of the first century AH, how did the elegies for Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) flourish?

4. Next to Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*), about whom among the murdered
offspring of Abu Talib were so many elegies recited?

5. How did the Shi‘ah poets benefit from the use of dispraising?

[^1]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH/1374 AHS), p. 121.

[^2]: Abu Mikhnaf, Maqtal al-Husayn ‘Alayhi’s-Salam, researched by Hasan
Ghaffari, 2nd edition (Qum: n.p., 1364 AH), p. 245.

[^3]: Ibid., pp. 227-228.

[^4]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 90.

[^5]: Maqtal al-Husayn ‘Alayhi’s-Salam, p. 181.

[^6]: ‘Ali ibn Musa ibn Tawus, Al-Luhuf ‘ala Qatli at-Tufuf, trans.
Muhammad Tahir Dezfuli, 1st edition (Qum: Mu’assaseh-ye Farhang va
Intisharati-ye Ansari, 1378 AHS), p. 284.

[^7]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), vol. 1, p. 6023.

[^8]: Maqtal al-Husayn ‘Alayhi’s-Salam, p. 245.

[^9]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 121.

[^10]: ‘Abd al-Husayn Amini, Al-Ghadir fi’l-Kitab wa’s-Sunnah wa’l-Adab
(Tehran: Dar al-Kitab al-Islamiyyah, 1366 AHS), vol. 2, pp. 294-295.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 235.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 295.

[^13]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab, 1st
edition (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH),
vol. 3, p. 327; Rijal ibn Dawud (Qum: Manshurat ar-Radhi, n.d.), p. 92.

[^14]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 71.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 110.

[^16]: A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, p. 170.

[^17]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 4, pp. 159-160.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 162.

[^19]: Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 511.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 242.

[^21]: Ibid., pp. 441-442.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 295.

[^23]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 65.

[^24]: Abi ‘Uthman ‘Amru ibn Bahr Jahiz, Al-Bayan wa’t-Tabyin, 1st
edition (Cairo: Matba‘ah Lajnah at-Ta’lif wa’t-Tarjamah wa’n-Nashr, 1367
AH/1948), vol. 3, p. 365.

[^25]: Dr. Shawqi Ḍayf, Ash-Shi‘r wa Tawaba‘ah ash-Sha‘biyyah ‘ala Murr
al-Ma‘sur (Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘arif, n.d.), p. 36.

[^26]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Al-Aghani (Beirut:
Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 17, p. 36.

[^27]: Murawwij adh-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 81.

[^28]: Al-Ghadir fi’l-Kitab wa’s-Sunnah wa’l-Adab, p. 256.

[^29]: Dr. Shawqi Ḍayf, Tarikh al-Adab al-‘Arabi al-‘Asr al-‘Abbas
ath-Thani (Egypt: Dar al-Ma‘arif, n.d.), p. 388.


