Lesson 1: Historical References
===============================

In this writing, I do not claim to be able to comprehensively study and
analyze everything that is relevant to the history of Shi‘ism. Instead,
I shall try to cite the most important references and citations, and to
present and analyze them concisely.

Since there have been many books on history and books about the life
account of the Infallibles {*ma‘sumin*}[^1] (*‘a*) as well as books on
*hadith*s and *rijal*,[^2] which are related to the history of Shi‘ism,
I have divided the references dealing with the history of Shi‘ism into
two: (1) special references and (2) general references, which we shall
deal with in two lessons.

Special References
------------------

In this lessons, some of the references on the history of Shi‘ism have
been cited. These references which have been introduced in brief are the
following:

1. *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin*;

2. *Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi* *Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah*;

3. *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah*;

4. *Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah*;

5. *Shi‘eh dar Tarikh*;

6. *Jihad ash-Shi‘ah*; and

7. *Tarikh-e Tashayyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta Qarn-e Haftum-e Hijri*.

1. Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
------------------------

One of the most significant references dealing with the history of
Shi‘ism is the book *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin*. Its author, Abu’l-Faraj
‘Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Isfahani, was born in 284 AH in the city of
Isfahan. He grew up in Baghdad and was educated under the guidance of
scholars and learned men there. His genealogy can be traced back to the
Umayyads but he is a Shi‘ah {*‘alawi madhhab*}.[^3]

As indicated in its title, the book deals with the descendants of Abu
Talib {*talibiyyun*} who were killed at the hands of the oppressors and
tyrants of the time, as the author thus writes:

In this book of mine, by the help and will of Allah, I shall give a
summary of the reports on the murdered ones among the descendants of Abu
Talib from the time of the Messenger of Allah (S) up to the moment when
I started writing this book in Jumadi al-Awwal 313 AH (circa July-August
925 CE). It includes those who were killed by means of eating or
drinking poison; those who escaped from the ruler of the time, hid
somewhere else and died there; and those who died while languishing in
prison. And in mentioning them, I observed the chronological order of
their deaths and not their merits…[^4]

This book is generally divided into two parts. The first part covers the
period from the time of the Prophet (S) up to the establishment of the
‘Abbasid caliphate while the other part covers the ‘Abbasid period.

Although this book deals only with the life account and martyrdom of the
martyrs among the descendants of Abu Talib {*al abi* *talib*}, including
life account of the Imams (*‘a*), martyred leaders and leading figures
among the ‘Alawis (descendants of ‘Ali (*‘a*)) and their own followers,
a part of the history of Shi‘ism can be extracted from every part of it.
Of course, since this book is more relevant to Shi‘ism’s political
history, it is less beneficial with respect to other aspects of the
history of Shi‘ism.

2. Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah
----------------------------------------------

The author of this book is Sayyid ‘Ali Khan Shirazi who was born on
Jumadi al-Awwal 5, 1052 AH (August 2, 1642) in the holy city of Medina
where he was educated. In 1068 AH (circa 1657-8) he migrated to
Hyderabad, India where he lived for 48 years. He then went to Mashhad,
Iran for the *ziyarah* {visitation} of Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*). During the
reign of Shah Sultan Husayn Safawi, he went to Isfahan in 1117 AH (circa
1705-6) where he stayed for two years. Thereafter, he proceeded to
Shiraz where he shouldered the religious and educational management of
the city.[^5]

The book, *Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi* *Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah*, is one of the
works of this high-ranking Shi‘ah scholar. Although the subject of this
book is a description of the condition of the Shi‘ah and their history,
general history of Shi‘ism can also be deduced from it for two reasons.
One reason is that it is a study of the conditions of the Shi‘ah in the
different periods and places, while the other reason is that the author
himself has dealt briefly with the history of Shi‘ism especially during
the Umayyad period of strangulation. He thus says in the introduction:

Be aware that—may God be merciful to you— in every epoch and period the
Shi‘ah of the Commander of the Faithful {*Amir al-Mu’minin*} (‘Ali)
(*‘a*) and other Imams (*‘a*) from among his descendants were hiding in
the nook and corner, keeping away from the attention of the rulers…[^6]

Then, he described the beginning of repression from the time of the
Umayyads up to the period of the ‘Abbasids.

This book, as it is noted by the author in the introduction, has been
arranged in 12 classes. That is, he has classified and then examined the
Shi‘ah into the following 12 classes:

(1) *As-Sahabah* {Companions of the Prophet (S)};

(2) *At-Tabi‘un* {Followers};[^7]

(3) *Al-Muhaddithun alladhi rawu ‘an al-A’immah at-Tahirin* {Scholars of
*Hadith* who Narrated Traditions from the Pure Imams (*‘a*)};

(4) *‘Ulama’ ad-Din* {Religious Scholars};

(5) *Al-Hukama’ wa’l-Mutakallimin* {Philosophers and Scholastic
Theologians};

(6) *‘Ulama’ al-‘Arabiyyah* {Scholars of Arabic Language};

(7) *As-Sadah as-Sawfiyyah* {Commoners};

(8) *Al-Muluk wa’s-Salatin* {Kings and Sultans};

(9) *Al-Umara’* {Rulers};

(10) *Al-Wuzara’* {Viziers and Ministers};

(11) *Ash-Shu‘ara’* {Poets}; and

(12) *An-Nisa’* {Women}.

What is available so far from this valuable reference is the first
class, i.e. the Class of the Companions in complete form, part of the
fourth class, and a small portion of the 11th class.

This book is considered the most significant reference on the subject of
Shi‘ism among the Companions and in this respect, it has also a good
sense of comprehensiveness. The writer of this book was able to compile
the views and opinions of the Shi‘ah scholars and biographers
{*rijaliyyun*} regarding the Shi‘ah among the Companions, and as such,
he has not much engaged in expressing his own views, opinions, analyses,
and investigations.

3. A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah
-------------------

The writer of this unique book is the great Shi‘ah researcher and
scholar, the late Sayyid Muhsin Amin. The book, *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah*, as
its title indicates, is a book concerning the life account and
description of the leading Shi‘ah figures. This book has three
introductions. The first introduction explains the author’s method of
writing. The introduction begins thus: “In stating our method in this
book which is as follows…” and then he explains in detail in 14 parts
the method of his writing.

The second introduction, meanwhile, is about the general history of
Shi‘ism, which is consisted of 12 discussions. The third introduction
deals with the references and authorities used in the book:

**Discussion 1:** The meaning and connotation of the word *Shi‘ah*;
other Shi‘ah terminologies; criticizing the view of the Ahl as-Sunnah
writers regarding the Shi‘ah sects.

**Discussion** **2:** The emergence of the Shi‘ah and their expansion;
the Shi‘ah among the Companions; Shi‘ah Companions; growth of the
Shi‘ah.

**Discussion** **3:** Points to the some of the oppressions perpetrated
against the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and their Shi‘ah.

**Discussion** **4:** Unjust treatment of the Shi‘ah of the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

**Discussion** **5:** Incessant attacks against the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*).

**Discussion** **6:** The existence of many calumnies against the Shi‘ah
and a summary of the Ja‘fari Shi‘ah Ithna ‘Ashari beliefs.

**Discussion** **7:** Factors behind the spread of Shi‘ism in the Muslim
lands.

**Discussion** **8:** The virtues of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and their
services to Islam.

**Discussion 9:** On the beliefs of the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah.

**Discussion 10:** Concerning the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’*, poets, men of
letters, and writers, and their works.

**Discussion** **11:** Viziers and ministers, rulers, judges, and chiefs
among the Shi‘ah.

**Discussion** **12:** Enumeration of the Shi‘ah-populated cities.[^8]

It must be beyond our responsibility to talk about the importance,
reputation and value of the book, *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah*, as it is an ocean
of historical knowledge and information which we cannot fathom,
overcome, or measure. Rather, we can benefit from it in proportion to
our capability. The articulacy of writing, depth of the subjects,
approach to the subjects, arrangement of the topics, logical order, and
the like are among its merits.

With regard to the points of criticism that can be made against it,
secondary cases may be indicated such as the following:

On the discussion of the other terms for the Shi‘ah, they are mentioned
very briefly and only the names such as Imamiyyah, Muta’awwalah,
Qizilbash, Rafidhiyyah, Ja‘fariyyah, and Khassah have been
enumerated,[^9] whereas the names applied to the Shi‘ah are more than
these. Only in the first century *hijri*, the labels such as ‘Alawi,
Turabi, Husayni, etc. have been applied to the Shi‘ah.

The other criticism that can be made with respect to this book is
related to the meaning of *Shi‘ah*. The Shi‘ah writers of *rijal* do not
regard as Shi‘ah some of the people whom he counted as Shi‘ah because
although these people were Shi‘ah in the political sense, they cannot be
considered as such in the ideological sense.

That is to say that in the political disputes they took the side of the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), but in terms of belief, they did not benefit from
that fountainhead {of knowledge} (*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)). A separate
section is supposed to be allotted to this discussion, and the beginning
should have stated to whom the label *Shi‘ah* refers.

4. Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah
--------------------

The book, *Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah*, written by the late great ‘Allamah Shaykh
Muhammad Husayn Muzaffar, is one of the important references and
authorities on the history of Shi‘ism. This book, reprinted many times,
has been translated into Persian by Prof. Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Hujjati.

The late Muzaffar has surveyed and discussed in 82 headings the history
of Shi‘ism from the time of the Prophet (S) up to his own time. In
general, the topics of this book can be summed up in three parts:

(1) periods of the spread of Shi‘ism,

(2) Shi‘ah-populated places, and

(3) Shi‘ah governments.

The late Muzaffar has been an able writer and erudite scholar whose pen,
apart from being versatile and fluent, has the necessary power and
firmness.

One of the most important merits of the book, *Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah*, is
its comprehensiveness as it has examined the presence of the Shi‘ah in
all parts of the world. This book can be one of the most important
references and authorities for the researchers dealing with the history
of Shi‘ism in every period and epoch.

In spite of all these merits that *Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah* does possess in
comparison with other books, on account of its brevity, it fails to
present the absolute truth except in topics such as the meaning of
Shi‘ah, the specific time when the label *Shi‘ah* was applied to the
sympathizers of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), the beginning of Shi‘ism, and
the spread of Shi‘ism, which are related to the main discussions about
Shi‘ah. In these cases, he has engaged in giving a detailed account,
which is appropriate to the subjects. The late Muzaffar thus says in the
introduction of this book:

“I have no other aim but to let the people know that Shi‘ism commenced
at the time of the Receiver of Message (Muhammad al-Mustafa (S)), and
the Iranians and Ibn Saba’ had no hand in founding it.”

The other defect of this book that can be cited is its lack of scholarly
character. Due to the observance of brevity, the honorable writer has
failed to quote and analyze the views of others.

Parts of this book dealing with the formation of Muslim states are
supposed to be completed. For, with the passage of time, main changes
and developments in the Shi‘ah states under discussion have occurred and
some of them have even ceased to exist, but the honorable translator of
the book has not discussed some of the new states and not conducted
up-to-date research. As a result, it has been translated in such a form
that the sections dealing with the Shi‘ah states gives an impression of
antiquity.

5. Shi‘eh dar Tarikh
--------------------

The book, *Ash-Shi‘ah fi’t-Tarikh* {*Shi‘eh dar Tarikh*}, written by
Muhammad Husayn Zayn ‘Amili, has been translated into Persian by
Muhammad Rida ‘Ata’i and published by Astan-e Quds-e Radhawi
(Custodianship of Imam ar-Rida’s Holy Shrine). As one of the authorities
on the history of the Shi‘ah, this book consists of five chapters and
the concluding part:

• The first chapter is about the meaning, concept, background, and a
summary of the Shi‘ah beliefs.

• The second chapter deals with the sects and groups that have separated
from the Shi‘ah.

• The third chapter covers the history after the Prophet (S) up to the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and an analysis of the events and
occurrences during that period.

• The fourth chapter is about the position of the Shi‘ah during the
Umayyad and ‘Abbasid caliphates.

• The fifth chapter deals with the Shi‘ah disavowal {*bara‘ah*} of
*ghulu* {extremism} and *ghulat* {extremists}.

The book, *Shi‘eh dar Tarikh*, is a good authority on the discussion of
the splits within the Shi‘ah, it has especially analyzed various factors
behind the separation of groups and sects from the Shi‘ah.

As a book on the history of Shi‘ism, it does not cover all the topics
and subjects dealing with the Shi‘ah. This is because at times the
discussion drifts away from the subject of Shi‘ism, embarking on such
subjects as the Khawarij (Kharijites)[^10] and the history of caliphate,
which are not so relevant to the history of Shi‘ism.

6. Jihad ash-Shi‘ah
-------------------

Another reference for the history of the Shi‘ah is the book *Jihad
ash-Shi‘ah* (even though its main focus is the armed struggles and
movements of the Shi‘ah). This book is written by Dr. Samirah Mukhtar
al-Laythi, university professor at the ‘Ayn Shams University, Egypt. The
Beirut-based Dar al-Jayl publisher has published *Jihad ash-Shi‘ah* in
1396 AH (1976) with 424 pages, 16.2x22.9 cm size, and hard-bound cover.

After the introduction, this book has been arranged into 5 parts and a
conclusion, and its subject is the *jihad* of the Shi‘ah. It has
examined and discussed the subject approximately up to the end of the
2nd century *hijri*. In other words, the author of the book, on one
hand, talks about the armed struggles and movements of the Shi‘ah
against the ‘Abbasids, states the ‘Alawi uprisings and factors for their
defeat, and discusses the role of the Shi‘ah movements and sects in the
socio-political currents and conditions of that period.

On the other hand, she has also analyzed the policy of the caliphs
toward the Holy Imams (*‘a*) and the Shi‘ah. Topics on the general
history of the Shi‘ah have been discussed in a certain section of the
first part which covers such topics as: Shi‘ah in the lexicon; the
concept of Shi‘ah; history of the emergence of the Shi‘ah; the impact of
the *jihad* of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) in the emergence of the Shi‘ah; the
Shi‘ah *jihad* in Iraq; the emergence of the Kaysaniyyah sect; and the
Shi‘ah Imamiyyah. In discussing the emergence of the Shi‘ah, she has
advanced various views and opinion regarding the history of the Shi‘ah.

One problem that can be cited with respect to the book is in elucidating
the “political theory” of the Holy Imams (*'a*) whom the author has
described as “the Imams of the Imamiyyah sect”. As the author is not a
Shi‘ah, she has failed to discern and explain the foundation of the
political thought of the Imams (*‘a*). As such, she describes the basis
of Imamate after Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) as spiritual and intellectual
Imamate, regarding their method as different from that of the Commander
of the Faithful, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*).[^11]

7. Tarikh-e Tashayyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta Qarn-e Haftum-e Hijri
----------------------------------------------------------------

The writer of this book, Mr. Rasul Ja‘fariyan, is among the valuable
researchers of the Islamic Theological Center in Qum. This book is a
well-researched and distinctive one in its own right, and it is one of
the best writings and literary works of this author. It is also one of
the most important research references on the history of Shi‘ism.

This book has valuable historical information and data, which no
researcher on the history of Shi‘ism will be needless of. Among the
merits of this book is its rich content. If it has any defect, it (only)
pertains to the form and appearance. For example, its footnotes have not
been printed in a standard and technical manner.

The other one is that some subjects such as critique of the references
used in the book are inserted in the (main) subjects, which gives
confusion to the readers. Of course, it would have been better to
discuss them in a separate chapter with the same heading, or at least,
they must have been mentioned in the footnotes so as to cause no
disruption to the main subjects.

Lesson 1: Summary
-----------------

All history books can be good references for the research on the history
of Shi‘ism. Among the special references on the history of Shi‘ism,
however, are the following:

• *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin* – the life account of the descendants of Abu
Talib {*talibiyyin*} who were murdered at the hand of the tyrants of
their respective times.

• *Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi* *Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah* – the history of the
Shi‘ah and not history of Shi‘ism, but a part of the history of Shi‘ism
can be learned from its survey of the conditions of the Shi‘ah as well
as from its introduction.

• *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah* – Although it is about the conditions of the
Shi‘ah, its second introduction is about the general history of Shi‘ism.

• *Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah* –“This book has surveyed the periods of the spread
of Shi‘ism, the Shi‘ah-populated places, and Shi‘ah states.” {The late
Muzaffar}

• *Shi‘eh dar Tarikh* – “It has explained the meaning and concept of
Shi‘ah, the Shi‘ah beliefs and its sects.” {Muhammad Husayn Zayn
al-‘Amili}

• *Jihad ash-Shi‘ah* – Examines Shi‘ah uprisings till the end of the 2nd
century *hijri*.

• *Tarikh-e Tashayyu‘ dar Iran az Aghaz ta Qarn-e Haftum-e Hijri* – This
book contains precious information regarding the history of Shi‘ism in
Iran, which no researcher can be needless of in his research.

Lesson 1: Questions
-------------------

1. How many types do references on the history of Shi‘ism have?

2. What is the subject of the book *Maqatil at-Talibiyyin*?

3. Give a brief description of the book, *Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi*
*Tabaqat ash-Shi‘ah*.

4. What is the relationship between the book *A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah*, and the
history of Shi‘ism?

[^1]: Ma‘sumin: those possessing the quality of ‘ismat (see n. 67
above); i.e., the Prophet, Fatimah, and the Twelve Imams. See A Brief
History of the Fourteen Infallibles (Tehran: WOFIS),
http://www.al-islam.org/brief-history-of-fourteen-infallibles ; Sayyid
Murtada al-‘Askari, The Twelve Successors of the Holy Prophet (S),
http://www.al-islam.org/twelve. {Trans.}

[^2]: Rijal or ‘Ilm ar-Rijal: a branch of the science of hadith dealing
with the biography of the hadith transmitters or reporters. {Trans.}

[^3]: Sayyid Ahmad Saqar, “Introduction to Maqatil at-Talibiyyin”, 2nd
edition (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH, p. 5.

[^4]: Abu’l-Faraj ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin,
2nd edition (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH, p. 24.

[^5]: Sayyid ‘Ali Jan ash-Shirazi, Ad-Darajat ar-Rafi‘ah fi Tabaqat
ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Mu’assasah al-Wafa’, n.d.), pp. 3-5.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 5.

[^7]: Tabi‘un {‘Followers’ or ‘Successors’} refers to the second
generation of Muslims who came after the Companions, who did not know
the Prophet (S) but who knew his Companions. {Trans.}

[^8]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf
Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.), vol. 1, pp. 18-209.

[^9]: Ibid., pp. 20-21.

[^10]: Khawarij (Kharijites or dissenters) were a group of quasi-holy,
narrow-minded Muslims who were originally followers of Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
and fought with him at the Battle of Siffin. Initially they supported
arbitration, pushing Imam ‘Ali to accept it; however, later they
revolted against it arguing that because God was the only true
arbitrator, Imam ‘Ali and those who agreed with him in the arbitration
were not just wrong they were unbelievers, hence they could have no
dealings with them. On Imam ‘Ali’s return to Iraq from Siffin, this
group split off from his army and set up camp on the banks of the
Nahrawan canal where they began terrorizing the people whom they
regarded as unbelievers. Imam ‘Ali was at first able to talk to them and
persuade some of them to cease in their hostilities, but eventually he
was forced to take up arms against them. In 659 CE he attacked their
army under the leadership of ‘Abdullah ibn Wahhab al-Rasibi at Nahrawan
almost annihilating them. Nahrawan was the third and last battle Imam
‘Ali had to wage with his enemies. {Trans.}

[^11]: Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi, Jihad ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar al-Jayl,
1396 AH), p. 36.


