Lesson 3: “Shi‘ah” in the Lexicon and the Qur’an
================================================

The word “Shi‘ah” in the lexicon is derived from the root-word **شيع**
{*shaya‘a*} which means escorting {*mushayi‘ah*}, victory and bravery
{*shuja‘ah*}.[^1] It is equally applied to the followers and supporters
as it is usually applied to the followers and supporters of ‘Ali
(*‘a*).[^2] As Azhari has said, “Shi‘ah refers to a group that loves the
progeny {*‘itrah*} and descendants of the Prophet (S).”[^3]

Ibn al-Khaldun says:

Be aware that ‘Shi‘ah’ in the lexicon means ‘followers’ and
‘supporters’, and in the parlance of the past and present jurists
{*fiqh*} and scholastic theologians {*mutakallimun*}, it is applied to
the followers of ‘Ali and his descendants.[^4]

But Shahristani limits the definitional scope of the word ‘Shi‘ah’,
saying:

‘Shi‘ah’ is referring to those who follow ‘Ali alone and believe in his
Imamate {*imamah*} and caliphate {*khilafah*} to be based on revelation
{*nass*}, and they say: ‘Imamate shall not bypass him except {that it is
done} through injustice {*zulm*}’.[^5]

There are also many cases in the Qur’an in which “Shi‘ah” connotes
“followers” and “supporters” such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِنَّ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ لإبْرَاهِيمَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“**Indeed Abraham was among his followers {shi‘ah}**”*[^6]

and the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَاسْتَغَاثَهُ الَّذِي مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ عَلَى الَّذِي مِنْ عَدُوِّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The one who was from his (Moses’) followers {shi‘ah} sought his help
against him who was from his enemies.”***[^7]

The word “Shi‘ah” has also been mentioned in the Prophetic traditions to
mean “followers and friends of ‘Ali (*‘a*)”.[^8]

“Shi‘ah” in the Shi‘ah references does not have more than one meaning
and conception and that is belief in the succession of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and
his eleven descendants in which no change has ever taken place since the
demise of the Prophet (S) up to the minor occultation {*ghaybah
as-sughra*}. Just as the Shi‘ah of the second half of the third century
*hijri* believed in all the twelve Imams (*‘a*), the pioneering Shi‘ah
among the Companions of the Prophet (S) also believed in this affair
because they had been informed of the names of these Imams from the
Prophetic traditions.[^9]

Although many of the Shi‘ah had no access to these traditions due to the
atmosphere of strangulation maintained by the tyrant rulers, what was
obligatory (for them) was to recognize the Imam of their respective
times. As the Holy Prophet (S) said, “He who will die without
recognizing the Imam of his time dies in a state of ignorance
{*jahiliyyah*}.”[^10]

As such, we can see that when Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) attained martyrdom,
Zurarah who was an old man sent his son, ‘Ubayd, to inquire about the
successor of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*). But before ‘Ubayd was able to return
to Kufah, Zurarah, who was about to die, took hold of a copy of the
Qur’an and said: “O God! Be my witness that I testify to the Imamate
{*imamah*} of the one who has been designated in this Qur’an.”[^11]

Of course, with the passage of time, the meaning and concept of *Shi‘ah*
assumes an explicit form and its scope is determined. Thus, the
infallible Imams (*‘a*) have regarded those who are identified with the
false sects and faiths as outside Shi‘ah circles, as Shaykh at-Tusi
narrates from Hamran ibn A‘in:

I asked Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*): “Am I really among your Shi‘ah?” The Imam
(*‘a*) replied: “Yes, you are among our Shi‘ah in this world and in the
hereafter, and the names of the Shi‘ah and their fathers are written for
us. Why, are there those who turn their back to us?” I replied: “May I
be your ransom! Is it possible for somebody to be your Shi‘ah and to
have knowledge of your being in truth, and then to turn his back from
you?” The Imam (*‘a*) said: “Yes, O Hamran! You will not perceive them.”

Hamzah az-Zayyat, who is one of the narrators of this *hadith*, thus
says:

Concerning this *hadith* we made a discussion and we were not able to
understand the purport of the Imam (*‘a*). As such, I wrote a letter to
Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*) and I asked him (*‘a*) (about this). The Imam (*‘a*)
said: “Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) was referring to the Waqifiyyah (a deviant
sect).”[^12]

It is for this reason that in the parlance of the Shi‘ah *rijal*
writers, the title *Shi‘ah* is only applied to the Shi‘ah believing in
the twelve Imams (*‘a*) and in the language of the jurists {*fuqaha*},
they are sometimes described as “our companions” {*ashabuna*} or “our
Imami companions” {*ashabuna al-imamiyyah*}.

And those who had inclined toward the deviant sects and drifted away
from the course of Shi‘ism have described with such labels as Fathi,
Waqifi, Nawusi, etc. and if ever the names of some of them are mentioned
in the Shi‘ah books on *rijal*, the reason is that they had narrated
these traditions prior to their deviation, just as the names of a number
of Sunni narrators who have narrated from the infallible Imams (*‘a*)
have been mentioned in these books.

The Sunni scholars and *rijal* writers, however, have used the word
*Shi‘ah* in broader sense and they have applied it to all the sects that
have separated from the body of Shi‘ism and even to the *ghulat* as
well.

In addition, they also refer to those who love and admire the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) as “Shi‘ah”. This is while some of these people do not
have any sort of belief in the infallibility {*‘ismah*} and Imamate
{*imamah*} of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), such as Sufyan ath-Thawri, a
rector {*mufti*} in Iraq who issued edicts {*fatawa*} based on the Ahl
as-Sunnah, but Ibn al-Qutaybah has enlisted him along with the
Shi‘ah.[^13] Regarding ash-Shafi‘i, who is the founder of one of the
four Sunni schools of thought {*madhahib*}, Ibn Nadim thus says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ الشَّافِعِي شَدِيْداً في التَّشَيُّع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Ash-Shafi‘i had extreme Shi‘ism {*tashayyu‘*}.”[^14]

Of course, during the second and third centuries *hijri*, besides the
Shi‘ah Imami, the Zaydis constituted the greatest number of Shi‘ah. They
were “Shi‘ah” more in the political sense than in ideology because, in
terms of jurisprudence {*fiqh*}, they were not followers of the Ja‘fari
*fiqh*; rather they were followers of the Hanafi *fiqh*.[^15]

From the viewpoint of the ideological principles also, as narrated by
Shahristani, “For sometime, Zayd was a student of Wasil ibn ‘Ata’, the
founder of the Mu‘tazilah (Mu‘tazilite) *madhhab* and has learned from
him the principles of the Mu‘tazilah *madhhab*.”

Therefore, the Zaydis are Mu‘tazilites in principles {*usul*}. It is for
this reason that they used to regard as permissible {*jayiz*} the
Imamate {*imamah*} of a deserving person {*mafdhul*} in the existence of
the more deserving person {*afdhal*} and in that they do not disrespect
the two sheikhs {*shaykhayn*} (Abubakr and ‘Umar).[^16] And in terms of
beliefs, they are closer to the Ahl as-Sunnah, as Ibn al-Qutaybah thus
says: “Among the *rafidhi* (Shi‘ah) sects, the Zaydis have the least
extremism {*ghulu*}.”[^17]

It was for this reason that the uprising of Muhammad Nafs
az-Zakiyyah—one of the Zaydi leaders—was praised by some jurists
{*fuqaha*} of the Ahl as-Sunnah, and as narrated by Waqidi, Abubakr ibn
Sirah,[^18] Ibn ‘Ajlan,[^19] and ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far[^20]—who were
among the great *hadith* scholars {*muhaddithun*} of the Medina school
{*maktab*} and from whom Waqidi himself has narrated *hadith*—were
involved in the uprising of Muhammad Nafs az-Zakiyyah. Also, Shahristani
says: “Abu Hanifah was among the followers of Muhammad Nafs
az-Zakiyyah.”[^21]

The Mu‘tazilites of Basrah also agreed with the uprising of Muhammad and
based on Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani’s narration, “A group of the
Mu‘tazilites in Basrah such as Wasil ibn ‘Ata’ and ‘Amru ibn ‘Ubayd have
paid allegiance to him.”[^22]

As such, the Zaydis can be regarded as Shi‘ah only from the political
viewpoint although they believe in the superiority of the descendants of
Fatimah (*‘a*).

Lesson 3: Summary
-----------------

Shi‘ah, according to the lexicon, refers to the followers and supporters
of ‘Ali (*‘a*). In the Shi‘ah references, “Shi‘ah” does not have more
than one meaning and that is belief in the succession of ‘Ali (*‘a*) and
his eleven descendants.

The infallible Imams used to consider those who were identified with the
deviant sects as outside the circle of Shi‘ism, but the Sunni scholars
and *rijal* writers have used the word *Shi‘ah* in broader sense and
they have applied it to all the sects that have separated from the body
of Shi‘ism as well as to the admirers of the descendants of the Prophet
(S). Of course, during the second and third centuries *hijri*, next to
the Shi‘ah Imami, the Zaydis had been regarded by them to have
constituted the greatest number of Shi‘ah.

Lesson 3: Questions
-------------------

1. In the lexicon, what does the word “Shi‘ah” mean? Explain.

2. What is the meaning and connotation of the word “Shi‘ah” in the
Shi‘ah references?

3. Were those who were identified with the deviant sects regarded as
“Shi‘ah” by the infallible Imams (*‘a*)? Explain.

4. How the Sunni scholars have been defining the word “Shi‘ah”?

5. Which of the sects is more akin to the Shi‘ah in the political
perspective? Why?

[^1]: For example, this poem: والخزرجى قلبه مشيع ليس من الامر الجليل
يفزع Indeed, the Khazraji man has a brave heart and is not afraid of
performing a great task. Al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi, Tartib Kitab
al-‘Ayn (Tehran: Instisharat-e Asweh, n.d.), vol. 2, p. 960.

[^2]: Firuz-Abadi, Qamus al-Lughah (Lithography), p. 332.

[^3]: Abu Faydh as-Sayyid Murtada al-Husayni al-Wasiti az-Zaydi
al-Hanafi, Taj al-‘Arus, vol. 11, p. 257.

[^4]: ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al-Khaldun, Al-Muqaddimah (Beirut:
Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1408 AH), p. 196.

[^5]: Shahristani, Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 131.

[^6]: Surah as-Saffat 37:83.

[^7]: Surah al-Qasas 28:15.

[^8]: We shall quote these traditions in the next chapter.

[^9]: Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, one of the Sunni scholars, mentions the
hadith on the twelve Imams, and with respect to its authenticity, he
claims to have consensus of opinion as it has been narrated through
various chains. Then, he embarks on interpreting the hadith quoting
contradictory statements from Ahl as-Sunnah scholars and ‘ulama’,
ultimately failing to reach a decisive conclusion. For example, Qadhi
‘Iyad al-Yahsubi has said: “Perhaps, it means the twelve caliphs who
were rulers during the glorified period of caliphate and grandeur of
Islam, i.e. up to Walid ibn Yazid’s reign.” Others have said: “It refers
to the twelve caliphs in truth who shall rule till the Day of
Resurrection, some of whose reigns have already passed, such as the
Righteous Caliphs {khulafa’ ar-rashidun}, Imam al-Hasan, Mu‘awiyah, ‘Abd
Allah ibn Zubayr, ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, and Mahdi al-‘Abbas. Two more
shall come, one of whom is the Awaited Mahdi {mahdi al-muntazar} from
the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).” Some ‘ulama’ have also interpreted the hadith on
the twelve Imams to refer to the twelve Imams, in which after Mahdi
(‘a), accordingly, six shall come from the descendants of Imam al-Hasan
(‘a) while the other five shall come from the descendants of Imam
al-Husayn (‘s). As-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, 2nd edition (Cairo: Maktabah
al-Qahirah, 1385 AH), pp. 20-21.

[^10]: Al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, 5th printing (Tehran: Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah, 1363 AH), vol. 1, p. 377.

[^11]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah ar-Rijal (Qum: Mu’assasah Al
al-Bayt Li Ahya’ at-Turath, 1404 AH), vol. 1, p. 371.

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 763.

[^13]: Ibn al-Qutaybah, Al-Ma‘arif, 1st edition (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radhi, 1410 AH), p. 624.

[^14]: Ibn an-Nadim, Al-Fihrist (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah Li’l-Matbu‘at
wa’n-Nashr, n.d.), p. 295.

[^15]: Shahristani, Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radhi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 143.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 138.

[^17]: Ibn al-Qutaybah, Al-Ma‘arif, p. 623.

[^18]: Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, 2nd edition (Qum:
Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radhi, 1416 AH/1374 AHS), p. 251.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 254.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 256.

[^21]: Shahristani, Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radhi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 140.

[^22]: Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin, p. 258.


