Lesson 4: The Origin of Shi‘ism
===============================

Diverse views have been expressed with respect to the origin and
beginning of Shi‘ism, but in general, these views can be divided into
two:

**1.** The writers and researchers who believe Shi‘ism was created after
the demise of the Prophet (S) and who themselves can be subdivided into
the following subgroups:

**a.** Those who believe that Shi‘ism has come into being during the day
of Saqifah—that day when a group of prominent Companions explicitly
said: “‘Ali is the most deserving one to the office of Imamate
{*imamah*} and caliphate {*khilafah*}.”[^1]

**b.** Those who regard the emergence of the Shi‘ah as being related to
the latter part of Uthman’s caliphate, connecting the spread of the
views of ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’ at this period with the beginning of
Shi‘ism.[^2]

**c.** Those who believe that the Shi‘ah has come into being on the day
of *Fitnah ad-Dar* (the day when the third caliph was murdered).
Thereafter, accordingly, the followers of ‘Ali (*‘a*) who were the very
Shi‘ah who confronted the so-called “‘Uthmanis”, those who were avenging
the murder of ‘Uthman. As Ibn an-Nadim thus writes:

When Talhah and Zubayr opposed ‘Ali and nothing could convince them but
to take revenge for the murder of ‘Uthman, while ‘Ali also wanted to
fight them so as to establish the truth, on that day those who followed
him were called “Shi‘ah” and he himself thus described them: “They are
my Shi‘ah”.[^3]

Ibn ‘Abd ar-Rabbih al-Andalusi also says: “The Shi‘ah are those who
regarded ‘Ali as superior to ‘Uthman.”[^4]

**d.** Those who believe that Shi‘ism had come into existence from the
coming into power, up to the martyrdom of ‘Ali (*‘a*).[^5]

**e.** Those who link the origin of Shi‘ism with the event at Karbala’
and the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*).[^6]

**2.** The researchers who are of the opinion that Shi‘ism can be traced
back to the period of the Messenger of Allah (*‘a*). Apart from all the
Shi‘ah *‘ulama’*,[^7] some of the Sunni scholars also hold such a
belief, just as Muhammad Kird-‘Ali—one of the distinguished Sunni
*‘ulama’*—says: “A number of the Companions during the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) were known as Shi‘ah of ‘Ali.”[^8]

Keeping in view of the opinions presented so far, it can be said that
the event of Saqifah, the latter part of the caliphate of ‘Uthman, the
Battle of Jamal (Camel), the rule of ‘Ali (*‘a*), and the events at
Karbala’ are phases of the events that have influenced the history of
Shi‘ism.

Although the existence of a person named ‘Abd Allah ibn Saba’ is
doubtful, the formation of Shi‘ism at these stages seems incorrect
because studying the Prophetic traditions, we find that the term
“Shi‘ah”, has been applied by the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad
al-Mustafa (S), to the sympathizers of ‘Ali (*‘a*) before all these
events, as recorded in many *hadith*s, some of which we shall cite
below.

All these *hadith*s are accepted by the Ahl as-Sunnah as authentic and
have been recorded in their *hadith* references. Take, for example, the
*hadith*s which have been recorded by Suyuti—one of the Sunni exegetes
{*mufassirun*} of the Qur’an—from the Holy Prophet (S) on the commentary
of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَئِكَ هُمْ
خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who
are the best of creatures.”***[^9]

Among them is this *hadith* of the Prophet (S) when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والّذي نفسي بيده إنّ هذا و شيعته لهم الفائزون يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“By He in Whose hand my life is! Verily, this man (‘Ali) and his Shi‘ah
shall secure deliverance on the Day of Resurrection.”[^10]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali (*‘a*): “God has forgiven the sins of
your Shi‘ah and the followers of your Shi‘ah.”[^11]

The Prophet (S) also said to ‘Ali (*‘a*): “You and your Shi‘ah will meet
(on the Day of Resurrection) at the Pool {*hawdh*} of Kawthar while
having drank from it and having bright faces, whereas your enemies will
meet me while they are thirsty and enchained.”[^12]

In a long *hadith* regarding the virtues of ‘Ali (*‘a*), the Holy
Prophet (S) thus says to his daughter Fatimah (*‘a*): “O Fatimah! ‘Ali
and his Shi‘ah are the saved ones of tomorrow.”[^13]

Similarly, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O ‘Ali! Your sins as well
as that of your progeny, your Shi‘ah and the followers of your Shi‘ah
have been forgiven…”[^14]

Again, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O ‘Ali! During the Day of
Resurrection, I shall cling to God while you shall hold fast to me; your
descendants shall hold fast to you; and the Shi‘ah of your descendants
shall hold fast to them.”[^15]

The Prophet (S) again said to ‘Ali (*‘a*): “In the hereafter, of all the
people, you are the nearest one to me… and the Shi‘ah are on pulpits on
light…”[^16]

Ibn al-‘Abbas narrated that Jibra’il (Archangel Gabriel) (*‘a*) gave the
news that ‘Ali (*‘a*) and the Shi‘ah shall be brought to Paradise along
with Muhammad (S).”[^17]

Salman al-Farsi narrates that the Most Noble Messenger (S) said to ‘Ali
(*‘a*):

O ‘Ali! Put a ring on your right hand so as to be with the nearest ones
{*muqarrabin*}.” ‘Ali (*‘a*) asked: “Who are the nearest ones?” He (S)
replied: “Jibra’il and Mika’il.” ‘Ali (*‘a*) again asked: “Which kind of
ring shall I put on?” He (S) replied: “A ring whose stone is a red
*‘aqiq* because *‘aqiq* is a testimony that one has acknowledged and
accepted the divine servitude {*‘ubudiyyah*}, my prophethood
{*nubuwwah*}, your guardianship {*wisayah*}, and your descendants’
Imamate {*imamah*}. Your followers are people of Paradise and the abode
of your Shi‘ah is the Garden of Firdaws {*jannah al-firdaws*}.[^18]

The Most Noble Messenger (S) again said: “Eighty thousand from my
*ummah* shall be admitted to Paradise without reckoning.” ‘Ali (*‘a*)
asked: “Who are they?” He (S) replied: “They are your Shi‘ah and you are
their Imam.”[^19]

Anas ibn Malik thus narrates from the Holy Prophet (S):

Jibra’il said to me: “God, the Exalted, loves ‘Ali to such a degree that
is not expressed to any angel. Just as the *tasbih*s {glorifications to
Allah} that are being uttered, God creates angels to seek forgiveness
for the admirers and Shi‘ah of ‘Ali till the Day of Resurrection.”[^20]

Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari narrates that the Prophet (S) said: “By
God Who sent me in truth as the Prophet! The angels are regularly
seeking forgiveness for ‘Ali and they pity him and his Shi‘ah as a
father does (with respect to his child).”[^21]

‘Ali (*‘a*) himself narrates that the Prophet (S) said: “O ‘Ali! Give
glad tidings to your Shi‘ah that I am {their} intercessor {*shafi‘*} on
the Day of Resurrection—the day when neither wealth nor child is of any
benefit except my intercession {*shafa‘ah*}.”[^22]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali (*‘a*): “The first four persons to
enter Paradise are I, you, Hasan, and Husayn; our descendants are behind
us; our spouses are behind our descendants and our Shi‘ah are on our
right and left sides.”[^23]

Finally, many of the Sunni *muhaddithun* and historians such as Ibn
al-Jawzi, Baladhuri, Shaykh Sulayman al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi, Khwarazmi,
and as-Suyuti have narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) thus said
while addressing ‘Ali (*‘a*): “Verily, this man (‘Ali) and his Shi‘ah
shall secure deliverance on the Day of Resurrection.”[^24]

There are even recorded traditions from the Most Noble Messenger (S)
about some of the Shi‘ah and what is interesting here is that these have
been narrated by the opponents of the Shi‘ah! For example, there is a
tradition about Hujr ibn ‘Adi al-Kindi which has been narrated by
‘A’ishah. When Mu‘awiyah performed *Hajj* after killing Hujr and his
companions and came to Medina, ‘A’ishah said to him:

O Mu‘awiyah! Where was your forbearance at the time of killing Hujr and
his companions? Be aware that I heard that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: “There is a group that shall be killed in a place called Marj
‘Adhra’ for which Allah and the inhabitants of heaven will be filled
with wrath.”[^25]

Since these *hadith*s are undeniable and have been narrated by prominent
Sunni *muhaddithun*, some Sunni writers have resorted to unjust
interpretation of them. For instance, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid says:

What is meant by the Shi‘ah in many *hadith*s who have been given the
glad tidings of Paradise are those who believe in the superiority and
preeminence of ‘Ali (*‘a*) over others. For this reason, our Mu‘tazilite
*‘ulama’* have thus written in their books and treatises, “We are truly
the Shi‘ah” and this statement is nearer to reality and more akin to
truth.[^26]

Also, in the book, *As-Sawa‘iq al-Mahriqah fi’r-Radd ‘ala Ahl al-Bid‘a
waz-Zindiqah*, which is a book rejecting the Shi‘ah creeds and beliefs,
while quoting this *hadith*s, Haythami has said:

What is meant by the Shi‘ah in these *hadith*s are the Shi‘ah that no
longer exist. It refers to progeny and followers of ‘Ali who are neither
afflicted with innovation {*bid‘ah*} nor curse and abuse the Companions
of the Prophet (S).[^27]

In reply to him, the late Muzaffar says:

It is strange that Ibn Hajar imagined that what is meant here by the
Shi‘ah are the Ahl as-Sunnah! And I do not know if the reason behind
this is the similarity of “Shi‘ah” and “Sunni”. Or, it is because these
two sects are identical. Or, it is for the reason that the Ahl as-Sunnah
follow and love the family of the Prophet (S) more than the Shi‘ah
do![^28]

The late Kashif al-Ghita’ also says: “By applying the term “Shi‘ah” to
the Shi‘ah of ‘Ali (*‘a*), its purport can be understood because other
than this group, there is no other Shi‘ah.”[^29]

The existence of the term “Shi‘ah” in the *hadith*s and sayings of the
Prophet (S) is clear and indisputable, and with these (unjust)
interpretations, they wanted to conceal the truth but in the end they
have deceived nobody but themselves. This is particularly true in view
of the fact that the connotations of “Shi‘ah” has been clarified during
the time of the Prophet (S) and a number of the Companions were known at
the time as “Shi‘ah of ‘Ali”.[^30]

The Companions of the Prophet (S) also referred to ‘Ali’s (*‘a*)
followers as “Shi‘ah”. Hashim Marqal thus writes concerning a person
named “Mahal ibn al-Khalifah at-Ta’i”: “O Commander of the Faithful! He
is among your Shi‘ah.”[^31]

The Shi‘ah themselves used to call one another as Shi‘ah. As Shaykh
al-Mufid narrates, some people came to ‘Ali (*‘a*) and said: “O
Commander of the Faithful! We are among your Shi‘ah.” He (*‘a*) in turn
said: “The faces of my Shi‘ah turn pale on account of night vigil and
their eyes weak due to weeping…”[^32]

In many instances, Hadrat[^33] ‘Ali (*‘a*) himself, as in the
abovementioned case, used to apply the word “Shi‘ah” to his followers.
For example, when he heard the news of martyrdom of some of his Shi‘ah
in Basrah at the hand of Talhah and Zubayr, he (*‘a*) cursed the two and
said: “O God! They have killed my Shi‘ah. Kill them too.”[^34]

Even the opponents of ‘Ali (*‘a*) used to refer to his followers as
“Shi‘ah”, just as what ‘A’ishah, Talhah and Zubayr said during their
conversation about their route from Mecca to Iraq: “We shall go to
Basrah and expel the governor {*amil*} of ‘Ali and kill his
Shi‘ah.”[^35]

In any case, the truth of Shi‘ism, which is the same love and fellowship
to ‘Ali (*‘a*) and to regard him as superior (to others), is related to
the time of the Prophet (S). He (S) used to enjoin the people in his
speeches to follow ‘Ali and his family as exemplified by the event in
Ghadir Khumm. As Ibn Abi’l-Hadid says: “This report {*akhbar*} has been
narrated by *muhaddithun* none of whom has been accused of *rafdh* and
Shi‘ism {*tashayyu‘*} and they have not even believed in the superiority
and preeminence of ‘Ali (*‘a*) over others.”[^36]

Now, we shall quote some of these *hadith*s. Buraydah Aslami says:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “God, the Exalted, has ordered me to
love four persons and said to me that He also loves them.” They asked:
“O Messenger of Allah! Tell their names.” He (S) said thrice: “‘Ali and
then Abu Dharr, Miqdad and Salman.”[^37]

At-Tabari narrates that in the course of the Battle of Uhud, the Most
Noble Messenger (S) said: “‘Ali is from me and I from him.”[^38]

It has thus been narrated on the authority of Umm Salmah: “When the
Messenger of Allah (S) was angry, no one could dare to speak except
‘Ali.”[^39]

Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqas narrated that the Most Noble Messenger (S) said: “He
who loves ‘Ali loves me and he who loves me loves God. Also, he who is
hostile to ‘Ali is hostile to me, and he who is hostile to me is hostile
to God.”[^40]

Ibn al-Jawzi narrated that the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) said: “O ‘Ali!
You are the separator of heaven and hell. And you shall open the door of
heaven and enter it without any reckoning.”[^41]

Khwarazmi narrated in *Al-Manaqib* on the authority of Ibn al-‘Abbas
that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

When I was brought to the heavenly ascension {*mi‘raj*}, I saw that it
is thus written on the gate of heaven:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا الٰه الاّ الله، محمّد رسول الله، علىّ حبيب الله، الحسن والحسين صفوة
الله، فاطمة امة الله، على مبغضهم لعنة الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*La ilaha illallah, Muhammadan Rasulullah, ‘Aliyyun* *Habib Allah
Al-Hasan wa’l-Husayn* *Sifwat Allah, Fatimah Ummat Allah, ‘ala
mabghadhuhum la‘nat Allah*.[^42]

Zubayr ibn Bakkar—who is among the grandchildren of Zubayr and known for
deviation from the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)—has narrated that
the Most Noble Messenger (S) said: “I enjoin anyone who believe in God
and confirm my apostleship {*risalah*} to love ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and
recognize his guardianship {*wilayah*}. He who loves him loves me and he
who loves me loves God.”[^43]

Ibn Abi’l-Hadid narrates on the authority of Zayd ibn al-Arqam that the
Most Noble Messenger (S) said: “I shall guide you to something which if
it would be known to you, you shall never go astray. Your guardian
{*wali*} and Imam is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. Acknowledge him as Jibra’il
thus informed me of it.”

After narrating this *hadith*, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid thus says:

If they would say, “This is an explicit proof for (Imam ‘Ali’s) Imamate
{*imamah*},” how will then the Mu‘tazilites solve this problem? In
reply, we say: It is possible that the Prophet means that ‘Ali is their
Imam in religious edicts {*fatawa*} and laws {*ahkam*} and not in
caliphate {*khilafah*}.

Similarly, what we quoted in the explanation of the statements of the
great and leading Mu‘tazilite figures of Baghdad can be the answer, the
gist of which is as follows: The Imamate and caliphate belonged to ‘Ali
with the condition that he would show inclination to it and fight others
for it. As he relinquished it to somebody and kept silent, we do accept
the guardianship {*wilayah*} of the other person and believe in the
legitimacy of his caliphate.

As the Commander of the Faithful did not raise any opposition against
the three caliphs, did not unsheathe his sword and call on the people
against the three, it follows then that he has approved their
caliphates. It is based on this that we do accept them and believe in
their purity, goodness and righteousness. If he would have waged war
against them and called on the people to fight them, we would then
believe in their transgression, deviation and misguidance.[^44]

Lesson 4: Summary
-----------------

Some writers regard Shi‘ism to have emerged on the day of Saqifah while
others regard the same to be on the latter part of ‘Uthman ibn
al-‘Affan’s caliphate. The third group believe that Shi‘ism came into
being after the murder of ‘Uthman while the fourth group say that it has
come into existence after the martyrdom of ‘Ali (*‘a*). The fifth group
is of the opinion that Shi‘ism originated after the event in Karbala’.

Apart from the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* as a whole, some Sunni scholars such as
Muhammad Kird-‘Ali maintain that the root of emergence of Shi‘ism is
during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (S) and it was the Prophet
(S) who first applied the term “Shi‘ah” to the comrades of ‘Ali (*‘a*).

A number of Companions of the Prophet (S) were also known during that
time as “Shi‘ah of ‘Ali (*‘a*)”.

In addition to this, Shi‘ism is the same love and fellowship to ‘Ali
(*‘a*) to which the Prophet (S) had enjoined his Companions on many
occasions.

Lesson 4: Questions
-------------------

1. How many views have been expressed regarding the emergence of
Shi‘ism? Explain.

2. Who was the first person to apply the name “Shi‘ah” to the comrades
of ‘Ali (*‘a*)?

3. Write two *hadith*s from the Messenger of Allah (S) regarding the
Shi‘ah.

4. What has Ibn Abi’l-Hadid said regarding the *hadith*s pertaining to
the Shi‘ah?

5. What is Ibn Hajar al-Haythami’s opinion with regard to the *hadith*s
relating to the Shi‘ah?

6. What is the truth of Shi‘ism?

7. Write the opinion of Ibn Abi’l-Hadid concerning the *hadith* narrated
by Zayd ibn al-Arqam.

[^1]: Ya‘qubi said: “A number of distinguished Companions refused to pay
allegiance to Abubakr saying, ‘‘Ali is the most deserving one in the
office of caliphate’.” Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 124.

[^2]: Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi, Jihad ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar al-Jayl,
1396 AH), p. 25.

[^3]: Ibn an-Nadim, Al-Fihrist (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah, n.d.), p. 249.

[^4]: Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd ar-Rabbih al-Andalusi, Al-‘Aqd
al-Farid (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1409 AH), vol. 2, p.
230.

[^5]: Abu Mansur ‘Abd al-Qadir ibn Tahir ibn Muhammad al-Baghdadi,
Al-Firaq bayn al-Firaq (Cairo: n.p., 1397 AH), p. 134.

[^6]: Samirah Mukhtar al-Laythi, Jihad ash-Shi‘ah, p. 35, quoting
Bernard Lewis, Usul al-Isma‘iliyyah {The Principles of Isma‘iliyyah}, p.
84.

[^7]: Ja‘far Kashif al-Ghita’, Difa‘ az Haqqaniyyat-e Shi‘eh {In Defense
of the Truthfulness of the Shi‘ah}, trans. Ghulam-Hasan Muharrami, 1st
edition (n.p.: Mu’minin, 1378 AHS), p. 48; Muhammad Husayn Zayn ‘Amili,
Ash-Shi‘ah fi’t-Tarikh, trans. Muhammad-Rida ‘Ata’i, 2nd edition
(Mashhad: Bunyad-e Pazhuhesh-ha-ye Islami-ye Astan-e Quds-e Radhawi,
1375 AHS), 34.

[^8]: Muhammad Kird-‘Ali, Khatat ash-Sham, 3rd edition (Damascus:
Maktabah an-Nuri, 1403 AH/1983), vol. 6, p. 245.

[^9]: Surah al-Bayyinah 98:7.

[^10]: Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti, Ad-Durr al-Manthur fi’t-Tafsir
bi’l-Ma’thur (Qum: Manshurat Maktabah Ayatullah al-‘Uzma al-Mar‘ashi
an-Najafi, 1404 AH) vol. 6, p. 379.

[^11]: Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Makki, Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, 2nd edition
(Cairo: Maktabah al-Qahirah, 1385 AH), p. 232.

[^12]: Ibid.; Nur ad-Din ‘Ali ibn Abibakr al-Haythami, Majma‘ az-Zawa’id
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr Li’t-Taba‘ah wa’n-Nashr wa’t-Tawzi‘, 1414 AH), vol.
9, p. 177.

[^13]: Akhtab Khwarazm, Al-Manaqib (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah
al-Haydariyyah, 1385 AH), p. 206.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 209; Shaykh Sulayman al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi, Yanabi‘
al-Mawaddah, 1st edition (Beirut: Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami
Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1418 AH), vol. 1, p. 302.

[^15]: Akhtab Khwarazm, Al-Manaqib, p. 210.

[^16]: Ibid., vol. 188, p. 158.

[^17]: Ibid., chap. 19, hadith 329, p. 322.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 234.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 235.

[^20]: Shaykh Sulayman al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi, Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p.
301.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 302.

[^23]: Nur ad-Din ‘Ali ibn Abibakr al-Haythami, Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, p.
178.

[^24]: Ibn al-Jawzi, Tadhkirah al-Khawas (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah
al-Haydariyyah, 1383 AH), p. 54; Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri,
Insab al-Ashraf, researched by Muhammad Baqir Mahmudi (Beirut:
Ma’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1349 AH), vol. 2, p. 182; Shaykh
Sulayman al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi, Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, 1st edition (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1418 AH), vol. 1, p. 301;
Akhtab Khwarazm, Al-Manaqib (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah
al-Haydariyyah, 1385 AH), p. 206; Jalal ad-Din as-Suyuti, Ad-Durr
al-Manthur fi’t-Tafsir bi’l-Ma’thur (Qum: Manshurat Maktabah Ayatullah
al-‘Uzma al-Mar‘ashi an-Najafi, 1404 AH) vol. 6, p. 379.

[^25]: Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi,
1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 231.

[^26]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 20, p. 226.

[^27]: Ahmad Ibn Hajar Haythami al-Makki, As-Sawa‘iq al-Mahriqah
fi’r-Radd ‘ala Ahl al-Bid‘a waz-Zindiqah (Cairo: Maktabah al-Qahirah,
1384 AH), p. 232.

[^28]: Muhammad Husayn Muzaffar, Tarikh ash-Shi‘ah (Qum: Manshurat
Maktabah Basirati, n.d.), p. 5.

[^29]: Ja‘far Kashif al-Ghita’, Difa‘ az Haqqaniyyat-e Shi‘eh {In
Defense of the Truthfulness of the Shi‘ah}, trans. Ghulam-Hasan
Muharrami, 1st edition (n.p.: Mu’minin, 1378 AHS), pp. 48-49.

[^30]: Sa‘d ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ash‘ari thus says in this regard: “The
first sect is the Shi‘ah and it is the sect of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a)
which had been called the “Shi‘ah of ‘Ali” during the time of the Holy
Prophet (S) and after the demise of the Prophet (S) they were known to
have belief in his Imamate. Among them are Miqdad ibn Aswad al-Kindi,
Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr, and ‘Ammar. They used to prefer obedience to
him to any other thing and they used to follow him. There were also
others whose inclination is harmonious with that of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
and they were the first group from this ummah to be called “Shi‘ah”;
for, Shi‘ah as an appellation is an old one such as the Shi‘ah of Nuh
(Noah), Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses), ‘Isa (Jesus), and other
prophets.” Al-Maqalat wa’l-Firaq, 2nd edition (Tehran: Markaz-e
Intisharat-e ‘Ilmi va Farhangi, 1360 AHS), p. 3.

[^31]: Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn an-Nu‘man (Shaykh al-Mufid), Al-Jamal,
2nd edition (Qum: Maktab al-‘Ulum al-Islami (Central Publication), 1416
AH), p. 243.

[^32]: Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn an-Nu‘man (Shaykh al-Mufid), Al-Irshad,
trans. Muhammad Baqir Sa‘idi Khurasani, 2nd edition (Tehran:
Kitabfurushi-ye Islamiyyeh, 1376 AHS), p. 228.

[^33]: Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. {Trans.}

[^34]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Jamal, p. 285.

[^35]: Ibid., p. 235.

[^36]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 2, p. 349.

[^37]: Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Makki, Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, 2nd edition
(Cairo: Maktabah al-Qahirah, 1385 AH), p. 122.

[^38]: Tarikh at-Tabari, 3rd edition (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah,
1408 AH), vol. 2, p. 65.

[^39]: Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Makki, Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p. 123.

[^40]: Ibid.

[^41]: Sabt ibn al-Jawzi, Tadhkirah al-Khawas (Najaf: Manshurat
al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1383 AH), p. 209.

[^42]: Akhtab Khwarazm, Al-Manaqib (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah
al-Haydariyyah, 1385 AH), p. 214.

[^43]: Zubayr ibn Bakkar, Al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyyat, researched by Dr.
Sami Makki al-‘Ani (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 312.

[^44]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, 1st edition (Beirut: Dar
Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1378), vol. 3, p. 98.


