Lesson 5: The Other Terms for the “Shi‘ah”
==========================================

After the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) and
with the spread of Shi‘ism, in addition to the name “Shi‘ah”, other
appellations such as ‘Alawi, Imamah, Husayniyyah, ‘Ithna ‘Ashari,
Khassah, Ja‘fari, Turabi, and Rafidhi were gradually applied to the
friends of the family of the Prophet (S). Although the *Ahl al-Bayt*’s
(*‘a*) adherents as a whole were called “Shi‘ah” as usual, these
appellations and titles were also applied to the Shi‘ah on various
occasions.

Sometimes, the enemies also used to give certain titles to the Shi‘ah
with the aim of belittling and degrading them. During the time of
Mu‘awiyah, for example, the Banu Umayyah and the people of Sham[^1] used
the epithet “Abu Turab” {literally, “Father of the Earth/Soil”} for ‘Ali
(*‘a*) among all his epithets and sobriquets and they used to call his
Shi‘ah as “*Turabis*”.

After the Battle of Siffin and the rule of ‘Ali (*‘a*), whenever
Mu‘awiyah wanted to dispatch ‘Abd Allah ibn Hadhrami to Basrah, he would
give instructions regarding the tribes but concerning the tribe of
Rabi‘ah, he said: “Leave alone the Rabi‘ah as all of them are
*turabi*s.”[^2] According to Mas‘udi, Abu Mikhnaf had a book entitled,
*Akhbar at-Turabiyyin*, from which he has narrated the event of ‘Ayn
al-Warad.[^3]

The enemies of the Shi‘ah used to apply to them the label, “Rafidhi” and
in most cases, whenever they liked to accuse somebody of abandoning
religion, they would brand him a *rafidhi*, just as ash-Shafi‘i says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن كان رفضاً حبّ آل محمّد فليشهد الثّقلان أنّى رافضى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If loving the progeny {al} of Muhammad is rafdh, the two worlds (of
mankind and jinn) shall therefore be the witness that I am indeed a
rafidhi.*[^4]

It has been recorded in history that after the uprising of Zayd ibn
‘Ali, the Shi‘ah were then called *Rafidhi*. Shahristani thus says:

When the Shi‘ah of Kufah learned from Zayd ibn ‘Ali that he does not
declare disavowal against the two sheikhs {*shaykhayn*} (Abubakr and
‘Umar) and regard as permissible the Imamate of a deserving one
{*mafdhul*} in the existence of the most deserving one {*afdhal*}, they
abandoned him. Therefore, they were then identified as *Rafidhi* because
*rafdh* means “abandonment”.[^5]

Regarding the label, *‘Alawi*, Sayyid Muhsin Amin says:

After the murder of ‘Uthman and the confrontation between Mu‘awiyah and
‘Ali (*‘a*), the supporters and followers of Mu‘awiyah were called
“‘Uthmanis” as they used to love ‘Uthman and be inimical to ‘Ali (*‘a*).
In addition to “Shi‘ah”, the followers of ‘Ali (*‘a*) were also called
“‘Alawis”, and this practice persisted till the end of the Umayyad rule.
During the ‘Abbasid period, the labels “Uthmani” and “‘Alawi” were
abrogated and only “Shi‘ah” and “Sunni” were used.[^6]

“Imamis” was another term applied to the Shi‘ah usually in
contradistinction to the Zaydis. As Ibn al-Khaldun writes,

Some Shi‘ah believe in explicit traditions substantiating the
proposition that Imamate {*imamah*} is solely in the person of ‘Ali and
after it will also be transferred to his descendants. They are Imamiyyah
with aversion toward the two sheikhs {*shaykhayn*} (Abubakr and ‘Umar)
for not considering ‘Ali as superior and not paying allegiance to him.
They do not accept the Imamate of Abubakr and ‘Umar. Other Shi‘ah
believe that God did not appoint a specific person but described the
characteristics of the Imam which conform to the personality of ‘Ali and
the people were at fault in not recognizing this. They do not abuse the
two sheikhs and they are Zaydis.[^7]

Keeping in view of the surviving poems from the supporters and
companions of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*), it can be discerned that after his
martyrdom, his Shi‘ah and supporters were also called “Husaynis”. In
many of their poems they introduced themselves as “Husaynis” or “of the
religion of Husayn”.[^8]

In this regard, Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih thus says: “Among the *rafidhi*s are the
Husayniyyah and they are companions of Ibrahim al-Ashtar who used to
roam around the alleys of Kufah shouting: “*Ya litharat al-Husayn!*”
They were called Husayniyyah.”[^9]

Meanwhile, the term “Qat‘iyyah” {lit. “Decisiveness”} was applied to the
Shi‘ah after the martyrdom of Imam Musa al-Kazim (*‘a*) in
contradistinction to the Waqifiyyah.

That is to say that they were certain and decisive with respect to the
martyrdom of Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) and believed in the Imamate of Imam
ar-Rida (*‘a*) and the Imams after him, whereas the Waqifiyyah were not
convinced of the death of Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*).[^10]

Nowadays, the label “Ja‘fariyyah” is applied to the Shi‘ah more on
account of jurisprudence in contradistinction to the four Sunni schools
of jurisprudence {*madhahib*}. The reason for this term is that the
Shi‘ah jurisprudence took form more through Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
compared to all the Imams (*‘a*) and most traditions on our
jurisprudence are narrated by him (*‘a*).

Nonetheless, keeping in view a poem we have from Sayyid Humayri, it can
be understood that only on account of jurisprudence during Imam
as-Sadiq’s (*‘a*) period the term “Ja‘fari” was applied to the Shi‘ah,
but this term has also been applied to them in terms of principles of
religion {*usul*} in contradistinction to other sects. The poem of
Humayri is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تجعفرت باسم الله و الله أكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the Name of Allah, I became a Ja‘fari, and Allah is the great*.[^11]

By becoming a Ja‘fari, Sayyid Humayri is referring to the correct course
of the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah in contradistinction to the Kaysaniyyah.

The Status of ‘Ali (‘a) among the Companions {sahabah}
------------------------------------------------------

The Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) occupied a special position
among the Companions of the Prophet (S). Mas‘udi says:

In terms of all the virtues and merits that the Companions of the
Prophet (S) possessed, such as precedence in Islam; *hijrah*
{emigration}; helping the Prophet; kinship with him; contentment
{*qina‘ah*}; sacrifice {*ithar*}; knowledge of the Book of Allah;
*jihad*; piety {*wara‘*}; asceticism {*zuhd*}; judgment {*qadha’*};
jurisprudence {*fiqh*}; etc., ‘Ali (*‘a*) had abundant share and perfect
delight.

This is apart from the fact that some of the virtues are possessed by
him alone such as brotherhood {*ukhuwwah*} of the Prophet and statements
of the Prophet such as: “You are to me as Harun (Aaron) is to Musa
(Moses),” “Of whomsoever I am master {*mawla*}, ‘Ali is also his master.
O God! Befriend him who befriends him and be inimical to him who is
inimical to him”; and also the supplication of the Prophet for him; when
Anas brought a cooked bird to the Prophet (S), he said: “O God! Let the
most beloved creature (after him) come in so as to partake with me.”
Then, ‘Ali (*‘a*) came in and partook with the Prophet. This is while
the other Companions did not possess those virtues.[^12]

Among the Banu Hashim, ‘Ali (*‘a*) was also the nearest person to the
Prophet (S). He grew up in the house of the Prophet (S) and under his
training.[^13] He (*‘a*) slept in the Prophet’s (S) bed during the night
of *hijrah*, returned to their respective owners the possessions
entrusted to the Prophet (S) and joined the Prophet (S) in Medina.[^14]

The most important of all is ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) position in Islam. The Most
Noble Messenger (S) determined this position at the very beginning of
the Prophetic mission.

When the Prophet received instruction from God to invite his kith and
kin, it was only ‘Ali in the assembly who was ready to assist and
accompany the Holy Prophet (*‘a*). Then, in that very assembly, the Most
Noble Messenger (S) announced before the elders among his relatives that
‘Ali is the executor of his will {*wasi*}, minister {*wazir*}, caliph
{*khalif*}, and successor notwithstanding the fact the he was the
youngest among those who were present.[^15]

The Holy Prophet (S) informed his Companions on several occasions of the
status and position of ‘Ali (*‘a*), admonishing them to recognize his
position. The Holy Prophet (S) was watchful of his their attitude toward
‘Ali (*‘a*) particularly after the spread of Islam when many individuals
with diverse motives joined the ranks of Muslims. This is especially
true with respect to the Quraysh whose envy toward the Banu Hashim had
amplified by then. Ibn Shahr Ashub thus narrates on the authority of
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab:

I used to annoy ‘Ali, the Prophet (S) once came to me and said: “You are
annoying me, O ‘Umar!” I said: “I seek refuge in God from annoying the
Messenger of Allah!” He said: “You are annoying ‘Ali and he who annoys
him annoys me”.

Mus‘ab ibn Sa‘d has narrated from his father, Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas, that:
“I and another person were in the mosque and we were abusing ‘Ali.
Infuriated, the Prophet came to us and said: ‘Why do you annoy me? He
who annoys ‘Ali annoys me’.”[^16]

Haythami has narrated:

Buraydah al-Aslami, who is one of those who had gone to Yemen under the
commandership of ‘Ali, says: “I went back to Medina earlier than the
army. The people asked me: ‘What news?’ I said: ‘There is news. God made
the Muslims victorious.’ They asked: ‘Why did you come earlier (than the
army contingent)?’ I said: ‘‘Ali has allocated a bondwoman from the
*khums* for himself. I have come to inform the Prophet of it…’

When the Prophet was informed of it, he was annoyed and said: ‘Why are
some people belittling ‘Ali? Anyone who finds fault with ‘Ali finds
fault with me. Anyone who would separate from ‘Ali has separated from
me. ‘Ali is from me and I from him. He has been created out of my
essence and I from the essence of Ibrahim (Abraham) though I am superior
to Ibrahim… O Buraydah! Don’t you know that ‘Ali deserves more than one
bondswoman? He is your guardian {*wali*} after me.[^17]

Ibn Shahr Ashub also narrates a similar *hadith* from Sunni
*muhaddithun* such as Tirmidhi, Abu Na‘im, al-Bukhari, and Musalli.[^18]

As such, ‘Ali (*‘a*) had earned special respect among the Companions.
Again, Ibn Shahr Ashub has thus narrated from Anas ibn Malik:

During the period of the Holy Prophet (S) whenever we wanted to know if
a certain person is a bastard or not, we would know it from the spite of
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. After the Battle of Khaybar, every man would hug his
child and go. If ever he would see ‘Ali along the way, he would point to
‘Ali with his hand to the child and ask him: “Do you like this man?” If
the child would say, “Yes,” he would kiss his child and if the child
would say, “No,” he would put the child on the ground and say, “Go to
your mother!” ‘Ubadah ibn Samit also says: “We used to test our children
with the love for ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. If we found out that one of them
does not like him, we would know that he will never be an upright
person.”[^19]

During the latter years of the Prophet’s (S) life, the issue of ‘Ali’s
(*‘a*) position was more publicized so much so that the title *wasi*
{executor of one’s will} became one of his widely known titles, which
was accepted by both his friends and foes especially after the Holy
Prophet (S) said to ‘Ali (*‘a*) before going to the Tabuk expedition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت منّي بمنزلة هارون من موسىٰ إلاّ أنّه لانبيّ بعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are to me as Harun (Aaron) is to Musa (Moses) with the only
difference that there shall be no prophet after me.”[^20]

In the course of the Farewell Pilgrimage {*Hajj al-Wida‘*} in Mina and
in ‘Arafah also, the Holy Prophet (S) informed the people in several
speeches about twelve persons shall be his successors and all of whom
are from Banu Hashim.[^21]

Finally, on the return from Mecca in Ghadir Khumm, he (S) received
instruction from God to announce the succession of ‘Ali (*‘a*) to all
the Muslims. He ordered the Muslims to halt and mounting a pulpit made
out of the camel saddles he delivered a long speech. He then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من كنت مولاه فهذا عليّ مولاه اللّهمّ وال من والاه و عاد من عاداه وانصر
من نصره واخذل من خذله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Of whosoever I am Master {*mawla*}, then ‘Ali is also his Master
{*mawla*}. O Allah! Be Thou a Friend of him who is a friend of him
(‘Ali), and be Thou an Enemy of him who is his enemy. Help him whoever
helps him, and forsake him whoever forsakes him.

Then, he asked the people to pay allegiance to ‘Ali (*‘a*). ‘Allamah
al-Amini has given a comprehensive explanation of this subject in the
first volume of the book, *Al-Ghadir*.

In this manner, the Messenger of Allah (S) asserted his successor’s
identity to the people. Thus, the public was of the opinion that after
‘Ali (*‘a*) would succeed (as the leader of Muslims) the Prophet (S)
after his demise. In this regard, Zubayr ibn Bakkar says: “All the
*Muhajirun*[^22] and the *Ansar*[^23] had no doubt that ‘Ali will be the
caliph and master of the affairs after the Messenger of Allah (S).”[^24]

This subject is so clear in the poems that have been recorded from the
time of Saqifah and these poems bespeak of a smaller degree of
distortion that has ever happened in poetry. ‘Utbah ibn Abi Lahab
recited this poem after the event of Saqifah and Abubakr’s inauguration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كنت أحسب أن الأمر منصرف عن هاشم ثمّ منها عن أبي حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أليس أوّل من صلّی لقبلتكم و أعلم النّاس بالقرآن و السّنن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أقرب النّاس عهداً بالنبي و من جبرئيل عون له في الغسل و الكفن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما فيه ما فيهم لايمترون به و ليس في القوم ما فيه من الحسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ماذا الّذي ردهم عنه فنعلمه ها أن ذاغبناً من أعظم الغبن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I was not imagining that the caliphate affair would be withdrawn from
the Banu Hashim and much less to Abu’l-Hasan (‘Ali).*

*Is he not the first person to pray facing your qiblah and of the people
the most knowledgeable of the Qur’an and the Sunnah?*

*He is the last person to look at the face of the Prophet; Jibra’il
(Archangel Gabriel) was his aid in bathing and enshrouding him (the
Prophet).*

*They do not think about what he has and what they have; whereas within
the community {qawm} there is nobody who possesses his points of
goodness.*

*What is it that made them withdraw from him? Say that this loss of ours
is the gravest of all losses!*

After ‘Utbah’s recitation of this poem, ‘Ali (*‘a*) asked him not to
recite it again and said: “For us the safety of religion is more
important than anything else.”[^25]

Ibn Abi ‘Abrah Qurshi has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شكراً لمن هو باثناء قيق ذهب اللّجاج و بويع الصديق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كنّا نقول لها على و الرضا عمر و أولاهم بذاك عتيق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Thanks to Him Who is worthy to be praised! The dispute was no more and
the allegiance was paid to* *Sadiq (Abubakr).*

*We were saying: “‘Ali is the owner of caliphate; we were also pleased
with ‘Umar; but the best of them in this case is the old {‘atiq}
(Abubakr)!”*[^26]

During the course of the dispute between the *Ansar* and Quraysh that
had surfaced on the event of Saqifah, ‘Amru ibn al-‘As has spoken
against the *Ansar*. In reply to him, Nu‘man ibn al-‘Ajlan—one of the
poets of the *Ansar*—has recited a poem in which ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) right has
been emphasized:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقل لقريش نحن أصحاب مكّة و يوم حنين و الفوارس في بدر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قلتم حرام نصب سعد و نصبكمعتيق بن عثمان حلال أبابكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و أهل أبوبكر لها خير قائم و أن علياً كان أخلق بالأمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كان هوانا في عليٍّ و أنهلأهل لها يا عمر و من حيث لاتدري
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فذلك بعون الله يدعو إلى الهدىو ينهى عن الفحشاء و البغي و النّكر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وصيّ النّبي المصطفى و ابن عمه و قاتل فرسان الضلالة و الكفر
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Say to the Quraysh: “We are the army of (the Conquest of) Mecca and the
Battle of* *Hunayn, and the cavalry of Badr!”*

*You said that appointment of Sa‘d to the caliphate is unlawful {haram},
but your appointment, ‘Atiq ibn ‘Uthman, of Abubakr is lawful {halal}.*

*{And you said:} Abubakr is the man of this task and can perform it
well, but ‘Ali was the most deserving of people to the caliphate.*

*We were on ‘Ali’s side and he was the man for this job, but you do not
understand, O ‘Amru!*  
*This man (‘Ali), by the help of Allah, calls (us) toward guidance, and
forbids perversion, oppression and evil.*

*He is the executor of will {wasi} of al-Mustafa the Prophet, his
cousin, and the killer of the champions of disbelief {kufr} and
misguidance {dhalalah}.*[^27]

With the aim of thanking Fadhl ibn al-‘Abbas who, under ‘Ali’s (*‘a*)
order, had defended the *Ansar*, Hassan ibn Thabit has recited this
poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جزى الله عنّا و الجزاء بكفّه أبا حسن عنا و من كان كابى حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبقت قريشاً بالذي أنت أهل هفصدرك مشروح و قلبك ممتحن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حفظت رسول الله فينا و عهده إليك و من أولى به منك من و من
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألست أخاه في الهدى و وصيّهو أعلم منهم بالكتاب و بالسّنن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May God give good reward to Abu’l-Hasan for us as the reward is in his
hand. Who, by the way, is like Abu’l-Hasan?*

*Concerning which you were a member, you were ahead of the Quraysh. Your
breast is expansive and your heart tested (pure and sincere).*

*You preserved what the Messenger of Allah instructed regarding us.
Except you, who could be foremost for him, and who could be?*  
*Are you not his brother {akh} in guidance and the executor of his will
{wasi}, and among them, the most knowledgeable of the Book and the
Sunnah?*[^28]  
 Initially, Abu Sufyan opposed the institution of (Abubakr’s) as
caliphate and defended the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*). Apart from
the speeches he delivered in this regard, he also composed the following
poem:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بني هاشم لا تطمعوا النّاس فيكم و لا سيّما تيم بن مرّه أو عدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فما الأمر الاّ فيكم و إليكم و ليس لها الاّ أبو حسن عليّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Bani Hashim! Do not allow others to get involve in your affair
especially Taym ibn Murrah or ‘Adi.*[^29]

*The affair of caliphate belongs to you alone and it is only Abu’l-Hasan
‘Ali who is its man.*[^30]

Finally, on that very day of Ghadir Khumm, the Prophet’s poet, Hassan
ibn Thabit, asked the Messenger of Allah’s (S) permission to narrate the
event of Ghadir in poetry, and thus recites:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يناديهم يوم الغدير نبيّهم بخمّ واسمع بالرّسول مناديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد جاء جبرئيل عن أمر ربّه بانّك معصوم فلاتك وانيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و بلغهم ما أنزل الله ربّهم إليك و لا تخش هناك الأعاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قام به اذ ذاك رافع كفّه بكف عليّ معلن الصوت عاليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال فمن مولاكم و نبيّكم؟ فقالوا و لم يبدا أهناك التّعاميا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهكَ مولانا و أنت نبيّنا و لم تلق منّا في الولاية عاصيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال له: قم يا عليّ فإنّني رضيتك من بعدي إماماً و هاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن كنت مولاه فهذا وليّه فكونوا له اتباع صدق مواليا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هناك دعا: أللّهمّ وال وليّه وكن للّذي عادى عليّاً معاديا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيا ربّ انصر ناصريه لنصرهم إمام هدى كالبدر يجلو الدياجيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Their Prophet calls on them on the day of Ghadir Khumm; now, listen to
the call of the Prophet:*  
*Jibra’il brought a message from God that “You are under the protection
of God; so, do not be dejected.”*

*Convey what has been revealed by Allah, their Lord, and here do not be
afraid of the enemies.*  
*He raises ‘Ali along with him; while he raises the hand of ‘Ali along
with his hand, he announces in a loud voice.*

*Then he said to the people: “Who is your Master {mawla} and your
guardian {wali}? Then, without showing inattention, they said:*

*“Your Lord is our Master {mawla} and you are our guardian {wali}, and
no one among us today disobeys you.”*

*Then he said: “Stand up O ‘Ali! For, I am indeed well pleased that you
are the Imam and guide after me.”*

*{He then said:} “Therefore, of whomsoever I am master, ‘Ali is his
master also. May you be their true supporters!”*

*He then prayed, saying: “O Allah! Be Thou a Friend of those who are his
{‘Ali’s} friends, and be Thou an Enemy of those who are his enemies.*

*So, O Lord! Help his supporters as they help the Imam of guidance who
is like the moon during a dark night”*[^31]

As is evident from this poem, in transcribing the Prophet of Islam’s (S)
speeches about ‘Ali (*‘a*), Hassan has called him Imam, guardian
{*wali*} and guide {*hadi*}, which clearly stipulates the leadership and
headship of the *ummah*.

Yes, the masses of Muslims did not imagine that after the Holy Prophet’s
(S) demise, somebody would contest ‘Ali (*‘a*) on the issue of caliphate
and succession to the Prophet (S). As Mu‘awiyah has written in reply to
the letter of Muhammad ibn Abubakr,

We and your father during the period of the Messenger of Allah (S) used
to consider obedience to the son of Abu Talib as expedient for us and
his virtues were not concealed to us. After the demise of the Prophet
(S), your father and ‘Umar were the first persons to trample upon his
position and called on the people to pay allegiance to them.[^32]

This is why those who were not around Medina during the last months of
the Prophet’s (S) life and were uninformed of the conspiracies—such as
Khalid ibn Sa‘id and Abu Sufyan—were vehemently agitated when they
returned to Medina, after the demise of the Prophet (S), to see Abubakr
sitting in the Prophet’s (S) lieu introducing himself as the Prophet’s
(S) caliph.[^33] Even Abu Sufyan—when he returned from a journey and saw
the situation as such—came to ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib and ‘Ali
(*‘a*) and asked them to revolt in order to get their rights but they
refused.[^34] Of course, Abu Sufyan has no intention in these moves.

In conclusion, although most of the Prophet’s (S) Companions recognized
the caliphate of Abubakr officially, they did not forget ‘Ali (*‘a*) as
being the most deserving {*afdhal*}. Whenever he was in the mosque, no
know except him would issue edict {*fatwa*} on religious issues as they
used to regard him as “the leading judge of the *ummah*”
{*aqdhi’l-ummah*} as stipulated by the Most Noble Messenger (S).[^35]

‘Umar used to say: “May God forbid that day when a problem would arise
and Abu’l-Hasan is not present.”[^36] As he used to say to the
Companions of the Prophet (S): “Whenever ‘Ali is in the mosque, no one
except him has the right to issue any religious edict.”[^37]

Although after the demise of the Prophet (S), ‘Ali (*‘a*) was not able
to acquire political power, his virtues and distinctions were narrated
by the same Companions of the Prophet (S). Ibn Haythami—who is one of
the staunched Sunni *‘ulama’*—regarded the number of narrators of the
*hadith* about Ghadir as 30 persons from among the Companions,[^38] but
Ibn Shahr Ashub has counted 80 narrators of the *hadith* on Ghadir from
among the Companions.[^39]

Meanwhile, the late ‘Allamah Amini has counted the following 110
narrators of the *hadith* on Ghadir from among the Companions:

Abu Hurayrah; Abu Layla al-Ansari; Abu Zaynab al-Ansari; Abu Fudhalah
al-Ansari; Abu Qudamah al-Ansari; Abu ‘Umra ibn ‘Amru ibn Muhsin
al-Ansari; Abu’l-Haytham ibn Tayyihan; Abu Rafi‘; Abu Dha’ib; Abubakr
ibn Abi Quhafah; Usamah ibn Zayd; Uba ibn Ka‘b; As‘ad ibn Zurarah
al-Ansari; Asma’ bint ‘Umays; Umm Salmah; Umm Hani; Abu Hamzah Anas ibn
Malik al-Ansari; Bara’ ibn ‘Azib; Zubaydah Aslami; Abu Sa‘id Thabit ibn
Wadi‘ah al-Ansari; Jabir ibn Sumayrah; Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari;
Jublah ibn ‘Amru al-Ansari; Jabir ibn Mut‘am al-Qurshi; Jarir ibn ‘Abd
Allah Bajli; Abu Dharr Jundab ibn Junadah;

Abu Junaydah al-Ansari; Hubbah ibn Jawin ‘Arni; Habashi ibn Junadah
as-Saluli; Habib ibn Badil ibn Warqa’ Khaza‘i; Hudhayfah ibn Asid
Ghaffari; Abu Ayyub Khalid ibn Zayd al-Ansari; Khalid ibn Walid
al-Makhzumi; Khuzaymah ibn Thabit; Abu Sharih Khuwaylid ibn ‘Amru
Khaza‘i; Rafa‘ah ibn ‘Abd al-Mundhir al-Ansari; Zubayr ibn ‘Awwam; Zayd
ibn al-Arqam; Zayd ibn Thabit; Zayd ibn Yazid al-Ansari; Zayd ibn ‘Abd
Allah al-Ansari; Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas; Sa‘d ibn Junadah; Salmah ibn ‘Amru
ibn Aku‘; Samrah ibn Jundab; Sahl ibn Hanif; Sahl ibn Sa‘d al-Ansari;
Sadi ibn ‘Ajlan; Ḍamirah al-Asadi; Talhah ibn ‘Ubayd Allah;

‘Amir ibn ‘Amir; ‘Amir ibn Layla; ‘Amir ibn Layla al-Ghaffari; ‘Amir ibn
Wathilah; ‘A’ishah bint Abibakr; ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib; ‘Abd
ar-Rahman ibn ‘Abd Rabbih al-Ansari; ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf al-Qurshi;
‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Ya‘mur ad-Dayla; ‘Abd Allah ibn Abi ‘Abd al-Athar
al-Makhzumi; ‘Abd Allah ibn Badil; ‘Abd Allah ibn Bashir; ‘Abd Allah ibn
Thabit al-Ansari; ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far al-Hashimi; ‘Abd Allah ibn
Huntab al-Qurshi; ‘Abd Allah ibn Rabi‘ah; ‘Abd Allah ibn al-‘Abbas; ‘Abd
Allah ibn Abi ‘Awf; ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar; ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud; ‘Abd
Allah ibn Yamil; ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan;

‘Ubayd ibn ‘Azib al-Ansari; Abu Tarif ‘Adi ibn Hatam; ‘Atiyyah ibn
Basar; ‘Uqbah ibn ‘Amir; ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib; ‘Ammar ibn Yasir; ‘Umarah
al-Khazraji; ‘Amru ibn al-‘As; ‘Amru ibn Murrah Jahni; Fatimah bint
Rasul Allah (S); Fatimah bint Hamzah; ‘Umar ibn Abi Salmah; ‘Umran ibn
Hasin al-Khaza‘i; ‘Amru ibn Humq al-Khaza‘i; ‘Amru ibn Sharahil; Qays
ibn Thabit al-Ansari;

Qays ibn Sa‘d al-Ansari; Ka‘b ibn ‘Ujrah al-Ansari; Malik ibn Huwayrath
al-Laythi; Miqdad ibn ‘Amru; Najiyah ibn ‘Amru; al-Khaza‘i’ Abu Burzah
Fadhlah ibn ‘Utbah Aslami; Nu‘man ibn ‘Ajlan al-Ansari; Hashim Marqal;
Wahshi ibn Harb; Wahhab ibn Hamzah; Abu Juhayfah; Wahhab ibn ‘Abd Allah;
and Yu‘la ibn Murrah.[^40]

Among the narrators of the *hadith* on Ghadir, individuals who had
hostile relationship with ‘Ali (*‘a*)—such as Abubakr, ‘Umar ‘Uthman,
Talhah, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Zayd ibn Thabit, Usamah ibn Zayd,
Hassan ibn Thabit, Khalid ibn Walid, and ‘A’ishah—can also be noticed.
Even those Companions who sometimes disagreed with him defended him
against his enemies.

For example, Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas—who was among those who voted in favor
of ‘Uthman and against ‘Ali (*‘a*) at the 6-man council after the death
of ‘Umar, and did not extend cooperation with ‘Ali (*‘a*) during his
caliphate and preferred neutrality—in his conversation with Mu‘awiyah,
thus said to Mu‘awiyah:

“You fought and waged war with a person who was more deserving than you
to the caliphate.” Mu‘awiyah asked: “Why?” He replied: “One reason is
that the Messenger of Allah (S) said concerning: ‘Of whosoever I am
Master {*mawla*}, then ‘Ali is also his Master {*mawla*}. O Allah! Be
Thou a Friend to him who is a friend of him (‘Ali), and be Thou an Enemy
to him who is his enemy,’ and other reasons are his virtues and
merits.”[^41]

Similarly, ‘Abd Allah, the son of ‘Amru ibn al-‘As, along with his
father was in the army of Mu‘awiyah. When ‘Ammar ibn Yasir was killed
and his head was brought before Mu‘awiyah, two persons were in dispute
as each of them was claiming to have killed ‘Ammar. ‘Abd Allah said:

“It is better for one of you to relinquish his right to the other
because I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say: ‘‘Ammar shall be killed
by a tyrant group’.” Mu‘awiyah was annoyed and said: “So, what is he
doing here?!” ‘Abd Allah replied: “Since the Messenger of Allah (S)
ordered me to obey my father, I am here with you, but I will not
fight.”[^42]

The presence of ‘Ammar in the ranks of the Commander of the Faithful
(*‘a*) whose killers had been described by the Messenger of Allah (S) as
a tyrant group during that chaotic period was a clear testimony to the
truthfulness of ‘Ali (*‘a*) so much so that even the son of ‘Amru ibn
al-‘As admitted it.

Lesson 5: Summary
-----------------

After the caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*), other
names have also been given to the Shi‘ah. Contemptuous labels such as
*Rafidhi* and *Turabi* were used by the enemies of the Shi‘ah with the
aim of debasing them. Some other labels such as ‘Alawi, Imami,
Husayniyyah, ‘Ithna ‘Ashari, Khassah, and Ja‘fari were applied to them
as well.

‘Ali (*‘a*) had a distinguished position among the Companions of the
Prophet (S) as well as being the nearest one to the Prophet (S) among
the Banu Hashim. He grew up in the Prophet’s (S) house, and most
important of all, the Most Noble Messenger (S) had appointed him as his
minister {*wazir*} and successor {*khalifah*} and the masses of people
were aware of it.

Lesson 5: Questions
-------------------

1. Briefly list the terms used to refer to the Shi‘ah.

2. What labels did the enemies of the Shi‘ah address them with?

3. Why were the Shi‘ah called ‘Alawi or Ja‘fari?

4. What is the statement of Mas‘udi regarding ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) position?

5. How many narrators are there for the *hadith* on Ghadir from among
the Companions of the Prophet (*‘a*)?

6. The poems that were recited on the event of Saqifah bespeak of which
subject?

7. What was the position of the Companions of the Prophet (S) vis-à-vis
abusing ‘Ali (*‘a*)?

[^1]: Sham or Shamat: up until five centuries ago, included Syria of
today, Lebanon and parts of Jordan and Palestine. It was then the
capital of the Umayyad caliphate. {Trans.}

[^2]: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, researched
by Muhammad Baqir Mahmudi (Beirut: Ma’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at,
1394 AH), vol. 2, p. 423.

[^3]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 3, p. 110.

[^4]: Haythami al-Makki, As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p. 123; Sayyid Muhsin
Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah (Beirut: Dar at-Ta‘aruf Li’l-Matbu‘at, n.d.),
vol. 1, p. 21.

[^5]: Shahristani. Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal (Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif
ar-Radi, 1364 AHS), vol. 1, p. 139.

[^6]: Sayyid Muhsin Amin, A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 19.

[^7]: ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Muhammad Ibn al-Khaldun, Al-Muqaddimah (Beirut:
Dar Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1408 AH), p. 197.

[^8]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani. Manaqib Al Abi Talib (Qum: Mu’assasah
Intisharat-e ‘Allameh, n.d.), vol. 4, p. 102.

[^9]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih, Ahmad ibn Muhammad. Al-‘Aqd al-Farid. Beirut: Dar
Ihya’ at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1409 AH

[^10]: Shahristani. Kitab al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, p. 150.

[^11]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab (Beirut:
Manshurat Mu’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1411 AH), vol. 3, p. 92.

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 446.

[^13]: ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil at-Talibiyyin
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 41.

[^14]: ‘Ali ibn Husayn ibn ‘Ali Mas‘udi, Murawwij adh-Dhahab, p. 294.

[^15]: Muhammad Hadi Yusufi Gharawi, Mawsu‘ah at-Tarikh Islami, 1st
edition (Qum: Majma‘ al-Fikr al-Islami, 1417 AH), vol. 1, p. 410.

[^16]: Ibn Shahr Ashub Mazandarani, Manaqib Al Abi Talib, vol. 3, p.
211. {Trans.}

[^17]: Hafiz Nur ad-Din ‘Ali ibn Abibakr Haythami, Majma‘ az-Zawa’id
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr Li’t-Tiba‘ah wa’n-Nashr wa’t-Tawzi‘, 1414 AH), vol.
9, p. 173.

[^18]: Ibn Shahr Ashub, Munaqib Al Abi Talib, pp. 211-212.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 207.

[^20]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 2, pp. 62-63; Tarikh al-Kamil, vol. 2, pp.
40-41; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 111; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 13, pp. 210-212.

[^21]: Sayyid Ja‘far Murtada al-Amili, Al-Ghadir wa’l-Mu‘aridhun, 3rd
edition (Beirut: Dar as-Sirah, 1418 AH), pp. 62-66.

[^22]: Muhajrun (lit. “Emigrants”): The Meccan Muslims who accompanied
the Prophet (S) in his hijrah {emigration} to Medina. {Trans.}

[^23]: Ansar (lit. “Helpers”): The Muslims of Medina who invited the
Prophet (S) and Muslims of Mecca to migrate (hijrah) to Medina. {Trans.}

[^24]: Zubayr ibn Bakkar. Al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyyat (Qum: Manshurat
ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1416 AH), p. 580.

[^25]: Zubayr ibn Bakkar. Al-Akhbar al-Muwaffaqiyyat, p. 581.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 580.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 592.

[^28]: Ahmad ibn Abi Ya‘qub Ibn Wadhih, Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, 1st edition
(Qum: Manshurat ash-Sharif ar-Radi, 1414 AH), vol. 2, p. 128.

[^29]: Taym is the tribe to which Abubakr belongs while ‘Adi is the
tribe of ‘Umar.

[^30]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 126.

[^31]: ‘Abd al-Husayn Amini, Al-Ghadir fi’l-Kitab wa’s-Sunnah wa’l-Adab
(Tehran: Dar al-Kitab al-Islamiyyah, 1366 AHS), vol. 1, p. 11; vol. 2,
p. 39. See also Khwarazmi al-Maliki, Al-Manaqib, p. 80; Sibt ibn Jawzi
al-Hanafi, Tadhkirah Khawas al-Ummah, p. 20; Ganji Shafi‘i, Kifayah
at-Talib, p. 170; and others. {Trans.}

[^32]: Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn Jabir Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf (Beirut:
Ma’assasah al-A‘lami Li’l-Matbu‘at, 1394 AH), vol. 2, p. 396.

[^33]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 126.

[^34]: ‘Izz ad-Din Abu’l-Hasan ‘Ali ibn Muhammad Abi’l-Kiram Ibn Athir,
Asad al-Ghabah fi Ma‘rifah as-Sahabah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-‘Arabi, n.d.), vol. 3, p. 12; Tarikh al-Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 126.

[^35]: Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 97.

[^36]: Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
at-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1378 AH), vol. 1, p. 18.

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah (Cairo: Maktabah al-Qahirah, 1385 AH), p.
122.

[^39]: Manaqib Al Abi Talib (Qum: Mu’assaseh-ye Intisharat-e ‘Allameh,
n.d.), vol. 3, pp. 25-26.

[^40]: ‘Abd al-Husayn Amini, Al-Ghadir fi’l-Kitab wa’s-Sunnah wa’l-Adab,
vol. 1, pp. 14-16.

[^41]: Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 109; Akhtab Khwarazm,
Al-Manaqib (Najaf: Manshurat al-Matba‘ah al-Haydariyyah, 1385 AH), pp.
59-60.

[^42]: Baladhuri, Insab al-Ashraf, vol. 2, p. 312-313.


