Part 2 Chapter 6: Laws Pertaining To Contracts And One-Side Decisions
=====================================================================

272. It is obligatory upon every duty-bound person to fulfill his/her
pacts and commitments. In Islamic law, pacts are of three types:

1. Pacts that God has made with His servants, such as the obligations
and prohibitions that God has charged upon His servants through His
prophets.

2. Pacts people make with themselves such as an oath, vow, or promise to
perform or abstain from a specific act.

3. The commitments people make with each other, including mutual
agreements or contracts (*‘aqd*)—such as business dealings—and one-sided
resolutions—such as divorce, acquittance, and annulment of a contract.

All the above are considered by the Islamic law pacts and covenants and
it is obligatory to fulfill all of them according to their conditions. A
brief example of each is stated in the following issues.

273. It is obligatory upon both parties of an irrevocable contract
(*‘aqd-e lazim*) to act according to their agreement and to undergo all
of its effects and stipulations, whether the contract is verbal,
written, practical, or reciprocal delivery. An *‘aqd* is a contract
based upon the consent of both parties. There are two types of contracts
(*‘aqd*):

1) Irrevocable contracts: The contracts whose parties have no right to
revoke except in special cases.

2) Revocable contracts: The contracts whose parties have the right to
revoke at any time.

Whatever is commonly considered a contract is an irrevocable contract
unless there is evidence to the contrary; thus, violating such a
contract is forbidden.

Now let us refer to a few irrevocable contracts:

1. Transaction (*mubaya’ah*), i.e. buying and selling: It is obligatory
upon the selling party to transfer the purchased commodity to the buyer
after concluding the deal, and it is obligatory upon the buying party to
pay the set price to the seller, except in certain cases. It is
forbidden for the two parties to violate the contract.

2. Lease (*ijarah*; a contract comprising the possession of benefit,
which is a job or the like, in return for compensation): It is
obligatory upon the lessor to convey the leased property, service, etc.
to the lessee. In property lease, the property must be conveyed, and in
hiring people, the hired person must be made available. It is obligatory
upon the lessee to pay the rent to the lessor. It is forbidden for any
of the parties to violate the contract except in special cases.

3. Endowment (*waqf*; endowment of property to be devoted to a religious
or charitable purpose): It is obligatory on the donor and the
beneficiary to act according to the endowment contract after delivery of
the endowed property and concluding the contract. It is forbidden for
the donor to revoke or change the endowment stipulations after the
closing of the contract. It is forbidden for others to annul or change
the endowment stipulations after the death of the donor, whether the
endowment is public, such as mosques, schools, and bridges, or private,
such as endued to the children of the donor exclusively, except in some
cases.

4. Settlement (*sulh*; a transaction involving seeking agreement between
two persons on possessing of a property or canceling of a debt or a
right, be it with compensation or free): It is obligatory upon the
parties of a settlement contract on an ambiguous property, a disputed
debt, or an action to act according to the articles of the contract, and
it is forbidden for them to violate these articles except in special
cases.

5. Will (*wasiyyah*; a formal declaration involving investment with
ownership or authorization of a certain disposal after death): It is
obligatory upon the executer of a will to act according to its articles
after accepting and confirming it. To violate any of these articles is
forbidden. It is also forbidden to refrain from acting upon the will,
delay it beyond the required time, change the aim of the testator, or
refrain from acting upon some of its articles. It is also forbidden for
a testator to will unfair things, such as depriving certain heirs of
their inheritance, deciding not to pay the dues of a creditor, or using
the property for sinful actions.

6. Matrimony: It obligatory upon the two parties to act upon the lawful
responsibilities after the concluding of this holy covenant. Refraining
from acting upon any of the marriage responsibilities is a violation of
the covenant and strictly forbidden.

7. Sharecropping (*muzara’ah*): This is a farming contract by with
usually one party pledges to supply land, water, and facilities and the
other undertakes sowing and cultivation of crops. It is obligatory upon
the two parties to act according to this contract, and it is forbidden
to violate it.

8. Share-irrigating contracts (*musaqat*): This is a contract comprising
the agreement of irrigating and watching over the trees of another
person to a specified term with a share of the produce. It is obligatory
upon the two parties to act according to the contract, and to dissolve
it is violation of the contract, which is forbidden.

9. Mortgage (*rahn*): This is a property given as pledge for a debt.
After the contract is made, it is obligatory for the debtor to deliver
the collateral to the creditor who must keep it as security for the
debt. It is forbidden for either of the parties to take possession of
and make changes in the mortgaged property or to violate the contract,
except by the consent and agreement of both parties.

10. Competition (*musabaqah*): In Islam, horseracing, some other types
of races, and archery have been declared permissible. After determining
the conditions, the prize of the race, and the success of the winner, it
becomes obligatory to give the prize to the winner and it is forbidden
to violate the transaction. The same conditions are applied to the
shooting competitions.

11. Guaranty (*dhaman*): This is when one person undertakes the debt of
another person. When such contracts are concluded, it becomes obligatory
upon the guarantor to consider himself the debtor and to pay the
guaranteed property to the creditor. To violate such contracts is
forbidden.

12. Debt Transfer (*hawalah*): This is a transaction in which a debtor
refers the creditor to another person, i.e. a second debtor, for
receiving his/her due. It is obligatory upon the debtor and the party
who accepts the debt transfer to act upon the contract, the violation of
which is forbidden.

13. Surety (*kafalah*): This is when a person undertakes to present a
third party who owes a debt or blood money, or deserves retaliation
whenever the entitled party requests. After concluding the contract, it
becomes obligatory upon the guarantor to bring the debtor at any time
the owner of the right wants, and if she/he cannot ensure his/her
presence, the guarantor her/himself must pay the debt or blood money.

14. Donation (*hibah*; a contract involving transfer of ownership
without compensation): In this revocable contract, taking back the
donated property is allowed except in the following cases in which it is
forbidden to take back the donated property:

A. Reciprocal Donations: This means that a person gives something as
donation to another person who reciprocally gives her/him something in
return, or that a person states as a condition that the donated person
should give him/her a donation in return, even if the second person has
not yet given her/him anything.

B. Donations intended for seeking nearness to God.

C. Donations to relatives and kinsfolk.

D. Donations that are consumed or destroyed while in the possession of
the donee.

E. Donations that are no longer possessed by their recipients.

F. Donations whose donors have died and their heir demands their return.

G. Donations whose donees have died and the doner wants to retrieve it.

It is not forbidden to take back a donation except in these cases.
Similarly, to cancel other revocable contracts is not forbidden, such as
in limited partnership, trust, free lending, attorneyship, and mortgage
for the recipient of mortgages.

274. After the composition of the majority of the one-sided contracts
(*’«qa‘*), it becomes binding to fulfill these commitments, since to
violate or cancel them is forbidden. Examples of one-sided obligations
are stated below.

275. It is obligatory on all duty-bound persons to commit themselves to
their proper oaths (*qasam*), i.e. oaths in God’s name.

276. It is obligatory to act upon one’s vow (*nadhr*), which is to
undertake something as a duty to God.

277. It is obligatory to act upon a promise, which is to make a covenant
with God to perform a certain act. Violation of any of these three
commitments results in obligatory atonements. The details of these
atonements can be found in the books of Muslim jurisprudence, under the
title *kaffarat*.

278. Perjury (i.e. false swearing) is forbidden. In the terminology of
Muslim jurisprudence, such false swearing is called *yamin ghamus*;
which means an oath that drowns the person in an ocean of sins.

279. It is obligatory to protect deposits and trusts until they are
given back to their owners. Trust stands for a property that is
entrusted to a person by its owner, such as deposits entrusted to
trustees, properties rented to a tenant, properties of an employer in
the hands of the employees, and properties entrusted to the other party
of a limited partnership contract, a sharecropping contract, and a
share-irrigating contract.

280. It is obligatory to protect and return to the owner the trusts that
have been kept in the custody of a person by permission of the law, such
as found properties, foundlings, and properties accidentally forgotten
inside a purchased house or chest.

281. It is obligatory to give full measure in weight, number, area,
inspection, and any other unit, whether the measurement involves the
delivery of sold merchandise, equivalence, price, payable loan, share of
beneficiaries, or distribution of inheritance. Violation of giving full
measure is strictly forbidden. In the terminology of Muslim
jurisprudence, such violation is called *tatfif*, meaning giving a
deficient or insufficient measure of something, be it a debt or one of
the duties towards God.

282. It is obligatory to settle and pay up the debts and dues in their
due times if their owner asks for settlement and the debtor has the
ability to pay, whether the liability is to a person, such as debts
whose deadline has arrived, monetary atonements for causing death or
loss of property, or a religious tax, such as *khumus*, *zakat*, and
*kaffarah*. It is strictly forbidden to refrain from paying the dues and
property of others, whatever the due may be and to whomever it must be
paid, except in certain cases.

283. It is obligatory to pay the commission (*ju’alah*; a pronouncement
involving taking upon oneself the rendering of a remuneration in return
for a certain work) after the work is done accordingly. For example, if
a person says, ‘I will give whoever finds my car one hundred dollars,’
and then a person finds it and gives it to its owner, the owner of the
car must immediately pay the hundred dollars to the finder.

284. It is obligatory upon the partners in the possession of a property
to distribute it among themselves when one of them asks for his/her
share, on the condition that this distribution does not cause loss to
them and does not make them pay anything.

285. It is obligatory upon a person who confesses something to act
according to her/his confession as long as this confession causes
him/her loss, but not benefit. For example, if a man admits having a
child, he must provide for the education and living expenses of that
child, but he does not have a parental right on him. If he dies, the
child will inherit his wealth, but he will not be given inheritance if
the child dies. If the father becomes poor, he does not have the right
to take his living expenses from the child.

286. It is obligatory upon the creditor to grant his/her debtor respite
if it is proved that the debtor does not have the ability to pay her/his
debt. It is forbidden to pursue him/her, take legal action against
her/him, and put him/her in jail. It is also forbidden to force her/him
to sell his/her essentials of life, such as her/his house and furniture
in order to pay his/her debt.

287. It is obligatory upon all duty-bound persons who feel the imminence
of death to try their bests to return the trusts, properties, and debts
they owe people, to perform the obligatory devotional acts they have
missed, such as prayers, fasts, hajj and ‘umrah, and make the physical
and monetary atonements. In case a person is unable to make up all these
missed duties, she/he must inform his/her heirs and bid their
performance after her/his death.

288. It is forbidden to break a promise without acceptable reason, even
if fulfilling this promise was not intended at the time of promising or
the promising person has changed his/her mind later. However, this issue
is subject to controversy.

289. It is forbidden for a borrower to use the lent property in a way
other than stated in the contract. In this case, she/he is liable for
the property if it is lost and must also pay the common fee for uses not
stated in the contract.

290. It is forbidden for a person judged as bankrupt to take possession
of and make changes in her/his own property if the judge determines
him/her to be under interdiction, except for the properties that are not
part of the confiscation, such as his/her private house, furniture, and
living requirements.

291. Forbidden is the betrayal of trusts, which means to make
impermissible disposition of trusts, neglect protecting them, and fail
to safeguard them suitably thus exposing them to damage, whether these
trusts belong to people or to God. In addition to being forbidden, this
action also brings about liability. This law is also applicable to the
trusts of non-Muslims. However, it is controversial issue.

292. It is forbidden for any of the partners to make disposition of the
shared property or right before obtaining the permission of the other
partners, except in necessary cases.


