Preface
=======

Human deeds and actions are of two kinds:

1. Inward or ideological, such as assertions and beliefs, and

2. Outward or physical, such as enunciation and bodily movements.

Each of these two consists of obligations and prohibitions.

Since intellectual actions and beliefs are the cause of physical
actions, they have a greater effect and are of more importance.
Accordingly, the words and actions of a person are generally the results
of her/his beliefs and will.

This book is arranged into two sections:

1. Inward obligations and prohibitions, under the title “Beliefs,” and

2. Outward obligations and prohibitions under the title “Laws of
Action.”

The two following points deserve attention:

1. From the viewpoint of a sound mind and the manifest law, learning the
principles of belief and the laws of action is the individual
responsibility of every person. Having character conforming to the
principles of belief is known as *faith*, and following the laws of
action is termed as *justice*. One who is successful in acquiring these
two great bounties has reached a high level in human perfection. It is
as if one has performed all the commandments of the Glorified God and
has realized reverence in belief and action.

Renouncing the principles of belief indicates *disbelief*, and
renouncing the laws of action indicates *sinfulness*. These two things
cause wickedness and bear severe retribution in the other world.

Now with the intention of performing my duty, which I deem important, I
present, yet briefly, these writings so that those seeking prosperity
may reach perfection in faith by correcting their beliefs and following
the laws of action, treading on the path of justice. Finally, this
Qur’anic verse will be applicable to them:

“…*those who believe and do good deeds*. (2/25)”

2. Issues pertaining to belief stated in the first part of this book are
derived from Qur’anic verses (*ayat*, sing. *ayah*) and chapters
(*surah*), sayings of the Ahl al-Bayt, and books of theology. I have
presented them to the extent I saw necessary in this book.

The secondary issues of Part Two, which are derived from books of
reasoning and Islamic laws, were combined with the recommended
(*mustahabb*), undesirable (*makruh*), and permitted (*mubah*) actions,
along with other rulings pertaining to purity (*taharah*) and impurity
(*najasah*) as well as other issues.

I have separated the obligations and prohibitions from the other rulings
and have stated them in this book. Because our duties comprise nothing
but these two parts, although performing the recommended and refraining
from the undesirable things bring about perfection, the lack of
observing the discretionary rulings will not bring punishment, unless
they prevent one from performing the obligations or cause a sinful deed.


