Part 1: Ideological Laws
========================

Ideological laws are of two kinds of belief (I will state all as “**We
believe**”):

**Group One**: This group includes the beliefs that are obligatory to
find the truth about them, to focus on, and about which a question is
formed in one’s mind. However, to keep oneself in a state of doubt and
uncertainty about these beliefs is forbidden. These beliefs consist of
the following issues:

1. **We believe** in the necessary existence of Allah, the source of
creation, and the origin of being. **We believe** in the unity and
oneness of His Divine Essence and that He does not have any partner in
His Attributes of Beauty and Majesty. This means, “There is no god but
Allah.”

2. **We believe** in the Attributes of Beauty and Majesty of God
Almighty. By the attribute of majesty, we mean that His Divine Essence
is free from any defect and imperfection. By the attribute of beauty, we
mean that His Pure Essence is adorned with all perfections and good
traits.

3. **We believe** in God’s Prophets and Messengers whom He has sent for
guiding and conducting humankind and chosen them to be of the same race
of humankind. Through them, He has sent down divine books from heaven
and delivered a religion for guiding, learning, and educating human
race. We have particular faith in the Prophets whose names have been
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and general faith in those not mentioned
therein.

4. **We believe** in the prophethood and messengership of Muhammad (s),
the son of ‘Abdullah, the Arab, Medinite and Meccan Prophet. **We** also
**believe** that he is the seal of the prophets. **We believe** in the
everlastingness of his prophethood, messengership, faith, and Book,
meaning that after his department from this worldly life, human society
is in no need for any other religion or book, given that his religion
includes all the needed individual and social laws and duties, both
spiritual and material, for a complete life in this world. Even if this
viewpoint seems logically incorrect to others, it is free of fault from
the viewpoint of the Shi‘ite School of Thought; for after his awaited
reappearance, Imam al-Mahdi (‘a) will enjoy all the attributes of the
Holy Prophet except that he is not prophet. Among these attributes, Imam
al-Mahdi (‘a) will have full authority over the divine laws so that he
will be authorized to change them in a way conforming to the
circumstances of his time and the nature of the community.

5. **We believe** in the Next World and the physical resurrection;
meaning that after the elimination of this material world, all humans
who were born and who have died will be restored to life in a world
beyond nature, in the gathering place of resurrection, in a time named
the Judgment Day, and will be in the presence of God. Without doubt, all
angels, jinn, and animals will also be resurrected in this magnificent
and unprecedented event.

6. **We believe** in the lawful and divinely appointed vicegerency and
leadership (*imamah*; Imamate) after the Holy Prophet. This means that
before he departed this worldly life, Prophet Muhammad (s), by a divine
commission, nominated individuals in successive order as his successors
for the next leadership of the Muslim nation and gave them authority
over the community. **We** also undoubtedly **believe** that the Prophet
(s) did not depart this life before he had performed this duty
completely, important to both the creation and the Creator.

7. **We believe** that the Holy Prophet (s), by the strict order of the
Creator, named twelve individuals in a certain order for succeeding him
in the leadership of his nation. The first of those twelve individuals
is (1) ‘Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Prophet’s cousin and son-in-law. The
other eleven are the descendants of ‘Ali and the Prophet’s daughter,
Lady Fatimah. They are namely: (2) al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, (3) al-Husayn ibn
‘Ali, (4) ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, (5) Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, (6) Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad, (7) Musa ibn Ja‘far, (8) ‘Ali ibn Musa, (9) Muhammad ibn ‘Ali,
(10) ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, (11) al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, and (12) Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan al-Mahdi, peace be upon them all.

The era of the vicegerency of the first eleven Imams extended to the
year 260 AH, but the vicegerency of the twelfth Imam, who is at present
in occultation, has continued until now. When the Beneficent God wills,
this Imam will reappear to fill the world with justice and peace.

8. **We believe** that the Holy Qur’an, this great divine book, which is
now in the hands of Muslims, was sent down to the heart of the Noble
Prophet (s) as the eternal miracle of his prophecy and he conveyed it to
the people without adding or deleting even a single letter of it. **We**
thus **believe** that the Holy Qur’an has never been and will never be
altered or exposed to distortion.

**Group Two**: The second group includes the beliefs about which neither
investigation nor research is obligatory; therefore, it is not necessary
to believe, disbelieve, or depend on personal views regarding them.
However, if a person investigates and learns the truth about them, it is
her/his obligation to form his/her own beliefs according to her/his
findings. To deny these beliefs without reason, only because of doubt,
is not permissible. These beliefs are formed in the following issues:

9. **We believe** that God Almighty is not material, He is not composed
of parts, He is not exposed to any alteration or change, and His
attributes are not apart from His Divine Essence. He is beyond time and
place. He was not born from anything, nor was anything born of Him, and
His existence is necessary. Understanding the truth of His Divine
Essence is beyond the capacity of any intellect, including those of
prophets, angels, or scientists.

10. **We believe** in the existence of angels, their inerrancy, and
their vast and widespread control over the world, under the
administration of God Almighty. The Divine Book is full of references to
them, their missions, and proficiency in various fields all over the
creation. **We believe** that to deny them, especially the ones named in
the Holy Qur’an, brings about disbelief. We also have faith in the
existence of *jinn* and devils, be they of one kind or of two.

11. **We believe** in all the heavenly books sent down to the prophets
prior to the last prophet Muhammad (s). We have specific faith in the
books named in the Qur’an and general faith in the ones not mentioned
therein.

12. **We believe** in divine revelation, i.e. the secret spiritual
communication between the prophets and God Almighty, and that all the
divine religions and heavenly books were delivered to humankind from God
through them. They also received other laws and sciences and delivered
them to the people. There were three methods of revelation:

a. Inspiration of divine words to the heart of the prophet through a
method beyond physical senses.

b. Inspiration of God’s words through the hearing sense, without the
appearance of anything.

c. Descent of an angel to the prophet and inspiration of God’s words in
a face-to-face manner.

It is likely that all three kinds of revelations were sent down to all
prophets, with differences in degree, time, place, and subject.

13. **We believe** in the infallibility and immunity of all prophets
from sin, mistake, and error in the religious affairs. This means that
they never committed any sin, be it small or great, neither in childhood
nor in maturity, neither before being raised up as prophets nor
afterwards. They also never made mistakes or errors, neither in the
stage of learning the laws of God nor in the stage of delivering them to
the people by means of speech or writing, neither in the stage of
carrying out and enforcing the laws in the society nor in the stage of
personally following the laws and showing reverence to God.

14. **We believe** that extravagance (*ghuluww*) and digression
concerning the Holy Prophet or any of the Infallibles (*ma‘sumin*; the
Holy Prophet, Lady Fatimah, and the Twelve Imams) is forbidden and
rationally wrong. This is also applicable to the Companions
(*Sahabah*)[^1], the angels, and any other mortal being no matter how
close to the Prophet and the holy persons. Likewise, we also deny any
exaggeration concerning all sacred things.

Extravagance means to exceed the limits in belief, such as:

a. To believe that these individuals are gods along with denial of the
existence of God Almighty.

b. To believe that both they and God Almighty are gods, each independent
of the other.

c. To attribute partnership in godhead with God, similar to what
Christians say about Prophet Jesus (‘a).

d. To characterize them with one of the particular Attributes of God
Almighty, such as claiming that they are the creators of heavens and the
earth, creators of humans and animals, sustainers of all living beings,
taking life away from the living beings and bringing them back to life,
or any other things that are exclusively God’s. In most cases, such
extremist beliefs are deemed disbelief (*kufr*).

15. **We believe** that the Holy Qur’an, the Divine Book, which is now
in the hands of Muslims, has not been distorted. This means that the
present words of the Qur’an are the same as those that the Angel of
Revelation inspired to the heart of the Holy Prophet from God Almighty.
They are the same words that the Holy Prophet conveyed to the Muslims.
They were written by the scribes of revelation and later others and they
became available to the people. We have thus received them as
undistorted as they were revealed. In other words, the luminous Book we
are having in our hands today is the same Book that was descended to the
heart of the Holy Prophet (s), and it is the same as what exists in the
pre-eternal knowledge of the Almighty.

16. **We believe** that the twelfth Imam—Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, the
Argument of God against His creatures (*al-hujjah*), the
expected—al-Mahdi (‘a), was born during the Imamate of his father, Imam
al-Hasan al-‘Askari (‘a). Before the martyrdom of his father and
according to the predetermined command of God and His Prophet, Imam
al-Mahdi (‘a) was appointed as the leader, ruler, and guide for all the
duty-bound (*mukallaf*; a person too sane and mature to be excused for
violating religious obligations) persons on earth. Since that time, he
has been entrusted with the position of leadership and authority over
humankind, and he has undertaken the unseen dignities of divine
jurisdiction in the society. When God Almighty wills, Imam Mahdi (‘a)
will reappear to turn the corrupted world into a virtuous community.

17. **We believe** that the Holy Prophet (s) received the religious laws
and principles through divine education. He knew all the sciences and
secrets of the Qur’an, all the Books of the former prophets, all the
different fields of knowledge, which the human society of his time was
unaware of, all that which he would be questioned about, and the divine
knowledge and hidden secrets that are beyond the realm of our
imagination. We also have the same belief about his Infallible
Successors.

18. **We believe** in the complete validity of God’s Book, the Qur’an.
In other words, it is necessary to accept the fundamental and
subordinate religious rulings mentioned in the Holy Qur’an as well as
the knowledge and wisdom it explicitly or apparently denotes, with their
specified circumstances. Hence, it is forbidden to deny them.

19. **We believe** in the traditions (*Sunnah*) of the Holy Prophet (s)
as valid argument against us. The *Sunnah* consists of the words that
the Holy Prophet stated as religious laws and divine knowledge. We also
believe that the Holy Imams are transmitters and explainers of the
*Sunnah*, which was completely transferred to them free of fault, doubt,
or alteration. On the Judgment Day, God will interrogate all the people
of the world with regard to two documents: His Book and the *Sunnah*,
and they will refer to these two to prove their claims and acquit
themselves from religious liability.

20. **We believe** in reason and reason-based understanding as valid
argument against us. This means that the understanding of every person
about the validity and invalidity of beliefs and the goodness and
evilness of things is the perfect evidence and convincing proof, just
like the Holy Book and *Sunnah*. On Judgment Day, when God settles
account with His creatures in full justice, the reason-based judgment
about one’s good and evil acts will be a proof for whether they are
deserving of reward or punishment.

21. **We believe** in the temporal contingency of the world, meaning
that God created and gave life to all the creatures in the universe from
absolute nonexistence. Therefore, His Holy Being is the pre-eternal
necessary existence and everything other than Him is a possibly existent
(i.e. contingent) product. This means that it exists when He exists and
is not other than Him.

22. Regarding persons’ actions, **we believe** in the median between
free will and compulsion. This means that both humans and God have
influence in any action humans perform. If a human wills and acts, God
will help him/her by providing the provisions for the action. Humans are
not completely independent such that their will is the complete cause
for their actions with God exerting no influence; nor is the will of God
the absolute cause for their actions, so that their own will has no
influence in their actions, like the movement of a flag by the wind,
which is compulsion.

Thus, the median between free will and compulsion denotes the
interference of both the person and God in voluntary actions. In this
position, there is no difference between obligatory and forbidden
actions, although these two differ in other ways. God is content with a
permitted action and discontent with a forbidden one. He has ordered or
allowed the permitted actions and has forbidden the forbidden ones. He
will reward humans for doing permitted and favorable actions and punish
them for committing forbidden actions. These distinctions concern the
external aspect of the voluntary actions of a person.

23. **We believe** in *Barzakh* (the period between burial and the final
judgment). This period is a temporary abode of the human souls that have
departed their bodies in this world. The angels who run the affairs of
this *intermediate world*, which also has a temporary heaven and hell
and temporary reward and punishment, also reside there. When they come
to this intermediate world, the souls are divided into three groups:

a. Some souls will be awake and joining blissful life. These are the
souls of the pure and faithful believers.

b. Other souls will be awake, yet undergoing chastisement. These are the
souls of the unbelievers and infidels.

c. Other souls will be put in a state of dormancy (known as *subat*)
until the Judgment Day. These are the souls of those who spent their
lives with a mixture of uprightness and sinfulness as well as the souls
of the mentally enfeebled ones.

24. **We believe** that on the Judgment Day, all duty-bound persons will
be questioned about their beliefs and actions and will be put on trial
and settled to account. God will thus impartially judge in all the
intellectual and physical disputes, beginning with the issue of His
Oneness to the most trivial discrepancies about property and dues.

25. **We believe** that, on the Judgment Day, some “Witnesses” will
testify for or against some people with regard to settling account with
and judging them. This means that if the disbelievers and wrongdoers
deny the missions of the Prophets or deny that they conveyed the message
of God to them out of fear and horror of the Resurrection, these
“Witnesses,” the Prophets, or private plaintiffs, will rise and give
evidence on the inaccuracy of these denials. Accordingly, the
disbelievers and wrongdoers will be judged. Such testimonies will also
be made to refute the baseless claims of those who deny that they have
been invited to the Religion of God, deny the completion of proof
against them, deny their sins, or deny their violating the others’
rights.

These “Witnesses” are God Almighty Himself, the Prophets of each nation,
the Prophets’ Successors ordained by God, the angels appointed to
certain jobs, the angels commissioned to record the good and evil deeds
of each person, the scholars, the righteous people, those who have
witnessed the deeds of the deniers, times and places of the committed
sins, and finally the limbs and body parts of the deniers.

26. **We believe** in the weighing up of actions in the Hereafter. This
means that the good and evil actions of every person, including the
internal beliefs, external and physical actions, and moral and mental
attributes, will be spiritually and rationally weighed up and measured
and will be given reward or punishment depending on the assessment of
this Scale (*mizan*). In this assessment, pious and reward-deserving
actions are weighed up as “heavy” and less deserving actions as “light.”

27. **We believe** that all good and evil deeds of a person in the
worldly life, from the time he/she has the ability to distinguish right
from wrong until the last moment of his/her life, are written by the
assigned angels. These deeds will be compiled in a book and given to the
right or left hand of the person in the Hereafter. This book contains
beliefs and actions, be they big or small. The person him/herself will
be familiarized with the contents of that book and will be informed of
the method of the calculation of her/his deeds before the actual
judgment.

28. **We believe** that intercession (*shafa*‘*ah*) will play a role in
the final judgment of some people. In other words, when a sinner is
sentenced to punishment in hell, God will allow certain individuals to
intercede and ask Him on behalf of the sinner to release him/her. In
this way, God may forgive the sinner. However, intercession is
contingent upon God’s permission after it is requested by the
“interceders” or the wrongdoers. The “interceders” are particularly the
Prophets, the angels, the scholars, the martyrs, and the righteous
persons.

Of course, intercession is made for minor sins, not disbelief and
polytheism. The result of intercession is either complete rescue or
reduction of punishment. Occasionally, there will be intercession for
those who enter heaven. This means that those whose reward-deserving
deeds are few and their rewards are accordingly little, thus given a low
rank, will attain a higher status and given more reward by means of
intercession.

29. **We believe** in an eternal heaven following the conclusion of the
Judgment Day. This means that upon the end of the settling of accounts
with the creatures on the Judgment Day, some are deserving of reward for
their good deeds or by means of intercession and others are to be
sentenced to chastisement on account of their invalid beliefs or wicked
deeds. At such time, God will place the pious and the rescued ones in
heaven (*jannah* or Paradise), a place of inexplicable beauty and most
pleasing splendor and glory. The promised heaven is eternal and
everlasting, and it has chambers, different ranks, gardens, trees with
bountiful fruits, spouses, and maids, all beyond imagination. One who
enters this environment will never have to exit it. Aging, tiring,
sickness, anxiety, sadness, harmful creatures, and any kind of evil,
harm, or calamity are nonexistent there. Heaven has already been
created.

30. **We believe** in an eternal hell upon the conclusion of the
Judgment Day. This means that those sentenced to punishment and
chastisement in the tribunal of the Judgment Day will be confined to
hell, a place full of fire, with various kinds of castigations beyond
imagination. Hell is the place of the disbelievers and the ideologically
and principally corrupt; it is eternal and everlasting, and those
entering it can never leave Although Hell is temporary for those of
minor sins.

[^1]: - Sahabah, an Arabic word meaning companions, is a term
exclusively said to the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) and,
terminologically, all those who saw, heard, or witnessed him (s),
regardless of their age. However, various opinions have been expressed
in this regard. For more information, see Ahmad Husayn Ya‘qub: The
Conception of the Sahabah’s Ultimate Decency; translated by Badr Shahin,
Ansariyan Publications - Qum, 1999.


