Part 2 Chapter 1: Learning Religious Knowledge
==============================================

31. It is obligatory upon every sane, mature person to learn the
practical laws of Islam and the subsidiary obligations and prohibitions
after confessing faith to the religion’s fundamentals and acquiring
wholehearted belief in its primary principles.

32. One who has faith in the religion’s fundamentals will naturally find
the complete conviction (*yaqin*) that is the realm of faith. He/she is
then responsible for carrying out certain practical obligations and
refraining from all prohibitions. These laws are called “Mandatory
Subsidiaries of the Religion” or “The Somatic Program.”

33. Once a duty-bound person learns these laws and understands that God
wants us to comply with them, she/he will be no longer excused to act
contrarily and it will be obligatory upon him/her to exert all possible
efforts in learning the laws and acting accordingly. Otherwise, he/she
will be held responsible in the Hereafter and may be punished for
violating them.

34. Based on the above law, it is obligatory upon every duty-bound
person to be educated in religious knowledge and laws concerning all
fields of life. This means that one must try one’s best to deduce all
laws from the Book (i.e. Holy Qur’an) and *Sunnah* (words, deeds, and
confirmations of the Holy Prophet and Imams). These laws must be then
kept in mind or in a book in order to refer to them whenever necessary
and to teach them to others. This process is known as *ijtihad* in the
terminology of Muslim jurisprudence (*fiqh*). Since this time-consuming
process is conditional upon many special qualifications and is extremely
exhausting, it is not practically attainable except by a few.

35. One unable to go this route must follow a religious authority. This
means that one must refer to a well-qualified religious jurist
(*mujtahid*) who has gone the mentioned way and become an expert in
deducing religious laws from their sources. Thus, a duty-bound person
has the option to either become a religious jurist or follow a religious
jurist, which are two independent ways of attaining the laws of
religion. It is up to him/her to choose between the two options.

36. It is said that if a duty-bound person is not a religious jurist and
does not want to follow one, it is her/his obligation to choose a third
way for attaining the religious laws, which is to observe precaution
(*ihtiyat*) in action. This means that if he/she does not know the
ruling of an action but thinks that it may be obligatory, she/he must
act upon it, and if he/she thinks it could be forbidden, she/he must
abstain from it. However, finding the method of precaution in issues
needs dexterity and familiarity with Muslim jurisprudence; thus, the
only way to reach a conclusion concerning religious laws is limited to
either becoming a religious jurist or following one highly experienced
in this field.

37. A duty-bound person may not know the rulings related to a certain
case, whether that case is in language or actions, worship or business,
etc. Therefore, before acting, she/he must refer to a religious jurist
and identify his/her religious duty, for if she/he acts without
referring to a jurist, he/she may refrain from an act while it is
obligatory to do or perform an act while it is forbidden to do, thus
committing a sin.

38. If in a single period there is more than one well-qualified
religious jurist, it is obligatory upon one who wants to follow one of
them to investigate about all of them. If all of them are equal or close
in knowledge, he/she may refer to any one she/he wants. If they vary in
the degree of knowledge, he/she must then refer to the most
knowledgeable.

39. It is an obligation for a follower of an unqualified jurist to refer
to a qualified one, whether she/he intentionally followed the
unqualified jurist or by mistake, whether the jurist was unqualified to
begin with or later became unqualified. This is the case even if someone
later becomes preferable over the first jurist.

40. In case a jurist dies, it is obligatory upon the jurist’s followers
to refer to a living jurist in all affairs. This is the case if the
living jurist is more knowledgeable than the deceased one. One may
remain a follower of a deceased jurist if the jurist is more
knowledgeable than the living one or if both are equal in knowledge. One
may remain a follower of the earlier jurist or can refer to the living
one, or may follow the earlier in some issues and the second in others.

41. It is collectively obligatory (*wajib kifa'i*: i.e. if enough people
carry it out others will be released from responsibility, but if
everyone refrains from carrying it out they will all be liable) upon an
intellectually inclined, financially able group from each region to join
academies of religious studies in order to study and become learned in
the fundamental and subordinate laws of religion, in order to fulfill
their own religious duty, educate others, and guide and warn the people.

42. It is collectively obligatory upon people to establish religious
assemblies and seminaries by appointing a group to perform this mission
and to attain the following three goals:

a. The first goal is to lead the ignorant people to decency; i.e.
religion, its fundamental and secondary principles, virtues, sciences,
and learning, which are means of spiritual perfection and motives of
material welfare.

b. The second goal is to enjoin to the right and invite people to
perform righteous deeds.

c. The third goal is to discourage from wrong and keep them from
indecent actions.

This is a collective obligation addressed to all Muslims or all
duty-bound persons. By *a group,* we mean those who work in religious
centers and other fields of knowledge. It is in fact collectively
obligatory upon an assembly of Muslims to choose some persons to study
in seminaries and provide for their expenses from their own property.
However, since every community naturally needs an authoritative leader,
this leader will be automatically responsible for choosing such persons,
at least because the leader has the right to allocate public property to
various uses.

43. To guide ignorant individuals to the right is mandatory in the sense
that it is obligatory to direct people towards the truth and teach them
the religious laws—be they principles of belief, action, or
introductions to these principles—to the extent possible. The
fulfillment of this obligation is the most important reason for
establishing seminaries (i.e. *hawzah*).

44. It is obligatory to examine the validity of any news reported by a
corrupt person, be it information about a religious law, such as
recounting a command, a saying of an infallible, a ruling from a
religious jurist, or information about other issues, such as relating a
dead person’s will. This obligation is conditional upon investigation
and certainty; otherwise, the news cannot be considered substantial
evidence or proof.

45. Just as learning religious rulings is an obligation, so is it
obligatory to learn the details of these rulings. It is thus obligatory
to learn the parts, conditions, and impediments of devotional acts
deemed obligatory by religious law, such as prayer (*salat*), fasting
(*sawm*), poor-rate (*zakat*), pilgrimage (*hajj*), atonements
(*kaffarah*), and so on.

The parts of prayer, for example, include *takbirat al-ihram* (i.e. to
say *allahu-akbar* as the exordial statement of prayer), *ruku’* (bowing
down), *sujud* (prostrating), and other acts. Its conditions include
purity of body and dress, minor ablution (*wudhu’*), facing the qiblah
direction, and other things. The nullifying matters of ritual prayers
include talking (during the prayer), eating, and so on.

Similarly, the parts of ritual *hajj* (pilgrimage to the Holy House in
Mecca) are *ihram* (i.e. entering into a state of consecration by
putting the uniform of *hajj* and refraining from doing certain things),
*wuquf* (halting on Mount ‘Arafat on certain days), *tawaf*
(circumambulating the Holy Ka’bah), *sa’y* (traveling fast seven times
between the hills of al-Safa and al-Marwah), and other matters.
Likewise, the validity of one’s *hajj* is conditional upon certain
matters.

It is also obligatory to learn the non-devotional laws of religion, such
as the amount of *kurr*, less-than-*kurr* water, mines, spoils of war,
legal distances (as they apply to prayers in journeys), shortened-form
prayers, complete-form prayers, residence, homeland, materials on which
*tayammum* (dry ablution) must be done, and the like. Each of these
titles has its own details, laws, and rulings.

46. It is obligatory upon every duty-bound person to learn the
obligations and prohibitions regarding the issues one encounters in
one’s daily life, including personal, family, social, devotional, and
business affairs. Just as it is obligatory to learn the laws pertaining
to the beliefs and principles of the religion, so also is it obligatory
to learn the secondary issues of the religion. The difference is that
learning the fundamentals of the religion is purely rational obligation,
while learning the secondary issues is religious obligation.

47. Innovating heretical doctrines in the religion is forbidden. This
includes ascribing to religion a deed, which is not part of religion or
cannot be proven so, or teaching it to others under the claim that it is
part of religion, be such a deed in the field of belief, devotional
acts, or any other field. Examples of heresy include believing that a
certain tree or a certain place is sacred (without religious proof),
cooking a stew on a certain day in a certain place in the name of a
certain person, observing a continuous fast, or abstaining from talking
as part of devotional acts.

48. It is forbidden (*haram*) for both jurists and ordinary persons to
issue a religious verdict or explain a divine law without having full
knowledge of it, or give a wrong answer to a religious question.

49. It is forbidden for religious scholars to conceal their knowledge,
be it in the field of theology, jurisprudence, mysticism, ethics,
exegesis of the Holy Qur’an, or traditions of the Holy Prophet. In other
words, it is obligatory upon all experts in any of the fields of
religious knowledge to state their views and express their knowledge by
means of speech or writing on condition that there is no fear of
expressing such views, the community is in need for them, or there is no
one else to replace them. Thus, if such information or knowledge cannot
be obtained from any other person, it is then an individual obligation
upon the expert to declare it. However, this obligation will be
collective if there is more than one expert.

50. If people are in urgent need for specialists in a field of
knowledge, such as medicine, engineering, or any other field, it is then
impermissible for the specialists to conceal their expertise. However,
it is collectively obligatory upon such specialists to practice their
skills as much as the public needs them. Also in accordance to the need
of the public, it is collectively obligatory upon the people to practice
jobs that require less specialty, such as grocery, bakery, farming,
agriculture, trade, and the like.

In Muslim countries, fulfilling urgent public needs may be either a
collective obligation or it may change into individual obligation when
refraining from it will cause disorder in the social system, regardless
of the nature of the job.

However, this does not mean that they are required to work for free;
rather, the occupation itself is an obligation, whether they are paid or
not.


