Part 2 Chapter 3: Laws Pertaining To Matrimonial And Family Affairs
===================================================================

134. It is obligatory upon unmarried mature men or women to marry, even
with the minimal financial ability, in the event that not getting
married causes him or her to sin.

135. It is obligatory to defend one’s wife, children, and relatives
against any danger to the extent that it does not result in one’s death.
In such cases, depending upon the situation, it may either be allowed or
forbidden.

136. It is obligatory to maintain relations with family and relatives,
which means keeping a good relationship with one’s parents in matters of
salutation, speech, visit, correspondence, and other common affairs the
refraining from which is considered breaking off connections with them.
This is also applicable to other relatives, yet with different levels.
In addition to providing their livelihood, these actions are obligatory
towards one’s parents and children.

137. It is forbidden to act disrespectfully towards the parents through
such acts like causing one’s father or mother distress and refraining
from carrying out their biddings if such behavior causes them heartfelt
sorrow or anguish except in cases where they order their children to
commit an unlawful deed or violate a forbidden matter.

138. It is forbidden to cut off the ties of kinship without acceptable
reason. This includes refraining from providing the expenses of parents,
children, grandparents, and grandchildren (however much removed) if they
are in need, and also cutting off relationships with one’s paternal and
maternal relatives unless there is a lawful excuse to do so.

139. It is obligatory upon fathers and paternal grandfathers to
undertake the supervision and guardianship of their immature and
mentally disabled children and grandchildren even after the mentally
disabled ones attain puberty. Likewise, it is obligatory upon fathers
and grandfathers to hold the properties of their children and
grandchildren in trust until they are mature. They are required to
educate them physically and mentally and provide them with necessary
expenses by using the children’s property or their own property in case
the children have no property in a generally acceptable way that is
corresponding with the laws of Islam.

140. It is forbidden to kill one’s child for any reason; such as
financial deficiency, inability to train them, or disgrace and
accusation regarding the parents. This law includes illegitimate
children, because to kill an illegitimate child is the same as killing
any other Muslim individual.

141. It is obligatory upon the testamentary guardians of fathers and
grandfathers to undertake the guardianship and supervision of their
immature or mentally disabled children and their properties in the event
that their guardian dies and entrusts this responsibility to the
testamentary guardian.

142. When fathers, grandfathers, or testamentary guardians are absent
and when the supreme religious authority cannot be reached, it is
obligatory upon any believer (*mu’min*)—if a just[^1] (*‘adil*) believer
is not available—to look after and supervise orphans and the mentally
disabled and provide for them through these individuals’ own property.
Naturally, relatives have priority in this regard.

143. It is obligatory upon solvent fathers and paternal grandfathers to
pay the marriage expenses of their male and female children and
grandchildren when they are in need for marriage, too destitute to
afford their own marriages, and expected to commit sins otherwise. As to
children and grandchildren, it is obligatory upon them to pay the
marriage expenses of their single fathers and mothers according to the
aforementioned conditions, since it is obligatory upon them to supply
their parents with the necessary provisions. However, this issue is
controversial.

144. It is obligatory for a man who marries an immature girl by the
permission of her legal guardian and copulates with her before she
attains maturity, causing her urinary and vaginal canals or vaginal and
anal canals to become joined, to pay her life-time alimony even if she
divorces him and marries another man.[^2]

145. In the aforementioned case, it is perpetually forbidden for the
husband to copulate with the wife even if he does not intend to divorce
her.[^3]

146. It is obligatory upon wives whose husbands apostatize to separate
from them and observe a widow’s period of waiting[^4] (*‘iddah*). The
period of waiting starts from the time of the husband’s apostasy,
regardless of whether he repents or not.

147. Before entering into a marriage contact, it is obligatory for men
who suffer one of the following four defects to declare so: (1)
insanity, although periodical, (2) having defected testicles or lack
thereof, (3) having no genital organ, and (4) impotency (i.e. inability
to have sexual intercourse).

148. Before entering into a marriage contact, it is obligatory upon
women who suffer one of the following seven defects to declare so: (1)
insanity, (2) genital mass that prevents sexual intercourse, (3)
leprosy, (4) muteness, (5) vitiligo, (6) blindness, and (7) union of the
urinary and vaginal canals or the vaginal and anal canals.

149. It is obligatory upon all men and women to commit themselves to the
conditions they have agreed upon in the marriage contract or any other
irrevocable contract. Such conditions may involve teaching the other
party the Holy Qur’an, financing the hajj pilgrimage of the other party,
not taking a wife away from her homeland, etc.

150. It is obligatory upon wives to obey their husbands in sexual
matters and to provide him with any type of sexual gratification he
desires, whether through sexual intercourse or other means, unless she
has a religiously valid excuse. It is forbidden for a wife to deny their
husbands from having such pleasure and enjoyment.

151. It is obligatory upon husbands to provide their permanent wives
with such livelihood expenses like food, clothing, and housing in a
generally acceptable manner. This is also applicable to the alimonies
during the period of waiting of revocably divorced wives.

152. It is obligatory upon both wives and husbands to treat each other
kindly through such praiseworthy behavior like nice language, good
manners, high individual and social moral standards, and familiar family
etiquettes, refraining from which is considered misbehavior.

153. It is obligatory upon the wealthy to ensure the living expenses of
their needy fathers, mothers, paternal and maternal grandfathers and
grandmothers, children, and grandchildren.

154. Even if they do not intend to divorce, in case the husbands are
wealthy enough to pay, it is obligatory upon husbands to pay their
wives’ dowries, identified in the marriage contracts, whenever the wives
demand them. In case the husbands have not yet had sexual intercourse
with their wives who demand them to pay their dowries, half of the dowry
must be paid. If the dowry has not been identified yet and copulation
with the wife has taken place, a familiar dowry[^5] (*mahr al-mithl*)
must be paid. However, if neither the dowry has been determined nor has
copulation taken place husbands are not required to pay anything unless
they divorce their wives before copulation. In that case, the husband
must pay an amount relative to his own situation, which is then called
*mut’ah* in the terminology of Muslim jurisprudence. It is strictly
forbidden to refrain from paying the dowry, to pay a lesser amount than
determined, or to force the woman to give up part of or the entirety of
her dowry.

155. It is obligatory upon polygynous husbands to apply justice with
reference to sleeping (not copulating) with their wives. This does not
apply to men who have only one permanent wife. To explain, a husband who
has more than one wife must sleep with each wife equally; if he sleeps
with a certain wife once a week, he must sleep with the others, be they
one or more, once a week, too. However, this issue is controversial.

156. It is obligatory upon permanent and temporary wives who have had
sexual intercourse with their husbands to observe the period of waiting
(*‘iddah*) after separating from them by divorce or legal cancellation
of the marriage contract for permanent wives or by termination of the
term of the temporary marriage or the optional revocation of the
contract for the temporary wives. Generally, a marriage contract is
automatically revoked in the following cases:

a. If the husband apostatizes.

b. In cases where both husband and wife are non-Muslim and the wife
converts to Islam while the husband keeps his to his faith.

c. Certain cases of breastfeeding, such as when the mother-in-law
breastfeeds her son-in-law’s child, with further details found in books
of Muslim jurisprudence.

In all of these cases, divorced or separated women must observe a period
of waiting before they are allowed to remarry.

157. It is obligatory upon permanent and temporary wives to observe the
widow’s period of waiting immediately after the death of their husbands
even if they have not had sexual intercourse with them.

158. During this period of waiting, it is obligatory upon widows to
abandon all sorts of adornment and makeup such as using kohl or perfume,
or wearing fancy dresses regardless of the occasion.

159. It is obligatory upon wives who mistakenly have intercourse a man
other than their husbands to observe a period of waiting from the time
of the intercourse. The husbands then must stay away from them. This
serves to remove all ambiguity about paternity should pregnancy have
occurred due to the mistaken intercourse.

160. It is obligatory upon a revocably divorced woman to comply with all
the rules of matrimony during the period of waiting. She is therefore
required to refrain from leaving her house without the permission of her
husband and to refrain from refusing her husband if he revokes the
divorce. Likewise, it is obligatory upon the revocably divorcing husband
to comply with the rules of matrimony, such as paying the living
expenses of his wife and not casting her out of the house.

161. It is obligatory upon husbands to break oaths meant to upset their
wives. In plain words, if a husband swears that he will not have
intercourse with his permanent wife for more than four months or
forever, intending to upset or distress her, it is then obligatory upon
him to break his oath and engage in intercourse. Moreover, such husbands
must make atonement for taking such an oath, which is terminologically
called *ila’*.

162. It is forbidden to act with prejudice regarding one’s kith and kin,
such as introducing them dishonestly, giving them what rightfully
belongs to others, turning a blind eye to their violation or oppression,
and helping them persecute the others.

163. It is forbidden for wives to act contrary (*nushuz*) and refrain
from fulfilling their legal and moral responsibilities towards their
husbands without acceptable reason.

164. It is forbidden for husbands to act contrary and refrain from
fulfilling their legal and moral responsibilities towards their wives
and treating them in an unworthy manner.

165. It is forbidden for husbands to have sexual intercourse with their
permanent or temporary wives before they (i.e. the wives) have reached
the age of puberty, be they willing or not.

166. It is strictly forbidden for husbands and wives to have sexual
intercourse during the wife’s menstrual and lochial periods, be they
permanent or temporary wives.

167. It is forbidden for wives to hide the existence of a fetus in their
wombs, to keep their husbands ignorant of their menstrual calendar, or
to give false information regarding these issues when it is necessary
for their husbands to be informed, such as in case they must know
whether the period of waiting has terminated or not to see if they can
return to their wives.

168. It is forbidden to harass wives with divorce. In other words, it is
forbidden for a husband to revocably divorce his wife, then return to
her at the very end of the period of waiting, and then divorce her again
and so on, in order to deprive her of her right to remarry. It is also
forbidden to prevent her from remarrying after the termination of the
period of waiting.

169. It is forbidden to cheat the suitors of a woman by describing her
falsely and giving false information about her health, mental, and
physical conditions in order to fool the suitors, whether this action is
done by the woman herself or by her legal guardians and whether the
defects being concealed are among those that automatically cancel a
marriage contract or not. If this happens, the husband, after
discovering that the woman has one of the defects that automatically
annul a marriage contract, has the right to cancel the marriage contract
without resorting to divorcement.

170. It is forbidden for any duty-bound person who has not performed the
*tawaf al-nisa’* ritual in hajj (Women’s Circumambulation) or has
performed it incorrectly to engage in sexual intercourse with his or her
lawful spouse, whether the spouse is male or female, mature or immature,
because such a person is considered to have not yet released
himself/herself from the state of *ihram* until he/she or a proxy on
behalf of him/her performs this ritual in the approved manner.

171. It is forbidden for the abovementioned person to choose a spouse
and get married until he/she performs this ritual. As to persons who do
not believe in *tawaf al-nisa’* as one of the obligatory rituals of
hajj, such as Sunnis, to have sexual intercourse with their spouses or
to get married is not forbidden or invalid. Thus, it is not forbidden
for Shi’ite men and women to marry Sunni women and men who have not
performed the ritual of *tawaf al-nisa’*.

172. It is forbidden for men to marry unmarriageable (*mahram*)[^6]
blood kinswomen; namely, the following five categories:

1. Daughters and granddaughters, however much removed.

2. Mothers and paternal and maternal grandmothers, however much removed.

3. Full sisters and maternal and paternal half-sisters.

4. Daughters and granddaughters of one’s full or half-siblings.

5. Sisters of one’s parents, grandparents, and so on.

173. It is forbidden for a man to marry anyone who falls within one of
the five aforementioned categories because of an illegitimate sexual
relationship, such as an illegitimate sister, illegitimate mother, and
the like.

174. It is forbidden for men to marry anyone who falls within one of the
five aforementioned categories as a result of drinking a sufficient
amount of a woman’s milk and thus becoming her foster *(ridha‘i)*
child*.*

175. It is forbidden for women to marry unmarriageable blood kinsmen;
namely, the following five categories:

1. Sons and grandsons, however much removed.

2. Fathers and paternal and maternal grandfathers, however much removed.

3. Full and half-brothers.

4. Sons and grandsons of one’s full or half-siblings.

5. Brothers of one’s parents, grandparents, and so on.

176. It is forbidden for a woman to marry anyone who falls within one of
the five aforementioned categories because of an illegitimate sexual
relationship, such as an illegitimate father, illegitimate son, and the
like.

177. It is forbidden for women to marry anyone who falls within one of
the five aforementioned categories as a result of *ridha‘i* fostership
(see item 174)*.*

178. It is forbidden to marry stepdaughters (i.e. a daughter of one’s
wife by another marriage) and step-granddaughters, if sexual intercourse
has been had with the wife herself.

179. It is forbidden for a man, after the marriage contract has been
carried out, to marry his mother-in-law, the mother of his
father-in-law, the mother of his mother-in-law, and so on up.

180. It is forbidden for a man to marry his daughter-in-law (i.e. the
son’s wife).

181. It is forbidden for a woman to marry her father-in-law and
grandfathers-in-law, however much removed.

182. It is forbidden for a man to marry his father’s wife and it is
forbidden for a woman to marry her husband’s son and grandsons, however
much removed.

183. It is forbidden for a man to simultaneously have two sisters as
wives, whether their marriage contract is conducted at the same time or
with an interval. In this case, the marriage with the second sister is
forbidden.

184. It is forbidden for a man to marry the daughter of his wife’s
brother or sister without the permission of his wife.

185. It is forbidden for a man to marry the mother, sister, and daughter
of a boy with whom he has committed sodomy during childhood or maturity.
However, it is not forbidden for the sodomized to marry the mother,
sister, or daughter of the perpetrator.

186. It is forbidden to marry more than four permanent wives.

187. It is precautiously forbidden to marry a second or more wives
permanently for those who know that they will not be able to treat the
wives fairly and equally.

188. It is forbidden for Muslim men to marry non-Muslim women with the
exception of the *Ahl al-Kitab*[^7] (i.e. People of the Book), although
this exception is a controversial issue among Muslim master
jurisprudents.

189. It is forbidden for a Muslim woman to marry temporarily or
permanently a non-Muslim man, be he from the *Ahl al-Kitab* or not.

190. It is forbidden for a permanent wife to leave her house without her
husband’s permission, except in certain cases such as performing the
obligatory hajj and ‘umrah, urgent medical treatment, and participation
in defensive or primary jihad if individually obligatory or commanded by
the supreme religious authority.

191. It is forbidden for fathers to disavow paternity of their children
unless they have proof that the child is not theirs and by the verdict
of a religious magistrate.

192. It is forbidden for a husband to hinder his wife’s right of custody
and nursing of her own children if she is willing to nurse without being
paid or for a wage equal or less than what others get.

It is forbidden to force one’s wife to nurse her child if she does not
want to, with or without payment.

It is forbidden to impose on the father a payment beyond his lawful
responsibility.

193. It is forbidden to divorce one’s wife three times on one occasion.
This is not a valid divorce and accordingly the wife is not legally
detached from matrimony.

194. It is forbidden for a man to remarry his three-time divorcee unless
she permanently marries another man, has sexual intercourse with him,
and then separates from him through divorce or his death. After
observing the period of waiting of the divorced or the widow, the first
husband is allowed to remarry her.

195. It is forbidden for a woman whose husband is missing to remarry
unless she gains conclusive knowledge of his death or she refers to the
supreme religious authority who is required by the divine law to search
for the missing husband for four years. If the husband is not found,
then the wife’s guardian can declare her divorced by a judgment issued
by the supreme authority who, also, has the right to declare her
divorced. After her period of waiting elapses, she has the right to
remarry.

196. It is forbidden for a husband to swear, in one of the legal forms
of oath, to eschew sexual intercourse with his permanent wife for more
than four months, with the intent to upset her. Although such an oath is
valid, it is forbidden and it is obligatory to break it and make
atonement, as previously shown in Question No. 71.

197. It is forbidden for a man to accuse his wife of adultery due to
likelihood, suspicion, or someone else’s word, even if the informer is
reliable, before he has absolute conviction. Even if he has such
conviction, a husband must not accuse his wife, because this exposes him
to punishment if he cannot provide before the judge four witnesses to
testify to the wife’s having committed adultery after their testimonies
are subjected to certain strict procedures. If not, the husband and wife
have to take part in a mutual imprecation of God’s curse upon the lying
party (terminologically *li’an*).

198. It is forbidden for a man to marry a woman after they have been the
parties of a legal form of mutual imprecation. Mutual imprecation of
God’s curse upon the lying party (*li’an*) is a legal procedure
according to which a husband who has accused his wife of committing
adultery or disavowed her child swears before the judge, using the
fourfold Qur’anic forms of oath, that he is the truthful party while his
wife is lying. In order to prove her innocence, the wife swears in the
same manner that she is telling truth while her husband is lying. Once
they do so, their matrimonial contract revoked and they are forever
disallowed from marrying one another.

199. It is forbidden for a husband to remarry his divorcee after he has
divorced her revocably nine times, even if she has been married and then
divorced by another husband for every three times. After the ninth
divorce, it becomes eternally forbidden for the divorcer and the
divorcee to remarry. Details of the revocable divorcement can be found
in books of Muslim jurisprudence.

200. It is forbidden to carry out a matrimonial contract with a married
woman or a woman whose period of waiting due to a previous marriage with
another husband has not yet elapsed. If the two parties of such a
matrimonial contract have had full acquaintance of this condition, it
becomes forbidden for both of them to remarry each other forever, even
after the woman’s current husband divorces her or departs life.

201. It is forbidden for a man to marry a woman with whom he has
committed adultery during her husband’s lifetime or during her period of
waiting of revocable divorcement. As a general law, it is eternally
forbidden to marry a woman with whom adultery was committed during the
lifetime of her husband even if the he divorces her or dies.

202. It is forbidden forever for ex-husbands to remarry their deaf and
mute ex-wives after they have accused them of adultery, but could not
prove it by providing religiously acceptable evidence. In this case,
their matrimonial contract is revoked and they can never remarry.

203. It is forbidden for a man to marry a daughter of one of his
parents’ sisters if he has had sexual intercourse with her. However, the
issue is controversial.

204. In the Islamic law, it is strictly obligatory upon women to wear
hijab (the modest, covering veil of Muslim women). It is forbidden for
women to beautify themselves and show their ornaments and parts of their
bodies—except the naturally and normally shown parts, such as the face,
the palms of the hands, and the outward appearance of the clothed
body—before men other than the following categories:

1. Husbands,

2. unmarriageable blood relatives (i.e. father, brothers, and the like),

3. unmarriageable foster-relatives (*ridha‘i*),

4. unmarriageable in-laws,

5. insane and feeble minded men, and

6. immature boys.

Women who have lost any sexual attraction because of old age or the like
matters are allowed to show their body parts on condition that they do
not beautify themselves.

205. It is forbidden to allow wives to return to their infidel husbands
after they, having been proven as faithful Muslims, have separated from
their husbands and have taken refuge in the Muslim state. Of course,
when a wife converts to Islam, her marriage with an infidel husband is
canceled and it is forbidden to return her to the ex-husband; rather,
she is allowed to marry a Muslim man.

206. It is forbidden for men to look at the body parts of marriageable
women (*ajnabiyyah*) except the face and the hands, whether with the
intention of lust and taking pleasure or otherwise. Excepted from this
law are the lust-free looks at women who are accustomed to exposing
certain parts of their body and do not heed enjoinments to the contrary,
such as non-Muslim women and Muslim women who imitate them.

It is also forbidden to look lustfully and pleasurably at the faces and
hands of marriageable women.

207. It is forbidden for women to look at the body parts of
unmarriageable men with and without the intention of lust and taking
pleasure. Excepted from this law are the looks at the body parts that
are naturally uncovered.

It is forbidden for women to look lustfully and pleasurably at the
naturally uncovered body parts of men.

208. Adultery and all kinds of illegal sexual intercourse are forbidden.
So are all preparatory acts to illegal sexual intercourse, such as
conversation, phone calls, correspondence, dating, moving towards an
illegal goal, lustful looks, shaking hands, kissing, and the like.

209. Sodomy (i.e. male homosexuality) is forbidden along with all of its
preparatory acts, such as kissing and lustful physical contact.
Likewise, lustful looks of men at boys and other men are forbidden.

210. Lesbianism (i.e. female homosexuality) is forbidden, whether the
two women are relatives, one of them or both are married or single, or
one is mature and the other is immature. However, in case that one of
them is immature, the effects of violating this prohibition are
undergone by the mature only. Likewise, all preparatory acts of
lesbianism are forbidden, such as the acts previously mentioned for the
prohibition of sodomy.

211. It is forbidden for two naked men or two naked women to sleep under
one cover. Excepted from this law are the relatives, like father and his
son and mother and her daughter even if it is not necessary to do so. It
is forbidden for men to sleep with non-relative women under one cover
even if both are fully clad. Specified punishments have been determined
for committing such sins.

212. It is forbidden to act as intermediary between two persons for
committing adultery or homosexuality.

213. On the whole, all sorts of lustful actions that are intended for
taking pleasure are forbidden for men (except with their wives and
bondwomen) and for women (except with their husbands and masters).[^8]
This prohibition is extended to include all sorts of masturbation, and
lustful manual and mutual stimulation for sexual pleasure, whether or
not the two parties are of the same sex or one party is not human,
regardless of the form of sexual pleasure; e.g. looking, kissing, body
contact, or sexual intercourse.

214. It is obligatory upon men to cover their private parts against all
discerning persons (i.e. having the power of mind developed enough to
discern the good from the bad) regardless of the sex except their wives.
The ritual prayers of those who do not cover their private parts during
prayer are invalid.

215. It is forbidden to look at the private parts of others, be they
male, female, or hermaphrodite, marriageable or unmarriageable, except
for spouses, undiscerning children, or instances of necessity.

216. Exclusive of husbands, it is forbidden for men to assist women in
childbirth, be they relatives or not, except in urgent cases.

217. It is forbidden to inhibit a man’s ability to have sexual
intercourse by depriving him of sexual appetite or power towards his
present or future wife through means such as casting a spell upon him,
using certain medications, and any other means. It is also forbidden to
inflict such means on a wife in order to make it impossible for her
husband to have sexual intercourse with her.

218. Abortion and removal of a fetus from the womb after the
fertilization of the ovum whether at the beginning of the fertilization
or in later stages is forbidden, whether this is done by the parents or
a third person and whether their permission is or is not obtained,
except in cases of emergency, such as danger to the life of the mother.
Miscarriage, regardless of the stage, is a sin that necessitates
atonement and payment of blood money.

219. Medical examination, treatment, surgery, care, and childbirth of
women, requiring sight and touch of body parts must be done by female
physicians except in cases of necessity and emergency.

220. Medical examination, treatment, surgery, and care of men, requiring
sight and touch of body parts must be done by male physicians except in
cases of necessity and emergency.

[^1]: - An ‘adil person is one who complies with religious duties and
refrains from violating religious prohibitions.

[^2]: - In the terminology of Muslim jurisprudence, this case is known
as ifdha'.

[^3]: - Here it seems necessary to add that a girl who has been married
to a man before her age of consent may annul the marriage after reaching
that age. Additionally, item 145 is a point of controversy.

[^4]: - ‘Iddah is a specified period of time that must elapse before a
widow or divorcee may legally remarry.

[^5]: - This is a dowry equal to the dowries of women similar to her in
terms of familial, social, aesthetic, religious, intellectual, etc.
statuses.

[^6]: - These are illegally marriageable persons due to kinship, foster
relation, or the like.

[^7]: - These are followers of divine religions such as Judaism and
Christianity that possess divine books as distinguished from those whose
religions that are not based on divine revelations.

[^8]: - According to the law of Islam, the unmarried women that are
owned by men due to slavery are legally considered their wives. Owing to
the wisdom of the Islamic legislation, slavery was abolished, yet
gradually.


