Part 2 Chapter 5: Laws Pertaining To Food, Dress, and Ways Of Self-Protection
=============================================================================

246. It is obligatory to protect oneself against any significant harm
and against any food, drink, and bodily movement, which causes notable
harm or serious disease.

247. It is obligatory to defend oneself in any possible way against
danger and causes of death, whether the menace is human, animal, or an
event in nature, even if the defense causes harm, injury, or death to
the attacker.

248. It is forbidden to eat the meat, eggs, and other body parts of
marine animals, except for fish with scales. Also, it is forbidden to
eat the eggs and body parts of animals whose meat is haram.

249. It is obligatory to slaughter, according to Islamic standards, the
animals whose meat is halal for eating and other uses and to slaughter,
according to Islamic standards, the animals whose meat is haram for uses
and benefits other than eating. There are certain Islamic standards for
slaughtering any animal. For instance, camels are slaughtered from the
jugular notch, i.e. the hollow at the bottom of their necks, (this type
of slaughter is used for camels and it is called *nahr*), other animals
by cutting their jugular veins, wild animals by hunting, marine animals
by bringing them out of water while still alive, and grasshoppers by
trapping them in a container or a special place for this purpose, or by
emergency slaughtering. In cases of emergency, animals may be
slaughtered in a non-standard form. For example, a cow that falls into a
well and is about to die may be stabbed with a piece of iron while
pronouncing the phrase ‘*bismillahi* (in the Name of God)’ so that its
blood is shed and slaughtering takes place.

250. It is forbidden to eat the meat of a dead animal (i.e. an animal
that is not slaughtered in a lawful way), be it domestic, wild, desert,
or marine, such as the strangled, the dead through beating, the dead
through falling from a height, that which has been killed by the goring
of horns, that which is killed by wild beasts, and that which has been
immolated unto idols. In any of these cases, however, if the animal can
be slaughtered according to Islamic standards before death their meat is
halal. Also, in cases of emergency the aforementioned meat may be
consumed. The prohibition of eating the meat of dead animals is the same
whether the flesh of the dead animal is impure, i.e. *najis*, (such as
dog and swine) or pure, i.e. *tayyib*, (such as fish). However, whether
or not it is legal to use the body parts of animals whose flesh is
impure is controversial, such as the skins of swine and dogs.

251. It is forbidden to eat the meat obtained from the markets of
unbelievers, from an unbeliever in non-Muslims markets, or from a Muslim
who has bought it from an unbeliever. The skin of an animal obtained in
this way is impure and it is wrong to use it.

252. It is forbidden to eat the meat of various small ground and sky
animals, whether they have gushing blood—like rats and porcupines—or
not—like frogs and snakes—except for grasshoppers, which are halal.

253. Of the domestic animals, it is forbidden to eat the meat of cats
and dogs.

254. It is forbidden to eat the meat of predatory animals such as lions,
leopards, wolves, fox, hyenas, and jackals.

255. It is forbidden to eat the meat of the various metamorphosed
creatures—creatures that were originally evil humans of ancient
rebellious nations, transformed by God the Almighty as punishment—such
as elephants, monkeys, pigs, bears, and rabbits.

256. It is forbidden to eat the meat of birds that have talons, such as
hawks, eagles, falcons, and vultures.

257. It is forbidden to eat the meat of the various kinds of crows,
whether black, spotted, or otherwise. This issue is controversial.

258. It is forbidden to eat the meat of birds that always or usually fly
with open wings, without flapping them, and birds that do not have
crops, gizzards, and spurs, except those that are specifically stated as
halal in traditions.

259. It is forbidden to eat the eggs of the birds whose meat is haram.

260. It is forbidden to eat the meat of halal animals that have become
used to eating human excrement. This prohibition remains effective until
the habit is broken and its normal cleanliness is restored.

261. It is forbidden to eat the meat of a halal animal with which a
human being has committed a sexual act. It is also forbidden to drink
their milk, eat their eggs, or even eat the meat of the offspring of
such animals.

262. Some body parts of halal animals are forbidden to eat even if they
have been slaughtered legally. These parts are namely: (1) both male and
female genital organs, (2) uterus, (3) bodily glands, (4) testicles, (5)
pea-like parts of the brain, (5) spinal cord, (6) the fat on the two
sides of the backbone, (6) gall bladder, (7) spleen, (8) urinary
bladder, (9) pupil of the eye, and (10) the center of hooves. However,
some above items are subject to controversy.

263. It is forbidden to eat and drink impure things (*najis*), such as
dead bodies, blood, the meat of a dog or swine, wine, and all other
intoxicating liquids.

264. It is forbidden to eat and drink pure and clean foods and drinks
that are unpurified due to contact with impure things.

265. It is forbidden to use things that are normally intoxicating, even
if they do not intoxicate on exception. The prohibition of using such
things include eating, drinking, injecting, smoking, rubbing on the
body, sniffing, or even wearing, since there are certain clothes that
cause intoxication.

266. It is forbidden to take part in a gathering in which alcoholic and
intoxicating liquids are served.

267. It is forbidden to drink beer, even if it does not cause
intoxication.

268. It is forbidden to drink the grape juice that has boiled on fire
and two thirds of its quantity have not evaporated. This is also true in
case that it has boiled under sunlight or on its own.

269. It is forbidden to eat and drink anything that causes notable harm
to the body and to use any thing that causes notable harm, whether it
causes death, paralysis of limbs, impairment of constitution, or
disablement of any of the bodily abilities, like the ability to
reproduce and give birth.

It is forbidden to cut off any of the body parts unless there is
justifiable reason. It is also forbidden to use any substance that
brings about obvious harm to the mind and spirit.

270. It is forbidden to eat any kind of dust or mud, whether small or
large in amount.

271. It is forbidden to abstain forever from eating the good things God
had deemed legal. These good things include allowed actions, allowed
pure food and clothing, and all the natural gifts and bounties that
Islam has not forbidden. To abstain forever from doing something is to
claim that this thing is forbidden in the law of Islam.


