Al-Irshad
=========

In his biography of ash-Shaykhu 'l-Mufid, Dr. Howard, the translator of
Kitab al-Irshad (The Book of Guidance), has reviewed the intellectual
and social aspects of the author's life. On our part, we also have done
so in the biographies of the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah theologians in the
introduction to the English translation of "Kitabu 't-Tawhid" of Usul
al-Kafi.

Therefore, we shall neither repeat anything here nor comment on what Dr.
Howard has written – in spite of some points of disagreement that we
have with him – because such differences can be seen by comparing the
two discussions here, however, we shall only comment on some important
points related to the book, al-Irshad, itself.

The Name of the Book
--------------------

The title of the book "al-Irshad" has been mentioned without any
genitive construction in both al- Fihrist of ash-Shaykhu’t-Tusi and
al-Fihrist of an-Najashi[^1] as well as in most of the later sources[^2]
that apparently followed the former two bibliographical works. This is
how al-Irshad became the famous title for the book.

However, in many ancient and later references, and also in many
manuscript copies of the book, the title appears in a more complete form
as al-Irshad fi ma‘rifat hujaji 'llah ‘ala 'l-‘ibad. The same title also
appears in the ijazah (permission) for narrating the book issued by the
famous Imami traditionalist, Rashidu'd-Din, Abu Ja‘far, Muhammad ibn
‘Ali ibn Shahrashub as- Sarawi al-Mazandarani (489/1096–588/1192)[^3]
for as-Sayyid Muhyi 'd-Din, Muhammad ibn ‘Abdillah ibn ‘Ali ibn Zuhrah
al- Husayni al-Halabi (566/1171–636/1239)[^4].

Similarly, the full title appears in another ijazah given to al-Halabi
by the famous Shi‘ah jurist, ash-Shaykh Abu Ja‘far, Muhammad ibn Idris
al- Hilli (543/1148 – 598/1202).The author (r.a.)[^5], himself has not
described the title in the book; yet the longer title is descriptive of
the purpose for which the book was written as mentioned in the author's
introduction.

The Readership
--------------

Al-Irshad was written for the lay reader- ship, according to their
requirements, and in a form appropriate for the general level of
education prevailing at al-Mufid's time so that every reader and
listener may benefit from it. Therefore, the writer (r.a.) was bound to
write in brief and to the point as he himself has mentioned in the
introduction, the epilogue and at various other places in the book.

The only style adopted by the author is of description and narration –
just as the historical events are described in books of history and just
as the ahadith are narrated in the books of hadith – without providing,
for what he has written, any proof or evidence except by quoting hadith
and history. This is the style to which every reader and every
listener's mind is moulded.

Indeed, the writer (r.a.), succeeded in his objective, since the book
al-Irshad – although written a thousand years ago – has became one of
the important sources for oratory in Imamiyyah gatherings, especially in
the memorial ceremonies for the Master of the Martyrs, al-Imam al-Husayn
ibn ‘Ali (may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon him and all those
who sacrificed their lives with him). Even today, the lecturers and the
orators of the maqtal[^6] depend on it, at times even read directly from
it. May Allah reward the writer on our behalf – the community of
Imamiyyah – with the best of His rewards!

This is the reason why the writer (r.a.), did not resort to the
polemical and theological style of writing which relies on rational
arguments and scientific terminology – from philosophy, theology and the
principles of jurisprudence – which cannot be complete without going
into details, identifying the weak points, highlighting the ambiguous
aspects, quoting differing views for each issue that he propounds,
analyzing them and preferring one view and refuting the other as is the
common practice of the theological and philosophical studies.

In short, the author (r.a.), has refrained from the theological style of
writing; and, therefore, it would not be correct to consider the book as
anything but a reflection of ash-Shaykhu 'l-Mufid's perspective in
history and hadith; it cannot be considered as a sample of his
theological and polemical style of writing. In the following pages, we
shall mention some examples clarifying the difference between the style
he has adopted in this book and the style of theologians he has adopted
elsewhere when discussing the same issue.

In order to combine the style of relying on the narration without
analyzing them minutely or without employing pro- found rational
thinking, on the one hand, and the exercise of convincing the reader
about the validity of the narration, on the other hand, ash-Shaykhu
'l-Mufid has relied in his narration of the lives of the Imams
(‘a.s.)[^7], and their distinctive characteristics in most instances on
what has been mentioned by the neutral historians and biographers.

I do not say that the attribute of neutrality can be applied to all of
them and to all that they narrate, nor do I claim that the accusation of
partiality and sectarian bias in presenting historical events for
religious or political motivations are applicable to the sources not
used by al-Mufid. I leave aside this discussion about the affiliations
of the historians, narrators and jurists to the rulers, and that they
choose to ignore whatever the rulers wanted to be ignored and that they
presented favourably whatever the rulers wanted to be presented
favorably.

At this stage, I would just like to state that the biased and official
historians have ignored the lives of the later Imams of Ahlu 'l-bayt
(‘a.s.), except where the events were connected to the rulers and the
caliphs. This is the reason why ash-Shaykhu 'l-Mufid was compelled to
rely on the Shi‘ah Imamiyyah narrators when discussing the Imams of Ahlu
'l-bayt (‘a.s.), who came after the first Islamic century.

The style of brevity which al-Mufid has imposed on him- self in
al-Irshad has compelled him in many instances to rely on a single
historian whom he has chosen against the others without giving reasons
for his preference as a source for that particular event. This is so
even in cases where there is a difference among the historians on that
particular issue, for instance, when he mentions the death of al-Imam
Musa al-Kazim (‘a.s.) in which he has relied entirely on Abu 'l-Faraj
al-Isbahani. This is one of the objectionable points raised by the
respected translator against the writer. Moreover, Abu 'l-Faraj is
considered closer than others to neutrality by the opponents of the
Imamiy- yah, and he is not accused by them of sectarian bias.

If I may say so, the translator himself was also acting under the same
self-imposed restriction when he mentions in his foot- note (p.275) only
one source for the event of Ghadir Khumm, that is, al-Baladhuri. Any
scholar slightly familiar with hadith, islamic history and the
discourses on imamate knows that very few events in the history of Islam
and very few ahadith among the prophetic narration on imamate or the
life of Amiru 'l- Mu’minin ‘Ali (‘a.s.) have received that much
attention at the hand of Muslim scholars and theologians (the Shi‘ahs
and the Sunnis alike) as the event of Ghadir Khumm.

It would suffice to know the books written by the Muslim scholars and
traditionalists sunni and shi‘ah alike on this subject; the latest and
most important of all works on this issue is al-Ghadir fi 'l-Kitab wa
's-Sunnah wa 'l-Adab by one of the contemporary Shi‘ah scholar
ash-Shaykh ‘Abdu 'l-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Amini an- Najafi
(1320/1902–1390/1970) of which eleven volumes have already been
published, and the work is not yet complete.

Ash- Shaykh al-Amini has dedicated the first volume to the text of
hadithu 'l-Ghadir and its narrators from our Sunni brethren and their
scholars who number hundred and ten companions (ashab) of the Prophet,
eighty-five disciples (tabi‘in) of the companions and about four hundred
scholars of hadith and history over the thirteen Islamic centuries after
the first century of the companions and their disciples.

The style of brevity and strict adherence to its objective also defined
the contents of the book, and that is why al-Mufid does not narrate the
life of the Holy Prophet (s.‘a.w.a.)[^8] or the life of Fatimatu
'z-Zahra’ (‘a.s.). Otherwise, the lives of these two personalities are
inseparable from any discourse about the lives of the Imams as can be
observed in what has been done by al- Kulayni in "Kitabu 'l-Hujjah" of
Usul al-Kafi; by at-Tabrisi in I‘lamu 'l-wara bi a‘lami 'l-huda; by
al-Irbiliyy in Kashfu 'l- ghummah fi ma‘rifati 'l-aimmah; and by
al-‘Allamah as-Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin in his A‘yanu 'sh-Shi‘ah.

[^1]: at-Tusi, al-Fihrist, p.187; an-Najashi, al-Fihrist, p.311.

[^2]: Ibn Shahrashub, Ma‘alimu 'l-‘ulama’, p.101; al-Quhba’i, Ma‘jma‘u
'r- rijal, vol.6, pp.33-34; al-Hurr al-‘Amili, Wasailu 'sh-Shi‘ah,
vol.20, p.43;

[^3]: al-Majlisi, al-Bihar, vol.107, p.156.

[^4]: Ibid, vol.109, p.44. The same title also appears in adh-Dhari‘ah,
vol.10, pp.509-10; the introduction by as-Sayyid Hasan al-Khirsan to
Tahdhibu 'l-ahkam, (an-Najaf al-Ashraf [Iraq] edition), vol.1, p.22;
Brockelmann, Tarikhu't-turathi 'l-‘Arabi, (Arabic transl.), vol.12,
p.278. The last two references have mentioned numerous manuscripts of
al-Irshad.

[^5]: Rahimahu 'llah, i.e., May Allah have mercy upon him.

[^6]: Narration of the martydoms of al-Imam al-Husayn's (‘a.s.), and his
companions

[^7]: ‘Alayhi/‘alayha/‘alayhima or ‘alayhimu 's-salam (i.e., Peace be
upon him/her or them)

[^8]: Salla 'llahu ‘alayi wa alih (i.e., May the blessing of Allah be
upon him and his progeny).


