Imam Hasan (A)
==============

Imam Hasan (a) was the eldest son of Imam Ali (a). He was born on 15th
Ramadan, 3 A.H. in Madina. The first phase of seven years of the second
Imam's infancy was blessed with the gracious patronage of the Holy
Prophet, who gifted him with all his great qualities and adorned him
with divine knowledge to such an extent that he was outstanding in his
knowledge, tolerance, intelligence, bounty and valour. After Imam Ali
(a) he became the second Imam of the Muslim Ummah. He showed kindness
even to his enemies.

During the time of Imam Hasan (a) and his father Imam Ali (a) there was
a man who was desirous of becoming the leader of all the Muslims. To
achieve this end, he used to abuse Imam Ali (a) and his family. The name
of the man was Mu'awiyah.

One day, a follower of Mu'awiyah came to Madina and approached Imam
Hasan (a). As he was opposed to the Imam, he did not even wish him and
began using foul language. The followers of Imam Hasan (a) wanted to
punish the man for his misbehaviour but the Imam asked them to leave him
alone. Then he turned to the man, and said: “Salamun Alaikum” and
enquired about his health. He spoke to him very nicely and invited him
to his house.

When the man observed the Imam's noble behaviour, he was very much
ashamed. He also realized that whatever Mu'awiyah said against Imam Ali
(a) and Imam Hasan (a) was not true. Therefore, before leaving Madina,
he went to Imam Hasan (a) and begged his pardon. Thereafter, whenever he
heard anyone saying anything against Imam Hasan (a) or other members of
the Holy Prophet's family, he would say that it was not true. He would
tell people how good, kind and generous Imam Hasan (a) was.

Imam Hasan (a) was very modest and forbearing.

Questions
---------

1. Why was Mo'awiyah against Imam Ali (a) and his family?

2. Why did Mu'awiyah's follower use foul language against the Imam?

3. How did Imam Hasan (a) treat Mu'awiyah's follower? What was the
effect of this treatment?


