Imam Zayn Al-Abidin (A)
=======================

The fourth Imam Ali (a) was born in Madina on 15th Jumadi I, 37 A.H. He
was very pious and was usually busy praying to Allah. For this reason,
people called him Zayn al-Abidin (Ornament of the worshippers) and
al-Sajjad (One who prostrates).

He was the only son of Imam Husayn (a) who survived after the tragedy of
Karbala. Thereafter, he devoted himself to Allah's worship and guidance
of the people.

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a) was very mindful of the welfare of the sick, the
needy and the poor. He usually left home late at night with some food
and money. Without being observed by the general public he reached the
houses of the needy and delivered these things to them. After having
done this, he returned home.

It was the keen desire of Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a) that people should
become learned. He, therefore, encouraged all the Muslims, especially
the children, to acquire knowledge.

One day he saw a group of children studying together, This pleased him
very much. After saying Salam in reply to their greetings, he said:

“O dear children! Study well You are children today but will grow up
after some time. Take care that the knowledge you acquire should be
beneficial for humanity”.

The invaluable collection of the Imam's edited supplications is known as
“Sahifa al-Kamila.” The collection is an invaluable treasury of
wonderfully effective supplications to Allah in an inimitably beautiful
language. Through these supplications, the Imam gave all the necessary
guidance to the faithful during his seclusion.

Only that knowledge is worth acquiring which is beneficial for humanity.

Questions
---------

1. Why is our fourth Imam called Zayn al-Abidin?

2. How did Imam al-Sajjad (a) usually help the people?

3. What advice did Imam al-Sajjad (a) give to the children whom he saw
studying together?


