Imam Ja'far Al-Sadiq (A)
========================

The name of our sixth Imam is Ja'far (a) and he is generally remembered
by the title of al-Sadiq. He was the son of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a).
He was born in 83 A.H.

Imam al-Sadiq (a) was the greatest and most renowned sage of his time.
He had established a school in which thousands of students received
instruction in Islamic Law and other branches of learning.

Imam al-Sadiq (a) treated all human beings like his children. He
generously helped the needy and the poor. It is said that once the
Abbasid Caliph, Mansur, decided to kill Imam al-Sadiq (a). For this
purpose he hired one hundred illiterate and uncouth persons. The plan
was that he would summon the Imam and when a specified signal was given,
they should cut him to pieces with their swords. However, when the Imam
came all those persons showed him respect, although the necessary signal
had been given to them. The hypocritical caliph also received the Imam
cordially. When the Imam had left for his house, Mansur enquired from
those persons as to why they had not killed him. They replied, “By
Allah! We did not know that you wanted us to kill this holy person. He
is as kind to us as a father and helps us day and night. How could we
kill him?” Mansur had no alternative but to keep quiet.

Like other leaders of the faith, Imam al-Sadiq (a) also liked to do his
work with his own hands. One day, when he was working on his farm, one
of his disciples came up. He said to the Imam, “Please allow me to work
for you” The Imam replied:

“Everyone must work for his own livelihood instead of depending on
others”.

Love and sincerity can turn the worst persons into the best friends.

Questions
---------

1. What services did the Imam render to Islamic learning?

2. Why did the persons hired by Mansur not kill the Imam?

3. Why did Imam al-Sadiq (a) not allow his disciple to work for him on
the farm?


