Respect for Others
==================

The prayer time was drawing near. The Holy Prophet was sitting in the
Masjid in Madina with some of his followers and was speaking to them. By
and by, other people also began entering the Masjid to pray with him,
and also to benefit from his valuable sayings.

One of the entrants was a rich man wearing a very costly garment. He
came and sat just in front of the Holy Prophet. In the meantime, another
man also came in and sat by the side of the rich man. The garments and
appearance of the new-comer betrayed his weak financial position. The
rich man disliked his sitting by his side in an unconcerned manner and
pulled his clothes away from him.

This action on the part of the rich man was strongly disapproved by the
Holy Prophet - the greatest benefactor of humanity, the torch-bearer of
equality, fraternity and justice. He addressed him in these words:

“I have noticed that you have pulled away your clothes from this man,
what is the reason for this? Is it because you were afraid that some of
your wealth might go to him, or that his poverty might penetrate into
you?”

The rich man was noble-minded by nature. He at once realized his mistake
and said:

“O' Prophet of Allah! I admit that I have made a great error. To atone
for this, I am prepared to give half of my wealth to this brother of
mine”.

The Holy Prophet then asked the other person, “What do you say about
it?” To this he replied:

“O' Prophet of Allah! I accept the apology of my brother and forgive
him. His wealth is not, however, acceptable to me, because I am content
with the living earned by hard-work. I do not want to become rich
without doing any work.

To err is human, to forgive divine.

Questions
---------

1. Why did the rich man pull away his clothes?

2. Did the Prophet approve of the action of the rich man?

3. Why did the poor decline to share the wealth of the rich?


