The Secret of Successful Life
=============================

The secret of human success lies in keeping things properly. People who
keep their belongings in proper order are always successful in life. On
the other hand, those who lack this quality can never achieve success.

Punctuality and regularity in all our activities are very important
factors of success. We should do everything at its proper time. We
should chalk out a programme for our work, games, outings, rest and
sleep, and adhere to it strictly. We should also offer our prayers
regularly and at the proper time. By doing so, we shall be able to
perform every task in time and shall not face any embarrassment. We
should never postpone today's work until tomorrow. Doing so is the cause
of all troubles.

Time is something very precious. It is a well-known saying that, “Time
and tide wait for no man”. We should, therefore, appreciate the value of
our own time and should not waste the time of others. If we make an
appointment with another person, we should make it a point to reach the
place agreed upon at the appointed time or a minute or so earlier.
Similarly, if we undertake to do some task for somebody, we should do it
properly and on time.

It is necessary to do every job neatly and in a proper manner. When you
return from school, you should not throw your uniform into one corner
and your books into another. The best way is to request your mother to
fix a place for your books and other things and to keep them in a proper
way.

An orderly life is the key to success.

Questions
---------

1. What should one do to lead a successful life?

2. Why should we appreciate the value of time?

3. Which are the important factors of a successful life?


