Sympathy for Animals
====================

Man is Allah's noblest creature. A glance at the universe shows that he
is the central figure in it and Almighty Allah has created him to make
gradual progress. It also appears that all other things are subordinate
to him and have been created to assist him in achieving this object. The
animals form an important part of such useful things.

Man utilizes animals for various purposes. He uses some of them for the
purpose of cultivation and others as means of transport. Some animals
provide him with meat as well as milk, which is a very wholesome human
diet. He also uses their hides and skins to manufacture various
articles. There are also many other jobs for the completion of which man
needs the services of animals.

As we derive so many benefits from animals, it is also our duty to
protect and nourish them. The commands of Islam in this behalf are very
important and clear. The Holy Prophet of Islam has said: “It is the duty
of those who use animals for transport purposes to provide them with
enough fodder and water and to take proper care of them. They should not
load them beyond their capacity and should not harm them”.

As explained above, it is our duty to treat the animals sympathetically
and kindly. We should take particular care to feed the domestic animals
properly and accommodate them at a comfortable place. We should not be
cruel to them. It should also be remembered that the Holy Imams, too,
took special care about the comfort of the animals. Good treatment meted
out by us to animals is also likely to be reflected in our treatment of
human beings.

Islam has ordered us to treat the animals kindly.

Questions
---------

1. What benefits do we derive from animals?

2. What instructions did the Prophet give about the animals?

3. What opinion will you form about a person who does not treat animals
kindly?


