The Holy Qur'an
===============

Almighty Allah endowed the Prophets with knowledge and wisdom, and sent
them to guide the people. However, these chosen servants of Allah also
performed some super-natural feats to satisfy the stubborn ones. These
feats are called 'miracles'.

Our Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) also performed many miracles. However, his
ever-lasting miracle is the heavenly Book brought by him viz. QUR'AN.

Qur'an is the book in which no alteration has taken place so far, nor
will it ever take place in future. It is not possible for anyone to
compose anything which may equal even one verse of this unique book.

The Holy Qur'an is the last message of Allah for mankind, and its
teachings are the only source of human prosperity and guidance. It is a
masterpiece of knowledge, methods of education and secrets of creation.

In some parts of the Holy Qur'an man has been asked to think deeply to
understand the realities of the vast universe, and thus realize the
Greatness of Allah, to the extent possible. In other parts, a mention
has been made of the Day of Judgement, and man has been reminded that he
will have to account for his good and evil deeds. In the last parts of
the Holy Qur'an, man has been ordered to follow Divine rules and
regulations in the matter of justice, peace and social welfare.

Some true stories about the former Prophets and nations have also been
related in the Holy Qur'an. The stories of the conversion of the rod of
Musa (a) into a python and coming to life of the dead and the recovery
of the born blind through Isa (a) are undeniable. The Holy Qur'an is the
guide which directs humanity in all its affairs and at every stage of
its development, it ensures the success of man in this world as well as
the Hereafter.

The Holy Qur'an is the corner stone of Islam.

Questions
---------

1. Why is it said that Qur'an is an unparalleled miracle?

2. What is the nature of the commandments given in Qur'an?

3. What stories are narrated in the Holy Qur'an?


