Childhood of Prophet Muhammad (S)
=================================

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) was the son of Abdullah and Amina. His
father, Abdullah, passed away a few days before his birth. He was born
in the city of Mecca in Arabia. His forefathers were the chiefs of the
tribe of Quraysh.

It was customary among the noble families of Quraysh that they entrusted
their new-borns to country-women so that they might be brought up in the
open and healthy environments. According to this custom, therefore, the
mother of the Holy Prophet gave him into the care of Halima Sa'dia, a
lady belonging to the tribe of Banu Sa'd.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) spent the first five years of his life
with Halima and then she returned him to his mother, Amina. His mother
brought him up with great love and devotion. When he was about six years
old, she took him to Madina for a few days. On her return journey,
however, she breathed her last on the way. After this his grandfather
Abd al-Muttalib took him into his care.

Abd al-Muttalib loved his orphaned grandchild very much and was very
kind to him. However, he too, expired after two years.

Now the Holy Prophet began to live with his uncle Abu Talib. Fatima,
daughter of Asad, who was the wife of Abu Talib loved Muhammad (a) as if
he were her own son. Abu Talib, too, was very good to him. When he
undertook a journey for the purpose of trade, he took his young nephew
along with him.

As Muhammad (a) acquired, under the guidance of his uncle, fair
knowledge and experience of business, and was well spoken of by persons
who happened to come in touch with him, some traders engaged him as
their representative to conduct important business affairs on their
behalf. Muhammad (a) so successfully executed these trusts that people
were perfectly satisfied with his honesty. The people, therefore,
respected him very much and used to call him Sadiq (the truthful) and
Amin (the trustworthy).

From his early childhood he never took part in idolatrous rituals and
never told a lie. He had excellent habits and an unimpeachable
character.

Honesty and truthfulness command respect and honour.

Questions
---------

1. How old was the Holy Prophet when his father died?

2. How did Abu Talib and his wife treat the Prophet?

3. Why did people call the Holy Prophet Sadiq and Amin?


