Social Etiquette
================

When Prophet Muhammad (a) declared himself to be the Messenger of Allah,
the people of Arabia were leading a very miserable life. They were rough
and ignorant people who were not conversant with the decorum of a
civilized society. So much so that they did not care even to seek
permission before entering another's house and did not wish each other
when they met. They considered themselves to be enemies of each other
and spoke in a very harsh tone. The Holy Prophet gradually taught them
the rules of social behaviour and the principles of civilization and
culture.

During the last fourteen centuries, man has made great progress in
different walks of life. Education has become very common and modern
means of transport have made the world much narrower. However, the
universal and eternal Islamic principles of civilization continue to
guide humanity. We mention below some of them which are well-known as
well as very important for our social life.

If we intend entering somebody's house or room and the door is shut, we
should knock at the door gently with a view to seeking permission to
enter.

If we happen to meet some acquaintances in a gathering or in a street,
we should wish them by saying “Salamun Alaikum”.

While walking in a street, we should be careful not to bump into anyone.
In case we form part of a crowd, we should walk behind one another so
that we do not block the way of others.

It is necessary for us not to disturb others. When others are sleeping,
we should remain quiet and should not disturb their sleep by making
noise.

Most of us are well aware of these rules and principles but are usually
negligent in observing them. However, to lead a pleasant social life, it
is incumbent upon us to understand these principles properly and to act
upon them to the best of our ability.

Islam teaches us the best social etiquette.

Questions
---------

1. What was the condition of the Arabs 14 centuries ago?

2. If we visit another person, what should we do before entering his
house?

3. Which are the best social manners?


