Imam All (A)
============

Imam Ali (a), the first Imam, was the son of Abu Talib and the cousin
and son-in-law of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (a). He was born on Friday,
the 13th Rajab in the Holy Ka'aba. From his very childhood, he was
brought up in the house of the Holy Prophet who imparted the best
education to him. Even after he grew up, he spent most of his time with
the Holy Prophet. He was the first among men to accept Islam and offer
prayers in the company of the Holy Prophet. He had complete mastery of
the verses of the Holy Qur'an and Islamic Laws. After the Holy Prophet
of Islam, he was the greatest scholar of Islamic learning.

He was unmatched in his piety, learning, kindness, justice, contentment,
toil, forbearance, self-sacrifice and bravery and enjoyed the highest
position among the Muslims.

Before saying or doing anything, he gave serious thought to all its
aspects. As such, whatever he said was correct and whatever he did was
according to Islamic teachings and justice.

He spent the whole of his life fighting against injustice and always
upheld truth and justice.

He was polite and modest and treated everyone like a brother and a
friend. He was never unfair to anybody and did not displease anyone.

He used simple, but clean clothes. His diet was also very simple. He
usually ate barley bread. He was so just and contented that he once
said,

“If you give me the whole world, to snatch away just one grain from the
month of an ant, I will never do so”.

Under Allah's command, the Holy Prophet nominated Imam Ali (a) as his
successor and the leader of the Muslims. He lived for about thirty years
after the Holy Prophet. On the 19th of Ramadan 40 A.H., while offering
his prayers in the Masjid al-Kufa, he was struck with a poisoned sword
by a Kharejite, Abd al Rahman son of Muljim. He breathed his last on the
21st of Ramadan. His sacred tomb is in the city of Najaf al-Ashraf, in
Iraq.

Love for Imam Ali (a) is an article of faith.

Questions
---------

1. Who brought up Imam Ali (a) right from his childhood?

2. What are the qualities for which Imam Ali (a) is well known?

3. What was Imam Ali (a) doing when he was attacked?


