8. Appreciation and Acclamation
===============================

The meaning of appreciation and acclamation is that the "'parents"
should respect their children, should appreciate their sweet and
admirable tasks, direct them on the right path with sincerity and
soberity. Make the atmosphere at home peaceful and dignified. These
freshly bloomed roses are weak in physique, therefore adopt extreme
Politeness and tenderness in making them to read and write, it is very
important to take care of their ignorance. Therefore when a remedial
measure is required, adopt love and affection!

Well, on hearing the issue of "appreciation and acclamation" with
respect to their children, some parents may feel irritated! -- -But,
what to do? To harness your beloved and dear ones, to foster a complete
and fully balanced personality, these are the demands of the rules of
psychology and the laws of Sharia'h The Holy Prophet (SAWAW) has
ordained:-

"You should respect your children, enrich them with the qualities of
decent etiquettes.

Allah would forego your short falls.61 The Greatest blessings of the
universe, Holy Prophet (SAWAW) has further directed: - "Do not under
evaluate the value and prestige of any Muslim, because in the Grace of
Allah, even the small children of believers have an extremely high
stature ,"62 In this context, there is still another saying of the Holy
Prophet: -


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
61. Wasail ash-Shia', Vol:15, Page: 195
Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol:23, Page: 114
Sannan-Ibne-Maja', Vol:2, Page: 397, pub1isI~ed Lahore

62 Maj'mua-e-Warram, Vol: 1, Page: 31

"Oh people! I stress upon you to unceasingly demonstrate honest and
decent attitude towards your youngsters."63 Now let us dwell a while on
these sayings.

The first stage of appreciation of the children is to pay special
attention towards the signs of their general recognition, i.e. their
name. The name of every individual permanently binds to himself, and is
permanently used for his recognit1on. Therefore the name should be so
selected that, it should be beautiful (attractive), dignified, and a
base for "the cognizance of Allah" rather the "cognizance of one's
self".

Regarding this, the Prophet of Allah (SAWAW), guides us in the
following manner:- "The first prize awarded to your child should be that
you give him an extremely beautiful name."64 Out of the special
teachings that the Holy Prophet taught Hazrat Ameer (ASWS) one of them
was:-

"Oh All (ASWS)! every son has a right over his father, that he should
suggest a nice name for him, and should educate him by extremely refined
techniques."65 The seventh guide of the progeny of the Holy Prophet,
Hazrat Imatn Musa Kazim narrates:

Once a person came to the Holy Prophet, and said: "Oh Prophet of Allah
(SAWAW)! what is the right of this son of mine, upon me"? The Holy
Prophet answered:

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
63. Kitab-e-Qurreish, Page: 1.
64. Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol:1O1, Page: 130
65. Wasail ash-Shia', Val: 15, Page: 123.

"Give him an attractive name, enrich him with the qualities of decent
etiquettes and provide him with the best possible means to work."66
Further in the same context there is another saying of lmam Musa Kazim
(ASWS)

"Whosoever he may be, the first good deed he should do for his son is
the selection of a decent name. Moreover, at the time of selection of
the name everyone of you has to fully concentrate on it's beautification
aspect"67

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

There is no reason to refute the fact that, the elegance or the ill
structuredness of a name has a profound impact on one's personality!
Good names are liked by all, no one prefers a bad name! And the "beauty
or distortion" of a name, produces a pleasant or repulsive reaction by
which the biological composition of the body keeps on accepting positive
and negative effects.

During a mutual introduction session in a gathering, any sensible
person would definitely feel shy and uncomfortable by introducing
himself, say by the name as Lousy, or his father as Crook, and moreover
due to the persistence and continuity of this state, would certainly
develop inferiority complex. Since name is an extremely significant
issue of the whole life, therefore the leaders of the caravan, assigned
to lead the mankind to the apex of perfection with peace and safety, did
not deprived us from their divine guidance in this sphere.

To lead, right from the very start, the new generation to a dignified
life, our guides who are well aware of "the Islamic mood", besides
bestowing us with many other enlightenments for our thought and percept,
also gave this divine guidance that we must decorate our beloveds with
names, elegantly carved as emeralds; so that, when these innocent buds,
in the garden of our


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
66. Waail ash-Shia', Vol: 15, Page: 198.
Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol: 71, Page: 85
67. Tahzeeb-ul-Ahka'm, Vol: 7, Page: 437, A1-Kafi, Vol: 6, Page: 18.
Wasail ash-Shia', Vol: 15, Page: 122.

desires, bloom out as roses, the sumptuous composition of their names
and the fascinating grace of it's meanings, should start generating in
them lofty waves of "life and colour".

Well, the measure of the beauty and grandeur of names is that, when
called out, be graceful; when heard, be vibrant; and on writing be
lucid. Moreover there meaning should portray nobility, bear grandeur,
and encompass a world of well being and prosperity, in it.

Well there is a possibility that, someone due to his environment and
mental stature, gets, impressed by a name because of it's literal
subtlety (delicacy) and it's euphonic (sweet) melody, but while giving
someone a name, just the lingual elegance and attractive expression, is
not sufficient! Here all the relationships of grandeur and purity, both
historical and traditional are essential in it's selection.

Otherwise, when someone is given an incomplete name, he would not only
be deprived from his established right of "respect and acclamation", but
it would also be an injustice with his personality! That is why the
righteous leaders have very openly pinpointed the model and approved
names. Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqar (ASWS) says, that the Holy Prophet
(SAWAW) has stated:-

\`"The best names are those by which manifest dedication to Allah, and
ideal names are the names of the Honourable Prophet!" The Holy Prophet
says:-

"If some person has four sons, and none of. them bear my name, then he
has been unjust to me!"68 Sadiq-e-Ale-Muhammad lm?m Jaffa'r . as-Sadiq
was being questioned: - "Oh Mola' (Our Lord)! We name our children on
the names of your forefathers, would we be deriving any benefit out of
it?"

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
68. Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol: 101, Page: 130
Tehzeeb-ul-Ah'kam, Vol: 7, Page: 438

lmam replied: yes, by God you would definitely draw benefit."69 The
Ba'b-ul-Hawa'ij Hazrat Imam Musa Kazim directs:-

"In any family if the names (of males) are Muhammad, Ahmad, Ali, Hasan,
Hussain, Ja'ffar, Ta'lib, or Abdulla'h, and the names of any of the
female is Fatima, then poverty and hunger would never struck that
home!"70

Under the chapter of "Respect and Honour", not only the adoption of an
appropriate and suitable name is being emphasized, but the wealth of
Islamic knowledge and ethics instructs us that the leaders of the
religion of Allah, at certain instances, in order to satisfy the people
and for keeping them as well-wishers, changed the undesirable names of
personalities and localities.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
Hazrat Imam Jaffar Sadiq, quotes through his father:-

"The bad names which the people, cities, and localities bored, the
Prophet of Allah used to change them."71 Among one of the renowned
personalities, to whom the Holy Prophet (SAWAW), handed over his written
scriptures, is also the representative of Banu' Salim, named
Rashid-bin-Abd'eRa'b. It is mentioned in the books of traditions,
general history and history of narrators, it is mentioned that his name
was originally "Za'lim (i.e. meaning a tyrant)", and according to
Marzbani, before. Islam be used to be called as Ghavi (i.e. meaning
Misleader)"! When he was blessed with the audience of Holy Prophet, the
Grace of the two worlds, Hazrat Muhammad (SAWAW) changed his old name to
"Rashid (i.e. meaning pious)".72

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol: 101, Page: 130
Tah'zeeb-ul-Ah'kam, Vol: 7, Page:438
Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol: 101, Page: 127. Qurb-ul-Asna'd, Page:45.
Makatee'b-e-Rasool, by: Ali-bin-Hussain Ali

In the same way, there was another elder named as Abu-Rashid
Abdar-Rahman Az'di. The editor of Asa'd-ul-Gha'ba. Ibne Kaseer, narrates
that he belonged to Palestine. Probably in the year nine (9) A.H. he was
blessed by the audience of the Holy Prophet.

The Holy Prophet inquired:What is your name?

He replied:Abdul-Ghuz'a. The Prophet asked:And Surname?

He replied:Abu Mghavia. on hearing this, the Prophet said:

"From today, your surname is Abu-Rashid, and name, Abdur- Rahman . "73
Imam Muslim-bin-Haj'jaj in his Sah'ih, chapter AI-A'ada'b, and Abu
Dawood in his Sanan, chapter A'ada'b has mentioned this tradition:-

lbn-Umar states that the name of one of the daughter of Umar bin
Khat'ab was As'siya (meaning sinner, culprit), the Holy Prophet changed
it to Jamila (meaning beautiful, elegant). 74

Summing up the issue, in the instructions given to us regarding giving
of names, there is no yielding! The name should be appropriate,
exquisitive (refined) and purposeful. Our guides changed those names,
where ever there was the slightest doubt of indecency or
inappropriateness. They either replaced them with a better name, or made
the persons feel the displeasure of his name and surname.

The Great authentic scholar, like Zurara-ibne-Aeyan Shiba'ni, narrates
in this tradition, after directly hearing it from Baqar-ul- Uloo'm lmam
Muhammad Baqar (ASWS):-

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
73. Makatee'b-ur-Rasool, Vol: 2, Page: 372
74. Sah'ih Muslim, Va]: 14, Page: 119, published: Beirut, Sanan
Abu-Dawood, Vol:4, Page: 288, published: Beruit

Zurara quotes that lrnam Muhammad Baqar narrates that, a person, whose
surname was Abu- Marrah, frequently used to visit l-Iazrat lmam
Zain-ul-Abe'edin, and when ever he used to arrive, he used to tell his
surname, and request permission to meet. As soon as the Imam heard of
his surname, he said that, for God when you come here next time do not
get yourself identified by saying Abu-Marrah.

Note: Abu-Marrah75 is the surname of Iblis.76

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Another method of giving respect and encouragement is by paying
"attention"! Every child persistently requires the courtesy of the
elders, to satisfy his ego, by the expression of his self through his
talks, his means of sport, or by the small tasks that he accomplishes,
and it is necessary upon the guardians to whole heartedly satisfy his
needs.

If we do justice, we would certainly come to know that, this is not
only the requirement of the off springs, but of the elders too! That is,
when ever they speak the listener must pay full attention to what they
say, give due importance to their discourse, and in the same context if
they are involved in some favourite entertaining hobby, they would like
that their involvement be free from intervention, disapproval or
critic.

And moreover, when they are carrying out some task, this desire do
persists in their hearts that, if not somebody else, at least the
directly related circles must appreciate their efforts, and it's worth
be given recognition!

Please consider, that children are also human! What if they are small?
After all nature has awarded them with sense and understanding,
comprehension and perception, along with the qualities of liking and
disliking, inclination and displeasure. Just

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
75. The linguists also say so. for ref: Al-Mun'jid, Page: 753, Ed:7,
published Beirut
76. A1-Kafi', Vol:6, Page:21.

like their elders, these youngsters also get aware of the attitudes of
"respect and neglect". And when it is an undeniable reality, then there
is no reason whatsoever that instead of protecting their mini emotions
and fragile feelings, we crush them mercilessly due to our
unattentiveness?

The princess of Divine Light and the ideal lady of the universe, Hazrat
Fatima Zahra (ASWS), often used to hear the "events" that took place in
the assembly with the Prophet, from her elder son Hasan Mujtaba! and at
possible occasions, use to invite Ameer-ul Momene'n Ali-Ibne-Abi Talib
(ASWS), and would herself say emphatically:

"You should listen, and appreciate the style of expression of your son
Hasan" The authorities on history and tradition mention that the Holy
Prophet used to participate with full interest, in the sport played by
his younger grandson Hussain lbne Ali.77

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*
And in this respect the most significant aspect is that the living
environment of the "children", should be a nucleus of peace and
tranquil. That is, that every nook and corner of the "home" be scented
with the sweet fragrance of "well being and prosperity".

Regarding family life, the Holy Quran ordains us with the following
philosophy: -

"One of the signs of Allah is that, He created a life partner for you,
from amongst your own specie, so that you may live in peace; and Allah
created the feelings of love and affection

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

77. Manaqib lbne Shehr A'shob, Vol: 2, Page:148, Biharul Anwar, Vol:10,
Page:93, Al Adab al Mufrad, lmam Bukhari, Page: 104, Sannan lbn. Main,
Vol:1 Page: 73 lste'ab lime Abdul Barr Part:1 Page:144, Ashshuatun Min
Hayatul Hussaln Ustad Abdullah al Alaeli.

amongst you, Certainly there are many signs in it, for those who
ponder."78 Home does not mean, rooms, courtyard, walls and windows, and
beautifully decorated furniture and material! but a location where the
residents find love at every step, and peace and tranquility at every
instance.

Islam intends that every' home be a model in itself! That is why the
Shari'ah (Islamic code of life) has implemented such laws and
injunctions, which protects and enumerates the rights and duties of each
and every member of the family. So that every family could live with
concord and harmony in his own tranquil atmosphere.

Well, the wisdon in this arrangement is, that when the peripheral
conditions would be satisfactory, then the new generation would also be
cheerful and glad, and as a result would increase the good and pleasant
citizens, in the future!

But, God forbid, if there is a convulsion in the family life, the
result of this tension would also entangle the nerves of these tender
children, which would have extremely ill effects on the growth of these
innocent lives. Please remember, may be due to their certain natural
weakness, these innocents have a special affection with their "mother",
and may be because of this, they pay special significance to the
"personality of their mother".

But, if some ferocious and Ill tempered father, constantly scolds their
"mother", disgraces her, teases her at all occasions, in front of them
then surely there would be an ebb and flow, a strong turmoil in their
emotions, and psychologically they would not remain normal, like other
children! This should be considered as an extremely grave situation for
the human society! Therefore, when we study religion in a little more
depth and detail, we find that the Islamic Sharl'ah through It's system
of education, has fully organised the development of a refined and
cultured brains.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
78. Surah Ru'm, Verse: 21

It has already been written at length that "the new off springs"
greatly demand admiration and appreciation. That is why the religion of
Allah has directed us to fulfill this demand from every angle and
aspect. But the issue does not end up here when every child demands that
he should be given affection and love, at the same instance he also
desires that his "mother" should also have a highly dignified status.
That is why our perfect guides have directed us:-.

"It is obligatory upon every individual that he should accept the
respect and honour of "the mother of his child" as an important duty and
as a authentic right" of his children". Quoting Prophet Muhammad
(SAWAW), lmam Jaffar Sadiq (ASWS) states:- "Every son has this right on
his father that he should behave with respect and dignity with his
mother, and similarly every daughter has this right on his father that,
her mother be honoured and dignified!79

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
79. Wasail ash-Shia', Vol:7, Page: 199.


