11. Work
========

Management of food, clothing and shelter is every ones problem!

Besides this, when the social life starts proceeding, then besides
these basic necessities, many other directions of "want and need"
originate. And many other multifarious circles of wish and desire keep
on shaping, building and expanding. And then it becomes obligatory upon
every responsible person, to tackle these primary and secondary needs.

But, all the things required for this mortal life, do not make
themselves available on their own. Efforts are necessary for their
acquirement. One has to strive hard for them. And the "economic
problems", shape the aspects of effort and demand!

In this connection, the Islamic teachings are, that every responsible
(Mukal'laf) individual should make efforts do some work, and whatsoever
he receives as a result of this labour, only from that, should resolve
his economic difficulties. Allah Almighty says:-

"Whatsoever a man would receive, would be in accordance to his labour
and efforts."121 And it is so directed in Surah Nah'al:

"Whatever noble deeds a man does, may he be male or female, but that he
is a believer, then We would provide him a decent means of life, in this
world and also in accordance with the noble deeds performed by him,
would provide him reward, in the Hereafter."122

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
121 Surah Na'jam; Verse: 39.
122 May be someone particularize and limit the concept of -"noble
deeds" or virtuous act, to just praying and supplication!

But when we study the pious lives of the reverent people of Allah, we
find that our Great Grandfather Hazrat Adam (AS) is engaged in
agriculture, Hazrat Nu'h (AS) is busy making the ship- watch the mongery
of Hazrat Dawood, (AS) here the blaze of voice is moulding the hearts,
and there the iron is being moulded,

There are about three hundred and sixty verses in the Holy Quran, where
there is the mentioning of the word "work" and at most of the location
it is used in a generalized meaning. To make it more clear, the means
for the provision of bread and butter is also included in the context of
"work", or more over in the "virtuous acts"! Our infallible Guides, have
also casted light, on these topics.

In this regard the Holy Prophet (SAWAW) says:-

"Curse has befallen upon that person, who puts his load on someone
else's shoulder."123 Hazrat Au (ASWS) says:-

"Allah Almighty, loves an earning skillful believer (mo'min) "124
Sadiq-e-Ale Muhammad (ASWS) says:


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
as wax, by the flare of strength (i.e. of his hands). Hazrat Yousaf
(AS) is resolving the political, administrative, and economic problems
of Egypt. Hazrat ldrees (AS) is absorbed in garment making. Hazrat
Suleiman (AS) is conducting the affairs of the government, over all the
visible creations that exist on the Earth and in the skies. Hazrat
Zakariya (AS) is controlling the market, because of his business!

On the lands of Mac'ca, the impressions of the art of construction take
shape, with the efforts of the friend of Allah, Hazrat lbrahim (AS) and
his virtuous son Hazrat lsma'il (AS) which turn in to a unified
direction for all the lseoT,le of the universe.

Yes, the dignified (ul'ul-as'm) prophet Hzrat Musa (AS) outmarked in
irrigation and cattle breeding. Hazrat~ Es'sa (AS) gained fame in the
field of medicine, and the Last of the Prophets Hazrat Muhammad (SAWAW),
gained outstanding success in the field of bussiness. The Guides, from
his school of thought and deeds, Hazrat Ali lbne-Abi Talib, Hazrat lmam
Hasan Mujtaba, and the founder of the school of Ahle- Bait Hazrat lmam
Jaffar Sadiq (ASWS), are seem absorbed in agriculture and gardening!

If we do not include the above acts and engagements of these reverent
personalities and the distinguished persons of Allah, as "virtuous
acts", then what should we name it? Moreover, if we do not consider
these long durations of toil and labour as divine worship, then it would
be unjust with the act of worship itself! and would be a disgrace to all
the symbols of submissions, in this universe?

123 Furou-e-Kafi, Vol: 5, Page:72. Tuhaf ul-Uqool, Page:32.
124 Wasail ash-Shia, Vol: 6, Page: 13. Furo'u-e-Kafi, vol 5, Page:
113.

"One who earns his bread and butter with toil and labour, is considered
a soldier (mu'jahid), in the way of Allah."125 And Hazrat Muhammad Baqar
(ASWS), directs:-

Without involvement in action (work), the perception of our sovereignty
and love in not possible."126

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In fact, we should be crystal clear regarding livelihood and the means
of earning. In this context some points are extremely important.

Firstly, that every person should really understand the true aim and
purpose of means of subsistence. Then, on seeing the type of job and
tasks (that he could undertake), he should be fully satisfied regarding
his potentialities, capabilities and the ability required for the
accomplishment of the task.

Moreover, as a Muslims, it is obligatory to keep an eye on all the laws
of permissibility and forbiddance (he'lal and ha'ram), approved and
disapproved (ja'iz and na-ja'iz i.e. mustahab and makruh). Besides this,
while in search of economic means, it is obligatory to abide by the
limits.

It has been observed that people get lost in the futile desire of
"making gold". They get tirelessly involved, in the vicious circle of
the acquisition of benefits. They sacrifice, their life, rest, energy,
family relation, collective norms, the human obligations and values of
belief, in the lust of accumulation of wealth! That is why regarding the
economic norms and financial means, Islam has restrained every
individual by a (unified) theory and certain principles, so that no one
should fall a prey of excesses and deficiencies.

For this reason, it is obligatory upon the parents that instead of
educating the legendary characters, they must inculcate Islamic thinking
in their children. Right from the beginning, when the

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
125.Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol: 100, Page: 13. Furo'u-e-Kati, Vol:5,
Page:88.
126.Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol:77, Page: 188.

dreams regarding the future of the "new coming generation" starts
shaping itself, the most significant task of the parents regarding their
dear ones, is to develop (enforce) in them, the concepts of real
purposeful living beings! Yes of course! according to their
capabilities, they should teach (cultivate) these "evolving brains", the
concepts of "life and style". Make them understand the meaning of
'work". Draw their attention towards their potentialities and
capabilities. Stress upon the observance of rules and regulations. Carve
the concepts of right and wrong, and then along with the directive to
abide by all the ethical limits, inculcate in them the eagerness and
desire to work!

Let us now to an extent study the need, significance and importance of
economics from the point of view of Islamic code of life (Shari'ah) and
also the way and means of Islamic economy, so that we may be able to
conceive it's essence and could communicate it to our beloveds.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*


**11.1. Balanced Life!**

There need be a suitable means for subsistence to live in this world,
with peace and harmony, respect and honour. But according to the known
economic methods, the issue of earning of money, without mental efforts,
and physical efforts and labour is an unaccomplished dream!

May Almighty Allah protect us from poverty. How weak, helpless, and
constrained, a poor man is! Let us hear about this reality, in the
eloquent language of Hazrat Ali Murtaza (SAWA). The leader of the Pious
Instructs his beloved son, Muhammad Ibne Hanafi'a:-

"Oh my son! (God forbid) I fear that you may not get entangled in
poverty and hunger! Oh my beloved! Seek Allah's refuge from destitution
and poverty (empty handedness), because insolvency and Unresourcefulness
weakens faith, brings dispersion in thought (brain). And one who has
nothing with him, becomes unbearable for all!"127 Therefore the Holy
Prophet (SAWAW), guides our intellect,

in the following manner:-

Such a person is "without welfare", who does not adopt the legitimate
(ha'lal) means of earning money, for his own prestige, for laying off
his loans, and for the help (and support) of his relatives.128 And lmam
Muhammad Baqar (ASWS), says:-

"The person who earn through legitimate means, and that also for the
reason that, he could save himself from the disgrace of extending his
hand in front of others, to fulfill the needs of his children, to extend
support to his neighbour, then he would be so rewarded, that when he
would appear in the Grace of Allah Almighty, his face would be shining
like the moon of the fourteenth night."129

One of the opening sentence of the supplications before the Almighty
Allah, by The Leader of the faithful, Hazrat Ali (ASWS) is: -

"Oh Almighty Allah! safeguard my prestige by bestowing upon me economic
welfare.
Oh Allah! do not degrade me in the eyes of the people because of the
financial constraints!"130 And, now let us remember by heart, this
important instruction of lmam Jaffar Sadiq:-

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
127.Nahaj-ul-Balag'ah, Commentary and footnotes: Dr. Sab'hi Saleh,
Page: 531, published in Beruit.
128.Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vol: 100. Page:7, Furou-e-Kafi, Vol:5, Page:72.
129.Bihar-ul-Anwa'r, Vo: 100, Page:8. Mustadrak-ul-Wasil Vol:2,
Page:424.
130.Nahaj-ul-Balaq'ah, Commentary and footnotes: Dr. Sab'hi Saleh,
Page:347, published in Beruit. Sahifa-e-Ala'wia, trans-lation:
Hujjat-ul-Islam Al-Haj Syed. Murtaza Hussain, Fazil Lucknowi, Page:147.
Published Lahore.

All bin Abdul Aziz says, that Sadiq-e-Ale Muhammad (ASWS) inquired from
me: What did Muhammad bin Muslim do?

I replied:

May I be sacrificed upon you! He has given up his business, and is
absorbed in praying. On hearing this, He replied.

"I feel pity! Does he not know, that one who does not strives for
subsistence, his supplications are not accepted!"131


