Chapter 68: Influence of Muslim Thought on the West
===================================================

Western Thinkers On Islam In General
------------------------------------

Muslim philosophy influenced Western thought in several ways. It

(1) initiated in the West the humanistic movement;

(2) introduced the historical sciences and

(3) the scientific method;

(4) helped the Western scholastics in harmonizing philosophy with faith;

(5) stimulated Western mysticism;

(6) laid the foundations of Italian Renaissance and, to a degree, molded
the modem European thought down to the time of Immanuel Kant, in certain
directions even later.[^1]

1. The Muslims were the first humanists and they gave a humanist bend to
the Western mind. They were the first to reveal to the West that outside
the prevailing Catholic Church it was not all darkness and barbarism but
untold wealth of knowledge. They captured and further developed all the
intellectual achievements of Greece and transmitted them to the West
before any direct contact between the Greek intellect and the Western
mind was established.

It was through their influence that ancient and contemporary men outside
the Christian West also began to be looked upon as human and even
possessed of higher civilizations.[^2]

Nothing can prove their own humanism better than the fact that within
eight years of the establishment of Baghdad they were in possession of
the greater parts of the works of Aristotle (including the spurious
Mineralogy, Mechanics, and Theology, the last of which was actually an
abridged paraphrases of the last three books of Plotinus' Enneads), some
of the works of Plato and the Neo-Platonists, the important works of
Hippocrates, Galen, Euclid, Ptolemy, and subsequent writers and
commentators, and several Per­sian and Indian writings on mathematics,
astronomy, and ethics.

All this was taking place in the Muslim world when Greek thought was
almost un­known in the West. While in the East “al-Rashid and al-Maman
were delving into Greek and Persian philosophy their contemporaries in
the West, Charle­magne and his lords, were reportedly dabbling in the
art of writing their names.”[^3]

Humanism spread to Western Europe through contact between the Muslims
and the non-Muslims in Spain; to Italy by a similar contact in Sicily;
and throughout Europe by the impress of a higher culture received by the
Crusaders in Syria and Asia Minor.

Since Islam originated from monotheism, it conceived idolatry as its
real enemy and acted with the purpose of subduing it first in the Arab
lands and then throughout the world. The Qur'an accepts Christianity and
the Jewish religion as divine religions; therefore, it did not instigate
any struggle against them. However, Christianity first conceived of
Islam as a competitor and, therefore, attacked it directly.

The Arian and Nestorian sects of Christianity had a positive outlook on
Islam since they were monotheistic in outlook. As compared to Islam the
doctrine of the Trinity and the Monophysite mode of thinking retained
the residues of idolatry. The places of ancient Jupiter, Apollo, Venus
were given to God, Jesus, and Mary. Since iconoclasticism of Islam was
against their frame of mind, the Christians started a religious struggle
against Islam.

The following verses from the Qur'an indicate that in Islam there is no
obligatory doctrination but religious tolerance: Lakum din-u-kum wa
li-ya din (you have your religion and I have mine); la ikra'ha fi al-din
(religion is not to be forced on anyone). On the other hand, the idea of
proselytism is dominant in Christianity. Christianity indoctrinates that
it is the only way to spread and spreading is its main duty.

In spite of this principle in Christianity, the spread of Islam in all
domains from the first Hijrah on not by wars but sporadically was much
more rapid. Barthold sees the reason for this in the capacity of the
Arabic language and in the Islamic custom of not collecting taxes and
duties from defeated nations if they accepted Islam.[^4]

Although these sociological factors play a significant role, the ease in
accepting a natural and rational religion and its consistency with human
idealism are additional reasons for the spread of Islam.

The Christian reaction to Islam in the East and West took different
forms. Those who criticized the new religion vehemently and did not wish
to accept it as a religion at all come first. John of Damascus in his
book De Haeresibus, considered Islam to be heresy. The first Byzantine
writer who referred to the Prophet was Theophanes the Confessor
(202/817). He also attacked Islam as severely as John. Guilbert de
Nogent's (518/1124) criticism was based on the fact that wine and pork
were tabooed in Islam.

As an exception, Hilderbert de Lemans for the first time, in the Middle
Ages in the West, stated that Muhammad was a real Prophet and he did
produce miracles. Guillaume de Tripolis' work on Islam was written with
extreme hate and was most offensive. Its descriptions were far from
reality, being a mixture of mythical elements with history. [^5]

Peter de Cluny (d. 551/1156) translated the Qur'an into Latin for the
first time. His work set the foundation for St. Thomas' attacks on
Islam. Two helpers named Peter de Toledo and Peter Poitier participated
in Peter Cluny's attempt at translating the Qur'an. The Latin
translation of an epistle on the discussion over the principles of
Christianity and Islam between 'Abd al-Masill al-Kindi who was the
Caliph Mamun's secretary and Yahya al-Dimashgi was added at the end of
this version of the Qur'an.

This epistle indicates how tolerant the 'Abbasid Caliph was about
re­ligious discussions even in the third/ninth century. When this work
was translated into Latin in the West in the sixth/twelfth century, very
bitter and offensive expressions were used for Islam in the preface to
the Latin translation. Casanova and Muir critically investigated whether
or not this epistle really belonged to the third/ninth century.[^6]

Massignon has looked for a relationship between the epistle of this
al-Kindi-who has no relation to the philosopher al-Kindi-and that of
Yahya ibn 'Adi in which the Trinity is defended.[^7] The problem has not
yet been solved.

St. Thomas referred to Islam and to its theologians. He is the first to
give his criticisms a philosophical orientation. Raymond Lull (633-716/
1235-1316) studied Arabic at Majorca and Muslim philosophy in Bugia near
Tunisia. It was he who suggested to the then Pope to start the moral
crusade against Islam.

This suggestion which was met at first with complete disinter­estedness
was later accepted by the Popes after Raymond's long endeavor to that
effect; it became indeed the foundation of the Missionary movement.
Raymond translated Asma' al-Husna (The Beautiful Names of God) of Muhyi
al-Din ibn 'Arabi. He adapted several passages from Futahat al-Makkiyyah
(The Revelations of Mecca).

He wrote an epistle relating to the discussions of a Christian, a
Muslim, and a Jew. Although he wrote many epistles and books about
Sufistic theology and philosophy, yet he essentially preserved his
enmity against Islam.

At the same time Constantine Porphyrogenitus was referring to the
Pro­phet with respect and politeness in a passage of his work on
history. Ibn Sab'in, an adherent of tasawwu/, in qa book entitled
al-Ajwibah 'an al-As'ila al-Saaliyyah (Answers to Sicilian Questions)
answered the questions asked on Aristotle's philosophy by the King of
Naples and Emperor of Germany.

Yet the moral tension between the two worlds did not ease. Dante in the
section on “Inferno” of the Divine Comedy describes the Prophet in the
eighth sphere of the underworld in a most atrocious manner, although, as
Asin Palacios in his studies of his Divine Comedy demonstrates, he owed
to ibn 'Arabi his entire topic, his manner of synthesis, and his idea of
moral ascension. Since all the publications in the West against Islam
for centuries after the Middle Ages had continuously been written by
adaptations, trans­lations, imitations, copying without any mention of
source, they were no more than expressions of a complex against Islam as
a faith.

It was at first rather difficult for the Western philosophers to get rid
of religious, imperialistic, and racial prejudices and look at Islam and
the East with understanding. In spite of the fact that Renaissance
became possible only through profiting by Muslim works on philosophy,
and science and their trans­lations and interpretations thereof for
centuries, the attitude of some Western people who were hostile to the
very civilization that created these works indi­cates how deep-rooted
the religious, political, and racial prejudices were.

From the eleventh/seventeenth century on, Western philosophers gradually
got rid of their prejudices against Islam. Cultural and intellectual
influences from the Muslim East for centuries were instrumental in
bringing about that change.

From the twelfth/eighteenth century on, the attitude of Western free
thinkers took a truly humanistic turn. The libre penseurs took a stand
against negative and malicious publications. Edward Sale, in the preface
he wrote for his translation of the Qur'an in 1147/1734, likens the
Prophet to Thesee and Pompillus.

He praises his philosophy, his political views, and his realism.
Boulainvilliers in his book, The Life of the Prophet, going one step
further tried to prove that Islam is superior to Christianity in
rationalism, realism, and its consistency with the nature of man. Savory
in the preface he wrote for his translation of the Qur'an completed in
1198/1783, describes Muhammad as “one of the marvelous persons who
appear in the world from time to time.” Due to its importance, Savory's
translation was again published ten years ago.[^8]

This sympathetic attitude towards Islam evoked a strong reaction in
Voltaire. He made extremely offensive and insolent statements about
Islam and the Prophet of Islam. Kant praised Islam in his La Religion
dans les limites de la simple raison. “Islam,” he said, “distinguishes
itself with pride and courage, for it propagates faith not by miracles
but by conquests, and it is founded on courageous asceti­cism.

This important phenomenon is due to the founder who propagated the
conception of the unity of God. The nobility of a people who were freed
from idolatry has been an important factor in bringing about this
result. The spirit of Islam is indicated not in conformity without will
but in voluntary adherence to the will of God, and this, above all, is a
noble quality of a high order.”[^9]

In his Mahomet, Goethe, with great sympathy and enthusiasm, describes
the power of the new faith exalted against idolatry, and the sincere
adherence of its believers to it. This work of Goethe is in the nature
of an answer to Voltaire's work bearing the same name.[^10] Goethe read
the Qur'an in 1184/ 1770 and annotated certain verses which were later
referred to in Megerlin's German version of the Qur'an.

By this time the Prophet of Islam was well known in Germany as the
founder of a “Natural Religion,” and a protagonist of intellectual
advance. Megerlin's translation of the Qur'an (1186/1772) and that of
Boysen's (1187/1773) were published in Germany in addition to Turpin's
work, The Life of Muhammad, in which Muhammad is described as a “great
Prophet,” “powerful mind,” “true believer,” and “the founder of natural
religion.”

Auguste Comte, in his “Law of Three Stages of Social Development,”
con­siders Islam to be the most advanced phase in his so-called
theological stage and regards it even as preparatory to the metaphysical
stage[^11] Oswald Spengler compares Islam with the Protestant faith. In
Muhammad he sees the puritan personality of a Luther or a Calvin.
According to him, Islam calls for the same kind and quantity of
“Illumination” and “Intellect” as was insisted on by Confucius, Buddha,
Lessing, and Voltaire. [^12]

Although Nietzsche severely attacks Christianity in all his works,
particularly in his Antichrist[^13] he did not include Islam in his
adverse judgment. On the other hand, he mentioned it with praise. Eduard
von Hartmann, in his book entitled The Religion of the Future, remarks
that, although Hebrew religion is an advance over paganism, the
conception of monopolistic and rationalist God rather hinders its
progress; and he concludes that monotheism finds it’s most powerful way
of expression in Islam.[^14]

Carlyle designates Islam as a very superior faith and thinks that
Muhammad is the hero of the prophets.[^15] He refutes the false
accusation made against the Prophet and states that “this kind of
opinion is shame on us.”

Thus, Orientalism, interest in which began during the seventh/thirteenth
century merely through religious fanaticism and with the aim at
establishing missionary organization, gradually became a subject of
methodical research. [^16]

After the twelfth/eighteenth century those who possessed intensive
knowledge of Arabic began to occupy themselves with the study of Islamic
sciences, principles of Islam, and the history of Muslim nations. The
number of those who got rid of their prejudices and subjective views and
who knew how to take truth seriously increased as scientific research
became more extensive.

Dieterici, Sebillot, Quartermere, de Slane, Pococke, Sylvestre de Sacy,
Fleisher, Wustenfeld, Horten, de Boer, Masson Oursel, Goichon, L.
Gardet, Massignon, Rene Guenon, M. Asin Palacios, E. G. Browne,
Nicholson, Sir Hamilton Gibb are among them. We may add that Orientalism
today is oriented towards understanding Islam and other Eastern
religions by serious scholarship, although there still are some who
carry on their studies for imperial or missionary purposes.[^17]

In the above account an attempt has been made to show how, starting with
thorough antagonism to Islam, the West gradually moved towards a
humanis­tic approach to Islamic culture. But this humanistic attitude
was directed not only towards Islam but also to other Eastern religions.

August Wilhelm Schlegel, from 1234/1818 to the time of his death,
occupied himself with Oriental studies. From 1239/1823 to 1246/1830 he
published the journal I ndische Bibliothek in three volumes and also
edited the Bhagvad Gita and the Ramayana. These efforts mark the
beginning of Sanskrit scholarship in Germany.

How the Jews and Christians in the West followed in the footsteps of
Muslim thinkers in their recapture of Greek learning, and how they
captured Muslim thought itself will be shown later.

2. A large part of the Qur'an refers to the past and takes the mind of
the reader to the rise and fall of nations in the days gone by. In fact,
it lays special emphasis on history as well as on nature as sources of
knowledge. This Qur'anic attitude to history developed a true historical
sense amongst the Muslims who in due course produced next to Herodotus
world's first great historians like al-Tabari, al-Mas\`udi, ibn Hayyan,
ibn Khaldiin, and others.

One of them, al-Biruni, laid down for the first time in history the
principles of historical criticism. The Muslims were, thus, the first
after Herodotus to develop the historical sense and to lay open the
various historical sciences before the West.

3. The greatest boon that the Muslim East bestowed upon the West was the
scientific or inductive method of inquiry. Although most of the Muslim
thinkers used the inductive method in their scientific investigation in
different fields, the two of them who particularly expounded this method
were Muhammad bin Zakariya al-Razi and ibn Haitham. Ibn Hazm, writing on
the scope of logic, emphasized sense-perception as a source of
knowledge. Later ibn Taimiyyah in his refutation of Aristotelian logic
showed that induction was the only form of reliable inference.
Suhrawardi Maqtul too offered a systematic refutation of Greek logic.

It was the method of observation and experiment which led al-Birimi to
the discovery of reaction time, al-Kindi to the formula that sensation
is a response of the organism proportionate to the stimulus, and ibn
Haitham to his findings in optics.[^18]

The influence of Muslim method of observation and experiment on the West
has been recognized by Briffault in the following terms. “Numerous Jews
followed William of Normandy to England and enjoyed his protection ...
establishing a school of science at Oxford; it was under their
successors at that Oxford school that Roger Bacon learned Arabic and
Arabic science.

Neither Roger Bacon nor his later namesake has any title to be credited
with having introduced the experimental method. Roger Bacon was no more
than one of the apostles of Muslim science and method to Christian
Europe; and he never wearied of declaring that knowledge of Arabic and
Arabic science was for his contemporaries the only way to true
knowledge.

Discussions as to who was the originator of the experimental method…are
part of the colossal misrepresentation of the origins of European
civiliza­tion. The experimental method of the Arabs was by Bacon's time
widespread and eagerly cultivated throughout Europe; it had been
proclaimed by Adel­hard of Bath, by Alexander of Neckam, by Vincent of
Beauvais, by Arnold of Villeneuve, by Bernard Silvestris, who entitles
his manual Experimentarius, by Thomas of Cantimpre, by Albertus
Magnus.”[^19]

Science is the most momentous contribution of Arab civilization to the
modern world, but its fruits were slow in ripening. Not until long after
Moorish culture had sunk back into darkness did the giant to which it
had given birth rose in its might. It was not science only which brought
Europe back to life. Other and manifold influences from the civilization
of Islam com­municated its original glow to European life.[^20]

“Although there is not a single aspect of European growth in which the
decisive influence of Islamic culture is not traceable, nowhere is it so
clear and momentous as in the genesis of that power which constitutes
the paramount distinctive force of the modern world, and the supreme
source of its victory natural science and the scientific spirit.[^21]

“The debt of our science to that of the Arabs does not consist in
startling discoveries of revolutionary theories; science owes a great
deal more to Arab culture, it owes its existence. The ancient world was,
as we saw, pre-scientific. The astronomy and mathematics of the Greeks
were a foreign importation never thoroughly acclimatized in Greek
culture. The Greeks systematized, generalized, and theorized, but the
patient ways of investigation, the accumulation of positive knowledge,
the minute methods of science, detailed and pro­longed observation and
experimental inquiry were altogether alien to the Greek temperament.

Only in Hellenistic Alexandria was any approach to scientific work
conducted in the ancient classical world. What we call science arose in
Europe as a result of a new spirit of inquiry, of new methods of
investigation, of the methods of experiment, observation, and
measurement, of the development of mathematics in a form unknown to the
Greeks. That spirit and those methods were introduced into the European
world by the Arabs.[^22]

4. In the West, even up to the ninth/fifteenth century, philosophy and
science were regarded as antagonistic to religion. Hence the teachings
of Aristotelianism and Averroism were banned, Bruno was burnt, Kepler
was persecuted, and Galileo was forced to retract. Muslim thinkers,
following Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus, harmonized faith with reason
and made possible, for themselves and for Europe, unhampered development
of both.

5. European mysticism was also much influenced by the mysticism of
Islam. Arthur J4 Arberry observes in The History of Sufism that “it is
impossible, for example, to read the poems of the Spanish mystic St.
John of the Cross without concluding that his entire process of thinking
and imagi­native apparatus owed much to those Muslim mystics who had
also been natives of Spain.” In the beginning of the eighth/fourteenth
century, Raymond Lull wrote on mysticism.

He was an accomplished scholar and founder of school of Oriental
languages at Rome. His mystical writings are “beyond question”
influenced by Sufi speculation. These are only a few examples of what
Arberry regards as “unquestionably a general process.” In later times
the influence of Persian mystical poetry on so great a genius as Goethe
is too well known to be mentioned.

Miguel Asin Palacios, in his study of the influence of the Muslim
conception of the next world on the Divine Comedy, investigated ibn
'Arabi's influence on Dante. The relationship between ascension to
heaven in Dante's book and the Ascension (mi'raj) in Islam bad already
caught the attention of some scholars. Ozanam, a
thirteenth/nineteenth-century French scholar, in his great study of
Dante, mocked at those who thought that the work of the poet from
Toscana was “a lonely monument of the Middle Ages” and he considered the
poet an erudite who was considerably well informed and who made use of
all past experiences.

According to him, “two roads, one going north and the other south, lead
Dante to the old Eastern sources. He maintained that the relationship
between the Saracens and Europe was very close at that time.” Dante had
read the Latin versions of the works of many Muslim philosophers and
adherents of tasawwuf, at least those of ibn Sina and all-Ghazali.

Following Ozanam and d'Ancona, Charles Labitte, in the preface he wrote
for Brizeux's translation of the Divine Comedy into French, maintained
that the theme must have been borrowed from the world of Islam. At that
time, Modi de Goeje and some other authors held similar views. More
recently Edgard Blochet published two studies on this problem: Etudes
sur l'mistoire Religieuse d' l'islam, 1307/1889, and Les Sources de la
Divine Comedie, 1319/ 1901.

In these studies he defended the view that the idea of ascending to
heaven came directly from Islam. According to Blochet, in a verse in the
Qur'an, there is a reference to mi'raj (ascension to heaven) though no
details are given. Many of these details are the products of public
imagination in Islam and they must have been due to more ancient
sources. He finds the roots especially in Mazdaism.

He relates the mi'rdj description in the Mazdakite poet Artay Viraf's
literary work based on Zend-Avesta. Barthelemy translated Artay Viriif's
Namak and in his foreword demonstrated similarities between the Divine
Comedy and the Mazdakite book. Blocbet claimed that the idea of
ascending to heaven in Dante was transmitted both from the Persian and
Islamized sources.

Asin Palacios' conclusions are more precise. Not being satisfied with
mere comparison between the texts, he studied the sources of Dante and
thereby demonstrated how these depended on Islamic works, i. e., on
their translations. By emphasizing the special significance of ibn
'Arabi's “Revelations”, he solved the problem with great success. Ibn
Masarrah al-Jibali from Mercier and Cordova who specialized in ibn
'Arabi's doctrine of tasawwuf, demonstrated the influence of this
doctrine on Western scholastics, in general, on the priests of the
Franciscan denomination, and on Dante who was till then known as a
follower of Aristotle and of St. Thomas in particular.

Palacios' book is composed of four parts: (1) comparison of the Divine
Comedy with lailat al-isra and mi'rdj; (2) comparison of the Divine
Comedy with Muslim descriptions of the next world ('uqba); (3) Islamic
elements in the Christian legends before Dante; (4) studies and
determination of the transmission of Islamic works to Christian Europe
in general. In the first part, Asin studies the development of the idea
of mi'raj in Islam. He traces this with reference to different texts and
footnotes and compares each separately with the Divine Comedy. Many
phantasies were created in the public imagi­nation about a verse in the
Qur'an on mi'raj.[^23]

All these got incorporated in the descriptions of descent to hell at
night (isra) and the Ascension to heaven (mi'raj). The theme of mi'raj,
which public imagination worked on, is used as a mystic symbol by ibn
'Arabi. Several adherents of tasawwuf, e.g., Junaid Baghdadi, Bayazid
Bistami, etc. had used the moral symbol before. In ibn 'Arabi's work it
received a more significant place. Later, in the books entitled Mi'raj
Nameh and in Nizami Ganjeh's Makbzan al-Asrar the event of Ascension to
heaven is related in great detail. Muslim miniature artists illustrated
these works with many drawings about this spiritual journey.

The construction of Dante's hell is the same as that of ibn 'Arabi's
hell. Both are large funnel-shaped edifices composed of several storeys.
Spiral staircases lead down to these storeys, in each of which a
different class of sinners is housed. The weight of the sinners
increases as they descend further down. Each floor is sub-divided into
various parts. The first floor in ibn 'Arabi's hell is an ocean of fire
and corresponds to what Dante called Dite, on the shores of which there
are various fire tombs.

Thieves, murderers, plunderers, despots, and the gluttons are tortured
in the same chambers. The punishment of thirst given to the makers of
false money in the Divine Comedy is given to drunkards in the Mi'raj
Nameh.

The Prophet meets the angel placed at his service by God at the gate of
heaven. He takes the Prophet to a group of nymphs in heaven surrounding
the sweetheart of the poet Im u' al-Qais. In the same way, when Dante
enters heaven, he meets a fair maiden Matilda who politely and elegantly
answers his questions. The construction of heaven is the same in both
images and is inspired by Ptolemy's Alma jest.

In accordance with the degree of their virtues, the happy souls are
located in one of the nine heavens. Each of the nine heavens corresponds
to a sign of the zodiac. Both works have a moral structure, assigning
virtues to each storey or to each sphere in heaven. Islamic books
entitled Mi'raj Nameh give the same amount of details and demonstrate
the same kind of skill in the description of the heavenly world as is to
be found in the Divine Comedy.

The eyes of both travelers are dazzled by getting near God as they enter
a new phase of the mi'raj. When their respective guide Gabriel or
Beatrice informs them of His grace, their eyes open. Gabriel and
Beatrice not only serve them as guides, but also pray for them at each
post. As finally Beatrice leaves her place to St. Bernard when Dante
enters heaven, so does Gabriel leave the Prophet when he advances to the
presence of God guided by a ray of light.

In studying Dante's Muslim sources, one has to compare the Divine Comedy
with the Arab poet abu al-'Ala' al-Ma'arri's Risalat al-Ghufran. There
is a close re­lationship between the religious ecstasy, charitable pity,
and irony, orienting the feelings of the author of this book and the
religious ecstasy, criticism, satire, and irony of Dante.

Since the topic of mi'raj is basic to the Arab poet's book too, in the
absence of any historical documents to supplement a comparison of this
kind, its study is still useful. In heaven, Dante meets his
contemporaries Piccardo from Florence and Gunizza from Padua. According
to abu al-'Ala', the Prophet meets Hamdum from Aleppo and Taufiq from
Baghdad. Both have similar endings. As the Prophet in one case and Dante
in the other enter the presence of God, they see Him as a strong ocean
of Light.

The Muslim adherents of tasawwuf, with the exception of ibn Masarrah of
Spain (270-319/883-931) and ibn 'Arabi, were not as well known in Europe
as were the “philosophers.” Ibn Masarrah was the founder of the
illuministic or Ishraqi School. From Spain the ideas of this school were
transmitted to the Augustinian scholastics such as Duns Scotus, Roger
Bacon, and Raymond Lull.[^24]

Yet Goethe wrote the Der west-ostliches Diwdn (Compendium of Poems on
the East) during his mature years after reading Hafiz. Fitzgerald
translated Kh-ayyam's Rubd'iyat into English and it was received with
great interest. Nicholson published in several volumes English
translation of Rumi's Mathnawi in addition to the selections from his
Diwan and also from the Mathnawi.

Massignon has devoted his entire life to the study of Halaj Mansflr. The
number of studies on the works of Harith Mulaasibi has increased
recently. Aldous Huxley makes frequent references to Riimi in his
Perennial Philosophy, and thinkers like Rene Guenon have been directly
inspired by tasawwuf.[^25]

In our own times Corbin, by publishing the greater part of Suhrawardi
Magtul's books in two volumes with their Arabic and Persian originals at
Istanbul and Teheran entitled Opera Metaphysica et Mystica,[^26] has
brought the great martyr to the attention of existentialists and
philosophical anthropologists. [^27]

6. The process by which Muslim thought laid the foundations of the
Italian Renaissance and influenced subsequent thought was a long one. It
will be briefly described in the sections that follow.

Theological Influence
---------------------

The influence of Muslim theologians on the West was only secondary.
Tension between the two religions, Islam and Christianity, was the
reason for this. Nevertheless, Muslim theologians were known to the West
even though indirectly through the works of the “philosophers”; only
al-Ghazali\`, theology was known to the Western scholars directly. St.
Thomas refer to the theologians in his Contra Oenetiles as
loquentes.[^28]

However, fm long knowledge of Muslim theology remained meagre and that
for two reasons:

(i) the information about the Mu'tazilah and the first theologian was
second-hand, nothing was taken from their own works; and

(ii) the masters of the philosophico-theological movements after
al-Ghazali long remained unknown. Up to the thirteenth/nineteenth
century hardly ani scholar in the West was acquainted with the works of
Fakhr al-Din Razi

Saif al-Din 'Amidi, ibn Taimiyyah, Siraj &I-Din Urmawi, Sayyid Sharif
al-Jurjani, Sa'd al-Din Taftazani, and others. No complete account can,
therefore, be given of the influence of Muslim theology on the
West.[^29]

However, important works on the philosophy of religion have been
translated since the beginning of the present century. Among these the
Irshad of abu al­Ma'ali (Imam al-Haramain) and several books by ibn
Taimiyyah have been translated into French. In addition to these, Max
Horten has published a big volume on Muslim theologians.[^30] Recently,
Louis Gardet together with Anawati has released Introduction a la
Theologie Musulmane. Albert Nader has written Le systeme Philosophique
des Mu'tazila (first published in Arabic and then translated into French
by the same author). [^31]

Al-Ghazali had a unique position. He was a theologian as well as a
philoso­pher. Therefore, his influence in the West was theological as
well as philo­sophical. Miguel Asin Palacios studied al-Ghazali's
theological influence on Western thought in several of his
writings.[^32] As it was previously assumed, this influence cannot be
confined to the Tahafut only, the Latin version of which was made during
the sixth/twelfth century. Al-Qhazali's influence was also effected
through his other works.

The Magdsid was translated into Latin under the heading Logika et
philosophea Algazelis Arabic by Gundisalvus; it was published in Venice
in 912/1506. His al-Nafs al-Insdni was also translated under the title
De Anima Humana. AI-Gazali's influence which Asin Palacios elaborately
discussed in his book, La espiritualidad de Algazel su sentido
cristiano, has several phases. The influence on Raymond Martini, a
Dominican monk who profited by al­-Ghazali's works on theology and
philosophy, comes first.

According to Palacios, the influence of the early Christian sources, for
instance of St. Augustine, on al-Ghazali himself should first be taken
into consideration. Although it is not possible to indicate how and by
what means Augustine's ideas were transmitted to al-Ghazali, it is quite
possible that his influence was widespread in the intellectual circles
where al-Ghazali was brought up.[^33]

Palacios, however, fails to refer to any evidence to prove his
assertion, though he has much documentary evidence about the
transmission of al-Ghazali's thought to the West. Take the case of
historian-philosopher Bar Hebraeus known in the Muslim world as abu
al-Faraj. He was a minister at a Syriac Jacobite church and was famous
during the seventh/thirteenth century. He wrote in Arabic and Syriac and
copied many chapters from al-Ghazali's Ihyd' (Revivification of
Religious Sciences) and adapted them in his books entitled Ethicon and
The Book of the Dove. This marks the beginning of al-Ghazali's influence
on Christian spirituality.

If an author like Bar Hebraeus, who was rather influential in the
Christian church, profits by al-Ghazali's ideas in writing his own books
considered fundamental in monastery instruction, the reason for this,
according to Palacios, was that he regarded these ideas totally
consistent with his own doctrine.

In his study of al-Ghazali, Wensinck shows that the two books by Bar
Hebraeus are not only written in accordance with the organization of the
chapters taken from al-Ghazali's Ihya' (e.g., virtues, vices, the
degrees of moral perfection) but also al-Ghazali's ideas and even his
examples, analogies, and at times phrases, and the kind of evidence
Ihya' brings from poetry and literature, are employed in them in exactly
the same way.[^34]

According to Palaeios, Bar Hebraeus did so because in reality these were
fully consistent with the Christian spirit even though he wanted to keep
secret the apparent source of the ideas transmitted to him. However,
there was no need for Palacios at this point to go into making
interpretations which would contradict his own straight arguments.[^35]

Palacios traces the development of al-Ghazali s ideas in the West as
follows. The Spanish Dominican monk Raymond Martini, who was Bar
Hebraeus' contemporary, borrowed the same ideas from him and from
al-Ghazali. Instead of profiting only by the books of Muslim
“philosophers,” he, unlike the scholastics, directly profited by
al-S;hazali's texts in his books entitled Pugio Fidei and Explanatio
Symboli, written in the field of religion. These texts were taken from
Ta/ed/ut, Magasid, al-Mungidh, Mizdn, Magsad, Mishkat al-Anwdr and
Ihyd'. According to Palacios, the benefit derived here is more
substantial than Bar Hebraeus' adaptations which he had made without
mentioning any source, for the arguments have been taken exactly as they
were in the original.

Furthermore, St. Thomas used some texts of al- 'hazali's in Contra
Gentiles either directly or through the mediation of Raymond Martini.
Al-Ghazali's arguments in favour of the creatio ex nihilo, his proof
that God's knowledge comprises particulars, and his justification of the
resurrection of the dead were adopted by many scholastics including St.
Thomas. St. Thomas, who had received his education from the Dominican
order in the University of Naples, had known al-Ghazali's philosophy
well, and used his arguments in attacks on Aristotelianism.

St. Thomas' Summa Theologica and al-Ghazali's treatise on the place of
reason as applied to revelation and theology run parallel in many places
in their arguments and conclusions. Both of them claimed to have found
happiness in the beatific vision and both stated the case of their
op­ponents fairly before pronouncing their own judgments on it. The
questions on which St. Thomas seems to have been deeply influenced by
al-Ghazali are the ideas of contingency and necessity as proving the
existence of God, divine knowledge, divine simplicity, divine names, and
divine attributes, God's speech a iverbum mentis, the miracles as a
testimony to the truth of prophecies, and resurrection of the dead.[^36]

Al-Ghazali's influence was very significant towards the end of the
Middle Ages. During the eighth/fourteenth century, three sceptic
philosophers were influenced by al-Ash'ari's arguments on the problem of
causality through the mediation of al-Ghazali. Their names are (1) Peter
of Ailly, (2) Nicholas of Autrecourt, and (3) Gillaume of Occam. Occam,
the scholar most influenced by al-Ash\`ari's nominalism in the West,
arrived at the conception of intuitive divine knowledge via his own
criticisms of the theory of causality and his occasionalism (by which he
tried to explode St. Thomas' rationalistic philo­sophy) under
al-Ghazali's influence.[^37]

A relation was established for the first time between Christian and
Muslim philosophies with Gundisalvus' translations from al-Ghazali. C.
Baumker was the first to call public attention to these translations.
From the works of this great scholar (as later from those of E. Gilson)
it has become clear that ibn Sina had an influence on the West in two
ways: (1) directly through his own works and (2) indirectly through
al-Ghazali's works translated by Gundisalvus.

Al-Ghazali was in a way ibn Sind's disciple even though he later opposed
him. First he elaborated the ideas inspired by him, and later he
criticized them. For instance, he followed the philosopher's point of
view in the classification of souls. Ibn Sins, divided the soul into
three faculties named in Latin: vegetabilis, sensibilis, rationalis. In
al-Ghzali's translations, the terms used are: anima vegetative, anima
animalis, anima humana (al-nafs al-nabdti, al-nafs al-hayawdni, al-nafs
al-insdni). As to nafs al-ndtigah (the soul endowed with the gift of
speech) Gundisalvus uses slightly different terminology. Above the
hierarchy of the intellects there is al-'aql al- f a”dl (intellectus
agens) which al-Ghazali designates as Substantia existens per se quae
non est corpus­substance existing in its own right without the need of
body-a definition which we do not find in ibn Sina and which proved
valuable for the Western scholastics. Al-Ghazali calls the active
intellect dator formarum.[^38]

Al-Ghazali's influence on the West was not confined to Raymond Martini.
In his book Huellas des Islam, Palacios carries this influence down to
Pascal. According to him, there is a conformity between al-Ghazali's and
Pascal's ideas about the next world which is not due to coincidence. The
sort of argument concerning the defence of religion extensively employed
by al-Ghazali, known in the West as “betting” (pari), is elaborated
again and again by Pascal in his Pensdes. In addition to Lachelier's
well-known study on this topic, the same theme has also been studied by
E. Degas in his Pari de Pascal.

Statement of the argument aims at making the non-believers see that
there is no inconsistency in performing religious duties and believing
in the possibility that the next world may not exist at all. This
argument may be summarized in one sentence: If you win you shall win
all; if you lose you will loose nothing (Si vows gagnez zoos gagnez
tout, so vows perdez, vans ne perdez rien). Those investigating the
roots of this argument give us information about a short text by Arnobiu
who, after Bayle, was the first to use it. Another text in Sohund's
Theologie Naturelle concerned itself with those roots. Finally, two
French theologians, who were contemporaries of Pascal, formulated the
betting argument in a way similar to his.

One of them was Silhon, the author of Immortalite de l'Ame. Blanchet and
Lachelier studied in what ways these authors were like Pascal and how
they differed. Following a penetrating analysis of the text, Blanchet
demonstrates that they were Pascal's sources both in ideas and literary
form. The result of these investigations is as follows. Pascal's betting
idea was held by many authors in embryonic form since Arnobiu.

The idea took a long journey from al-Ghazali to Raymond Martini and then
to Pascal. Let us see only the comparisons Palacios draws between Pascal
and al-Ghazali basing them on well-founded studies of the texts. Pascal,
like al-Ghazali, is of the opinion that our senses may deceive us. Here,
Palacios compares the text of al-Mungidh with that of PensEce and
indicates the similarities. Pascal as much as al-Ghazali strongly
suspects that our dreams are the reality, our life is nothing but a
dream when we are awake, and that we wake up from that dream when we
die.

The resemblance to the effect that life is a dream and death waking up
from that dream is significant. Both philosophers find the way to get
rid of the state of doubt in mysticism. Both of them look for it in
divine inspiration as a product of moral virtues and love of religion
free from all logical judgments. This power of inspiration bestowed by
God on the believers is the most dependable source for knowledge of the
super­natural world, both in al-Ghazali and Pascal.

It is evident that the foundation of Pascal's theory about the “logic of
the heart”[^39] was laid in al-Ghazali's idea about the “eye of the
heart.” Both assigned deductive intellect to the lowest category, for it
has practically no influence on our emotional life and beliefs; the
mental attitudes determined by it vary; its field of activity is
confined to a limited number of elite; and most people remain outside
its influence. On the other hand, the functioning field of practical
life which is based on habits, familiarity, imitation, and the emotions
of the heart is very broad and can be considered to be the common and
normal foundation of religious life.

Palacios compares the ideas of al-Ghazali and Pascal on faith and human
certitude, and also the anecdote on p. 68 in al- Ghazali's Faisal
al-Tafriqah with that on p. 350 in Pascal's Pennies. In terms of ideas,
both say the same thing, viz., “God is felt not in the intellect but in
the heart” (Dieu est sensible au c.xur, non- a la raison). Then,
Palacios notes the following points in Pascal about “betting” which
remind us of al-Ghazali.

(i) The indifference of non-believers and free-thinkers towards the
problem of the next world and eternity is stupid. It shows a weak
intellect, an evil heart, and faulty perception. The Spanish author
compares Pascal's work with al-Ghazali's Mizdn al-'Amal (Criterion of
Action) and Ihya' in this respect. '

(ii) In order to remedy the indifference of this group of non-believers
it is not sufficient to depend on objective arguments, intellect, and
faith, for, the state of doubt they are in originates from the
doubtfulness of the causes of existence and the non-existence of the
next world. Therefore, one should begin with the hypothesis which would
affirm the impossibility of definite arguments concerning the eternity
of the soul. Here, Palacios compares Pascal's Pennies with certain
chapters and passages in al-Srhazali's works, e.g., Ih,d', Mizan, and
Arba\`in, and shows how the arguments in them are repeated by Silhon and
Pascal with very little change.

(iii) If one begins with the above hypothesis, in case of the
insufficiency of convincing arguments by direct proof, one should look
for such an argument as would recommend the idea of the existence of the
next world where rewards and punishments should be calculated after
death, depending upon personal interest, egotism, and the rules of most
elementary caution and thereby con­vince non-believers of it. Here again
Palacios compares passages from al­ghazali's works, e.g., Ihya', Mizan,
Arba'in, Mustazhiri, with the texts of Silhon, Sirmond, and Pascal.

(iv) Above all this argument consists in putting the problem of next
life in the same way as the possibility of success in present life in
terms of the game of chance and fate. The game of fate consists of
actions and events dependent on chance, like hunting, taking a sea-trip,
wars, surgical operations, drugs for therapy, commercial transactions,
professional education, new industrial enterprises, etc. The person who
takes measures in all these activities calculates that the gain which is
expected to be obtained in the future would be more beneficial than the
one that is risked. Here Palacios points out that in his Ihya' and
Mizan, al-Ghazali used the examples of hunting, commerce, political
occupation, taking a sea-trip, drugs, and industry, and that as a matter
of fact Pascal repeated many of them.

(v) The bulk of the argument is like the process of weighing as in a
pair of scales. The values of the gains risked by betting as to whether
the next world existed or not were put on one tray of this pair of
scales and the values of the gains and losses, in either world, were put
on the other. Here, Palacios gives examples from al-Ghazali's books,
e.g., lhya', Mizdn, and Musta.Ihiri, and compares them with those in the
works of Silhon, Sirmond, and Pascal. Pascal says, Lequel prenez vows
voyonn; pesons le gain et la perte.

(vi) The first point to be taken into consideration in order to complete
this comparison is that the pleasures and properties of this world
should be weighed and then their uselessness and total quality stressed.
The limited use that can be made of one's worldly possessions, during
the lifespan lasting for about seventy years, should be emphasized.
Texts from al-Ghazali's Ihya', Mizdn, and Muatazhiri are compared here
with those of Sirmond's and Pascal's.

(vii) The eternity of next life (the loss or gain of which is the case
in point), i.e., its infinity, limitlessness, unique timelessness which
cannot be compared with millions of years and centuries, is weighed. For
this too Palacios makes detailed comparisons between al-Qhazali's and
Pascal's texts.

(viii) It is understood that there is no comparison between that which
has an end and is limited and that which is unlimited and is endless, in
terms of the worth and quality of values. The party that wins is of
those who choose the road of virtue and accept the existence of the next
world, thus getting rid of the sinful pleasures of this life. Here,
Palacios compares parts of Mizan, Ihyd', and Arba'in with the like parts
in the works of Pascal. “The one who does not believe is the loser.”

(ix) This argument may leave the possibility to the infidels of raising
the objection that it is based on doubt about the things to be gained or
lost in the next world. We have no definite idea about a thing to be
gained or lost in the next world, whereas in this world we can determine
with absolute certainty the things we are going to gain or lose. There
is doubt about the matters of the next world but definiteness about
those of this world.

(x) This difficulty is solved by pointing out that a limited thing which
is definitely risked is negligible as compared with the infinity of
expected gains even though doubtful. Here too Palacios makes comparisons
between the texts of Mizdn al-'Amal and Ihya' and those of the works of
Sirmond and Pascal, and indicates striking similarities between them.

(xi) Finally, assuming that the next world does not exist, if the laique
person who is not under religious discipline acts virtuously in this
world, he shall lose nothing. For the real happiness that man can find
on this earth is not merely the satisfaction of his passions. Just the
opposite; it comes from control­ling the passions, putting them under
the control of the intellect. Only in that way can man rise above the
level of animals.

This state saves man from becoming a slave to sensuality and helps him
gain his true freedom which gives him nobility. It enables him to get
rid of anxiety, sorrow, mental weak­ness, and leaves him with infinite
peacefulness of the soul, which is purer and more lasting than the
sensuous pleasures. Here also Palacios quotes from Mizdn al-'Amal,
Arba'in, Mustazhiri and shows how many of Pascal's statements resemble
those of al- Ghaziili.

According to Palacios, it should be granted that there are some
differences between the two\# philosophers besides their similarities.
First of all, like Sir­mond, Pascal did not present the problem openly
but mentioned it in an indirect way. Al-Ghazali, however, made a careful
and detailed study of it. The point mentioned in paragraph (xi)
illustrates this. According to Palacios, neither Sirmond nor Pascal
stated the problem as thoroughly and analytically as al-Ghhazali did.

Thus, if the irreligious people and free-thinkers act virtuously, as if
the next world really did exist, they will strengthen their position
when a world which is doubtful for -them materializes in the future.
Besides, they would be acting in a way which is consistent with their
interests in this world. The direct source for the betting problem lies
in self-interest and the principle of expediency.

This kind of reasoning directed against the irreligious and the
free-thinkers who disregard all metaphysics and altruism is consistent
with the rule of argument ad hominem which consists of using the
arguments of the opponent against himself leaving him no way of escape.
“If you win, you win all; if you lose, you lose nothing” principle will
constitute the strongest proof for them. However, so long as they are
convinced that as they bet in favor of the existence of the next world,
which establishes control over their appetites, not only is earthly
happiness which is very dear to them not sacrificed, but is, on the
other hand, realized positively and fully.

Al-Ghazali explains the critical aspect of the betting idea better than
Sir­mond and Pascal. For neither of the two thinkers debates with the
irreligious who directly refute the next world and consider the
religious dogma a mere fake and absolute nonsense. Sirmond and Pascal
argue only with those who are in a state of hesitation because of the
lack of positive arguments to reach a decision. Al-Ghazali begins
debating with the irreligious in Ihya' 'Uliem al-Din because of their
ruthless actions and in Mizdn al-'Amal and Arba'In he faces them and
meets them on their own ground.

In doing so, al-Ghazali's aim is to make them believe that they will
find the positive happiness of the only life they believe in and wish to
lead, not in loose life but in knowledge and virtue. According to
Palacios, al-Ehseems more open and thorough than Pascal on betting.
Pascal's Pensdes does not seem to be a completed work as al-Ghazali's
books are. It is in the nature of an outline which the philoso­pher
intended to develop in a complete work. His death, however, hindered
that plan. But the mathematical clarity of Pascal and the results of his
calculations of probability cannot be found in al-Ghazali. Palacios
finds the reason for this in the Muslim philosopher's Islamic view of
regarding all chance games as illegitimate.[^40]

Philosophical Influence Before Descartes
----------------------------------------

Interest in Muslim philosophy developed in Europe towards the end of the
fifth/eleventh century. The Muslim rule in Spain, the Crusades, the
seminaries in Sicily, the inadequacy of the old Western scholastic and
scientific systems, and the density of population and internal
congestion necessitated relations of the West with the world of Islam.
In Toledo Muslims and Chris­tians lived side by side. It was here that
Raymond I, Archbishop of the provincial capital (525/1130-545/1150),
established a translation bureau to render Arabic masterpieces into
Latin.

In France and especially in Normandy, scientific trend appeared first
among the monks. Robert, the King of France of the Capetian dynasty, at
one time a disciple of Gilbert's, was friendly to­wards the Muslim
scientific endeavor. At the time he invaded southern Italy, Calabria,
and Sicily, he observed the Italian seminaries and borrowed many things
from them. In that way, the seminaries of Sicily and Naples acted as
transmission media of Islamic science to the West.

The transmission of Muslim thought to the medieval West passed through
the following phases.

1. In the first phase, a band of scholars went to Muslim countries and
made personal studies. Constantine of Africa and Adelhard made studies
of this sort for the first time. Constantine, who was born in Carthage
near the end of the fifth/eleventh century, travelled all through the
East. He made translations into Latin from the Arabic translations of
Hippocrates' and Galen's books in addition to those of the original
works of Muslim scholars on medical science.

Later on, many students from Italy, Spain, and southern France attended
Muslim seminaries in order to study mathematics, philosophy, medicine,
cosmography, and other subjects, and in due course became can­didates
for professorship in the first Western universities to be established
after the pattern of the Muslim seminaries.

2. The second phase starts with the founding of the first Western
uni­versities. The style of architecture of these universities, their
curricula, and their method of instruction were exactly like those in
the seminaries. First, the Salerno seminary was founded in the kingdom
of Naples. Courses were offered in grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic,
music, geometry, and cos­mography. Books of Aristotle and those on the
interpretation of his philosophy were brought to Italy by way of
Salerno.

Emperor Frederick of Sicily was known as a patron of Muslim science. He
founded the seminary at Naples. Aristotle's books were translated from
Arabic into Latin by his order. He corresponded with ibn Sab'in on
philosophical matters.[^41] Alphonso X, King of Castile and Leon
(650/1252-683/1284), ordered that astronomical tables be made following
a study of Arabic works. At that time, important seminaries were also
established at Padua, Toulouse, and later at Leon.

3. At last, the science of the Musalmans was transmitted to France and
to other Western countries via Italy. Bologna and Montpellier seminaries
were founded at the beginning of the seventh/thirteenth century. The
University of Paris opened its doors for instruction somewhat later. At
that time Oxford and Koln Universities were established after the same
pattern and thus the new science was transmitted to England and Germany.

During the seventh/thirteenth century, the Oxford school became a centre
of the activities of translation and interpretation. Here for the first
time Alexander Neckam translated from Arabic Aristotle's books “On
Heaven” and “On Soul.” In the same School Michael Scot translated into
Latin a book by al-Bitraji (Albatragius) on cosmography and several
books by ibn Sina and ibn Rushd. Robert Grosseteste was another member
of the Oxford Group (651/1253).

His efforts were noted in the translations of Greek and Muslim
philosophical works. Roger Bacon (611/1214-692/1292) was the most
important member of this group. This great scholar who made researches
in language, mathematics, and biology became known as a magician and
occultist during the Middle Ages and was, therefore, convicted; in fact
he was one of the founders of empiricism. The influence of Muslim
philosophers on Roger Bacon, particularly that of ibn Sina, was very
great.

The word “experiment” (experimentum) is closely associated with his
scientific and extra-scientific studies. While the trends initiated by
ibn Sina and ibn Rushd constituted the roots of Western rationalism,
Muslim naturalists like al-Razi and ibn Haitham influenced the empirical
thought of England.

The best known Polish author during the translation period was St.
Thomas' friend Wittelo (b. 628/1230). Wittelo went from Poland to Italy.
He compiled an important work about Greek and Muslim scholars. In his
book entitled Perspective, there were important selections from Euclid,
Appolonius, Ptolemy's Optica, and ibn Haitham's Kitab al Manazir.
Wittelo and Roger Bacon carried further ibn Haitham's work in physical
research.

In the University of Paris, from the day it was established in 612/1215,
much importance was given to Aristotle's texts and their interpretations
in Arabic. From 629/1231 on, the Pope Gregory IX renewed the decree
against the instruction of Aristotle and his texts. In the following
years the Pope's actions against the universities became increasingly
severe. Bacon, Duns Scotus, and Nicholas of Autrecourt were convicted.
Investigations were made about the Averroists; they were convicted and
circulation of their books was prohibited. These severe actions
continued until the end of the eighth/fourteenth century.

These severe measures which had originated from fanaticism had
ideological roots too. In general, they embodied a reaction against
Aristotelian­ism. The tendency of Platonism and dialecticism against
Aristotelianism and experimentationism was again aroused. Muslim
philosophy was unable to meet the needs of the West when it came to
Plato's Dialogues. For, many of them were not known to the Muslims.
Those that were known were in­complete.

At the end of the ninth/fifteenth century extensive publication of books
translated into Latin from Arabic rendered the decrees by the priests
partially ineffective and these books rapidly spread everywhere, even
outside the university curricula; while the mental orientation towards
experimentation was now struggling against reaction in the fields of
ideology and research, the ground was being laid for the Renaissance.

The translation into Latin of the works of abu Bakr Zakariya al-Razi,
founder of the philosophy of nature in Islam, was an important step in
the transmission of Muslim philosophy to the West.[^42] Constantine the
African translated into Latin two philosophical works of al-Rfzi, Kitab
al-'Ilal and Sirr al-Asrdr, and Gerard of Cremona translated al-Mansuri,
another work of his, under the title Liber Albubatri Basis qui dicitur
Almansoriua. Al-Razi's greatest work Kitab al-Hawi (Liber de Continens)
was translated into Latin and the Latin translation was published
several times.

It was translated by Faraj ben Salim known as Faragut, a Jew educated at
Salerno, in twenty­five volumes, under the orders of the King of Naples.
It was first published in 892/1486 in Brecia, then in Venice in
906/1500, 91211506, 915/1509, and 949/ 1542. Al-Razi's influence was not
confined to the Latin translation of his works only; it led further to
the translations of other Muslim philosophers who referred to him in
their works.[^43]

The famous Jabir bin Hayyan is known among the naturalists as an
alchemist, chemist and philosopher.[^44] He is known in the Latin world
better than in Islam, not as a philosopher and chemist but as a magician
and alchemist. Summa pert ectionis magisteri is a translation of his
collected works.

E. Gilson, in a number of detailed studies, investigated how Aristotle's
psychology reached al-Farabi and al-Kindi, how it developed in their
hands, and how it was transmitted to the Latin world.[^45] Many of
al-Kindi's books were translated into Latin. Plato of Tivoli translated
his book on the problems of geometry; Arnold of Villanova, his books on
degrees under the title De Gradibus; Robert the Englishman, his book on
astronomy entitled “On the Dragon”; and de Azogont, his book on physics
and meteorology.

This last book was first printed in Venice in 913/1507 and then in Paris
in 947/1540.[^46] One of al-Kindi's important books, Kitab al-'Aql (Book
of the Intellect), was translated into Latin perhaps by John of Seville
under the title De Intellectu. Gerard of Cremona also translated some
books by the philosopher. According to Quadri, Giordano Bruno, the great
philosopher of the Renaissance, refers to al-Kindi thus: “Al-Kindi is an
Arab philosopher. Among the first scholars he is the best. Ibn Rushd
profited by his books. Does this not signify his power?”

In the West, al-Kindi was known as one of Aristotle's faithful disciples
and, therefore, for a long time, was considered to be a heretic.
How­ever, with his works and those of his successors, empiricism
penetrated into the West from the Arab world and helped the rise of
modern thought. Quadri notes that besides al-Kindi's book “On the
Intellect,” the Latin translation of two other works of his, namely,
Liber de quinque essentiis and Liber introc­torius in artem logica
demonstrationis, were also known in the West.

The latter was compiled by his disciple Mubammad ibn Taiyib
al-Sarak-hsi; its authen­ticity, however, is doubtful. The former marks
progress in the classification of the intellects and is a very important
work. According to Latin texts, al-Kindi's philosophy is inclined
towards Neo-Platonism.[^47]

Coming to al-Farabi, not all but some of his works were known in the
West during the Latin medieval period.[^48] Translations were made into
Latin from his psychology, metaphysics, and logic. Through these
translations he had a penetrating influence on Latin philosophers of the
medieval West.

One of the most important figures in the translation activity during the
Western Middle Ages was Gundisalvus (d. 546/1151). He was the spiritual
leader at Segovia; in addition to numerous translations, he wrote a
book, De Division Philosophiae, which imitated al-Fhrabi almost step by
step.[^49] In this book he substituted al-Farhbi's encyclopedic
classification for the system of seven types of knowledge (trivium et
quadrivium) which was traditional in the East during the medieval
period,[^50] and this classification which was very new and original for
the Western world was followed for long in the then recently established
universities.

Gundisalvus' translations had an influence on Christian scholastic
philosophy, newly awakened during the seventh/thirteenth century, and
especially on St. Thomas and Albert the Great. Al-Fiirabi and, following
him, ibn Sina added the third form of the famous cosmological proof of
God based on the conceptions of possibility and necessity, the first two
being based on the ideas of motion and potentiality as formulated by
Aristotle.

It was taken up from ibn Sina by the Jewish philosopher, Maimonides, and
from him by St. Thomas Aquinas, and then it passed on to Spinoza and
Leibniz. It was this proof that Kant criticized as the model
cosmological proof. Al-Farabi's idealistic logic, according to B. Carra
de Vaux, produced a permanent effect on the logical thought of Latin
scholars.[^51] Robert Hammond, comparing the arguments of St. Thomas
about the existence of God with al-Fhrabi's, has recently shown his
influence on the Christian philosopher. [^52]

By placing some other ideas of these two thinkers in opposite columns as
follows, Hammond reinforces his views regarding this influence:

|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **The proof of movement:**                                                                                                   | **The proof of movement:**                                                                              |
| Due to our sense it is evident that in this world there are things that move. Each being is moved by something else. *Summa* | In this world there are moving beings. Each being is moved by aninstigator.*'Uyutn al-Masa'il*          |
| **Active cause:**                                                                                                            | **Al-'illat al-fa'ilah:**                                                                               |
| In this world we evidence an order of active cause. *Summa*                                                                  | Every being has a cause in this changing world and this is the cause of another being. *Fusus al-Hikam* |
| **Divine attributes:**                                                                                                       | **Divine attributes:**                                                                                  |
| God is an absolutely eternal Being. *Summa*                                                                                  | God is an eternal Being without cause. *Al-Siyasat al-Madaniyyah*                                       |

Al-Farabi synthesizes Aristotelianism and Neo-Platonism but supports the
trends towards Neo-Platonism in the medieval West. As E. Gilson has
shown, al-Farabi's translations were long used as arguments by those
Western philo­sophers who wished to reinstate the Augustinian era.

With al-Farabi originated the idea of definite determinism based on a
meta­physical foundation. As a result this conception led to the
distinction between psychological necessity and physical necessity. God
is the Necessary Being according to al-Farabi (Wajib al-Wujud) and takes
necessity from Himself. All other beings take their necessity from God.
The conception of God under­stood as Universal and Necessary Being is
substituted in this way for the conception of God as the “efficient
autonom”[^53] of the theologians.

The world which takes its necessity from God and is as necessary as God
Himself depends no longer, as in Aristotle, on the subtle laws of beauty
and habit. It is not dependent on the autonomous will of God either.
Thus, physics found a stronger and more unshakable foundation in
al-Farabi than in the Greeks. This foundation is the metaphysical
conception of necessity.

During the era of translations into Latin, the following were the main
translations from al-Farabi:

John of Seville and Gundisalvus,
*Liber Alpharabii de Ortu Scientiarium*.

Gerard of Cremona,
*Liber Alfarabii de sillogismi, De Divisions, de Scientiis,*
*Distinctio super librum Aristotelis de naturali auditu*
*Liber Alf arabii de Scientiis.*

Hermann the German,
*Declaratio compendi viam divisions Alf arabii super libri rhetoricum
Aristotelis ed f ormam clariorom et totale reducta.*

To this list may be added E. Gilson's edition of De Intellectu et
intellects with a French translation.[^54]

The philosophical development of the great Arab physicist ibn Haitham
(Alhazen) proceeded from skepticism to a kind of criticism. The
evolution from scepticism to his own ideological synthesis, he owed to
al-Farabi. The Latin translations of some of ibn Haitham's books written
during his empiricist and skeptical periods were instrumental to the
development of Roger Bacon's ideas.

In addition to this, Western science profited by ibn Haitham's detailed
research on optics. He really marks the beginning of physics as well as
that of the movement of empiricism in the West. In the origination of
empiricism, his role is even greater than that of al-Razi. Ibn Haiiham
explained the role of induction in syllogism. He criticized Aristotle
for the meagreness of his contri­bution to the method of induction which
he regarded as superior to syllogism. He considered it to be the basic
requirement for true scientific research.[^55]

Besides his analysis of light, ibn Haitham devoted the major part of hi
book to a detailed discussion of the problem of perception. He studied
the perception of darkness, distance, position, body, size, and then in
the menta field, the perception of proportion, appearances, and beauty.
He saw the relation between perception and reflection and showed great
acuteness i explaining how true knowledge is founded on these two
processes. He held that knowledge combines the substance of the
intellect with the content o experience and, thus, reconciled
rationalism with empiricism.

The influence of ibn Sina on the West was very significant. During the
period of translations into Latin, many of his books became known in the
West. His greatest work al-Shifa' was first transmitted to the West in
th fifth/eleventh century through Yanbu'al-Hayat,a philosophical work by
the Jewish philosopher, Solomon b. Gabriel (known to the Latins as
Avencebrol o Aviceborn).

Many adaptations of ibn Sina's philosophy were made by the Latin
philosophers. B. Haneberg has given an elaborate account of this
influence (Zu Erkenntnislehre von ibn Sina and Albert us Magnus, 1866).
In his article published in Arch. d'hist. et lit. du Moyen Age, Gilson
shows this influence still more full) By comparing the Latin
translations of ibn 8-ma's works with the origin, Arabic texts we have
prepared the following table of parallel terminology.

![](/sites/default/files/001_1.jpg)

![](/sites/default/files/002_1.jpg)

The translation movement received new impetus during the beginning of
the sixth/twelfth century. By his work Daldat al-Ha'irin (The Guide for
the Perplexed) Maimonides introduced Muslim philosophers and especially
ibn Sina (Avicenna), to the West in great detail.[^56] During the same
century arguments started between Abelard and St. Thomas in the Latin
world. Numerous translations from Arabic into Latin, especially of
al-Farabi and ibn Sina, during that era suddenly widened the horizons of
thought in the West.[^57]

During the sixth/twelfth and seventh/thirteenth centuries the main
centres where translations were made from Arabic into Latin were Toledo,
Durgos, Sicily, and Naples. Translations made by John of Seville and
Gundisalvus were of primary importance. The first translated Arabic
texts into the Roman language and the second, from Roman into Latin. Ibn
Sina's al-Shifa was also partly rendered into Latin and entitled
Suffacientia. Kitab al-Qanuln fi at-Tibb (Canons of Medicine) was also
translated during the same period. The Latin rendering of the works of
these as well as of other Muslim philosophers continued during the
seventh/thirteenth century.[^58]

The influence of these translations has to be classified in two groups.

i) The influence beginning with ibn Sina and al-Farabi and leading to
the development of the trend of Avicennism.

ii) The continued influence exercised by al-Ghazali's summaries of
al-Farabi's and ibn Sina's views.

The translations from al-Farabi and ibn Sina helped in the establishment
of Augustinian philosophy. It supplied it with affirmative arguments.
Hippone, in his book Doctrine Sacra, succeeded in making that synthesis.
Ibn Sine's influence on medieval Christian thinkers was of primary
importance sincethey profited by his ideas directly and also since he
was useful in interpret­ing St. Augustine. However, the Augustinians,
who were adherents of ibn Sina and had accepted the major ideas of the
Muslim philosopher, severely attacked some of his doctrines.

This trend originated from De Anima the authorship of which had been
attributed to Gundisalvus for a long time though later on the
probability of its belonging to John of Seville increased. This is a
work fully inspired by ibn Sina. It was published in 914/1508 in Venice
as a preface of Shifa'.[^59]

In the seventh/thirteenth century an effort was made at the
reconciliation of St. Augustine's ideas with those of Aristotle-a
reconciliation for which ibn Sina's system served as an appropriate
basis. This led to the movement called Augustinian-Avicennism. William
of Auvergne was the most important wit­ness of Latin Avicennism.

His mentioning ibn Sina in different sections of his books forty times
indicates how full he was of his ideas. William benefited from ibn
Sina's definitions, his classification of the sciences, and many of his
ideas on theology; used the examples he borrowed from him; and took over
with some modifications his idea that “the celestial sphere is a living
being”.

Carra de Vaux states that William's idea of the immortality of the
soul-immortalitate anime-was inspired by ibn Sina. However, William
attacked ibn Sina for such ideas as the eternity of the universe, the
necessity of creation, and the separate active intellect taken as the
efficient and final cause of all souls, etc.

It was for this reason that, according to the decrees issued in 607/
1210 and 612/1215, the teaching of Aristotle's interpretations and,
among them, ibn Sink's books were prohibited by the Church. While
William was criticizing Aristotle and ibn Sina, there were other Western
thinkers of his time who were benefiting from the great Muslim
philosopher. In de Vaux's terms, they were not Avicennists reconciling
ibn Sina, as William did, with Christianity, but Avicennists who
followed him in all respects.

Many Christian philosophers during that era accepted ibn Sine's theory
of knowledge instead of Aristotle's. We observe the highest development
of this trend in favour of ibn Sina, especially in Roger Bacon's
illuminism. According to de Vaux, he was an Avicennist. Among the
renowned scholars of the seventh/thirteenth century, he was the one best
informed about ibn Sine's life and works. He did not only know all of
ibn Sine's works translated into Latin, but also knew that apart from
these he had other books in Arabic. With ibn Sine's treatise “Oriental
Philosophy,” now lost, he was well acquainted.

He not only knew his works on philosophy, but also those on astronomy,
medicine, and alchemy, and since he was an empiricist, he benefited to a
great extent from ibn Sina's researches and did not stick to the limited
view of the scholastics concerning him. He even claimed to have found in
him the doctrine of the Holy Ghost and that of the origination of the
universe in time. Ac­cording to Gilson, his thesis on illumination is
connected with ibn Sina's idea of the separate active intellect.

Roger Bacon followed ibn Sina in social ethics, conception of the
City­State, and also in philosophy of religion. He argued that God is
eternal, and His being eternal signifies infinite power. Infinite power
necessitates infinite quality and, therefore, infinite goodness and
sagacity. If the power of the First Cause is infinite, then the universe
can be created by it.

Goodness of the First Cause necessitates its creation by It and its
sagacity necessitates its creation according to purpose. Ibn Sina had
arrived at the same con­clusions through the same kind of thinking (E.
Gilson, “Les Sources, etc.,” Archives, 1930).Alfred of Sareshel also
studied ibn Sina and, like Roger Bacon, was an Avicennist in a broad
sense.

The book entitled De Causis Primis et Secundis was attributed to ibn
Sina for some time, because the anonymous author of this work was
through­out inspired by him. Without mentioning the name, he refers to
ibn Sina's Metaphysics three times and to his De Anima once. In another
place, without mentioning hiss name, he quotes passages from him. Many
times he summarizes him or makes free adaptations from him. The plan of
the book as well as the dominant topics belong to ibn Sina altogether.

In the book entitled De Division Naturae the author of which is also
un­known, ibn S-ma's views are partially Christianized and St.
Augustine's ideas are partially laicized in an attempt at
reconciliation. Gilson regards this book as the limit of
Augustinian-Avicennism. De Vaux sees an apparent Avicennism in it. The
most daring passages from ibn Sina have been adopted in it with­out
modifications. Ibn Sina dominates the book.

On the other hand, Erigena and St. Augustine are included in it with
many modifications and further interpretations. In fact, texts from
Erigene and Denys together with ibn Sina's cosmism are put into a
Christian composition.

Eventually, the influence of Avicennism got stronger than
Augustinianism. For instance, the classification of intellects by
al-Farabi and ibn Sina dominated Albert the Great. St. Thomas was still
under the influence of these philo­sophers even when he criticized them
just as al-Chazali was under their in­fluence on many points even when
he offered a criticism of them.

Ibn Sina, was getting known in the Western world also through the
efforts of John of Seville who is named Hispanensis in some of his
translations. David, his father, was of Jewish origin after whom he is
also called ibn Dawud. Some of ibn Sina's books on metaphysics were
translated by him. John compiled these under the title Opera (Majmu'ah =
Collections), and it was twice published in Venice, in 901/1495 and in
906/1500.

The following books have been included in this Opera:
1. Logika;
2. Suf ficientia;
3. De Coelo et Mundo;
4. De Anima;
5. De Animatibus;
6. Intelligentia (Kitab al-'Aql);
7. Philosophia Prima (Falsafat al-fla).[^60]

Ibn Sing's classification of the philosophical sciences was widely
accepted in Europe in the Middle Ages and was preferred by the
scholastics of the seventh/thirteenth century to that of any other. By
his reading of ibn Bajjah's books, the Latin translations of most of
which have now been lost, Albert the Great was led to the study of ibn
Sing's works as also of al-Ghazali's.

Both he and his disciple Ulrich of Strassburg were influenced by him.
The former followed ibn Bajjah's method and regarded him as the greatest
commentator of Aristotle. One of the many new ideas that ibn Sina handed
down to the West was that of intentio or the intelligible. His
classification of the soul was also accepted by Albert the Great and
through him by many medieval Western philosophers. One also sees ibn
Sina's influence on St. Bonaventure and St. Thomas.

St. Thomas criticized ibn Sina indirectly while making a penetrating
study of ibn Rushd (Averroes). In his book entitled Contra Averroistas,
he examined all the interpretations of Aristotle made by ibn Rushd, and
he profited by the ideas of Albert the Great who was his master. That
way he got up to ibn Sina. St. Thomas developed his own philosophy by
giving new meaning and direction to Aristotle while explaining and
criticizing ibn S-ma's and ibn Ruahd's theories on the problem of the
intelligible as separate from the material (al-mufariqat).

According to St. Thomas' explanations in this book, for ibn Sina all
knowledge of the universal depends upon the knowledge of the particular,
that is, the universal can be comprehended only with the help of the
lower faculties, like perception, memory, and imagination. A totally
naturalistic philosophy appears here, although the philosopher is
al­together in the field of metaphysics.

According to ibn Sina, the deeper our soul gets in the field of
sensations, the nearer does it get to the intelligibles. According to
St. Thomas, however, the farther the soul gets from sensations, the
closer does it get to the intelligibles. According to him, ibn Sina's
doctrine is a form of Platonism without being faithful to it in its
results.[^61]

It is certain that the translations of the majority of ibn Sing's books
into Latin led to a considerable change in Western thinking. E. Gilson
studied his influence on Duns Scotus in the article: “Avicenne et le
point de depart de Duns Scotus,” Arch., 1927. Ibn Sina's views about the
definition and clas­sification of the soul had a wide influence. Ibn
Sina defines the soul both as maturity of the body, entelechy, or form,
as Aristotle had done, and as sub­stance which is independent of matter.

This second definition marks the beginning of the conception of the soul
as a substance independent of matter­a conception which took its
complete form in Descartes. The Muslim philo­sopher goes deep into the
second category of the classification of the soul and, in order to prove
that the soul is independent of the body, advances many arguments some
of which, like the argument of identity and that of unity, were used by
the Western philosophers following him.

The example of the flying man as cited by ibn Sina, in order to prove
the substantiveness of the soul, given no doubt by the philosophers
preceding him, was used in the West by St. Bonaventure and by others
after him. Lastly, it may be noticed that ibn Sina's philosophy of
illumination, developed under Neo-Platonic influence, paved the way for
the development of several religiophilosophical trends in the West
during the medieval period.

However, the failure to make complete translations of ibn Sina's works
and to fill in the incomplete parts of Aristotle's texts found at a
later date hindered the accurate appreciation of the Muslim philosopher
and led even to the spread of certain vague ideas about him for
centuries to come.[^62]

For ibn Sina as for al-Ghazali after him and for Kant in the modern age,
the categories are subjective. Indeed, the Kantian position that the
categories are subjective and the knowledge of objects is due to a
synthesis of sense ­perception and logical intelligence, was a common
place of Muslim philosophy in the sixth/twelfth century.

It was expounded not only by ibn Sina and al-G,hazali, but also by the
latter's contemporaries: ibn Haitham, famous for his optics, and
al-Birfini (d. 440/1048), well known for his studies in mathe­matics,
astronomy, geography, and ethnology.[^63]

By the middle of the seventh/thirteenth century, almost all the works of
ibn Rushd, known as Averro6s in the Latin world, had been translated
into Latin. This translation work Was executed in various institutions
by several scholars. At the college founded by Raymond, Archbishop of
Toledo, some of the most important works of Muslim writers on philosophy
and science, including Arabic versions of Aristotle and commentaries and
abridgments by al-Farabi, ibn Sina, and ibn Rushd were translated into
Latin.

One of the well-known translators working at Toledo was a German,
Hermann by name, but his renderings of the Arabic translations of
Aristotle's works were regarded by Roger Bacon as barbarous and
unintelligible. Orientalists like Cassiri, Rossi, Jourdain erroneously
regard ibn Rushd as Aristotle's first Arab trans­lator.

In fact, ibn Rushd knew neither Greek nor Syriac, let alone his being
the first translator of Aristotle. Aristotle's work had, in fact, been
translated into Arabic and interpreted by many persons before him and
ibn Rushd read him through these translations.

The following of ibn Rushd's works were translated into Latin and/or
Hebrew: Tahafut at-Taha/ut (Destruction of Destruction) into Latin and
Hebrew;[^64] so was his Manahij al-Adilah, a work on philosophy and
theology;[^65] his Fasl al-Maqal which discusses the relationship
between faith and philosophy was translated into Hebrew; the Latin
version of his three volumes on Lav is entitled Vigilia super erroris
reportas in textibus civilis.

There was also the Hebrew translation of ibn Rushd's summary of
al-Majisti (Almagest) on astronomy, but only its Latin version is extant
under the title De Motu sphearr celestis. His writings on medicine were
compiled in a volume entitled Kulliyd (Compendium). These were
translated into Latin and published in sever volumes entitled De
Colliget.
Volumes 2, 4 and 7 were compiled by Jean Bruyerii Champier and entitled
Collectanea de Remedica. He also wrote an interpretation of ibn Sina's
poem on medicine entitled Urjuzah fi al-Tibb which was one of ibn
Rushd's best known books. An epistle by ibn Rushd entitled Theri­aque
(Tirydq) too was translated into Latin and Hebrew.

Ibn Rushd's com­mentaries on Aristotle's works were translated into
Latin by Michael Scot, Hermann the German, and others. Ernest Renan in
his book entitled Averroi et l'averroisme gives full account of the
Latin texts.

Ibn Rushd is considered to be the greatest interpreter of Aristotle in
the Muslim world. He composed three kinds of works on the interpretation
o' Aristotle, one in a summary form, another in medium size, and yet
another in detail. But he was not an interpreter only; he was also an
original thinker of no mean stature.

The trend he started in the West caller Averroism continued for
centuries. Siger de Barbante was its last representative. Ibn Rushd
considered all former interpretations of Aristotle t be deviations from
the thought of the master. He tried to interpret his thought as it
originally was, freed from all kinds of Neo-Platonic influences. It was
through ibn Rushd's works that Aristotle became widely known in Europe.
Those who were looking in the medieval period for the real Aristotle,
and bad a glimpse of him from those preceding ibn Rushd, became
enthusiastic Averroists.[^66]

No Muslim thinker influenced the medieval West more than ibn Rushd The
main ideas for which he was vehemently opposed by the scholastics o the
East and of the West and most enthusiastically welcomed by the radicals
in thought from the sixth/twelfth to the eighth/fourteenth century an,
which opened the door to the European Renaissance were : (1) allegories
interpretation of the Scriptures, (2) the theory of two truths, which,
in th, words of Macdonald, “ran like wild-fire through the schools of
Europe,” (3) pan-psychism which implied immortality of the universal
soul of humanity and mortality of the individual soul, (4) eternity and
potentiality of matter, and (5) emancipation of women.

Ibn Rushd's theory of two truths, combined with the doctrine that matter
is eternal and potent to produce all forms from within itself, was a
godsend for the scientifically-minded people in the West who were, as a
rule, condemned and persecuted by the orthodox Church and the State.
They found in the above theses, which passed as Averroism, their best
support. For this reason de Wulf calls ibn Rusted Doctor of the
Anti-Scholastics.

In transmitting Muslim thought to the non-Muslim West, the Jews of Spain
took the lead. During the short fanatical rule of the Berbers of
Morocco, the Muwahbids, one of whom, abu Yusuf Ya\`qub al-Mansnr
(r.580/1184­596/1199) banished even ibn Rushd from Morocco for a time to
appease the orthodox, the Jews were persecuted and forced to migrate to
the neighboring countries, viz., to Leon and Castile (the Christian part
of Spain), to France across the Pyrehees, and to Sicily.

They were welcomed by Alfonso VI who had himself been educated among the
Arabs and had done the work of initiating the Christians into Muslim
thought. His successors Ferdinand II and Alfonso the Wise maintained the
tradition and engaged Jewish scholars for translation work. Later, many
of the Jewish scholars who were living in the country adjacent to the
Pyrenees, having been turned out from there because of their Averroism,
fled to other parts of Europe taking with them the learning of the
Muslims.

Wherever they settled down they translated the works of Muslim thinkers,
especially those of ibn Rushd whom they universally admired, from Arabic
into Hebrew and from Hebrew into Latin. The family of Tibbonids
established at Lunel undertook the translation almost exclusively of ibn
Ruth--'s original works and his commentaries.

Such were Samuel ibn Tibbon's “The Opinions of the Philosophers,” Juda
ben Solomon Cohen's “The Search for Wisdom,” and Gershon ben Solomon's
“Gate of Heaven.” Among Jewish philosophers, while Ha-Levi followed
al-Ghazali, and Maimonides ibn Sina, Gersonides was a disciple of ibn
Rushd. Besides Jewish scholars, Jewish statesmen and travelers were
instrumental in spreading Averroism in France, Italy, and Central
Europe. The Friars also took a lead in accelerating the spread of
Averroism; under their influence were translated Aristotle's works from
the original Greek as well as ibn Rushd's commentaries on these works.

By the end of the sixth/twelfth century Averroism, i. e., the philosophy
of ibn Rushd, had become so popular, particularly among the whole school
of philo­sophers represented first by the Faculty of Arts at Paris, and
had become such a menace to Orthodox Christianity that in 607/1210 the
Council of Paris forbade all teachings of Aristotle's Natural History
and ibn Rushd's commentaries on it.

This prohibition was confirmed by the Legate Robert of Courcon, Cardinal
of Paris, in 612/1215, and renewed by the Popes in 629/1231 and 643/
1245. The Physics and Metaphysics of Aristotle were forbidden at the
Uni­versity of Toulouse by Urban IV in 662/1263. In 668/1269 the Bishop
of Paris condemned thirteen of ibn Rushd's basic doctrines, and in
676/1277 he condemned the prominent Averroist, Siger of Brabant. Yet the
strength o Averroism was irresistible.

No force could suppress it. In 612/1215, Frederick II became the Emperor
of Rome. Having bee] educated at Palermo under Arab teachers and having
come into close contac with the Muslims of Sicily and during the
Crusades also with those of Syria, h. had become a great admirer of
Muslim thought in general, and of ibn Rush( in particular. In 621/1224
he established a university at Naples chiefly wit) the object of
introducing Muslim philosophy and science to the people of the West.

St. Thomas received his education at this university. Here both
Christian and Jewish translators were engaged for rendering Arabic works
int. Latin and Hebrew. The works of Aristotle and ibn Rushd in their
Latin translation were used not only in the curriculum of this
university, but wer sent also to the Universities of Paris and Bologna.

Nowhere did Averroism strike deeper roots than in the Universities of
Bologna and Padua. Of thess two centers of learning Padua became the
“hot-bed of Averroism.”

Averroism became rapidly the ruling mode of thought in the West.
Scholars of medieval Europe were agitated by ibn Rushd's Aristotle as by
no other author. From the end of the sixth/twelfth to the end of the
tenth/sixteenth century Averroism remained the dominant school of
thought, and that inspite of the orthodox reaction it created first
among the Muslims in Spar then among the Talmudists and, finally, among
the Christian clergy. “His writings... after being purged of
objectionable matter by ecclesiastic authorties became prescribed
studies in the University of Paris and other institution of higher
learning.”

Ibn Rushd became more famous in the Latin world than in the Mush world,
because very few copies of his books had been made and circulated Muslim
countries. Besides, the disgrace be had to face towards the end of 1
life was instrumental to his being forgotten. Another important reason f
it was the destruction of his books in Spain by Ximenez's order. In
pursuant of this order, 80,000 manuscripts in Arabic were burnt in the
squares Granada.[^67] In about 1009/1600, Scaliger, while searching for
new manuscril in Spain, could find not even a single copy of ibn Rushd's
works.

Philosophical Influence From Descartes To Kant
----------------------------------------------

Although Pascal was a contemporary of Descartes, he cannot be said to
have been a pioneer of modern philosophy in the West. Modern
philosophical thought really began with the speculation of Descartes.
Muslim philosophers had penetrated deep into the West much before
Descartes' time, and most of the works of al-Ghazali had been translated
into Latin before the middle of the sixth/twelfth century, and since
then had exercised a considerable influ­ence on Jewish and Christian
scholasticism.

Much before Descartes, his skepticism had been taken up by Jehuda
Ha-Levi (d. 540/1145) in his work Chosari and it had also shown its mark
on Crescas (d. 813/1410). The Domini­can Raymond Martin had freely used
the Hebrew translation of Tahd/ut al-Falasifah, another of al-Qhazali's
works, and incorporated a great deal of it in his Pugio Fidei. Pascal
too had been deeply affected by his thoughts.

The influence that al- hhazali had on modern European thought has not so
far been fully appreciated. There is no acknowledgment by Descartes of
his indebtedness (direct or indirect) to any Muslim thinker, and yet it
is difficult to believe that he did not know al-Ghazali's general
position and was not influenced by it through the Latin scholastics,
whom beyond question he must have read. This conclusion forces itself
upon the mind all the more strongly when one realizes that he was not
only a scholar of Latin, but had himself written two of his most
important works, Meditationes de prima philo­sophia and Principia
philosophiae, in Latin.

We notice that, exactly like al-Ghazali, Descartes came to his
conclusions by a study of his own self, al-Ghazali's starting formula
being “I will, there­fore, I am,” and Descartes' being, “I think,
therefore, I am.” He followed al-Ghazali's derivation of the negative
and positive attributes of God from the concept of necessary existence.

The distinction made by him, and by Galileo before him, between the
infinite (that the parts of which cannot be expressed by any number or
measurement) and the indefinite (that which has no limit) was exactly
the same as given by al-Ghazali and ibn Sina, and, following them, by
Crescas and Bruno. Exactly like al-Ghazali he begins with describing how
in vain he interrogated in his mind every school and every creed for an
answer to the problems that disturbed him and finally resolved to
discard all authority.

If the Muslim world had possessed the original of any mode of thought or
movement, particularly in matters of detail, which was developed by the
West later, when most of the classics of Muslim thought in the spheres
of philosophy, medicine, and science had been translated into Latin,
then, even in the absence of direct evidence, one would be justified in
presuming that that mode of thought or movement was stimulated by
influence from the Muslim East.

Although all other masterpieces of al-Ghazali had been translated into
Latin before 545/1150, and had admittedly exerted great influence on the
Western scholastic thought, there is no evidence that al-Ghazali's
al­-Munqidh min al-Dalal had been translated into Latin before
Descarte's time.

It is for the scholars of Latin to discover that. But there is so much
internal evidence in the most remarkable parallel of that work with
Descartes' Discours de la methode, printed in 1047/1637, that it becomes
impossible to deny its influence on the father of modern philosophy in
the West.

Both of these works, al-Ghazali's al-Mungidh and Descartes' Discours de
Influence of Muslim Thought on the West la methode, are
autobiographical. Both al-Ghazali and Descartes began the stories of
their lives from their youth (M. 4, D. 8).[^68] Both realized how,
despite having the same reasoning faculty, the children of Muslim or
Christian parents, thanks to custom and example, had different beliefs
from the beliefs held by those brought up by Jewish parents, and how
those brought up among Frenchmen were different from those brought up
among the Germans (M. 6, D. 19).

Both, therefore, decided that they would not believe anything that was
based on tradition, custom, or example (M. 5-6, D. 13), and both walked
into every dark spot to discover the truth (M. 4, D. 19). Both held, for
exactly the same reasons, that the senses cannot yield certain knowledge
(M. 8-9, D. 36).

The language and the examples of the defects of sense-experience given
by both of them were almost identical (M. 8-9, D. 36, 37). Both studied
all the literature that came into their hands, and in the accounts of
their studies both mentioned the same subjects: philosophy, mathematics,
logic, theology, and physical sciences. After examining all these
subjects and all creeds one by one both concluded that they all fell
short of certain knowledge and so resolved to discard all authority (M.
17-62, D. 8-14); and, thus, both became ex­tremely skeptical about all
that had passed as knowledge up to their times and boldly rejected the
opinions they had so far held (M. 12, D. 17). Both of them, considering
that the very same experiences as they had in waking life might occur
also while they slept without there being at that time any truth in
them, decided to feign that everything that had entered their minds till
then was no more than illusion of dreams (M. 10, D. 31).

Both withdrew from their places of work, wandered in search of truth for
several years from place to place (M. 3, D. 28), and finally went to
lands quieter and more congenial for their search after truth (Tus and
finally Nishapur in the case of one and Holland in the case of the
other) (M. 3, D. 30). Both devised a new method of discovering the truth
and this method was exactly the same for both. It consisted in taking
only that as true which was conceived very clearly and very distinctly
without any possibility of doubt (M. 5, 20, D. 20).

Both thought that the clarity and distinction they demanded of every
truth must be at least that found in mathematics, that which we see, for
example, in apprehending that 10 is greater than 3 or that the sum of
the three angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles (M. 7, D.
35). Both modestly declared that the purpose of their discourses was not
that everybody should follow their example, but only to relate the story
of their own method of finding the truth; others may find the truth in
some other ways (M. 19, D. 36f).

This most amazing resemblance between the two works makes George Henry
Lewis say in his Biographical History of Philosophy that “had any
translation of it existed in the days of Descartes, everyone would have
cried out against the plagiarism.”

If it were only a few facts of their autobiographies, their going, for
example, to quieter places for contemplation, and a few other things
common to these works of al-Ghazali and Descartes, they might be
considered to have been due to mere coincidence, but when the entire
plan of their respective works, the whole treatment of the subjects
discussed, and the whole content of these subjects down to detailed
arguments, examples, and relatively unimportant matters, culminating in
skepticism and in ultimate discovery of the method of finding the truth,
run parallel to each other, it becomes impossible to attribute all that
to coincidence.

It might be that along with other masterpieces of al-Ghazali, al-Munqidh
too had been translated into Latin and read by Descartes. Nowhere has
the existence of a translation of this work been mentioned, but nowhere
has it been expressly denied. Alfred Guillaume in his article in The
Legacy of Islam states, “His books on Logic, Metaphysics and Physics
became known through the translators of Toledo in the sixth/twelfth
century.”

He mentions no exception. It might have been one of the eighty-seven
Arabic works translated by Gerard of Cremona or one of the works
rendered into Latin by John of Seville and Dominic Gundisalvus. Or else
it might have been the case that the text of al-Ghazali was orally
translated for Descartes by some scholar of Arabic. Descartes himself
refers to “the example of many fine intellects that had previously had
this plan” (D. 29), but does not mention any by name. This may be a
veiled reference to al-Ghazali who alone among his predecessors had
followed exactly the same plan. In any- case, whatever the facts, in our
opinion the influence of a1-Ghazali on Descartes' Discours de la mkthode
is indubitable.

The next great luminary of modern philosophy was Spinoza. As shown by
Dunnin Borkowski, he was deeply influenced by al-Farabi, whose ideas had
reached him through Jewish scholars like Maimonides. “Any one who reads
Spinoza's De Emendatione Intellectus would be struck by the great
similarity between this book and al-Farabi's book What Should Precede
the Study of Philosophy.

The succession of ideas in the two books is the same ... Even the final
aim of the two books is the same, namely, the knowledge of God, \`in
order to follow His example as much as lies in human capacity.’”[^69]

Ibn Sina's influence on Spinoza through Maimonides is noticeable in his
(Spinoza's) view that in God intelligence, intelligent, and intelligible
are identical, and so are essence and existence, while in created beings
existence is an accident super-added to essence.

As mentioned before, the cosmological proof for the existence of God
given by al-Farabi and ibn Sins, was accepted by Spinoza, as by
Maimonides and St. Thomas before him, and al-Ghazali's distinction
between the infinite and the indefinite was followed by him as it was
done by Crescas, Bruno, Galileo, and Descartes. Besides, his idea of
substance was the same as al-Ghazali's idea of God-simple, having no
accidental qualities, no distinction of genus and species and no
separation of essence from existence.

His idea of freedom was also identical with al-Ghazali's idea of
necessity (non-dependence upon anything else) and that of necessity was
identical with the latter's idea of pos­sibility (dependence upon a
cause). Again, Spinoza's definition of the forms of imagination more or
less conformed to the distinction between retentive memory and composite
memory made by Maimonides following al-Ghazali In all these cases there
is merely a difference of terminology.

The greatest name in modern philosophy after Spinoza is that of Leibniz
But before we show his relation to Muslim thought, we should like to
make a few remarks about the philosophy of another great thinker of the
modern age, Kant, who claimed to be the Copernicus of philosophy.

Like al-Ghazali, Kant distinguished between phenomena and noumena and
regarded the physical world of which alone the scientific knowledge is
true as the world of phenomena, to which alone the categories, which to
him are equally subjective, are applicable, causality, substance, and
attribute bein; excepted by al-Ghazali. Like him, he demonstrates that
theoretical reason cal analyse only what the senses yield, and that it
cannot solve the basic and more important questions of philosophy and
religion, such as the existence of God the nature of His attributes, the
immortality of the soul, and the eternity c the universe. Kant found the
key to the solution of these questions in the practical reason of man,
while al-Ghazali discovered it in the religious experience of the
Prophet and the mystic, which in its turn is to be tested by the moral
certitude and moral influence which it exercises upon the soul. This
comparison should make it clear as to who the Copernicus of philosophy
was, al-Ghazali or Kant.

How are we to explain this close resemblance between the philosophic]
ideas of al-Ghazali and Kant? We believe that this explanation can be
foun in the philosophy of Leibniz, for, as T. H. Green observed, the
doctrines Leibniz formed a permanent atmosphere of Kant's mind, despite
the insp ration he received from Hume in his youth.[^70]The minds of
both worked o the same lines.[^71] Kant was only a corrected and
developed form of Leibniz, whereas Leibniz was an incorrect and
undeveloped form of al-'Ghazali combine with the Asharite atomism.[^72]

Leibniz, like al-Ghazali and Kant, regarded the world as phenomenal. For
him, as for these others, human knowledge does not consist solely in the
perception of universal truths, nor does it entirely depend upon the
sense Like both of them, he made a distinction between concepts and
percept though he used different terms (relatively clear and confused
perceptions) express this distinction.

Time and space for him, as for them, are not real characteristics of the
real, though, like al-Ghazali and unlike Kant, he regards them not as
intuitions but as ideas of relations. As for them, so for him, the
categories-being, substance, unity, causality, identity, etc.-are
supplied to experience not by the senses but by the mind.[^73] Only
their lists of these categories are in some details different.

Leibniz was a younger contemporary of Spinoza whose indebtedness to
Muslim thought is undoubted. He could read Latin with the help of
pictures at the age of eight; he wrote poetry in that language at the
age of fourteen and read the scholastics during his youth. Therefore, he
cannot be supposed to have been ignorant of al-Ghazali's views through
Latin translations. In fact, the influence of Muslim thought on him is
evident in some other respects as well.

Al-Farabi's proof of the existence of God from the concepts of necessity
and contingency came down to him through ibn Sina, Maimonides, and St.
Thomas, and his view that man's perfection comes from God and
imperfection from his own nature is also traceable to Muslim
scholastics. The same is true of his view of Goo as simple. Ibn Sina's
influence on him can hardly be doubted for there is a curious
parallelism in al-Shifa' and the Monadology of Leibniz in describing
association and memory. The similarity is remarkable not only in the
treatment of the subject but also in the example of the dog and the
stick with which they illustrate their theory.[^74]

Without intensive research in the education that Locke and Berkeley
received and the studies they pursued it is difficult to say whether
al­-Ghazali had any influence on their philosophy or not, but what we
can say with certainty is that he anticipated much of their speculation.
Like the empiricists from Locke to Hume, he bases knowledge on
experience rather than on intellectual concepts, though he does not
confine the meaning of the term “experience” to sensuous experience
only, but extends it so as to include within it the intuitive experience
of the Prophet, the mystic, and the saint, and thus escapes skepticism
to which the European empirical thought inevitably led. This latter kind
of experience is, according to him, far more important than
sense-experience, since this alone yields the knowledge of Ultimate
Reality.

Like Hume, al-Ghazali proclaims that we can have no knowledge of cause
and effect in the realm of phenomena. All we know is that one event
succeeds another. His description of induction is the same as Mill's. We
perceive by the senses that the same thing repeatedly passes the same
way (e.g., fire burns); we conclude that it will always pass the same
way (fire will always burn); or we notice that certain things pass for
the most part the same way (e.g., taking scammony is followed by
diarrhoea or wine by intoxication); we judge that the one will probably
follow the other in future cases as well.

But this explanation of induction is not based on the fallacy of petitio
prin­cipii as Mill's. According to him, it is reason which judges that
this sequence of events must come to pass by necessity, for if it came
by mere chance could not have occurred always or in most cases in the
past. It is, he sa3 by this argument alone that induction of empirical
laws can be rational justified.

Al-Ghazali anticipates Schopenhauer and other voluntarists in holding
that not thought but will is the fundamental reality, but he steers
clear Schopenhatter's pessimism. God, according to him, is Will and the
words flows from Him like a river. Like Bergson, even more like Jacobi
and Schleik macher, he makes intuition or immediate consciousness the
source of knowledge.

Al-Ghazali exerted great influence over the East and the West. It w the
Protestant revolt that freed the West from the grip of this great mar
intellect, and in the East, having conquered all rival thought; it has
even this day a hold too tight to allow any fresh movement.[^75]

Philosophical Influence in the Post Kantian Period
--------------------------------------------------

In the sixth/twelfth century some stir was created by another Musl
thinker ibn Tufail (Chapter XXVII) known in the Latin world for long
Abentofal or Abubacer. Most of his writings were lost probably during
the destruction by Ximenez. But his fame is due to his Hayy Ibn Yagzan,
a philosophical romance, in which he shows that even without the help of
tradition and revelation man can attain to the knowledge of nature and
through that the knowledge of God.

This remarkable work was first translated into Hebre and Moses of
Narbonne wrote an excellent interpretation of it. It was translat from
Arabic into Latin by Edward Pococke Junior under the title Philo phus
autodidactus sive Epistola Abi Jaafar ebn Tophail de Hai ebn Yokdh and
published together with the Arabic text at Oxford in 1082/1671, and then
its translations appeared in most of the European languages.

It was first translated into English by George Keith in 1085/1674, then
by Geot Ashwell in 1098/1686. Simon Ockley published its translation
into Engli from the original Arabic in 1120/1708. Its Dutch version was
first publish in Amsterdam in 1083/1672 and again in 1113/1701. It was
translated in German twice. Finally, Gauthier published the French
version of the be with an analytic summary in 1318/1900. In Paul
Bromilc's words, “in comparatively short time it caught the fancy of the
public--in fact it to the world by storm and for a long time it remained
in vogue.” The work interest in it has not yet ceased, for it was
translated into Russian in 13. 1920, and into Spanish in 1353/1934.

The large number of these translations is indicative of the influence
this philosophical novel on Western thought. After the appearance of
translations, many books written in the West were inspired by this work.
Among them may be Bacon's philosophical novel, Atlantis, and other
Utopian novels, the last of which was Robinson Crusoe produced by Daniel
Defoe in 1132/1719, eleven years after the publication of Simon Ockley's
translation. It has, therefore, been justly concluded that, among
others, Daniel Defoe was indebted to the great Muslim philosopher for
the conception of his work.

In discussing the influence of Muslim philosophy on Western thought we
cannot omit the reference to ibn Khald0n. He has been recognized by many
to be the father of sociology and the first philosopher of history. He
was the first to oppose Greek and early Muslim philosophers explicitly
by asserting that human societies should not be studied from an
idealist-rationalist point of view, but ought to be taken as natural
phenomena.

This view is fully ex­pounded in his Muqaddimah (Introduction) to his
historical work entitled Kilab al-'Ibar. The Introduction was first
printed in Paris by Quatremere and then by Mustafa Fehmi at Bfilaq. Its
first translation was made in Turkey by Pirizade Sahib Molla and Ahmet
Jevdet Pasha.

Western people were not aware of this philosopher until the beginning of
the twelfth/eighteenth century. At the end of the eleventh/seventeenth
century, d'Hiberbelot merely referred to him in Bibliotheca Orientalis;
Sylvestre de Sacy emphasized his importance at the beginning of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century.

At the end of that century, Hammer Prugstall wrote articles about him
and referred to him as the “Montesquieu of the Arabs.” Some years later,
Garcin de Quatremere published the original version of the
“Introduction” under the title Prolegomenes d'Ebn Khaldoun and attempted
a summarized translation of it but could not finish it. Baron de Slane
succeeded in making a complete trans­lation between 1279/1862 and
1285/1868. In 1351/1938 this translation was reproduced in photoprints.

This translation made it possible for philosophers and sociologists to
study the text. In the West since then, ibn Khaldun has been often
referred to by Western thinkers and some have considered him the founder
of a new science. Some consider him a philosopher of history. Others
think he pioneered sociology. For instance, Rappoport, R. Flint, N.
Schmidt think he is a philosopher of history. Gumplowitz, R. Maunier,
Findikoglu, Sati'u Bey al-Husri, and Schmidt consider him the pioneer of
sociology.

According to Gaston Bouthoul, he had both these qualities. He regards
him as the leader of the biological conception of society-a conception
later worked out in their own way by Vico, Montesquieu, and Marx. F.
Schulz wrote many articles on ibn Khaldun in the Journal Asiatique
(Paris, 1303/1885). Graberg of Hemso, Franz Rosenthal, von Kremer,
Lewine, G. Bouthoul, Gabrieli, Stefano Colosio, Ferreiro, Carra de Vaux,
T. J. de Boer, G. Richter, Gauthier, A. Bombaci, Charles Issawi, W.
Fischel, D. B. MacDonald, Breisig, H. A. R. Gibb, R. Alte­mira, etc.,
have referred to him since the end of the last century. As a result of
this strong interest shown by the Orientalists in him, his conceptions
of history and society have had an influence on some contemporary
philosophers of history such as Spengler and Breisig.

Bibliography
------------

Ibn al-Qifti, Tdrikh al-Hukama'; ibn abi Uyaibi'ah, 'Uyun al-Anbd' f
Tabagat al-Atibba'; ibn al-Nadim, Fihrist; Bhahraetani, al-Milal
w-al-Nilual; §hahraziui, Tarikh al-Hukama'; Baihaqi, Siwan al-Hikmah; M.
Meyerhof, Von Alexandrien nach Baghdad, Cairo, 1930; A. Jourdain,
Eecherches Critiques cur l'dge et l'origine des traductione latines
d'Aristotle; F. Wiistenfeld, Die tlbersetzungen arabiseher Werke in das
Lateinische seit dem XI. Jahrhundert, Gottingen, 1877; Die Aka­demien
der Araber and ihre Lehrer, 1837; D. Campbell, Arabian Medicine and Its
Influence on the Middle Ages, 1926; S. Munk, Melanges de philosophic
juive et arabe, Paris, 1859; M. Steinschneider, Die europaischen
Uberaetzungen aus dem Arabischen, his Mitte des 17. Jahrhunderts, 1904;
Die hebrdischen Uber­setzungen des Mittelaltere, Berlin, 1893; Victor
Chauvin, Bibliographic des ouvragea arabes ou relatif aux arabes,
publics dans l'Europe Chrdtienne de 1810 A 1885, Liege, 1922;

J. Forget “Do l'influence do la philosophic arabe sur la philosophic
scola­stique,” Reuve Neo-Scolastique, Oct. 1894, pp. 385-410; A.
Schmolders, Documenta philosophia arabum, Bonn, 1836; Essai our les
ecoles philosophiques chez lea Arabes et notamment sur le doctrine
d'Algazzali, Paris, 1942; M. Bouyges, Notes our lea philosophies arabes
connus des latins au Moyen-Age, Beyrouth, 1922; A. F. Mehren,
“Correspondance d'Ibn Seb'in avec Frederic II”, Journal Asiatique, Vol.
XIV, 1879; Algazel, Magacid at-falasifat, cite par Saint Thomas sans
Summum; Algazel, Taha f at al-Falasi f at, cite par Raymond Martini; C.
Huit, Les Arabes et l'Aristotelisme, Bans les Annales de Phil.
Chretienne, Vol. XX, Paris, 1890; Haneberg, Zur Erkennt­nislehre von Ibn
Sina and Albertus Magnus, 1868; S. Beitriige, Zur Psychologie de Ibn
Sina, Mdnehen, 1872; G. Quadri, La Philosophic Arabe daps i'Europe
MEdie­vale, des origins a Avexroestrad de b'italien, Paris, 1947;

E. Gilson, “L'auguatinisme avicennisant,” Archives d'Histoire doctrinale
et littdraire du Moyen-Age, 1929; A. M. Goichon, La Philosophic
de'Avicenne et son Influence en Europe medicvale, Paris, 1944; Ernest
Renan, Averroes et l'averroisme, Paris; Calmant-Levy, L'lslam et
1'Occident, Melanges composes par plusieurs auteurs, Cahier du Sud,
1947; Leon Gauthier, Ibn Rochd (Averroes), Paris, 1848; Miguel Asin
Palacios, Huellas des Islam, 1918, La spiritualidad de Algazely su
sentido cristiano, 4 Vols., Madrid, 1934-941; Emile Brehier, Histoire de
la Philosophic; H. Z. Ulken, Islam Medeniye­tinde Tercumeler, Istanbul,
1947; La Penile de l'Islam, Istanbul, 1953; Islam Felsefeei Tarihi,
I,1957; “Ibn Sins,” “Ibn Rughd “ Islam Ansiklopedisi, (Turkish; G. M.
Wickens (Ed.), Avicenna, Scientist & Philosopher, Luzac, London, 1952.

[^1]: M. M. Sharif, “Muslim Philosophy and Western Thought,” Iqbal, Vol.
VIII, No. 1, Lahore, July 1959, pp. 1-14.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Hitti, History of the Arabs, p. 315

[^4]: Barthold, Mussulmane Culture

[^5]: Gustave E. Von Grunebaum, Medieval Islam, Chicago, 1946.

[^6]: Risalah'Abd Allah Ibn Isma'il al-Hashimi ila'Abd al-Masih Ibn
Ishaq al-Kindi (a work of the third/ninth century written in defence of
Christianity), London, 1885

[^7]: Petits traites Apologitiques de Yahya ben 'Adi, Arabic text with
French translation by Augustin Perier, Geuthner, Paris, 1920.

[^8]: Gustave E. Von Grunebaum, op. cit.

[^9]: E. Kant, La Religion dans les limites de la simple raison, French
translation by J. Gibelin, J. Vrin, Paris, 1943, pp. 230-40.

[^10]: Goethe, Mahomet (French translation).

[^11]: Auguste Comte, Systems de la politique positive, Vol. III, p.
470.

[^12]: Oswald Spengler, Le Declin de l'Occident, trad. de l'allemand par
M. Tazerout, Vol. II, pp. 173-298.

[^13]: F. Nietzsche, Der Antichrist.

[^14]: Eduard von Hartmann, La Religion de l'Avenir, p. 148.

[^15]: Thomas Carlyle, Heroes and Hero Worship, French translation by
Jean Izoulet, Armand Colin, 1928, pp. 67-122.

[^16]: La Conquete du Monde Musulman: La Oroisade Spirituelle chez lea
musulmans, de Saint Francois d'Assise a Raymond Tulle, 1912; H. Z.
Ulken, Islam Dusuncesine Giris, Istanbul, 1954.

[^17]: Rene Guenon, “L'esoterisme islamique,” Plslam et l'Occident,
1947; F. Bon­jean, “Culture occidentale et culture musulmane,” ibid.;
Ph. Guiberteau, “Islam, Occident et Chritiente,” ibid.; F. Bonjean,
“Quelques causes d'in-comprehension entre,” ibid.

[^18]: Sir Mohammad Iqbal, The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in
Islam, Lahore, 1954, p. 129.

[^19]: Briffault, The Making of Humanity, London, 1928, pp. 200-01

[^20]: Ibid., p. 202.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 190.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 191.

[^23]: Qur'an, 17:1.

[^24]: E. J. Jurji, Illumination in Islamic Mysticism, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 1938, p. 5.

[^25]: Margaret Smith, An Early Mystic of Baghdad, Harith al-Muhasibi,
London; L. Massignon, La Passion d'al-Hallaj, 2 Vols.; “Diwiln
d'al-Hallaj,” ed and tr. in Journal Asiatique, 1931; A. J. Arberry,
Sufism, London, 1950; R. A Nicholson, Mathnawi; Dr. Muhammad M. Hilmi,
al-Hayat al-Ruhiyyah fi al-Islam abu 'Abd al-Ralunan al-Sulami, Tabaqat
al-Sufiyyah, al- K-anji, Misr, 1953.

[^26]: Henry Corbin, “ Shihab al-Din Yahya al-Suhrawardi,” Opera
Metaphysiea e Mystica, Vol. I, Istanbul, 1945, (Euvre8 philosophiques et
mystiques de Shahabuddin Yahya al-Suhrawardi, prolegomenis en francais,
Teheran, 1952.

[^27]: Idem, Suhrawardi d'Alep. fondateur de la doctrine illuminative,
Paris, 1939, poul'Anthropologie Philosophique; un traite persan inedit
do Suhrawardi (Le Familie des Amante), pp. 371-423 (in Recherches
Philosophiques, Vol. 11, 1932-33, Paris).

[^28]: La critique thomiste des Motecallemin (Loquentes) in: “Pourquoi
St. Thoma a critique St. Augustin” by E. Gilson in Archives, 1926.

[^29]: Henri Laoust (Ed.), Contribution d une etude de la Methodologie
de Taki al-Din Ahmad b. Taimiya, two opuscules of ibn Taimiyyah, Cairo,
1939.

[^30]: Max Horten, Die philosophischen Sy8teme der spekulativen
Theologen im Islam,Bonn, 1912.

[^31]: L. Gardet and M. M. Anawati, Introduction d la Theologie
Musulmane; Albert N. Nader, Le Systems Philosophique des Mu'tazila
(Premiers penseurs de ('Islam), Beyrouth, 1956; Tor Andrae, Les Origins
d ('Islam et le Chriatianisme, trad. de l'allemand par Jules Roche,
Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1955.

[^32]: This problem has been discussed by Wensinck in his book, La
Pensie de Ghazzali. The author considers the great importance of this
influence, and com­pares al-Ghazbli with Plotinus, Augustine, and
Pascal.

[^33]: Saint Augustine is mentioned by Qurlubi (fifth/eleventh century)
in his Kitab al-Islam fi Din al-Nasara min al-Fasad w-al-Auham wa
Izhar-i Mahasin-i Din al-Islam (Library Koprulu, Istanbul), as
Qissisinukum Ogustin (Your Priest Augustine), p. 9; on page 53 in these
words: Qala Ogustin qad ijtama'at al-milal al-thalath (the three
religions, Augustine said, have gained common ground).

[^34]: A. J. Wensinck, op. cit., Paris, 1940, pp. 10, 14, 15, 16. The
author finds similarities between Mishkat al-Anwar and the Enneads of
Plotinus (p. 270). The same comparison between al-Szhi azali and
Plotinus appears in D. B. MacDonald's article: “al-Gazali” in
Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, pp. 146-49. For the influence of
al-Ghazali on the medieval Christian thought, cf. H. Z. Ulken, La Pensee
d l'lslam, Istanbul, 1953, p. 235, and R. A. Nicholson, Fi al-Tasatowul
al-Islamiyyah, Egypt, 1927, pp. 140-44; M. Lutfi Jum'ah, Tarikh
Falasilat al-Islam. p. 74.

[^35]: M. Asin Palacios, “Contacts de la spirituality musulmane et de Is
spirituality Chretienne,” l'Islam et ('Occident, 1935.

[^36]: A. Guillaume, The Legacy of Islam, London, 1952, p. 274.

[^37]: S. Horovitz, Der Einflus8 der griechi8chen Skepais au/ die
Entwicklung der Araber, 1915, Chap. 4: “The helation Between Ghazzali's
Thought and Christian Scholastics.”

[^38]: MacDonald, “Life of al-Ghazzali with Special Reference to His
Religious Experience and Opinions,” Journal of American Oriental
Society, Vol. XX, 1899, pp. 71-132; Carra de Vaux, Gazati, Paris, 1902;
A. J. Wensinck, op. cit., Paris, 1940; Miguel Asin Palacios, La Mystique
d'al-Ghazzali; Quadri, La Philosophie Arabe, Payot, 1947; Qaasim
Kufrali, “Ghazzali,” Islam Anisklopedisi; H. Z. Ulken, Islam Felsefesi
Tarihi, 1955.

[^39]: Logic of Heart: Logique du caur (le cmur a des raisons qua in
raison ne connait pas).

[^40]: Palacios, “Contacts de la spiritualite musulmane et de la
spiritualite Chré­tienne,” L'Islam et l'Occident, Cahier du Sud, 1952.

[^41]: L. Massignon, Ibn Sab'in et la critique psychologique Bans
t'hiatoire de la philosophy musulmane (Memorial Henri Basset), Paris,
1928. Serfathin Yaltakaya, “Sicilya cevaplari nin telkik ve tereumesi,”
Felsefe Yilligi, II, 1936 (Turkish).

[^42]: Paul Kraus, “Abi Bakr Muhammadi filii Zachariae Razis,” Opera
Philosophica, Vol. I, Cairo, 1939; M. Amin, al-Tafkir al-Islam.

[^43]: Steinschneider, Die europdischen Obersetzungen aus dem
Arabisehen, his Mitte des 17. Jahrhunderts; 1904.

[^44]: Paul Kraus, Rasd'il Jdbir Ibn Hayydn, Eseai sur l'histoire des
idles scienti­fiques dans t'Islam, I, textes choisis, Maisonneuve,
Paris, 1935; ibn Khaldun, Mugadimmah; Aldo Mieli, La Science Arabe.

[^45]: E. Gilson, “Le sources greco-arabes de l'augustinisme
avicennisant” (le texte latin medieval du D'intellectu d'alfarabi);
“Jean Scot Eriugene, source du Pseudo Avecenne,” Archives d'Histoire
doctrinale et litdraire du Moyen-Age, Annee, 1929, pp. 5-149.

[^46]: D. Campbell, Arabian Medicine, 2 Vols., 1926, Chap. IV,
“al-Kindi”; F. Wustenfeld, Die tibersetzungen arabischer Werke in da8
Lateinische seit dem XI. Jahrhundert, 1877, p. 129.

[^47]: Albino Nagy, Die philosophiechen Abhandlungen des al-Kindi
(Beitrage II, 5), Munster, 1897; S. Munk, Melanges de philosophic juive
et arabe, Paris, 1895.

[^48]: Ibrahim Madkour, La Place d'Al-Farabi dons la Philosophic Arabe;
Stein schneider, Al-Farabi, Berlin, 1868; R. Hammond, The Philosophy of
Alfarabi and Its Influence on Medieval Thought, New York, 1947.

[^49]: Moritz Steinschneider, op. cit.; F. Wustenfeld, Die Ubersetzungen
arabischer Werke in das Lateinische seit dem XI. Jahrhundert, GSttingen,
1877.

[^50]: Inspired by Farabi's Ihsa' al-'Ulum.

[^51]: M. M. Sharif, Muslim Thought, Its Origin and Achievements,
Lahore, 1951, p. 97.

[^52]: R. Hammond, op. cit.

[^53]: The Mutakallimin's conception of God is expressed by the term
fail-i mukhtar.

[^54]: F. Wustenfeld and D. Campbell. Steinschneider has annotated De
Intellectu, Dieterici has published the Arabic text, and E. Gilson the
Latin version. E. Gilson has also translated it into French in Archives,
1930.

[^55]: Muglafa Nagif Bey, al-Hasan Ibn al-Haitham, 2 Vols., Cairo, 1943;
Aldo Mieli, op. cit., pp. 105-07; de Boer, Geschichte der Philosophic im
Islam, Stuttgart, 1901; Nallino, “Ibn Heysem,” in Encyclopedia de
l'Islam.

[^56]: Munk, Melanges, pp. 461-511 (Esquisse historique de la
philosophie chez les Jurfiz); Vajda, La Philosophy juive; Moses
Maimonides, The Guide for the Per­plexed, English translation by M.
Friedlander, London, 1904.

[^57]: A. M. Goichon, La Philosophic d'Avicenne et son influence en
Europe Medi4vale, Paris, 1944.

[^58]: Ibid., pp. 90-133; E. Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas a critiqud St.
Augustin,” Archives d'Histoire etc., Vol. I, Paris, 1926.

[^59]: Steinschneider, Wustenfeld, Campbell, etc.

[^60]: Haneberg, Zur Erkenntnislehre von Ibn Sina and Albertus Magnus,
Munehen,; E. Gilson, “L'augustinisme avieennisant,” Archives d'Histoire,
Vol. IV, 1929 (Memorial de 1000 bme anniversaire d'Ibn Sina b'Baghdad).

[^61]: Henry Corbin, Avicenne et le rdcit visionnaire; Etude sur Is
cycle des recite avicenniens; Notes et glosses de la traduction du recit
de Hayy Ibn Yaqzan, Teheran, 1954; E. Gilson, “Pourquoi St. Thomas a
critique St. Augustin,” Archives d'Histoire, Vol. I, Paris, 1926.

[^62]: Hammer Jensen, Des sogenannte IV. Buch der Meteorologie des
Aristotles. M. T. Alverdy discussed this problem in an article he wrote
on the occasion of the millenary of the philosopher: “L'introduction
d'Avicenne en Occident,” in Revue du Caire, June 1951.

[^63]: M. M. Sharif, op. cit., p. 98.

[^64]: Tahafut al-Tahafut: The Incoherence of the Incoherence,
translated into English by Simon van den Bergh, London, 1954.

[^65]: Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Traite decisif (Fast al-Maqal) our l'accord
de la religion et de la philosophie suivi de l'appendice (Damimah),
Arabic text, with French translation by L. Gauthier, Algiers, 1848; Fast
al-Megal, translation into Turkisl by Nevzat Ayasbeyoglu, 1952.

[^66]: Munk, Melanges, pp. 418-58; Ernest Renan, Averroes et
l'averroisme, Colman Levy, Paris; Quadri, La Philosophie Arabe, pp.
198-340; Lutfi jum\`ah, op. cit pp. 112-224; L. Gauthier, Ibn Rushd,
Paris, 1938; H. Z. Ulkeo. “Ibn Rushd, Islam Ansiklopedisi, 1952; Mahmmud
Qasim, al-Feylosof al-muftera aleyh Ibn Roshe Cairo, n.d.

[^67]: Ernest Renan, op. cit., p. 80.

[^68]: 'M' stands for al-Ghazali's treatise al-Munqidh min al-Dalal
published by Mashhur-i 'Alam Press, Lahore, 1311/1893, and 'D' stands
for Discourse on the Method (translated into English from the French
text of Discour8 de la methods published in Paris in 1637) in Descartes,
Philosophical Writings, selected and edited by Elizabeth Anscombe and
Peter Thomas Geach, Edinburgh, 1954.

[^69]: Osman Amin, “The Influence of Muslim Philosophy on the West”,
Iqbal, Lahore, Vol. VIII, No. 3, Tanuary 1960, p. 2.

[^70]: T. H. Green, Works, Vol. III, p. 134.

[^71]: R. Latta, Leibniz: The Monadology, etc., p. 172. 72 T. H. Green,
op. cit., Vol. III, p. 134.

[^72]:

[^73]: R. Latta, op. cit., “New Essays,” pp. 360, 367.

[^74]: F. Rahman, Avicenna's Psychology, London, 1952, p. 81.

[^75]: M. M. Sharif, Muslim Thought, Its Origin and Aehievemew,, pp.
78-80.


