Chapter 69:  Influence of Muslim thought on the East
====================================================

Introduction
------------

Gibbon describes the rise and expansion of Islam as one of the most
memor­able revolutions which has impressed a new and lasting character
on the nations of the world. Beginning with a small following,
ill-equipped financially and militarily, Islam turned out eventually a
mighty force, wielding its scepter of authority over a world greater
than that of Alexander the Great, greater than that of Rome, and that
too acquired in a very much shorter period.

Hardly fifty years had passed since Prophet Muhammad was commissioned by
God to spread His gospel of truth when the Muslims planted the banner of
Islam on the confines of India on the one side, and on the shores of the
Atlantic on the other. Islam began to spread after the migration
(hijrah) of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina. Conversions took place on
an un­precedented scale. The new ideology inspired the Arabs as no other
ideology had done before; it filled their hearts with longings both
mundane and supra­mundane and enabled them to accomplish in an
incredibly short time what would have otherwise required centuries of
well-planned and well-calculated strategy.

The amazing success of the Arab nation was due not only to their
organiza­tion, zeal, and aspiration, but also and in a large measure to
the unifying action of Islam and the inspiring and revolutionary nature
of its social programme and its ability to lead the masses out of the
hopeless situation created by the decay of the antique civilizations of
Greece, Rome, Persia, China, and India,[^1] and to the all-powerful
influence of the Qur'an. None can deny the inherent faith of the early
Muslims in the ultimate triumph of their cause, actuated as that faith
was, not by the baser motives of power, but by the idea of establishing
the Kingdom of God on earth.

In the opinion of Georges Rivoire[^2] the objective of the Muslim
conquests was the construction of a universal State which “recognized no
distinctions of race, nor of social conditions, the only rule it
insisted upon was equal justice and fraternity.” Naturally, the
physically suffering and morally dis­jointed masses found in Islam a
promise of liberation and salvation.

To the places they conquered the Muslims carried not only the flag of
Islam but also culture, philosophy, and the study of nature all of which
had their source in the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

In what follows, an attempt will be made to trace the course of
intellectual revolution which Muslim thought brought about in Persia,
Turkey, China, India, and Indonesia.

Persia
------

Islam was introduced to the land of Persia in 7/628 by the Prophet
Muhammad himself, when through an epistle addressed to Khusrau Parviz,
the then Persian monarch, he extended an invitation to him and his
subjects to embrace Islam: to affirm the unity of God and the
apostleship of Muhammad, to do good and to refrain from evil. In olden
times no king, much less a Persian potentate, would receive a direct
communication from an unknown person without getting flared up, the act
being regarded as an instance of insolence and sacrilege.

Accordingly, the Prophet's letter was torn to pieces and his emissary
expelled with ignominy and disgrace. On hearing this, the Prophet felt
sad and prophesied an early downfall of Khusrau's Empire. It was during
the rule of the first Caliph that, as a response to this insult, the
Muslim forces, under the leadership of General Sa'd, invaded Persia and
inflicted a terrible defeat on the Persian army in the battle of
Qadisiyyah.

This battle served as a prelude to a series of defeats which the
Persians suffered at the hands of the Arabs and which sealed their fate
in a short period of ten years after the delivery of the Prophet's
letter. King Yazdigird, a lad of eighteen, was probably the last ruler
to make a futile attempt against the Muslims. His Chinese and Turkish
mercenaries deserted him on the first onslaught of the Arabs, while he
was himself plundered and assassinated by a villager in whose hut he had
taken refuge after fleeing from the battlefield.

In the first/seventh century the Persian Empire like the Byzantine
Empire was tottering under the crushing weight of despotism.
Persecutions born of reli­gious dissensions were the order of the day.
Zoroastrianism was the State religion and its priests, not content with
the spiritual authority they enjoyed by virtue of their office, also
held positions of trust and responsibility in the administration of the
State. A campaign of vilification followed by persecutions started
against the adherents of the older forms of religion in Persia, among
which ranked Jews, Christians, Buddhists, Sabaeans, Gnostics, and
Manichaeans.

All the older faiths and creeds longed to breathe freely and freshly in
an atmosphere of toleration and comradeship which they eventually found
in the teachings of Islam. Not only was it enjoined by Islam that the
Christians and Jews must be treated with fairness and consideration
because of their being the “People of the Book,” but according to the
clear directions of the Prophet the Zoroastrians were also to be treated
at par with them, and hence entitled to the same privileges and
concessions as enjoyed by the Muslims.

All that was required of the non-Muslims was payment of a nominal
poll-tax for the security they enjoyed under the Muslim rule. In return
they were exempted not only from the payment of zakat, the State tax
which every Muslim had to pay, but also from military service. Those
non-Muslims who entered the military service had not to pay the
poll-tax.

The conquest of Persia by the Arabs brought relief to the Christians.
Earlier, the Sassanid kings had fomented bitter struggles between the
Jacobites and the Nestorians; they had also been persecuting the
Christian sects within their domains because of the Christian aggression
from abroad. King Khusrau II ordered a general persecution of the
Christians as he had suffered a defeat at the hands of Heraclius, a
Christian monarch. The masses also welcomed the new creed. The
Zoroastrian priests held in contempt the working classes­artisans,
mechanics, laborers, agriculturists-who defiled fire, earth, and water
in pursuance of their trades and professions.

The laboring classes in the Zoroastrian society had the same miserable
lot as the Sudras in the caste ­ridden Hindu society. In the new faith
of the conquerors, the common man found a panacea to most of the social
ills from which he had so terribly suffered. Islam recognizes no
distinctions of caste and occupation; it gives no preference to one
class of individuals over another save on the basis of merit; and
advocates a theory of human brotherhood which transcends geographical
and political limits.

With the downfall of the Sassanid dynasty, Zoroastrianism lost its
powerful support. In the altered circumstances it found it extremely
difficult to hold its own against the contending forces competing for
supremacy. To its spiritual bankruptcy may be added the social confusion
for which its priests were chiefly responsible. The Zoroastrian masses
welcomed the new faith because of its liberalism, dynamism, and absence
of parochialism.

They were also drawn towards it because of the many similarities between
their faith and the new one. Instead of Ahura Mazdah and Ahriman, they
found Allah and Iblis; they also got their angels and demons, their
stories about the creation of man and his resurrection, about heaven and
hell and about sundry things similar to those they found in their own
religion. Besides all this, they dis­covered that the ethics of Islam
was not very different from theirs. Under the Muslim rule they began to
enjoy a remarkable degree of toleration; their religious practices were
respected and their fire-temples safeguarded.[^3]

Besides the causes enumerated above for the spread of Islam in Persia
mention may also be made of the marriage of Shahrbanu, a daughter of
Yazdigird-the last monarch of the Sassanid dynasty-with Husain, the son
of 'Ali. Consequently, in the descendants of Husain and Shahrbanu,the
Per­sians could see the heirs to their ancient kings. This also accounts
to some extent for the rise of Shi'ism as a separate sect in Persia and
the devotion of the Persians to the 'Alids. Islam lost its alien
character and appealed to the patriotic feelings of the average Persian,
as he felt that, in addition to other advantages, he gained through the
aforesaid marriage alliance a reasser­tion of his native values and
traditions.

Persia had a remarkable culture and a highly developed civilization many
centuries before the advent of Islam. In olden times, she was the cradle
of thoughts and beliefs which supplied religion and philosophy to
Persians and non-Persians. She was also the centre of a mighty political
organization, and her theories of statecraft and administration became a
model to the Turks.

The intellectual aspect of the pre-Muslim Persian culture was determined
by the philosophies of Zoroaster, Mani, and Mazdak-more or less
dualistic despite a tinge of monotheism. The pre-Sassanian thought
indicated a tendency towards monotheism, especially in Zoroaster, but
the tendency became a dominant feature of Persian thought, almost an
indubitable truth, only after the Muslim conquest. The dualism of Good
and Evil yielded place to the dualism of God and matter.

The 'Abbasid Caliphate provided the most congenial atmosphere to the
development of philosophy. As a result of Muslim influence, the Persians
be­came the leaders of thought. Among the names of the foremost Persian
thinkers may be mentioned those of ibn Miskawaih, ibn Sina, al-grhazali,
Fakhr al­Din Razi, Nasir al-Din Tasi, Mulla Sadra.

The encyclopedists, Ikhwan al-Safa, though not original in their
contributions, are also worthy of mention. They had among them some good
scholars like Zaid, son of Rifa'a, abu SulAi­man Muhammad of Bust, 'Ali
of Zanjan, abu Ahmad Mihrajani and 'Aufi.[^4] Persian Sufism also
contains some very great names such as abu Said ibn abi al-Khair,
'Attar, Jalal al-Din Rilmi, Sa'di, Hafiz, al-Jili, and Jami.

From Persia, Islam spread to China, Turkey. Afghanistan, India, and
Indonesia.

China, Turkey and Afghanistan
-----------------------------

Islam was carried over to China by Muslim merchants. It was firmly
planted there by Arab troops who fought for Su Tsung (139/756) and
settled in China after the successful conclusion of the war.

Arnold thinks that there is no direct evidence of any proselytizing
activity on the part of the Muslims in China. The entire Muslim
population of the land consists of the descendants of the immigrants
from Arabia, Persia, Turkey, and other Muslim territories as a result of
Mongol conquests.[^5] The number of Muslims in China is estimated at
about thirty million.[^6] The Chinese Muslims have, however, identified
themselves with the rest of their country­men, in spite of their
religious differences.

The Afghans believe that they were invited to Islam by Khalid bin Walid
in the first/seventh century. But the earliest record of their
conversion to Islam dates from the reign of al-Mamdn (198-218/813-833)
when a king of Kabul was converted to Islam. His successors, however,
reverted to Buddhism. Afghanistan was won for Islam in 258/871 by Ya'qub
bin Laith, but Islamic ideas did not catch the imagination of the masses
until after the conquest of the country by Subuktigin and Mahmfd of
Chaznah.

The invasion of Chingiz Khan on Muslim Asia is regarded as the greatest
calamity that has ever fallen on the human race. Like the huge waves of
a mighty cyclone, it swept over the lands of Bukhara, Khiva, Khurasan,
Iraq, and Russia. Not only did Chingiz Khan plunder whatever he laid his
hands on, but he also destroyed seats of learning and the precincts of
Islamic civilization.

After his death, his Empire was divided among his sons. Persia fell to
the lot of Tuli, one of whose descendants, Hulagu, was destined to found
a dynasty which lasted for about a century and a half. The official
religion of the Mongols was Shamanism, which, being a primitive type of
religion could not hold its own against the organized religions
prevalent in the lands over which the Mongols ruled.

Islam had the least chance of success as the Mongols had established
their kingdom on the ruins of the Muslim Empire. But it is one of the
surprises of human history that the conquered became the con­querors.
The Mongols eventually accepted Islam-a religion the annihilation of
which they had planned. With the conversion of the Mongol king to Islam
this religion got a chance of spreading to Turkestan, Siberia, and
Russia.

The Turks originally inhabited certain parts of Central Asia,
particularly Mongolia, Siberia, and Turkestan. They did not profess any
of the Semitic or non-Semitic faiths. They worshipped, like most
primitive tribes of Asia, the sky, the earth, and water. Their religion
lay in deifying the forces of nature and propitiating them by offerings,
magic, and incantations. Before their acceptance of Islam they had come
under the influence of Buddhism, Manichaeism, Judaism, and Christianity.

But none of these creeds could win them over permanently to its side. It
was Islam which they accepted finally in the fourth/tenth century.
Several reasons have been advanced for the triumph of Islam, but the
most cogent one out of these, according to G. L. Lewis, “was the fact
that acceptance of Islam automatically conferred citizen rights in a
vast and flourishing civilization.”[^7]

It was towards the middle of the seventh/thirteenth century that a small
band of nomad Turks migrated from Khurasan under Sulaiman Shah. Driven
by Mongols they hoped to find shelter in Asia Minor. In the rulers of
this area they found people of a kindred race, the Saljuqian Turks,
whose kingdom was disintegrating due to disputes of succession and
invasions from Central Asia. Taking advantage of the decadent
conditions, Ertoghrul and Dundar, two sons of Sulaiman, established
themselves in a territory ceded by the Saljuqs in recognition of their
military assistance. To \`Uthman, the son of Ertoghrul, however, goes
the credit of laying a secure foundation for the Turkish Empire.

Though the Saljugs were nomad tribesmen, they evinced keen interest in
the civilizations of the Persians and the Greeks with whom they came in
contact. During the sixth/twelfth century, Anatolia, Quniyah, and
Erzerum became covered with architectural designs inspired by the
Persian and the Greek art, They also “encouraged religious thinkers and
philosophers. The famous Jalal al-Din Riimi flourished under their
auspices in Quniyah, and so did others of the Sufi school.” [^8]

The Ottoman Turks who replaced the Saljugs were no less ardent in
furthering the cause of learning and literature. It is said about
\`Ut-hman that as he lay on his death-bed, he advised his sons to
“promote the learned to honour ... and whatsoever place thou hearest of
a learned man, let honour, magnificence, and clemency attend him.”[^9]

Ottoman literature is very extensive, comprising every species of
letters then current. Among the earlier poets may be mentioned Ghazi
Fadil, Shaikhi, Mir 'Ali Shir Nawa'i, Abmad Pasha, Najati, Dhati,
Zainab, Mihri, and ibn Kamal. They wrote lyrics, and also thoughtful
poems explaining the knotty problems of life through allegories and
stories of animals and birds. Among the later poets who give evidence of
greater poise and balance may be mentioned Fudiili, Bagi, Nefi, Nabi,
and Nadim. They intro­duced new strains and new modes of thinking in
poetry. Among the prose­writers, the names of 'Ali Chalabi, Avliya
Efendi, Katib Chalabi may be mentioned. They wrote on history,
chronology, geography, travels, and other subjects. [^10]

All this shows that, like other Muslim countries, Turkey espoused the
cause of learning and literature. The incentive was, however, provided
by the religion of Islam, which the Turks had finally accepted.

India
-----

The impact of Islam on Hinduism is a phenomenon of remarkable
signifi­cance. It is regretted that the Western writers as well as those
of India (with the sole exception of Dr. Tara Chand) have in their works
either ignored this fact altogether or assigned to it an insignificant
place in the history of Indian thought. In this section, it is intended
to bring out the extent and significance of those ideas and beliefs
which had their source in Muslim philosophy and religion and which in
course of time, through personal contacts, religious disputations,
discussions, and exchange of views, colored and changed to a very
substantial degree the complexion of Hindu thought and gave it a new
orientation and direction.

There is no denying the fact that the Muslims were also influenced by
Hinduism in some very important respects. They borrowed from the Hindus
some aspects of mysticism and some mores, especially their caste-system,
funeral and birth rites, marriage customs, untouchability which they
practised against sweepers, and a host of other things-good and
bad-which it is needless to enumerate. But the main tenets of the Hindu
creed had no influence on Muslim ideology and code of life. No Muslim
thinker of any importance has ever accepted the doctrines of
transmigration, incarnation, karma, and polytheism in any shape or form,
and these doctrines constitute the very soul and spirit of Hinduism.

On the contrary, monotheistic ideas of the Muslims together with their
belief in the universal brotherhood of mankind were adopted by the
Hindus which they bandied about as of Hindu origin. Indian philosophy
after the first/seventh century has evinced keener interest in
monotheism and tasteless society; it has also laid less emphasis on
ritualism and negativism in life. This change may be due to several
sociological and technological forces among which the advent of Islam in
India must be ranked as a major factor of great cultural and
philosophical importance.

In the event of two cultures meeting together the dominant one pushes
the weaker one to the periphery and occupies the centre itself.
Something of the same sort happened in the case of Hindu culture and
beliefs. In the ideological struggle which ensued Muslim infiltration
into India, the native culture, finding itself unequal to the incoming
one, had to relinquish the central position.

In what follows an attempt will be made to explain very briefly this
remark­able phenomenon. After a short historical survey of the cultural
contact, Muslim influence will be traced first up to Sankara, then from
Sankara to Ramanuja, and lastly from Ramanuja down to the present times.

### Cultural Contacts

The impact of Islam on Indian culture, thought, and religion was felt as
early as the second/eighth century if not earlier. The writings of
Muslim historians and travellers show that it was in South India, on the
Malabar Coast, that the Muslims who were often preachers of their faith
first settled as traders. Akbar Shah Khan[^11] reports of the tomb of a
Com­panion of the Prophet, named Tamim Ansari at Mylapur, twelve miles
south of Madras. Islam also penetrated Ceylon, Ibn Battutah found the
tombs of several preachers and saints in Ceylon during his travels. He
mentions the names of Shaikh 'Abd Allah Hanif, Shaikh 'Uthman, and Baba
Tahir among others.

Historical evidence proves unmistakably that the first Arab fleet
appeared on Indian waters in 15/636 and was repulsed. But about the end
of the first/ seventh century, says Rawlinson, the Muslim Arabs settled
on the Malabar Coast, and this fact is corroborated by Francis Day in
his Land o/ the Permals, and by Sturrock in his South Kanara and Madras
Districts Manuals. Humayun Kabir writes, “Innes, in his Malabar and
Anjangode District Gazetteer, quotes an inscription of a tomb from
Kollam of one 'Ali who died there in 166/788.

Further circumstantial evidence is offered by the revolt in 141/ 758 of
a colony of Muslims established at Canton in China. It is obvious that
this colony could not have been founded without intermediate stations,
of which the Malabar Coast was likely to be one. Caldwell picked up near
Kayala­pattan in Tinnevelly, near the mouth of the Tamraparni, a number
of Arab coins bearing dates from 71/690.”[^12]

Mubammad bin Qasim invaded Sind in 94/712. The expedition was despatched
by I,Iajjaj, the viceroy of Iraq and Iran of the Umayyad dynasty. As a
result of the conquest of Sind, Islam came to exercise a potent
influence on Indian thought and culture. This part of India remained the
Far Eastern territory of the Caliphate till 267/880 when the Caliphate
began to decline.

The kingdom of Ghhaznah founded by Subuktigin who conquered Peshawar in
380/990 was a direct result of the weakening of the Caliphate. The
aggressive policy of Subuktigin was followed by his ambitious and
energetic son Mahmud and by a series of Mughul, Tartar, Khurasani, and
Afghan leaders. It was never the intention of the Muslim invaders to
spread or work for their religion. A large number of the natives were
converted to Islam not because of the political domination of the
Muslims but for other reasons, among which may be ranked the missionary
activities of the Sufi thinkers and the intolerable economic condition
of the masses coupled with the ignorance of their own religion.

The most important cause of the conversion was, however, the simplicity
of the Islamic doctrine: the brotherhood it proclaims, and the equal
status it accords to Sudras and non-Sudras alike. Even at the early
stages the influence was so great that Dr. Titus mentions eleven out of
the several Hindu sects in which a definite mixture of Hindu and Muslim
notions and practices prevailed[^13] K. A. Nilkanta admits monotheism
and democratic spirit of Islam as potent factors in the evolution of
religio-philosophic culture in India and traces in the strictly
monotheistic doctrines of Nanak the influence of Islam.[^14]

It has been observed that Sind formed an outlying province of the
Caliphate till 267/880. During this period and particularly during the
reigns of al-Mansnr, al-Harun, and al-Mamiin attempts were made to
understand Indian thought. From Sind, Hindu pundits came to the Court of
al-Mansur and presented to him Brahmasiddhanta and Khandakhadyaka,
famous astronomical works of Brahma­gupta. Both of these were translated
into Arabic. A great impetus to this cultural understanding was afforded
by the ministerial family of the Barmakids, who were patrons of Hindu
learning in the Court of Harun al-Rashid.

According to al-Biruni, this family came from Balkh where an ancestor of
theirs was an official in a Buddhist temple. Arab scholars were sent by
this family to India to study Indian thought, while Indian scholars were
invited to the Court of Baghdad to explain Hindu learning. In the
fifth/eleventh century al-Muwaffiq and al-Birdni visited India with the
object of understanding Indian medicine, astronomy, and philosophy.
Al-Biruni was the first to translate Sattkhya of Kapila into Arabic. He
also translated Yoga Sutra by Patanjali and introduced Bhagvad-Gita to
the Muslims.

The Hindus also evinced eagerness for understanding Muslim religion and
thought. Baladhuri writes in the Futuh al-Buldan that during the reign
of Harun al-Rashid, a Hindu rajah requested the Caliph to send a scholar
to him to expound and discuss the fundamentals of Islam. Mas'udi, a
historian, reports that when he arrived in India in 302/914 he found a
Brahmani ruler supremely interested in religious discussions. Whenever
this ruler heard of a Muslim arriving in his territory he would invite
him and entered into religious discussion with him. [^15]

### From the First/Seventh Century to Sarikara

Inter-communication of such an active nature could not but influence the
thoughts and beliefs of both the communities. Indian philosophy would
have been substantially different from what it is today, had Islam with
its “militant democracy,” “liberal rational­ism,” and “uncompromising
monotheism” not entered the arena of Indian thought.

There would have been, in all probability, no proofs for the existence
of God such as we find in Udavana's Kusumdnjli written in the
fourth/tenth century, nor would there have been Sankara about whom
Humayun Kabir observes, “Historical factors do not exclude the
possibility Sankara's acquaintance with the elements of Islamic
thought.”[^16] “It is necessary to repeat that most of the elements in
the southern school of devotion and philosophy taken singly were derived
from ancient systems, but the elements in their totality and in their
peculiar emphasis betray a singular approximation to Muslim faith and
therefore make the argument for Islamic influence prob­able.”[^17] Even
today there is a group of Sainkara's followers who do not cremate but
bury their dead in the Islamic way.

All the Mu'tazilites, with the solitary exception of al-Jabiz, had
discussed philosophy and propounded their theories, before Sahkara was
born in the last quarter of the second/eighth century. Even al-Jabiz
would have died before Sankara, had he not lived up to the age of
ninety. The Mu'tazilites were Unitarians par excellence. They would not
admit the attribution of eternal qualities to God, for that would mean
the existence of other eternals besides the eternal God. 8ahkara too was
an uncompromising monist, believing God to be one and the only reality,
all else being illusion.

In the writings of Sahkara one finds an increasing emphasis on the unity
of God which some people have regarded as an extension of the ancient
monotheism of the Upanisads. But this explanation has failed to satisfy
a good many Orientalists who find in Sankara's works “something
pertaining to the semitic religions especially.”[^18] Abu al-Hudhail, a
prominent Mu'tazilite, appears to be a pre­cursor of those Hindu monists
who maintained that God could be described only in negatives.

Abu al-Hudhail, however, admitted, quite contrary to his fundamental
position, that God is knowing, loving, and powerful. The other
Mu'tazilites were quick to discover the inconsistency and denied,
therefore all positive attributes to the Supreme Reality. In their hands
God became unpredictable as well as unknowable, more of an abstract,
impersonal, and absolute principle at the back of the universe than a
God conceived as a person with whom any contact could be established.
They did believe in the possibility of the beatific vision but strongly
repudiated all forms of anthropomorphism.

The majority of the Mu'tazilites were atomists. The universe, they
thought, was composed of atoms which were indivisible entities. They
divided the physical world into substance and accidents or atoms and
bodies. Strict determinism, according to them, governed physical
phenomena, while freedom of action characterized human beings.

As we have shown in previous chapters, the Mu'tazilites believed in the
cult of reason and endeavoured to reconcile the doctrines of Islam with
rationalistic views then prevalent. Quite a good many of them enjoyed
State patronage. Bishr, the son of Mu'ammar, was a favorite of the
Caliph al-Mamun during whose reign efforts were made to understand Hindu
thought and culture through discussions and translations of religious
literature. In theological and philosophical discussions, the
protagonists of different views had complete freedom to express
themselves.

It is not unlikely that in this free exchange of ideas the Hindu
participants returned to their homeland with quite a number of
rationalistic doctrines having their origin in the Mu'tazilite mode of
thought. Communication is rarely one-sided; in free and frank ex­change
of ideas the traffic is more often than not two-sided.

The Mu'tazilites could not satisfy the masses because of their exclusive
concern with reason and their seemingly unorthodox views. The Ash'arites
protested against the religious rationalism of the Mu'tazilites and
advocated a middle path between philosophy and orthodoxy. They refuted
the Mu'tazilite views, even while they modified the orthodox doctrine.
They rejected the Greek and Oriental philoso­phies, proved Islamic
doctrines by the dialectical method, and refuted non-Islamic religions
as well as some sects of Islam.

Al-Ash'ari, al-Bagillani, al­Juwaini, al-Ghazali. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi,
and ibn Taimiyyah wrote in defence of Islamic theology and in refutation
of Greek and particularly Aristotelian thought. Al-Ash'ari was born in
c. 260/873, while al-Ghazali, in whose hands the Ash'arite theology
reached its final triumph; was born in 450/1058. Al-­Ghazali was
convinced that the philosophical theory could not form the basis of
religious thought and that it was by revelation alone that the
essentials of religion could be known. Al-Ghazali asserted that
revelation was quite enough and that its ultimate truth could be
ascertained only by the experience of the individual. Through ecstasy
one could become a knower and receive, so to say, direct communication
from God.

In addition to the Mu'tazilites, Ash'arites, and al-Ghazali who touched
almost on all problems of philosophical and religious interest and whose
theories found a way to the Indian soil through various channels some of
which we have mentioned above, there was a long, unbroken line of Sufis,
beginning with the early Companions of the Prophet who, like the Prophet
himself, set a model for the Sufis by their intense zeal and enthusiasm
for the cause of Islam, by their piety, and by the austere life they
led.

The Sufis, among whom may be counted Ibrahim bin Adham (d. 160/783),
Fad[ bin 'Iyad (d. 185/901), Rabi'ah al-Adwiyyah (d. 1851802), were
orthodox Muslims with no pantheistic bias; they revelled, however, in
self-abandonment, fervent piety, and quietism, carried to the extreme.
Rabi'ah conceived of prayer as a free and intimate intercourse with God.
Her prayers indicate spontaneous out­pouring of her heart to God. Says
she, in one of her prayers, “O my Lord, if I worship Thee from fear of
hell, burn me in hell, and if I worship Thee from hope of paradise,
exclude me thence, but if I worship Thee for Thine own sake, then
withhold not from me Thine Eternal Beauty.”

From Sanikara to Ramanuja.-By the time of Ramanuja, who was born in
407/1016, a host of Muslim thinkers and Sufis-some of the best
philosophers that Islam has ever produced-had expounded and elaborated
their thoughts in fine systems. It is very unlikely that their thoughts
and theories should have failed to influence Indian thought through
religious discussions and philosophical disputations which, as we have
seen, took place on a wide scale both on the Indian soil and in the
Courts of the Caliphs.

Evidence is not wanting to show that some of the controversies which
figured so prominently in Indian philosophy, after Islam had firmly
entrenched it­self on the Indian soil, were nothing more than echoes of
Muslim thought, in some cases well in others more blatantly expressed.

Sufism now entered a new phase of its development. Asceticism still
remained important but it was subordinated to theosophical and gnostic
speculations. This position is discernible in the sayings of Ma'riif
al-Karkhi (d. 200/815), abu Sulaiman al-Darani (d. 236/850), and Dhu
al-Nun Misri. According to Nicholson, Dhu al-Nun is the source of
Neo-Platonic elements in Islamic thought. Abu Yazid al-Bistami (d.
260/874) was the first Sufi to propound the doctrine of /and', and in
his teaching Sufism became practically identified with pantheism.

Husain bin Mansur, commonly known as al-Hallaj (b. 244/857), famous for
his saying, “I am the Truth,” had travelled in East Iran, Gujerat
(India), and Central Asia. He maintained that the soul which is
immaterial and immortal suffers from its alignment with the body, that
the Supreme Being is incomprehensible by the human intellect and
imagination, and that union with the Ultimate Reality is possible
through suffering. Mansur was not appreciated by his contemporaries
owing to some of his unorthodox utterances as a result of which he was
executed. It was a1-'Dhazali, however, who won recognition for Sufism in
Islam.

Apart from the fact that Sufi doctrines and practices must have found
their way to India along with other ideas of Muslim origin, there is
irrefutable historical evidence to show that Muslim Sufis came in the
wake of Muslim conquerors and traders and attracted the people of India
by the purity and sublimity of their lives. They transmitted, by their
personal contacts and discussions, their whole ideology and the way of
life as understood by them and their counterparts in other parts of the
Muslim world. Ibn Hajar 'Asgalani mentions in his al-Isabah ft Tamyiz
al-Sahdbah a certain Baba Rattan who accepted Islam and visited Mecca
twice. He was perhaps the earliest Indian Sufi.

A little later came 'Abd Allah known as Baba Khaki, who died in 101/ 719
and was buried in Pakdaman cemetery in Lahore. Another saint was Sayyid
Salar Mas'ud~,hazi Mian who, in 425/1033, met a martyr's death at the
age of nineteen and was buried in Bharaich in the United Provinces. In
the same century there came to India another saint of very great
eminence and of far greater historical significance than any of his
predecessors. He was 'Ali al-Hujwiri, popularly known as Data Ganj
Bakhsh, the writer of the well­known work, Katb/ al-Mahjitb.

Amongst the Muslim thinkers who flourished between the second/eighth and
fifth/eleventh centuries may be mentioned al-Kindi (c. 185/830-260/873),
the first philosopher of the Arabs, more renowned as a mathematician and
astrologer; al-Farabi (258/870-339/950), who adopted the Neo-Platonic
doctrine of emanation; al-Razi (251/865-313/925), the celebrated Muslim
physician, physicist, chemist, and philosopher; Miskawaih (d. 421/1030),
a Persian moral­ist, philosopher, and physicist; and ibn Sina
(370/980-428/1037), the repre­sentative of purer Aristotelianism.

The philosophical thought that had developed from al-Kindi to ibn Sina,
that is, before Ramanuja's time, was transplanted in India by the early
Muslims, who, in the opinion of Tara Chand, “were men of high rank ...
who lived and labored in India, and through their personal contact and
influence spread the ideas of Islamic philosophy and mysticism through
the length and breadth of India.”[^19] As a result of this impact,
theism became pronounced in Indian philosophy; one comes across proofs
for the existence of God for the first time in Udayana's Kusmaiijali.

The Kusumanjali or the Hindu proof of the existence of God was written
in the fourth/tenth century.[^20] Keith says, “To Udayana doubtless
belongs the credit of making theism a principal tenet of the school,
though we have no reason to suppose him the inventor of the
doctrine.”[^21] The same is true of the Vaisesika. Radha­krishnan
observes, “The Vaisesika has been regarded as non-theistic. Kanada...
the author of the Vaisesika Sutras ... does not mention God, but later
com­mentators felt that the immutable atoms could not by themselves
produce an ordered universe unless a presiding God regulated their
activities.

The authorship of the Vedas and the convention of the meaning of words
require us to postulate a prime mover. The world cannot be explained by
the activities of the atoms alone or by the operation of karma. The
system, therefore, adopts the view of God which is found in Nyaya.”[^22]

In Indian philosophy the Nyaya and the Vaisesika are generally treated
together, but these systems in fact never formed a single unitary
doctrine before the middle of the third/ninth century. Keith puts the
date of the syncretism of these two systems in the year 285/898 when
Vaeaspati composed his Nyayasucini-bandhu.[^23] A clear exposition of
the combined doctrine is, however, to be found in Udayana “whose date,
after many vicissitudes of opinion, is definitely fixed at 374/984 by
his own statement in the Laksanavli.... Much more famous is his
Kusumdnjali which is the classic exposition of the proof of God.”[^24]

It is worth remembering that the Nyaya and the Vaisieska were combined
together to form a single system, after Islam had penetrated deep into
the Indian sub-continent. Both the systems were atheistic and atomistic
to begin with, but later they took a theistic turn as a result of Muslim
influence.

From Ramanuja up to Date.-Ramanuja (b. 407/1016), a Hindu reformer of
southern India, advocated the worship of God with devotion and faith. He
recognized love as the guiding principle for the relation not only
between man and God but also between man and man. Consequently, all
man-made barriers including those of caste were to be discarded and the
doors of religion thrown open to all, irrespective of social position
arising from caste or color.

Ramanuja admitted Sudras to temples, emphasized self-surrender
(prapatti), and adoration of the guru (guru bhakti). His emphasis on
self surrender and love of the guru can be traced to Buddhism and
Upanisadism but his acceptance of monotheism and the stress he laid upon
it was entirely due to the inspiration he received from the new faith
which was then being preached to the people by Muslim saints like Nathad
Wali, for the erection of whose mosques land was granted by the Hindu
king Kun-Pandya [^25]

While not denying the influence of Buddhism and Upanisadism on the
philosophy of Ramanuja, it can be maintained that Islam could have
supplied to the Bhakti leader both the idea of submission to the will of
God and that of adoration of the spiritual guide. As for adoration of
the guru, Ramanuja could have got the clue from the writings of the
Sufis and also from his personal contacts with them.

The objective of bhakti, according to Ramanuja, is not the realization
of nirvana, but eternal blessedness in the presence of God-a Sufistic
belief and not a Buddhistic view. His recommendation of a tasteless
society in which Sudras should suffer no indignity because of their
birth and his throwing the doors of temples open to the low-caste are a
clear evidence of profiting by Muslim religion and Muslim practices.

In the sixth/twelfth century there arose two sects in the South which
clearly revealed the influence of Islam. They were the Lingayats and the
Siddharis. The Lingayats worshipped one God, who, according to them,
reveals Himself, as the world-teacher (\`Allamah Prabhu). The leader of
the movement, Basava, was regarded as an incarnation of Shiva, an
\`Altdmah Prabhu, whose divinity passed on to his successors and
representatives. As

love was considered to be the first creation of God, bhakti or devotion
was taken to be the ideal of life. This ideal was attainable through
treading a path of austerity, resignation, and concentration on God. The
Lingayats made no sacrifices, kept no fasts, did not go on pilgrimages,
and discarded purifica­tion ceremonies. There was no caste and no
differences based on birth or sex. Marriage was voluntary, widows were
permitted to remarry, the dead were buried, and the doctrine of
transmigration of the soul was not believed in.

Siddharis, a group of philosophical rhymists, were more uncompromising
in their monotheistic beliefs than the Lingayats. They rejected the
authority of the Vedas and Ssastras and also the theory of
metempsychosis. Like the Sufis, they described the Ultimate Reality as
Light and conceived of the end of life to be an absorption in God. The
Siddharis were also alchemists, and followed Phu al-Nun Misri in this
respect.[^26]

The religious reform movement started in the South spread to the North
from the eighth/fourteenth century onward. The Muslim conquest of
Northern India by the end of seventh/thirteenth century ushered in an
era of unpre­cedented revolution in traditional Hindu thought, from the
eighth/fourteenth century onward, we find the religious leaders of the
North rejecting certain elements of the ancient creed and exhibiting a
strong tendency to imbibe new ideas and theories.
Indian architectural designs show a borrowing of certain features from
the Arab and Persian styles of architecture; Indian paintings are
influenced by the Central Asian and Persian techniques; in Indian
literature a common medium arises in the form of Urdu, while Indian
technical and scientific disciplines give evidence of a considerable use
of terminology and information contained in Muslim works.

In the realm of thought the same phenomenon is evident. Ramananda, who
flourished in the first half of the ninth/fifteenth century, is by many
regarded as a bridge between the Bhakti movement of the South and that
of the North. He travelled far and wide in search of knowledge and had
teachers from the various sects of Hinduism, but his soul remained
discon­tented till he came in contact with Muslims in Benares.[^27]
Followers of all religions were welcome to his creed. He admitted to his
sect disciples from both sexes.

From the teachings of Ramananda arose two schools, one represented by
Tulsidasa and the other by Kabir, the former being conservative and the
latter radical, but each was concerned in its own way with the evolution
of a religion acceptable to the Hindus and Muslims alike. Both lay
stress upon devotion; condemned externalia of religion, rituals, and
ceremonies; protested against dogma and authority; and maintained that
“the divine disclosed it­self in the human race as a whole.[^28]

Kabir was introduced to Hindu philo­sophy and religion by Ramananda, but
he spent a considerable part of his time in the company of the Sufis.
Kabir hated caste distinctions, rejected the authority of the six
schools of the Indian philosophy, pooh-poohed the theory of the
transmigration of souls, and repudiated the doctrine of reincarnation.

In his teachings Kabir was indebted to the Sufis. His central theme was
that God cannot be comprehended through intellect but that He can be
approached only through bhakti, i. e. to say, through devotion and
ecstatic trance. He held that the essence of God is light and thus came
close to the fundamental position of the Sufis. Nicholson finds many
points of resemblance between his views about the universe expounded in
his first Ramaini and the notions of al-Jili and Badr al-Din hid.[^29]

According to Tara Chand, Kabir made an attempt to reproduce, as in
Muslim philosophy, the scheme of nine spheres through which the whole
creation develops.[^30] The goal of human life is the realization of
union with God for which purpose the services of a guru are absolutely
essential. Consequently, utmost care is to be exercised in the
selec­tion of a guru. The guru directs the soul of the disciple along
the right path, disciplines his self, and brings him in the living
presence of God.

Kabir never recommended renunciation, in spite of his concern with God,
and remained till the end of his life a weaver. No doubt, he prescribed
a rigorous path of self-discipline, even prophesied disappointments and
frustration for the pilgrims, but nowhere did he teach complete
withdrawal from the world.

In the latter half of the ninth/fifteenth century was born a redoubtable
champion of monotheism in a small village of the Punjab. His parents
gave him the name of Nanak and the subsequent generations remember him
as Guru Nanak for his piety, cosmopolitanism, and spiritual leadership.
He laid the foundation of Sikhism on principles which show clearly and
unmistakably the influence of Islamic ideology, beliefs, and practices.

Guru Nanak felt that he was commissioned by the Almighty to launch a
campaign for monotheism and a life of righteousness. He condemned
polytheistic beliefs and practices, preached non-sectarianism, and
admitted no caste distinctions. His ethics, unlike that of the Hindus,
was life-affirming, practical, and to some extent puritanical. He
recommended righteous living, fear of God, and the obedience of a
guru-all Muslim principles-in order to attain salvation which to him was
the blending of the light of the soul with that of God.

Nanak realized like the Sufis that God, being incomprehensible through
the intellect, can be approached through humility and through
understanding one's worthlessness and inadequacies. Despite his love for
God, he would allow no anthropomorphic characterization of the Deity,
though he remembered Him lovingly sometimes as a husband and sometimes
as a bride to relate Him intimately to his own soul.[^31] Guru Nanak did
believe in the transmigration of souls and also in hell. Not satisfied
with the punishment which the sinners were destined to suffer through
repeated births in lower forms, he threatened them with dire punishments
as described in the Qur'an in the parable of hell.

Guru Nanak's debt to Islam was so great and his teachings so well
steeped in Sufi lore that, according to Tara Chand, “the fact of the
matter is that it is much harder to find how much exactly he drew from
the Hindu scriptures.

His rare references to them lead one to imagine that Nanak was only
super­ficially acquainted with the Vedic and the Purdnic
literature.”[^32] In his in­sistence on the unity and brotherhood of
mankind and in his condemnation of idol-worship, caste distinctions, and
ritualism, Guru Nanak was as good a Muslim as any other Muslim. It is a
pity that the later Gurus were drawn into a whirlpool of politics as a
result of which a peace-loving Church was converted into a militant
society.

Kabir, Tulsidasa, and Guru Nanak were followed by a host of Hindu
thinkers and reformers in the tenth/sixteenth and eleventh/seventeenth
centuries who promoted and furthered what in essence were the
fundamental principles of Islam. Tuka Ram, a Maratha saint, conceived of
God on lines identical with those of Kabir, rejected Vedic sacrifices,
idol-worship, and caste,33 while Chaitanya, a Brahman by caste, loved
the Muslims so much that he had several Muslim disciples. Caitanya
preached the unity of God, insisted on love and devotion, song and dance
and ecstatic trance for union with God.[^33]It can be easily seen that
Chaitanya's teachings bore a close resemblance to those of the Sufis.

Coming to modern times, we notice two important movements of the Arya
Samaj and the Brahmo Samaj. The former, despite its opposition to Islam,
preaches what in reality is the essence of Islam. Swami Dayanand (vide
his Satydrath Parkash), the founder of the Arya Samaj movement,
denounced idol-worship and ritualism as a corruption of the pure Hindu
religion. He also condemned hereditary caste-system and instead favored
functional castes.

What is remarkable about him is that he indefatigably preached the
doctrine of monotheism which in his opinion could be derived from the
Vedas and other sacred books of the Hindus. That monotheism is deducible
from the Vedas, may be true. It does not, however, contradict Islam;
rather, it ratifies the basic standpoint of Islam that God has been
revealing Himself to different nations. Hence if monotheism is found in
the Vedas, it would not be surprising to a Muslim. What is, however,
surprising is Swami Dayanand's emphasis on this doctrine which is
lacking in the pre-Islamic literature of India.

The Brahmo-Samajists have discarded the theory of rebirths. They are
also opposed to ritualism, image-worship, and caste-system.

In addition to these two movements in modern Hinduism, there is the
Rama-Krishna religious reconstruction movement and the Theosophical
Society following a religious and social programme; each of these bears
close resemblance to Muslim faith and practice. From India Islam goes to
Indonesia.

Indonesia
---------

Before the advent of Islam, the Indonesian Archipelago, the biggest
country after China in the Far East and the seventh among the great
countries of the world, was ruled over for about a thousand years by the
Hindus, who went there as traders in the first or second century A.D.
and eventually became rulers through their effective diplomacy and
practical common sense. According to Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru,[^34] the
first Hindu immigrants to Indonesia belonged to Southern India.

Being traders they settled on coasts and traded with different lands in
sundry articles of daily use. They also brought with them their religion
which, because of its superiority, could not fail to influence the
natives. There is, however, no historical evidence to show whether it
was Buddhism or Hinduism that first came to Indonesia. The Hindus never
culti­vated the art of history in the early centuries, nor did they
devise canons for sifting recorded or oral evidence, with the result
that their early history is nothing but a mass of fairy tales founded
upon imagination, make believe, or hearsay with no solid rock of facts
to stand upon.

The early Hindu settlers in Indonesia have left no record of theirs;
consequently, it is difficult to determine the chronological order of
Hindu cults and beliefs as they found their way into this new land. It
is, however, conjectured that the form of Buddhism first to enter the
Archipelago was Hinayana and that after a considerable period of time
the other form of Buddhism, Mahayana, was also introduced.

In the Majaphit period when Hindu culture and Hindu domination were at
their highest a new religion arose, which was the result of the fusion
of Brahmanism and Buddhism, incorporating in itself some strands of
indigenous thoughts and feelings.

In spite of the political and commercial domination of the Hindus, the
country as a whole was never converted to Hinduism. In Java, Hinduism
had its strongest centre, while Buddhism had the greatest number of its
adherents in Sumatra, Malaya, and a few other adjoining and adjacent
islands. A large part of the Archipelago, however, remained untouched by
Hinduism and continued to revel in idolatry and nature-worship.

In a large majority of the islands, life went on as usual-the same round
of festivals, customary observances, and rituals, showing no sign of
foreign influence or changed socio-political conditions. Life in these
areas was hemmed in by countless superstitions and irrational fears-the
products of ignorance and idol-worship. Multiplicity of superstitions
led to the creation of innumerable deities, each deity being held
responsible for a particular phase of human life or nature. Homage was
paid to gods and goddesses out of fear, for their displeasure could
bring about disaster, infertility, epidemics, floods, death, and what
not.

Consequently, an elaborate ritual, performed meticulously, was required
to keep the deities on the right side. Often the ritual was so
com­plicated that a specially trained agency was called for to perform
it strictly in accordance with set practices and established laws. There
arose thus a priestly class whose function it was to help invoke the
sympathy of gods and goddesses through incantations, charms, sacrifices,
and offerings-all of these practiced and performed in a characteristic
manner and style.

Wherever Hinduism was in ascendancy the Brahmans assumed the func­tions
of priests and arrogated to themselves the power which none else but a
person endowed with supernatural powers could have. The priestly class
came to wield, in course of time, not only spiritual but also temporal
power through their association with Courts and princes, for the kings
needed divine help as much as ordinary mortals.

Anxious to keep their power intact, the priests transmitted their
knowledge only to their kith and kin. Very often the recipient of the
information was the son of the priest who was initiated into the art of
performing ceremonies and trained in them with the utmost exactitude and
care, for a slight error or omission would bring about the wrath of a
god instead of pleasing him. Thus, the priestly class became hereditary,
enjoying special privileges and prerogatives.

The society was split up into two classes, with the priestly class at
the top, dominating and exploiting the other by its cleverness,
sophistry, and chicanery. Because of his colossal ignorance, political
servitude, and economic insufficiency, the common man contented himself
with the life and fortunes of a serf or an underling.

Hinduism accentuated the prejudice of class distinction; it gave a
fillip to idol worship; it augmented rather than diminished the number
of deities; and above all it introduced ahirisa, a life-negating ethics
and a life-renouncing philosophy. The natural outcome of this attitude
was extension in the field of super­stition, an acute sense of
individual and collective insecurity together with moral and spiritual
bankruptcy on a wide scale.

Islam entered the arena when Hinduism was at the zenith of its glory.
The latter was armed with the might of political domination; it had its
missionaries all over the Archipelago, who had converted thousands of
the natives to their faith; and it had firmly entrenched itself on the
soil by its cultural superiority, commercial leadership, and marital
relationships. Islam had to fight against heavy odds.

There was no political power to launch a campaign against the Indonesian
Hindu rulers. In the middle of the seventh/ thirteenth century when
Islam got a foothold in Sumatra, the Muslims all over the world had
fallen on evil days. The Fatimids who ruled over the Arab countries,
Egypt, and Africa were in a process of disintegration; the \`Abbasids
were on their last legs; Persia was the vantage ground for self
interested upstarts; while Spain, once the pride of Muslim culture and
philo­sophy, had forgotten its traditions and was in the throes of
death, surrounded as it was by the Christian hordes who were bent upon
giving it a short shrift.

In India the Slave dynasty was replaced by the Khaljis, who were busy at
that time setting their own house in order and had little time to look
to other peoples' affairs. It is evident that under these circumstances
no Muslim power was in a position to lend a helping band to any
campaign, much less to one which had no connection with territorial
aggrandizement or imperialistic expansionist program.

On the Indonesian soil no gun was fired, nor any sword drawn for the
propagation of Islam. Arnold says, “The history of the Malay Archipelago
during the last six hundred years furnishes us with one of the most
interesting chapters in the story of the spread of Islam by missionary
efforts.... In every instance, in the beginning, their work had to be
carried on without any patronage or assistance from the rulers of the
country, but solely by the force of persuasion, and in many cases in the
face of severe opposition, especially on the part of the
Spaniards..”[^35]

Several causes have been listed by historians for the slow and
spontaneous spread of Islam throughout Indonesia, but it must be
admitted that there is yet no established theory to account for this
remarkable phenomenon-unique in the annals of history for its
methodology and success.

A common explanation for the religious conquest of Indonesia by Islam is
offered in terms of the commercial relations which the Muslim merchants
from India established in the middle of the seventh/thirteenth century
with the Indonesians. These merchants, it is said, married Indonesian
women and secured thereby a respectable position for themselves. In
course of time the Indonesian wives together with the slaves of their
household furnished a nucleus for the acceptance and spread of Islam.

A little reflection will, however, show that this explanation is no
better than a myth and needs to be exploded in the interest of truth.
Before exhibiting the hollowness of the explanation, it is interesting
to note that even so great an authority as Arnold[^36] seems to
subscribe to it. He quotes approvingly from Padre Gainza who says, “The
better to introduce their religion into the country, the Muhammadans
adopted the language and many of the customs of the natives, married
their women, purchased slaves in order to increase their personal
importance, and succeeded finally in incorporating themselves among the
chiefs who held the foremost rank in the state.

Since they worked together with greater ability and harmony than the
natives, they gradually increased their power more and more, as having
numbers of slaves in their possession, they formed a kind of confederacy
among themselves and established a sort of monarchy, which they made
hereditary in one family.

Though such a confederacy gave them great power, yet they felt the
necessity of keeping on friendly terms with the old aristocracy, and of
ensuring their freedom to those classes whose support they could not
afford to dispense with.” To this quotation Arnold adds, “It must have
been in some such way as this that the different Muhammadan settlements
in the Malay Archipelago laid a firm political and social basis for
their proselytizing efforts.

They did not come as conquerors, like the Spanish in the sixteenth
century, or use the sword as an instrument of conversion; nor did they
arrogate to them­selves the privileges of a superior and dominant race
so as to degrade and oppress the original inhabitants, but coming simply
in the guise of traders they employed all their superior intelligence
and civilization in the service of their religion. ...”[^37]

This explanation along social lines founded on respect and prosperity is
invalidated, according to C. A. O. van Nieuwenhuijze, by the fact “that
the type of trade which the foreign Muslims conducted was by no means
alien or new to the Indonesian society.”[^38] The same point of view is
presented with much rigour and empirical data by Comp. J. C. van
Lour[^39] to whom the inquisitive reader may turn for further
elucidation and clarification.

The object of the refutation is not to deny the role of the early Muslim
traders in the dissemination of Islamic beliefs and practices; it is
rather to assign to them a proper place in the situation which was
extremely complex and comprised far more potent factors than trade and
marital relationships. The traders were no better than carriers of a
culture or a world-view which could not have gained ground in spite of
their zeal and fervor, had it not the strength to stand on its own legs.

Another explanation for the peaceful penetration of Islam into Indonesia
is to be found in the socio-political conditions of the urban society
which was powerfully influenced by the caste-system that had been
introduced by Hinduism. Priesthood had divided the society into two
watertight compart­ments. This and like differences were supported and
in a way accentuated by the caste-system which the Hindus had brought
with them and introduced.

Hinduism not only ratified bifurcation in the Indonesian society, it
also multiplied the then existing divisions, for Hinduism admits of four
classes and not only two in society. These divisions based originally on
professions became hereditary so that no person, howsoever talented he
might be, could change his caste.

A person born Sudra home could by no means shed the social stigma
attached to him for having been born in a low-caste home. Intelligence,
integrity, talent, and hard work were of no avail in face of the
inflexibility of the caste-system. The worst to suffer in this system
were those who stood at the lowest rung; they were the most oppressed
and the most exploited, but the others too with the exception of the
priestly and the Brahmanical class had to suffer different kinds of
social indignities and disabilities.

The non-priestly classes, particularly the lower ones, found in Islam a
panacea to the ills which like a miasma were eating up the very fabric
of the society. Since Islam recognizes no distinctions which divide man
from man and recommends a classless and tasteless society, it captured
the imagination of the Indonesians, who embraced the new religion to
reassert their dignity as human beings and to re-acquire democratic
rights to live as free individuals unhampered by artificial man-made
restrictions.

The conception of the uni­versal brotherhood of mankind together with
the basic equality of all human beings, which Islam advocates so
vehemently, proved a dynamite for the foundations of the social
structure of Hinduism. Accordingly, Hinduism crum­bled like a house of
cards and the Indonesian masses, particularly those living in the urban
areas, accepted the new faith in large numbers. From the harbor towns
and coastal areas, where the grip of the caste-system was the strongest
and the most pinching, Islam spread inland.

Another reason for the success of Islam is to be discovered in the
simplicity of the creed that it preaches. It makes no metaphysical
presuppositions as is done, for instance, by Buddhism, nor does it
demand credence in too many transcendental beings as is the case with
Hinduism. Islam is unencumbered by theological subtleties. It simply
asserts the godhead of one God and the prophethood of Muhammad and that
of others.

The fundamental tenets of Islam are, thus, the fundamental demands of
the human intellect. Professor Montet says, “Islam is a religion that is
essentially rationalistic in the widest sense of this term considered
etymologically and historically.... This fidelity to the fun­damental
dogma of the religion, the elemental simplicity of the formula in which
it is enunciated ... are so many causes to explain the success of
Muhammadan missionary efforts. A creed so precise, so stripped of all
theological complexities and consequently so accessible to the ordinary
understanding, might be expected to possess and does indeed possess a
marvelous power of winning its way into the consciences of men.” [^40]

Hinduism never accorded with the genius of the Indonesians in spite of
the Hindus' long cultural contact with them and their equally long
political domination. The average Hindu Indonesian wore his creed like a
veneer which left his soul as well as his body almost naked. He yearned
for a creed more in line with his natural cravings and intellectual
demands. When Islam presented itself as a rival to Hinduism and
heathenism, it quickly acquired victory by the force of its logic and
the rationality of its demands.

Another factor which may have contributed to the success of Islam is its
theory of human society which releases man from his narrow geographical
grooves and makes him a member of the community (ummale) of Islam.
National loyalties and political affiliations are subordinated to the
larger interests of the Muslim community as a whole.

Not only does this conception emancipate an individual from the prison
of self-interest and parochialism, it also provides an anchor-sheet for
the forlorn and the neglected. A convert, after having lost his kinship
with his clan, can save himself from the pangs of loneliness by
conjuring up his association with a bigger whole which recognizes
neither territorial limits nor clannish bonds. A thing of this kind is
not to be found in other religions, much less in Hinduism, torn as it is
by its caste-system, family distinctions, and the practice of
untouchability.

Islam has not only the idea of ummah to put an individual in a wider
perspective, it has still another idea nobler and richer in content for
the rehabilitation and re-establishment of the lonely and the forsaken.
This idea is to be found in mysticism which promises to place man in the
lap of Infinity. It is said that in the beginning the Indonesians were
attracted by the mysticism of Islam rather than by any of its other
aspects.

In addition to the reasons enumerated above, one very potent reason for
the propagation and success of Islam in foreign lands, particularly in
Indonesia, Malay, Indo-China, and the Philippine Islands, was the
enthusiasm and sincerity with which Islam was presented by the early
Muslim mystics who migrated to these islands of their own accord and
settled there temporarily or permanently. Generally, they accompanied
the Muslim traders or came in their wake. The first thing they did was
to acquaint themselves with the local dialect; this was necessary for
transmission and exchange of ideas.

After acquiring proficiency in the native language, the Sufis started
propa­gating Islam among the influential and the rich, believing that
reform of these would rid the society of most of the ills from which it
suffered, and that their conversion would be followed by those of the
masses. The unlettered and the unsophisticated people which formed the
bulk of the society looked up to their chiefs and nobles for guidance
and inspiration. Not able to make a decision themselves, they imitated
the high-ups in all matters. Hence the success of a religious ideology
among the upper classes, the Sufis thought, would work for the spiritual
regeneration.

The Sufis built mosques which often had schools attached to them. From
these centers of learning were delivered courses of lectures on Muslim
theology, culture, philosophy, and history. Mysticism has a philosophy
of a very high order. It replaces the cold formalism of the Shari'ah by
an intense and passion­ate longing for the all-loving God and ensures
the purification of the heart by treading a well-regulated Path.

The Subs regarded prayers, fasting, and pilgrim­age as means and not
ends to be cultivated and pursued for their own sake. But they knew that
the means were as much necessary for the spiritual uplift of a person as
the attainment of the end. And, therefore, the early mystics who took
upon themselves the burden of carrying the message of God to the four
corners of the world stressed the performance of religious duties, such
as offering prayers, fasting, going on a pilgrimage, etc., along with
acts of super­erogation for winning the pleasure of God.

A brief historical sketch of the growth and development of mysticism in
Islam has been provided in an earlier chapter and, therefore, need not
be repeated here. Suffice it to say that by the end of the
seventh/thirteenth century when Islam was imported to Indonesia and
other adjacent islands, the theory of mysticism had received its final
touches at the hands of the leading Muslim thinkers and divines.
According to a number of Orientalists, the best of Muslim religion is to
be found in its mysticism.

Maulana Burhan al-Din is said to have been the first Muslim to preach
his faith to the islanders. He belonged to the Qadiriyyah order of
Sufism which is named after 'Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (470/1077-561/1166),
a saint whose writings, generally orthodox in content, have a tendency
to mystical inter­pretation of the Qur'an.

The Maulana also belonged to the Shafi'iyyah sect­one of the four legal
schools of Muslim theology named after Imam al-Shafi'i who effected a
synthesis of the strict adherence to Tradition of the Malikii with the
Hanafl method of giyds, that is to say, with the analogical deduction.
Abu Hanifah, the founder of the Hanafi legal school, made free use of
his own judgment in deciding between traditions, while Malik ibn Anas
maintained the exclusive validity of the accepted traditions. Al-Shafi'i
carved a via media between these two modes of approach and attempted a
synthesis.

Maulana Burhan al-Din was, thus, steeped in the best traditions of
Islam. He followed the Shari'ah and was affiliated to the most tolerant
and progressive school of Sufism, a school which was neither too liberal
nor yet too conservative. The Muslims of the Archipelago at present
belong predominantly to the Shafi'iyyah sect and this is due to the
teachings of the Maulana.

It is interesting to note that the Shafi'iyyah sect was predominant on
the Coromandel and the Malabar Coasts of India when the Muslim traders
from these areas first landed in Sumatra and introduced their culture
and religion. It may be conjectured in the absence of any historical
record that the Maulana belonged to India and travelled with or came in
the wake of the Indian Muslim traders who also belonged mostly to the
Shafi'iyyah sect as well as to the Qadiriyyah school of mysticism.

Among the Muslim rulers of Sumatra, Sultan Alimad worked ceaselessly for
the glory of Islam. During his reign as well as during that of his
descendants Muslim missionaries were sent far and wide. Wherever they
went, they built mosques and schools to provide permanent centres of
devotion and learning. The schools also served as community centres
where matters of common interest were discussed.

The King al-Malik al-Zahir, a descendant of Sultan Ahmad, was fond of
holding discussions with theologians, and his Court was thronged with
men of learning and letters. We have it on the authority of ibn Battutah
that the king had summoned two jurisconsults from Persia for discussion
and clarification of some religio-legal issues.

Next to come under the influence of Islam was the Molucca. There is no
knowing of the fact how the new religion was introduced, but this much
can be inferred from the present cultural condition of the islands that
there existed strong traces of Indian and Arabian influence in the life
and literature of the inhabitants. Their religion is predominantly
Shaf'iyyah, but their culture is steeped in Arabian lore and learning.

The Muslim kings of the Moluccas rendered yeoman's service to the cause
of Islam by instituting centres of Muslim culture, literature, history,
and philosophy. During the reign of Mansur, the Malayan language adopted
the Arabic script. Ancient Indian Muslim literature was transliterated
into Malayan Arabic script. Mansur also introduced Islamic constitution
in the country, though not completely, for he kept intact the old system
of taxation, general administration, and fishing; yet in all other
matters he made an attempt to follow the Shafi'iyyah jurispru­dence,
social polity, and details of administration.

Islam spread to Java through the efforts of the trading mystics of
Malay, particularly of Maulana Malik Ibrahim, an Indian national of
Gujerat district. The Maulana was not only a Sufi of high order but also
a scholar of the first rank and a Hakim of no mean repute. He cured a
Hindu dignitary who subsequently embraced Islam and is counted among the
nine saints of Java. He is known as Raden Rahmat. The other saints
belonged either to the rich Hindu families or to the defunct Majaphit
dynasty.

All of them without excep­tion led a life of simplicity, piety, and high
religious fervor. They converted thousands to Islam by their example and
teaching. A mosque was built where the nine saints met occasionally to
discuss matters of common interest. The converts also congregated there
to discuss their problems and difficulties. Deputations from foreign
lands were also received in this mosque. This shows that the mosque was
not only a centre of devotion but also a community centre dedicated to
multipurpose activities. So great was the religious ardor that the
Muslim converts of Java entertained a keen desire to visit the holy
places of Islam; one of them, Sunan Gunang by name, went for pilgrimage
to Mecca where he learnt the principles of Islam from Arab teachers, and
came back to Java full of enthusiasm for the new faith.

It will take several pages to recount the story of the spread of Islam
in other islands of Indonesia. Suffice it to say that its propagation
was nothing but a peaceful penetration through the efforts of traders,
mystics, and preach­ers-both native and foreign.[^41]

Before the advent of Islam, Java had been ruled by Majaphit, a Hindu
dynasty, which had fallen on evil days; as a result, the country had
become divided into a number of principalities, each owing allegiance to
its own chieftain. The people followed either Hinduism or Buddhism, but
very often their religion was an admixture of both with a strong
overtone of animism and belief in magic and sorcery.

The condition of other islands was no better. The Hindus whose early
contacts with the Archipelago were of purely commercial nature[^42] soon
developed colonial and imperialistic designs in the land[^43] and
started a process of “Hinduization,” which gave birth to a caste-system
as rigid as that in India and provided in addition an appeal to the
deification of kings and the ruling class.[^44]

After the downfall of the Majaphit dynasty in the ninth/fifteenth
century the Muslim rule was firmly established in Java and other islands
till the conquest of the Archipelago by the Dutch towards the end of the
tenth/ sixteenth century. For about two hundred years the Muslims
remained at the helm of affairs and contributed substantially to the
cultural development of the country.

They tried to rid literature of absurd and obscene stories about gods
and goddesses; they worked for the amelioration of the society, and
introduced, through translation of Arabic and Persian books, a system of
philosophy, mysticism, jurisprudence, and ethics, which had its roots in
Muslim thought and religion. That the Indonesian literature of the
pre-­Muslim period was utterly nonsensical, superstitious, and obscene,
has been testified by Crawford[^45] and also by Dr. Richards.[^46] The
latter maintains that the purpose of such literature was simply to humor
the princely class by its esoteric and fictitious nature.

The Muslim rulers replaced it by healthy literature. Sultan Agung, a
ruler of Mataram (1022/1613-1055/1645), wrote a treatise on philosophy,
morals, and statecraft; the eldest son of an Egyptian scholar, 'Allamah
ibn Hajar al-Hutami, wrote a monumental book on mysti­cism entitled
Sirat al-Mushlaqin; [^47] \`Allamah Nur al-Din compiled a historical
work called Bustan al-Salatin,[^48] while Tan Muhammad, a premier of
Malaya during the reign of Sultan 'Abd al-Jalil, wrote a historical
account of the rulers of Malaya and Sumatra.

Besides original publications, a host of Persian and Arabic works were
translated. Al-Gbazali's al-Israr was translated by 'Abd al-Samad.
Sikandar Nanaeh and Mathnatoi of Maulana Rum and Tuhtat al-Ahrar of Jami
were also rendered into the Malayan language.[^49]

The impact of translations and original works on theology, morals,
philo­sophy, and culture of the Indonesians was tremendous. It paved the
way to a new type of literature which attempted to deduce morals from
stories in which the principal actors and characters were birds,
animals, and trees. These anecdotes were written on the pattern of the
aforesaid Malhnawi of Maulana Rum and Mantiq al-Tair of \`Attar, and
helped to inculcate a healthy attitude towards world and its affairs.

Instead of ahimsa and life-negating ethics, emphasis was now laid upon
effort, struggle, and achievement. Renunciation was eschewed in favor of
community living, and a tasteless society was preached for in place of a
caste-ridden one. Spiritual values were extolled as against the
commercial ones. All this led to a great awakening among the masses. The
Indonesians realized as never before that they were connected with one
another by ties which transcend caste, creed, and color.

Bibliography
------------

### General

Encyclopaedia of Islam; Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics; A. M. A.
Shushtery, Outlines of Islamic Culture, 2 Vols; Khalifa Abdul Hakim,
Islamic Ideology; M. M. Sharif, Muslim Thought: Its Origin and
Achievements; V. V. Barthold, Musulmane Culture.

### Persia, Turkey, Afghanistan, and China

S. Muhammad Iqbal, The Development of Metaphysics in Persia; E. G.
Browne, A Literary History of Persia, 4 Vols; Shibli Nu\`mani, 8hi\`r
al.'Ajam; M. Inostranzov, Iranian Influence in Moslem Literature; Julius
Germans, Modern Movements in Islam; R. A. Nicholson, A Literary History
of the Arabs; Studies in Islamic Mysti­cism; Sykes, A History of Persia;
History of Afghanistan; Richard Danvey, The Sultan and His Subjects;
Robert Doris Osborn, Islam under the Khalifs of Bagdad; Marshall
Broomshall, Islam in China; Syed Ameer Ali, A Short History of the
Saracens.

### India

E. C. Dewick and Murray T. Titus, Indian Islam; Tara Chand, Influence of
Islam on Indian Culture; Sir Wolseley Haig, The Cambridge History of
India; S. K. Aiyangar, South India and Her Muhammadan Invaders;
Ramanuja; al-Bald­dhuri, Futuh al-Buldan; S. Lane-Poole, Mediaeval India
under Moslem Rule; T. Rajagopalacharya, The Vaisnava Reformers of India;
E. C. Sachau, Alberuni's India; J. T. Reinaud, Relation de voyages fails
par les Arabs et Persans; T. W. Arnold, The Preaching of Islam; Dara
Shikuh, Safinat al-Auliyd'; Majma\` al-Bahrain; G. Henry Keene, The
Turks in India; Najm al-Ghani Khan, MadMhib al-Islam; ~haikh Did'
al-Din, Tuhfat al-Mujahidin; R. A. Nicholson, The Mystics of Islam;
Maeauliffe, The Sikhs; Khazan Singh, History and Philosophy of the Sikh
Religion; Jadunath Sarkar, Chaitanya; J. C. Oman, The Mystics, Ascetics
and Saints of India; 'Abd al-Qadir Badayi m, Muntakhab al-Tawarikh;
Babur, Wagi­'at-i Baburi; G. A. Herklots, Islam in India; J. N.
Farquhar, An Outline of the Religious Literature of India; Modern
Religious Movements in India; W. W. Hunter, The Indian Musulmans; Syed
Ameer Ali, The Spirit of Islam; M. N. Roy, The Historical Role of Islam;
Wilfred Cantwell Smith, Modern Islam in India; Islam in allodern
History; Sayyid Sulaiman Nadawi, \`Arab wa Hind ke Ta\`allugat.

### Indonesia

I. Bruno Lasker, Peoples of South-East Asia; H. G. Debby Javanese
People; D. G. E. Hall, A History of South-East Asia; J. Gonda, Sanskrit
in Indonesia; C. A. 0. Nieuwenhuize, Aspects of Islam in Post-Colonial
Indonesia; H. A. R. Gibb, Wither Islam?; J. C. van Lour, Indonesian
Trade and Society; William Marsden, The History of Sumatra; Margueritte
Harmon Bro, Indonesia; Richards Winstedt, Malay, Its History; Kali Das
Nag, India and the Pacific World; T. W. Arnold, The Preaching of Islam;
H. A. R. Gibb (Tr.), Ibn Batfttictah, Travels in Asia and Africa,
London, 1929; Alexander Hamilton, A New Account of the East Indies, 2
Vols.; Marco Polo, The Book of Marco Polo; 2 Vols.;

A. K. Coomaraswamy, History of Indian and Indonesian Art; R. C.
Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East; I. Tsing, A Record of
the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay Archipelago;
Captain P. J. Beigbie, The Malay Peninsula; John Crawford, History of
the Indian Archipelago; A. A. Hossein, The Netherlands East Indies; G.
S. Hurgronje, De Atjehers, 2 Vols. ; Sir Richard Winstedt, The Malaya: A
Cultural History; B. H. M. Vlekka, A History of the East Indian
Archipelago;

C. Wolf, The Indonesian Story: The Birth, Growth, and Structure of the
Indonesian Republic; B. Schrieke, Indonesian Sociological Studies; J. M.
van der Krocf, Indonesia in the Modern World; W. F. Wertheim, Changes in
Indonesian's Social Stratification; Sir Hugh Clifford, Further India; K.
P. Landon, Southeast Asia, Crossroads of Religions; Sir Stamford
Raffles, History of Java, 3 Vols.; W. F. Stutterheim, Den Islam en Zijn
Komst in den Arcipel ; Wales Quaritch, The Making of Greater India; Ndr
Ahmad Qhdri, Tartkh-i Tamaddun-i Indonesia.

[^1]: M. N. Roy, The Historical Role of Islam, Chaps. 1-3.

[^2]: Visages de l’Islam quoted by Zaki Ali, Islam in the World, Lahore,
1947, p. 110.

[^3]: Arnold, The Preaching of Islam, Chaps. VII and IX.

[^4]: A. M. A. Shushtery, Outlines of Islamic Culture, Vol. II,
Bangalore, 1938, p. 426.

[^5]: Arnold, op. cit., p. 207.

[^6]: A. M. A. Shushtery, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 26.

[^7]: G. L. Lewis, Turkey, Ernest Benn Ltd., London, 1957, p. 17.

[^8]: M. Philips Price, A History of Turkey, London, 1956, p. 33.

[^9]: Lord Eversely, The Turkish Empire, Lahore, 1957, p. 9.

[^10]: Stanley Lane-Poole, Turkey, London, 1900, pp. 302-23.

[^11]: A'inah-i Haqiqatnuma', pp. 46, 47.

[^12]: The Cultural Heritage of India, ed. Bhattacharya, 1956, Vol. IV,
p. 587.

[^13]: Indian Islam, pp. 172-77.

[^14]: The Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV, p. 61.

[^15]: Muruj al-Dhahab, Vol. I, p. 254.

[^16]: The Cultural Heritage of India, Vol. IV, p. 586.

[^17]: Tara Chand, Influence of Islam on Indian Culture, Allahabad,
1946, p. 107.

[^18]: Pope, Manikka Vashar. Cited by Tara Chand, op. cit., p. 106.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 48.

[^20]: S. Radhakrishnan and C. A. Moore, A Source Book in Indian
Philosophy, Oxford, 1957, p. 358.

[^21]: A. B. Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism, Oxford, 1921, p. 32. 11 S.
Radhakrishnan and C. A. Moore, op. cit., p. 386.

[^22]: A. B. Keith, op. cit., p. 29.

[^23]: 24 Ibid., p. 31

[^24]: Tara Chand, op. cit., p. 112.

[^25]: Caldwell, Indian Antiquary, Vol. I, p. 177.

[^26]: Macauliffe, The Sikhs, Oxford, 1909, Vol. VI, p. 102.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Studies in Islamic Mysticism.

[^29]: Tara Chand, op. cit., p. 157.

[^30]: Macauliffe, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 195.

[^31]: Tara Chand, op. cit., p. 177.

[^32]: Fraser and Marathe, Hymns of Tukaram.

[^33]: Jadunath Sarkar, Chaitanya.

[^34]: Glimpses of World History, p. 133.

[^35]: Arnold, op. cit., p. 363.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 365.

[^37]: Ibid., pp. 365-66.

[^38]: Aspects of Islam in Post-Colonial Indonesia, p. 35.

[^39]: “Indonesian Trade and Society,” Essays in Asian Social and
Economic History, The Hague, 1955.

[^40]: Edouard Montet, La propaganda chretienne et sea adversaries
musulmans, Paris,, pp. 17-18, quoted by Arnold, op. cit., pp. 413-14.

[^41]: Detailed information on this subject is to be found in Arnold's
Preaching of Islam and Crawford's History of the Indian Archipelago,
Edinburgh, 1820.

[^42]: . J. Gonda, Sanskrit in Indonesia, p. 18.

[^43]: R. C. Majumdar, Ancient India Colonies in the Far East, Lahore,
1927, p. 70

[^44]: D. G. E. Hall, A History of South East Asia, London, 1955, p. 18.

[^45]: John Crawford, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 298.

[^46]: Richard Winstedt, The Malayas, London, 1950, p. 143.

[^47]: Nur Ahmad Qadri, Tarikh-i Tamaddun-i Indonesia, p. 357.

[^48]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II. p. 507.

[^49]: Richard Winstedt, op. cit., p. 144.


