Part Six: The Natural Basis of Family Rights
============================================

We pointed out that the spirit and foundation of the Declaration of
Human Rights is that even human being should benefit from a kind of
essential and honorable respect and individuality. In the context of his
creation and formation, a series of rights and freedom were given to him
which can no way be taken from or denied him.

We also said that this spirit and foundation is upheld by Islam and is
in harmony with the philosophy of the east. What is incompatible with
the spirit and essence of this Declaration, and what shows it to be
false and baseless is the very explanation given in many of
philosophical systems of the west concerning man and the make-up of his
existence.

Evidently the sole reliable testimony to which we can refer for the
purpose of finding out the true rights of human beings is the priceless
book of creation. By referring to the pages and lines of this great
book, the real rights held in common by all human beings and the
position of the rights of man and woman in comparison with each other
may be determined.

Strangely enough, there are some naive people who are not prepared to
recognize the great testimony of the book of creation unless they see
some reason to do so. In their opinion the only competent authority is
the body of the people who had a hand in the preparation of the
Declaration and are today the masters and the supreme rulers of the
world. It does not matter if they themselves are not concerned to abide
by the subject-matter of this Declaration. Others should not be so
presumptuous as to question what they say. However, on the basis of
these very same human rights we believe we have a right to question and
to take note of what they say and do. We consider the huge process of
creation, the speaking book of God, to be the only competent referable
source of evidence.

I again apologize to my worthy readers that in this series of articles,
certain of the questions which I put forward have a somewhat
philosophical tinge and seem rather dry, and for some readers may be
rather boring. I myself, as far as possible, avoid discussing these
sorts of problem, but sometimes the relevance of these dry,
philosophical matters to the problems of the rights of women are so
great that it is impossible to avoid them.

The connection between natural rights and the direction in which nature moves
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In our view, natural and innate rights come into existence when the
handiwork of creation directs created beings towards the perfection of
their qualities, the predisposition for which is inherent in them,
although in a latent state, and does this with clear-sightedness and by
keeping in view the function and purpose of all of them.

Every innate aptitude is the basis of a natural right. For example, the
child of a human being has a right to education and schooling but a
young lamb has no such right. Why? Because the aptitude for leaning and
attaining wisdom exists in a human child, but not in a lamb. The plan of
creation has assigned this aptitude of acquiring knowledge to mankind,
but has not ascribed it to sheep. The right to think, to give expression
to one’s thoughts and to hold independent opinions, is of the same
category.

There are some people who think that to assume natural rights and to
claim that mankind has been given the distinction of having a particular
kind of right by creation is a baseless and self-centered idea and
should be discarded. There is no difference at all as far as the rights
of human beings and other creatures are concerned.

This is a totally mistaken idea. As a matter of fact, natural aptitudes
are very varied. The creative plan has assigned to every kind of
creature its own particular sphere, and its well-being is also
determined to be within the path of its own orbit. The creative process
has its own plan in relation to this matter, and it has left this basic
document in the hands if its creatures so that there could not the even
the least possibility of an accident based on ignorance or lack of
information.

The root and foundation of family rights, which is the subject under
discussion, should also he looked for in nature like all other natural
rights. By looking into the natural characteristics of men and women and
the inborn aptitudes that creation has endowed them with, we can
understand whether men and women have identical rights and duties. Do
not forget us we have mentioned in our preceding articles, that the
problem under discussion is the identicalness of the rights of men and
women and not the equality of their rights.

Social rights
-------------

As far as non-family social rights are concerned, that is, as far as
rights within society at large, outside the circle of the family, are
concerned, an individual acquires both equal and identical rights. In
other words, fundamental natural rights are equal and identical to each
other. Every member of society has an equal right to benefit from his
innate talents; everyone has the right to work; everyone has the right
to take part in the race of life; every individual has the right to
offer himself for any post or position in society and try to get it in a
lawful manner; everyone has the right to demonstrate his personal
academic achievements and practical worth.

Of course, the same equality in basic natural rights gradually places
people in an unequal position as far as acquired rights are concerned;
that is to say, everyone has an equal right to work and to take part in
the competition of life, but when the question of the result of the
competition, the standard of work and the level of adequacy is
considered, not every one come’s up to the required standard. Some prove
themselves more talented and some are found to be less talented. Some
are more efficient and some less efficient, some are more capable and
some are less capable. Some are found to be more learned, more
proficient, more skilful, more useful and more efficient than others in
the task, and so, naturally, their acquired rights assume an unequal
patterning. If we resolved that people’s acquired rights should also be
equal like their basic natural rights, our decision could be called
nothing but cruel and unjust.

Now, why should all individuals be considered equal in their natural
fundamental social rights? The reason is that observation of human
beings demonstrates that amongst human individuals no-one is born the
ruler or the ruled. No-one has come into this world as a worker or a
craftsman, or a professor, or a teacher, or an officer, or a soldier, or
a minister. These are the merits and peculiarities which are a part of
acquired rights. It means that individuals, by their competence,
potential, work and activity, must take them from society, and that
society by positive law give them to its individuals.

This is a very important difference between the social life of mankind
and the collective life of gregarious animals like the bee. The
institutions in the life of these animals are totally natural. Their
duties and functions are all assigned by nature and not by their own
choice. Some are born rulers and some are born to be ruled. Some are
laborers and some engineers, while others are born executives. Evidently
the life of man is not like this, and that is why some thinkers have
totally refused to accept the old philosophical idea that man is by
nature gregarious, and have considered human society to be based
completely on arbitrary convention.

Family rights
-------------

This is the state of affairs in society outside the family. Do the
individuals within the family unit also have identical fundamental
natural rights, the difference only lying in acquired rights? There is a
lot of difference between a family which consists of wife and husband,
the father and mother, and sons and daughters, the brothers and sisters
and society outside the family, regards fundamental rights, and the law
of nature has set up family rights in a special pattern.

Here there are two different opinions. One view is that the fact of
being a wife or a husband, a father or a child, a mother or a child,
like all other social relationships and like the cooperation between
individuals in public or state institutions, is not a reason in itself
for some persons to have automatically a special status. Only required
privileges can be a reason for some one of them, for example, to be the
head and the other a subordinate, one to be obeyed and others to obey
him, one to get more monthly pay and the other less. If a person is
wife, or a husband, or a father, or a mother, or a son, or a daughter,
this would not be in itself a reason for him to have a special status.
Only acquired privileges can determine their position in relation to
each other. The idea of the identicalness of the rights of men and women
within the family, to which they have wrongly given the name of equality
of rights, is based upon this very opinion. According to this idea, a
man and a woman with similar talents and needs who have an understanding
of similar rights to which they are temperamentally disposed will get
married. As a result, it is necessary that family rights should be based
upon equality, identicalness and uniformity.

As opposed to this, the other view is that their basic natural rights
are also different. To be a husband in itself, that is, the fact of
being a husband, imposes certain obligations and signifies certain
rights, and to be a wife in itself imposes certain obligations and
implies certain rights, and likewise in the case of being a father, or a
mother, or son, or a daughter. Anyhow, according to this view, the
family is different from all social partnerships and associations. The
unidenticalness of the rights of men and women, which Islam endorses, is
based upon this principle.

Now, which of the two above opinions is valid, and in what way can we
understand which of the two is correct?

The natural basis of family rights 2
------------------------------------

In order that the respected readers may successfully draw their own
conclusions, it is necessary that they should bear in mind the subjects
mentioned in the previous chapter. We said:—  
 1. Natural rights exist due to the fact that nature has a definite aim,
and, keeping that aim in sight, it has placed certain abilities in the
being of created things, and given them rights.

2. A human being, because he is human being, benefits from a particular
series of rights, which are called the rights of man, while animals do
not benefit from these rights.

3. The method of determining natural rights and their special qualities,
is to refer back to creation. Every natural aptitude is natural evidence
for a natural right.

4. All individual human beings, as far as social life is concerned, have
equal and identical natural rights the difference is in their acquired
rights which depend upon work, the performance of duties and upon their
taking part in the competition for carrying out these responsibilities,

5. All individual human beings’ rights in society are equal and
identical. The reason for this is that a close study of the innate value
of individual human beings brings to light that amongst them (unlike in
the case of gregarious animals such as bees) there is no one who is born
a ruler or to be ruled, and likewise, no-one is born to submit or to be
obeyed, to carry out orders or to command, to be a worker or to be the
employer. They did not come into this world as commanders or soldiers.
The careers of man are not demanded according to nature. Their tasks,
jobs and responsibilities were not assigned by nature.

6, The theory of the identicalness of the rights of men and women is
based upon the assumption that social life within the family is the same
as social life outside the family. The members of the family have equal
and identical rights. A woman and a man with the same aptitudes and the
same requirements join together in family life, and they have the same
innate capabilities. The law of creation did not determine their status,
and did not assigned certain tasks and functions to them.

On the other hand, the theory of non-identicalness in family life is
based upon the idea that the circumstances of family social life are
different from those of social extra-familial life. A man and a woman do
not join together in family life with the same aptitudes and the same
requirements, and they do not possess the same natural capabilities. The
law of creation has placed them in different positions, and has designed
a particular orbit for each of them.

Now, let us see which one of the above two theories is correct and find
out in what way we can discover the correctness of one of them.

According to the criteria that we have already laid down, it is not so
difficult a matter to determine which one of the two views is correct.
If we refer to the natural aptitudes and requirements of men and women,
namely to the natural capabilities with which the law of creation has
endowed every man and woman, it is possible to determine the right
course of action.

**Is family life conditioned by nature or regulated by convention:**

We mentioned in the last section that there are two views about human
social life. Some think that mankind is by nature, social, and they
consider man to be what is called “gregarious” by nature.

Others, on the other hand, consider social life to be based upon
convention. They think that man, by his own free will, and under the
pressure of certain unavoidable external factors (not any inner drive)
has made his choice and has agreed to live with his fellow man.

Now, what about family life? Are there two opinions here? No, the family
life of human beings is completely natural, that is, man is by nature
created domestic. Suppose that we doubt whether the social life of man
is natural; even then we cannot doubt whether his domesticity is natural
or not. Many animals, for example, have a kind of “married” life, like
pigeons or certain insects which live in pairs, although they do not, by
nature, have much social life, indeed, they may have none all.

The question of family life is different from that of social life. Among
human beings and among some animals there is a natural tendency towards
a family life, establishing a home and having children, and this is
according to a purposeful plan of nature.

History does not have any evidence for the theory that man was at any
time without a family life. In other words, neither did man and woman
ever live separated from each other, nor did sexual relations between
individuals take a communal or public form. The life of wild tribes in
the present age, which is considered to be a specimen of the life of
primitive man, is also not like that.

The life of primitive man, whether matriarchal or patriarchal, did take
the form of family life.

The theory of the four eras
---------------------------

As far as the question of the owner of property is concerned, it is
admitted by all that in early times ownership took the form of
joint-ownership and individual possession began after wards; but, in the
case of sex, this has never been so. The reason that there was joint
ownership in the early ages of human life was that at that time human
society was arranged in tribes was based on the pattern of a large
family.

In other words, the members of a tribe who lived together shared the
benefits as in family life. This was the reason for joint-ownership. In
early times, let us suppose, there was no ides of law, or custom or
tradition that could make man or woman responsible to each other. Only
nature and their innate natural feelings bound them to certain duties
and rights, but even then they never had unrestricted sexual relations.
Just as with animals who live in pairs and abide by no social or
positive law but under the law of nature, and conform their behavior to
certain rights and duties, their life and sexual relations is not
without cheeks and conditions.

Mihr’angiz Manuchihriyan in the introduction to her book *Intiqad bar
qavanin-e asasi va madani-e Iran* (Criticism of the Constitution and
Civil Law of Iran) writes: “According to sociology, the life of men and
women in the different parts of the world is passing through one of
these four eras: 1. The natural era; 2. The era of male dominance: 3.
The era of female protest; 4. The era of the equality of the rights of
men and women.

“In the first era men and women associate and have sexual relations with
each other without any restriction or condition.”

Sociology does not agree with the above statement. What sociology
accepts at the most is that amongst some tribes, and sometimes, some
brothers may marry some sisters jointly. All the brothers can have
sexual relations with all the sisters, and the children are related to
all of them. In other instances, adolescent boys and girls, before they
get married, are not bound by any restrictions, and only marriage
imposes limitations over them. If it happens that the situation as
regards sexual behavior is in some savage tribes more generalized than
this and woman is, as it were, a “public” woman, that is an exceptional
state of affairs and should be considered a case of deviation from the
natural and normal situation.

In his *The Story of Civilization*, vol.1, Will Durant writes**:**

“Our animal forefathers invented it. Some birds seem to live as
reproducing mates in a divorceless monogamy. Among gorillas and
orangutans the association of the parents continues to the end of the
breeding season, and has many human Features. Any approach to loose
behavior on the part of the female is severely punished by the male. The
Orangs of Borneo, says in De Crespigny, ‘live in families: the male, the
female, and a young one’; and Dr. Savage reports of the gorillas that
‘it is not in usual to see the ‘old folks’ sitting under a tree regaling
themselves with fruit and friendly chat, while their children are
leaping around them and swinging from branch to branch in boisterous
merriment.’ Marriage is older than man.

“Societies without marriage are rare, but the sedulous inquirer can find
enough of them to form respectable transition from the promiscuity of
the lower mammals to the marriage of primitive men.”

The message is that family feelings are a natural and instinctive matter
for a human being. It is not a product of habit or the result of
civilization, it is just as for many animals who naturally and
instinctively have a drive towards family feelings.

As a result we hold that there never was a period for mankind in which
male and female, without any kind of restriction, condition or
obligation, however natural, lived a completely free conjugal life. Such
an imaginary stage is like sexual communism, which even the upholders of
economic communism never claimed to have found any traces of in early
times. The theory of four eras in the relations between man and woman is
a bungled imitation of the theory of four eras which socialists believe
in as regards the ownership of property. They say that mankind has
traversed four eras as regards ownership: the first stage that of common
property; then the stage of feudalism; then capitalism; and finally the
stage of socialism and communism, which is a return to the first stage
of common property, but on a higher level.

We are in for a pleasant surprise when Ms. Manuchihriyan gives the
relationship of men and women the name of ‘equality of rights of men and
women’ and does not follow the socialists in this matter, and does not
give the last era the name of “common property”.

Although the above-named lady believes that between the fourth era and
the first era there is much similarity, the reason she gives for it is
that “In the fourth era, which has much similarity with the first era,
man and woman live together with absolutely no kind of domination or
superiority of one over the other.

I am still at a loss to understand what Ms. Manuchihriyan really means
by ‘much similarity’. If she only means the non-domination and
non-supremacy of man, and an equality of undertakings and conditions
between each other, how do a similarity exist between each other, how
does the similarity exist between the present era and the era when,
according to her, there existed no undertaking, no condition and no
limits whatsoever, and men and women did not lead a family life. If the
underlying idea is that during the fourth era all limitations and
undertakings will gradually disappear, family life will be abolished,
and sort of sexual communism will prevail, it shows that the idea of
these fervent believers in ‘equality of rights’ is something other than
all other supporters of equality of rights imagine and demand. It would
probably by rather horrifying for them.

We shall now divert our attention towards the nature of the family
rights of men and women. In this connection, we should keep two things
in mind: one of them is to see whether men and women have any difference
in their nature, or not. In other words whether the differences of men
and women are only as far as concerns the sexual organs, or whether the
differences are more profound than this.

The other thing is whether, if the differences and dissimilarities are
there, they are of the kind which have an effect in the determination of
their rights and duties, or whether these are only differences of color
and birth which have no relevance to the nature of human rights.

Woman in nature
---------------

I do not think that there is a need for arguments to decide the first
issue. Everyone who has studied this subject knows that the differences
between men and women do not merely concern the sexual organs only. If
there is anything which is worth thoughtful consideration, it is whether
these differences have any effect in determining the rights and duties
of men.

European thinkers and scholars have satisfactorily explained the first
issue. The close study of biology and psychology and also the social
aspect of this question by these eminent thinkers does not give the
least occasion for an objection concerning this issue. The aspect which
attracted their attention less was how far these dissimilarities can
have an effect in determining family rights and duties, and as a result
put men and women in different positions.

In his well-known book *Man the Unknown*, the world-famous French
physiologist, surgeon and biologist Alexis Carrel admits both issues,
that is, he acknowledges the fact that men and women, according to the
law of creation, have been made differently, and adds that these
differences and dissimilarities make their duties amid rights
dissimilar.

In the chapter headed “Sex and Birth” he has discussed the subject. He
says: Testicles and ovaries possess functions of overwhelming
importance. They generate male and female cells. Simultaneously, they
secrete into the blood certain substances, which impress the male or
female characteristics on our tissues, humors, and consciousness, and
give to all our functions their character of intensity. The testicle
engenders audacity, violence and brutality, the qualities distinguishing
the fighting bull from the ox drawing the plough along the furrow. The
ovary affects the organism of the woman in an analogous manner……….

The differences existing between man and woman do not come from the
particular form of the sexual organs, the presence of the uterus, from
gestation, or from the mode of education. They are of a more fundamental
nature. They are caused by the very structure of the tissues and by the
impregnation of the entire organism with specific chemical substances
secreted by the ovary. Ignorance of these fundamental facts has led
promoters of feminism to believe that both sexes should have the same
education, the same powers and the same responsibilities.

In reality, woman differs profoundly from man. Every one of these cells
of her body bears the mark of her sex. The same is true of her organs,
and, above all, of her nervous system. Physiological laws are as
inexorable as those of the sidereal world. They cannot be replaced by
human wishes. We are obliged to accept them just as they are. Women
should develop their aptitudes in accordance with their own nature,
without trying to imitate the males. Their part in the progress of
civilization is higher than that of men. They should not abandon their
specific functions.”

After the explanation regarding the way in which the cells of the male
sperm and female ovule are created, and how their union with each other
takes places; and after pointing out that it is the existence of the
female and not the male which is essential for the generation of
offspring, he says that pregnancy fully develops the body and soul of a
woman. At the end of the chapter he says: The same intellectual and
physical training, and the same ambitions, should not be given to young
girls and to boys. Educators should pay very close attention to the
organic and mental peculiarities of the male and the female, and to
their natural functions. Between the two sexes are irrevocable
differences. And it is imperative to take them into account in
constructing the civilized world.” (pp.89 —90 and 92)

As you have seen, this eminent thinker states the great number of
natural differences between men and women, and also believes that these
differences, in terms of their functions and rights, place men and women
in different positions.

In the next chapter, also, we shall quote the writings of thinkers
concerning the differences between men and women, and we shall infer
from these in which areas of human activity they have similar abilities
and requirements and in which they should have similar rights, and in
which areas they do not have the same positions and in which they should
have dissimilar rights and duties.

In the study and determination of the family rights and duties of men
and women this is one of the most sensitive areas.


