Part Nine: The Question of Inheritance
======================================

The old world either gave absolutely no inheritance to women or, when it
was given, the woman was treated as a minor, which meant that she was
not given independence and the status of a person having rights. Under
the old laws of the world, if inheritance was occasionally given to
daughters, it was never given to the daughter’s children, while a son
could inherit himself, and his children could grow up as the successor
to their father’s property as well. In some other laws of the world
which gave an equal inheritance to women and men alike but not in the
shape of a specified share, it was what the Qur’an mentions as

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نصيباً مفروضاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*i.e. a fixed share to which she was entitled*), but it took this form:
a person was entitled, if he so liked, to make a will in favour of his
daughter as well.

The history of women’s inheritance is long. Scholars and learned persons
have extensively examined it, and have left behind a vast body of
investigations and writings on this subject which can be studied. I do
not think it necessary to quote from their writings and their
observations. The summary of their writings is as we have mentioned
above.

The cause of woman’s being deprived of inheritance
--------------------------------------------------

The cause of a woman’s being deprived of inheritance was to prevent the
transfer of family property to another family. According to the old
idea, the role of the mother in the birth of a child was considered to
be insignificant. Mothers were considered were considered as mere
containers in which the man’s sperm developed, and out of which a child
came into existence. For that reason they believed that the children of
someone’s son were the issue of a man, and thus they were a part and
parcel of his family.

On the other hand, the children of his daughters were not his children,
but the children of the husband of the daughter, and they belonged to
the family of the husband of the daughter. Consequently, if a daughter
inherited, and afterwards her children succeeded her, that. would cause
situation where the wealth of one family would pass on to a different
family.

In the book, *Irth dar huquq-e madani-e Iran* (Inheritance in the Civil
Laws of Iran) written by the late Dr. Musa ‘Amid, on page 8, after his
remark that ‘in ancient times it was religion which laid the foundations
for the formation of families and not natural ties,’ he says:

“The religious spokesmanship of the family (under the patriarchal
system) was with the grandfather of the family, and after him, the
religious rites and rituals of the family were performed only by the
male children, generation after generation. The ancients considered that
the male children were the only source of continuation of their lineage.
The father of the family, life-giver to his son as he was, also
transferred his religious beliefs and the religious rituals, the right
to keep the Fire alive, and the right to recite special prayers
also.[^1]

As is mentioned in the Hindu Vedas and in the laws of Greece and Rome,
the power of generation is confined to men, and the result of this
antiquated belief was that the family regions were the special concern
of men. Women had no business and concern with religion except through
their fathers and husbands….. and because they had no hand in religious
rituals, they were naturally deprived of all family privileges.
Afterwards, when with the improvement of the economic situation an
occasion for inheritance arose, women were deprived of that right.”

There were other reasons also for woman’s being deprived of inheritance.
One of them was their weakness in combat. In societies where preferences
and prerogatives were based on heroism and valor and one war-faring
person was preferred to a hundred thousand non-war like persons, woman
was naturally deprived of inheritance because of her weakness in the
performance of acts of defense and bravery.

Arabs of the pre-Islamic age were against were against woman’s receiving
inheritance for this very reason, and when there was a male member of a
family however distant in the ranks of inheritance he may have been,
they never gave inheritance to a woman. So, when the verse of
inheritance was revealed and it distinctly stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَالْأَقْرَبُونَ
وَلِلنِّسَاءِ نَصِيبٌ مِمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَالْأَقْرَبُونَ
مِمَّا قَلَّ مِنْهُ أَوْ كَثُرَ ۚ نَصِيبًا مَفْرُوضًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***To the men a share of what parents and kinsmen leave, and to the
women a share of what parents and kinsmen leave, whether it be little or
much, a share apportioned.*** **(4:7)**

It was rather a shock for the Arabs. Incidentally in those days the
brother of Hasan ibn Thabit, the well-known poet of the Arabs, died and
left behind him a wife, and a few daughters. The sons of his uncle
seized all his property, and spared nothing for his wife and daughters.
The wife of the dead man brought a complaint against them before the
Holy Prophet. The Prophet called them before him. They submitted that
woman is not in a position to arm her and fight against an enemy. “It is
we who have to take the sword in our hands and defend ourselves and
these women.” So wealth should also belong to man. Nevertheless, the
Holy Prophet then recited to them the commandment of God.

Inheritance of an adopted son:
------------------------------

In pre-Islamic days, the Arabs sometimes adopted someone their son, and,
as a result, that adopted son was considered to be a successor when the
man died, like a real son. The custom of adoption existed in other
communities among which were ancient Iran and Rome. According to this
custom, the adopted son, because he was exactly like a son, was entitled
to all the privileges to which the real daughters of the deceased were
not entitled.  
 One of these privileges was that the adopted son was to inherit from
the deceased. There was another similar privilege and consequence which
was that it was considered forbidden to marry the woman to whom the
adopted son had been married. The Qur’an disposed of this custom also.

Inheritance by a confederation:
-------------------------------

The Arabs had another custom regarding inheritance which was also
abolished by the Holy Qur’an. That custom was of ‘confederation’. This
meant that two strangers would enter into a pact that the blood of one
was the blood of the other, and attack on one was the attack on the
other, and each one was entitled to inherit from the other. According to
this pact, the two non-kindred persons defended each other from attacks
during their lifetime, and whoever died earlier left his property to the
other.

Woman as a part of the share of inheritance:
--------------------------------------------

Arabs sometimes counted the wife of the deceased as part of his property
and holdings and took possession of her as a share in the inheritance.
If a man had a son by some other wife, that son could, in token of his
possession, threw a cloth on the face of that woman and count her as a
part or his share. It depended upon his inclination whether he entered
into wedlock with her or whether he gave her in wedlock to another
person and received her dower for himself. This custom was not confined
to Arabs only, and the Qur’an abolished it.

In old Hindu, Japanese, Roman, Greek and Iranian laws, very many unjust
discriminations are to be found. If we were to quote the observations of
those persons who have made a thorough study of the subject, we would
require a great deal of space.

Woman’s inheritance in the Sassanid period in Iran:
---------------------------------------------------

The late Sa’id Nafisi writes on p 42 of his book *Tarikh-e ijtima’i-e
Iran az zaman-e sasaniyan ta inqirad-e Umawiyan* (The Social History of
Iran from the Sassanid Period till the Overthrow of the Umayyids):

“In connection with the establishment of a family, another notable point
in the Sassanid civilization was that when a son reached the age of
puberty, his father would give one of his several wives to him in
marriage. Another mentionable fact is that in Sassanid civilization,
woman had no individuality and thus no rights, and a father and a
husband had immense authority to keep a hold over them. When a girl
reached the age of fifteen, and reached full maturity, the father, or
the head of the family, was required to give her in marriage, but the
marriageable age for a son was considered to be twenty years. In the
matter of marriage the consent of the father was a necessary condition.
The girl who went over to her husband without such consent did not
inherit from her father or guardian, and in the selection of a husband
for herself she was not considered to have any right. However, if after
reaching puberty, her father neglected to give her in marriage, she had
a right to have recourse to an illegal marriage, and in these
circumstances she was not entitled to inherit from her father.

“The number of women that a man could keep had no limit. From Greek
document, it transpires that a man sometimes had several hundred women
with him in his house. The principle of marriage in the Samanian period,
as recorded in the religious books of the Zoroastrians, is very complex
and confusing, but there were five customary kinds of marriage.

1. A wife who was married with the consent of her parents, and who gave
birth to children who were hers in this world and hereafter, was called
“*padishah-e zan*” (queen of the wives).

2. A wife who was the only child of her father and mother was called
“*ug zan*” (unique wife). The first child she gave birth to was given
over to her parents so that the child could fill the place of his or her
mother who had gone from the house and had married. Thereafter she too
was spoken of as “*padishah-e zan*”.

3. If a man died in his youth without marrying, the members of his
family used to give a dower to a woman from another family, and take her
to the house of a man not of their family, and that woman was called
“*sidhar zan*” (adopted wife). Any child that she gave birth to was to
be considered in the next world as one half or the young man who had
died and the other half of the man still alive.

4. A widow who married for the second time was called “*chigar zan*”
(servant wife). If she had no issue by her first husband she was given
the status of “*sidhar zan*”.

5. A woman who went to a husband without the consent of her father and
mother was considered to be of the lowest status, and she was called
“*khud saray-e zan*” (willful wife), and did not inherit from her father
or mother. Nevertheless, when her son reached the age of puberty and
accepted her as his “ug zan”, her status changed.”

The share of women in inheritance according to Islam:
-----------------------------------------------------

In Islamic laws, none of the incongruities of the past are found in the
question of inheritance. The matter regarding which those who claim
equality of rights raise objections is that the share of a woman in
inheritance according to Islam is half the share of a man. In Islam, a
son inherits twice as much as a daughter, a brother twice as much as a
sister, and a husband twice as much as a wife. It is only in the case of
the father and mother that, if the deceased has children and his father
and mother are also alive, both the father and the mother will inherit
one sixth of the property of the deceased.

The fact that a woman inherits one half of the share of a man is due to
a special state of affairs. Because a woman is entitled to a dower and
maintenance, and because she is incapable of taking an equal part in the
defense of the community, the fact that her share is one half of her
brother’s is, to some extent, the result of a law of recompense. In
other words, the special inheritance position of woman is founded upon
the special place she occupies as regards dower and maintenance and so
forth.

In accordance with the arguments which we have put forward in the
previous chapters, Islam has acknowledged dower and maintenance as a
necessary and effective factor in strengthening the mutual relationship
between husband and wife, safe guarding the tranquility of the
household, and establishing unity between husband and wife. In the eyes
of Islam, the abolishing of dower and maintenance, but especially
maintenance, would cause a shaking in the foundations of the household
and the wife being drawn towards promiscuity.

As Islam considers dower and maintenance to be obligatory, the wife is
automatically exempted from providing for the family budget, and that
responsibility has been laid upon the husband. Islam seeks that this
responsibility should be recompensed by inheritance, and so twice as
much of the share or inheritance has been allocated to man as to woman.
In short, it is dower and maintenance which has decreased the woman’s
share in inheritance.

An objection by the worshippers of the west:
--------------------------------------------

When a group of worshippers of the west give vent to their utterances
concerning this problem, and make an issue of a woman’s share being less
than a man’s in their propaganda against Islam, they start on the
subject of dower and maintenance. They say: “Why should we proceed in a
circuitous and a round-about way? Why should we not give equal shares to
man and to woman, so that we should not be obliged to compensate the
deficit by way of dower and maintenance?”

Firstly, these busybodies have mistaken the cause for the effect and
vice versa. They consider that dower and maintenance is the effect of
the situation that holds as regards a woman’s share in inheritance,
whereas in fact, that special situation is the effect of dower and
maintenance.

Secondly, they think that what really matters is the financial and
economic aspect of the question. Obviously, if only the financial and
economic aspects were in view, there would have been no justification
for dower and maintenance or for the share in inheritance being unequal.
As we pointed out in the preceding article, Islam has kept in view many
aspects of the question some of which are based on nature and some
psychological. On the one side there are the excessive requirements and
problems of woman in connection with childbirth, while man is free from
all this. On the other side there is her lesser ability to produce and
earn wealth.

Thirdly, there is the fact that her consumption of wealth is more than
of man. Moreover, the special psychological and intellectual
considerations regarding men and women, in other words, the
characteristic psychology of men and women and the fact that a man
should always be there as the person responsible for the expenses of
women, and, lastly, the subtle psychological and social considerations
which are the source of strength in family ties—all these aspects have
been kept in view by Islam. It has considered dower and maintenance
positively necessary.

These necessary and unavoidable matters are an indirect cause of the
burden on the man’s expenses. This is the reason that Islam has ordained
that in recompense for the responsibilities that have been laid upon
man’s shoulders; he should have twice as much share in inheritance as a
woman. Any how, the financial and economic aspect is not the only one
and it is not the only goal aimed at in Islamic law, so the question
proposed: “Why, in one place, is the share of woman cut to half, and in
another place recompensed? does not arise.

The objection of atheists at the beginning of Islam about inheritance:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

We pointed out that, in the view of Islam, dower and maintenance are the
cause, and the situation regarding a woman’s share in inheritance is the
effect. It is not only recently that questions regarding this part of
the law have been raised, for it has been under discussion from the
early days of Islam.

There was a man called Ibn Abi’l-‘Awja’, who lived in the second century
of the Hejra, and had no belief in God or religion. This man took
advantage of the freedom of that period and propagated his atheistic
beliefs everywhere. Not only that, but he sometimes went to the Holy
Mosque (Masjidu’l-Haram) in Mecca, or the Holy Mosque of the Prophet
(Masjidu n-Nabi) in Medina, and there he debated the subjects of the
Unity of God, life after death, and other cardinal principles of Islam.
One of his objections against Islam was the very same one about
inheritance. He would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما بالُ المرأة المِسكينة الضَّعيفة تأخُذ سهماً ويأخذ سهمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Why should a poor woman, who is weaker than man, gets only one share,
while a man, who is stronger, gets two? This is contrary to justice.”
Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) replied that it was because Islam had
exempted woman from armed combat, and moreover that dower and
maintenance had been imposed upon man for her benefit. What is more, in
certain cases of doubt, in which blood relatives had to pay ransom
money, woman has been exempted from sharing with others in the payment.
These are the causes why the share of woman is lees than the share of
man. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said distinctly that the special situation of
woman in inheritance is the effect of dower and maintenance is the
effect of dower and maintenance and exemption from armed combat and
paying ransom money.

Such questions were put to all the Imams of our faith, and all of them
replied in the same way.

[^1]: This describes the situation in Ancient Iran (Tr.)


