Part Ten: Right of Divorce
==========================

In no age has the danger of the breaking-up of the family and the evil
side-effects that arise from it been the object of so much attention as
in ours, and in no age were human beings involved in this danger and in
the evil consequences springing from it as they are in this age.

Law-makers, jurists, psychologist, — all of them try, with all the means
in their control, to further strengthen, stabilize and render
indestructible the structure of marriage, but all effort have failed and
have instead aggravated the disease. Statistics show that year after
year the number of divorces increases, and that there is imminent danger
of the breaking up of many other homes.

Usually, whenever some disease attracts attention, and material and
intellectual efforts are expended to combat and defeat it, the number of
cases decreases as a result and very often the disease is eradicated;
but in the case of divorce it is just the opposite.

The increase of divorce in modern life
--------------------------------------

In the past little thought was given to divorce, its evil effects, the
causes of its occurrence and increase, and the ways of preventing its
incidence, while at the same time there were fewer divorces, fewer
broken homes. Certainly the difference between the past and the present
is that now the causes of divorce are on the increase. Social life has
assumed a form in which the causes of separation, disunion and the
breaking of the ties of home life have been multiplied, and that is the
reason why the efforts of the experts and the well-intentioned have not
as yet been at all successful. Unfortunately, in the future it is likely
to become more serious.

On February 13th 1967, Newsweek published an article under the title:
“The Divorced Woman - American Style” (later translated into Persian and
printed in *Zan-e ruz* (no.105), there it was written: “Getting in and
out of divorce is almost like getting in and out of taxis.”

It also writes that American people have an expression: “The worst
reconciliation is preferable to the best divorce.” This expression was
first coined by the Spanish writer Cervantes in 1600. Another saying,
this time from 1960 and contrary to first one says: “Love is lovelier
the second time around”, and comes from the pen of one Sammy Kahn,
songwriter.

From the text of the article it appears that the second saying is now
being realized in America, for it writes: “The allure of the
marriage-go-round has grown so potent that it is attracting not only
teen-agers and young marrieds but more and more of their mothers. The
U.S divorce barometer is not on the rise; in fact, it has hovered around
the 400,000 a-year level in World War II. . . Nearly 40 per cent of all
ruptured marriages today have lasted ten years or more and 13 per cent
have survived more than twenty years. The median age of the U.S’s two
million divorcees is now 45. Furthermore, belying the myth that progeny
preserves marriages, some 60 per cent (vs. 42 per cent in 1948) of
todays divorced women have children under 18 at the time of their
breakup.”

The article continues: “Yet for all her privilege and plenty the
divorcee — mature or not — is hardly gay. Her *tristesse* is revealed in
the incidence of divorced women seeking psychoanalysis, in their rate of
alcoholism, (one in four) and suicide (three times that of married
women)….In short, once outside the courtroom, many a newly divorced
woman discovers that things are not what she deemed… . The partnered
world has yet to form a cohesive set of attitudes towards the female
ex-partner. She may be respected, admired, even envied — but she does
not fit snugly into other people’s private lives.”

The magazine then goes on to ask whether the cause of speedy divorces is
disharmony and the absence of sexual compatibility between husband and
wife. It writes: “To judge by court records, money, sex and
incompatibility are still the prime reasons for divorce among all ages
and classes. What underlies the failure of so many marriages is not a
new form of friction — but a new unwillingness to tolerate the old
frictions. In the age of the pill, the sexual revolution and the
feminine mystique, the notion that happiness takes precedence over
family solidarity has clearly captured the female imagination.”

“A wife today,’ says Unitarian minister Rudolph W. Nemser, of suburban
Washington, D.C., ‘is less willing to tolerate incompatibility without
questioning her situation. The husband, by contrast, is more likely to
accept the fact of a bad marriage and will persevere with it.’ According
to Psychiatrist Wahl, women are becoming more demanding of sexual
gratification and more intolerant of sexual incompatibility”

### Divorce in Iran

The rise in the divorce-rate is not confined to America. It is a
universal disease of the times. Wherever western manners and customs
have influenced the lives of people more, the number of divorces has
also gone up. If, for example we consider the case of our own Iran,
cases of divorce are found more in cities than in the country. In
Tehran, where western manners and habits are more wide-spread, divorce
cases occur in greater number than in other cities.

In issue no. 11512 of the daily newspaper *Itila‘at,* a short
statistical record of the marriages and divorce in Iran was made. It was
mentioned that “more than a quarter of the number of divorces recorded
are entirely connected with the area around Tehran, that is, twenty
seven per cent of the divorces recorded occurred in Tehran, in spite of
the population of Tehran being ten per cent of the total population of
the country. On the whole the percentage of divorces in Tehran is higher
than the percentage of marriages. Marriages in Tehran account for
fifteen per cent of all the marriages of the whole country.”

### The environment in divorce-infected America

Let us leave aside now the fact that talk of an increase in divorce
first arose in America, and as it was said in *Newsweek*, an American
woman prefers her own enjoyment and pleasure to the well-being and
safety of her own home, and let us precede a step further and see why
the American woman has become like this. Certainly it is not related to
the nature of American woman; it must have some social cause. It is
surely the social environment in America that has created this mentality
among American women. Our worshippers of the west try to direct and push
the women of Iran onto the tracks along which American women have
passed. If their wish is fulfilled, there can be no doubt that the
Iranian woman and Iranian family-life will meet the same fate as the
American woman, and the Iranian home will become like the American home.

In issue no.66 (4.5.1344.SH), the weekly *Bamshad* wrote: “See how far
matters have gone! The voice of French people is raised in protest. ‘The
Americans Have Perpetrated Another Outrage.’ This heading is from an
article in the French newspapers *France-Soir* which says that in more
than two hundred restaurants and cabarets in the State of California
female attendants work topless. In that article it is written that a
special skin-tight costume like a bathing-costume, which does not cover
the breasts, has been officially recognized as a working dress in San
Francisco and Los Angeles. In New York city a considerable number of
cinemas show only those films which are based upon sex, and the naked
pictures of women at their doors confront the eyes. These films are
called ‘Wife-Swapping’, The Vice-Girls’, ‘Revealing Panties’ and so on.
In the shop-fronts and book-stalls there may be very few books on the
front of which there is no picture of a naked woman. Even the classics
are not exempted from this rule. In the midst of these books one can
find a large number of books with titles such as: “The Sexual Behavior
of American Husbands”, The Sexual Behavior of Western Husbands”, “The
Sexual Behavior of Youths under Twenty Years of Age”, “New Methods in
Sexual Behavior on the Basis of the Latest Surveys”.

“The writer of the article in *France-Soir*, surprised and thoughtful,
asks himself at this stage: ‘To what extent does America want to go.’

At this point *Bamshad* writes: The truth is that it will go anywhere it
wants to…….only my heart aches for these people of my country who think
that they have found an ideal standard to follow, and are completely
confused in this path.”

So it is clear that if an American woman has become playful and prefers
her own pleasure to faithfulness to her husband and her home, she is not
very much to blame. It is the social environment which has struck the
destructive blow at the roots of the household. It is strange that the
leaders of our times are continuously giving encouragement to the social
causes of divorce and the breaking up of the family. Amongst themselves,
they try to excel each other in their attempts in this direction, and
then raise cries of woe and wonder why divorce is so frequent. With one
hand, these people add to the causes of divorce, and with the other,
they want to repress it by force of law. It is like asking for the
impossible.

### Assumptions

Now let us begin discussing the subject at its roots. Firstly we should
see whether, in principle, divorce is a good thing or a bad thing.
Should recourse to divorce be entirely unrestricted?

If divorce is a good thing then every circumstance that increases the
already increased occurrence of divorce is quite all right. Or maybe the
way to divorce should be completely barred, and union by marriage should
be forcibly kept intact for ever, and every circumstance and innovation
which causes slackness in the sacred union of marriage should be
strictly dealt with. Or there is the third course, the proper course to
be adopted, which is as follows. The law should not entirely bar the way
to divorce to man and woman, but rather it should leave the way open to
it in those cases in which it is deemed necessary and unavoidable.

When the law does not completely ban it, society should simultaneously
take adequate steps to bring about such conditions that the causes of
dissension between husband and wife should not occur. Society should
take a firm stand against the causes which are the source of the
disunion and separation of husband and wife, and the loneliness of
children. If society itself furnishes the causes of divorce, no legal
prohibitions can be fruitful.

If it is considered proper that the law should keep the door of divorce
open, then under what conditions and in what way, should it be left
open? Should it remain open only for the husband, or only for the wife
or else for both of them? In the case of the latter alternative, should
the door be kept open for both husband and wife in the same way? Should
the law allow the husband and wife to step out of marriage both in the
same manner, or is it preferable that for each one, the husband and the
wife there should be different procedures for dissolving this tie.

In all there are five angles from which the problem of divorce can be
discussed:

1 The unimportance of divorce, and the lifting of all moral and legal
checks and hindrances for the control of divorce.

2. Those people support this view who consider marriage only as a source
of sexual pleasure, and do not imagine it to have an aspect of
inviolability, and do not consider the integrity of the family to be an
asset or society. They think, in accordance with the saying ‘the second
love is more enjoyable’, that the sooner that a new, different marriage
is entered upon, the greater a source of sexual pleasure for woman and
man it will be. In this point of view both the social value of peace of
the home has been ignored, and also the joy, purity, cordiality and
happiness which is found in a continuous married life; and the
occurrence and recognition of the unity of two spirits as if has been
disregarded. This point of view is the most superficial and the most
frivolous.

2. Marriage is a sacred pact. It is a union of heads and souls, and must
always remain intact and secure. The word “divorce” should be dropped
from the vocabulary of human society. A wife and a husband, who many
each other should know that nothing except death can separate them from
each other.

This view is the one the Catholic Church has maintained for centuries
and is not prepared to relinquish at any cost.

The supporters of this view are on the decrease in the world. Except in
Catholic Italy and Spain, this law is not enacted these days. Time and
again we read in newspapers how the wailings of Italian men and women
are raised against this law; they attempt to get the law of divorce
officially approved so that many unsuccessful marriages be prevented in
their troubled country.

Some time back, in one of the current daily newspapers, the translation
of an article from the *Daily Express* was published under the headline
“Marriage in Italy-Slavery of women”, and I went through it. In this
article it was said that at present in Italy because there is no
divorce, many people enter into illicit sexual relations. According to
the article “at present more than five million Italians believe that
their lives are nothing, but sheer sin and illicit relationships”.

In the same newspaper it was quoted from the French *Le Figaro* that the
non-availability of divorce is the cause of great distress among the
Italian people. There are many persons who have given up Italian
Citizenship for this very reason. One Italian institute at last sought
the opinion of Italian women as to whether the introduction of the
provisions of divorce was against the principles of religion or not.
Ninety-seven per cent of the women gave their replies in the negative.

The Church persists in its view, and argues all the more in support of
the sanctity and inviolability of the marriage pact.

The sanctity of marriage, a necessity for its inviolability and
indestructibility is of course acceptable, provided that the
relationship of the husband and the wife can be securely maintained in
practice; but there arise occasions when compatibility between the
husband and the wife is impossible. On such occasions it is not feasible
to keep them tied up together by force of law and call it the union of
husband and wife. The discarding of the opinion of the Church is
certain. It is not unlikely that the Church may revise its belief, so it
is not necessary to scrutinize and discuss further the viewpoint of the
Church.

3. Marriage may be dissolved and terminated by the husband. As for wife,
it is not dissoluble at her discretion it all.

May be in former days this view was entertained, but at present I do not
think that any supporters will be found for this view. At any rate, it
too requires no further discussion and criticism.

4. Marriage is sacred and the peace of the family to be respected, but
recourse to divorce on special conditions for both husband and wife
should be possible. Moreover, the way to step out of this blind alley
should be the same for both.

Those who support the identicalness of the rights of man and woman in
family affairs, and who misrepresent this as equality of rights also
support this view. In the opinion of this group all those conditions,
requisites and limits that apply to the wife should also apply to the
husband, and the very same way that the man has to get out of this blind
alley should be the right of the woman as well. If there is any
difference, there will be cruelty, discrimination and injustice.

5. Marriage is sacred and the peace of the family to be respected, and
divorce an unpalatable and detestable thing. Society is responsible for
removing the causes and incentives to divorce, but at the same time the
law should not bar the way of divorce for incompatible marriages. The
way to get out of the bond of marriage should be kept open for the
husband as well as for the wife. The door by which the husband is to
come out of this situation is different from that which the wife is to
use. One of the matters in which a man and a woman have different right
is divorce.

This is the view which Islam has proposed, and Islamic countries, though
half heartedly, do act upon it.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Divorce 2
---------

Divorce in our age is a great world problem. Everyone moans and
complains. Those people under whose laws divorce is totally prohibited
complain that they do not have the remedy of divorce for those
unsuccessful marriages which are bound to take place. On the other hand,
the cries those who have kept the way to divorce open equally for man
and woman rise to the heavens, complaining about the increase in
divorces and the instability of the family structure with all its
associated ills and uncalled for side-effects. Moreover, those who have
given this right only to man complain on two accounts.

Firstly, about the unmanly divorces of certain men who, having lived
together with their wives as husbands, suddenly develop a fancy for a
new wife, and the first wife, who spent her vitality, youth, energy and
health on their home and never imagined that her cozy abode would one
day be seized from her, is driven away from her repose, forsaken and
utterly dejected, by only one visit to the office of the registrar of
divorces.

The other is the unmanly refusal of certain men to divorce their wives
when there remains no hope of a harmonious and united life.

It can happen that due to some special reasons, the differences between
a husband and wife reach a stage where there is no hope of their finding
a settlement. All attempts at reconciliation prove fruitless: a great
dislike exists between the husband and wife; they live separately, and
each of them has practically nothing to do with the other. In such
circumstances, any reasonable person would be convinced that the only
thing proper for them is that the relation which has to all intents and
purposes been cut should also legally be served, and that each of them
may be allowed to make the selection of some other partner.

Nevertheless some men, if only to torment the other party and depriving
her of the benefit of enjoying a married life, keep their unfortunate
wife in a state of suspense for nothing (in the words of the Qur’an)
(*ka’l-mu ‘allaqah*) كالمعلقة like someone hanging on).

As this kind of person knows nothing about Islam and Muslims except the
name, and then they do these things in the name of Islam and by leaning
on the laws of Islam, a doubt is created in some people who are not
conversant with the depth and the real spirit of Islamic teachings as to
whether Islam really advocates that the business of divorce should be
like this.

With a voice of complaint, these people say: Has Islam really allowed
men, sometimes by giving divorce and sometimes by withholding divorce,
to persecute women in any way they like? Those people who act in the
above mentioned way are completely satisfied that they are correct in
the way they take advantage of their religious and legal rights. Those
who raise objections say: Is that not cruelty? If this is not cruelty,
what is cruelty? Do you not say that Islam is against injustice in any
form and in any shape, and that Islamic laws are based upon justice and
truth? If these acts are cruel and unjust, and Islamic laws are based up
on truth and justice, tell us, so that we may see what provision is made
by Islam to check these cases of injustice.

There is no denying that these acts are cruel. We will point out
afterwards that Islam has provided correctives for these practices and
has not left them to themselves. Nevertheless, there is one other point
which should not be lost sight of, and that is to think over what
methods should be adopted to check these cruelties and injustices. Is
the only thing which causes cruelties of this description to be
committed the divorce law, and will only amendment of the divorce law
amend these things? Or should the root cause of these cruelties be
looked for elsewhere, because changes in the law alone cannot stop these
things.

The difference between the view of Islam and some other views about
solving social problems is that some people, holding views other than
that of Islam, imagine that all problems can be solved by passing and
altering laws. Islam, on the other hand, clearly makes the point that
although the law can certainly be effective as far as the everyday
affair of the people and matters revolving around contracts, etc. are
concerned, in cases where the problem is characterized by feelings of
affections and love and pertains to individual likes and dislikes, in
short, in cases with an emotional aspect, then the law alone cannot be
effective. Other causes and factors should be investigated, and other
provisions brought into use to obtain the desired goals.  
 We shall prove that Islam has made use of the law in places where it
can be effective, and has not been neglected in this direction.

### Dishonourable divorces

Firstly, we shall discuss the foremost problem of our times, namely
dishonorable divorces.

Islam is strongly against divorce and wants divorce to be avoided as far
a possible. Islam has provided his remedy only for occasions in which
there is no alternative but separation. Islam considers as enemies of
God those men who marry one woman after the other and divorce them in
quick succession and whom it calls *mutallaq* (lit: a divorcer).

In the book al-Kafi[^1] it is narrated: The Prophet went to a man and
enquired: “What did you do about your wife?”  
 He said: “I divorced her.”  
 The Prophet asked, “Did you see anything objectionable in her.”  
 He replied, “No, I did not see anything objectionable in her.”  
 The matter stopped here, and that man married again. The Prophet asked
him, “Did you marry another wife?”  
 He said, “Yes.”  
 After some time the Prophet again went to that man and asked him; “What
did you do about your wife?”  
 He said: “I divorced her.”  
 The Prophet asked him, “Did you see anything evil in her.”  
 He said: “I did not see anything evil in her either.”  
 The matter closed again here, and that man married for the third
time.  
 The Prophet asked him: “Have you taken another wife?”  
 He said: “Yes, O’ Messenger of Allah!”

A considerable time passed and the Holy Prophet went to him and asked: “
What did you do about the wife you married?”  
 He said: “I divorced her also.”  
 The Prophet asked: “Did you see anything evil in her?”  
 He replied: “No, I did not see anything evil in her either.”  
 The Prophet said “Allah considers as His enemy and damns the man who
relishes changing wives one after the other, and the woman who delights
in changing husbands one after the other.”  
 The Prophet was informed that Abu Ayyub al-Ansari was determined to
divorce Umm Ayyub, his wife. The Prophet personally knew Umm Ayyub, and
knew also that the divorce of Abu Ayyub was not grounded in an genuine
cause. He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن طلاق أُم أيُّوب لَحُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, the divorce of Umm Ayyub is a great sin.” The Prophet also
said: “Jibra’il (Gabriel) so much commended the cause of the woman, and
so counseled me as to give me the impression that except in the clear
case of adultery the wife does not deserve to be divorced”.

Imam (Ja‘far) as-Sadiq quoted the Holy Prophet as saying: “To God no
house is dearer than the house where there is the union of marriage, and
no house exists which deserves His wrath more than that in which the
union of marriage is broken by divorce.” Imam as-Sadiq then said that
the word *talaq* (divorce) occurs repeatedly in the Qur’an, and that the
details of the matter of divorce have been honored with the attention of
the Holy Qur’an, The reason for this is that God is an enemy of
separation.

Tabarsi[^2] in *Makarimu’l-akhlaq* (Noble Deeds of Morality) quoted from
the Prophet: “Get married, but do not divorce because the throne of
Allah shudders when there is divorce.”

Imam as-Sadiq said: “No lawful thing is the object of so much wrath and
hate in the eyes of Allah as divorce is. Allah considers the man who
repeatedly divorces as His enemy.”

This thing is not especially found in traditions from Shi’ite sources.
The Sunnis have also quoted similar traditions. In the Kitab as-Sunan,
Abu Dawud quotes from the Holy Prophet that Allah declared lawful
nothing so abominable to Him as divorce.

Mawlavi (Jalalu’d-Din Rumi) in his well-known story of Musa (Moses) and
the shepherd alluded to the same tradition of the Prophet when he said:

*As far as possible do not step into separation.*  
*For ‘the most detestable thing to me is divorce’.*

In the biographies of the leader, and guides of our religion it is
observed that, as far as possible, they abstained from divorce. It was,
therefore, very rare that they divorced a woman, and when they did there
was a very reasonable and logical reason for that. For example, Imam
(Muhammad) al-Baqir wedded a woman who was dearly loved by him. Then the
Imam became aware that the woman was *nasabiyyah,* that is, she detested
Ali ibn Abi Talib and nourished a grudge against him in her heart. The
Imam divorced her.

The Imam was asked, “The woman was loved by you, why did you divorce
her.” The Imam replied, “I did not want that a flame from the fires of
Hell should be by my side.”

### A malicious tale without any truth

Here it is necessary to refer briefly to a baseless and scandalous story
which was fabricated by the criminal ‘Abbasid Caliphs, and was spread
about amongst people in general and mentioned in books, that Imam
al-Mujtaba,[^3] the honored son of ‘Ali, Amir al-mu’minin, was one of
those who wedded large number of women and then divorced them. Because
the foundation of this malicious tale was laid almost a century after
the death of the Imam, it spread everywhere.

The admirers and followers of the Imam also began to talk about it
without looking into the truth of the matter and without thinking over
the fact that in the view of Islam this is an abominable and detestable
thing and is befitting only for a sensuous and ignorant person. It is
not the work of a person who used to go to *Hajj* (pilgrimage to Mecca)
on foot from Medina. During his lifetime, more than twenty times he
divided up all his wealth and holdings among the needy and the poor; he
took half of it and the other half he distributed among the destitute.
How can this mischievous tale accord with the high standing position of
utmost piety and infallibility and the Imamate of that venerable
personality?

As we know, with the change of the caliphate from the Umayyids to the
‘Abbasids, the Bani al-Hassan, that is, the grandson of Imam Hassan
cooperate with the Bani al- ‘Abbas, while the grandsons of Imam Husayn,
at the head at that time was Imam as-Sadiq, abstained from cooperating
with them. The Bani al ‘Abbas, though in the beginning they showed
esteem and respect for the Bani al-Hasan and gave them to understand
that they thought them to be worthier of the caliphate than themselves,
ultimately betrayed them. Most of them were eliminated from the scene by
being beheaded, and some were imprisoned.

The Bani al-‘Abbas began to propagate lies against Bani al-Hasan for the
purpose of firmly establishing their political position. One item of
their mischievous propaganda was that Abu-Talib, who was the
great-grandfather of the Bani Al-Hasan and the uncle of the Prophet, was
not a Muslim, and had died an infidel, while ‘Abbas who was another
uncle of the Prophet, embraced Islam and died a Muslim. So the Bani
al-‘Abbas, who were the progeny of the Muslim uncle of the Prophet,
deserved the caliphate more than Bani al-Hasan, who were the progeny of
an infidel uncle of the Prophet. So as to make this view popularly
acceptable, they spent large sums of money and invented false stories.
Today, also, a section of the Sunnis, under the influence of the same
propaganda and plan, declare Abu Talib to be an unbeliever. However if
research were carried out in real earnest among Sunni scholars on this
subject, they would be able to correct this matter in line with history.

The other item of propaganda which they started against the Bani
al-Hasan was that they said that the forefather of the Bani al-Hasan,
Imam Hasan, succeeded his father to the caliphate, but because he was a
libertine, he occupied himself with wedding women, and divorcing them.
That is why he could not succeed in the duties of the caliphate. He
accepted sums of money from Mu‘awiyah, his strong rival, abdicated the
caliphate in favour of him, and applied himself to the sensuous
activities of wedding and divorcing women.

Fortunately in the end, eminent scholars of the subsequent period
carried out research and arrived at the root of this falsehood. The
above comment was first of all made by a judge who was in the service of
Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, the ‘Abbasid caliph, and it was commanded to
publicize this falsehood. One of the historians remarked on this
circumstance, that if Imam Hasan had wedded so many wives, where was all
his children? Why was the number of his sons and daughters so small? The
Imam was not sterile, and birth-control and abortion were not the
practice of that day.

I am amazed at the senseless credulity of the Shi’ite narrators of
traditions. On the one they narrate a large number of traditions from
the Holy Prophet and the pious Imams saying that God considers as His
enemies men who divorce irresponsibly, and that He condemns them.

On the other hand, they write that Imam Hasan was a person who divorced
excessive number of women. These people never reflect that they should
make a choice of one of three courses. Either they should say that there
is nothing wrong with divorce and God does not consider as His enemy a
man who divorce women in great number, or they should say that Imam
Hasan was not a person who divorced many women.

The third possibility is for them to declare, God forbid, that Imam
Hasan did not abide by Islamic law. However, on the one hand these
venerable personages take the traditions of the detestableness of
divorce as authentic and genuine, and on the other hand they believe in
the exceeding holiness and piety of Imam Hasan and display great esteem
and respect for him. Along side this they quote the excessive number of
divorces of Imam Hasan, and, without critically looking into the matter,
pass on.

There are certain others who have gone so far in this matter as to say
Amir al-mu’ minin, Ali (a.s.) was displeased with this behavior of his
son. He informed people publicly from the pulpit, and advised them not
to marry their daughters to his son because he would divorce them.
Despite this, the people answered that they would be proud of the honor
of having their daughters married to the grandson of the Prophet. If he
wanted them, he could keep them, and, if he did not want them, he could
divorce them.

Perhaps some people consider the consent and agreement of the daughters
and the members of their families sufficient to tone down and do away
with the detestability of divorce. They think that divorce is to be
hated only when the other side is not agreeable to it; but that when the
woman desires to have the honor of living a few days with a man she is
proud of, there is no harm in divorce.

But it is not like this. The consent of the fathers of the girls, and
the consent of the girls themselves do not weaken the degree of the
detestability of divorce. The reason is that Islam wants only that the
ties of marriage should be steadfastly maintained. The agreement of the
husband and the wife about separation does not; in this respect very
much alter the situation.

Islam considers divorce detestable not to oblige or favour woman, and
not to receive her gratitude and that of her family members. Her consent
and the consent of the members of her family cannot do away with the
detestability of divorce.

The reason I have brought up the subject of Imam Hasan, besides the
point that a false accusation about a historical figure should be
refuted whenever possible, is that some persons who are not afraid of
God may act in this manner, and then excuse themselves in the light of
the example of Imam Hasan.

Anyhow, what cannot be denied is that divorce and the separation of
husband and wife is detestable and hated in the eyes of Islam.

### Why did Islam not make divorce Illegal?

At this point a relevant question can be raised. If divorce is so
detestable that someone who divorces a woman is considered to be an
enemy of God, why did Islam not declare it unlawful? What hinders Islam
from making divorce unlawful, and allowing it only on specifically
determined occasions. In other words, would it not be preferable for
Islam to prescribe conditions, and only allow a man to divorce a woman
in those circumstances? And if divorce were conditional, a judicial
aspect would necessarily have entered it. Whenever a man intended to
divorce his wife, he would first of all have to submit evidence before
the judiciary concerning the fulfillment of the required condition. If
the judiciary considered his proof reliable and his arguments
reasonable, he would get permission for the divorce, otherwise not.

What after all is the underlying meaning of the words: ‘the most
detestable of lawful things is divorce?’ If divorce is lawful, it is not
detestable, and if it is detestable, it is not lawful. Being detestable
and being lawful are contradictory.

Besides all this, the question is whether society, in other words, what
is called the judiciary, which represents the society, has the right in
divorce, which you say a detestable and hated, to interfere to such a
degree that it can hold back a hasty divorce and delay it so much that
the man may go back on his determination. At other times, society, that
is, this same judiciary, may realize that the marriage in question is an
incompatible one, and, that it is preferable that the relationship be
dissolved.

Divorce 3
---------

The discussion has reached the point that in the eyes of Islam divorce
is vehemently hated and detested. Islam inclines towards maintaining the
contract of steadfast and firm marriage. At this point we took up for
consideration the question as to why, when divorce is hated and detested
to this extent, Islam did not declare it unlawful. Does Islam not
prohibit every activity which is detestable like drinking, gambling and
tyranny? Why did Islam not declare divorce altogether unlawful, and why
has it not put a legal prohibition on it? What is the logic in saying
that divorce is a lawful but detestable thing? If it is lawful, what
does it mean to say that at the same time it is detested; and if is
detestable, why should it be lawful?

On the one hand Islam frowns at the man who divorces his wife, and feels
disapproval and disgust towards him, but, on the other hand, when the
man wants to divorce his wife, it puts no legal barrier up against him.
Why should this be so? This is a very relevant question. All the mystery
lies in this very point. The real secret, the crucial point, is that
marriage and the life of a husband and wife is a spontaneous
relationship and is not based upon contract; special laws have been
stipulated in nature for it. The pact is intrinsically different from
all other social agreements, such as sale agreements, leases,
conciliations, mortgages, and the power of attorney and so forth, all of
which are merely a series of social contractual agreements; one’s nature
and disposition have nothing to do with those things.

Moreover, neither have any laws in the natural or innate sense been
determined for them; in contrast to the marriage agreement, in which the
natural inclination of the two parties, which has, so to speak, a
special mechanism, should be taken into account.

For this reason, if the marriage contract has provisions which other
agreements and contracts do not have, it should not be an occasion for
surprise.

### Natural laws in the case of marriage and divorce:

In civil and social life, the natural law is the law of freedom and
equality. All social arrangements should be based upon the two
principles of freedom and equality and not anything else, unlike the
pact of marriage, for which, in nature, principles other than freedom
and equality have also been provided, and there is no alternative except
to observe these laws. Divorce, like marriage, has a law in the
framework of nature prior to any contractual, positive law. Just as in
the start of the matter and in its intermediary period, that is, during
married life, the laws of nature should be observed, so also in divorce
which is its termination, these laws must be kept in view. (We mentioned
these things in the sections on proposing, on dower and maintenance, and
especially in the e section on the differences between men and women).
To leave the matter wholly to nature would serve no purpose, for, as
Alexis Carrel has said, the biological laws pertaining to life, are like
the laws of the heavens: strict, cruel and unopposable.

Marriage is unity and coming together, and divorce is separation and
breakage. When nature has to contrived the law of pairing and union of
man and woman in such a way that from the one side there is effort to
take possession and from the other side there is giving way for the
purposes of charm and attraction, the feelings of the one side are based
on getting the person of the other and the feelings of the other side
are based on capturing the heart of the other. When nature laid the
foundations of marriage on love, unity and sympathy of feeling, and not
on the basis of working together and comradeship, and when the nature
has arranged the design of the family on the centrality of the more
delicate sex and the orbiting of the coarser sex, the separation,
disunion and breaking up of this home and the wreck of this harmonious
system should also follow a special arrangement.

In our fifteenth article, we quoted an eminent thinker as writing
“Finding a mate means for men an attack for domination and for women
giving way for the purposes of charm and attraction. The actions of man,
since he is by nature a hunting animal, are aggressive and positive and
woman is for him a prey which he must trap. Finding a partner is a
battle and a combat and marriage is possession and authority.”

The contract which is based on love and unity, and not on working
together and comradeship, cannot be forced or coerced. It is possible to
bind two individuals to work together by force of law, and they consider
their contract to work together to be based upon justice, and so, worthy
of being respected, and they will go on for a number of years working
together. However, it is impossible to order two individuals to love
each other and be sincere to each other, to command one to devote him or
herself to the other, and to consider the happiness of the other, as his
or her own happiness by force of law.

If we want such relations to exist between two individuals, we must make
use of other practical and social contrivances apart from the imposition
of legal obligations.

The natural mechanism of marriage, on which Islam has based its laws, is
that the woman should have a position of being loved and respected in
the family order. Consequently, if, for some reason, the wife has fallen
from this position and the warmth of the love of the husband for her has
cooled down and he has lost his affection for her, the foundation and
the main pillar of the family had been destroyed. In other words a
natural social unit has been destroyed by a rule of nature. Islam views
this situation with regret, but once it is evident that the natural
basis of that marriage has been destroyed, Islam cannot continue to
imagine it to exist and be alive from a legal point of view. Islam
tries, and takes specific steps to maintain the life or of a family,
that the woman should remain in the position of being loved and being
sought after, and the man in the position of the seeker, the lover,
ready to help.

Islam recommends that a woman should make herself attractive to her
husband, that she should employ her skills in new ways for her husband,
that she should satisfy her husband’s libidinal needs and that she
should not turn down his advances and thereby create complexes and
neuroses in him. Correspondingly, Islam has recommended the man to be
kind and affectionate towards his wife and to demonstrate his affection
and love for her; he should not be reticent in his love for her. The
plan of Islam in these recommendations is that the enjoyment of sex
should be confined to milieu of the family. Large gatherings should be
an environment for work and other activities, and not a focus of sexual
pleasures.

The recommendations of Islam are all grounded in this principle that
contacts between men and women outside the frame of reference of the
marriage must necessarily and definitely be morally impeccable and
without lubricity. All these things have as their sole and unique aim
that the family units of the society should be guarded and protected
from being broken up and destroyed.

### The natural status of man in family life:

In the eyes of Islam, the greatest insult for a woman is that her
husband should say to her, “I don’t love you. I hate you”, but at that
stage the law may seek to keep the woman forcibly and by compulsion in
the house of that man. Law can by compulsion retain the woman in the
house of that man, but it cannot possibly keep her in her natural
position in the conjugal environment, that is, the position of being
loved and centrality. The law has the power to safeguard the material
interests of the wife like enforcing her right to maintenance, and so
forth, but it has no power to force the husband to maintain his position
as a devoted person lovingly revolving round his wife.

So whenever the fire of the love and affection of the husband is
extinguished, the union of marriage, from the natural point of view,
subsists no more.

We are confronted with another question here. If that fire of love is
extinguished on the side of the woman, what is the situation? Does
family life continue and flourish in spite of the fact that the wife’s
warmth of affection for her husband has cooled down, or does it not? If
it does, what is the difference between a woman and a man, whereby man’s
indifference and apathy is the cause of the end of family life, while
the woman’s apathy is not the cause of its breaking up? If an end in the
warmth of a wife’s love brings family life to a stop, and if and when
the woman declares her apathy towards her husband, should we consider
the marriage to have ceased to exist and should we give the wife also
the right to divorce?

The answer is that family life depends upon the affections of both
sides, not of one. The only thing is that the psychology of women and
men is different in this respect, and we have established this point on
the authority of eminent thinkers in our previous articles. Nature has
devised the ties of the husband and wife in such a form that the part of
the woman is to respond to the love of the man. The affection and love
of a woman which is genuine and stable can only be that love which is
born as a reaction to the affection and admiration of man towards her.
So the attachment of the woman to the man is the result of the
attachment of the man to the woman and depends upon it. Nature has given
the key to the love of both sides to the man, the husband. If he loves
his wife and is faithful to her, the wife also loves him and remains
faithful to him. It is an admitted fact that woman  
 is naturally more faithful than man, and that a woman’s unfaithfulness
is a reaction to the unfaithfulness of the man.

Nature has deposited the key of the natural dissolution of marriage in
the custody of man. In other words, it is man who by his own apathy and
unfaithfulness towards his wife makes her cold and unfaithful.
Conversely, if the indifference begins on the side of the wife, it does
not effect the affection of the man, rather; incidentally it makes the
affection more acute. Consequently, the indifference of the man leads to
indifference on both sides, but the indifference the woman does not lead
to indifference on both sides. Coldness and the extinction of love in
the husband is the death of the marriage and the end of the family life,
but the wife’s coldness and the extinction of her affection towards the
husband drives her to the state of a half dead patient with a hope of
recovery. When the coldness begins on the side of the wife, if the
husband is wise and faithful, he may regain the warmth of affection of
the wife by expression of love and kindness. It a not an insult for man
to keep his disillusion beloved by force of law until she gradually
regains her affection, but it is unbearable for a woman to have to seek
the force and the constraint of the law to keep her supporter and his
love.

This is of course in such situations where the cause of the apathy of
the woman is not the immorality and cruelty of the husband. If the
husband begins to tyrannize his wife and she because of the oppression
and cruelty of her husband becomes unaffectionate towards him that is
quite another thing. We shall discuss this matter separately, man, in
connection with the second problem to be discussed, we shall put forth
our point of view that is, we shall discuss the unmanly way in which
some husbands withhold divorce. Concerning this we shall say that this
kind of men should not be allowed to take advantage of his wife and keep
her with him to be cruel to her and to tyrannize her.

Briefly, then, the difference between the man and the woman lies in the
fact that the man needs the person of the woman, while the woman needs
the heart of her husband. The affectionate support and kindness of the
husband is so valuable for the wife that without this the marriage
becomes unbearable for her.

### The view of a female psychologist:

In issue number 113 of *Zan-e ruz*, an article was published from a book
called the psychology of mothers by a French woman, Beatrice Marbeau.
According to the article, she is a psychiatrist. She is a psychologist
and psychoanalyst attached to the Paris hospitals, and is herself a
mother with three children.

In this article, a woman’s need of the love and kindness of her husband
when she is pregnant has been well explained. She says, “From the time
that a woman has the feeling that she will shortly be a mother, she
begins to watch, examine and smell the different parts of her body,
especially when it is her 1st child. This state of inquisitiveness is
very important. It is just like the state of a woman who is a stranger
to herself and wishes to discover herself. When, for the first time, the
woman feels the slight movements of her tiny child within her womb, she
begins to listen to all the sounds of her body, The presence of another
being within her body gives her such a feeling of well-being and
pleasure that she gradually seeks to be apart and alone and cuts
connections with the outer world The reason for this mental state is
that she wishes to be alone with her embryonic child who has not yet
come into this world….

“During the days of the pregnancy of their wives, husbands have a very
important job on their hands but they always, regretfully, avoid
carrying out these duties. The future mother wants to feel that her
husband understands her, loves her and supports her. Otherwise when she
sees that her stomach has swollen and her beauty is impaired, and she
feels sickness and is afraid of the delivery, she will put the blame on
her husband for all those discomforts for it was he who made her
pregnant…It is the duty of the husband to stay by the side of his wife
much more than before. The members of a family need to speak directly to
a kind father of all their difficulties, sorrows and pleasures, even if
their talk is senseless and boring. A pregnant woman very much needs to
talk about her child. All the pride and honor of a woman is in her being
a mother, and when she feels that her husband is indifferent towards the
child whom she shall soon bring forth into the world, that feeling of
pride and honor is changed into hate and futility. She begins to hate
the thought of being a mother, and pregnancy begins to mean for her
arriving at the point of death. It has been proved that mothers who have
become disillusioned in this way bear the pains of birth with very great
difficulty...

The relation of a child and its mother is not the relation of two
individuals. As a matter of fact it is the relation of three persons,
the mother, the baby and the father; and the father, even if he is
absent (he may have divorced his wife), has a basic role in the inner
life of the woman, in her ideas and thoughts, and also in her feeling of
being a mother.

These are the ideas of an eminent woman thinker who is a psychologist as
well as a mother.

### The structure which is built on affections and feelings:

Now seriously consider whether a person who depends to this extent upon
the sympathies, sincere affection, support and kindness of another
person, and who is able to endure everything on the strength of that
person’s affectionate behavior and kindness, so much so that even that
person’s own child has no proper significance without that other persons
feelings of love and affection and not just his presence, whether that
needing person can possibly be forced by law to be attached to the other
being who is man.

Is it not a mistake that, on the one hand, we provide sources to
encourage permissiveness and incentives for men to lose interest in
their wives, and everyday provide more and more circumstances to excite
sexual passions, and then, on the other hand, we want to bind wives to
their husbands by force of law? Islam has provided the conditions for
the husband to really want and love his wife, but Islam has never wanted
to unite woman and man by force.

As a general rule, whenever there is a question of the interest of the
heart, devotion, sincerity and the such like being the basic determining
factor, the force of law has no place. It may be regrettable in some
cases, but there is no point in compulsion, coercion and obligation.

For example we know that in communal prayers (*salatu ‘l- jama’ah*) the
righteousness of the Imam and the confidence of those who follow him in
prayers in his righteousness is a necessary condition. The relation of
the Imam and those who follow him in prayers is a relation which has for
its base the righteousness of the Imam and the confidence, devotion and
sincerity of those who follow him. The heart and the feelings are the
basic pillar of this relation. For this very reason this relation does
not admit of any force or coercion. The law cannot guarantee the
continuance and maintenance of this relation. If the followers in
prayers sever their connections with the Imam and their faith and
devotion is disturbed, this connection automatically breaks up,
irrespective of whether this lapse of faith and devotion is well-founded
or not.

Suppose the Imam had the distinction of having the highest degree of
righteousness, piety and competence, but he could not make people follow
him in prayers. It would be ridiculous for the Imam to approach the
court of law and complain against the people about how they have no
faith in him, and how they should not devoted to him and finally how
they do not follow him in prayers. Rather, it would be a most
contemptible thing for the Imam to compel people to follow him in
prayers by force of law.

The same is the case of members of Parliament and their constituency.
The nature of this relation is such that it should be based on a feeling
of trust and faith. A feeling of devotion and goodwill is the vital
pillar of this relation and cooperation. People must have faith, trust
und confidence in the representative whom they elect. If people do not
elect an individual, he cannot and should not force people to elect him,
even if the people are mistaken in their assessment and the man is the
most competent and deserving candidate, because the nature of
electioneering and voting is incompatible with compulsion, and such a
man cannot, on the strength of his competence, approach a court of law
with a complaint about how people, in spite of his being so-and- so did
not elect him.

What is required in circumstances like this is that the level of thought
of the people should be raised. Their education should be carried out in
the right way so that whenever they want they can perform their
religious duties in a correct way. They should find out who really are
the righteous persons, and then attach themselves to them and follow
them. When they want to perform their duties in society they should be
able to find out the competent persons, and, according to their
inclinations and loyalties, cast their votes for them. If it happens,
after some time, that people change their convictions and move towards
some other person, and have even done this without any justification for
their action, it is, no doubt, regrettable; but it is not an occasion
for compulsion and the use of force.

Family duties are just like religious duties and social duties. The main
point is that we should understand that Islam considers family life to
be a natural social unit and that for this natural social unit a special
mechanism is called for, and that it is necessary and unavoidable to
keep that mechanism within view.

One of the miracles of Islam is that it has determined what this
mechanism is. The Western world has ignored this aspect of human
relations and that is why it cannot overcome the difficulties
surrounding family affairs. Every day a new difficulty arises. However,
fortunately, scientific research is gradually bringing it to light. I am
quite sure and can confidently assert that by scientific enlightenment
the western world will gradually accept principles in the regulation of
their family life. Of course, I realize that my concept of the sound and
enlightening teachings of Islam is not what most people understand it to
be.

### It is something more than equality which strengthens the foundation of the family:

What the Western world professes to be fond of is equality, but it does
not know that Islam has already solved the question of equality fourteen
centuries ago. In the affairs of the family, which has its own order,
there is something which is superior to equality. Nature has decreed
equality only in civil social life and that is all, but in the family
unit it has designed other laws, too, besides that of equality. Equality
alone is not sufficient to regulate family relations. In relations, all
the laws of nature should be kept in view.

### Equality in corruption:

Unfortunately the word ‘equality’, has lost its true connotations and
meaning due to much repeated and excessive use. A few think that the
meaning of ‘equality’ is equality of rights, and they imagine that when
they have applied the concept of equality to one situation their work is
finished. These uninformed persons think that formerly men used to
deceive women, but that now, since women also deceive men, everything is
all right, because equality in deception has been established. In the
past, ten out of a hundred marriages were terminated by divorces and
separations which were in the hands of men, but now, in some parts of
the world, forty per cent of marriages are terminated by divorce, and in
half this number the move is made by the wives. So they should rejoice
and be happy that perfect equality has been established.

Formerly it was only the men who were treacherous to women, and it was
only men who were not God-fearing and pious. Today, fortunately, women
also commit breaches of mist and are not pious and God-fearing. What can
be better than that? Long live equality! Down with inequality! Formerly
men were the symbols of cruelty and oppression. It was they who, despite
having a few darling children, went after a new love, leaving behind the
wife and children. And now wives, long- married, after living for years
joined with their husbands in matrimony and with several children,
abandon their hearth and home with complete cruelty and faithlessness,
impressed by an introduction to another man at a party. They leave to
satisfy their desires. What a good thing. What can be better than that?
Men and women have come to stand on the same footing and equality has
been established.

Instead of remedying the endless number of social ills, reforming the
weakness of men and women, and strengthening the structure of the family
home, we are further damaging it and making it more unstable, yet we
rejoice and make merry and are perfectly satisfied that, anyhow, we are
stepping forward in the direction of equality. Perhaps our only fear is
that gradually women will gain victory over men in corruption,
perversion, heartlessness and cruelty.

It is thus clear why Islam, despite the fact that it considers divorce
to be detestable and hated, does not legally ban it. By now the meaning
of a legally permissible but detested thing should have become clear.
The question as to how it is possible for a thing to be legally
permissible but intensely detested and hated should now have been
solved.

Divorce 4
---------

From our previous discussions we hope it has become clear that Islam is
opposed to divorce and the dissolution of the family home; it is her
enemy in and Islam has resorted to various kinds of moral and social
precautions to safeguard the environment of the family against the
danger of its breaking up. Islam has used every means and every weapon
to avoid the occurrence of divorce except force and the weapons of the
law.

Islam is against the use of force and the weapons of the law to restrain
man from divorce and to keep the wife in the house of her husband. It is
considered incompatible with the position and the status which a wife
should maintain within the family. The reason for this is that the main
pillar and the foundation of home life are the affections and the
sentiments; and the person who should be the recipient, the central
object and the beneficiary of the kindness and love, and who should in
her own turn transmit this love and affection to her children is the
wife. Apathy and coldness in the affections of a husband towards his
wife makes the family environment dark and dismal. The sentiments and
the attitude of the husband towards his wife have much bearing even upon
the motherly feelings of the wife towards her children. According to
Beatrice Marbeau, whose extract we quoted in the previous section,
motherly feelings are not instinctive in the sense that in all
circumstances it follows that a mother will always have the same warmth
of feeling, not more and not less. The kindness and affection of her
husband towards her have a great effect on her maternal feelings.

The result is that wife should receive kindness and affection from her
husband so that she may be able to feed her children at the bountiful
springs of her love and affection.

The husband is like the highlands, the wife is like a spring and the
children are flowers and plants. The spring receives and stores the rain
from the highlands so that it may give rise to clean and limpid streams
which will irrigate and cause flowers, plants and meadows to flourish.
If rains do not fall on the highlands, or if they are of a kind that
does not absorb anything, the springs will dry up, and the flowers and
plants will fade and die.

So just as the main source of life for plains and fields are the rains,
especially the rains of the highlands, the main source of family life is
the kind and affectionate feelings of the husband towards his wife. It
is from these sentiments that the wife’s life as well as that of the
children is serene, bright and flourishing.

How can it be possible to have recourse to the law as a weapon and
scourge against the husband, when the sentiments and affections of the
husband towards his wife have this vital position and produce this
animating effect in the very spirit of the life of the family.

Islam is completely against unmanly divorce, by which we mean that a man
after undertaking to live with a woman as a husband, and after living
together with her for a period, takes a fancy to a new woman, or
indulges in some other aspiration, and drives away his former wife.
However, the remedy, according to Islam is not to force the unmanly
husband to keep his wife. This kind of keeping is intrinsically
incompatible with the natural law of family life.

If the wife wants to return to the house of her husband by the power of
the law and the administration, she can forcefully secure the occupation
of that house, but she cannot regain the position of the woman of that
family and be the intermediary in reviving the affections of her husband
and transmitting them to the children. She is also unable in this way to
satisfy her own inward urge to receive the devoted affections of her
husband.

Islam has endeavored to do away with unmanliness and with unmanly
divorces, and has advised men they should be generous towards their
wives and behave towards them with affection and kindness. Nevertheless,
in its capacity as law-giver, and bearing in view the position of the
woman as the centre of the family system and as the intermediary in the
receiving and transmitting of sentiments, Islam does not agree with
forcibly and compulsorily retaining the woman in the home of an
irresponsible person.

What Islam has done is exactly the opposite of what occidentals and
worshippers of the west have done and are doing. Islam vehemently fights
against the factors of unmanliness, faithlessness and promiscuity, but
it is not willing to force a woman to stay with an unmanly and faithless
person. Nevertheless, every day occidentals and those who worship the
West add to the factors which cause waywardness, promiscuity and sensual
gratification in men and then want the woman to remain with a
promiscuous, faithless and irresponsible man.

We hope it will be acknowledged that, in spite of the fact that Islam
has not forced wives to stay with undesirable persons and has set them
at liberty; it has diverted all its endeavors towards enriching the
human spirit and its decency. It has been able in fact to lower the
number of unmanly divorces by its very noticeable sense of equilibrium,
although others, who are unmindful of these matters, which resort to
force and try to get everything they want at the point of the bayonet,
have had very little success in this connection. With the exception of
these cases of divorce which take place on the initiative of wives on
the plea of incompatibility, and, in the words of Newsweek, because
women are becoming more demanding of sexual gratification……those cases
of divorce which have taken place and are still taking place there
through the capriciousness of husbands to gratify their sexual whims far
exceed in number the cases which take place in our midst.

### The nature of peace in the family is different from all other forms of peace:

Peace and amity should definitely exist between wife and husband.
Nevertheless, the peace and amity which should pervade family life are
very different from the peace and amity that should obtain between two
colleagues, two partners, two neighbors or two adjacent countries which
have common frontiers.

The peace and amity in the life of the married couple is similar to the
peace and amity that should subsist between parents and their sons and
daughters; which means generous treatment, self-denial, concern with
each other’s future, breaking down the barrier of duality, considering
the happiness of the other to be his or her own happiness and the
misfortune of the other to be his or her own misfortune. This is
different from the peace and amity that holds between colleagues or
partners, or neighbors or two countries.

The peace which we mean by the peace between colleagues and so on
signifies non-intervention in, and non-encroachment on, the rights of
each other. Between two enemy countries even ‘suspension of armed
hostilities’ is sufficient. If some third power interferes and occupies
the border-land between the two countries and hinders the armed
confrontation between the two countries, peace subsists, because a
political peace has no other meaning than non-intervention and
non-interference.

However, the peace of the family is different from political peace. In
the peace of the family, non-encroachment on the rights of one by the
other is not sufficient. An armed peace is of no avail. Something both
more advanced and more basic is needed. Unity, oneness and the union of
spirits into a single whole should be established as in the case of the
peace and amity between, fathers and sons, and something more exalted
than non intervention is necessary.

Unfortunately, because of certain historical reasons and possibly
because of its geographical position, the west is stranger to sentiments
(even within the environment of the family). In the thinking of
westerner, the peace of the family has little difference from a
political or social peace. According to the same pattern as the
accumulation of strength on the border of two countries, he makes peace.
He wants to make peace while focusing his strength on the frontier of
the lives of the wife and the husband, and he is oblivious to the fact
that the foundation of family life rests upon the dissolution of these
frontiers, upon oneness and upon considering every other power as
foreign.

Instead of diverting the attention of occidentals towards their mistaken
conception of family life and their pride in their own impressive
individuality, the worshippers of the west are so far lost in imbibing
occidental ways of life that they are utterly confused and have even
forgotten themselves. But this state of being lost to them cannot last
for ever. The time when the east will discover her own personality, rend
asunder this halter of worshipping the west, and rely on its own ways of
thought and its own philosophy, is not far off.

At this stage, it is necessary to mention two points.

**1. Islam welcomes any factor that will do away with divorce:**

Some persons may possibly have got the impression from what we said so
far, that we believe that there should he no obstacle for a man to
divorce, and that as soon as a man makes up his mind to divorce, the way
to it should be cleared for him in every respect and from all
directions. No, we never meant such a thing. What we said concerning the
Islamic view was only that there should be no recourse to compulsion and
legal force as a deterrent to prevent a man from divorce. Islam welcomes
everything which could be instrumental in dissuading a man from divorce,
and has purposely laid down conditions and has ordained hard and fast
rules which naturally have the effect of delaying, and may, in all
probability, result in dispensing with, the divorce.

Besides advising the administrators of the marriage oath (*sighah*), the
witnesses and others to make efforts to dissuade the man from divorce,
Islam has ordained that the divorce should not be considered lawful and
rightly administered except in the presence of two righteous witnesses.
This condition is for the good reason that when a divorce is to be
administered in their presence, because of their righteousness and
piety, they will try their best and make an extreme effort to bring
about reconciliation between the wife and the husband.

Despite this, the present practice is that the person carrying out the
divorce pronounces the divorce before two righteous witnesses who have
never seen the husband and the wife before and do not recognize them.
Only the names of the wife and the husband are mentioned before them.
However this is all a meaningless routine and it has nothing to do with
the viewpoint and the purpose of Islam. In our midst the practice is
that those carrying out the divorce gather two righteous persons and
pronounce the names of the wife and the husband before them, for
example, they say: “The husband is Ahmed and the wife is Fatimah; I, as
a representative of the husband, divorce the wife.” However, who are
that Ahmad and Fatimah? And have the righteous witnesses, who listen to
the pronouncement of words of divorce, ever seen them. If there arises
an occasion some day when evidence is required, could they bear witness
that the divorce of these two particular persons was administered in
their presence? Of course not I am quite sure.

In any case, one of the things which, tends to dissuade men from divorce
is the presence of these two virtuous persons, provided that the right
method is adopted. Islam has not laid down the presence of two righteous
persons as a necessary condition for marriage, which is the beginning of
the contract because it did not want to cause practical delay in a
virtuous deed. But for divorce, in spite of its being the end of the
contract, the presence of two righteous persons is laid down as a
necessary condition.

Like wise, Islam has not laid down that the woman’s monthly period of
menstruation should be an obstacle in the performance of the marriage
agreement, while it has laid down this thing as an obstacle to obtaining
a divorce, even though, as we know, menstruation (as far as the Divine
law is concerned) prevents the husband and wife having sexual
intercourse and thus has relation to marriage but not to divorce which
is the occasion of a final separation, from which time on the man and
the woman will have nothing to do with each other.

Normally speaking, Islam should have prohibited the marriage agreement
taking place during the period of menstruation, so as to avoid the
danger of an infringement of the necessary staying apart of a man and
woman who are with each other for the first time. Divorce, on the other
hand, results in separation, and menstruation is of no consequence in
this connection. Islam for all its being in favour of ‘union’ as against
‘separation’, laid down the monthly period as an obstacle to the
lawfulness of divorce, while Islam did not deem it necessary that this
period should stand in the way of the lawfulness of the marriage
contract. In some cases a period of three months during which no
intercourse took place is required before it is permissible to divorce.

It is evident that all these obstacles and hindrances are meant to
ensure that during this period the violence of passions and the
displeasure which may have contributed to the decision to divorce should
subside, that the man and the woman may have time to make amends, and
thus the divorce may be dispensed with.

Besides that, when the cause of the divorce is the displeasure of the
husband and the divorce takes place in the form of a revocable divorce,
the man is allowed period of grace called *‘iddah*, during which he can
revoke the divorce and return to his wife.

Since Islam has laid down that the expenses of the marriage, the
expenses of the period of *iddah*, and the expenses of the maintenance
of the children should be the responsibility of the man, it has there by
devised a practical obstacle to a man’s going to that length. A man who
wants to divorce his wife and marry some other woman must pay for the
maintenance of his former wife during the period of *iddah*, he must be
responsible for the expenses of the children that he may have had by the
wife he is divorcing, he must provide a dower for the new wife, and he
must once more bear the burden of the living expenses of the new wife
and the children that are born to her.

These things, in addition to the responsibility of the supervision of
the motherless children, present an awful prospect for the man who would
divorce. All these things are themselves a check on his determination to
divorce.

Over and above all these things, where there is a fear of the
dissolution and the break up of the family peace, Islam has required
that a family “tribunal” be formed and set in motion. It should be
arranged in this manner, that one individual arbiter representing the
husband and another representing the wife be chosen to investigate and
reconciliate.

The arbiters have to try their best to remove the hurdles and
differences, and if then, after direct consultation with the wife and
the husband, they discern that separation between them is the only
remedy; they can carry out a separation between them. In the event that
persons having the ability to arbitrate can be found in the families of
the wife and the husband, they are to be preferred to the others; this
is the actual saying of the Qur’an. In verse 35 of the chapter
*an-Nisa’* (The Women), the commandment comes in the following words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُوا حَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهِ
وَحَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهَا إِنْ يُرِيدَا إِصْلَاحًا يُوَفِّقِ اللَّهُ
بَيْنَهُمَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if you fear a breach between the two, bring forth an arbiter from
his people and from her people an arbiter, if they desire to set things
right; Allah will compose their differences; surely Allah is
All-knowing, All-aware.***

> The writer of the commentary al-Kashshaf, commenting upon the word
> حُكم ‘arbiter’ writes: “the person who is selected, should be
> trustworthy, influential and impressive in his talk, acceptable and
> capable of proper peace-making arbitration”. He afterwards says that
> the reason the arbiters should be selected in preference from among
> the members of the families of the husband and the wife is that
> closely related persons better know the actual position that exists
> between them. Besides that, since they are relatives, they are more
> interested in their reconciliation than strangers. Moreover, the wife
> and the husband will disclose their inner secrets better to relatives
> than to strangers. They will speak out secrets before their own kith
> and kin which they would not be prepared to speak out in front of
> strangers.

There is a difference of opinion amongst religious scholars as to
whether the setting up of the arbitration tribunal is obligatory or
merely recommended. Some eminent researchers believe that that is a duty
of the government of the day, and is obligatory. Shahid ath-Thani, in
*al-Masalik*[^4] explicitly pronounced his legal decision that the
matter of arbitration, in the manner we have mentioned, is obligatory
and necessary, and that it is the duty if the ruler always to see that
it happens.

Sayyid Muhammad Rashid Rida,[^5] the writer of the Qur’an commentary
al-Manar, after putting forth his view that the convening of the
arbitrating body is obligatory, refers to the controversy of religious
scholars concerning whether it is obligatory or recommended says: “If
there is one thing that does not exist among the Muslims it is the
taking of action according to this commandment and benefiting from its
infinite advantages. Discords and disputes take place every day.
Discords and disputes make their way into homes, but not the slightest
use is made of the principle of arbitration which is commanded by the
actual text of the Holy Book. All the energy of religious scholars is
being spent in debates and disputes as to whether it is obligatory or
recommended. None came forward to ask why, if it is obligatory or
recommended, whichever it may be; no practical steps are taken to comply
with this clear commandment? Why should all your energies be spent in
debates and quarrels? If it has been decided that no action is in actual
fact to be taken, and that people are not to benefit from its
advantages, what is the difference in its being obligatory or
recommended?”

Shahid ath-Thani[^6] says concerning the powers and the authority which
the two arbiters have that they may, for example, oblige the husband
that he should put up the wife in such and such house, or that he should
not keep his mother or his other wife in that house, not even in a
separate room, or, for example, that he should pay any dower money to
his wife which he had promised to pay in cash, or in case he had
borrowed money from her, that he should pay it back.

The purpose is that every strategy which can bring about a
reconciliation, or at least delay the divorce, is right and desirable in
view of Islam.  
 .  
 Here it is necessary to answer the question which can be put in this
form: Has society, that is, the body, whether it is called a department
or whatever, which is the representative of society, the right to
interfere in the matter of divorce, which, in the view of Islam is
detestable and disliked, with a view to preventing or delaying the
decision of the husband to divorce?

The reply is that of course it can do such a thing. The reason is that
all decisions which are taken to divorce are not indications of a real
death of the union of marriage. In other words all decisions which are
taken to divorce the wife are not due to the complete extinction of the
fire of love of the man, or the falling of woman from her natural
position, or, finally, the inability of the husband to maintain the
wife. Most decisions are taken under the influence of emotion and
rashness, and in error. By all means society may take steps to any
extent to see that decisions arising from hastiness and rashness should
not come to fruition. This is a proper step and is a thing which Islam
would welcome.

The departments who represent society should prevent the persons in
charge of the divorce court from carrying out a divorce until the
department has informed them of its failure in its attempts to bring
about reconciliation between the husband and the wife. The department
should try to make the husband and wife return to amity and goodwill,
and only if it has evidence that there is no possibility of
reconciliation and adjustment between the husband and wife, should it
issue a certificate of the non-feasibility of reconciliation and inform
the divorce court accordingly.

**2. The wife’s past services to the household:**

The other point is that in unmanly divorces, over and above the
dissolution of the sacred peace of the family, there arise special
difficulties for the wife which should not be overlooked. The wife
conducts herself sincerely while she lives for years in the house of her
husband. As she has no idea of any duality between herself and the
husband, and considers the house to be her own house and her own refuge,
she does her best and strains every nerve to furnish, equip and improve
the facilities of the home. Most women (with the exception of the modern
town woman) work hard, and take pains to economize in food, dress and
the other expenses of the house to such an extent that their husbands
disagree with them. They very often refuse to employ a home-help for
economic reasons; they sacrifice their energy, their youth and their
health for the home, their abode, their refuge, and, in reality, they do
all this for the sake of the husband. Now, suppose that the husband of a
wife like this, after years of life as a partner, takes a fancy to a new
wife and divorces the previous wife, and wishes to bring the new wife
into the refuge and home of the first wife, which was created at the
price of her life-blood, her youth, her health and her frustrated
aspirations. He wants to live in luxury with the second wife on the
product of the labors of the first wife. What is the proper course to
pursue in cases like this?

In such, situations, as mentioned above, the matter to be looked into is
not only the question of the upsetting of the peace and tranquility of
family, and the breaking up of the tie of conjugality. It is not the
place here to say that the disgraceful behavior of the husband is the
cause of the death of the union of marriage, and that forcing a woman to
remain with an irresponsible man is below the natural dignity of the
wife.

Here, there is another problem to be tackled. Here the matter of
evacuation and of being homeless and of handing over one’s own place of
refuge to an intruding rival comes in. The thing to be considered here
is a situation in which taking pains; toiling, enduring hardships and
being of service come to nothing.

Forget about the husband, the peace of the family and the cooling down
in family affections. Every human being needs a shelter, a place of
refuge, and then with the shelter and the home, which one builds up with
one’s own hands for one’s own use, one has affection and attachment. If
you turn out a bird from its living-place, the nest that it has built
for itself will naturally defend itself. Has the wife no right to defend
her refuge and home? Is such a thing not severe cruelly in the part of
the husband? What remedy has Islam provided for this aspect of the
situation?

Our view is that this complicated matter requires full attention and
careful thinking out. Most of the difficulties that result from unmanly
divorces are of this nature. It is in cases like this that divorce is
not only the dissolution of conjugality, but is rather the break down
and complete annihilation of the woman.

Nevertheless, as it was suggested in the posing of the problem itself,
the matter of housing and shelter is distinct from the matter of
divorce. These two difficult matters should be differentiated and
considered separately from each other. According to the Islamic view and
its laws, this difficulty has already been solved. It is due to an
ignorance of Islamic laws, and the taking of advantage of the good
intentions and faithfulness of wives by husbands, that this difficulty
presents itself.

The source of this difficulty is that most husbands and wives imagine
that the work and the services that a wife renders in the house of her
husband and the gains that accrue from them, belong to the man. They
believe that a husband has a right to give orders to her as if to a
slave or a laborer, and that it is obligatory on her to carry out his
orders in all and sundry matters. As we have repeatedly said, a wife has
independence in connection with household work and activities, and any
work that she does is for the benefit of herself. The husband has no
right to pose as an employer. With the full economic independence that
it has granted to woman, and, besides that, with the laying down of the
responsibility of her expenses and the expenses of her children on the
husband, Islam has given her enough leisure and the complete opportunity
to make herself economically independent of man and to obtain the means
of a respectable living.

This she should be do to such an extent that, in this regard, the
divorce and the separation cannot create any problem for her existence
.All those things which a woman may contribute to the house and her home
should be considered by her to be her own property, and the husband
should have no right to take those things from her. This kind of anxiety
exists in the system of the family, because the husband considers his
wife to be obliged to work in the house, and also imagines that the
results of his wife’s work belong to himself and not to his wife. The
anxieties which exist amongst our men too are also due to ignorance and
being unaware and unmindful of Islamic law.

The other cause of these discomforts is that husbands take undue
advantage of the faithfulness of wives. Some women, not because of
ignorance of Islamic law, but rather because they place their confidence
in their husbands, make sacrifices in their homes. They wish there to be
no question of ‘mine’ or ‘yours’ in between them and their husbands. On
these grounds, they take no notice of their rights and do not care to
take advantage of the opportunity which Islam has granted to them.
Sometimes it so happens that they are disillusioned, and they come to
know one day that they sacrificed their life for a faithless being, and
that they missed the chance to avail themselves of the right which Islam
has guaranteed them.

Such women should take care from the beginning:

*How fortunate it is that affection arises on both sides.*[^7]

If a woman rises above making use of her legal right to save and keep
money and wealth in her own custody, to make arrangement for residence
in her own name, and instead makes a gift of the energy of her work to
her husband, the husband also, according to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حُيِّيتُمْ بِتَحِيَّةٍ فَحَيُّوا بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهَا أَوْ
رُدُّوهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a fairer than it
or return it;*** (Qur’an, 4:86) should make a present of a reciprocal
amount or more to the wife as a gift. Amongst thoughtful and considerate
men, it has always been a practice, and still is, that in return for the
sacrifices and sincere services of their wives, they give something of
value, a house, or some other landed property, as a gift to their wives.

However what we want to say that the difficulty of the wife being
shelterless has no connection with the law of divorce. Any amendment in
the law of divorce will not reform or improve things in this connection.
This difficulty is related to the question of the economic independence
and non independence of the wife, and Islam has completely solved it.
This difficulty in our society arises from the unawareness of number of
women of Islamic teachings and the negligence and naivety of the others.
If women are aware, take notice, and make use of the opportunity is
granted to them in this connection, and are not so simple as to
sacrifice and waive their rights in favour of their husbands, this
difficulty is solved by itself.

Divorce 5
---------

Our worthy reader may remember that in the second part of this section
on divorce, we said that our worries about divorce came from two
directions, we said that our worries about divorce came from two
directions. One concerned the unmanly divorces arising from the
faithless and callousness of a section of men. The other is the unmanly
refraining from divorcing a wife by those men with whom there is no hope
reconciliation. They restrain themselves from divorcing only so as to
persecute the woman, and not so as to take advantage of such time to
reach a compromise.

In the two previous chapters we have discussed the first category. We
said that Islam welcomes all means that may serve as an obstacle to
unmanly divorce, and it has itself endeavored by special contrivances to
see that divorces of this description do not place. Islam is only
against the use of force for the continuation of the union of marriage.

From what has been said it is evident that a family is a living unit,
and that Islam endeavors that this living unit should continue to live.
Nevertheless, when the living entity expires, Islam regards it with
regret ad issues the permission to bury it; but Islam is not ready to
mummify its dead body with the balm of law, and does not approve of the
idea that with this mummified body there should be a display of feigned
liveliness.

The reason is now intelligible why a husband has the right of divorce.
The association of married life rests upon the pillar of spontaneous
attachment and has a unique mechanism. Creation has given the key to
strengthening it, and also the key to bringing it down and shattering
it, into the hand of man. Under the command of creation, every woman and
man has a certain disposition and certain characteristics, when compared
with each other, which cannot be exchanged and are not the same. This
disposition and these distinctive characteristics are by themselves the
root-cause of many things and one of these things is the right of
divorce.

In other words the source if this situation is the particular and
distinctive role of both man and woman in love and in their search for a
mate, and nothing else.

### The right of divorce arises from the particular role of the man in the matter of love, and is not based upon his ownership:

From here you can have some idea of the worth of the propaganda of
elements that are against Islam. These elements sometimes say that the
cause of the giving of the right of divorce to men in Islam is that it
does not acknowledge women as having the capacity to will, to desire or
to want. It considers them in the category of material things and not
persons. Islam considers man to be the owner of woman, and naturally,
according to the law “*an-nas musallatuna ‘ala amwalahum*” (people have
mastery over their property) it gives them the right to discard his
property at any time he may wish to.

it is clear that the logic of Islam is not based upon man’s ownership
and woman’s status of being owned. This much is evident, that the
rationale of Islam is too deep and too far above the level of
comprehension of these writers. Under the guiding light of revelation,
Islam has realized the secrets of the foundation and structure of the
family and family-life to which learning and science, after a lapse of
fourteen centuries, is trying to approach.

### Divorce is a release in the same way as the inherent nature of marriage is dominance:

Sometimes these people ask: “Why does divorce take the form of a
release, an emancipation? Surely it should have a judicial form.” To
these people it should be said: “Divorce is a release in the same way
that marriage is a state of dominance. If you can possibly do so, change
the natural law of seeking a mate in its absoluteness with regard to the
male and the female, remove the natural state of marriage from the
condition of dominance; if you can make the role of the male and female
sex in all human beings and animals identical in their relations, and
change the law of nature. Then you will be able to rid divorce of its
aspect of release and emancipation.”

One of these people writes, “Generally, the Shi’ite jurisconsults count
the contract of marriage as an irrevocable contract, but I wish to say
that the contract of marriage, according to Islamic jurisprudence and
the Civil Law of Iran is irrevocable only in relation to woman. As far
as man is concerned it is revocable contract, for he can any time make
the above contract ineffective and breaks the marriage pact.”

Afterwards he writes, “The contract of marriage is revocable as far as
man is concerned, jut as far as woman is concerned it is irrevocable.
This is an injustice of the law that has made woman a captive of man.
Whenever I read the wordings of sec. 133 of the Civil Law of the Royal
Land of Iran (law of the right of man to divorce), I feel ashamed in
front of Iranian women, in front of these schools and colleges and this
age of atoms, satellites and democracy.”

This gentleman, first of all, could not understand a very simple thing.
That is that divorce is different from the dissolution of marriage. When
it is said that the contract of marriage in its essence is irrevocable,
that means neither the husband and wife (with the exception of special
cases) has the right to dissolve it. If a marriage is dissolved, all its
consequences are nullified and it be comes a nullity. When in special
circumstances a marriage is dissolved, all its consequences, including
dower are eliminated. The woman then has no right to demand it.

Likewise, there is no question of maintenance for the period of
*‘iddah*. In contrast to this is the case of divorce, in which the
relation of conjugality is broken up, but the consequences of the
marriage contract are not absolutely eliminated. If a man marries a
woman and agrees to a dower of five hundred thousand tumans and after
one day’s married life wants to divorce that wife, he must pay the whole
amount of the dower and, over and above that, maintenance for the period
of *‘iddah*. If a man, after the marriage contract, but before the
consummation of marriage, divorces his wife, he must pay half the amount
of the dower, and, because a woman thus divorced is not bound by
*‘iddah*, maintenance for that period is out of question. So it is clear
that divorce is not able to nullify all the consequences of the marriage
contract; but in the case where the marriage is dissolved, the woman has
no right to claim the dower. It is thus evident that divorce is
different from dissolution.

The right of divorce being with the husband does not make marriage
incapable of being an irrevocable contract. Islam has acknowledged two
things: dissolution and divorce. The right of dissolution obtains in
such cases where there may he some defect in the man or in the woman.
This right is given to the man and also to the woman as opposed to the
right of divorce. The occasion for divorce is on the death of family
life, and this right exclusively belongs to the husband.

The fact that Islam has made a distinction between the category of
dissolution and the category of divorce and has laid down different
regulations for each of them, shows that the fact that the power of
divorce has been given to man does not arise from the intention of Islam
to favour man with a privilege.

To the above-mentioned gentleman it should be said that, so that they
need not feel ashamed in front of the schools, colleges and satellites,
it would be a good idea for them to take the trouble of receiving a
little education and learning something for once. They may then be able
to differentiate between dissolution and divorce, and they may also
become acquainted with the deep and subtle philosophy of Islam
concerning society and family life. In this way, they would not feel
ashamed in front of schools and colleges, but rather they would be able
to pass them by holding up their heads. However, we are sorry to say
that ignorance is a totally incurable disease.

### Penalty for divorce:

In some of the world’s legal systems they used to impose a penalty for
the prevention of divorce. I do not know whether there exists any such
law as this in the world at present or not. Nevertheless, records show
that in the Holy Roman Empire penalties were imposed on husbands who
divorced their wives for no good reason.

Obviously this is another manner of resorting to force but it is not
effective.

### Wife having the right of divorce as an entrusted right

At this juncture it is necessary to mention one thing. Up to this time
all our discussion has been about the fact that divorce is a natural
right peculiar to man. Nevertheless, a man can give his wife the right
of divorce as an absolute attorney, or in special circumstances on his
own behalf. This is something else which according to Islamic
jurisprudence is, acceptable, and the Civil Law of Iran has also
explicitly mentioned it.

By the way, so that the man may not waive his appointing of an attorney,
and so that he may not deny the ceding to the woman of this right, that
is, so as to give it the form of an irrevocable attorneyship, an
attorneyship of this description is usually concluded by the contrivance
of making it a binding condition in the marriage contract.

According to this condition, the woman may unconditionally, or in
special circumstances that have been specified beforehand, divorce. In
this way, from the olden times, those women who had a cause to be
anxious about some aspects of their future husbands, kept the right of
divorce, secure in their hands in the form of a binding conditions
contained in the marriage contract, and made use of it when absolutely
necessary.

Thus, in the view of Islamic Law, a woman has no inherent natural right
of divorce, but as a stipulatory right, namely in the form of a
condition contained in the marriage contract, she may have that right.

Clause 1119 of the Civil Law lays down: “The parties to the marriage
contract may put forth any condition that is not inconsistent with the
named contract in connection with the marriage contract or some other
binding contract. For example, there may be the condition: whereas the
husband marries another wife, or disappears for a certain period, or
ceases to maintain his wife, or has evil intentions against the life of
his wife, or develops a bad character so that their life together become
unbearable, the woman is an attorney and can appoint an attorney so that
after the establishing of the condition in the law- court and before the
legislature, she may consider herself divorced.”

As you see, the thing which is all the time repeated, that, in the view
of Islamic law and the Civil Law of Iran, divorce is a one-sided right
and is absolutely denied the woman, is just not true.

In the view of Islamic law, and also according to the Civil Law of Iran,
the right of divorce as a natural right is not meant for the woman, but
as stipulated and conferred right it can exist, and can be made use of
by her.

Now we have arrived at the stage where we can take up the second part of
our subject, namely the cruel and unmanly refusal of certain men to
divorce. We have to see whether Islam has provided some way for the
solution of this difficulty which is really a very problematic
situation. We shall discuss this subject under the heading of ‘Judicial
Divorce’. Meanwhile, we mention our regret that our discussion of the
first part has become so long.

Judicial Divorce
----------------

By judicial divorce we mean a divorce which is obtained through a judge
and not through the husband.

In many of the world’s systems of law, the authority of divorce is
altogether in the hands of the judges. The judiciary is the only forum
which can adjudge the plea of divorce and the dissolution of marriage.
Under those laws all divorces are judicial divorces. In our previous
sections, by taking note of the spirit of the union of marriage and the
purpose in setting up a peaceful family environment, and also by keeping
in view the position and status that a wife should have in the family
milieu, we clarified the invalidity of this approach. We have submitted
our reasons, and have shown that divorces which culminate through the
natural course of events and as a result of these events cannot depend
upon the decision of a judge.

The question a present is whether, in the view of Islam, a judge
(*qadi*) - with all the strict and stringent necessary attributes that
Islam has prescribed for him - has no right to give a divorce in any
case, situation or circumstances. Or whether under certain special
conditions that right does devolve on him, however exceptional or rare
those cases might be.

Divorce is a natural right of man, provided that he behaves in a normal
manner towards his wife. The normal behavior of a husband towards a wife
is that, if he likes to live with his wife he should look after her
properly, respect her rights and behave with love towards her. In case
there is no way in which he can continue to live with her, he should
courteously and kindly divorce her, i.e., he should not abstain from
divorcing her. He should pay what is due to her, and something over and
above that as an expression of gratitude:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَتِّعُوهُنَّ عَلَى الْمُوسِعِ قَدَرُهُ وَعَلَى الْمُقْتِرِ قَدَرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Yet make provision for them, the affluent man according to his means,
and according to his means the needy man*** **(2:236).**

And inform her about the termination of their relationship as husband
and wife. However, if the husband does not act according to the normal
code of behavior, what should be done? We mean to say that we come
across a man who does not wish to live with his wife, who neither
behaves in a congenial manner nor provides a happy and Islamic
environment for the family, nor even sets the wife free to her own fate,
who in other words, neither cares to perform the responsibilities of
married life, nor cares to take measures to create suitable situation
for his wife, nor even consents to divorce his wife, in such
circumstances what is to be done?

A normal divorce is similar to a normal childbirth, which makes natural
progress by itself, but a divorce from a man who neither performs his
duties as a husband nor consents to divorce his wife is similar to an
unnatural and abnormal birth in which, with the help of a doctor and a
surgeon, the new child has to be delivered.

### Whether some marriages are a cancer which the wife must suffer and put up with:

Now let us see what Islam says about this kind of divorce and this kind
of man. Does it still say that the matter of divorce depends completely
upon the will of the husband? If this kind of man does not agree to a
divorce, should the wife suffer and put up with it? Does Islam
helplessly wash its hands before each of them and observe this cruel
position from a far?

The belief of the majority of jurisconsults is the same. They believe
that there is no remedy for this in Islam. As if this is a sort of
cancer, and as if, by chance, some individuals are made a victim of it
and there is no remedy for them. The woman must grin and bear it till
eventually she meets her end.

In my own opinion this way of thinking is absolutely in consistent with
the accepted principles of Islam, the religion which always declares its
belief in justice, “*qiyam bi-qist*” (the upholding of justice), that
is, which considers that the real and the basic purpose of all the
prophets of God was to maintain and uphold justice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَتِّعُوهُنَّ عَلَى الْمُوسِعِ قَدَرُهُ وَعَلَى الْمُقْتِرِ قَدَرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed, We sent Our Messengers with the clear signs, and We sent down
with them the Book and the Balance so that men might uphold justice.***
**(Qur’an, 57:25)**

So, how is it possible that for such a clear and glaring justice as this
no remedy has been provided. As if it is possible that Islam has
arranged its laws in such a way that as a result of them a miserable
person would suffer like terminal cancer patient.

It is regrettable that some individuals, in spite of their admission and
acknowledgement that Islam is the religion of justice, and in spite of
counting themselves as followers of the doctrine of justice, express an
opinion like this. If it is agreed that we can ascribe an unjust law to
Islam under the excuse of ‘cancer’, there can be no grounds for raising
an objection to some other peoples oppressive law which excuses itself
as a ‘tetanus’, and someone else’s law which counts itself as
tuberculosis’, and someone else’s as ‘paralysis’, and another’s’ on some
other pretext and their excuses should therefore be acceptable.

If it is really like this, what about the principle of justice which is
the foundation stone of Islamic legislation, and what about the
establishment of justice which was God’s main purpose in sending the
prophets.

They say ‘cancer’, I say all right, let it be cancer. But if a patient
suffer, from cancer, and minor operation, if promptly done, can cure the
patient, what then?

A woman submits herself to a man as a partner for life, and afterwards
there is a change in the state of affairs, the circumstances take such a
turn that the husband takes undue advantage of his authority and also
refuses to divorce her. He takes this step only to prevent her from
marrying some suitable man, and not so as to live with her thereafter
amicably as husband and wife, and leaves her, in the words of the
Qur’an, *like someone hanging on*. No doubt, such a woman is confined
like a cancer patient, although, as a matter of fact, she suffers from a
kind of which can be cured by means of a minor operation. The patient
can become well, and can completely recover, by means of a minor
operation. This kind of operation is possible at the hands of competent
religious authorities and judges.

As we pointed out in our previous articles, one of the two difficult
problems in our society is the abstention of a section of merciless men
from divorce, and this act of severe cruelty they commit in the name of
and under the pretext of religion. These cruelties are the outcome and
an offshoot of a wrong conception of Islam, which, according to them,
says; “A woman must bear such cruelties like a terminal cancer patient.”
This has created an impression of Islam which is more harmful than any
of the evil propaganda against our faith.

In spite of the fact that the arguments concerning this matter are of a
rather technical and a specialized nature and are somewhat out of place
in these articles, I think it worthwhile to examine the factors
surrounding this subject. My object is to show the pessimists that what
Islam really says is different from the above nonsense.

### Deadlocks:

Such deadlocks as this are not limited to matters of marriage and
divorce. In other spheres of life, say, in money matters, situations
like this present themselves. Firstly, let us see what Islam has done in
matters other than marriage and divorce as regards certain difficult
situations. Did it leave them as deadlocks and as irremediable
phenomenon, or did it disregard the idea of a deadlock, and find a
remedy?

Suppose two individuals get the right of ownership by succession or by
some other way to an indivisible property like a jewel or a ring, or an
automobile, or a rare painting, and do not agree to make use of it in
partnership. Neither of them agrees to the suggestion that the property
should remain for sometime with one of them and for sometime with the
other. Neither of them is prepared to sell his share to the other
partner. Thus, they do not arrive at any mutual agreement about making
use of that thing. Also we know that if one of them makes use of it, it
depends upon the permission and consent of the other. Now, what should
be done in situations like this? Should that property be left alone
without being used and the matter be left as too complicated and
insoluble? Or has Islam provided a remedy and a solution for situations
like this?

The fact is that Islamic jurisprudence does not leave a problem like
this as insoluble. When there is a case of property not being used and
going to waste, Islam does not acknowledge the inviolability of the
right of ownership and possession. In cases like this Islam allows the
religious authority to deal with it as a matter of social welfare, to
take his decision on it as problem of dispute, despite the will and
obstinacy of the owners, and to make the correct arrangements. For
example, the article in question may be rented out, and the rent may be
divided according to their shares; or the property may be put up for
auction and the sum received may be shared between them. Anyhow, it is
the duty of the religious authority or the judge as “*wali-e
mumtani’*”[^8] to make proper arrangements. The owners of the property
may agree or may not agree; it is immaterial.

Why is the right of ownership, which is a legal right, not kept in view?
For the good reason that another basic principle is being taken into
account. The principle of preventing property from going to waste and
lying unused. Regard for ownership and possession by the owners is to be
observed, as long as that right does not lead to the waste of property
and wealth.

Suppose that the disputed item is precious stone or a sword or some
other thing like this; and that neither of the owners is prepared to
sell his share to the other partner; but suppose that each of them
agrees to break the item into two, and each one is ready to accept half
of it as his share. It means that they have gone to such a limit in
their begrudging and ill-will that they are prepared to render the
property worthless and spoil it. It is obvious that a precious stone, or
a sword, or an automobile, when is broken into two, becomes useless.
Does Islam allow this? No. Why not? Because this is a waste of property.

‘Allamah Hilli,[^9] one of the most celebrated jurisconsults in Islamic
history, said: “If they want to do an act like this, the religious
authority should prevent them from taking this step. The assent and
agreement of the owners of the property is not enough for them to be
allowed to do something like this.”

### The deadlock of divorce:

Now let us see what is to be done in the problem of divorce. If the man
has an incompatible attitude and does not grant those rights and perform
those duties, which he is bound by Islam to do, what is to be done? Some
of those duties are financial (maintenance). Some of them are moral
(courteous behavior), and some concern sexual matters (the right of
sexual relations and intercourse), If he does not grant these rights and
fulfill these responsibilities, or some of these responsibilities, and,
in spite of that, is also not prepared to divorce the wife, what course
is to be adopted. Does the maxim of (*asl-e lazim*) ‘priority of the
principle’ or (*mawrid-e ahammiyati*) ‘the matter of priority’ apply in
this case so that Islam can allow the religious authority or the judge
(*qadi*) to take proper steps, in the same way as it allowed them in the
matter of property; or does that maxim or principle not apply here?

### View of Ayatu’llah Hilli:

Hence forward I would I would like to place this discussion in the hands
of one of the first rank jurisconsults of our time, Ayatu’llah Hilli,
who lived in Najaf.[^10] This illustrious jurisconsult has given his
view on this subject in a book called *Huququ ‘z- zawjiyyah* (Conjugal
rights).

The summary of his opinions in so far as they are related to the rights
of women and limitations on men are as under:

“Marriage is a sacred contract and is at the same time a kind of
partnership between two persons, and this brings about a series of
contracts between the two of them. The peace and prosperity of each one
of them depends only upon compliance with the terms of those contracts.
Moreover, the prosperity of society as a whole also lies in their
prosperity and the performance of the terms of the contracts concluded
by each one of them.

“The main rights of the wife are maintenance, dress, sexual relations
and intercourse as husband and wife with courteous behavior. If man
neglects to perform his duties towards his wife, and also abstains from
divorcing her, what is the proper course for the wife to pursue, and how
should the husband be dealt with?

“In eventualities like this, two courses become incumbent. One course is
that the religious authority should have the right to intervene and by
granting a divorce settle the matter for good. The second course is that
the wife herself should, in the same way as the man, refrain from
performing and complying with her part of the contract.

“Now, regarding the first line of action, namely, the intervention of
the religious authority, let us see under what principle and on what
grounds the religious authority has the right to intervene in situation
like this.

‘The Qur’an in *surah al-Baqarah* (The Cow) makes the following
commandment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الطَّلَاقُ مَرَّتَانِ ۖ فَإِمْسَاكٌ بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ تَسْرِيحٌ
بِإِحْسَانٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Divorce is twice; then honourable retention or setting free kindly***
**(2:229)**

And again in *surah al-Baqarah* it is ordained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا طَلَّقْتُمُ النِّسَاءَ فَبَلَغْنَ أَجَلَهُنَّ فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ
بِمَعْرُوفٍ أَوْ سَرِّحُوهُنَّ بِمَعْرُوفٍ ۚ وَلَا تُمْسِكُوهُنَّ
ضِرَارًا لِتَعْتَدُوا ۚ وَمَنْ يَفْعَلْ ذَٰلِكَ فَقَدْ ظَلَمَ نَفْسَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“And when you divorce women, and they have reached their term, then
retain them honorably or set them free honorably; and do not retain them
by force, to transgress; whoever does that has wronged himself***
**(2:231)**

“From these verses a general principle can be deduced and that is that
every man in family life should make a choice between two alternatives:
either he must fulfill all rights and perform all duties politely
(‘honourable retention’) or break the tie of the union and set the woman
free (‘setting free kindly’) Any third possibility that he may neither
give her rights properly and politely nor divorce her, is not known in
Islam. The phrase: *And do not retain them by force to transgress*
negates this very possibility.

“It is not unlikely that the above phrase may connote a general rule;
that is, it may include those cases when a husband intentionally and out
of negligence makes the life of his wife difficult and miserable, and it
may also include those cases where, in spite of the husband not being at
fault intentionally, as far as the matter of honourable retention is
concerned, there is nothing but loss and hurt for the wife.

“Although these verses were revealed in connection with the period of
‘*iddah* and the revocation of divorce or its non revocation by man, and
throw a light upon the proper course of action for him, yet he is
advised that the revocation must be with the intention of behaving
considerately and looking after the wife and not of harming or hurting
the poor woman. Nevertheless, it is not limited exclusively to that
occasion. It lays down a general principle, and lays down the rights of
a wife for all times and in all conditions. It signifies that a husband
should choose for himself one of the two above-mentioned alternatives,
and that there is no third course possible for him.

“Some juristconsults are involved in an error at this very juncture, and
have thought that these verses are exclusively about those men who want
to revoke the divorce within the period of *‘iddah*. No, that is not so.
These Verses shed a light on the duties of all husbands in all
circumstances, in respect of their wives. Our argument concerning this,
besides the sequence and trend of the verses is that the Holy Imams have
expounded and cited these verses on occasions other than ‘*iddah*. For
example, Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said, concerning a man who makes a vow of
“*ila’*” (which means that somebody declares on oath that he will not
have sexual relations with his wife for four months or more) that he
must, after the four months have passed, either break his oath and make
atonement, or else he must divorce his wife, for the good reason that
God commands, *honourable retention or setting free kindly.*

“On another occasion, when a man had appointed another man as his
attorney to make a marriage contract with a woman on his behalf and to
fix a dower, the attorney complied with the request but the man who had
appointed him as his attorney afterwards denied having given him that
authority. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said that for that woman there was no
obstacle to her choosing another husband. Nonetheless, if that man had
really made another person his attorney and the marriage that took place
was through a rightful attorney, the who appointed the attorney must,
for the sake of God, divorce that woman and must not let her go without
a divorce. The Imam said, ‘because God in the Qur’an commands: *then
honourable retention or setting free kindly*’. Thus, it is clear that
the Holy Imams pave treated this verse as a general principle, and not
limited it to specific occasions.

“When a man neither performs the duties which he must perform as a
husband, nor divorces his wife, the religious authority should call the
husband. Firstly, he should ask him to divorce his wife. If he does not
divorce her, the religious authority should divorce them. In a
tradition, related by Abu Basir, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘If there is
anyone who has a wife and does not arrange for her dress and does not
provide her maintenance, it is obligatory on the leader of the Muslims
to enforce a separation between them (through divorce).’”

This was a very short summary of the views of a contemporary first-rank
jurisconsult. Anyone who wants to study his views in detail may go
through the book *Conjugal Rights,* which is a compilation of his
lectures for his students.

As you have seen, the phrase retention honorably or setting free kindly
is a principle and a general rule in the frame of which the Holy Qur’an
has inscribed the rights of wifehood. Therefore, under this principle,
and in accordance with the emphasis with which the phrase *and do not
retain them by force to transgress* is ordained; husbands are not
allowed in any case to take undue advantage of their authority. A man is
not allowed to keep his wife by force if he has no intention of living
amicably with her and only wants to keep her in distress and prevent her
from marrying another man.

### Other arguments and citation:

Besides, the references and arguments which have been mentioned in the
book Conjugal Rights there are other, more convincing arguments and
references to support our viewpoint. On the strength of those arguments
we arrive at the conclusion that in the view of Islam the Qur’anic
phrase *retention honorably and setting free kindly* is a general and
absolute principle. Within that framework the rights of women can be
read and should be observed. The more a man studies the pros and cons of
this point, the more clear he will find it, and the more intensely he
will realize the soundness of the regulations of the sure religion of
Islam.

In *al-Kafi,* vol.5, p. 205, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا أراد الرجُل أن يتزوَّج المرأة فليقُل: أقررتُ بالميثاق الذي أخذ
الله: إمساكُ بِمعرُوفٍ أو تسريحٍ بِإحسان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Which means that whenever a man wants to marry a woman he should say:  
 “I acknowledge the promise which God has taken from me that I will
retain the woman honorably or shall set her free with kindness.”

In verse 21 of Surah an-Nisa in Holy Qur’an it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَيْفَ تَأْخُذُونَهُ وَقَدْ أَفْضَىٰ بَعْضُكُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ
وَأَخَذْنَ مِنْكُمْ مِيثَاقًا غَلِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How shall you take it, when each of you has been privily with the
other, and they have taken from you solemn compact?***

The Sh’ite and Sunni commentators both agree that by ‘solemn compact’ is
meant the same covenant that God has taken from men with the phrase:
retention honorably or setting free kindly, This is the same promise
about which Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said that, on the occasion of marriage,
the man should promise and acknowledge: *retention honorably or setting
free kindly.*

There is a well-knowing *hadith* of the Prophet which he said on the
occasion of his last hajj (*hajjatu ‘l-wida* ‘) and which the Shi ‘ah
and Sunni have both related:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتقوا الله في النساء فإنكُم أخذتُمُوهُنًّ بِأمانة الله واستحللتُم
فُروجهُنَّ بِكلمة الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“O people! Keep Allah in mind and fear Him in respect of women,
because you have taken them as trust from Allah and you have made lawful
their chastity for yourselves by the word of Allah.”**

Ibn al-Athir[^11] in *Kitab an-nihayah* said: “by word of Allah”, which
the Holy Prophet said, and by which the chastity of women becomes
judicial, is the same as that which is expressed in the Qur’an by the
phrase: *retention honorably or setting free kindly.*

### The view of Shaykh at-Tai’ifah:

Shaykh at-Tai’fah at-Tusi[^12] in the book *Khilaf*, vol.2, p.185 after
expressing his view regarding ‘impotence’, said that after it is proved
that a man is impotent, the wife has the right to dissolve the marriage
and there is consensus of opinion of the learned on this point. At that
juncture he said: “and also it has been argued on the grounds of the
verse retention honorably or set her free kindly, that, because an
impotent man is unable to retain his wife honorably and properly, he
should set her free”

From all this it can be understood for certain that Islam never allows a
deceitful man to take undue advantage of the right of divorce, and
retain a woman as a prisoner.

However, from what has been said it should be understood that not
everyone who calls himself a *qadi* has the right to interfere in
matters like this. In the eyes of Islam, there are very serious and
stringent conditions to fulfill to be eligible and to be competent as a
*qadi* However, this is not the occasion to define and explain them.

The other point which requires due attention is that from the Islamic
standpoint, in spite of all Islamic efforts to maintain the peace of the
family, the occasion for judicial divorce only occurs in very rare,
exceptional and uncommon cases. Islam never allows divorce to take the
form which it has taken in Europe and America, examples of which we read
daily in the newspapers. For example, a wife complains and demands a
divorce from her husband on the ground that he does not appreciate the
film which she likes most, or that her husband does not kiss Fifi, her
dear dog, or other ludicrous matters like this, which are manifestations
of the breakdown of human values.

The worthy reader will, we hope, have fully understood, by what we have
said in these few articles, the points which we raised and set down to
be thought over at the beginning of our section. In this section we have
detailed five points regarding divorce the following order:  
 1. The unimportance of divorce and the lifting of all moral and social
checks and hindrance from control over divorce.  
 2. The concept that all marriages are eternally binding, and that
divorce is not permissible for any reason. (The view of the Catholic
Church)  
 3. That marriage can be terminated by the man, but not by the woman in
any circumstances.  
 4. That marriage should be terminable by the man as well as by the
woman under special conditions, and that the way to put this into
practice should be one and the same for both of them.  
 5. That recourse to divorce should be open for man and for woman too.
It should not be altogether barred, but the door by which the husband
should come out of the marriage should be is different from the door for
the wife.

We have said in this section, that Islam approves the fifth viewpoint.
From what we have said regarding the conditions at the time of the
conclusion of the marriage contract and also on the subject or judicial
divorce, it is, we hope, clear that, although Islam does not recognize
divorce as taking the form of a natural right for woman, yet it has not
altogether barred the way for her and has provided special doors for
her.

On the subject of judicial divorce, we could have said more in the light
of the guidance of the Imams and the jurisconsults of all the sects of
Islam, and how, according to those views, laws are enforced in all the
countries of Islam. Anyhow, we think that what we have said in these
articles will suffice.

[^1]: Kitab al-Kafi, one of the most authoritative collections of hadith
in both usul (principles of faith) as well as fiqh (jurisprudence)
compiled by Abu Jafar Muhammad ibn Ya‘qub ibn Is’haq al-Kulayni during
the lifetime of the twelfth Imam. This particular hadith is in vol. 6,
p.54 of the Tehran edition.

[^2]: Al-Hasan ibn al-Fadl ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Fadl at-Tabarsi (d.
548/1154), expert in the science of Hadith.

[^3]: Imam Hasan, the second Imam, brother of Imam Husayn.

[^4]: See note \#1 under “Freedom in determining one’s future”

[^5]: Muhamnad Rashid Rida (1865-1935), Muslim scholar who spearheaded
an intellectual response to the encroachment of western values in Muslim
countries. He published the newspaper al-Manar which published his
Tafsir al-Manar in installments and which promulgated the views of the
new Islamic reformist perspective of himself and his intellectual
predecessors Muhammad ‘Abduh and Jamalu’d-Din al-Afghni. His commentary
was published in twelve volumes (incomplete, up to surah Yousuf) in
Cairo (Tr.)

[^6]: See note \#1 under “Freedom in determining one’s future”

[^7]: Quotation, from the quatrains of the famous Iranian poet Baba
Tahir Hamdani

[^8]: “wali-e mumtani” (the guardian of withheld rights) is the name for
the religious authority in his position as the restitutor of a right
which one person claims from another when the latter will not give that
right.

[^9]: Jamalu’d-Din Hasan ibn Yusuf ibn ‘Ali ibn al- Mutahhar al-Hilli
(648/1250 — 726/1325). Apart from his studies in law, theology and usul
(principles of faith), he also studied philosophy with Nasiru’d-Din
at-Tusi, whose Tajrid he commented on (Sharh Tajrid al-i’tiqad). He
wrote more than 500 works altogether. His move to Iran in 708/ 1305 and
conversion of the Il-Khanid of Iran from Sunnism to Shi’ism was one, of
the, factors in determining Shi’ite Islam as the official religion of
Iran.

[^10]: The centre of Shi’ite religious education in Iraq and the resting
place of Imam Ali (a.s). (Tr.).

[^11]: Abu’s-Sa‘adah Majdu ’d.Din al.Mubarak ibn al-Athir
(544/1149-606/1210) worked in Mosul for its ruler and compiled a
collection of sayings and acts of the Holy Prophet called an-Nihayah fi
gharibu ’l-hadith wa ’l-athar.

[^12]: Shaykh at-Ta’ifah Abu Ja‘far Muhammad ibn al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali
at-Tusi (385/995- 460/1076). The greatest Shi’ite jurisconsult of the
5th / 11th century, whose title, Shaykh at-Ta’ifah means “the Chief
Scholar of the Shi’ite Sect.” His book Kitab al-khilaf fi’l-fiqh is a
comparison of the difference sects of Islam in the domain of
jurisprudence.


