Publishers Foreword
===================

**In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful**

The famous Islamic writer, the great scholar, the late Shaikh Murtadha
Mutahhari, may Allah bestow His mercy on him, was one of the most
celebrated authors in Iran, who had the ability to put forward in the
clearest way Islamic ideas pertaining to principles and law. Allah gave
him both the power to think originally and the ability to explain his
thoughts in an immediately understandable way in every subject he
tackled, he was able to cover it comprehensively from all aspects; and
those powers enabled him to reach his great position among Islamic
writers in Iran. The extent of the loss to Muslims on his death is to
the same degree as the benefit to them of his writings, all of which are
at a high level of originality.

It is a great pity that readers who are not acquainted with the Persian
language are prevented from a direct contact with the works of Allamah
Mutahhari, so our Organization has decided to endeavor to the best of
their ability to translate and publish them. There is no strength and
power except with Allah. We have previously published the translation of
*Wilayah, The Station Of The Master* and now we are presenting the
second of his books to be translated *Nidam-e-huquq-e- zan dar Islam*
(The rights of Women in Islam), praise be to Allah.

For the information of our reader this book was first of all given to a
translator abroad and then this translation was examined by someone who
has a first- hand knowledge of both the English language and literature
and who was fortunately acquainted with Persiàn, who went through every
page correcting it and making necessary addition and footnotes. In some
places where the first translator had not understood the text, the
translation was done again from the original.

We can thus say with praise to Allah, that we have spared no effort in
the translation of this work. We can only pray to Allah that He make
this translation as beneficial to the readers as He has made the
original. We beseech Allah to inspire us with goodness and guidance to
keep us away from error and fault. For He is the best guide, the best
helper.

World Organization For Islamic Services  
 (Board of writing, Translation and Publication)  
 29/8/1400 AH  
 12/7/1980 AD  
 Tehran — Iran


