Preface
=======

The requirements of our age is to make it necessary to examine and weigh
once more many matters about which it is no longer enough to accept the
old assessments. The system of family rights and responsibilities is one
of these matters.

In this age for reasons to be pointed out later, it has been commonly
supposed that the basic questions in this area are the liberation of
Women and the equality of their rights with men. All other problems are
off-shoots of these two matters.

However, in our opinion the most fundamental problem concerning the
system of family rights, or at least one which is on the same level as
the basic problems is to decide whether the family system is independent
of other social systems, and whether it employs a special logic and
special criteria different from the logic and criteria of any other
social institutions; or whether no kind of disparity exists between this
social unit and other social units. Do the very same logic, the very
same philosophy, and the very same criteria govern this unit as govern
other units and institutions?

The root cause of this doubt is, on the one hand, that the two main
parties of this unit are the two different sexes, and, on the other
hand, there is the succession of sons and daughters.

The creative process has established the members of this unit with
dissimilar and unequal dispositions, and with differing and with
differing qualities and temperaments. The social structure of the family
is one which is semi- innate and semi-conventional, that is to say it
occupies an intermediary position between an instinctive social
structure, like that of bees and ants, all of those whose behavioral
limits, rights and laws are determined by nature, and a social structure
based on convention, like that of human civic society which has a
smaller ‘natural’ or instinctive component.

The ancient philosophers, as we know, counted the philosophy of family
life as an independent branch of “practical philosophy”, and believed
that this department of human life had a separate logic anti criteria.
Plato in his Republic, Aristotle in his Politics, and Ibn Sina
(Avicenna) in his ash-Shifa’, has all dealt with this subject from this
perspective and from this angle.

As regards the rights or women in society, a doubt and questioning also
arises, of course, as to whether the natural and human right of men and
women are identical, or not identical. In other words, whether creation
and nature, which has granted one series of rights to mankind, has
arranged these rights bisexually or unisexual; whether being male or
female is relevant to social rights and responsibilities or whether
these rights are the same for both sexes in the eyes of nature and in
the logic of Creation.

In the western world, subsequent to the seventeenth century, there was a
movement in the area of social affairs, which took place in the wake of
scientific and philosophical developments, and which wail under the name
of ‘Human Rights’. The writers and thinkers of the seventeenth and
eighteenth century propagated their own ideas regarding ‘natural,
intrinsic and undeniable human rights with admirable tenacity. Rousseau,
Voltaire and Montesquieu were among this group of authors and thinkers.
Human society in general is deeply indebted to them. It may even be
claimed that human society is no less indebted to them than to the great
discoverers and inventors.

The basic point to which this group gave their attention was that a
human being by his nature and by reason of his birth and disposition,
possesses a series of rights and liberties. No person or group can, by
any means or under any pretext, deny these rights and liberties to any
individual or people. The owner of these rights himself cannot, by his
free will and inclination, transfer them to anybody else and strip
himself or deprive himself of them. Everybody, whether he is a ruler or
ruled, white or black, rich or poor, is equal and alike with regard to
these rights and liberties.

This intellectual and social movement bore its fruits firstly in England
and then in America and afterwards in France through revolutions,
changes in the form of governments, signatures to petitions and
gradually these ideas spread to the other countries of the world.

In the nineteenth century new ideas with regards to the economic, social
and political rights of human beings sprung up, and other changes took
place which culminated in the appearance of socialism and the
requirement of an allocation of a share in profits to the proletariat,
and the transfer of government from capitalists to those who defended
the working class.

Up to the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth
century, what was said about human rights and what practical steps were
taken were connected with the rights of the people with respect to
governments, or else with the rights of the worker and the proletariat
with respect to the employer class and the overlords. But in the
twentieth century, the question of the rights of women as opposed to the
rights of men arose, and, for the first time, in the “Universal
Declaration of Human Rights”, which was drawn up after the second
World-war in 1948 by the United Nations Organization, the equality of
women and men was explicitly declared.

In all the social movements of the west, from the seventeenth up to the
present century all ideas centered around two things: liberty and
equality. Keeping in view the fact that the movement for women’s rights
in the west followed the same sequence as the other movements, and
although the history of women’s rights in Europe was full of
extraordinary hardships as far as their liberty and equality was
concerned, still in this case also, nothing other than, ‘liberty and
equality’ was discussed.

The pioneers of this movement considered the liberty of women and the
equality of their rights with those of men to be the completion and
fulfillment of the movement for human rights that had been the central
idea since the seventeenth century.

They claimed that without securing the liberty of women and establishing
equal rights for them and men, any reference to human rights and freedom
was meaningless. Moreover, they believed that all difficulties within
the family arose from the absence of freedom for women and the
inequality of the rights of women and men, and that with the securing of
this objective all difficulties in the family would be solved in one
swoop.

In this new departure, that which we call “the fundamental question is
the system of family rights”, that is the question of whether this
system is naturally an independent system with its own logic and
standards separate from the logic and standards social institutions or
not, was entrusted to oblivion. That which engaged people’s minds was
the extension of the principles of the liberty and equality of women
with respect to men. In other words, in the matter of the rights if
women, also, the only topic for discussion was the “natural,
inalienable, irrevocable rights of man”, and nothing more. Everything
resolved around the one matter that man and woman are partners in
humanity, that woman is a genuine human being, and must therefore enjoy
the alienable and undeniable rights of a human being, just as a man, and
in equality with him.

In some of the, chapters of this book there is a thorough discussion of
the sources of natural rights, and we have proved there that the basic
foundation of natural rights is nature itself. If the human being enjoys
certain special rights which the horse, the sheep, the bird, and the
fish do not share with him, it is due to his nature, origin and
creation. If all human beings are equal in natural rights and every one
of them must live in “liberty”, it is an order issued in the text of
creation itself. There is no other proof. The intellectuals who were
supporters of equality and liberty as the natural rights of human beings
likewise had other argument than this.

Now let us see why the matter which we have called the fundamental
question in the system of family rights has not attracted attention. Has
it been discovered in the light of modern science that the difference
and variation between man and woman is a simple difference in
constituent organs and that this has no effect on their fundamental
physical and spiritual structure, the rights which are dependent upon
it, and the responsibilities which it engenders? And is this why no
separate chapter has been opened for them in modern social philosophies?

It so happens that circumstances are just the opposite. In the light of
modern discoveries and advances in the biological and psychological
sciences, the differences between the two sexes have become clearer and
better documented. In some of the chapters of this book we have
discussed this, and have quoted the research findings of biologists,
physiologists and psychologists.

It is a cause for amazement that in spite of all this, the basic problem
has altogether been left to oblivion.

The origin of this neglect is, perhaps, that these developments took
place very precipitately, and the result was that, although it took
certain misfortunes away from woman, it brought, as a gift, other
sufferings and misfortunes for her and for the whole of society. We
shall, in the chapters of this book, see that woman in the west was
deprived of even the simplest and most common-place rights up to the
early part of the twentieth century, and that only at the beginning of
the twentieth century did western man begin to think of redressing the
situation; and since this movement was the tail end of other movements
in the field of “equality” and “liberty”, they expected every miracle to
come from the spirit of these two words.

They ignored the fact that equality and liberty depends on the relations
of human beings with one another, and from the fact that they are human
beings. In academic terminology: “Equality and freedom are the right of
man according to his degree of being man.” Because woman is human being,
she is created free like all other human beings, and so she shares in
equal rights. But woman is a human being with particular conditions, and
man is a human being with other conditions. Man and woman are equal in
their being human, but they are two kinds of human being with two kinds
of characteristics and two kinds of psychology.

This difference is not the result of any geographical, historical or
social factors; rather it is sketched out in the very plan of creation.
Nature had a purpose in these two different conditions, and so whatever
step is taken against nature and the order of things is bound to produce
an undesirable toll. Just as the liberty and equality of human beings,
both men and women, has been revealed to us from nature, so we must look
to nature to inspire us concerning the uniqueness or the duality of the
right, of women and men, and also as to whether the family unit is at
least a semi-natural social unit, or not.

One point at least can be sketched out is the bisexuality of animals,
including man, merely accidental, or is it a part of the plan of
creation? Is the dissimilarity in the two sexes merely on the basic
level of constituent organs; or, in the words of the French biologist
Alexis Carrel is every one of the cells of a human being a sign of his
or her sexuality? Do man and woman each have their own special mission
in the logic and language if innate disposition? Are rights unisexual or
bisexual? Are morality, and being brought up, uni-sexual or bi-sexual
matters? What about punishment? What about responsibilities and
vocations?

In this development, it was forgotten that there are other matters
besides equality and liberty to be taken into consideration. Equality
and liberty are necessary conditions, but they are not sufficient. An
equality of rights is one thing, but an identicalness of rights is
something else. The equality of the rights of man and woman from the
point of view of their material and spiritual value is one thing but
their parity, uniformity and identicalness is another thing. In this
development, intentionally or unintentionally, ‘equality’ is taken to
mean ‘ identicalness’ and ‘equivalence’ or ‘uniformity’, Quality has
been eclipse by quantity in the attempt to remember woman’s ‘man-ness’,
her ‘woman-ness’ has been, forgotten.

This inadvertence, in fact, cannot be counted merely as a philosophical
inattentiveness arising out of undue haste. There were other factors at
work also that wanted to take advantage of this ‘liberty’ and ‘equality’
of women.

One of those factors was that the aspirations of capitalists were
involved in this current. Because factory owners wanted women to be
attracted horn from their homes to the factories, and because they
wanted to benefit from their economic power, they took up the banner of
the rights of women, their economic independence, their liberty, the
equality of women’s rights with those of men and it was only these
people who could give these demands a legal acceptance.

In chapter nine of his ‘The pleasures of Philosophy’, after quoting some
of the contemptuous ideas of Aristotle, Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, and
some of the holy books of the Jews about women and after pointing out
that although the liberty of women was also talked about during the
French Revolution, without there being any practical change in their
position, Will Durant remarks: “Until 1900 or so a woman had hardly any
rights which a man was legally bound to respect.” (p.131).

He then writes about the causes for the change in the status of women in
the twentieth century: “The emancipation of ‘woman’ was an incident of
the ‘Industrial Revolution’. He continues in his own words: They (women)
are cheaper labor than men; the employer preferred them as employees to
the more costly and rebellious males. A century ago, in England men
found it hard to get work, but placards invited them to send their wives
and children to the factory gate… The first legal step in the
emancipation of our grandmothers was the legislation of 1882, by which
it was decreed that thereafter the women of Great Britain should enjoy
the unprecedented privilege of keeping the money they earned.[^1]

It was a highly moral and Christian enactment, put though by the
factory-owners in the House of Commons to lure the ladies of England
into attendance upon their machines. From that year to this the
irresistible suction of the profits motive has drawn women out of the
drudgery of the home into the serfdom of the shop.” (*ibid*. pp.131—132)

The development of mechanization and the ever-increasing growth in
production at a rate greater than the level of the actual needs of
people, the necessity of persuading consumers through thousands of
deceptions and frauds, the urgency with which all auditory usual,
psychological, sensory, aesthetic, artistic and venal means to transform
man into an involuntary agent of consumption, further required that the
capitalist should take advantage of woman’s existence; not of woman’s
physical strength or her work power as a simple worker sharing with man
in production, but rather of her power to attract with her beauty, by
trading in her honor and respect, through her power to entice, to
captivate minds and wills and to transform them, to impose consumption
on consumers. It is clear that all this was done in the name of her
‘liberty’ and her becoming ‘equal’ with man.

Politics also did not lag behind in making use of this factor; one can
read the circumstances of this regularly in newspapers and magazines. In
all these things, the existence of woman is exploited and woman is used
as a means for accomplishing the aims of man: and all this under the
cover of ‘liberty’ and ‘equality’.

Clearly the young man of the twentieth century did not fail to avail
himself of this precious opportunity, He stopped taking on the
traditional responsibilities with regard to women, and made the seeking
of a partner something cheap and gratuitous, seizing her in his talons.
Then they shed more crocodile tears than before over the misfortunate of
women and the unjust discrimination against her. And, finally, so as to
avail themselves more fully of the pleasures of this world they delay
their marriage until they are forty and later; and then even prefer to
remain bachelors.

There is no doubt that our century has removed a whole series of
misfortunes from women, but the point is whether, it has not actually
brought another series of misfortunes as a gift. What is the reason for
this? Is woman condemned to one of these two calamities, and forced to
choose one of them, or is there nothing to hinder her from banishing her
old misfortunes, as well as the new misfortunes?

The fact is that there is no compulsion or inevitability. The
misfortunes of the olden days were mostly caused because the fact that a
woman is a human being was forgotten, and her modern misfortunes are
because, intentionally or otherwise, the womanliness of a woman, her
inborn tendencies and nature, her mission, the axis around which she
turns, her instinctual needs and her special capabilities are totally
ignored.

It is really strange that whenever the dissimilarity in the innate
characteristics and nature of women and men is brought up, a section of
people interpret this as meaning the defectiveness of woman and the
perfection of man, and ultimately as something which necessitates a
series of benefits for man and a series of privations for woman,
forgetting that defectiveness and perfection is not under consideration.
The scheme of creation did not seek to create one perfect and the other
imperfect.

After their logical and wise interpretation, these people exclaim “All
right, since nature was so cruel to woman, and created her weak and
imperfect, should we aggravate the situation and add injustice to
injustice? If we consign woman’s natural disposition to the realms of
oblivion, will we not make her more human?

The situation, incidentally, is just the reverse. Indifference towards
the natural and innate disposition of woman has entailed the violation
of her rights. If man confronts woman and tells her: “Now you are one
and I am one. All task, duties, profits, rewards and punishments will be
alike and equal, and in all difficult, heavy work you will be my partner
and receive compensation in proportion to your work force; do not expect
any special respect and support from me; be responsible for all your
living expenses; share with me the expenses of children; defend yourself
against all dangers and perils; spend as much on me as I do on you……”,
that is, the occasion for woman to throw in the sponge, because her
labor strength and productive power is naturally less than that of a
man, and the drain on her earnings is more.

Besides, her monthly period, the inconveniences to her during pregnancy,
the difficulties of labor and the bringing up of the child, have all
placed her in a situation where she is under the protection of man with
fewer responsibilities and more rights. This is not confined to human
beings alone: all animals that live in pairs behave like this. In all
these species the male instinctively rises up to protect his female
partner.

If the natural and innate disposition of both sexes is kept in view, and
their equality in being human and in the shared rights of humanity is
remembered, then woman will find herself in a very favorable position
neither will her person nor will her personality be crushed.

Because of inattention we find that the natural, innate circumstances or
the two sexes are forgotten and in the end everything depends on liberty
and making things equals; it would be hotter to look at those people
who, prior to us, started out on this mute, and have reached the end,
and see what they have said and written.

In the magazine *Khandaniha* (“Things Read” no 79, year 34,4th Tir,
1353) there is an article from Mahnamah Shahrbani under the title of
“The Adventures of Women Workers in American Society”. It has been
translated from a magazine called Coronet.

This article is detailed and is worth reading. It begins with the
grievances of one woman. The writer describes how, in the name of
equality between man and woman, the allowances that used to be made for
women workers no longer exist. For example, they used not to be required
to lift any weight more than 25 lbs (12 kilos) while there was no such
limit for men workers. She says: the working conditions in the General
Motor Factory, in Ohio State, or, to give it a better name, the place
where, at present, 2,500 women are toiling in wretched conditions, have
been changed ….” ‘The said woman describes herself attending to a very
powerful steam-engine or cleaning a 12 kilogram metallic oven which,
shortly before, a strong muscular man had set in its place, looked at it
and said to himself: “I am all worn out!” She says that every minute she
has to lift up onto a hook a 25 to 50 inch lever weighing over 35 lbs.
Her hands are always swollen and aching.

This article afterwards narrates the grievances, anxieties and
apprehensions of another woman, whose husband is a sailor in the navy.
Recently the Admiral took the decision that a number of women would be
employed to work on board a man’s ship. She writes: “Meanwhile the naval
authorities sent a ship on duty with 40 women and 480 crew. When the
ship returned after her first mixed sea voyage to the port, the
excitement and anxiety amongst Crew members was such that an inquiry was
held, and it was soon discovered that not only had many love affairs
developed during the voyage but that most of women had also had sexual
relations with several man, not just one.”

The article continues that in the State of Florida the worry after
‘liberation’ was that widows would suffer, because one of the judges of
that State, called Thomas Testa announced that the law that exempted
widows from paying income-tax on sums up to 500 dollars was null and
void. The judge considered that this particular law amounted to a
discrimination against men.

Then it says that Mrs. MacDaniel has aching hands, Mrs. Stone (whose
husband is a sailor) is anxious and apprehensive, and the widows of
Florida have been fined; all of them have had their taste of freedom.
For a large number of them the question arises as to whether women have
lost more than they have gained. As of now there is no purpose in
further discussion because the game has already started, and the
spectators have just managed to find their seats. It has been resolved
that this year (1974) the twenty- seventh amendment in the Constitution
of America be passed, and according to that amendment the showing of any
preference on the basis of sex becomes illegal. Thus the assertions of
Dr, Rosku Bavand, Professor of Harvard Law College, that the freedom of
women will be the source of regrettable results for the situation of
women’s law in America, will come true.

One of the senators from North Carolina, Mr. G. Irwin, after studying
mixed American society were rights were equal declared that family laws
should all be changed. No man should any longer be held legally
responsible for covering family expenses.

The magazine writes that Mrs. McDaniel says that one of the
women-workers, because of lifting a heavy weight, became afflicted with
inner bleeding. “We want to return,” She says, “to our previous
position. We want men to treat us as women and not workers”. She adds
that it is a very simple matter for the upholders of women’s liberation
to sit in their plush drawing rooms and declare that men and women are
equal, because they have never visited any factories. They do not
realize that most if the wage-earning women of America must like
herself, work and drudge in factories. She further says that she does
not want this equality, because she cannot carry out the job which is
meant especially for men. Men are physically stronger than women, and if
she were called upon to complete in work with them and her work were
compared, she would prefer, on her own behalf, to leave the work. The
concessions which the women-workers of Ohio have given up are more than
the privileges and benefits which they got through the law of protection
for workers. She finally says that women have forsaken the individuality
of womanhood and that she cannot understand what they have gained since
their ‘liberation’. It is possible, of course, she says, that the
position of a limited number of women may have improved but working
women are decidedly not amongst those.

This was a short summary of the article. From the contents of the
article it is evident that these women, because of the troubles that
have been imposed on them in the name of liberty and equality, have lost
patience to such a degree that they are now the enemies of these two
words, little understanding that these two words are not evil in
themselves. Woman and man are two stars in two different orbits.

***It is not for the Sun to over take the Moon, nor does the night
outstrip the day. They float each in a heaven.*** ***(Qur’an 36:
40)***[^2]

The basic condition for the happiness of both man and woman, and, in
fact, for the whole of human society, is that each of the two sexes
should continue to move in their own orbit. Liberty and equality will be
of benefit to them as long as neither of them leaves his or her natural
orbit and direction. What has sown trouble in that society is that they
have risen up against the natural order, and nothing else?

What we are claiming is that the question of the system of rights for
woman in the home as well as in society should once again be assessed
and that we should not be satisfied with the assessments of the past. We
mean that we should firstly take nature as our guide, and secondly draw
the maximum benefit from the experiences of the past and the present
centuries, whether good or bad. It is only then that the development of
rights for women will, in its real sense, be fulfilled.

The Holy Quran is accepted by its friends and its enemies as the
upholder of the rights of women. Its opponents accept at least this
much, that the Qur’an in times of revelation took long steps forward for
the benefit of women and for their human rights. But the Qur’an never
neglected the womanliness of women and the manliness of man in the name
of restoring woman to the status of a human being and making her the
partner of man in humanness and in human rights. In another words the
Quran looked at woman as she is in nature. In this respect there is
complete conformity between the decrees or the Qur’an and the decrees of
nature. These two great books of God, the one created and the other
compiled, coincide with each other. In following articles, if they can
do something useful and new, there will be found an exposition and
explanation of this conformity and harmony.

What is now before the respected reader is a collection of articles
which the author wrote in special circumstances in 1345 (S.H) 1966/7 A.
D.; they were published in the magazine *Zan-e-ruz* under the heading
*Zan dar huquq-e- Islami* (Woman in Islamic Rights). The articles were
read with much interest. When those people who do not know the
background, and who were not involved at the time, hear that these
articles were published for the first time in that particular magazine,
they will certainly be surprised that I chose the above magazine for
their publication. They may be also surprised that magazine consented to
publish these articles without any interference or cuts. It is therefore
necessary to mention the circumstances of the publication of these
articles.[^3]

In 1345 (H.S.), 1966/7 AD., the climate of magazines and periodicals,
especially women’s magazines, saw a sharp rise in temperature caused by
the discussion of changes in the Civil Law in connection with family
rights. As most of the proposals that were put forward were contrary to
the actual text of the Qur’an, they naturally arose uneasy feelings
amongst the Muslims of Iran. In the midst or this, Judge Faqid Ibrahim
Mahdavi Zanjani caused more agitation than anyone else and added fuel to
the fire. He drew up a bill for this purpose, containing forty articles
and got it published in the above named magazine. The magazine published
the article with blaring headlines and attached what were in those days
called “coupons”, requesting its readers to offer their opinions
regarding those forty proposals. The said writer, by the way, promised
that in the course of a series of articles in the same magazine, he
would put forward his arguments in support of his forty proposals.

At about that time, I received a telephone call from a respected and
well-known Islamic centre in Tehran who expressed their opinions, and in
a meeting with the editors of the *Kayhan* and *Itila’at*[^4] or
publishing houses, I made reference to some of the matters published in
their women’s publications. The editors stated that if I had anything I
wanted to write I could give it to them, and they promised that my
articles would be published in entirety.

After they had proposed this, the two, gentlemen made a suggestion. They
said that if time and circumstances permitted, I could go through those
magazines and make some necessary notes about each issue. I said that I
was not ready to write comments on every issue, but that since Mahdavi
promised to write a series of articles in defense of his ‘forty
articles’ in *Zan-e ruz*, I was ready, during the publication of that
series, to make my comments on those forty articles on the opposite page
of the same magazine, so that both ideas could be exposed to the public.
The gentlemen asked me to give them time so that they might once again
contact the Directors. Once more they contacted me on the telephone and
informed me that the magazine had agreed. After this exchange I wrote a
letter to that magazine declaring my readiness to defend the Civil law
in so far as they were in agreement with Islamic law, and requested them
to publish my articles in the magazine alongside the articles of
Mahdavi.

I incidentally reminded them that in case the magazine agreed to my
suggestions, they should publish my letter, as it was, with their notice
of consent. The magazine agreed and printed that very letter of mine
along with their notice of consent in their issue no.87 dated 7th Aban,
1345 (H.S.) (29.10.1966), and the first article appeared in issue no.88.

During my previous studies about the rights of women, I had read a book
written by Mahdavi, and for some time I had been conversant with his
logic and that of others like him. Besides that, I had been deeply
interested for many years in the subject of the rights of women in Islam
so I had ample material with me on the subject and I was fully prepared.
The articles by Mahdavi were published and my articles were given the
space alongside his articles. Naturally, I had to start from where he
started, but it soon proved too difficult for him to carry on with the
articles. It was not more than six weeks later that he died as the
result of heart attack and was thus freed from writing the replies for
ever. During that period of six weeks these articles had made their
mark. Those readers who had been interested in the articles appealed to
me and to the magazine to continue the articles. This appeal was agreed
to and thirty-three articles appeared in the magazine. These were the
circumstances of the publication of these articles.

Although in these thirty-three articles only a part of the matter that I
had in mind was dealt with and much remained to be discussed, due to my
tiredness and certain other things that diverted my attention elsewhere,
I had to stop writing the series. Those who had read the articles with
interest have been pressing all the time for the publication in book
form. On my part, since I wanted to finish off the task and to publish
some where a complete work on the system of women’s rights in Islam, I
did not agree to the simple reprinting of the articles. At last, when I
felt that I could not expect to complete the work, I decided to be
content with what there was.

In this series of articles, the aspects of the problem that have been
dealt with are: proposing; fixed-term marriage (*mut’ah*); woman and
social independence; Islam and the modernization of life; the status of
women in the Qur’an; self-respect and human rights; the natural
foundations for family rights; the differences between woman and man;
dowry; maintenance; inheritance; divorce; and polygyny.

Other aspects of the subject that remain to be discussed and for which I
have study-notes already prepared are: the right of the man to maintain
order in the family; the right of guardianship of a child; the period of
*iddah* for women between marriages and its philosophy; women, *ijtihad*
(competence in Islamic jurisprudence) and *ifta*’ (giving legal
opinions); women and politics; women and the appointment of judges; the
education of women and ethics; women’s dress; sexual morality; honor,
chastity, modesty etc.; motherhood; women and out-door work, and a
number of other matters. If I am favored with an opportunity by God, I
shall collect together and edit this part as well, and publish it as the
second volume of this book.[^5]  
 Requesting success and guidance from Allah;  
 Murtada Mutahhari. 28th Shahriwar 1353  
 2nd Ramadan-ul-mubarak, 1394 19th September, 1974

[^1]: In his comments on the Civil Law of Iran, Dr. Ali Shaygan (p.266)
writes: “The independence that a woman has with respect to her own
possessions which Shi'ite jurisprudence acknowledged from the very
beginning did not exist in Greece, Rome or Germany or in the law of most
countries until recently. She was forbidden to exercise any right of
ownership over her property, just like a minor, a lunatic or an
interdicted person. In England, where in the past the personality of a
woman faded into insignificance before the personality of her husband,
two acts were passed, one in 1870 and the other in 1882 AD., called the
law of the married woman’s right to ownership, which lifted this
prohibition from women.

[^2]: لَا الشَّمْسُ يَنْبَغِي لَهَا أَنْ تُدْرِكَ الْقَمَرَ وَلَا
اللَّيْلُ سَابِقُ النَّهَارِ ۚ وَكُلٌّ فِي فَلَكٍ يَسْبَحُونَ

[^3]: Zan-e ruz (“Modern Woman”) used to be a rather glossy,
western-style woman’s Magazine. It is s published, but, of course, with
a more independent and Islamic editorial policy. (Tr.)

[^4]: Both large tabloid publishing houses, printing both newspapers and
magazines (Tr.)

[^5]: Unfortunately it was never published.


