Introduction
============

I am glad that the magazine *Zan-e-ruz* has accepted my request to
discuss the forty-point proposal for amendments to sections of the Civil
Law of Iran pertaining to, and connected with, family matters. The
magazine has recorded its willingness in its next issue to publish this
series of articles on the strength of my message.

I very much value this opportunity which will give me an occasion to
reveal to young people one aspect of the social philosophy of Islam. I
hope to enlighten their minds so that they may comprehend the Islamic
concept regarding the problems connected with family life.

As I mentioned in my letter, I did not intend to take a stand in defense
of the existing Civil Law, holding it to be perfectly, thoroughly and a
hundred per cent in accordance with the Islamic Law and with true social
standards. I myself perhaps entertain certain misgivings about them, and
I do not either want to claim that the custom in this particular domain
prevalent amongst the majority or our people, are proper or justified.
On the contrary, I even point out irregularities and confusions in
family relations, and believe that basic reforms are necessary in this
connection.

I would not, however, put all the blame on the Civil Law of Iran, like
the writers of the book *Criticism of the Constitution and Civil of
Iran*[^1] and another book, The *Sacrament or the pact of marriage*[^2]
I do not see any reason to exonerate the people entirely. I also do not
accept the idea that the defects and flaws in the Civil Law are due to
its being in conformity with the Islamic jurisprudence and similarly do
not think that the only way to reform is to bring about changes in the
Civil Law. That part of the Islamic law about the rights of husband and
wife, their treatment of each other and of their offspring and
outsiders, has also been attacked, and a proposal for its change has
also been put forward. I shall deal with these one by one in this series
of articles and shall prove that these laws are in complete conformity
with subtle psychological, natural and social objectives. In these laws
the status and dignity of both man and woman has been fully safeguarded.
If the laws are followed and scrupulously executed, they are sure to
establish the best of family relations.

With the permission of my esteemed readers, I wish to lay before them a
few points before I start discussing the main subject:

1. Family relation, A world problem
-----------------------------------

The problem of family relations in our age is not so simple and trivial
as may be resolved by filling up questionnaires by boys and girls by
holding seminars — like the seminars I saw and heard of, and the level
and standard of intellect that was displayed in them, which is not
peculiar to our country. Other nations have also not been able to find a
solution to the problem, nor do they claim to have found one.

The philosopher Will Durant, the well-known writer of The *Story of
Civilization*, writes: “If in imagination we place ourselves at the year
2,000, and ask what was the outstanding feature of human events in the
first quarter of the twentieth century, we shall perceive that it was
not the Great War, nor the Russian Revolution, but the change in the
status of woman. History has seldom seen so startling a transformation
in so short a time.

The ‘sacred home’ that was the basis of our social order, the marriage
system that was our barrier against human passion and instability, the
complex moral code that lifted us from brutality to civilization and
courtesy, are visibly caught in that turbulent transition which has come
upon all our institutions, all our nodes of life and thought.” (*The
Pleasures of Philosophy* New York, 1953, p.l29)

Today, similarly, when we are living in the last quarter of the
twentieth century, the lamentations of western thinkers are all the more
articulate when they witness around them the break up of family ties,
the weakening of the foundations of marriage the evasion of young people
in accepting the responsibilities of marriage, the dislike of being a
mother, the dwindling of paternal and maternal affections, indulgence in
the satisfaction of temporary passions instead of love, the
ever-increasing incidence of divorce, the galloping increase in the
number of illegitimate child with unity and sincerity being very rare
thing in married couples.

### Should we be independent or follow the west?

It is regrettable that quite a number of uninformed people have the
impression that the problems connected with family relations are like
the technicalities of taxi-driving plumbing, electricity etc. European
experts solved these technical matters years ago; we are the people who
do not have that efficiency and capability and so, they think, we should
follow and imitate them as early as possible. This is a totally wrong
idea. As far as the problems under discussion are concerned, westerners
are more preoccupied than we are ourselves, and the wailings and cries
of their intellectual are louder. Leaving aside the question of the
education and instruction of women, western thinkers are in all matters
concerning women more perturbed than we are ourselves and have less
satisfaction in the contentments of family life.

### Historical determinism

Another section of our people think that the lack of warmth and
attachment in family ties and the creeping in of destructive influences
is the effect of the liberation and undue freedom of women; that
freedom, according to them, is the unavoidable result of industrial life
and advancement in learning and civilization. It is the force of
history, and there is no alternative, they say, except to tolerate and
endure this confusion and disorder. The excellence and dignity of family
life that was current in former days, they add, should be forgotten for
ever.

If we hold such a view, we have a very superficial and erroneous view.
We agree that in the west, industrial life did affect and still does
affect family ties, but what primarily interrupted the balance of
orderliness in family life are two other things apart from, that.

Firstly, there were primitive, oppressive and unjust laws for women in
Europe. These laws were in force till the present century. The
helplessness of women can be gauged from the fact that it was in the
nineteenth and at the beginning of the twentieth century that woman was
legally acknowledged for the first time to be capable of owning
property.

Secondly, those persons, who undertook to ameliorate the condition of
women and raise their status, happened to use the same method that is
being adopted at present by some of our so called intellectuals. The
outlook put forward in this forty-point proposal is one of such
examples. These people have, so to say, while desiring to improve her
eyebrows, actually deprived the helpless woman of her eyesight.

The obsolete laws of yesterday’s European together with the new
amendments to them are thus more responsible for the chaos and disorder
than industrial life. In such circumstances, it is not in the least
necessary for us, Muslims of the east, to follow strictly in their
footsteps and go the way they go, and tread the nasty path they tread.
We should remain always cautious towards western life-styles. While
making use of, and acquiring. Those of their sciences, arts and
technical subjects, and also those parts, of their social behavior which
are excellent and commendable, one should also refrain from aping and
imitating them in all their customs, habits and especially laws. These
laws have been a source of innumerable miseries for themselves; and
reforms in the Civil Law of Iran and their being brought into line with
European laws means, in practice, sharing those miseries with them.

2. The constitution and ourselves
---------------------------------

Apart from the fact that the said proposals are at once devastating and
against psychological, natural and social exigencies, as will be
explained later on, there remains the question: what about their
conformity with the Constitutional Law of Iran? The Constitution of Iran
clearly mentions that any law or proposed law which stands in
contradiction with the Islamic Law is void and cannot be passed in
either of the two Houses of the Iranian Parliament. The matter
incorporated in these proposals is, on the face of it, in contradiction
with the Islamic law. Can those westerners whom our worshippers of the
west blindly follow ever imagine turning their own Constitution into
play-thing like this?

Besides religious considerations, the constitution of every country has
a special sanctity for the people of that country. The Constitution of
Iran also has a special sanctity for the Iranian nation as a whole. Can
the Constitution of Iran be trampled under- foot by seminars, by the
printing of questionnaires, and by the bobbing up and down of members of
Parliament?

3. The attachment of the Iranian nation to religion
---------------------------------------------------

If, for the time being, we leave the discordance of the proposal with
the Constitution alone, and forget everything else, one thing can never
be forgotten that nowadays too, the strongest sympathy which governs the
mentality of Iranians is their Islamic sentiments. With the exception of
a very limited number, who have traversed all limits and readily
supports any disorder and confusion, the great majority of the people
follow the stipulations of religion.

Against the prognostications of some people, even modern education and
training has not caused any estrangement between this nation and the
religion of Islam. In spite of the fact that religion in its true sense
is not being propagated, and capitalism which is contrary to Islam, is
more often presented, the people who have had a modern education, and
students, are becoming more and more inclined towards Islam.

Now, I ask, how will the proposed laws suit this mental background, when
that background is necessarily there whether you like it or not? To be
more explicit, when the Civil Law of the country is not in conformity
with the aspirations of the people and with the clear commandments of
the shari’ah of Islam, what can be the result? Suppose that due to
certain differences and anger, woman files a suit in a Court of Law,
and, against the will of her husband, is granted a degree of divorce,
and after wards marries another person. These persons, the new husband
and wife, although they consider themselves legal husband and wife under
the civil law of the country, will in the depth of their religious
conscience, consider each other as strangers. They are bound to feel
pangs of conscience, however occasionally and stealthily, and consider
their association sinful, their children illegitimate, and themselves
deserving the punishment of death.

Now, imagine in what a miserable psychological situation they will be
placed; what will be their position and the position of their children
in the eyes of their religious minded friends and relatives. We cannot
possibly change the religious conscience of the people by legislation
and amendments to the law, fortunately or unfortunately, the convictions
of the majority of these people are so strong that they cannot be quit
of their religious sympathies.

If you were to invite an expert in law and psychology from a foreign
country and discuss with him and tell him what you want to legislate and
what the background and the convictions of your people are, do you
imagine that he would agree with you? Would he not say that such steps
are bound to create innumerable mental and social miseries?

It is a great mistake to compare this kind of law with penal laws as
regards how bad the effects resulting from them are. They are as
different as the earth is from the sky. The impact which results from
changes in and abrogation of the penal laws is quite clear to society
and only deviated people will be encouraged. But laws connected with
married couples and children are related to people’s individual lives,
and can be directly in conflict with each individual’s personal
religious sentiments. This kind of law will either remain without
practical effect due to the influence, of religion and the triumph of
the conscience, and inevitably the unhappiness which, this kind of law
causes will result in its being officially abolished, or else, after a
soul-destroying spiritual struggle, it will weaken the power of
religion.

[^1]: Zindah bidar is the translation by Badi u‘z- Zaman Furuzanfar of
the book Hayy ibn Yaqzan by Ibn Tufayl.

[^2]: Zanjani, Ibrahim Mahdavi – Payman-e Muqaddas ya mithaq-e izdivaj.


