Fatwas
======

The unknown writer has written some fatwas and a few forged ahadith
declaring the “Rafidha” or Shi’a as Kafir.

As for these ahadith, the readers will find it interesting that no less
a person than the Wahhabis’ Shaykhul Islam, Ibn Taymiyyah, has stated
that all the ahadith in which the word ‘Rafidha’ has been used are
forged. He writes: “(Because the word Rafidhah was coined in the year
105 A.H.) therefore it is clearly understood that all ahadith in which
the word “Rafidha” has been used are lies (forged).”[^1]

Now we come to the fatwas of some Sunni or Wahhabi writers or muftis.
Who has told these people that we care a damn for their views. Our Islam
and Iman is linked to Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala through Muhammad (S) and
his progeny who are his rightful successors. Why should we care about
those who are not connected with this Golden Link. We thank Allah that
our pristine Islam is not polluted with these people’s paganistic
beliefs.

Did the respected Companion, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari ask from ‘Uthman ibn
‘Affan any testimonial for his Iman?
Did ‘Amr ibn al-Humuq al-Khuza’i and Rushayd al-Hajari need any
certificate from Ibn Ziyad?
Was ‘Ammar ibn Yasir given any credential by Mu’awiyah? Did Mitham
al-Tammar need any warranty from Ibn Ziyad? Was Imam Husayn in need of
any testimonial from Yazid?

So why should we the Shi’as care what these followers of Mu’awiyah,
Yazid and Ibn Ziyad say about us?

Our Imam ‘Ali was the “total Iman” as the Holy Prophet (S) had declared
in the battle of Khandaq[^2]. As a result, we the Shi’as of ‘Ali are so
full of Iman that if in a manner of speaking, the word “kufr “ is
attributed to us, that “kufr” becomes lovely and praiseworthy in the
eyes of Allah, and Allah extols its virtues. He says in the Qur’an about
the believers like us:

***“therefore, whoever disbelieves (yakfur) in the taghut and believes
in Allah, he indeed has laid hold on the strongest handle which shall
not break off...”***[^3]

We the Shi’as of ‘Ali have heeded the words of Allah when He says:

***“Indeed, there is for you a good example in Ibrahim and those with
him when they said to their people: Surely we dissociate from you and
from what you worship other than Allah; we disbelieve in you (kafarna
bikum) and enmity and hatred have appeared between us and you forever
until you believe in Allah alone.”***[^4]

Following this ***“good example”*** we, the Shi’as of ‘Ali, send the
same message to these self-styled muftis and their followers. If they
say that we are disbelievers, let the world know that we disbelieve in
these muftis, we disbelieve in their falsehood, we disbelieve in their
hypocrisy and we disbelieve in their **American** Islam.

[^1]: Ibn Taymiyyah, Minhaju ’s-sunnah, old ed. vol. I, p. 8.

[^2]: Arjahu ’l-matalib, pp. 219-220.

[^3]: Qur’an, 2:256.

[^4]: Qur’an, 60:4.


