Epilogue
========

The unknown author has blackened many pages against what he calls “False
Slogans of Unity and Brotherhood”. He reviles “the ignorant supporters
of the Shi’ahs among Ahle-Sunnah” who “expect the Ulama to raise slogans
of brotherhood and to fabricate a common basis and a common platform of
fraternity” with the Shi’as.

This is the real purpose of this booklet; and it is the common aim of
all the hundreds and thousands the books, booklets, articles and fatwas
which the Wahhabi press churns out every day in Arabic, Urdu, English,
Turkish and scores of other local and regional languages.

They claim to be followers of the Qur’an; and they are spending billions
of petro-dollars to stop the Muslims of the worlds from joining hands
together, while Allah Subhanahu wa Taa’ala says:

***And hold fast by the rope of Allah all together and be not
divided.***[^1]

***And obey Allah and His Messenger and do not quarrel, for then you
will be weak in hearts and your power will depart, and be patient;
surely Allah is with patient ones.***[^2]

It is a tragic fact that in spite of so much emphasis on Unity, the
Muslims are divided into so many groups. Nevertheless, we have to
salvage whatever we can from this onslaught of disunity and strife. The
clarion call of Iran to the Muslims of the world to unite is based on
this divine order. Unfortunately, the enemies of Islam have twisted its
meaning to frighten the unsuspecting Muslims by imputing false motive to
this sincere ideal.

There are three conceivable ways of unity for the Muslims. Two of them
are:

**1. Unity in belief:** That all Muslims should adopt a single set of
beliefs; and

**2. Unity in rulings of shari’ah:** That all should follow a single set
of rites of worship, as well as personal, social, financial and penal
codes.

Obviously both these methods are impossible to adopt. The unity of
belief and shari’ah will not be achieved until the re-appearance of Imam
Al-Mahdi (a.s.).

Now there remains only the third way of unity, and that is the Unity in
face of the enemies of Islam. It means that all Muslims should stand
shoulder to shoulder to defend Islamic values, Muslims’ lands, Muslims’
honour and Muslims’ lives. They should forget their sectarian
differences in face of the Zionists, Communists and Capitalists. If they
will not stand together, surely they will hang together. See what is
happening in Kashmir and India, how Bosnia is being obliterated from the
map of Europe. Millions of Bosnian civilians have been massacred by
Christian Croats and Serbs, thousands of Muslim women have been raped.
But the usurpers of petro-dollars spend this Muslim wealth in protecting
the London Zoo from closure! Animals are more precious than the Muslim
masses - the victims of genocide and ethnic cleansing - of Bosnia,
Kashmir, Burma and Azerbaijan.

Squandering millions of dollars in one night on gambling tables of Las
Vegas is more important than alleviating the sufferings of the helpless
Muslims in Iraq, Bangladesh, Somalia and Albania. The fact that
Tajikistan has fallen again in the hands of the hard-core communists
creates no discomfort for them.

Unfortunately, the Wahhabis - or rather the ruling families of the
Arabian Peninsula (wrongly named ‘Saudi Arabia’), Kuwait and Bahrain do
not care what the Qur’an and the hadith say about a Muslim’s right on
other Muslims. The alpha and omega of their endeavours is to save their
Kingdoms and Sheikhdoms from the wrath of their people. They know that
no Muslim worth his name can support their debaucheries, their drinking
orgies and their gambling sprees.

They are fully aware that no man worth his salt can approve of their
oppressions, their tyrannies and their systematic crushing of the
non-Wahhabi Muslims. Propelled by this realization, they seek refuge
with their Western mentors. They ignore the warnings given by Allah not
to incline to the Jews and the Christians, not to seek their help, but
rely solely on Allah, as the following verses spell it out clearly:

***And the Jews will not be pleased with you, nor the Christians until
you follow their religion. Say: Surely Allah’s guidance, that is the
(true) guidance.***[^3]

***Oh, you who believe! do not take My enemy and your enemy for friends;
would you offer them love while they deny what has come to you of the
truth...***[^4]

***Let not the believers take the unbelieves for friend s rather than
the believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing (to do) with
Allah...***[^5]

***Oh, you who believe! do not take the unbelievers for friends rather
than the believers; dOh, you desire that you should give to Allah a
manifest proof against yourselves?***[^6]

***Oh, you who believe! do not take the Jews and the Christians for
friends; they are friends of each other; and whoever amongst you takes
them for a friend , then surely he is one of them. surely Allah does not
guide the unjust people.***[^7]

But these Wahhabi rulers have sold their souls to Reagans, Bushes and
Clintons: and what is more tragic they have heavily mortgaged the
Arabian Peninsula to those open enemies of Islam.

Since last ten centuries, the European (and American) powers have been
announcing that Islam was their enemy No. 1. After the collapse of the
Russian empire, the Sunday Times (London) wrote in May 1991 in an
editorial that as the West has accomplished this task, “now” it should
concentrate its energies “on Middle East” (Read, against Islam). What
happened soon after that was an eye-opener for those who might have been
under the illusion that the Western countries stand for “democracy” and
“human rights” and defend these values.

America has openly condemned Islam as its enemy No. 1. Archbishop of
Canterbury, Rev. George Carey, in his recent visit (July, 1993) to
Tanzania blasted “Muslim fundamentalists” as being a threat to the world
peace.

And the U.S.A. and its allies are encouraging their puppets in Middle
East and agents everywhere to wipe out the Islam and the Muslims from
the face of the Earth. Of course, they add the epithet, ‘Fundamentalist’
before “Muslims” to lull the masses to sleep.

These petro-shaykhdoms have the strongest whip to make the west bow down
to their will; as Imam Hafiz Ismet Saphic of Sarajevo (Bosnia) - whose
three daughters were killed while waiting in a bread queue - has said,
“If the Muslim countries that are dealing with oil stopped their tankers
just for one day, the West would start acting in a different way.”[^8]

But they have no courage to use this God-gifted weapon against the West,
because they are fully aware that their survival depends on the sweet
wish of the U.S.A.

These Wahhabi rulers think the Western-nations are the friends of the
Sunnis. Nothing can surpass this folly. These powers are neither the
Sunnis’ friend nor the Shi’as’ enemy. They are friends of only their own
interests and enemies of all who pose slightest danger to their
interests.

If they love Sunnism, then why did they order the Turkish army to usurp
power when Arbaken (a religious Sunni Muslim) had won the election? Why
did they instigate Algerian military to annul the election when the
victory of Islamicists appeared certain. Why John Major allegedly wrote
in a letter that he did not want any Muslim government (of Sunni Bosnia)
in Europe?

I do not want to linger on the political side of these anti-people
shaykhdoms. But what they are doing against Islam in general is more
heart-wrenching.

In their zeal to please their lords in the White House and the White
Hall, they are indulging in such activities which may bring down the
citadel of Islam.

This current “fitnah” of anti-Shi’a propaganda is one such example. The
Wahhabis think that if they accuse the Shi’as of, let us say, believing
in the Tahrif of the Holy Qur’an, it will tarnish the image of the Shi’a
faith; they do not realize that it is shaking the foundation of Islam
(which is the real aim of their Western patrons). Let us look at this
case in order to understand this Western game in its true perspective.

The Muslim ‘ulama, Shi’a and Sunni both, did not believe that there was
any alteration in, addition to, or omission from the Qur’an. No sensible
‘Alim of either sect has accused the other sect that it believed in
tahrif of the Qur’an.

Of course there have appeared from time to time some ‘ulama on both
sides who indulged in mud-slinging against the opposite sect, not
realizing that presence of ahadith in a book does not necessarily mean
that the people of that group really believed in it. Such traditions,
i.e. of Tahrif, remained more of less buried in the books and they were
not propagated for the simple reason that nobody based his belief on
them.

Things abruptly changed in February 1979, when the Iranian nation, under
the guidance of the late Ayatullah al-Khomeini (May Allah’s mercy be on
him) succeeded in establishing the first truly Islamic government on
Earth, centuries after the days of the Imams.

Had the Iranian Revolution resulted in a satellite government following
the line of the Western or the Eastern ideology, it would have been
gladly accepted - or at least, tolerated - by the self-appointed
guardians of “democracy”. But, contrary to the conventional wisdom, it
chose to follow the line of Islam. Then it raised the slogan of lslamic
Unity. By standing against all un-Islamic “isms’: and not bowing before
anyone except Allah, Ayatullah Khomeini and the Iranian leadership
gained unsurpassed popularity in the Muslim ummah throughout the world,
from Morocco to the Phillipines and from Europe to Americas.
Down-trodden masses saw with their own eyes that unarmed bare hands had
defeated the mightiest war machine in the Middle East. It gave a new
heart to the oppressed people even in non-Muslim countries, like South
Africa. This rapidly spreading influence of “Khomeinism” alarmed the
U.S.A., “the paramount chief” of the Westen “tribes”. They started
fighting against Iran, through the proxy war, through news media and in
political fora.

On another front, they made their clients in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
believe that the call of Islamic Unity was a mortal danger to their
crowns. Ordered by their masters, the Wahhahis started an intensely
hateful propaganda against “Khomeinism’:Iran and Shi’ism. Hired pens
began churning out books, articles and tracts against the Shi’as, saying
that the Shi’a were Ka.fir, they were mushrik , they had their separate
Qur’an, and believed this Qur’an of the Muslims to be altered and
incomplete. Some of their top employees were Ihsan Ilahi Zaheer in
Pakistan and Manzoor Ahmad No’mani and Abul Hasan ‘Ali Nadwi in India.
The last-named case was interesting. Long before the Revolution, he had
posed as a champion of the Islamic unity. He was the Chairman of the
Muslim Personal Law Board in India with a Shi’a ‘Alim as his Vice-
President. But he was also a recipient of the “Faisal Award” of the
Saudi dynasty. And no sooner was the slogan of “Neither East nor West,
Islam is the Best” raised from Iran, than he aligned himself with the
anti-unity forces.

It seems that the sound coming from their mouths is their master’s voice
and the Zionism’s dagger dipped in Muslims’ blood is used for their pen.

A book written by these agents might be written in Urdu, Arabic or any
other language; but within a few months it is translated in all major
languages of the Muslim world, and made available everywhere as well as
freely distributed to the hujjaj.

Ostensibly, these agents of American Islam are doing it to weaken Iran
and prevent the Iranian Revolution from influencing the “Muslim
Youths” - as Abul Hasan ‘Ali Nadwi himself had admitted in the preface
of a book. But is this the actual motive of their Masters - the
Judea-Christian enemies of Islam? Obviously, “Not:’ The manipulators of
the American Islam have exhumed some Shi’a traditions of tahreef buried
in the books, with the sole aim that the Shi’a would retaliate by
publicizing the similar traditions found in the Sunni books, and thus
the validity of the Qur’an would be questioned, Muslims’ faith in this
Last Divine Revelation would be destroyed and, as a result, Islam would
lose its power.

This demeaning polemics will provide the Christian missionaries with
effective arms and ammunitions to shake and rattle the Muslim’s faith in
the Qur’an. They hope that in this way many Muslims would easily be
persuaded to embrace Christianity, and even those who would not convert,
would not remain truly Muslim, nor would they follow a Book whose
authenticity was doubtful.

Gladstone is reported to have once stood up in the parliament with a
copy of the Qur’an in his hand, and declaring that as long as the
Muslims followed this Book, the British could not subjugate them. He
advised his people to use every subterfuge to shake the Muslims’ belief
in the Qur’an.

That strategy of Kufr has succeeded in Turkey, Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria
and many other so-called Muslim countries where a special hybrid variety
of Muslims has been hatched which seems to be allergic to Islam and the
Qur’an. It was about to succeed in Iran too, thanks to the Pahlavi
regime. But the plan failed, because of the religious leaders under the
guidance of late Ayatullah al-’Uzma Khomeini, and because of the
religiosity of the Iranian masses. Now the enemies of Islam are using
this propaganda of tahreef to achieve that goal.

This is what they have planned. But Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala says,

***They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will surely perfect his light though the unbelievers may be
averse.***[^9]

To sum it up, Wahhabis oppose the unity of the Muslims - which Allah has
so much emphasized, and they have taken the Jews and the Christians as
their friends and helpers - which Allah has so forcefully and in so many
places forbidden.

[^1]: Qur’an, 3:103.

[^2]: Qur’an, 8:46

[^3]: Qur’an, 2:120.

[^4]: Qur’an, 60:1.

[^5]: Qur’an, 3:20.

[^6]: Qur’an, 4:144.

[^7]: Qur’an, 5:51.

[^8]: The Muslim News, London, 30/7/1993.

[^9]: Qur’an, 61:8.


