Preface
=======

My attention has been drawn to a booklet “What is Shi’aism?” which has
been printed in Nairobi and distributed throughout East Africa by the
Wahhabis. The main purpose of such publications is to sow seeds of
discord and disunity among the Muslims in East Africa and elsewhere. The
Shi’a community is well-aware of this motive; and we had not wanted to
glorify such rags by writing their reply.

The Wahhabis take their order from the Saudi family who in their turn
are controlled by the White House in Washington; and as everybody knows,
it is the declared policy of Washington and its satellites that Islam is
their enemy No.1. Naturally they want to destroy Islam by all possible
means; and unfortunately, Khalids, Fahds, Mubaraks and their ilk are
dancing to their tunes.

We feel that replying to such trash would be playing in the hands of
those enemies of Islam. And it was this feeling that had kept us silent
for such a long time. But now we have reached a stage where silence is
misinterpreted as weakness. Therefore, a few short comments on the said
booklet will not be out of order.

Another thing which had prevented us from replying was the blindness of
these writers. They never look in the Shi’a books; they just go on
lapping what their ancestors have vomited; and then they transfer in on
paper, thinking that they have conquered the Everest. Hundreds, if not
thousands, of replies have been given to their books, but these writers
never look into them. And the fallacy is further compounded when a
writer is as ignorant as the author of the booklet under review, a
writer of unknown identity and origin. No torture can be greater for a
student of religion than to be forced to talk with such an ignorant man.
However, with much reluctance I have decided to undergo this torture,
and

***“I will only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah.”***[^1]
***()***

The booklet, “What is Shi’aism?” is written in a haphazard manner, and
to follow its sequence would have resulted in annoying repetitions.

In this reply, I have tackled all its main points in as much an
un-emotional way as possible, ignoring the abusive language which its
writer has used for the Shi’as. Only those whose proofs are weak try to
compensate for that weakness with abusing their opposite party.

In the beginning I have included one of my old articles, “Meaning and
origin of Shi’aism”, and a few important chapters which describe in
short the fundamental belief and faith of the Shi’a Ithna ‘Asharis. It
will help the readers to compare the truth with the baseless accusations
of the unknown author of the Wahhabi booklet.

Before touching the subjects of the said booklet, let me make it clear
that I have written for those who are in search of Truth, with open
minds, without any bias or preconceived ideas. I am not writing for
those whose logic runs as follows:

1. To curse the Sahabah (companions of the Prophet, s.a.w) is Kufr and
anyone indulging in it is Kafir.

2. Amir Mu’awiyah began cursing Amiru ‘l-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (the cousin and
son-in-law and companion of the Prophet s.a.w, and the fourth among the
Sunnis’ Khulafa al-Rashidin), in the Khutbas of Friday and ‘Idayn, and
this cursing continued for more than 90 years throughout the Islamic
empire from Sindh to Spain and from Africa to Turkistan.

3. Therefore, Mu’awiyah was a sincere believer and a most honoured
companion and Khalifah of the Prophet, (S).

Such people should better not read this book.

I pray to Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala to make this book a light for the
guidance of the Muslim ummah in these dark days.

Bihaqqi Muhammadin wa ‘alihi ‘t-tahireen.

**Dar es Salaam**
**24th September, 1993**
**Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi**

[^1]: Qur’an, 12:86


