This is Shi’ism
===============

Meaning & Origin Of Shi’ism
---------------------------

The Shi’a school of thought has been depicted by many non-Muslim writers
as a “heretical sect” of Islam as opposed to the “orthodox” Islam. Thus
implying that Shi’ism is a later deviation from Islam. Is this really
true or just a labelling campaign to discredit Shi’ism? Here is given
documented proof from the Sunni sources that Shi’ism is actually the
original Islam.

The Meaning of Shi‘a
--------------------

The word “Shi‘a - **شيعۃ**” is derived from Arabic word at-tashayyu’
**التشیع**ا( which means “to follow’) According to major dictionaries
like *al-Qamûs* and *Lisanu ’l-‘Arab*, the friends and followers of a
person are his Shi‘a. According to *Taju ’l-‘urus*, a group of persons
showing unanimity over an issue may be called “Shi‘a”. This word is
equally used for singular and plural as well as for masculine and
feminine genders.

In the Qur’an it has been used for the followers of the Prophets of
Allah:

In the story of Musa (a.s) it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَٰذَا مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ وَهَٰذَا مِنْ عَدُوِّهِ ۖ فَاسْتَغَاثَهُ الَّذِي
مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ عَلَى الَّذِي مِنْ عَدُوِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This was from his*** **(i.e. Musa’s)** ***followers*** **(Shi‘a)**
***and that from his enemies*** **(‘aduww).** ***And he who was of his
Shi‘a asked him for his help against him who was of his enemies***
**(‘aduww).**[^1]

In the story of Nuh (a.s) it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِنْ شِيعَتِهِ لَإِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And, verily, of his Shi‘a is Ibrahim.***[^2]

Arabic dictionaries, after giving the literal meaning of the word,
Shi‘a, usually add: “This name is generally used for those who love and
follow ‘Ali and the people of his house, and it has become their proper
name”.[^3]

Shaykh al-Mufid (d 413 A.H./1022 C.E.) has explained that when the word
Shi‘a is used with the definate article “al” (*al-Shi‘a* = the Shi‘a) it
only means “the group which follows ‘Ali (blessings of Allah be upon
him) with love and the belief that he was the Imam after the Prophet
(s.a.w.w) without any gap...”[^4]

In short, the Shi‘a got this name because they follow ‘Ali and his
sinless progeny, and reject the claims of others to the office of
Imamate (leadership after the Prophet). As will be explained later, it
was the Prophet himself who gave this name to the followers of ‘Ali.

The Origin of Shi‘ism
---------------------

The origin of Shi‘ism is the same as that of Islam.

The main difference between the Sunnis and the Shi‘as is about the
successor ship of the Prophet of Islam. The Sunnis believe that Abu Bakr
was the first successor; the Shi‘as believe that ‘Ali was the first
rightful successor. When a non-biased scholar studies the declarations
of the Prophet (s.a.w.w) as recorded by the Sunni scholars in their
commentaries of the Qur’an (*tafsir*), and traditions of the Prophet
(*ahadith*), biographies and history, he has to admit that it was the
Prophet (s.a.w.w) himself who was the originator of Shi‘ism.

The first open declaration of the prophethood was the very occasion when
the first declaration of the caliphate of ‘Ali (a.s) was made. The
occasion is known as the “Feast of the Clan”. The relevant paragraphs
are quoted here from the *Ta’rikh* of at-Tabari:

‘Ali said: “When the verse ‘***And warn thy clan of near
kindred*****’**[^5] was revealed to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.w), he
called me and ordered me to prepare one *sa‘* (about 3 kg.) of food and
invite the descendants of ‘Abdu ’l-Muttalib, so that he could talk to
them. They were about forty persons, among them his uncles Abu Talib,
Hamzah, ‘Abbas and Abu Lahab. Then the Messenger of Allah delivered a
lecture saying:

‘O Sons of ‘Abdu ’l-Muttalib! I know no man in all Arabia who ever
brought to his people anything better than which I have brought to you.
I have brought to you the good of this world and the hereafter. And
Allah (may He be exalted) has commanded me to call you to it. Who,
therefore, among you will help me in this matter, on the condition that
he would be my brother, my *Wasiy* (heir) and my *Khalifah* (successor)
among you?’”

‘Ali continues the narration: “Nobody came forward; so I said (though I
was the youngest in age):
‘I, O Prophet of Allah! shall be your helper in this (task).’ So the
Prophet put his hand on my neck and said: ‘Verily, he is my brother, my
*Wasiy* (heir) and my *Khalifah* (successor) among you. Listen to him
and obey him.’ The assembly stood up laughing and telling Abu Talib that
Muhammad has ordered him to listen to his son and obey him”.[^6]

This was in the beginning.

In the last months of his life, the Prophet (s.a.w.w) declared at a
place called Khumm, between Mecca and Medinah, that ‘Ali was his
successor and master of the Muslims. This event has been recorded by
numerous Sunni scholars. Imam Ahmad bin Shu‘ayb an-Nasa’i (d. 303
A.H./915-16 CE.) has narrated this event through several chains of
narrators in his *al-Khasa*’is, one of which is as follows:

Abu’t-Tufayl said that Zayd bin Aqram said, “When the Prophet returned
from the last pilgrimage, and stayed at the pond (*Ghadir*) of Khumm, he
ordered the place to be swept. Then he said: ‘It is as though I have
been called (back by God, meaning that death is soon approaching) and I
have accepted that call. And I am leaving among you two weighty,
precious things, one of them is greater than the other: the Book of
Allah and my descendants, my family-members. So look out how you deal
with them after me because they will not separate from each other until
they come to me at the fountain (of *kawthar*, on the Day of Judgement).
I am the master (*wali*) of every believer’. Saying this, he took the
hand of ‘Ali (Allah be pleased with him) and said, ‘Whomsoever’s master
I am, this (‘Ali) is his master. O Allah! Love the person who loves
‘Ali, and be the enemy of one who has enmity towards him”.

Abu’t-Tufayl says, “I asked Zayd, ‘Did you hear it from the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.w)?’ He said, ‘There was no one in the oasis but saw him
with his eyes and heard him with his ears,’”.[^7] This tradition is
known as “the tradition of two precious things”.

In the same book, Imam an-Nasa’i quotes another similar *hadith* from
Zayd bin Aqram which contains these words from the Prophet: “Don’t I
have more authority on every believer than his own self?” They replied,
“Surely, we bear witness that thou hast more authority upon every
believer than his own self”. The Prophet then said, “So, verily, he
whose master (*mawla*) I am, this is his Master (*mawla*).” Saying this
he took the hand of ‘Ali.[^8] This tradition is known as “the tradition
of mastership”.

The traditions of “two precious things” and “mastership” are jointly and
severally narrated by hundreds of traditionalists. The famous Wahabi
scholar,

Nawwab Siddiq Hasan Khan of Bhopal, says:

“Hakim Abu Sa‘id says that the traditions of ‘two precious things’ and
‘whose master I am, ‘Ali is his master’ are *Mutawatir*[^9] because a
great number of companions of the Prophet have narrated them. So much so
that Muhammad bin Jarir has written these two traditions by seventy-five
different chains of narrators (*asnad*).”[^10]

‘Abdu ’l-Husayn Ahmad al-Amini has classified the narrators of this
tradition and has found that among them are one hundred and twenty
*sahabah* (companions of the Prophet) and eighty-four *tabi‘in*
(disciples of the companions). The number of Sunni *muhaddithin*
(traditionalists) who have narrated it reaches upto three hundred and
sixty. Two hundred and sixty special books (several of them in many
volumes) have been compiled by Shi‘a and Sunni scholars on this
tradition only.[^11]

The Origin of the Name
----------------------

When we see that between these two events, the Prophet repeatedly
referred to the followers of ‘Ali as “Shi‘a”, we have to admit that not
only the faith of Shi‘ism, but even the name was originated by the
Prophet himself. The following ahadith are quoted from Sunni sources:

Ibn ‘Asakir narrates from Jabir bin ‘Abdullah that he said: “We were
with the Prophet (s.a.w.w) when ‘Ali came (to us). The Prophet (s.a.w.w)
said, ‘I swear by Him in whose hand is my soul, verily this (‘Ali) and
his Shi‘a are successful on the Day of Resurrection’. Then the following
verse was revealed,

***‘Verily those who believe and do good deeds, it is they who are the
best*** ***of creatures*** ***[Qur’an 98:7]’***”.[^12]

At-Tabarani says that the Prophet told ‘Ali: “O ‘Ali, verily you will
come before Allah, you and your Shi‘as well-pleased (with Allah) and
well-pleasing (to Him).”[^13]

There are so many *ahadith* from so many narrators that Sunni scholars
could not reject them. So they tried to fit these *ahadith* on their own
group. After quoting these traditions, Ibn Hajar al-Makki writes, “And
the Shi‘a of Ahlu ’l-Bayt are Ahlu ’s-Sunnah wa ’l-Jama‘ah (i.e, the
Sunnis), because it is they who loved the Ahlu ’l-Bayt as was ordered by
Allah and His Messenger. So far as others are concerned, they are in
fact the enemies (of Ahlu ’l-Bayt).”[^14]

This claim was repeated by Shah ‘Abdu ’l-Aziz Dehlawi who says, “It
should be known that the first Shi‘as (who are the Sunnis and the
Tafdiliyyah) in old days were known as Shi‘as. When the *Ghulat* and the
*Rawafid Zaydiyyah* and *Isma‘iliyyah* took the name for
themselves........... the Sunnis and Tafdiliyyah did not like this name
for themselves and so they took the name of Ahlu ’s- Sunnah wa
’l-Jama‘ah.”[^15]

Such claims should not be dignified by reply. But seeing that an
abridged Arabic translation of *Tuhfah* has recently been published in
Egypt, I quote here the comment of another Sunni scholar, ‘Ubaydullah
Amritsari, who after quoting the above claim in his book *Arjahu
’l-Matalib*, says: “To say that Sunnis in the beginning were known as
Shi‘as is merely a claim for which no proof can be found. Had the Sunnis
been called Shi‘a, then at least some of the Sunni elders should have
been known by this name before the event of Zaydiyyah (in 120 A.H.).
Moreover, had the Sunnis been known by this name, the Zaydiyyah and
Isma‘iliyyah would have not tolerated this name for themselves (because
of the enmity) and would have selected some other name for
themselves.”[^16]

The First Shi‘ias
-----------------

During the life-time of the Prophet (s.a.w.w) the word, Shi‘a, was used
as a name first of all for four highly respected companions of the
Prophet: Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr Jundab bin Junadah al-Ghifari,
Miqdad bin Aswad al-Kindi and ‘Ammar bin Yasir.

*Kashfu ’z-Zunun*, Vol.III, quotes from *Kitabu ’z-Zinah* of Abu Hatim
Sahal (sic) bin Muhammad Sajastani (sic), (d.205 A.H.):

“In the days of the Holy Prophet (may peace be upon him) the word Shi‘a
was mentioned with reference to four persons: Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr
Ghaffari (sic), Miqdad bin Aswad al-Kindi and ‘Ammar bin Yasir.”[^17]

Those were the first Shi‘as and that was the beginning of the Shi‘a
faith under the kind guidance and patronage of the Prophet of Islam
himself.

Hadith Ath-Thaqalayn
--------------------

In the preceding chapter mention has been made of two important
traditions of “Two precious things” (ath-thaqalayn) and “whose master am
I, ‘Ali is his master” (al-Wilayah). As for the latter, sufficient
details have been given in my book, Imamate (from page 62 to page 81).
As for the former, some references are quoted here (with adaptation)
from “The Right Path”, the English translation of al-Muraja’at.

The Holy Prophet said:
“Oh you people, I leave amongst you two things which if you follow, you
will never go astray after me, and they are the Book of Allah and my
Ahlu ‘l-Bayt.”[^18]

He also said:
“I have left among you certain things and if you will love them you
will never go astray. They are the Book of Allah, which is like a rope
extending from the heaven to the earth, and my children, that is my Ahlu
‘l-Bayt. These two shall never part from each other until they come to
me at the pool of Kawthar (in Paradise). So, take care how you treat
them.”[^19]

He also said:
“I leave among you two Weighty Things, the Book of Allah and my Ahlu
‘l­ Bayt; and these two shall never separate from each other until they
come to me at the Pool.”[^20]

He also said:
“I will soon be called away and will have to depart from you, but I
leave among you Two Weighty Things, the Book of the High and Mighty
Allah and my descendants. The Book of Allah is like a rope which extends
from the heavens to the earth, and my descendants who are my Ahlu
‘l-Bayt. The subtle and Aware (Allah) tells me that the two shall never
part company until they come to me at the Pool. So take care how you
treat them after me.”[^21]

When the Holy Prophet was returning (to Medina) from the Farewell
Pilgrimage and arrived at Ghadir Khum, he stopped there and said:
“It seems as if I have been summoned and I am going away. However, I am
leaving among you Two Weighty Things, one of which is greater than the
other. They are the Book of Allah the Almighty and my children. So take
care how you treat them after me. The two shall never part company until
they come to me at the Pool.’

He continued:
“The Lord, Allah the Almighty is my Master and I am the master of every
true believer.”

Then he took the hand of ‘Ali in his hand and said:
“He is the master of all those whose master I have been. O Allah, love
those who love ‘Ali and hate those who hate him…”[^22]

‘Abdullah ibn Hantab related that the Messenger of Allah addressed us at
Juhfah saying: “Do I not have authority over you more than yourselves?”
They all said, “Yes, of course”. Then he said: “I shall hold you
answerable for two things, namely, the Book of Allah and my
descendants.”[^23]

All these authentic traditions, which prove conclusively that it is
compulsory to follow the Qur’an and the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt are not ordinary
traditions. They are repeated many times and are related on the
authority of at least twenty companions of the Holy Prophet through
various sources. The Holy Prophet repeated these words over and over
again (and not merely in one isolated instance but on several occasions)
publicly to show that it is compulsory to follow and obey the Ahlu
‘l-Bayt. He made this announcement during the Farewell Pilgrimage, on
‘Arafat Day, at Ghadir Khum, and on the return from Ta’if, and at Medina
from the pulpit in the mosque. Finally, as he lay on his deathbed and
the room was packed with his Companions, he said:

“Oh, you folk! I am soon going to depart from here, and although I have
already told you, I repeat once more that I am leaving with you two
things, namely, the Book of Allah and my descendants, that is, my Ahlu
‘l-Bayt.’ Then he lifted up ‘Ali by the hand and said:
“Behold, this is ‘Ali: he is with the Qur’an and the Qur’an is with
him. They shall never part from each other until they come to me at the
Pool of Kawthar.”[^24]

A large group of distinguished persons belonging to the Sunni sects has
acknowledged this as the Holy Prophet’s last will and testament. Even
Ibn Hajar, after recording the Hadith al-Thaqalayn (the tradition of The
Two Weighty Things), comments on it by saying:

“Tradition of Adherence has been handed down through large number of
sources and more than twenty of the disciples have related it.’ Then, a
little further on, he says, “Here a doubt arises, and it is that while
the Tradition has come down through various sources, some say that the
words were spoken during the last pilgrimage, others that they were
spoken at Medina when he lay on his deathbed and the room was packed
with his disciples, yet another saying that he spoke these words at
Ghadir Khum or on the return from Ta’if. But there is no inconsistency
as it is possible that, having regard to the importance and greatness of
the Qur’an and the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt, and with a view to emphasizing the
point before people, the Holy Prophet might have repeated these words on
all these occasions so that anyone who had not heard them before might
hear them now.”[^25]

Moreover, since the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt carry as much weight in the eyes of
Allah as the Holy Qur’an, the former have the same qualities as the
latter. Just as the Qur’an is true from beginning to end without the
shadow of any untruth in it, and just as it is incumbent upon every
Muslim to obey its commands, so also must the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt be perfectly
true and sincere guides whose commands must be followed by all.
Therefore, there can be no escape from accepting their leadership and
following their creed and their faith. The Muslims are bound by these
saying of the Prophet to follow them and no one else. Just as it is
impossible for any Muslim to turn away from the Holy Qur’an or to adopt
any set of rules which is at variance with it, so when the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt
have been unequivocally described as equal in weight and importance to
the Qur’an, the same attitude has to be adopted with regard to their
precepts, and it cannot be permissible to turn away from them and follow
any other persons.

In the Prophet’s sayings: “I leave among you two things: if you will
adhere to both of them you will never go astray; and they are the Book
of Allah and my descendants,” the requirement of adherence to both of
them should be particularly noted. It plainly shows that whoever adheres
to or adopts both of them as his guides will be saved from going astray.
Therefore, if a person takes only one of them without taking the other
for a guide he will go astray. This point becomes still clearer by
considering Tabarani’s version, which contains the further injunction:
“Look out! And do not either go ahead of them or lag behind them, for
in either case you will be destroyed; and do not (try to) teach them for
they know more than you.”

Ibn Hajar holds that these words show that those members of the Ahlu
‘l-Bayt who possessed these distinctions were superior to all the
people.[^26]

Another tradition which should compel every Muslim to follow the Ahlu
‘l­ Bayt and accept no one else as guides in matters of religion is that
the Holy Prophet said (as narrated by Abu Dharr al-Ghifari):

“Behold! My Ahlu ‘l-Bayt are like the Ark of Noah; whoever embarked in
it was saved, and whoever turned away from it was destroyed.”[^27]

Yet another tradition tells us that the Holy Prophet said: “My Ahlu
‘l-Bayt are like the Gate of Repentance[^28] of the children of Israel;
whoever entered therein was forgiven.”[^29]

A further tradition is as follows:
“The stars protect the inhabitants of the earth from being drowned, and
my Ahlu ‘l-Bayt are the protectors of my followers against discord (in
matters of religion). Therefore, whichever group among the Arabs opposes
my Ahl al-Bayt (on questions related to the Divine Commandments) shall
be split up by dissentions and become the party of Satan.”[^30]

These traditions, therefore, leave no room for any doubt. There can be
no other way except to follow the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt and give up all
opposition to them. The clear and unequivocal terms in which the Holy
Prophet has directed us about these matters in the above mentioned
traditions cannot be surpassed or rivaled in any other language.

Here the ‘Ahlu ‘l-Bayt’ have been collectively referred to. The
expression includes all the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt. This epithet applies only to
those who are Proofs of Allah and occupy the position of Imams by Divine
Decree, as established by reason and upheld by the traditions. Learned
scholars of the Sunnis also admit this. For example, Ibn Hajar writes in
his Sawa’iqu ‘l-Muhriqah: “Some people think that probably the ‘Ahlu
‘l-Bayt’ whom the Holy Prophet has designated as the protectors are the
learned men among the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt, since the guidance can be attained
only through them. They are like the stars through whom we are guided in
the right direction, and if the stars are taken away we would come face
to face with the signs of the Almighty as promised (i.e., the Day of
Resurrection). This will happen when the Mahdi will come, as mentioned
in the traditions, and the Prophet Jesus will say his prayers behind
him, the Dajjal will be slain, and then the signs of the Almighty will
appear one after the other.”[^31]

In another place Ibn Hajar writes: “The Holy Prophet was asked what
would be the condition of the people after the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt, and he
replied:

‘Their condition will be like that of an ass whose spine is
broken.’[^32]

You know very well that the Holy Prophet’s tradition which says that the
Ahlu ‘l-Bayt are like the Ark of Noah leads to the conclusion that those
who adopt their creed and follow them shall be saved from the punishment
of Hell, while those who run away from them shall meet with the fate of
one who tried to save his life by climbing up the mountain, with the
only difference that whereas he (Noah’s renegade son) was drowned in
water, these people will be drowned in the fire of Hell. And the Holy
Prophet’s use of the simile of the Gate of Repentance signifies that
just like that Gate, the Ahlu ‘l-Bayt are the manifestations of the
Majesty and Sovereignty of the All-Highest Lord to whom we must submit
and offer our humble obedience.

Fundamental Belief of Shi’a Ithna-’Ashariya
-------------------------------------------

In Shi’a terminology, fundamental beliefs are called Usul al-deen, i.e.
Roots of Religion. The Usul al-deen are five. Three are called Roots of
Islam. They are:

**1. Tawheed,** Belief in oneness of God.

**2. Nubuwwat,** Belief in the Prophets.

**3. Qiyamat,** Belief in the Day of Judgment.

Remaining two are called Usul al-Iman, Roots of Faith. They are:

**1. ‘Adil,** Justice of God.

**2. Imamat,** the successorship of the Holy Prophet of Islam.

A person believing in all five Usul al-deen is called Shi’a
Ithna-’ashariyah. Such a Shi’a believes that:

### Tawheed

There is only one God, Eternal, Self-Sufficient. He has no beginning or
end. He is Omnipotent, has power over everything and every affair. He is
Omniscient, knows everything, nothing is ever a secret from Him. He has
His own discretion in all affairs, does not do anything under
compulsion. He is All-perceiving, All-hearing, All-seeing and
Omnipresent, He sees and hears everything though He has neither eye nor
ear. He has no partner or colleague, nor has He any son, daughter or
wife. He is neither made nor composed of any material substance. He has
no body nor is He confined to a place. He is not afflicted by anything
related to body. He is not governed by time, space, change or things
like that. He is not visible. He has not been seen, and will never be
seen either in this world or the hereafter. His attributes are not
separate from His person. He speaks truth and is Truthful. He does not
enter into any body, needs nothing, and does no evil. It is He who has
created the universe and it is He who sustains it.

### ‘Adl

Allah is just: He does not do injustice to anyone. He has ordered us to
do justice to our fellow creatures, but He Himself treats us not only
with justice but with grace. He created us for His worship, in order
that we may attain spiritual perfection through it. That spiritual
perfections enables us to reach nearer to Allah.

For this purpose, He has given us freedom of will and choice. When we
choose, by our free will, the Straight path (prescribed by Allah) we are
assured in the next world of everlasting happiness and glory by Grace of
Allah.

### Nubuwwat

To show us the straight path, Allah has been sending His Representatives
to the mankind. They are called Nabii (Prophet) and Rasul (Messenger).
It is wajib to believe in the Prophethood of the previous Prophets as
well as of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S).

There came a total of 124,000 Prophets and Messengers, beginning with
Adam (a.s.) and ending with Muhammad (S). All the Prophets were ma’sum
(sinless, infallible). Also they were free from every such defect in
body or character which might create repulsion in people. Muhammad, the
Holy Prophet of Islam, is the Final Prophet; anybody claiming
Prophethood after him is a liar and imposter.

The Holy Prophet of Islam ascended to the heavens in mi’raj. The Qur’an
is the word of Allah. There has been no alteration, omission or addition
in the Qur’an. Hadith is an authentic source of shari’ah.

It is wajib to believe in questioning in grave through Munkar and Nakir,
and in the squeeze of grave. The angels, the Satan and the jinns do
exist.

### Imamat

To lead the people to the Straight Path, and to preserve the religion of
Islam, Allah appointed twelve successors, one after another, of the
Prophet of Islam. They are called Imams. Imam literally means leader.
First of them was ‘Ali son of Abu Talib, and the last one is al-Mahdi
(a.s.). All Imams are ma’sum (infallible, sinless).

The names of the twelve Imams are as follows:

1. ‘Ali, son of Abu Talib.
2. Hassan, son of ‘Ali
3. Husayn, son of ‘Ali
4. ‘Ali Zaynul ‘Abideen, son of Husayn
5. Muhammad Baqir, son of ‘Ali Zaynul ‘Abideen
6. Ja’far Sadiq, son of Muhammad Baqir
7. Musa Kazim, son of Ja’far Sadiq
8. ‘Ali Riza, son of Musa Kazim
9. Muhammad Taqi, son of ‘Ali Riza
10. ‘Ali Naqi, son of Muhammad Taqi
11. Hasan ‘Askari, son of ‘Ali Naqi
12. Muhammad Mahdi, son of Hasan ‘Askari

Imam Mahdi, the twelfth Imam, is alive, but is hidden from our eyes by
order of Allah. He will re-appear, when Allah allows him, to establish
the Kingdom of God on the earth. It will be near the end of the world,
when he will establish justice and equity in the world after it has been
devastated by injustice and oppression.

### Qiyamat

After that will come Qiyamat, the day of resurrection, the day of
judgement. One day this world will come to an end. All people will die;
then the whole mankind will be resurrected to face the reckoning of
their faith and deed. People having correct belief and doing good deeds
will be placed in the paradise; while people having wrong belief will go
to hell. The Day of Judgment is a fact and truth; transmigration of soul
is a wrong idea.

Everyone will get recompense of his/her good or bad deeds. Mizan
(weighing scale), Hisab (reckoning of deeds), Sirat (Path, the bridge
over the hell) are facts and the truth; scrolls of deeds will be given
in people’s right or left hands. Shafa’at (intercession) by the Holy
Prophet is a fact and truth. Repentance is wajib. Paradise and hell do
exist even now.

To know and believe in the above-mentioned Usul al-deen is the first and
foremost responsibility of a person. As explained just now, neglecting
them throws one in ever-lasting punishment of the hell. If one does not
believe in the Usul al-deen, then his acts of worship are not accepted
by Allah.

Status Of Muhammad And His Progeny
----------------------------------

According to the Shi’as, Shafi’is and many other Sunnis, when Allah
Subhanahu wa Ta’ala wished to create the creatures, he created first of
all the Nur (Light) of Muhammad (S). The Shi’a ahadith to this effect
may be seen in Biharu ‘l-anwar, vol. 15. Here, I am quoting only from
Sunni sources for completing the proof against the Wahhabis who
erroneously believe that the Prophet was just like other human beings.

Al-Qastalani (d. 923 A.H) has narrated the Prophet’s tradition to this
effect through Jabir Ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari and ‘Ali (a.s).[^33]

Al-Mas’udi (d. 346 A.H) quotes a lengthy tradition from ‘Ali (a.s) which
says that Allah created first of all the Light of Muhammad; then he said
to that light:

“You are My chosen one and the Trustee (amin) of My Light and Guidance.
It is because of you that I am going to create the Earth and the Skies,
lay down reward and punishment, and bring into being the Garden and the
Fire”. The tradition goes on speaking about the Progeny of the Prophet,
creation of the angels, the souls and the world. Then it speaks about
the Covenant taken from the souls which combined the belief in the One
God with acceptance of Muhammad’s Prophethood.”[^34]

That is why Ibn ‘Abbas narrates that the Prophet said: “I was Prophet
when Adam was between soul and body.[^35]” That is, when Adam’s creation
was in its preliminary stages.

Muhammad’s Light adorned the ‘Arsh (Throne) of God. When eons later Adam
was created that Light was put into his forehead. It continued its
journey, generation after generation, through numerous Prophets and
their successors, until it came to the Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.); from
Ibrahim (a.s.) it came to his eldest son, prophet Isma’il (a.s).

Wathila ibn al-Aqsa’ said that the Holy Prophet (S) said: “Verily Allah
chose Isma’il from the progeny of Ibrahim; and chose Banu Kinanah from
the progeny of Isma’il; and chose the Quraysh from Banu Kinanah; and
chose Banu Hashim from the Quraysh; and chose me from Banu Hashim.”[^36]

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Gabriel said to me: ‘I looked at the Earth
from the east to the west, but I could not find any one superior to
Muhammad; and I looked at the earth from the east to the west, but did
not find any progeny superior to the progeny of Hashim.’”[^37]

The Holy Prophet said: “I and ‘Ali were one Light in presence of Allah
fourteen thousand years before the creation of Adam. When Adam was
created that Light was placed into his loin. Thus Allah was transferring
it from noble loins to pure wombs until Allah settled it into the loin
of ‘Abdu ‘l-Muttalib. Then Allah divided it into two, one part went into
the loin of ‘Abdullah and the other to that of Abu Talib. Therefore ‘Ali
is from me and I am from him, his flesh is my flesh and his blood is my
blood; whoever loves him, he does so because of my love, and whoever
hates him, he does so because he hates me.”[^38]

It is unanimously accepted by the Shi’as, the Shafi’is and the Hanafis
that the ancestors of the Holy Prophet (S) from ‘Abdullah to Qidar ibn
Isma’il and from there upto Adam (a.s.) were true believers. They
believed in the One and the Only God, and faithfully followed the divine
religion of their times. From Qidar to ‘Abdullah, all of them followed
the shari’ah of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.), which was the religion
prescribed by Allah for them.

The famous Shafi’i scholar, Imam Jalalu ‘d-deen as-Suyuti (d. 911 A.H),
has written nine books on this subject, and has proved beyond any doubt
that all the ancestors of the Holy Prophet (S) were true believers. The
famous Hanafi muhaddith, Shaykh ‘Abdu ‘l-Haqq Dehlawi has written: ‘‘All
the ancestors of the Holy prophet from Adam upto ‘Abdullah were pure and
clean from the uncleanness of disbelief and paganism. It was not
possible for Allah to put that Holy Light (of the Holy Prophet) into any
dark and dirty place, that is, in the loin of a pagan man or the womb of
a pagan woman. Also, how could it be possible for Allah to punish the
ancestors of the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgement and thus humiliate
him before the eyes of the world.”[^39]

The Holy Prophet (SAW) himself said: “I was always being transferred
from the loins of the clean ones to the wombs of the clean ones.”[^40]

For Shi’a sources, see Biharu ‘l-anwar, vol.15.

Al-Hashawiyah Wahhabiya
-----------------------

The Wahhabis’ belief is diametrically opposed to the Muslims’ belief.
The Wahhabis say that the parents and the forefathers of the Holy
Prophet (S) were idol-worshipers and Kafirs, na’udhu billah. The
Wahhabis will see the result of this hypocrisy on the Day of Judgement
when the Holy Prophet (S) will stand before Allah to complain against
them for such blasphemous slander against his parents and fore-fathers.
Can Muhammad ibn ‘Abdu ‘l-Wahhab save the Wahhabis from the wrath of
Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (S) on that day?

Now that the reader has seen in detail what Shi’ism means and what the
Shi’as believe, the time has come to look at the baseless accusations
levelled against them in the Nairobi booklet of the unknown writer.

It is necessary to mention beforehand that the Wahhabis are today’s
al-Hashawiyah; or let us say that their beliefs are views tally hundred
percent with those who were called al-Hashawiyah in the early centuries.

The term, al-Hashawiyah is derived from al-hashw, i.e. stuffing,
insertion. This name is used for those who accept and believe in all
traditions which were brought into Islam by insincere people. They
believe in the literal meaning of all the traditions attributed to the
Prophet (S) and his companions without any re-interpretation. Even if a
“tradition’’ was forged (but the forger had taken care to attach a good
chain of narrators to it), they accept it without caring whether its
text conforms with the Qur’an or mutawatir or accepted traditions or
not.

Most of the Sunni muhadditheen were Hashawiyah.

Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Yamani (died 840 A.H.) writes:
“al-Hashawiyah: This name is used for those who narrate stuffed
traditions, i.e., which were inserted by Zanadiqah in the Prophet’s
sayings and they accept it without any re-interpretation; and they call
themselves As-habul hadith and Ahlus-sunnah wal Jama’ah....... They
unanimously believe in compulsion (by God, concerning man’s actions),
and tashbih (that God is like his creatures), and believe that God has a
body and a form, and say that He has various limbs.......”[^41]

Abul Fath Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul-Karim ash-Shahristani (467-548 A.H) writes
in his Al-Milal wan-Nihal:

‘‘And a group of As-habul-hadith, al-Hashawiyah have explicitly declared
their belief of Tashbih (i.e. Allah is like his creatures)............
So much so that they have said that once Allah’s both eyes were ailing,
so the angels went to see Him; and He wept (grieving) on Noah’s flood
until His eyes were inflamed; and that the ‘Arsh gives moaning sound
under Him like the sound of a new saddle; and that He exceeds the ‘Arsh
(Throne) in size to the extent of four fingers on all sides.”[^42]

There is no need to point out that this definition and description fits
totally on the Wahhabis who call themselves Ashabul-Hadith or
Ahlul-hadith and very often pose as Sunnis, and now-a-days call
themselves Ansaru ‘s-Sunnah.

[^1]: Qur’an 28:15

[^2]: Qur’an 37:83

[^3]: Al-Qamus, vol. 2; at-Turayhi, Majma‘ul ’l-Bahrayn, vol. 2, p. 539;
Ibn al-Athir al-Jazari, an-Nihayah, Egypt ed., [1383/1963], vol. 2, pp.
519-520.

[^4]: al-Mufid, Shaykh, Awa’ilu ’l-Maqalat (Qum: 2nd ed:, 1370 A.H.)
pp.2-3.

[^5]: Qur’an 26:214

[^6]: At-Tabari, Muhammad bin Jarir, Ta’rikh, vol. 3 (Laden: EJ Brill,
1882-1885) p.1171-1173. It is interesting to note that in the Cario 1939
edition of at-Tabari’s Ta’rikh (which claims to have been checked by the
Laden edition), the important words “wasiyyi wa Khalifati” (my heir and
successor) have been changed to “kadha wa kadha” (so and so)! How sad it
is to see the academic world sacrificing its integrity on the altar of
political expediency. It should be mentioned here that this tradition
with the crucial words has been narrated by at least thirty Sunni
scholars, historians, traditionalists and commentators of the Qur’an.
Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal has narrated this in his Musnad (vol.1, P.111)
with the following sanad: (a) Aswad bin ‘Amir from (b) Sharik from (c)
al-A‘mash from (d) al-Minhal from (e) ‘Ibad bin ‘Abdullah al-Asadi from
(f) ‘Ali. Now (a), (c) and (e) are among the narrators of both
al-Bukhari and al-Muslim, while (b) is among the narrators of al-Muslim
and (d) among those of al-Bukhari Also, Ahmad b. Shu‘ayb an-Nasa’i,
whose Sunan is one of the six authentic sources of Sunni hadith, has
narrated this hadith from Ibn ‘Abbas in his al-Khasa’is, p.6. For other
references of this hadith, see al-Muraja’at of ‘Abdu ’l-Husayn Sharfu
’d-Din (letters 20 to 23). This is one of the most important Shi‘a works
of recent times; It has been printed scores of times in Iraq, Iran,
Lebanon and Kuwait. Its Urdu translation entitled as Din-e-Haqq was
published in Kujhwa (Saran) India, which in its turn was translated into
English as The Right Path by Mohammad Amir Haider Khan and was recently
published by Peermohamed Ibrahim Trust, Karachi. (The English
translation has since been reprinted several times in Iran, U.K. and
U.S.A)

[^7]: An-Nasa’i, al-Khasa’is, p.15

[^8]: Ibid. p. 16

[^9]: Mutawatir means a hadith narrated by so many people that no doubt
can be entertained about its authenticity.

[^10]: Siddiq Hasan Khan, Minhaju ’l-wusul, p.13

[^11]: See volume 1 of al-Ghadir, which deals exclusively with this
subject. This is another important Shi‘a book of recent times. Eleven
volumes were published before al-Amini died in 1969. It has been
published many times in Iraq, Iran and Lebanon. I have seen its Persian
translation. Late Shaikh Muhammad Mustafa Jawhar, of Karachi, had
translated the first volume in Urdu but it was lost from the press. Now
another Urdu translation of the first volume has been printed in India

[^12]: As-Suyuti, Jalalud ’d-Din (d. 910/1504-5), ad-Durru ’l Manthur,
vol.6 p.379. He narrates a similar ahadith from Ibn ‘Abbas and ‘Ali also
in the same place; Al- Khuwarizmi (d.569/1173-4) in al-Manaqib. Other
ahadith of the Prophet declaring that the Shi‘ahs of ‘Ali will succeed
in the hereafter are narrated from Abdullah, Abu Rafi‘, Jabir bin
Abdullah, Ibn ‘Abbas and ‘Ali by Sunni authorities including at-Tabarani
in his al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, Ahmad bin Hanbal in his al-Manaqib, Ibn
Marduwayh al-Kanji ash-Shafi‘i (d.658/1260) in his Kifayatu ’t-Talib and
many others.

[^13]: Ibn Athir in an-Nihayah; Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Makki in his
as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah (Cairo, n.d) p. 92. He narrates many ahadith to
this effect.

[^14]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah

[^15]: Shah ‘Abdu ’l-Aziz Dehlawi, Tuhfah-e-Ithna-‘ashariyyah,
Nawalkishor Press, Lucknow, n.d; pp. 4, 11, 59

[^16]: ‘Ubaydullah Amritsari, Arjahu ’l-Matalib, 2nd ed. Lahore, p. 608
(which is wrongly written as 164.)

[^17]: As quoted by Hasan al-Amin, Islamic Shi‘ite Encyclopaedia, Vol.
1, Beirut, 1968, pp.12-13.

[^18]: Reported by Tirmidhi and Nasa’i through Jabir and copied from
them by al-Muttaqi of India at the beginning of his chapter on
“Adherence” in his book Kanzu ’l-‘Ummal, Beirut, 5th ed., 1405/1985, vol
1, p.172.

[^19]: Tradition No.874 in Sahih al-Tirmidhi as related by Zayd ibn al
Arqam, Kanzu ’l ‘Ummal, vol.1, p. 173

[^20]: Imam Ahmad ibn al-Hanbal, Musnad, vol.5, p.182, and vol. 5, p.189
at the end: At-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir from Zayd ibn Thabit; Kanzu
’l-‘Ummal, vol.1, p.172; Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol.3, p.148, with the
comment that this tradition is authentic according to the tests followed
by the two Shaykhs (i.e., Muslim and Bukhari) though they have not
included it in their collections; Dhahabi, Talkhis al-Mustadrak.

[^21]: Imam Ahmad ibn al-Hanbal from the tradition related by Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri in two ways, in his Musnad, vol.3, p.17 and p.26. Also
recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. Abu Ya’li and Ibn al-Sa’d from Abu Sa’id;
Kanzu ’l-‘Ummal, vol.1, p.185, tradition No.944 also see traditions 945
& 946.

[^22]: Al-Hakim from Zayd ibn al-Arqam, Al-Mustadrak, vol.3, p.109 with
the comment that this tradition is authentic according to the tests
applied by the two Shaykhs, although they have not recorded it in full.
It has also been related through another source from Zayd ibn al-Arqam
and recorded in vol.3, p.533 of Mustadrak with the comment that it is
authentic, although the two Shaykhs have not recorded it. Dhahabi has
also recorded it in his Talkhis as authentic.

[^23]: Al-Tabarani has recorded this tradition as mentioned by ‘Allamah
al-Nabahani in his ‘Arba’in al-Arba’in, and ‘Allamah al-Suyuti in his
Ihya’ al-Mayt.

[^24]: Ibn Hajar, al-Haythami al-Makki, as-Sawa‘iqu’l-Muhriqah, ch. 9.

[^25]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah, chap 11. sub-heading 1. p. 89.

[^26]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah, chapter on the Holy Prophet’s will,
p.136.

[^27]: Imam Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p.151.

[^28]: Refer to Qur’an 2:57-58.

[^29]: Al-Tabarani, Al-Mu’jam Al-Aswat (tradition No.18) as related by
Abu Sa’id: Al-Nabahani, Arba’in, p.216.

[^30]: Imam Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, Vol.3, p.149 as related by Ibn ‘Abbas,
with the same note that in this authentic tradition but has not been
recorded by the two Shayks, Muslim and Bukhari.

[^31]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah, chap. 11 p. 91, dealing with the
interpretation of the seventh verse referred to therein.

[^32]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah, p. 143.

[^33]: al-Qastalani, al-Mawahibu ’l-Ladunniyah, vol. 1, pp. 5, 9, 10.

[^34]: al-Masu’di, Maruju’dh-dhahab.

[^35]: at-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir; al-Khasa’is al-kubra, vol. 1, p.
4.

[^36]: Sahih at-Tirmidhi; he has said that this hadith is Sahih (true,
absolutely reliable).

[^37]: Abu ‘l-Fida’, at-Tarikh.

[^38]: ‘Ubaydullah Amritsari, Arjahu ‘l-matalib, 1st ed. 1340 A.H. pp.
458-463. He has quoted eight traditions, with minor variation, of this
meaning from various Sunni Muhaddithin including Ibn Marduwayh,
Al-Khwarizmi, Ibnu ’l-Maghazili, Al-Khatib Al-Baghdadi, al-Hamwayni,
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Kanji ash-Shafi‘i, Abu Hatim and Abu Muhammad
Ahmad bin ‘Ali Al-‘Asimi etc. Some of these ahadith say: “So He made me
Prophet, and made ‘Ali (my) successor.”

[^39]: Madariju ’n-nubuwwah.

[^40]: ‘Ubaydullah Amritsari, Arjahu ’l-matalib, pp.526-258.

[^41]: Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Yamani, Kitab al-Munyah wal Amal, fi sharh
al-Milal wan Nihal, 1988 ed. p. 114.

[^42]: Ash-Shahristani, al-Milal wan Nihal, printed on the margin of
Kitabul Fasl of Ibn Hazam, p. 141.


