Hadith
======

The ignorant writer writes under the heading “Denial of the Hadith”:
“The Shia’s have their own books of traditions; however, in these books
the sayings of Rasulullah (Sallallahu alayhi Wasallam) are no more than
five percent; the rest 95 % contains sayings and doings of their imams.
In Shi’a terminology “Hadith” means talk, action or speech of an Imam.
Thus the Shi’as have broken all the links with the Islam of Rasulullah
(Sallallah alayhi Wasallam) who on the occasion of Farewell Pilgrimage
said:
“I am leaving behind two things among you; if you hold fast to them you
will never go astray. These are the Book of Allah and my Sunnah”

There are a lot of amusing things in this short quotation.

Let us begin with the definition of Hadith. Hadith even in Sunni
terminology is not confined to “narration of the talk, action or
‘Taqreer” of the Holy Prophet (S) but includes talks of his companions
and their disciples too.

Likewise, in Shi’a terminology it means the talk, action or “Taqreer” of
the Holy Prophet (S), his daughter Bibi Fatimah and the twelve Imams
(a.s.) (i.e. the 14 Ma’sums) or its narration.

Now it is for the reader to decide whether the words of the companions
and their disciples (who were admittedly not Ma’sum ) are more worthy of
acceptance or those of Bibi Fatimah and the 12 Imams whose ‘Ismah is
accepted even by such pillars of Sunni’ism as Shah Waliullah Dehlavi,
Shah ‘Abdu ‘l­ ‘Aziz Dehlavi and others. This is quite apart from the
fact that 4 of this group - Bibi Fatimah, ‘Ali, Hasan and Husayn a.s -
were also companions of the Holy Prophet (S).

The unknown writer has given the definition of hadith in these words:
“In Shi’a terminology “Hadith” means talk, action or speech of an Imam:’
You have seen that it is not only Imams but even before them the Holy
Prophet and Bibi Fatimah whose talk, action and Taqreer or its narration
which is called Hadith. Most amusing is his translation of “Taqreer” as
speech, which shows his crass ignorance of even his own madhhab and its
terminologies, because the terminology “Taqreer” is commonly used by all
sects, and it means this:

“When a follower does something in the presence of the Prophet or Imam
and the Prophet or Imam does not forbid him to do so (in spite of being
in a position to guide that follower if he so wished), then that silent
or tacit approval will prove the validity of the follower’s action:’
This “silent approval” is called “Taqreer” which this fool has
translated as “speech”

He claims that 95% of the Shi’a traditions are from the Imams. Can
anyone accept the claim of someone who has not ever seen any book of
Shi’a traditions? He is ignorant of the fact that our Imams never spoke
of their own accord. Whatever they said was a narration of the ahadith
received through their immaculate and sinless forefathers. As this fact
was known to one and all, there was no need for them to elongate their
hadith by mentioning the chain of narrators.

Someone who was unaware of this fact asked Imam Muhammmad al-Baqir
(a.s.) about the hadith “which you transmit without mentioning its chain
of narrators” The Imam (a.s.) said: “When I narrate a hadith without
mentioning its chain of narrators, then my link in that is “my father
(Imam Zaynu ‘l-’Abedeen a.s.) from my grandfather (Imam al-Husayn a.s.)
from his father (Imam ‘Ali a.s) from the Messenger of Allah (Blessings
of Allah be on him and his progeny), from Jibra’il from Allah the
Mighty, the Great.”[^1]

The same declaration was made by Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) about his
own ahadith.[^2]

Salim ibn Hafsah says: “When Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Baqir ibn ‘Ali
(Zaynu ‘l-’Abedeen) (peace be on both) died, I said to my companions:
‘Wait for me, so that I may go to Abu ‘Abdillah Ja’far (as-Sadiq) ibn
Muhammad (Al-Baqir) (peace be on him) to offer condolences to him’. Then
I went to his house and offered condolence. Then I said: “To Allah we
belong and to Him are we to return. By Allah, such a man has passed away
that when he said, ‘The Messenger of Allah (S) has said: he was not
asked about the links between him and the Messenger of Allah (S). No, by
Allah! his like will not be seen again!”

He says: “(Hearing this), Abu ‘Abdillah (Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq a.s .) was
silent for a while; then said: ‘Allah, the Mighty, the Great, has said:
“Verily, whosoever gives in sadaqah even a portion of a date, I make it
grow for him as one of you brings up his colt, until I make it (big) for
him like the (mountain of) Uhud;”” Then I came to my companions and
said: ‘I never saw anything more wonderful than it. We used to regard as
great the words, “The Messenger of Allah (S) said” when spoken by Abu
Ja’far (Imam Muhammad al-Baqir a.s.) without the intermediate links: and
(now) Abu ‘Abdillah (Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq a.s.) has said to me, ‘‘Allah,
the Mighty, the Great, has said” --without the Intermediate link.”[^3]

So when our Imams spoke, their connecting link upto Allah Ta’ala was
known and understood by their listeners: and they had no need to give
those sacred names every now and then. That is why a poet had said:

*“If you want to choose for yourself a madh-hab*
*Which will protect you from the Fire on the Day of Resurrection.*
*Then leave aside the opinions of so and so and this and that*
*And love and follow those people whose narration and hadith (runs as
follows):*
*“Has narrated it our Grandfather from Jibra’il from (Allah) the
Creator”.*

It is such a holy and blessed link that if it was uttered for some
reasons by our Imams it was treated as a precious treasure of spiritual
benefits.

Golden Link
-----------

A lot of muhadditheen have narrated that when our 8th Imam, Abu ‘I-Hasan
‘Ali Ar-Rdha (peace be on him) was passing from Nishapur on his way to
Marv, two famous muhadditheen, Abu Zar’ah ar -Razi and Muhammad ibn
Aslam at­ Tusi met him together with innumerable scholars and students
of fiqh, hadilh and dirayah. The two muhadditheen said: “O Great Sayyid,
son of the Sayyids who were Imams, we request you by the haqq of your
purified forefathers and venerated progenitors that you show us your
blessed face and narrate to us a hadith through your fathers from your
grandfather, Muhammad (S), that we should remember you by it:’ The Imam
stopped his mule, and ordered his servants to raise the shade from his
howdah; and thus the people were delighted to see his blessed features;
he had two strands reaching his shoulders.

All the people of various categories stood there looking at him, some
were crying, others weeping, yet others putting their cheeks on the
earth and some kissing the hooves of the mule. Then the scholars and the
jurisprudents asked the people to keep quiet, saying: “Hear and listen
and remain calm in order that you may hear what would benefit you, and
do not trouble us by excessive crying and weeping:’ Thereafter the Imam
(‘Ali) Ar-Rdha said:

“Narrated to me my father Musa al-Kazim from his father Ja’far as-Sadiq,
from his father Muhammad al-Baqir, from his father ‘Ali Zaynu
‘l-’Abedein, from his father al-Husayn the martyr of Karbala, from his
father ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib that he said: ‘Narrated to me my beloved and
the delight of my eye, the Messenger of Allah (S) from Jibra’il, that he
said: “I heard the Mighty and Exalted Lord saying: ‘The Kalimah, La
Ilaha Illallah, is My fort, and whoever utters it enters My fort, and
whoever enters My fort becomes safe from my chastisement:” Then the
shade was drawn on the howdah and he proceeded a little, and then he
called to them: “(It depends) on its conditions and I am one of its
conditions,”

This hadith was written on that day in that place by more than twenty
thousand scribes[^4]. It is one of the traditions agreed upon by Sunnis
and Shi’as both; and is narrated by scholars of both sects. The famous
Sunni muhadd ith Abu Nu’aym al-Isfihani has narrated it in his
well-known book, Hilyatu ‘l-awliya’; and then he writes: “This hadith is
confirmed and famous, with these links, by riwayah (narration) of the
purified ones from their clean fathers;’ Then he adds: “Some of our
predecessors among the muhaddithin used to say after narrating this link
of narrators: “If this asnad (chain of narrators) were recited on a mad
person, he would be cured:’ Ibn Hajar al-Haythami al-Makki has said that
this belief was expressed by Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal.[^5] Incidentally,
this asnad is known to muhaddithin as silsilatu ‘dh-dhahab (the Golden
chain).

Perhaps now this ignorant writer would understand why it was not
necessary for our Imams to spell in so many words their links to the
Prophet (S), for it was understood by everyone that whatever they said
was taken from their holy progenitor, the Messenger of Allah (S).

Nor it will be out of place to mention that a hadith of the same meaning
has been narrated with a longer “Golden chain” starting with our twelfth
Imam (a.s,), by none other than the Shah Waliullah Muhaddith Dehlavi,
who writes in his “Al Fazl al-Mubeen fi al-Musalsalat min hadith al-Nabi
al-Amin”:

“I say: Ibn ‘Uqlah had given me ijazah (permission) to narrate all that
he had the authority to narrate. And I have found in his al-Musalsalat,
a musalsal hadith in which each of its narrators has the distinction of
possessing a great virtue uniquely. He (may Allah have mercy on him) has
said: ‘Informed me the peerless of this time ash-Shaykh Hasan ibn ‘Ali
al-’Ujaymi; from the Hafiz of his time Jamaluddin al-Babili, from the
Relied one of his time Muhammad al-Hijazi al-Wa’iz, from the Sufi of his
time ash-Shakh ‘Abdul Wahbab ash­ Sha’rawi, from the Mujtahid of his
time Jalaluddin as-Suyuti, from the Hafiz of his time Abu Nu’aym Rizwan
al-’Uqba, from the Reciter of his time ash­ Shams Muhammad ibn al-Juzwi
from the Imam Jamaluddin Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Jamal the Zahid of his
time, from the Imam Muhammad ibn Mas’ud the Muhaddith of the Fars in his
time, from our Shaykh Isma’il ibn Muzaffar ash-Shirazi the Scholar of
his time, from ‘Abdus Salaam ibn Abi’r-Rabi’ Hanafi the M uhadd ith of
his time, from Abu Bakr ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Shapur al-Qalanasi
the Shaykh of his time, from ‘Abdu ‘l-’Aziz ibn Muhammad al-Adami the
Imam of his times, from Sulayman ibn Ibrahim ibn Muhammad ibn Sulayman
the extra-ordinary person of his time, from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn
Hashim al-Baladhuri the Hafiz of his time, who said that: Narrated to us
Muhammad (Al-Mahdi) ibn al-Hasan (Al-’Askari) ibn ‘Ali (al-Hadi), the
Hidden Imam of his time, (who said) narrated to us (my father) al-Hasan
(Al-’Askari) ibn ‘Ali (Al-Hadi), from his father (Imam ‘Ali Al-Hadi)
from his grandfather (Imam Muhammad At-Taqi) from his great grand-father
‘Ali ibn Musa Ar-Rdha, from (his father) Musa Al-Kazim who said:
Narrated to us my father (Imam) Ja’far as-Sadiq, (who said) narrated to
us my father (Imam) Muhammad al-Baqir, (who said) narrated to us my
father ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zaynu ‘l-’Abedeen as-Sajjad, (who said)
narrated to us my father al-Husayn the Chief of the martyrs, (who said)
narrated to us my father ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib the Chief of the Awliya: who
said: lnfonned us the Chief of the prophets Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah
(Allah’s blessings and peace be upon him!) who said: Informed me
Jibra’il the Chief of the angels who said that Allah the Paramount Lord
has said: “Verily I am Allah, there is none to be worshipped except Me;
whosoever acknowledges My Tawheed (Oneness) enters My fort, and
whosoever enters My fort is safe from My chastisement.”[^6]

At this juncture, it is necessary to draw the attention of the readers
to the following facts:

First: Shah Wahyullah Dehlavi narrates a hadith from the twelfth Imam of
the lthna-’asharis whom the said narration describes as “the Hidden Imam
of his time”. How could he narrate by ijazah that hadith if he did not
believe in the existence of that Imam who had transmitted it through his
illustrious forefathers up to the Holy Prophet?

Second: As quoted earlier, Mirza Hasan Ali in his question and Shah
‘Abdu ‘1-’Aziz Dehlavi in his detailed reply have used the words, (The
Respected Twelve Imams, Peace be on them). It means that they too
believed in the existence of our Twelfth Imam, and all of them had shown
full reverence and respect for these Imams; so much so that they used
for them the phrase “Peace be on them”.

Third: Maulana Ali Akbar Maududi, like Shah Waliullah, Shah ‘Abdu
‘1-’Aziz and Shaykh Muhyiddin ibn Al-’Arabi, Shaykh ‘Abdul Wahhab
Sha’rani and many others, believed that our Twelfth Imam (who is the son
of the Eleventh Imam a.s. and was born in 255 A.H.) is the Qutb of this
time, and all the bounties of Allah reach the creatures through him; and
that he, like his forefathers upto ‘Ali (a.s.) is Ma’sum, sinless and
infallible; and this distinction is reserved in this ummah to these
twelve persons only.

In spite of the above distinctions, no Shi’a has ever said, written or
thought that ‘Ali (a.s.) or his children were more virtuous than the
Messenger of Allah (S), as this writer of unknown origin accuses the
Shi’as to believe. (See p.22 of his booklet) The fool does not realize
that in the Shi’a’s eyes the virtues and distinctions of the Imams
(a.s.) are based on, and derived from the virtues and distinctions of
the Holy Prophet (S). Such demented balderdash should not be glorified
by reply. We should rather say: **Curse of Allah be on the liars.**

Before closing this topic it is necessary to point out that even if our
Imams had not made it clear that whatever they said was actually the
saying of the Holy Prophet (S) which had come to them through their holy
forefathers, we were bound to accept their words and follow their
guidance. Why? Because of the mutawatir hadith of “The two
precious/weighty things” which is accepted by both the Sunnis and the
Shi’a as we have briefly mentioned in the beginning.

Is it not strange that our adversaries are ready to accept and follow
the words of thousands of non-ma’sums -not only the Companions but even
their disciples like ‘Ikrimah, Mujahid, al-Hasan al-Basri and others;
but recoil from accepting and following the words of the ma’sum Imams of
Ahlu ‘I-Bayt, who are clearly designated by the Holy Prophet (S) as the
equals of the Qur’an!?

It is about the people of such mentality that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) had said in the presence of some people from Kufa: “How strange
it is that the people say that they have got all their knowledge from
the Messenger of Allah (May Allah’s mercy and blessings be on him and
his progeny), and that they have acted upon it and have been guided; and
at the same time they think that we, the people of his house, did not
receive any knowledge from him, nor were we guided aright while we are
his people and his progeny! !It was in our house that the revelation was
sent to him, and from our place the knowledge was imparted to the
people. DOh, you think that they got the knowledge and were guided while
we remained ignorant and went astray? Certainly it is impossible.”[^7]

[^1]: al-Mufid, Kitabu ’l-Irshad, Tehran. 1377. p. 250; Al-Majlisi,
Biharu ’l-Anwar, new ed, Vol. 46. p. 288.

[^2]: al-Mufid, Kitabu ’l-Irshad, p. 257; Al-Kafi, Vol.1, p.42.

[^3]: al-Mufid, Al-Amali, p. 90; Al-Majlisi, Biharu’l-Anwar, new ed Vol.
47. p. 27 and 337.

[^4]: Ash-Shaykh As-Saduq, ‘Uyunu Akhbar ‘r-Rida, Beirut, 1404/1984.
Vol.2, pp.143.

[^5]: as-Sawa‘iqu ’l-Muhriqah.

[^6]: Shah Waliullah, Al-Fazl al-Mubeen. as quoted in Istiqsa‘u
’l-ifham.

[^7]: Biharu’l-Anwar, Vol. 26. p. 158.


