Preface
=======

(Translated by John Cooper. This translation was carried out during the
period of tenure of a Fellowship of the British Institute of Persian
Studies, for which the translator would like to express his
gratitude.)

The article hereunder translated into English, first appeared in the
collection "Bahthi dar bara­yi Marja\`iyat wa Ruhaniyat" [^1], which was
reviewed by Lambton [^2]. This volume contained essays by figures who
were then prominent in the anjumanha­yi islami, an organization of
groups with a religiously educated leadership concerned to initiate
public debate of, and interest in, Islamic solutions to contemporary
political, economic and social problems. The occasion for the
publication of this volume was the death of the marja\` al­taqlid of his
time, Ayatullah Burujirdi, in 1961, and the discussions contained
therein dealt with various aspects of taqlid and the religious
institutions. Summaries and discussion of the articles will be found in
Lambton.

Most of the authors subsequently became leading names in the 1979
Iranian Revolution. Mahdi Bazargan, who had had both a religious and a
secular education and had been influential among the younger generation
as a professor at the University of Tehran and later as a politician,
became the first Prime Minister of the new Islamic Republic's
provisional government. Ayatullah Taliqani was an active revolutionary
figure who had spent much time in SAVAK prisons. He was particularly
well known in Tehran where he commanded much respect. He died in the
early morning of 10 September 1979 [^3]. Sayyid Muhammad Bihishti became
the first head of the Islamic Republican Party, as well as Chief Justice
of the post­revolutionary High Court; he held both posts until his
assassination in the bombing of the Party headquarters on 29 June 1981.
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i was much weakened by illness by the
time of the revolution, but was held in universal esteem for his piety
and learning. He died on 15 November 1981. All these figures, except
\`Allama Tabataba'i were also important members of the Revolutionary
Council, which had been set up by Ayatullah Khumayni during his stay in
Paris. The author of the present article, Murtada Mutahhari, had been
appointed head of this Council by Ayatullah Khumayni, and it was he who
had first convened it. After the victory of the revolution, the Council
continued to play an extremely important role in the course of events,
even after the setting up of the provisional government, indeed right up
to the formation of the new Majlis.

Murtada Mutahhari was born in a village some forty kilometres from
Mashhad in 1338/1919­20. After a primary education mostly at the hands
of his father, he entered, still a child, the hawza­yi \`ilmiya, the
traditional educational establishment, of Mashhad, but he soon left for
Qum, the centre for religious education in Iran. Even during the time of
his elementary studies there he was greatly affected by the lessons in
akhlaq (Islamic ethics) given by Ayatullah Khumayni, which Mutahhari
himself described as being in reality lessons in ma\`arif wa
sayr­u­suluk (the theoretical and practical approaches to mysticism)
[^4], and he later studied metaphysics (falsafa) with him as well as
jurisprudence (usul al­fiqh). He was especially attracted by falsafa,
theoretical mysticism (\`irfan) and theology (kalam), the "intellectual
sciences", and he also studied these subjects with \`Allama Tabataba'i.
His teachers in law (fiqh) were all the important figures of the time,
but especially Ayatullah Burujirdi, who became the marja\` al­taqlid,
and also head of the hawza­yi \`ilmiya of Qum, in 1945. Murtada
Mutahhari studied both fiqh and usul al­fiqh in the classes of Ayatullah
Burujirdi for ten years. He was also deeply affected at about this time
by lessons on "Nahj al-Balagha" [^5] given by Mirza \`Ali Aqa Shirazi
Isfahani, whom he had met in Isfahan. He later said that, although he
had been reading this work since his childhood, he now felt that he had
discovered a "new world".[^6] Subsequently, Mutahhari became a well known
teacher in Qum, first in Arabic language and literature, and later in
logic (mantiq), usul al­fiqh, and falsafa.

In 1952, Murtada Mutahhari moved to Tehran, where, two years later, he
began teaching in the Theology Faculty of the University. Not only did
he make a strong impression on students, but his move to Tehran also
meant that he could become involved with such organizations as the
anjuman ha­yi islami. These Islamic Associations were groups of
students, engineers, doctors, merchants, etc., set up during the fifties
and sixties; they formed the nucleus of the movement that was to become,
eventually, the revolution. He was also a founder member of the
Husayniya­yi Irshad, which played a central role in the religious life
of the capital during the four years of its existence until its closure
by the authorities in 1973 [^7]. At the same time he maintained his
contact with traditional religious activities, teaching first in the
Madrasa­yi Marvi in Tehran, and later back in Qum, and also preaching in
mosques in Tehran and elsewhere in the country. Through his lectures and
writings - articles and books - he became a famous and much­respected
figure throughout Iran, but it was mainly among the students and
teachers of the schools and universities that he was most influential,
setting an example and inspiring them as a committed and socially aware
Muslim with a traditional education who could make an intellectually
appropriate and exciting response to modern secularizing tendencies.

His wide­ranging knowledge and scholarship are reflected in the scope
of his writings, which cover the fields of law, philosophy, theology,
history and literature.[^8] He was also one of the few high­ranking
\`ulama' to be in continuous contact with Ayatullah Khumayni during the
fifteen or so years in which the movement which led to the revolution
was developing. He was actively engaged in all the stages of this
movement.

His life came to an abrupt and untimely end when he was shot in the
street by an assassin after a meeting of the Revolutionary Council on
the evening of 1 May 1979. Animated mourning accompanied his funeral
cortege from Tehran to Qum, where he was buried near the shrine of the
sister of the eighth Shi\`i Imam.

The discussion of taqlid had been important in the wake of Ayatullah
Burujirdi's death for the reasons given by Lambton. A solution to the
problems posed in those articles was never achieved, and events
subsequently altered the whole structure of the discussion, but the
issues raised did open important new areas for thought. As a result of
the revolution, the question of wilayat al­faqih came to the fore, and
taqlid became the subject of even greater public concern. As long as
taqlid had been restricted in the common understanding as applying only
to matters which belonged to the rubrics of the collections of fatwas
issued by the marja\`s, the only real debate took place within the legal
classroom; but during the seventies, and hand in hand with the
reawakening of political sensibilities, the boundaries of fiqh were seen
by the public to expand and encompass new territory.

The definition of these new frontiers was a source of some confusion,
and hence of heightened interest, and, in the great post­revolutionary
surge of printing, the Burujirdi volume was re­issued.

Taqlid had long been a socially important element in Iranian society,
and in Shi\`i society in general, for it united people, at least as
inhabitants of the same universe of duties and obligations, under their
marja\`s, but the events leading up to the revolution demonstrated the
power that the marja\`s could command through, among other means, their
issuing of proclamations (\`ilamiyas); this was reminiscent of the
mobilization of the Iranian people during the tobacco protest of 1891­2,
and during the Constitutional Revolution of 1906-11.

The following article is presented as a description of taqlid and
ijtihad by a leading contemporary Shi\`i mujtahid who strove to make
Islam comprehensible to the modern Iranian and to find answers to the
problems of his time within the Islamic framework. The text has been
left in its entirety; there were no footnotes in the original. It is not
for the believers to go forth all together; but why should not a party
of every section of them go forth, to become learned in religion, and to
warn their people when they return to them, that they may beware.

(9:122) [^9]


