Regarding the Popular Belief That the `ulama Cannot Be Tainted By Immorality
============================================================================

Some people imagine that the effect of sin on individuals is not of
only one kind: that sin has an effect on ordinary people which annuls
their piety and right behaviour, but that it has no effect on the
\`ulama' who have some kind of immunity. It is like the difference
between a little water and a lot which, if it is more than one kurr
[^35], cannot be tainted by any unclean thing. Now, in fact, Islam does
not consider anyone to be untaintable, not even the Prophet. For why
then should God have said:

[O Prophet] say: 'I also, if I commit a sin, fear punishment on the
Great Day.'?

Why should He have said:

If any kind of attributing godhood to other than Allah (shirk) enters
your actions, your work will be spoilt?

All this is to show that there is no kind of partiality or
discrimination, there is no immunity from sin for anyone.

The story of Moses and God's righteous servants, which is in the
Qur'an, is a wonderful story. One moral which can be drawn from it is
that the follower should surrender to the one he is following up to the
point where basic principles and the law are not contravened. If it is
seen that the leader does something against these principles, one must
not remain silent. It is true that the fact that in the story the things
which the servant of God does are not, in his view, against these basic
principles, since he sees a wider horizon and can see into the heart of
the matter; they were, rather, his very duty and responsibility. But the
question here is why Moses was not patient, and why he gave vent to his
criticisms, despite the fact that he had promised [the servant of God]
and himself that he would not make any objection? Why, then, did he
protest and criticise?

The defect in Moses' actions was not his protesting and criticising,
but the fact that he was not aware of the undivulged aspect of the
matter, the inward and secret side of the events. Of course, if he had
been aware of the hidden reasons for what happened, he would not have
objected, and he would have wanted to discover the secret of the affair;
but as long as his actions were, from his own point of view, against
basic principles and the divine Law, his faith would not allow him to
remain silent. There are those who have said that if the actions of that
servant of God were to be repeated on the Day of the Resurrection, Moses
would still object to them and criticise them, unless, by that time, he
were to become aware of the hidden reasons behind them. Moses said to
the servant of God:

"Shall I follow you so that you may teach me, of what you have been
taught, right judgement."

"Assuredly you will not be able to bear with me patiently."

Then he explained the reason very clearly:

"And how should you bear patiently what you have never encompassed in
your knowledge?"

Moses said:

"Yet you will find me, if Allah will, patient, and I shall not rebel
against you in anything."

Moses did not say that he would be patient whether he discovered the
secret of the matter or not. He merely said that he hoped he would have
that patience. Of course, this patience did exist within Moses as long
as he understood the reason for things.

Then the servant of God wanted to have something more definite from
him; that, even if he did not discover the reason for what had happened,
he would remain silent and not protest until the time came for him to
explain.

"Then, if you follow me, do not question me on anything until I myself
introduce the mention of it to you." (117:66­70)

Here, the verse does not say if Moses accepted; it only says that after
this they both set out together and continued till the end of the story
which we all know.

At any rate, I wanted to show that the ignorant person's taqlid of the
learned should not be blind allegiance. The unlawful kind of taqlid
between one who is ignorant and one who has knowledge is that kind in
which unquestioning obedience exists, which takes some such form as: "an
ignorant person cannot quarrel with a learned person; we don't
understand, perhaps the duties imposed by the shari\`a necessitate its
being like this."

I have mentioned this story as evidence and corroboration for what was
in the hadith of the Imam al­Sadiq.


