Taqlid Permitted By the Shari`a
===============================

After what I have narrated concerning the kind of taqlid forbidden by
the shari\`a, the Imam went on to explain the kind of taqlid permitted
by the shari\`a the kind which is to be praised, in these words:

Whichever of the fuqaha' can protect his self, who can preserve his
religion, who fights his desires and is obedient to the commands of his
Master, then he should be followed by the people in taqlid.

Of course, it is clear that the struggle of a spiritual \`alim with his
weaker desires is very different from the struggle of an ordinary
person, because the desires of each individual are associated with
specific activities. The desires of a youth are one thing, the desires
of an old man another; everyone, in whatever position, degree, stage or
age he may be, has a particular kind of desire. The standard for
subservience to inferior desires for a spiritual \`alim is not what we
see: for example, whether he drinks alcohol or not, whether he has
stopped praying and fasting or not, whether he gambles or not.[^37] The
standard for the subservience to inferior desires for such a person is
whether he desires position, to have his hand kissed, to become famous
and popular and have people walk behind him, to use the wealth of the
Muslims to lord over others, to allow his friends and relatives,
especially his sons, to benefit from the wealth of the Muslims. Then the
Imam said:

Only some of the Shi\`i fuqaha have these great qualities and traits of
character, not all of them.

This hadith, on account of its final phrases, is one of the pieces of
evidence in the question of ijtihad and taqlid.

So it is clear that both ijtihad and taqlid can be divided into two
kinds: that which is permitted by the shari\`a and that which is not.

Why is taqlid of a dead person not permitted

We have a principle in fiqh, which is one of the indisputable points of
our fiqh, that taqlid of a dead person in the first instance is not
permitted. If taqlid of a dead person is permitted, it is only when
taqlid is carried on from someone who was followed [by the same person]
while he was alive and is now dead.[^38] Moreover, the carrying on of the
taqlid of a dead person must also be with the permission of a living
mujtahid. I am not concerned here with the reasons in fiqh for this
principle, so I will only say that it is a very basic idea, but only on
the condition that the aim of the principle is clearly understood.

The first purpose of this principle is that it should be a means for
the survival of the traditional centres of learning of the Islamic
sciences, so that there should be continuity, and that the Islamic
sciences should be perserved - not only preserved, but that they should
advance day by day and be perfected, and that those matters which had
not previously been solved should be solved.

It is not the case that all our problems have been solved in the past
by our \`ulama', and that now we have no more problems and no more work.
We have thousands of riddles and difficulties in kalam (theology),
Qur'anic exegesis, fiqh and the other Islamic sciences, many of which
have been solved by the great \`ulama' of the past, but many of which
remain, and it is the duty of those who follow on to solve them and to
gradually write better and more complete texts in each subject, to
continue each subject and develop it, just as in the past, too,
exegesis, theology and law were gradually developed. The caravan must
not be brought to a halt in mid­journey. So people's taqlid of living
mujtahids, and their heeding them, is a means to the continuance and
development of the Islamic sciences.

Another reason is that every day Muslims are faced with new problems in
their lives, and they do not know what there duty is in these matters.
It is necessary to have living fuqaha', aware of the contemporary
situation, to respond to this great need. It is narrated in one hadith
concerning ijtihad and taqlid:

As for al­hawadith al­waqi\`a, refer concerning them to the narrators
of our hadith.

These hawadith al­waqi\`a are exactly these new problems which arise as
time passes. Study and research into the books of fiqh from different
epochs and centuries shows that gradually, according to the needs of the
people, new problems arise in fiqh, and that the fuqaha' set out to
answer them. It is for this reason that the dimensions of fiqh have
increased.

If a researcher were to make a tally, he could discover, for example,
in what century, in what place and for what reason, such­and­such a
problem arose in fiqh. If it were not necessary for a living mujtahid to
give answers to these problems, what difference would there be between
taqlid of a living person and taqlid of a dead person? It would be
better to follow in taqlid some of the dead mujtahids like the Shaykh
al­Ansari, who, on the admission of the now­living mujtahids themselves,
was the most knowledgeable and learned.

Basically, the 'secret' of ijtihad lies in applying general principles
to new problems and changed circumstances. The real mujtahid is one who
has mastered this 'secret', who has observed how things change, and
subsequently how the rulings on them have changed. For there is no skill
in only thinking about things which are in the past and have already
been thought about; or, at the most, changing an \`ala l­aqwa into an
\`ala l­ahwat.[^39] or vice versa; there is no need to make a song and
dance about any of this.

Of course, ijtihad has many preconditions and prerequisites; a mujtahid
must have acquired the various [preliminary] sciences. It is necessary
that he should have applied himself to the study of Arabic language and
literature, to logic, to the study of usul (jurisprudence), even to the
history of Islam and the fiqh of the other sects, so that he might
become a true and thorough faqih.

No one can ordinarily lay claim to ijtihad just by reading a few books
on Arabic grammar, or rhetoric and logic, then three or four of the set
books for the intermediate stage, such as the "Fara'id", the "Makasib"
or the "Kifaya"[^40], and then spending a few hours in the dars­i
kharij.[^41] He does not then become qualified to sit with the "Wasa'il"
and "Jawahir"[^42], in front of him and issue legal opinions. He must be
completely knowledgeable in exegesis and hadith, that is to say in the
several thousands of hadith which appeared in the two and a half
centuries from the time of the Prophet to the time of the Imam al­Hasan
al­\`Askari, and of the circumstances in which they appeared; he must
also know Islamic history and the fiqh of other Islamic sects, and the
narrators of traditions and their biographies and reliability.

Ayatullah Burujirdi was a true faqih. It is not my habit to mention
people by name, and while he was alive I never mentioned him in my
lectures. But now that he has died and there can be no ulterior motive,
I can say that this man was truly a distinguished and outstanding faqih.
He was conversant with, and proficient in, all these sciences, in
exegesis, hadith, knowledge of the narrators of hadith, in the sciences
of the evaluation of hadith (\`ilm al-daraya), and in the fiqh of the
other sects of Islam.


