How the Faqih's Outlook On the World Affects the Legal Opinions He Issues
=========================================================================

The work of a faqih and mujtahid is the deduction and derivation of the
precepts [of the shari\`a]; but his knowledge and understanding of all
things, in other words, his world­view, has a great influence on the
decisions he makes. The faqih must have all the information on matters
upon which he is going to issue a fatwa. If we imagine a faqih who is
always sitting in the corner of his house or his madrasa, and compare
him with a faqih who is conversant with the currents of life, both of
them refer back to the valid proofs of the shari\`a, but each one of
them will derive his legal rulings in a particular way, using a
particular method.

Let me give an example. Suppose that someone who grew up in Tehran, or
in a big town like Tehran, where running water is in plentiful supply
and there are reservoirs and tanks and gutters, becomes a faqih and
wishes to issue a fatwa concerning the precepts about what is pure and
what is impure. When he refers to the hadiths on purity and impurity,
such a person will, owing to his own previous experience, make a
deduction in a way which will be extremely circumspect and will
necessitate the avoidance of many things. But the same person, once he
has been to the House of God [the Ka\`aba] and seen the conditions of
purity and impurity and the lack of water in that place, will find
himself changing his outlook regarding the subject of purity and
impurity. After such a journey, if he consults the hadiths on this
matter, he will see them in a different light.

If someone compares the fatwas of the fuqaha' with each other, and then
pays attention to the individual circumstances and each of these
scholars' ways of thinking about living problems, he will see how the
mental environment of a faqih and the information he has concerning the
outside world influence his legal rulings in such a way that the legal
rulings of an Arab faqih have an Arabic flavour, those of an Iranian
have an Iranian flavour, and those of a country­dweller have a rustic
flavour as opposed to the urban feel of those of a city­dweller.

This religion is the final religion; it is not exclusive to a
particular time or place; it is relevant to all times and places. It is
a religion which came to establish order and progress in the life of
man, so how could a faqih who is uninformed of the natural arrangement
and movement of things and who does not believe in a progression towards
perfection in life, deduce the high and truly progressive laws of this
upright (hanif) religion in a way which is in perfect accordance with
the truth? For this religion came to give order to this natural
arrangement, movement and development, and it guarantees its guidance.

**The understanding of necessities**

At the present time, we have some cases in our fiqh where our fuqaha'
have given a definite ruling on the requirement of something only
because they have seen the necessity and importance of the matter. In
other words, since there is no transmitted evidence from the verses of
the Qur'an or from hadith which is explicit and sufficient, and since
there is also no valid consensus in the matter, they have used the
fourth basic principle of derivation, i.e., the principle of independent
reasoning (\`aql). In this kind of instance, the fuqaha' become certain
that the command of God in such and­such a case is such­and­such,
because of the importance of the matter and their knowledge of the
spirit of Islam which leaves no important matter in abeyance.

For example,

in the case of the legal ruling given by the fuqaha' concerning the
guardianship (wilaya) of the ruler and the subsidiary problems connected
with it, if the importance of this matter had not been realised, no
legal rulings would have been issued. The fuqaha' have only issued them
to the extent which they understand to be necessary. Other instances
similar to this can be found where the reason that a legal ruling has
not been given is the fact that the importance and necessity of the
matter has not been fully realised.


