An Important Recommendation
===========================

Here I have a recommendation which could be most useful for the
advancement and development of our fiqh. It was previously put forward
by the late Shaykh \`Abd al­Karim al­Yazdi[^43], and I am here only
reiterating his proposal.

He asked what it was that required people to follow only one person in
taqlid in all matters. Would it not be better if specialised divisions
were established in fiqh? That is to say, there would be groups who,
after having completed the general study of fiqh and become experts in
it, would specialise in one particular section, and then people would
follow them in that particular section. For example, some would take as
their specialisation \`ibadat (the rites of Islam), and others
mu\`amilat (transactions), some siyasat (politics), and other ahkam
(criminal law); this is exactly what has been done in medicine where
specialised branches have been created, and doctors divided into groups
for each speciality, some being heart specialists, some eye specialists,
some ear, nose and throat specialists, and others specialists in other
branches. If this were done, each person could study his own branch more
thoroughly. I believe that there is a discussion of this matter in the
book "al­Kalam Yajurru l­Kalam" by the Sayyid Ahmad al-Zanjani.[^44]

This recommendation is a very good one, and I will add only that the
need to divide fiqh up and to create specialised branches arose a
hundred years ago, and in present circumstances the fuqaha of today will
impede the forward development of fiqh and stunt its growth unless they
heed this recommendation.

**The division of the sciences into specialised branches**

The division of the sciences is the result of their development, but
also its cause. For a science gradually progresses until it reaches the
point where it is no longer possible for a single person to investigate
all the problems it raises. It must then necessarily be divided up into
branches of specialisation. Thus the division of a science and the
creation of branches within it is the result and the effect of the
development of that science, while, at the same time, more progress is
made when these branches are created, and thought can be concentrated on
the special problems in each branch.

In all the world's sciences - medicine, mathematics, law, literature
and philosophy - branches of specialisation have been created, and for
that very reason progress has been accelerated in each of these
branches.

**The progress made in fiqh during the last thousand years**

There was a time when fiqh was a very limited science. When we refer
back to the texts before the time of the Shaykh al­Tusi, we see how
restricted it was. By writing his "al­Mabsut", al­Tusi took fiqh into
new realms and enlarged its scope, and in the course of time, as a
result of the efforts of the \`ulama' and fuqaha, and because of the
creation of new problems and the initiation of new investigations to
answer them, fiqh progressed even further, to the point where, about a
hundred years ago, when the author of the "Jawahir" wrote his complete
compendium of fiqh, he was only just able to finish it.

It is said that he started his task when he was about twenty years old,
and that, thanks to his extraordinary genius, continual work and a long
life, he was able to write the last pages right at the very end of his
life. The "Jawahir" was printed in six very bulky [lithographed]
volumes, while the whole of al­Tusi's "al­Mabsut", which was in his time
the example of a comprehensive work on fiqh, is probably less than half
of one of these six volumes. After the author of the "Jawahir" died, the
foundations of a new fiqh were laid by the Shaykh Murtada al­Ansari, and
the epitome of this new fiqh was that great man's "al­Makasib" and
"al­Tahara".[^45] Since his time, no­one could even conceive of teaching
a complete cycle of fiqh with such thorough explanation and research.

At the present time, after this advance in the development of our fiqh,
which occurred in the same way as similar advances in other sciences all
over the world, and which has been the result of the efforts of the
\`ulama' and fuqaha' of the past, the scholars of today will find
themselves faced with the choice of either curbing any further progress
in fiqh or putting this sensible and progressive recommendation into
practice and creating branches of specialization, as a result of which
people will come to discriminate in their taqlid, in the same way as
they discriminate in referring to a doctor.


