The Kind of Ijtihad Which Is Forbidden By the Shari'a
=====================================================

Now, the kind of ijtihad which, in our opinion, is forbidden is that
which means "legislating" or "enacting the law", by which we mean that
the mujtahid passes a judgement which is not in the Book (the Qur'an) or
the Sunna, according to his own thought and his own opinion - this is
technically called ijtihad al­ra'y. According to Shi\`i Islam, this kind
of ijtihad is forbidden, but in Sunni Islam it is permitted. In the
latter the sources of legislation, and the valid proofs for determining
the shar\`ia, are given as the Book, the Sunna and ijtihad. The Sunnis
place ijtihad, which is the ijtihad al­ra'y explained above, on the same
level as the Book and the Sunna.

This difference takes its origin in the fact that Sunni Muslims say
that the commands which are given in the shari\`a from the Book and the
Sunna are limited and finite, whereas circumstances and events which
occur are not, so another source in addition to the Book and the Sunna
must be appointed for the legislation of Divine commands - and that
source is the very same as we have defined as ijtihad al­ra'y.
Concerning this matter, they have also narrated hadiths from the
Prophet, and one of them is that when the Prophet sent Mu\`adh b. Jabal
to the Yemen, he asked him how he would issue commands there. He
replied: "In conformity with the Book." "And if it is not to be found in
the book?" "I will make use of the Sunna of the Prophet." "And if it is
not to be found in the Sunna of the Prophet?" "Ajtahidu ra' yi, " he
replied, which means: I will employ my own thought, ability and tact.
They also narrate other hadiths in connection with this matter.

There is a difference of view among Sunni Muslims as to what ijtihad
al-ra'y is, and as to how it is to be conceived. In his famous book, the
"Risala" [^11] which was the first book to be written on the principles
of Islamic jurisprudence (usul al­fiqh), (...) al­Shafi\`i insists that
the only valid ijtihad according to hadith is qiyas [reasoning by
analogy]. Qiyas, briefly, is the taking into account of similar cases,
and ruling in a case from one's own opinion by comparing it with these
other similar cases.

But some other Sunni fuqaha [experts in fiqh, sing.: faqih] did not
recognize ijtihad al­ra'y as being exclusively qiyas; they also counted
istihsan ["finding the good" by one's own deliberations] as valid.
Istihsan means to see, quite independently, without taking similar cases
into account, what is nearest to the truth and to justice, and to give
one's opinion according as one's inclination and intellect approve.
Similarly with istislah [determining what is in the interests of human
welfare by one's own deliberationsl, which means the seeming of one
thing as more expedient than another, and ta\`awwul in which, although a
ruling may have been reached in one of the nusus [the textual bases for
a precept of the shari\`a sing.: nass], in a verse from the Qur'an or in
a hadith from the Prophet, one still has the right, for some reason, to
dispense with the contents of the nass and to give priority to one's own
independent opinion (ijtihad al­ra'y). Each of these requires
explanation and a detailed account, and the Shi\`i­Sunni debate is
relevant to such an account. Many books have been written both for and
against this idea, viz., that ijtihad is on a par with textual evidence,
and the best of them is the treatise written recently by the late
\`Allama, the Sayyid Sharaf al­Din, called "al­Nass wa l­Ijtihad".[^12]

Now, according to Shi\`i Muslims, such a kind of ijtihad is not
permitted by the shari\`a. In the view of Shi\`i Muslims and their
Imams, the first basic principle of this matter, i.e., that the rulings
of the Book and the Sunna are not adequate and that it is therefore
necessary to practice ijtihad al­ra'y, is not correct. There are many
hadiths relevant to this discussion, and, in general, [they tell us
that] there exist rulings for every eventuality in the Book and the
Sunna. In "al­Kafi" [^13], after the chapter on bid\`a [innovation] and
maqa'is [measurements], there is a chapter with the title: "Chapter on
referring to the Book and the Sunna - and there is no halal [permitted
thing] or haram [forbidden thing] or anything which the people need
which does not come in the Book or the Sunna." The Imams of the ahl
al­bayt have been known since the earliest days as opponents of qiyas
and ra'y.

Of course, the acceptance or non­acceptance of qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'
y can be studied from two angles. Firstly, from the aspect from which I
have looked at it; that is to say, we count qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'y as
one of the sources of Islamic legislation, and place it alongside the
Book and the Sunna, and say that there are cases which have not been
ruled upon by revelation and which mujtahids must explain using their
own opinion. Or alternatively, [we can study it] from the aspect that (
. . . ) qiyas and ijtihad al-ra'y [arel a means for deriving the real
rulings, just as we use the other ways and means such as khabar
al­wahid.[^14] In other words, it is possible to perceive qiyas as either
a substantive (mawdu\`iya) [element in law], or a methodological
(tariqiya) [principle].

In Shi\`i fiqh, qiyas and ra'y are invalid in both of the above senses.
In the first sense, the reason is that we have no ruling which is not
given in the Book and the Sunna; and in the second case, the reason is
that qiyas and ra'y are kinds of surmise and conjecture which lead to
many errors. The fundamental opposition of Shi\`i and Sunni legists in
the matter of qiyas is in the first sense, although the second aspect
has become more famous among the scholars of usul (the principles and
methodology of fiqh).

The right of ijtihad did not last for long among the Sunnis. Perhaps
the cause of this was the difficulty which occurred in practice: for if
such a right were to continue [for any great length of time], especially
if ta\`awwul and the precedence of something over the texts were to be
permitted, and everyone were permitted to change or interpret according
to his own opinion, nothing would remain of the way of Islam (din
al­islam). Perhaps it is for this reason that the right of independent
ijtihad was gradually withdrawn, and the view of the Sunni \`ulama
became that they instructed people to practice taqlid of only the four
mujtahids, the four famous Imams - Abu Hanifa [d.150/767], al­Shafi\`i;
[d.204/820], Malik b. Anas [d.179/795] and Ahmad b. Hanbal [d.241/855] -
and forbade people to follow anyone apart from these four persons. This
measure was first taken in Egypt in the seventh hijri century, and then
taken up in the rest of the lands of Islam.


