Ijtihad Permitted By the Shari'a
================================

The word ijtihad was used until the fifth hijri century with this
particular meaning, i.e., with the meaning of qiyas and ijtihad al­ra'y,
a kind of ijtihad which is prohibited in the eyes of the Shi\`a. Up to
that time, the Shi\`i \`ulama included a chapter on ijtihad in their
books only because they wanted to refute it, to emphasize that it was
null and void, and to proscribe it, as did the Shaykh al­Tusi in some of
his works. But the meaning of this word gradually extended beyond this
specific meaning, and the Sunni \`ulama themselves began not to use
'ijtihad' in the specific sense of ijtihad al­ra'y, [as a source] which
was on the same level as the Book and the Sunna. [Such a shift in the
meaning of the word can be seen with] Ibn Hajib [^15] in his "Mukhtasar
al­usul", on which \`Adud al­Din al­Iji wrote a commentary known as
al­\`Adudi, and which has been till recently, and maybe still is, the
authoritatively approved book on [Sunni] usul, and before him with
al­Ghazali [^16] in his famous work "al­Mustasfa".

It then became used rather in the unqualified sense of effort or
exertion to arrive at the rulings of the shari\`a, and was defined as
"the maximum employment of effort and exertion in deducing the rulings
of the shari\`a from the valid proofs (adilla, sing. dalil, see below ).
However, it is another matter to decide what the valid proofs of the
shari\`a are: whether qiyas, istihsan, and so forth, are among them or
not.

From this time onwards, the Shi\`i \`ulama also adopted this word
because they accepted this [general] meaning. This kind of ijtihad was a
kind approved by the shari\`a. Although the word had originally been one
to be avoided among the Shi\`a, after its meaning and the concept it
denoted had undergone this change, their \`ulama, discarded their
prejudice and subsequently had no reservations about using it. It seems
that in many instances the Shi\`i \`ulama, were careful to consider
unity of method and conformity among Muslims as a whole. For example,
the Sunnis came to recognize ijma\` (consensus of opinion among the
\`ulama) as a proof leading to certainty, and, in practice, they also
held it to be fundamental and substantive (mawdu\`i) just like qiyas,
whereas the Shi\`a did not accept it. However, to protect the unity of
method, they gave the name ijma\` to a principle which they did accept
[^17]. The Sunnis said that the valid proofs were four in number: the
Book, the Sunna, ijma and ijtihad (qiyas); the Shi\`a said the valid
proofs were four: the Book, the Sunna, ijma\` and \`aql (reason). They
merely substituted \`aql for qiyas.

At any rate, 'ijtihad' gradually found a wider meaning, i.e., the
employment of careful consideration and reasoning in reaching an
understanding of the valid proofs of the shari\`a. This, of course needs
a series of sciences as a suitable preliminary basis on which to develop
the ability to consider and reason correctly and systematically. The
\`ulama of Islam gradually realized that the deduction and derivation of
the precepts from the combined valid proofs of the shari\`a necessitated
[the learning] of a series of preparatory sciences and studies such as
the sciences of literature, logic, the Qur'anic sciences and tafsir
(Qur'anic exegesis), the science of hadith and the narrators of hadith
(rijal al­hadith), the science of the methodology of usul al­fiqh, and
even a knowledge of the fiqh of the other sects of Islam. A mujtahid was
someone who was a master of all these sciences.

I think it extremely likely, though I cannot state this categorically,
that the first person among the Shi\`a to use the words ijtihad and
mujtahid [positively] was the \`Allama al­Hilli.[^18] In his work "
Tahdhib al­usul'', he puts the chapter on ijtihad after the chapter on
qiyas, and there he uses the word in the same sense in which it is used
today.

[We can therefore say that] the ijtihad which is forbidden and rejected
in the eyes of the Shi\`a is ra' y and qiyas, which were originally
called ijtihad, whether this is counted as a source of the shari\`a and
as an independent basis for legislation, or taken as a means for
deriving and deducing true precepts; whereas the ijtihad which they deem
correct according to the shari\`a is that which means effort and
exertion based on expert technical knowledge.

In answer to the question: what is the meaning, the use and the place
of ijtihad in Islam, it can thus be said that it is ijtihad in the
meaning that it is used today, i.e., competence and expert technical
knowledge. It is obvious that someone who wants to refer to the Qur'an
and hadith must know how to explain the meaning of the Qur'an, he must
know the meaning of the verses, which verses abrogate which verses,
which ones have clear meanings and which ones ambiguous meanings [^19] -
and he must be able to distinguish which hadith is valid and
authoritative and which not. In addition, he must understand, on the
basis of correct rational principles, incompatibilities between hadiths
to the extent that it is possible for him to resolve them, and he must
be able to distinguish the cases in which the \`ulama of the Shi\`a sect
have consensus (ijma\`).

In the verses of the Qur'an themselves, and similarly in the hadith, a
series of general principles [for verification and interpretation] are
laid down, and the use and exercise of these principles need training
and practice, just as in the case of all other basic principles in every
science. Like the skilled technician who knows which material to choose
from all the materials available to him, the mujtahid must have
proficiency and ability. In hadith, especially, there is a great deal of
fabrication, the true and the false are mixed together; the expert must
have the power to distinguish between them. In short, he must have
enough preliminary knowledge so that he can exercise competence,
authority and technical expertise.


