The Appearance of the Akhbaris in Shi'i Islam
=============================================

Here we must mention an important and perilous current which first
appeared around four centuries ago in the Shi\`i world over the question
of ijtihad - Akhbarism. If a group of the \`ulama had not been
forthright and challenged it, and had not taken a stand against this
current and destroyed it, there is no knowing in what position we should
be today.

The actual school of the Akhbaris is no more than four centuries old.
Its founder was a man by the name of Mulla Muhammad Amin al­Astarabadi
[d. 1033/1624], who was, personally, a gifted man who found many
followers among the \`ulama'. The Akhbaris themselves claimed that the
original Shi\`is, up to the time of the Shaykh al­Saduq [^20], were all
followers of the Akhbari doctrine, but the truth is that Akhbarism as a
school with basic postulates did not exist more than four centuries
ago.

These postulates were: the denial of the possibility of arriving at
certainty through exercising reason (\`aql); the denial of the validity
and the proof (dalil) of the Qur'an on the pretext that the
understanding of the Qur'an lay exclusively in the hands of the
Prophet's ahl al­bayt, and that our duty is to consult the hadith of the
ahl al­bayt [for its interpretation and understanding]; the assertion
that ijma\` was the innovation of the Sunnis; the assertion that, of the
four valid proofs (adilla), i.e., the Book, the Sunna, ijma\` and \`aql,
only the Sunna is able to lead to certainty, the assertion that all the
hadith that appear in the "four books"" are true and valid, and of
categorical provenance [from the Imams] (qat\`i al­sudur).

In his book, ''\`Uddat al­Usul", the Shaykh al­Tusi mentions a group of
former Shi\`i scholars under the name of the "Muqallida", and adversely
criticises them; but they had no school of their own, and the reason
that the Shaykh called them "Muqallida" was that even in the
fundamentals of dogmatics (usul al­din) they constructed their proofs
with hadith.

At any rate, the school of the Akhbaris took its stand against the
school of ijtihad and taqlid. They denied the legal competence,
jurisdiction and technical expertise that the mujtahids believed in;
they considered taqlid of anyone else than the ma\`sumin [^22] to be
illegal. According to them, only the hadith are authoritative, and since
there is no right of ijtihad or deriving of opinions, people must
necessarily have recourse directly to the texts of the traditions and
act upon them, no scholar calling himself a mujtahid or a marja\`
al­taqlid [^23] can act as an intermediary.

Mulla Amin al­Astarabadi, the founder of this school, and personally a
very gifted man, learned and well­travelled, wrote a book called
"al-Fawa'id al­Madaniya" in which he went to war with the mujtahids with
astonishing stubbornness. He particularly tried to refute the principle
of the authority of \`aql. He claimed that it was only a proof in
matters which had their origin in the senses, or which were related to
sensory objects (such as in mathematics), and that in matters other than
these it was inadmissible as a proof.[^24]

It so happens that this idea was practically contemporary with the
appearance of empirical philosophy in Europe. The latter denied the
validity of pure reason, and al­Astarabadi denied its validity in
religion. Now where did he get this idea? Was it his own original idea,
or did he get it from elsewhere? We cannot say.

I remember that in the summer of 1322 [Sh./1943] I went to Burujird,
and at that time the late Ayatullah Burujirdi was still living there,
not yet having come to Qum. One day, the talk was of this idea of the
Akhbaris, and he criticised it, saying that the appearance of this idea
among them was the effect of the wave of empiricism that had arisen in
Europe. I heard this from him at that time. Afterwards, when he came to
Qum, and his lessons in usul al­fiqh reached this topic, i.e., the
validity of certainty as a proof (hujjat al qat\`), I was waiting to
hear this opinion again from him, but unfortunately he did not say
anything about it. Now, I cannot say if this had only been a conjecture
which he had voiced, or whether he had evidence, but I, myself, have not
till now found any evidence for it, and I feel it is extremely unlikely
that empirical thinking had then reached the East from the West.
However, against this is the fact that Ayatullah Burujirdi never spoke
without evidence. I now regret that I never asked him for an explanation
at the time.


