The Struggle With Akhbarism
===========================

In brief, Akhbarism was a movement in opposition to \`aql. An amazing
ossification and inflexibility ruled in their doctrine. Fortunately,
some discerning individuals like Wahid Bihbihani [^25], famous as "Aqa",
whose descendants are even now known as "Al­i Aqa (Family of Aqa)", and
his pupils, and afterwards the late Shaykh Murtada al­Ansari [^26], took
a stand and fought against this doctrine.

Wahid Bihbihani lived in Karbala.[^27] At that time, the author of the
"Hada'iq"[^28] an erudite Akhbari, was also in Karbala, and both of them
had a following of students. Wahid was a follower of the doctrine of
ijtihad, and the author of the "Hada'iq" of the Akhbari doctrine, and
occasionally there were bitter disputes. In the end, Wahid Bihbihani
defeated the author of the "Hada'iq", and it is said that the
outstanding pupils of Aqa Wahid, such as Kashif al­Ghita', Bahr
al­\`Ulum and the Sayyid Mahdi Shahrastani [^29], had first of all been
pupils of the author of the "Hada'iq" and had afterwards left him and
joined the lessons of Wahid Bihbihani.

Of course, the author of the ''Hada'iq'' was a moderate Akhbari; he
claimed that his doctrine was identical with that of Muhammad Baqir
al-Majlisi [^30], half way between Akhbari and Usuli. Moreover, he was a
pious and godfearing man of faith, and although Wahid Bihbihani fought
against him vociferously and forbade congregational prayers behind him,
he, quite the contrary, said that congregational prayers behind Aqa
Wahid were valid. It is said that at the time of his death he left in
his will that Wahid Bihbihani should recite his funerary prayer.

The struggle of the Shaykh al­Ansari was such that he managed to build
a solid foundation for the science of usul al­fiqh; and it is said that
he maintained that if Amin al­Astarabadi had been alive he would have
accepted his usul.

Naturally, the Akhbari school was defeated as a result of this
opposition, and now it has no following except here and there. However,
not all the ideas of Akhbarism, which penetrated people's minds so
quickly and securely after the appearance of Mulla Amin, and which held
sway for more or less two hundred years, have disappeared. Even now we
see many who do not recognize the permissibility of an exegesis of the
Qur'an unless a hadith is quoted. The inflexibility of Akhbarism still
reigns in many of the matters of akhlaq (ethics) and in social problems,
even in some parts of fiqh. But now is not the time for me to expand on
this.

One thing which is a cause of the popularity of the Akhbari way of
thinking is their self­righteousness, which is pleasing to ordinary
people, because their ideas are formulated in such a way that they seem
to be claiming: "we are not saying anything we have invented ourselves,
we are people of obedience and submission; we say nothing except what
the Imam al­Baqir (or the Imam al­Sadiq, etc.) said; we do not speak
ourselves, we only say what the ma\`sumin said."

In the chapter on ihtiyat and bara'a (precaution and exemption from
obligation) in his "Fara' id al­Usul" the Shaykh al­Ansari quotes from
Ni\`mat Allah al­Jaza'iri [^31], who maintained the doctrine of the
Akhbaris:

Can any rational person conceive the possibility that on the day of
Resurrection they will bring forth one of the slaves of Allah (i.e., the
Akhbaris) and ask him how he acted, and that when he says that he acted
according to what the ma\`sumin ordered and that everywhere there was no
word from the ma\`sumin he desisted as a precaution, they will take such
a person to Hell, while they will lead a thoughtless person who was
inattentive to the words of the ma\`sumin (i.e., an Usuli who follows
the doctrine of ijtihad), who rejects every hadith on the slightest
pretext, to heaven? It is not possible!

The answer which the mujtahids give is that this kind of obedience and
submission is not submission to the words of the ma\`sumin, but
submission to ignorance. If it is really certain that the ma\`sumin said
something, then we must submit; but these people wanted to submit
ignorantly to everything they heard.

I will give as an example something which I have recently come across,
so that the difference between the rigid Akhbari way of thinking and the
ijtihadi way of thinking can be seen.


