The Kind of Taqlid That Is Forbidden By the Shari`a
===================================================

Let us now turn to taqlid. It is [as was said before] of two kinds:
licit and illicit [in terms of the shari\`a]. There is a kind of taqlid
which is the blind following of one's surroundings and of habit, which
is, of course, forbidden, and it is this which is condemned in the
Qur'an when those who say:

Behold, we found our forefathers agreed on what to believe - and
verily, it is but in their footsteps that we follow. (42:23)

are condemned. We have said that taqlid is of two kinds: licit and
illicit. What we meant by illicit taqlid is not confined solely to the
kind of taqlid which is the blind imitation of one's surroundings, of
habit, of one's parents or ancestors, but we wanted also to say that
taqlid between those who do not have [the necessary] knowledge
(al-jahil) and those who do (al足\`alim), the consultation of the faqih
by the ordinary person, is of two kinds: licit and illicit.

We occasionally hear these days from some people who are looking for a
marja\` al足taqlid, that they are looking to find someone to whom they
can give unqualified allegiance. We want to say that the taqlid which
Islam has commanded is not "unqualified allegiance"; it is the opening,
and keeping open, of one's eyes, of awareness. If taqlid takes on an
aspect of devotion, thousands of evil affects will come about.

Now there is a well足known and detailed hadith on this subject which I
shall quote for you:

Whichever of the fuqaha can protect his self [^34], who can preserve his
religion, who fights his desires and is obedient to the commands of his
Master, should be followed by the people in taqlid.

This is one of the textual proofs for taqlid and ijtihad. The Shaykh
al足Ansari said about this hadith that the signs of truth are evident in
it.

It is an appendage to the following verse from the Qur'an:

And there are among them unlettered people who have no real knowledge
of the divine Book, only wishful beliefs, and they depend on nothing but
conjecture.(2:78)

This verse comes in condemnation of the ignorant and illiterate Jews
who followed, and practiced taqlid of, their religious scholars and
leaders, and it comes after some verses which mention the unattractive
behaviour of the Jewish religious scholars. It points out that a group
of them were such ignorant and illiterate people that they knew nothing
of the divine Book except a string of imaginary beliefs [about it] and
such things as they wished to believe, and that they had gone after
surmise and illusion.


