The Ill-omened Results of the Battle of Al-jamal
================================================

In the battle of al-Jamal more than thirty thousand Muslims were
killed. al-Ya'qubi The ill-omened results of the battle of al-Jamal and
the unpleasant after effects, which came by gradually, are really
astonishing. 145. Translation of Futuh of Ibn A'tham 2/339-340.

146. 'Abd Allah was the son of Ja'far ibn Abi Talib and nephew of 'Ali
ibn Abi Talib, of the Quraysh tribe and Banu Hashim house. His mother
was Asma', daughter of 'Umays al- Khath'ami. His parents emigrated from
Mecca to Abyssinia at the beginning of the Prophet's ordainment, where
'Abd Allah was born. He was the first Muslim to be born in Abyssinia and
later on her returned with his father Ja'far Tayyar to Medina. When his
father died Abu Bakr married 'Abd Allah's mother by whom Muhammad ibn
Abi Bakr was born. Thus 'Abd Allah ibn Ja'far became the half-brother of
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr on his mother's side, in the same way that
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr became brother with 'A'ishah on the father's side.
'Abd Allah was ten years old when the Prophet departed this world. He
was a benevolent and patient man and a famous generous Arab. It is said
that he died at the age of ninety in the year eighty or eighty-four or
eighty-five of the Hijrah. Aban ibn 'Uthman's son, who was governor of
Medina, performed his burial prayer. (Usd al-ghabah 3/133-135,
al-Isti'ab 422, Biography No. 1466) 147. al-'Iqd al-farid 4/328-329
(published by Li-jant at-ta'lif), Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/82
printed Egypt, History of Ibn A'tham 182, History of al-Ya'qubi 1/213,
Muruj adh-dhahab 5/197.

Historians write about it as follows: In the battle of al-Jamal the two
armies shot so many arrows at one another that their supply was totally
exhausted, and they pierced so many chests with their spears and killed
so many men that if horses had galloped in the battlefield, their hooves
would have touched nothing but the corpses of the Muslims.

A man who actually took part in that battle says: "After the battle of
al-Jamal whenever I visited Dar al-Walid in Basra, a place where women
wash clothes, the sound of the sticks used by them remind me of the
swords and spears in that battle."148

In the previous pages we have narrated the words of historians about
this battle as to how heads were severed from bodies, hands were cut and
bellies were ripped. The figure of those who received injuries and the
number of severed arms, and blinded eyes is more than can be imagined.
At-Tabari finds the number of the dead at six thousand, but Ibn A'tham
says in his history book that, the number of those killed totaled nine
thousand in 'A'ishah's army, and seven thousand and five hundred in
'Ali's army.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih writes in al-'Iqd al-farid that in the battle of
al-Jamal twenty thousand followers of 'A'ishah were killed, and five
hundred of 'Ali's army.

The history book of al-Ya'qubi says that the number of those killed in
both armies in the battle of al-Jamal, was more than thirty thousand.149
Thus in this battle much economical loss many mental and physical
sufferings were inflicted on both sides. Many a woman lost her sons or
became a widow, and many children became orphans. All these losses and
damages were inflicted on the Islamic society in a limited area, but the
damages and evil consequences of this war gradually appeared after the
battle during many long subsequent years, and involved many part of the
Islamic realm and the majority of the Muslims, about which no figure can
be given. We can only quote some pages of history related to this matter
for the reader and enumerate some of those consequences.

**Subsequent results**

1-One of the bitter results of the battle of al-Jamal was the kindling
of the fire of the Siffin battle, for this battle served as a complement
to the former battle and one of its ill-omened vestiges. These two
battles were connected together with a firm cord, one end of which Basra
was tied and the other end Siffin, the middle of which was in 'A'ishah's
hand, pulling both ends together. For, the uprising of 'A'ishah who was
of the Taym house and had no kinship with 'Uthman, paved the way for the
uprising of Mu'awiyah who was of the 148. History of at-Tabari 5/218,
al-'Iqd al-farid 4/32.

149. History of at-Tabari 5/225, al-'Iqd al-farid 4/224 (published by
Li-jant at-ta'lif), History of Ibn A'tham and History of al-Ya'qubi in
the Chapter on the battle of al-Jamal.

Umayyads and related to 'Uthman, and gave him a pretext. For, if alien
'A'ishah could rise to avenge 'Uthman's blood, then Mu'awiyah could on
the basis of his kinship with 'Uthman and his priority find a better
excuse and claim vengeance for 'Uthman's blood, and thus start the
battle of Siffin against 'Ali.

2-The uprising of 'A'ishah to avenge 'Uthman's blood had the result
that Mu'awiyah made the caliphate hereditary in his house of Umayyads,
which was also the house of the assassinated caliph, so that its
transfer to another house became impossible.

3-The unpleasant consequences of the battle of al-Jamal did not end
with the end of the battle of Siffin. These two battles joined together
to produce a third battle called the battle of an-Nahrawan, in which
again a number of Muslims were killed.

The first two battles left bad impressions in the minds of shortsighted
and cynical people, so that they were constantly in a state of anxiety,
doubt and indecision, and regarded one another with suspicion and
enmity. They excom- municated most of the Muslims and considered killing
them permissible. They resorted to brigandage and deprived the Muslims
of security and tranquility, and started many clashes and conflicts, the
scope of which lasted until the time of the Abbasid caliphs, and cost
many Muslims their lives.

Thus it is clear that the battle of al-Jamal was not confined to the
events which took place in the limited zone of Basra and ended within a
brief period. It continued to exist and was dragged on to many parts of
the Islamic realm and involved a large number of Muslims, and lasted
very long amongst them under various names other than the battle of
al-Jamal.

**The rise of intellectual differences**

Despite all that bloodshed 'A'ishah will continue to enjoy our respect,
but her account is with God. War and bloodshed usually leave behind all
kinds of differences of ideology and reaction amongst a nation and
society; for, actual practical differences naturally produce
intellectual and ideological differences.

The battles of al-Jamal, Siffin and Nahrawan were no exception to this
natural rule, and each of them produced in its turn a number of harmful
effects in the mind and spirit of the Muslims and caused wide divisions
and intense ideological differences. From the point of view of belief,
and thought, after these wars the people were divided into three groups:
A number supported 'Ali and formed the Alawite group.150 Another group
supported 'Uthman and formed the 'Uthman party, A third group
excommunicated the other two groups, while another number stood aloof
and called themselves neutrals. In this way each group formed a party
having a particular name for which it became known.

As a result of the internal wars various beliefs, creeds and ways rose
among the Muslims, and these ideological differences which had their
roots in the wars, sometimes led to other violent and bloody disputes,
and sometimes instead of producing hot clashes and massacres, took the
form of a cold war of arguments, and verbal disputes and quarrels, all
of which were due to the battle of al-Jamal and its subsequent evil
results.151 Thus in addition to the harmful results, some of which we
mentioned in the last chapter, the battle of al-Jamal caused the
greatest tensions and struggles among various Muslim masses. The
Khawarij (outsiders) believed that since Talhah, az-Zubayr and 'A'ishah
rose to fight 'Ali and oppose his leadership, therefore they became
infidels and went out of Islam, because on that day 'Ali was in the
right, but he, too, in the battle of Siffin agreed to arbitration and
signed the verdict of Abu Musa and 'Amr ibn al-'As, and consequently he,
too, went out of the faith of Islam.

Another group of Khawarij regarded 'Ali as rightful in the battle of
al-Jamal, but since he did not seize all the property of the people of
Basra and did not enslave their women and children after the victory,
they criticized his ways and cursed him.152

A number of the Mu'tazilah regarded both groups as unbelievers, and
considered both armies of 'Ali and 'A'ishah as outside Islam and
believed that their eternal place was the fire of hell.153

Another group of the Mu'tazilah regarded one of the two groups (without
determining which of them) as debauchees deserving fire, and claimed
that though both groups were guilty and sinful, only one group deserved
fire and only God must determine which. According to this group the
martyrdom of none of the soldiers of these two armies is not acceptable,
and they declared that if all the armies of 'Ali and 'A'ishah were to
give testimony for a leaf of vegetable, that testimony would be
rejectable and unreliable.154 A third group of the Mu'tazilah believed
that the whole army including even Talhah and az-Zubayr were sinful and
inmates of fire except those who 150. The Alawites are different from
the Shj'ites, since Shi'ism was founded from the time of the Prophet
himself among whom were such personalities as 'Ammar ibn Yasir, Maytham,
Malik al- Ashtar etc.

151. The book of al-'Uthmaniyah of al-Jahiz 55-250, Ibn Abi al-Hadid
2/159.

152. The book of al-'Uthmaniyah of al-Jahiz 55-250, Ibn Abi al-Hadid
2/159.

153. at-Tabsir 42.

154. at-Tabsir 41.

155. Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah, 3/296 and
2/448.

repented their sin. For, after the war 'A'ishah went to 'Ali and
confessed her sin and asked his forgiveness, and 'Ali pardoned her and
connived at her guilt and blunders.155 Al-Jahiz says: Some people's view
about the armies of 'Ali and 'A'ishah has been that, the leaders
received salvation, but their followers are inmates of fire.156

A large number of the Ash'ariyah believed in relation to 'A'ishah's
army that they were guilty in their uprising and in opposition to 'Ali
and committed a sin, but this sin does not make them infidel and
immoral, their blunder should not justify enmity to them, since it is a
small error which is pardonable since everyone is likely to be involved
with such errors.157 Another group of Ash'ariyah believed that 'Ali and
'A'ishah had committed no sin and they cannot be considered guilty of
immorality. Therefore their deed should not be criticized, since both
groups engaged in uprising and war on the basis of conviction, except
that they erred in their conviction. Thus we see that many different and
contradictory views have appeared about 'Ali and 'A'ishah and those who
took part in the battle of al-Jamal, so that their deed is sometimes
taken to the extent of unbelief, and sometimes it is regarded as
virtuous and deserving heaven.

But in our opinion the best view and statement is expressed by 'Ali who
said: "Despite all that dispersion and bloodshed, 'A'ishah deserves our
respect and respect of all Muslims, but her account of deeds is with
God."158

**Familiarity with the true character of 'A'ishah**

'A'ishah is sitting in her litter and acting as commander of her army.
**Text of the book**

In narrating the history of the battle of al-Jamal we described only
the points, which are directly or indirectly related to our objective,
namely the evaluation of 'A'ishah's traditions, that is to say those
which exhibit her moral and spiritual characteristics. These points have
been selected from both, books of 156. The book of al-'Uthmaniyah of
al-Jahiz 246, printed Egypt 1374 AH.

157. al-Milal wa an-nihal 1/144, al-Mufassal 4/l53.

158. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/63, Kanz al-'ummal 8/215-217,
Selection of Kanz 5/315- history and reliable sources, and are placed at
the disposal of readers in order to acquaint them more clearly with the
true personality, social and political power of 'A'ishah, and her moral,
mental and spiritual qualities. For, the familiarity with her
personality helps us greatly in our main objective, which is the
evaluation of her traditions and narrations, and to some extent paves
the way for us to discover the truth.

Now what we have obtained about 'A'ishah from historical sources will
be described briefly in the succeeding chapters, but in this chapter we
deal with the stout-heartedness of 'A'ishah which is one of her
distinctive qualities making her outstanding amongst her sex. 'A'ishah's
self-assurance 'A'ishah was unrivalled among the women of the world for
her stout heart and self-assurance, so that up to now history has not
shown her peer in this quality.

She was so much in control of her womanly feelings and emotions that it
was unbelievable. In the battle of al-Jamal, in the first phase when she
captured the city of Basra and arrested the guards of the treasury, she
ordered most cruelly and coolly to have all of them massacred, and thus
by her order many tens of Muslims were butchered like sheep.

Later on, when the battle started, she herself took part in that fiery
and bloody combat without showing the slightest fear and without losing
her coolness and balance. She issued commands like an experienced
commander. When heads fell from the bodies like autumn leaves, and
bellies were ripped open and severed arms were thrown up in the air, she
observed them all without the slightest frown, and sat like a grand rock
in her litter, playing her part as a leader and commander, issuing
successive orders, unlike any other woman Would the reader call it
stout-heartedness or cruelty? We leave it to the reader to judge on the
testimony of history.

**'A'ishah as the most statesman-like woman of the world**

'A'ishah! The roaring waves of all these riots are due to you. From
what we narrated in the previous chapter, it is clear that 'A'ishah
possessed an extraordinary personality, a natural magical power and
strength, With such a quality it was very easy for her to present right
as wrong and wrong as right, and to give reality to what was
non-existent by means of her dexterity and make-belief. She had
extraordinary creative power, skill in politics, and scene-making, It
was by means of this power that she succeeded in making a large number
of people violate their pact with 'Ali despite their previous
allegiance, and rebel against him, and collect a large army in the name
of avenging 'Uthman's blood even though he was killed by her order, and
mobilize that army to fight 'Ali. It is amazing that 'A'ishah with this
strange statesmanship was able in the battle of al-Jamal to bring
together contrary ideas and concentrate them in one place. She was able
unite various groups and parties each having different goals into one
single front.

Even more amazing is the fact that she managed to present Talhah and
az- Zubayr as avengers of 'Uthman's blood despite the fact that they
were the most stubborn enemies of 'Uthman and were his real assassins.
She persuaded them to violate their pact with 'Ali despite their
previous allegiance, and made them the emir and commander of an army
that had risen against 'Ali to avenge 'Uthman's blood.

'A'ishah did not only exonerate 'Uthman's assassins but also accused
'Ali of his murder, whereas according to the living evidence of history,
'Ali did not have any part in 'Uthman's assassination at all, some of
which testimony we will cite here from history:

1-'Ali often spoke of the allegiance of Talhah and az-Zubayr and their
perfidy, and of the fact that he himself had no part in 'Uthman's murder
and that it was these two who smeared their evil deed. He repeated these
points protestingly. Often he said that Talhah and az-Zubayr swore
allegiance to him and soon after they asked his leave to go on
pilgrimage to the House of God, but they emerged in Basra where they
started their riot, killed the Muslims and violated their pact with him,
inciting his enemies against him and doing their worst, At times he
addressed Talhah and az-Zubayr, saying: You swore allegiance to me and
then violated it and accused me of 'Uthman's assassination, You claim
that 'Ali is 'Uthman's assassin. But I say: let us leave the judgment
about this matter to the impartial companions of the Prophet, not to
your supporters or mine. Yes, let the former individuals judge this
matter, and when they introduce the assassin, whether it is you or me,
let them determine the punishment fitting the crime. 'Ali often referred
to this subject in Muslim gatherings and exonerated himself with strong
arguments.

Moreover, on the day the people swore allegiance to 'Ali, his non-
participation in 'Uthman's murder and Talhah's and az-Zubayr's
participation in it were quite clear to every one.

And yet, despite all that clear evidence which exonerated 'Ali from
complicity in 'Uthman's death, some people ignored his claim. But they
accepted and confirmed 'A'ishah's words of accusation despite all her
false reasoning. This was due only to the particular skill, which
'A'ishah had in altering and misrepresenting the truth, helped by her
popularity and social position gained in the rule of the two elder
caliphs.

2-Ibn Sirin says about the exoneration of 'Ali from 'Uthman's death:
"So long as the people had not sworn allegiance to 'Ali, he was not
accused of 'Uthman's death, but as soon as allegiance was sworn to him,
the accusation was started and he was charged with 'Uthman's murder."

3-Abu al-Aswad ad-Du'ali said to Talhah and az-Zubayr in the battle of
al- Jamal:

"You two and 'A'ishah were the most headstrong enemies of 'Uthman and
more than anyone else, incited the people to his murder. So you should
now rise against yourself in avenging his blood since you are his real
murderers. You claim that the question of caliphate should be given back
to the council. With what impudence do you utter such a claim? Was it
not you who with perfect willingness and without the slightest
disinclination swore allegiance to 'Ali?"

4-Before the battle started, 'Ammar visited 'A'ishah and said to her:
'A'ishah! All the seditions have been started by you, and in every event
the signs of your participation are evident. Even 'Uthman's death
occurred with your signal and order.

5-Before the battle began 'Abd Allah ibn Hakim showed a letter to
Talhah and asked: "Was this letter not from you, Talhah?" Talhah said
that it was. 'Abd Allah said: "I am surprised that, as this letter
shows, yesterday you invited us to rise against 'Uthman and kill him or
depose him from the caliphate, But we refused this invitation and gave
no positive answer. However, you joined hands yourselves and killed him,
and today you come to us to avenge his blood, and claim that blood from
us, innocent people who have no knowledge of it."

6-After the departure of 'A'ishah's army from Mecca, Sa'id ibn Al-'As
who was of the Umayyads and a cousin of 'Uthman, said to Marwan: "Where
are you going, and from whom do you claim 'Uthman's blood? 'Uthman's
blood is now in your own friends and then returns home."

All these are strong and clear evidence that perfectly acquit 'Ali from
participation in 'Uthman's death, and prove to everyone the complicity
of Talhah and az-Zubayr in that assassination. Nevertheless, 'A'ishah
employed her skill and cleverness to acquit herself and her accomplices
from this crime, and present herself and them as supporters of 'Uthman
and avengers of his blood. She accused innocent people especially 'Ali
who had taken no part at all in that crime, calling him 'Uthman's
assassin, and then collected and equipped an army to fight 'Ali in the
name of avenging 'Uthman's blood, thus starting one of the biggest wars
in history.

This was an amazing stunt, which was not possible for everyone.
Therefore, it must be said that 'A'ishah was one of the most
statesman-like and scene- making women of the world.

**'A'ishah's power of oratory**

O 'Ali now in your victory grant pardon! 'A'ishah possessed a
particular skill in oratory, and was closely familiar with the technique
of eloquent speech, so that she may be considered as one of the most
famous orators of the world. Her fiery and fluent addresses, which are
quoted in the books of history, are really amazing. Now as a supporter
of this claim we cite some examples of her orations which were delivered
during her travel to Basra. 1-Some of 'A'ishah's remarks are the answers
given to Umm Salamah when she reproached 'A'ishah who intended to start
a war against 'Ali, saying: "The course you have adopted is wrong and
sinful. Fear God who observes all your deeds."

'A'ishah answered: "Umm Salamah! What a fine journey is ahead of me!
For, in this journey I will change their disunion and enmity into
sincerity and brotherhood. I will thus conciliate two groups of Muslims
who are separated by intense differences and God's satisfaction." In
this way 'A'ishah used her oratorical power and skill in make-believe to
answer Umm Salamah with sophistry, and cover her evil intention with an
appearance of conciliation and winning God's approval, and pretended to
conceal her rancor and creation of dispersion under the cover of
peace-making, alliance and brotherhood.

But the question is: If 'A'ishah had kept to her house and abstained
from fighting 'Ali, where was that hostility between the two groups of
which she spoke of? What were the two antagonistic parties, which
'A'ishah intended to conciliate? Before 'A'ishah's uprising and her
journey to Basra there was no sign of any division and difference. How
fortunate. It would have been if she had not departed from Mecca for
Basra for the so-called conciliation, and if she had not started all
that conflict and bloodshed among the Muslims!

2-Another example of 'A'ishah's oration is the famous speech she
delivered at al-Mirbad. On that occasion Talhah and az-Zubayr addressed
the people of Basra, but no one listened to them, the people began to
clamor and protest so much so that Talhah and az-Zubayr failed to calm
them down. Here 'A'ishah stepped forth and delivered such a fiery
oration that silenced them. She said: "O people of Basra! It is true
that 'Uthman was guilty and committed some blunders, but we criticized
him on some of the deeds and acts committed and he repented his sins,
and returned from the way he had adopted. But you people did not accept
his repentance and you rushed upon him and killed him in his innocence,
and cruelly shed his blood. Then you brought 'Ali to power without the
approval of the Muslims. Now I have risen to support innocent 'Uthman
and avenge has blood, and depose 'Ali from his position as ruler and
caliph of the Muslims."

This was the first part of 'A'ishah's oration in the square of
al-Mirbad, thereby silencing all, and deeply impressing the crowd,
although they knew that 'A'ishah had resorted to false reasoning, they
listened to her most attentively and heartily accepted her words. This
could only be due to her power of oratory and her opportunism, and her
familiarity with the technique of public speech. Otherwise her falsehood
and sophistry were quite evident, since, if she had not issued the
verdict of death for 'Uthman, no one would have dared to kill him. She
and the accomplices of her house killed 'Uthman and then shed crocodile
tears.

'A'ishah then continued on with the second part of her oration in which
she spoke about 'Ali again and revealed the rancor which she had long
kept in her heart against him and said: "O people, you swore allegiance
to the son of Abu Talib without the knowledge of the Muslims and gave
him the position of caliph without their approval."159

She continued to say: "People! Remember that 'Uthman was killed in his
innocence and it is incumbent upon you to discover his assassins and
kill them wherever you find them, Then you must let the members of
'Umar's council choose the caliph from among themselves. But those who
have taken part in 'Uthman's murder should not attend this council or
participate in its decision, since their votes will not be acceptable in
the choice of the caliph, even if they had been members of 'Umar's
council."160

In this speech, 'A'ishah first nullified 'Ali's allegiance and
caliphate, and then conferred the matter of the choice of the caliph to
the members of the council, and banned 'Ali's presence in the session of
the council. If we analyze 'A'ishah's words and make a formula of it, it
would briefly come to this conclusion: "No one but Talhah and az-Zubayr
has a right to the caliphate, and one of these two should be chosen."

For, we know that at that time two of the six members of the council,
namely 'Uthman and 'Abd ar-Rahman, were not living. 'Ali, too, according
to 'A'ishah was accused of 'Uthman's death and could not, therefore,
participate in the session of the council or have a right to vote. As
for the fourth member, namely Sa'd, it was easy for 'A'ishah to accuse
him, too, if necessary and expel him 159. Here too 'A'ishah's sophistry
is quite evident since Talhah and az-Zubayr's allegiance preceded that
of the Basra people.

160. 'A'ishah meant only 'Ali since according to her no other member of
the council but 'Ali had a share in 'Uthman's murder.

from the council, leaving the field open for the remaining members,
namely Talhah and az-Zubayr, to do what they like. And since according
to 'A'ishah these two had no share in 'Uthman's death, they were
qualified in every way to be chosen as caliph.

Such a historical interpretation shows that 'A'ishah cleverly intended
to confine the matter of caliphate to Talhah and az-Zubayr, thus her
purpose in bringing about 'Uthman's death and opposing and deposing 'Ali
from his position would have been fulfilled.

3-Another point which shows that 'A'ishah had a natural power of
influencing others and rousing their feelings as a skilful psychologist,
is the statement she made about the members of the Banu Najiyah tribe,
encouraging those who held her camel's bridle in the battle of al-Jamal.
On that occasion she said: "O you noble house of Najiyah! Show
perseverance and fortitude, for, I observe in your visage the signs of
the valor and steadfastness of the Quraysh." Thus with this statement
she included the Banu Najiyah in the Quraysh tribe as and example of
glory, greatness, courage and merit, thereby stimulating in them the
spirit of bravery and self-sacrifice, and preparing them to stand to the
last against the swords of 'Ali's army and welcome death.

This was the most effective means which 'A'ishah employed in the
attainment of her goal, and she benefited much from it since the Banu
Najiyah had previously been scoffed at, and the Prophet had made a
remark about Samah through whom the Banu Najiyah regarded themselves
related to the Quraysh. He had said: "From my uncle Samah no son is
born." This meant that the Banu Najiyah were not related to Samah and
thus they had no connection with the Quraysh. Abu Bakr and 'Umar, too,
did not consider the Banu Najiyah to be of the Quraysh tribe.161

4-another example of 'A'ishah's opportunism is her words addressed to
the al-Azd tribe at a time when they held her camel's bridled and were
fighting stubbornly. She said: "O men of the al-Azd tribe! Show
fortitude since this is the sign of free men. So long as the Banu Dabbah
were amidst my army, I could see victory and hoped for it." By saying
this she aroused them to such a competitive state that in their combat
they kept on falling one after another around her camel hoping to excel
the men of the Dabbah house who had been so praised by 'A'ishah.

5-Again another example of her opportunism is a statement in which she
uttered in 'Ali's presence soon after the battle was over and she had
been captured and 'Ali was reproaching her. He said: " 'A'ishah! You
incited the people to fight against me and encouraged them to shed
blood, resulting in such a massacre and fratricide. Had the Prophet not
ordered you to stay in your

161. Description of Nahj al-balaghah by Ibn Abi al-Hadid 3/126,
Research of Muhammad Abu al- Fadl.

house always?"

The quick-witted 'A'ishah who had skill to deliver long and effective
orations on critical occasions, here in 'Ali's presence uttered only one
brief sentence, but a sentence that could pacify a benevolent and
generous man like 'Ali, and incline him to forgive her despite all her
rancor and hostility. 'A'ishah said at that moment: " 'Ali! Now in your
victory, shows forgiveness!" What a short but eloquent sentence! It
sounded like an order but in fact it aroused human feelings of kindness
and indulgence, and compelled great men towards complete
forgiveness.162

**Use made of a title**

'A'ishah harps on her title of Umm al-Mu'minin to the people. Text of
the book The Muslims applied the epithet of Umm al-Mu'minin (Mother of
believers) to the consorts of the Prophet, and all of them were known by
this title. But 'A'ishah made a more effective use of the title than the
others, and with this effective weapon she had gained an unprecedented
strong position in the Muslim society. She made people tremble with this
epithet, humbled them and forced submission on them.

It should be said that this power and influence had been gained since
the time of the two elder caliphs, namely Abu Bakr and 'Umar, and had
continued on until 'Ali's time. She used the title on all occasions and
reminded the people of it. In preparation for the battle of al-Jamal she
wrote a letter to Zayd ibn Sawhan at the opening of which she employed
this title and she invited him towards assistance and co-operation. Here
is the text of the letter: "This is a letter form 'A'ishah Umm
al-Mu'minin, daughter of Abu Baker, consort of the Prophet of God, to
her good son Zayd ibn Sawhan. After praising God, O Zayd! The moment you
receive this letter, depart to us and help us in this war. If you do not
obey and refuse to aid us, at least stay away from 'Ali and abstain from
all help to him."163

Again 'A'ishah reminded Ka'b ibn Suwar in Basra of this title, thereby
wholly altering that dignified man's attitude and decision. At a time
when Ka'b had retired to his house as a declaration of his neutrality
towards the people and both armies. 'A'ishah mounted her mule, went to
his house and talked with 162. 'Ali was too strong in character to be
charmed by the words of a woman like 'A'ishah. His pardon was a
chivalrous act, uninfluenced by this statement.

163. History of at-Tabari 5/183-184.

him. Ka'b refused to give a positive and favorable answer. When
'A'ishah found that her insistence was of no avail, she said:

"O Ka'b! Am I not your mother? Do I not have the right of mother upon
you?" These words overwhelmed and moved Ka'b so deeply that they
destroyed the walls of his decision, and he began to discuss the
possibilities and then entered the field as a helper. Then the various
branches of the Mad tribe followed the example of Ka'b and rose to aid
'A'ishah. If it had not been for her inciting words to fight 'Ali, she
would have been deprived of the support of the al-Azd tribe, which was
the most important tribe of Basra. Indeed, there is a wide gap between
staying at home and entering the field of battle. It was 'A'ishah's
power of oratory, her opportunism, and the use she made of the title of
Umm al-Mu'minin which filled the gap and transformed housekeeping into
combat.

The third example of her use of the title of Umm al-Mu'minin is on the
occasion when the people had encircled her camel for the sake of the
same title in the battle of al-Jamal, and went ahead offering their
lives. They emphasized the same title in their poems and war chants in
defense of the honour of the Mother of Believers and said: "O men of the
al-Azd tribe! Defend your mother, since this defense is incumbent upon
you like prayer and fast, and a duty for every one of you to show
respect toward this great mother." Another said: "O people! This is your
mother whose defense and protection is your religious and conscientious
duty, refusal to help and support her means trampling upon the rights of
a mother, an act which is considered the greatest of sins."

The al-Azd tribe picked up the dung of 'A'ishah's camel, split and
smelt it and exclaimed: "What a fine perfume! How exhilarating it is!"
This was all very strange to 'A'ishah, for, not even concerning the
Prophet of God had such a feeling been shown by anyone.

**'A'ishah was the greatest statesman of the world**

Marwan was trying to create a division in 'A'ishah's army.

Text of the book

'A'ishah was not only a peerless orator and eloquent speaker among the
women and orators of the world, but she also possessed extraordinary
mental and political power. It was through the same power that she was
able to remove all the differences and oppositions which existed in her
army, and transform those intense differences into friendship and co-
operation. From the day 'A'ishah's army left Mecca there arose sings of
differences and division amidst her forces. It was the plan of Marwan
who was present in the army and a well-known personality, to create
dispersion among them, and in the same way that he was opposed to 'Ali,
he felt hostile towards Talhah and az-Zubayr, too, on account of their
participation in 'Uthman's murder. As the army was proceeding from Mecca
towards Iraq, when the time arrived for the daily prayer, Marwan
resorted to a stratagem to create a dispute and riot in the army to some
extent in which he succeeded. To carry out his plan, he addressed Talhah
and az-Zubayr and said: "It is time for prayer and the people have lined
up waiting to begin. As both of you are considered worthy by the people;
which of you should I introduce as leader of the congregational
prayer?"

As neither Talhah nor az-Zubayr could explicitly answer the Question
and thus reveal the secret of their heart and openly offer their
candidacy of this position, they remained silent and gave no answer.

But 'Abd Allah, son of az-Zubayr, said: "Now my father who is commander
of the army should act as prayer leader since he is definitely worthy of
this position." Muhammad, son of Talhah, said: "Oh, no! My father has
more merit for it and he should perform this task." Thus Marwan sowed
the seed of disunion, and the dispute reached to such a point that the
whole army was almost involved and the whole campaign put in danger.
'A'ishah was informed of this dispute, and she succeeded with her strong
will, intelligence and skill to remove the disagreement before the
prayer started and put and end to the quarrel.

She sent the following message to Marwan: "Marwan! What do you think
you are doing? Do you intend to deprive us of our purpose? Why do you
cause disunion in the army? If your real purpose is related to prayer,
now my sister's son, 'Abd Allah, can act as prayer leader, and the
people can follow his example and keep away from dispersion." She was
thus able to put an end to the dispute and make the soldiers obey the
order to perform the prayer behind 'Abd Allah acting as leader, and
place both Talhah and az-Zubayr in the first row, and at the same time
she warned Marwan, hinting that she was aware of his plan and was
watching him. Thus Marwan was compelled to abstain from such
instigation's, and contrary to his wish, behave like a loyal soldier and
obey his commander.

'A'ishah used the same method once again in Basra. On the occasion when
Talhah and az-Zubayr defeated the governor of Basra and were preparing
for further victories, a difference arose between them about the
question of acting as Imam of the congregational prayer. This dispute
went on until 'A'ishah intervened and speedily and easily put and an end
to it, and settled a complicated problem which might have produced
unpleasant and dangerous consequences for the whole of her army. Again
she appointed 'Abd Allah, her sister's son, as leader of the prayer, and
added a political reminder that after the final victory she is the
authority that can choose a caliph to look after the Muslim's affairs.

This point shows that 'A'ishah not only regarded herself as emir and
commander of the army, but also considered it her right to rule all the
Muslims in the realm of Islam, and that she could appoint anyone she
wished to administer the affairs or dismiss him from that position.

**'A'ishah and her social influence**

Oh! What a lovely odor this dung of 'A'ishah's camel has! Another
characteristic of 'A'ishah was her great social influence. She had
penetrated the hearts of the Muslims to such an extent that they obeyed
her devotedly and showed more submission to her than to anyone else.
This influence was so deep that the rulers of the time feared her, since
she could shake the foundation of their government with one sentence or
verdict and start a riot against them. It was this power and influence
that helped her in every uprising and combat and was an effective factor
of her victory, as testified by history.

1-Imam 'Ali exonerated himself of 'Uthman's blood, and with clear
arguments proved his impartiality in that matter. Yet despite his
assertions and the people's awareness of the true facts about that
assassination, they did not believe him. Whereas they heartily accepted
the words of 'A'ishah in accusing 'Ali of complicity in 'Uthman's death,
even though it was quite evident that she was resorting to scene-making
and false reasoning and misrepresenting the truth.

2-'A'ishah's soldiers encircled her camel in the battle of al-Jamal
like a ring and made that animal the axis of the combat and victory,
circling round it and loudly crying out: "O Muslims! Defend your mother,
'A'ishah, with your heart and soul, since your protection of her is a
religious and moral duty for everyone of you, like your prayer and fast,
and negligence and weakness in this matter is an offense and sin."

This moving scene and the ardor of the people towards 'A'ishah was due
to her extraordinary social power and influence, a position, which is
not attainable by every individual.

3-It was owing to the same popularity and social influence that
'A'ishah was able to drag Ka'b ibn Suwar, that great and influential
judge of Basra, away from his retirement in his house to the field of
battle and make him take the bridle of her camel and act as her advance
guard.

4-The men of the Mad tribe picked up and smelt the dung of 'A'ishah's
camel as if it was perfume, and regarded it as the most exquisite order,
whereas such a conduct had not been shown even to the mount of the
Prophet. 5-In the battle of al-Jamal, 'A'ishah's army, contrary to the
custom of all wars, carried no banner, but 'A'ishah's camel on which she
was riding in litter served as the army's banner, and move on ahead of
the forces. So long as this live banner was on its feet and kept its
balance, 'A'ishah's warriors repaired every setback and showed a
stubborn resistance's against 'Ali's army. Even the resignation of
az-Zubayr as commander, and his retirement from the battlefield had no
effect on the army, and the fall of Talhah and 'Abd Allah, son of az-
Zubayr, did not leave the smallest reaction in the morale of 'A'ishah's
fighters, But when 'A'ishah's camel was knocked down, 'A'ishah's army
was badly defeated and routed, ending with their flight in every
direction.

The above was an account of 'A'ishah's social and political
personality, her intellectual genius, her astonishing talent in
make-believe and sophistry. It gave a picture of her true visage, her
spiritual and other characteristics all of, which were described in
previous chapters. And yet despite her strange and extraordinary
personality, she always showed a weak point in her life, since she was
easily influenced by the bewitching words of 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr,
and was deceived by him, an account of which will be given in subsequent
chapters.

**An account of 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr**

In my heart I cherish the hostility with the household of the Prophet
'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr The most lovable persons for 'A'ishah As
'A'ishah was an outstanding person in her mental qualities, she was also
peerless in her deep affection for her kith and kin, and above all her
relations she showed intense liking for 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, the
son of her sister, Asma'. She did not act like an aunt to him, but like
a kind and affectionate mother who loves her sole child. It was because
of this affection that she chose the title of Umm 'Abd Allah for herself
and became known by that title among the people.164

Hisham bin 'Urwah says: "I have not seen anyone prayed for so much by
'A'ishah during the battle as for 'Abd Allah, begging God for his safety
and victory. After the battle when she was informed of the good news of
his safety, she felt overjoyed and prostrated herself in thankfulness to
God, and gave a 164. al-Aghani 9/142.

reward of ten thousand drachmas to the person who had brought the good
tidings. When 'A'ishah was ill, her nephews along with 'Abd Allah were
among those who visited her. When 'Abd Allah saw her pale face and weak
condition, tears flowed down his cheeks. 'A'ishah looked up, and on
seeing his face, felt very sad and weeping she said: " 'Abd Allah, it is
very hard for me to see you sad, uneasy and weeping. My son! You are my
darling and the dearest of my kins. My dear! I say openly that next to
the Prophet and my parents I know of no one who is loved by me as much
as you, and no one has found such a place in my heart as you." She had
willed that after her death her private residence be given to 'Abd
Allah.165

**Enmity of 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr with Banu Hashim**

'Abd Allah who was so much loved by 'A'ishah, was the most obstinate
enemy of the Prophet's household, as if this rancor and enmity had been
born with him and was mingled with his blood. He grew up, found a
position, and owing to his intense dislike of 'Ali, he changed his
father's attitude towards his cousin, 'Ali, and turned it into cynicism
and hostility and brought him into the rank of 'Ali's enemies and was
able to arouse him to combat and war. 'Ali himself reveals this fact and
says: "az-Zubayr was our friend and supporter so that he was regarded as
a member of Banu Hashim, until his evil and incompetent son 'Abd Allah
grew up, and thenceforth az-Zubayr joined the rank of stubborn
enemies."166

'Abd Allah's enmity with the Prophet's household went so far that in
Mecca he abstained for forty consecutive weeks from the greeting and
mention of the Prophet's name, in the sermon of Friday prayer When they
protested to him, he answered: "I have no objection to mentioning the
name of the Prophet, but in order to humiliate those who take pride in
him and regard themselves related to him, I abandon this greeting and
abstain from mentioning his name."

This story has also been narrated by 'Umar ibn Shabbah, Ibn al-Kalbi,
al- Waqidi but other historians and some other historians like Muhammad
ibn Habib, Abu 'Ubaydah and Mu'ammar ibn al-Muthana say that 'Abd Allah
gave the following answer to the people's protest: "The Prophet has some
unworthy members among his kins who pride themselves in the mention of
his name, I wish to pound them by my refusal to mention his name thereby
smashing their pride and boast."167

165. Tahdhib of Ibn 'Asakir 7/400, Description of Nahj al-balaghah
2/482-483.

166. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 4/340, Tahdhib 7/363, al-Isti'ab
353, Biography No. 1518, Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/167 and
4/480.

167. Muruj adh-dhahab as commentary on Ibn al-Athir 5/163-164.

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr himself said to 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas: "For
forty years I have cherished the enmity to your house in my heart and
have concealed it until today."168 The enmity of 'Abd Allah ibn
az-Zubayr was turned against every member of the Banu Hashim house, but
mainly towards 'Ali, and sometimes this enmity reached the point of
abuse and insult.169 One example of this hostility is that 'Abd Allah
gathered Muhammad ibn al- Hanafiyah, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas and
seventeen others of Banu Hashim including al-Hasan al-Mujtaba and
imprisoned them in a dark and narrow valley of Mecca named "Banu 'Arim
valley". And ordered them to collect much wood at the mouth of that
valley, intending to set fire to it after a period of grace and burn
them.

When al-Mukhtar learnt of this plot, he quickly dispatched four
thousand fighters to Mecca, and saved the Banu Hashim prisoners from
'Abd Allah's fire. Some historians have narrated this incident in the
above manner, but Abu al-Faraj describes this story as follows:

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr had a deep and long enmity towards Banu Hashim
and spared no effort to accuse and slander them.

He incited the people against them and was always on the alert to cause
a dispute and sedition among them. On the pulpit and in his sermon he
attacked and sometimes openly insulted them. On some occasions Ibn
'Abbas and some other high members of Banu Hashim retorted and
contradicted him. Abu al- Faraj continues to say that at a suitable
opportunity 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr seized Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah
and a number of Banu Hashim's house and imprisoned them in the 'Arim
prison. Meanwhile he was informed that Abu 'Abd Allah al-Jadali and
other friends of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah were hurrying towards Mecca
to save the prisoners. So at once 'Abd Allah ordered them to heap up
firewood at the entrance of the prison and set fire to it intending to
burn Muhammad and his friends. Abu 'Abd Allah on hearing the report made
a greater haste and as the flame was beginning to rise high, he reached
the prison, extinguished the fire and set free Muhammad ibn al-
Hanafiyah and other prisoners.170

**The influence of 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr in starting the battle of
al-Jamal**

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr was the active motivator of the battle of
al-Jamal. Text of the book

168. Muruj adh-dhahab 1/163, Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/357.

169. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/358, al-Mas'udi 5/163-164,
al-Ya'qubi 1/7-8.

170. al-Aghani 9/6, published by Dar al-Kutub.

This same son of az-Zubayr who in enmity wanted to set fire to Banu
Hashim, also for the same reason made his father change his attitude
towards his cousin, 'Ali, and turn his affection into hostility. The
same 'Abd Allah took control of 'A'ishah who had a dislike and hatred
for 'Ali, to rouse her for combat with 'Ali, thus starting the battle of
al-Jamal among the Muslims. This point is not a baseless claim, but a
fact, which is confirmed by strong historical evidence.

Ibn 'Abd al-Barr narrates that one-day 'A'ishah said: "Whenever you see
'Abd Allah son of 'Umar, bring him to me as I wish to speak with him."
They brought him to 'A'ishah and she said: "O Abu 'Abd ar-Rahman! On the
day I was departing for Basra, why did you not advise me against that
journey?" He answered: "On that day you were facing a man like 'Abd
Allah bin az- Zubayr who controlled you mentally and had imposed his
view on you to such an extent that you had no power to contradict him.
Thus my words were of no avail against his, and could not prevent your
departure."

'A'ishah said: "Well, all is passed but you should know that if you had
dissuaded me from that journey, I would not have taken any step for
departure and would not have left my home and city."171

Before the battle of al-Jamal, too, Imam 'Ali wrote a letter to
'A'ishah as follows: " 'A'ishah! Your intense affection for
Ibn-az-Zubayr and your kinship with Talhah will drag you to a course,
which will end with God's punishment." Historians say that when 'A'ishah
reached al-Haw'ab and heard the bark of the dogs there; she remembered
the words of the Prophet about it and his warning. So she decided to let
the army stay where it was and she herself returned home.

When 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr heard of this decision, at once he went
to 'A'ishah and said: "Those who have called this place al-Haw'ab are
mistaken; for we have left al-Haw'ab behind and are well beyond it."

Owing to her deep affection for 'Abd Allah, 'A'ishah believed him and
accepted his words. Thus despite all her intelligence and sagacity, here
she showed a weakness which proved her total helplessness before 'Abd
Allah. But Ibn az-Zubayr was not content with this, and fearing that
someone might tell her the truth and cause her to revise her decision,
he did not leave her alone and stayed constantly with her until they
reached Basra and continued their sedition and combat.

If 'Abd Allah had not on this occasion shown his old-standing enmity,
and had not deceived 'A'ishah, the battle of al-Jamal might never have
taken place, and such a heavy bloodshed might not have resulted. That is
why we said that 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr was the actual motivator of
that battle.

So, dear reader, all the above pieces of historical evidence prove that
the real

171. al-Isti'ab 354, Biography of 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr No. 1518,
Description of Nahj al- balaghah 4/481.

instigator of 'A'ishah and the main agent of starting the battle of
al-Jamal was 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, not 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' whose
name has been spread so widely by historians thus turning a forged and
mythical story into an authentic historical fact, an account of which
fable will be given in the next chapter.


