Part Three : the Myth of 'abd Allah Ibn Saba'
=============================================

Our sources in the description of the topics have about the battle of
al-Jamal have been the traditions and narrations which are considered
reliable by all historians. In this survey we have selected the topics
from such books and quotations by the narrators and biographers whose
statements have been confirmed by those who are well acquainted with
such great personalities. As against these genuine narrations and
reliable history books, which we have adopted, there exist narrations
which have been forged by a single person, a person whom all biographers
have called non-religious and heretical, and yet his false narrations
have been quoted by writers and historians in their books. To be more
explicit, all these stories and narrations have been fabricated by a man
named Sayf ibn 'Umar at-Tamimi al-Kufi who is said to have died about
the year 170 of the Hijrah.

During his life he had fabricated many false myths and fables entering
them into historical books. One of these myths is Sayf's creation of an
imaginary character that he has clothed in the garment of a real person
to whom he has given the name of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba'.

This imaginary character was no more than a myth, since such a man had
never existed in the world, but he was fabricated by Sayf ibn 'Umar so
that he could propagate all kinds of falsehood in 'Abd Allah's name and
have a free hand in such forgeries. Thus he made up all kinds of strange
stories and fables and placed them at the disposal of the Muslims in the
name of his fictitious character.

One of his fables briefly says that a man of Sanaa of Yemen, named 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba', also called Ibn as-Sawda', apparently embraced Islam in
the caliphate of 'Uthman, but he was in fact a very fanatical Jew, and a
mysterious, cunning person who wanted to cause riot and sedition among
the Muslims and divide them and destroy their unity. It was to this end
that he embraced Islam and showed himself a true and devout Muslim in
order to deceive them. He began to carry out his plan in the following
way:

He began to travel to important Islamic centers and cities and visit
Medina, Egypt, ash-Sham, Kufah and Basra, and in these places he
presented himself as a missionary, giving the Muslims the good tidings
of the resurrection of the Prophet and his return among the people. He
also propagated this point that the Prophet's immediate guardian and
successor was 'Ali ibn Abi Talib whose right of caliphate had been
usurped by 'Uthman. 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' pretended to incline to and
support 'Ali. A number of the Prophet's companions and other Muslims
were taken in by him and believed his words.

'Ammar ibn Yasir, Abu Dharr, Abu Hudhayfah, Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr,
Malik al-Ashtar, Hujr ibn 'Adi and others who were the most famous of
the Prophet's companions and their dependents followed and gathered
around him. Thus that mysterious Jew managed to win the attention of
these exalted men and formed a party known as the Saba'is and it was the
members of this group of companions and Muslims who besieged 'Uthman in
his house and killed him.

So in Sayf ibn 'Umar's imagination, the Jew, 'Abd Allah ibn Saba',
cunningly entered the Muslim ranks, pretended to love and support 'Ali,
formed a party of Saba'is consisting of the Prophet's companions and
other Muslims and eventually killed their caliph.

Sayf ibn 'Umar in the same fable continues to narrate the historical
events subsequent to 'Uthman's assassination down to the battle of
al-Jamal, and then with his imaginative brain he created another
character in addition to 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' and named him al-Qa'qa'
ibn 'Amr, and made him a companion of the Prophet 172 and gave him the
mission of mediation and peace making, and then continued his fable as
follows:

In the battle of al-Jamal al-Qa'qa' ibn 'Amr tried hard to establish
peace, sometimes by contact with 'Ali, and on other occasions with
'A'ishah, Talhah and az-Zubayr, inviting them to peace and tranquility
and warning them of war and bloodshed. At last al-Qa'qa' succeeded as a
dove of peace to win the agreement of the commanders of both armies to
establish peace between them and so once more silence and tranquility
reigned over both camps. The Saba'is, namely 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', and
his followers, were worried about the consequences of this peace and
vexed at the disruption of their destructive schemes. So one dark night
they gathered together for discussion and prepared plans for ending that
peace.

'Abd Allah ibn Saba' himself, the hero of his fable, proposed that his
followers be divided into two groups, one group joining 'Ali's army as
supporters, and the other group going to 'A'ishah's forces as followers,
and then one dark night at a certain hour rush upon each other, making
both armies believe that they have been attacked by the other army, thus
rekindling the fire of war and turning al-Qa'qa''s peace into a bloody
combat.

The sabotage party gladly approved the plan of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' and
carried it out excellently one dark night, benefiting much from it. And
despite

172. You can read the story of al-Qa'qa' in the book of "One hundred
and fifty companions" by the author of this book, where he considers
al-Qa'qa' as a fabricated character. the inclination of the commander of
both sides, they incited the Muslims against one another and kindled the
fire of war again after it had been extinguished, thus producing the
battle of al-Jamal.

This is the story of how the battle of al-Jamal was started, according
to Sayf ibn 'Umar, a story that has no true foundation, since the heroes
of it, namely 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' and al-Qa'qa' ibn 'Amr were
fictitious characters. Even though the whole story is a myth, fabricated
by Sayf ibn 'Umar before the year 170 of the Hijrah, some writers of
history have adopted it included it in their books. In this way with the
passage of time it has assumed the form of a real historical event,
finding a place for itself in reliable books of history, and on this
basis a reader may not allow himself the slightest doubt about its
authenticity. Thus most Islamic historians and even Orientalists have
not realized that the story is only a fable fabricated by that liar.

**Sayf ibn 'Umar is the only source of the myth**

There is no one else but Sayf who is at the root of this fable, and
everyone else has adapted it from him. At-Tabari (who died in 310 of the
Hijrah) borrowed the story from this narrator and quoted it in his book.
Ibn 'Asakir (who died in 571 of the Hijrah) did the same thing for his
book of the "History of Medina and Damascus"; Ibn Abi Bakr (who died in
the 741 of the Hijrah) for his "al-Tamhid wa al-bayan" and adh-Dhahabi
(who died in 747 of the Hijrah) in his book of history. Thus their only
source had been Sayf ibn 'Umar. Later historians too until the present
time have taken the story directly from at-Tabari who had copied it from
that myth- making narrator. We have revealed this fact in our book on
'Abd Allah ibn Saba' and have shown how later historians have relied on
at-Tabari in quoting the story. Here we cite as examples two past and
present writers and historians:

1-Among past historians we must mention Ibn Khaldun, the great thinker
and historian. In his book of "al-Mubtada' wa al-khabar" he describes
the murder of 'Uthman and the battle of al-Jamal and then quotes some
parts of this fable. He says in volume two, page 425: "Such was the
story of the battle of al-Jamal which we have briefly quoted from
at-Tabari's history, and as we consider this book reliable, we have
confined our description of this story to that book and quoted it." He
also says on page 247 of the same book: "I have selected all these
historical events which are briefly quoted in my book from the great
history of Muhammad ibn Jarir at-Tabari, since I have found his history
book more reliable than other books, and have relied on it in my
quotations and since in it there are few cases of doubt, criticism and
sarcasm levelled at the great and good companions of the Prophet."

2-As for the present historians, we may mention Sa'id al-Afghani in
whose book of "'A'ishah wa as-siyasah in pages 32-34, pages 48-52, pages
145-147, and pages 155-185 he speaks of their false stories of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba' and his followers and speaks of the source of his book
on page five. He says: "In narrating historical events I rely on the
history of at-Tabari from which alone I have taken historical topics,
since at-Tabari's history is closer than all other books and sources to
historical events, and the date of writing precedes other books of
history. Moreover this author has taken a greater care in observing
historical honesty and trustworthiness than many other historians, and
also later reliable historians and writers have mostly relied on this
source in narrating the events in their books. I, too, am greatly
interested in this book so that I am inclined to quote his very words
and phrases."

Again on page 47 of the same book Sa'id al-Afghani said: "We rely
mostly on at-Tabari's history in our descriptions."

As our reader can see, after at-Tabari had resorted to quoting this
fable of Sayf ibn 'Umar in his book, later historians, too, relying on
the fame and high scholarly position of at-Tabari, have quoted from him
the same fable without any scrutiny and reflection. Thus a false and
forged story has been publicized as a reliable and true historical event
and an undeniable fact.

We draw the reader's attention to his diagram on the next page showing
how various narrators have taken their information about the story from
former narrators tracing it back to the first narrator, namely 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba', proving that its single source has been the mendacious
Sayf bin 'Umar, and the narrations of past and present historians are
based on his myth only. Those scholars, who study the life of great men,
are quite familiar with Sayf the forger of traditions.173

173. For a more detailed account of Sayf refer to the book of 'Abd
Allah ibn Saba' by the author of this book.

**Inner complexes are united 'A'ishah! Do you utter such words about
'Ali?**

Zaynab, daughter of Umm Salamah

After the battle of al-Jamal which ended with the victory of 'Ali,
'A'ishah returned home deeply distressed and broken- hearted, since in
addition to her defeat and failure she had lost her cousin, Talhah, a
man for whom she had cherished many hopes and wished to take the seat of
the caliphate and hold the rein of Muslim affairs.

In this battle, not only Talhah, 'A'ishah's cousin but also Muhammad
bin- Talhah, another very closer relatives of hers, were killed.
az-Zubayr, too, who was the husband of her sister, Asma'174 and
commander of the army lost his life. It was in this state of deep sorrow
as well as regret for ignoring the counsels of well-wishers that she
returned home. She came back to Medina with a heart full of rage and
rancor for 'Ali. However she had no remedy but to conceal her hatred and
enmity in her heart during the life and rule of 'Ali and hide that fire
under the ashes of fortitude.

But when the news of 'Ali's death reached her she prostrated herself in
thankfulness and was so overjoyed that she recited the following lines:
" 'Ali has gone and there is no return for him. With his death I was
overjoyed in the same way that a traveller's family is on his return.
Indeed, my eyes were brightened with his departure."

After reciting these lines she asked: Who is his assassin? They said
that he was of the Murad tribe. Then she recited a poem the meaning of
which is as follows:

"Although in his ('Ali's) death he was far from us,
Yet long live the youth who brought us the news
And overjoyed us!"

When 'A'ishah's words were heard by Zaynab, daughter of Umm Salamah175,
she reproached 'A'ishah saying: " 'A'ishah! Do you utter such words
about 'Ali? And do you regard his death a source of joy for yourself?"

'A'ishah said in apology: "I have become forgetful. Please remind me
when

174. Asma' was Abu Bakr's daughter and elder sister of 'A'ishah. Her
mother was Qilah or Qatilah. Asma' is nicknamed "Owner of two belts",
since on the day of the Prophet's emigration; she cut her belt into two,
and used it as a tablecloth for the Prophet. She was az-Zubayr's wife by
whom she had three children, namely 'Abd Allah, 'Urwah and al-Mundhir.
Then she was divorced by az-Zubayr. She was alive until her son 'Abd
Allah was killed in 73 of the Hijrah, and she died a few days after at
the age of one hundred. (Usd al-ghabah 5/468)

175. Zaynab was the daughter of Abu Salamah, and Rabibah was the
daughter of the Prophet's consort. Her father was 'Abd al-Asad Qarashi,
and was called Makhzumi, since he belonged to the Makhzum branch of the
Quraysh.

I am in such a state."176

According to Abu al-Faraj, after this conversation she recited a poem
the meaning of which is as follows:

"It was customary for us to eulogize
Our friends with many titles and epithets,
And compose odes and poems in their praise,
But that time has gone and that era is past.
Now your praising them is like the buzz of a fly
That is of no avail nor is it of the slightest use."

What 'A'ishah meant was that with 'Ali's death the occasion had passed
for praising him.

The above account showed examples of 'A'ishah's hatred and enmity
towards 'Ali, which she expressed knowingly or involuntarily and thus,
revealed her complexes about him. 'A'ishah's hostility towards 'Ali's
children 'A'ishah's enmity was not confined to 'Ali. It was so deep and
wide that it included his children and family, too.

Historians narrate that 'A'ishah veiled herself in the presence of
'Ali's sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and thus she regarded them as
strangers, despite the fact that Ibn 'Abbas objected to her and told her
that both al-Hasan and al- Husayn were intimate relatives.177

Ibn Sa'd after describing 'A'ishah's conduct says: Abu Hanifah178 and
Malik179 are quoted saying that the wife of a man would be always
intimate towards his children and grandchildren, and none of them can
marry her. The Muslims are unanimous about this point. In our opinion,
this matter about which all Muslims are unanimous and which is confirmed
by Ibn 'Abbas, Abu Hanifah and Malik, is not something, which 'A'ishah
did not know. But 'A'ishah's purpose in her conduct was to

176. at-Tabari 7/88, Tabaqat 3/40, Maqatil at-Talibiyin 42, al-Kamil of
Ibn al-Athir 3/137.

177. Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd 8/73.

178. Abu Hanifah's name is an-Nu'man or 'Utayk. He was the son of
Thabit ibn Zuti of the Taym tribe His grandfather was Zuti a slave of
the Taym ibn Tha'labah house, who was freed. Abu Hanifah is one of four
authorities and leaders of the Sunni sect. He was born in the year 80 of
the Hijrah in Kufah. Abu Ja'far, al-Mansur al-'Abbasi summoned him to
Baghdad, where he died in the year 150 at the age of 70, and was buried
in Khayzaran. (The History of Baghdad 13/323-324)

179. Malik, nicknamed Abu 'Abd Allah, was the son of Anas ibn Abi 'Amir
of the Qahtan tribe. His grandfather, Abu 'Amir was a companion of the
Prophet who fought under him in the battle of Uhud and subsequent
battles. He is another of the four leaders of the Sunni sect. He has
written a book named al-Muwatta' which is an important book of the
Sunnis, containing 1720 traditions. Malik was born in the year 90 or 93,
and died in 169 at the age of 79. (as-Suyuti's Tanwir al-hawalik)

negate the kinship of al-Hasan and al-Husayn to the Prophet as his
grandchildren.

**'A'ishah lays the foundation of a second war**

'A'ishah started an even more violent war against 'Ali. Text of the
book From the day that 'A'ishah incited the people against 'Uthman and
started a great riot, her relationship with the Banu Umayyah who were of
'Uthman's house and his supporters was darkened, and this disagreement
changed into an irreconcilable hostility with 'Uthman's assassination.
But when 'Ali became caliph and 'A'ishah rose against him, these two
hostile sides, namely 'A'ishah and the Umayyads reconciled. Although
these two were opposed to each other, that both of them were hostile to
'Ali and this common objective brought them closer to each other and
made a kind of friendship possible.

The Umayyads gathered around 'A'ishah's banner, and turned their enmity
into friendship and alliance. They concentrated their forces in order to
overthrow 'Ali from his position as caliph then settles their own
differences. But contrary to their expectation 'Ali emerged victorious
in that battle and compelled 'A'ishah to retire her house.

Although after the battle of al-Jamal, 'A'ishah had lost her army,
power and. influence, yet she could not remain quiet or show fortitude
towards those vexing complexes. So she made her relationship and
alliance stronger with the Umayyads and their chief of the time,
Mu'awiyah, and concluded a pact of cooperation with them to resume her
activities against 'Ali.

She took preliminary steps for another uprising, and thus started
another war against 'Ali, the consequence of which were even more
harmful and dangerous than the battle of al-Jamal.

'A'ishah could not abandon her opposition to 'Ali, and so after the
battle of al-Jamal she resumed that opposition by means of a cold war
and verbal attacks. But this cold war did not come to an end with the
death of 'Ali and its scope lasted to the last moments of 'A'ishah's
life. She continued this hostility towards 'Ali's sons, and this time
she resorted to a war of fabricating traditions against 'Ali, the evil
results of which have unfortunately remained down to the present day in
the history of Islam. Even after so many centuries the ill-omened
consequences of which have not been removed from the realm of Islam.

Mu'awiyah had always been opposed to 'Ali and used all his force and
power in this course. He resorted to every possible kind of trickery and
cunningness, and employed all his wealth and power for a war against
'Ali.

Therefore 'A'ishah became a great and strong supporter of Mu'awiyah.
You will read an account of this alliance in the third volume of this
book which will be published soon under the title of "'A'ishah in the
time of Mu'awiyah". We pray to God to make this book a source of benefit
to all Muslims and a means of eternal salvation for us.


**The End**


