Mobilization of the Army
========================

**What do women have to do with campaigning?**

When on her way to Medina the news of the people's allegiance to 'Ali
reached 'A'ishah, she decided to oppose him and returned to Mecca where
she raised the banner of opposition to him and openly incited and
encouraged the people against him. Hostile groups and parties, learning
of this scheme, rushed from every side to her and joined the forces of
opposition.

Talhah and az-Zubayr who opposed 'Ali's system of equality, as we said
in the last chapter, broke their pact with 'Ali and left his side,
proceeding to 19. Description of Nahj al-balaghah, Ibn Abi al-Hadid
7/39-41.

20. History of at-Tabari 5/53.

21. History of al-Ya'qubi 2/127, History of Ibn A'tham 166-167.

Mecca and joining 'A'ishah's army and opposition party.22 On the one
hand the Umayyads who had long been hostile to 'Ali and were waiting for
an opportunity to rise against his rule, on hearing of 'A'ishah's rise
and opposition, left Medina for Mecca and placed themselves under
'A'ishah's banner of opposition to 'Ali.

On the other hand the governors of 'Uthman's time who had been
dismissed one after another by 'Ali, left with their enormous wealth
gathered from public funds, from various cities towards 'A'ishah and
joined her army. Thus all the groups which had some complaint against
'Ali gathered there. At-Tabari quotes az-Zuhri as follows: Talhah and
az-Zubayr came to Mecca four months after 'Uthman's murder and 'Abd
Allah ibn 'Amir23 too who had been governor of Basra in 'Uthman's time
and was dismissed by 'Ali, left for Mecca with much wealth. Ya'la ibn
Umayyah24, governor of Yemen who had been dismissed by 'Ali arrived at
Mecca with enormous wealth and more than four hundred camels. 'Abd Allah
ibn 'Amir placed much wealth and many camels at the disposal of
'A'ishah's army and her warriors Ya'la ibn Umayyah, too offered
az-Zubayr four hundred thousand dinars and provided the equipment of
seventy fighters and offered the famous camel called 'Askar to 'A'ishah
which he had bought for eighty dinars (and according to al-Mas'udi, for
two hundred dinars), and it was this camel that 'A'ishah rode in the
battle of al-Jamal.25 They tied her litter firmly behind this camel and
'A'ishah sat in it.

In this way all those who were opposed to 'Ali, assembled in Mecca, and
mobilized a huge and well-equipped army ready to fight 'Ali. 22 These
two had a kinship with 'A'ishah Talhah as a cousin and az-Zubayr as her
sister's husband..

23. 'Uthman's cousin on the mother's side.

24. Ya'la ibn Umayyah, surnamed Abu Safwan and Abu Khalid, embraced
Islam in the capture of Mecca and took part with the Muslims in the
battles of Hunayn, at-Ta'if and Tabuk. 'Umar had appointed him as
governor of a city of Yemen. Ya'la had seized a pasture there for
himself, and 'Umar had summoned him to Medina for that offense, but
before Ya'la reached Medina, 'Umar had died. Then 'Uthman appointed him
as governor of Sanaa and a higher post.

So he felt a particular attachment to 'Uthman. On the day the Muslims
rose up against 'Uthman, Ya'la left Sanaa to aid 'Uthman, but on the way
he fell down from his mount and broke his knee. After 'Uthman's death he
reached Mecca and declared that he would provide the fund and equipment
necessary for avenging 'Uthman 5 blood. It was according to the same
promise that he offered four hundred thousand drachmas to az-Zubayr and
equipped seventy warriors of the Quraysh with mounts and weapons, and
offered a valuable camel to 'A'ishah which she mounted in the battle of
al-Jamal. In addition to all that wealth, Ya'la himself took part in
that battle against 'Ali and in the name of avenging 'Uthman's blood,
but he repented after the battle and joined the rank of 'Ali's friend s,
and fought in the battle of Siffin under 'Ali, thus showing himself an
opportunist!

25. History of at-Tabari 5/167.

**'A'ishah's army proceeds toward Iraq**

'A'ishah! God has forbidden you from wandering in the desert! Umm
Salamah At-Tabari says: In Mecca, 'A'ishah gathered a round her all the
parties that were opposed to 'Ali and thus, she prepared a large and
well-equipped army, and then assembled the commanders for a council of
war. Some of them said: We should go directly to Medina and fight 'Ali
with this army. Others said: We cannot stand up against 'Ali's forces
with this weak and small army, or attack the capital of the Islamic
realm. We should first proceed to ash-Sham and ask the aid of Mu'awiyah
in military forces and equipment and then engage in a war with 'Ali.
Another group suggested moving to Iraq first and obtaining
reinforcements from the people of the two large cities of Kufah and
Basra where Talhah and az-Zubayr had many supporters, and then being
better prepared and equipped, proceed to Medina and fight 'Ali there.

All the members of this council approved of this suggestion, and so
'A'ishah ordered the army to be ready and proceeded from Mecca towards
Iraq with seven hundred warriors. All along the way volunteers joined
them until their number rose to three thousand.26

**Umm Salamah speaks with 'A'ishah**

Ibn Tayfur says: On the days that 'A'ishah was going to leave for Basra
with her army, Umm Salamah met her and said: " 'A'ishah! Your God has
put limitations upon you. Do not step beyond His command. In respect for
His prophet, God has placed a veil between you and the people. Do not
show disrespect to the Prophet by tearing down that veil. God has
allotted you the corner of a house. Do not turn it into wandering in the
desert. 'A'ishah! The Prophet knew you better and was perfectly aware of
your position. If it were advisable for you to interfere in such
matters, he would surely have given you an instruction, about it and
made an arrangement with you, but he has not done so, and on the
contrary he has forbidden such acts. 'A'ishah! If the Prophet saw you on
this route, what would you say? Fear God and be ashamed before the
Prophet! For God is watching your deed and conduct, your smallest acts
are not hidden from the Prophet either.

'A'ishah! The way you have adopted is so repellent and contrary to
human virtue, that, if I were in your place and were ordered to go to
heaven, I would feel ashamed to meet the Prophet there, Do not abandon
your modesty and humbleness, stay in the corner of your house till
death, so as to satisfy the Prophet of God."

26. History of at-Tabari 5/167.

According to some historians, Umm Salamah ended her words with this
sentence: 'A'ishah! If I were to repeat for you what I have heard from
the Prophet about this matter, you would twist with pain and cry out!
'A'ishah answered: "Umm Salamah! Though I have always followed your
advice, I will not in this case do so. For, there is a fine journey
ahead of me, and I intend to establish peace between the two groups of
Muslims who are hostile to each other, and put an end to their
differences."27

**Reports of the route**

"O wives of the Prophet! Stay in your houses till death!" The Qur'an
Al-Haw'ab's dogs will bark at him. The Prophet of Islam 'A'ishah
equipped her army, which was composed of various groups and parties
opposed to 'Ali and proceeded towards Iraq, and now we will describe the
incidents, which occurred on the way until she reached Basra.

**Differences about acting as leader of the congregational prayer**

At-Tabari says: When 'A'ishah's army left Mecca, outside that city
Marwan recited the call for prayer. Then he went to Talhah and az-Zubayr
and said:

Which one of you should I consider as Emir and present to the people as
congregational leader? As Talhah and az-Zubayr could not explicitly
express their opinion in each other's presence and offer their candidacy
for that position, their sons took the lead, and each of them supported
his father as a nominee. 'Abd Allah spoke in favour of his father
az-Zubayr and Muhammad did the same for his father Talhah, thus creating
differences between them. When 'A'ishah was informed of this matter,
fearing that hostility would be created in the army about this question,
she summoned Marwan and said: "Marwan, what are you doing? Why do you
cause disunion in the army with your action? The prayer must be
performed with the Imamate of my brother's son, 'Abd Allah ibn
az-Zubayr."

According to her order, until reaching Basra, 'Abd Allah kept this
position as leader of prayer. When Ma'adh ibn 'Ubayd Allah noticed the
disagreement between Talhah and az-Zubayr, he said: "By God! Even if we
win victory, violent differences will arise between us on the question
of caliphate; for, 27. Balaghat an-nisa' 8. Some historians say that she
wrote the above words to 'A'ishah in a letter. Fa'iq az-Zamakhshari
1/290, Description of Nahj al-balaghah by Ibn Abi al-Hadid 2/79, al-
'Iqd al-farid 3/69 and History of al-Ya'qubi.

neither az-Zubayr nor Talhah are ready to forego their claim of this
position, and each of the two refuses to grant it to the other."28
Differences in the question of leadership At-Tabari says that when
'A'ishah's army halted at Dhat 'Irq, Sa'id ibn al- 'As29, who was a
Quraysh aristocrat of the Umayyads and was in 'A'ishah's army, said to
Marwan and his friends: "If your object is really avenging 'Uthman's
blood, whither are you going since the assassins of 'Uthman are in this
very army?30 Kill them and return to your homes. What is the point of
fighting 'Ali and getting killed?" Marwan and his friends answered: "We
are going to get reinforcements in order to kill all the assassins of
'Uthman." Then Sa'id contacted Talhah and az-Zubayr and said: "Be honest
with me, and tell the truth! If you win victory in this war, whom will
you entrust with the position of caliph?" They said: "Either of us who
is chosen by the people." Sa'id said: "If you have really risen to
avenge 'Uthman's blood, you had better entrust his sons with the
position of caliph."

They answered: "Should we put aside old and great Emigrants and give
the rein of affairs to their inexperienced young men." Sa'id said: "I
have no intention of seizing the caliphate back from the house of Abd
Manaf31 and giving it to others." After saying this he returned from
there.

'Abd Allah ibn Khalid ibn Usayd, too, who was of the Umayyads, withdrew
from the army. Al-Mughayrah ibn Shu'bah who was of the Thaqif tribe,
observing the above scene, gathered the members of his tribe and said to
them: "Any member of the Thaqif tribe, who is present in this army,
should return home."32 Thus they did so, and the rest of the army
continued its way.

**The Third difference**

at-Tabari continues his narration and says: After the rise of
differences on the question of caliphate and withdrawal of some
participants from the army, 'A'ishah's forces departed from Dhat 'Irq,
having al-Walid and Aban, two of 'Uthman's sons amongst them. But for
the third time, too, differences arose in 28. History of at-Tabari
5/168-169. 29. Sa'id ibn al-'As was one of Umayyad nobles and one of the
most eloquent members of that tribe. Imam 'Ali had Killed his father in
the battle of Badr. He was one of 'Uthman's scribes and was appointed by
him as governor of Basra, but 'Ali dismissed him. 30. He meant 'A'ishah,
Talhah and az-Zubayr.

31. The 'Abd Manaf house includes the tribes of Banu Hashim and Banu
Umayyah. When 'Ali was caliph, Sa'id of the Umayyads had no wish to see
the caliphate transferred from the Banu Hashim to Talhah of the Taym
tribe or to az-Zubayr of the Banu Asad.

32. History of at-Tabari 5/168-169, Tabaqat 5/23.

the army, some proposing departure to ash-Sham, and others to Iraq. In
this connection az-Zubayr consulted his son 'Abd Allah, and Talhah asked
the advice of 'Alqamah whom he preferred to his own son, they reached on
agreement to have Iraq as their destination, and thus they put an end to
the difference in the army.33

**The incident of al-Haw'ab**

The fourth happening which occurred for 'A'ishah's army on the way to
Iraq was as follows: Talhah and az-Zubayr were informed on the way that
'Ali had left Medina and had reached the halting place of Dhu Qar, and
had blocked their way to Kufah. So they decided to abandon the plan of
going to Kufah; and by choosing a by-way they proceeded towards Basra
until they reached a place called al-Haw'ab. When 'A'ishah heard dogs
barking she asked the name of the place and they told her it was
al-Haw'ab.

Here 'A'ishah remembered the words of the Prophet to his wives about
the dogs of al-Haw'ab, warning them about it. The memory of it worried
and frightened 'A'ishah, and she said: "We are from God and return to
Him. I am the woman whose future he predicted." Thus 'A'ishah changed
her mind about the journey and decided to return back: When 'Abd Allah
ibn az-Zubayr learnt of her decision, he went to her discussed the
matter, pretending that those who had spoken about the place had made a
mistake about its name, and this was not al-Haw'ab. After this incident
'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr constantly watched 'A'ishah to see that no one
would contact her again and dissuade her from that journey. Thus he
shadowed her until they reached Basra.34

**Interpellations of 'A'ishah's military commanders**

'A'ishah! Tell us what your purpose of this journey is! Abu al-Aswad
at-Tabari narrates that 'A'ishah's army left Mecca and reached the
vicinity of Basra and stopped at a place called Hafr Abu Musa. 'Uthman
ibn Hunayf al-Ansari who had been appointed governor of Basra by 'Ali,
hearing of the matter, ordered Abu al-Aswad ad-Du'ali to go to
'A'ishah's military camp and meet her commanders and investigate their
purpose.

33. History of at-Tabari 5/168-169, Tabaqat 5/23.

34. History of at-Tabari 5/178, 'Abd Allah ibn Saba' 1/100-103.

Abu al-Aswad went there and got in touch with 'A'ishah first and asked:
" 'A'ishah! What is your purpose of Coming to Basra?" 'A'ishah said: "We
have come here to avenge 'Uthman's blood and punish his assassins." Abu
al-Aswad said: "There are none of 'Uthman's assassins in Basra to be
punished."

'A'ishah said: "Abu al-Aswad! You are right. 'Uthman's assassins are
not in Basra. We have not come to find them here. We have come to ask
for people's aid and with their support to bring vengeance upon
'Uthman's assassins who have gathered around 'Ali in Medina. Abu
al-Aswad! On that day when 'Uthman hurt you with his scourges I felt
uneasy, and protested strongly to him. But how can I remain silent when
you rushed upon him with your sword and killed him, and did not lament
his innocence? No, Abu al-Aswad, I shall never remain silent!"

Abu al-Aswad said: " 'A'ishah! What have you to do with swords and
scourges? You are the veiled and secluded wife of the Prophet, and
according to his order your only duty is to retire to your house, recite
the Qur'an and worship your God. 'A'ishah! Islam does not impose jihad
on women. Moreover, avenging 'Uthman's blood is not your duty, 'Ali has
a better and worthier claim for this vengeance, since he has a closer
kinship with 'Uthman than you have. Both of them belong to the Abd Manaf
house, whereas you are of the Taym tribe."

'A'ishah said: "Abu al-Aswad! I will not alter my decision, and I will
not give up my plan. I will carry on attaining my goal and fulfilling
the purpose of my uprising. You said that war and jihad are not women's
duty. What war? What jihad? Is there a question of war and jihad? I am
in such a position that no one dares to engage in war with me, let alone
the actual occurrence of a war!" Abu al-Aswad said: " 'A'ishah, you are
mistaken in this very matter, for you will be fought so strongly that
the easiest scene of it will kindle a fire and break the back."

Here Abu al-Aswad ended his talk with 'A'ishah. Then he got in touch
with az-Zubayr and said: "az-Zubayr! The day is not yet forgotten when
the people swore allegiance to Abu Bakr, when you held your sword, and
uttering slogans, said: 'None is better and worthier than 'Ali is for
the caliphate, and the fine garment of caliph is fitting for none but
'Ali. But to day you are holding the same sword and have risen against
'Ali! az-Zubayr! Where are that sympathy and support, and what is this
hostility and opposition?"

az-Zubayr answered that 'Uthman's blood must be avenged. Abu al-Aswad
said: "We have heard that you people have been the overseers of
'Uthman's murder, and 'Ali did not take the slightest part in it."
az-Zubayr said: "Abu al-Aswad! Go to Talhah to hear what he says!" Abu
al-Aswad narrates that he went to Talhah and found him to be a rough and
seditious man seriously desiring war, and there was no use at all of
talking to him.35

According to another report, Abu al-Aswad said: " 'Imran ibn al-Hasin
and I went to 'A'ishah on behalf of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, governor of
Basra and asked her to explain what motive had brought her there, and
said: "Do you hear a decree from the Prophet for this uprising and
journey? Or have you taken this step according to your own personal
view?" 'A'ishah said: "I do not have a decree from the Prophet about
this matter, but have reached a personal decision for avenging 'Uthman's
blood since the day he was assassinated.

For, in 'Uthman's time we openly protested to him on why he treated the
Muslims unjustly and whipped them, and why he allowed his kith and kin
to seize public land and pastures for their flocks and cattle to graze
on. We reminded him of that wicked and tyrannical man, al-Walid, who was
driven a way by the Prophet and whom the Qur'an had called an evildoer36
who was appointed as Emir and ruler of Muslims. We told him all this and
he accepted all that we said. He regretted his deeds, and with the water
of repentance cleansed himself and made up for his blunders. But you
people did not in the least value his repentance, and rushed upon him
with your sharp swords and killed him in his house in all his innocence.
You smashed the greatness of the Islamic realm, Medina, and the dignity
of the caliphate and the respect due to the month of Dhu al-Hijjah,
which was greatly revered in Islam. How and why can I remain silent
before this injustice and oppression, and keep quiet before this
disobedience and transgression?"

Abu al-Aswad said: " 'A'ishah! What have you to do with whips and
swords? Had the Prophet not forbidden your interference in such affairs?
Had he not recommended you to remain in the corner of your house? Why
have you, done contrary to your exalted husband's order, and emerged
from your house, starting riot and sedition among the Muslims?"

'A'ishah answered: "Abu al-Aswad! What riot and sedition? Does there
anyone want to fight me, or to speak against me so as to cause riot and
sedition? Such a thing will never occur, and no one would dare to engage
in such acts against me."

Abu al-Aswad said: " 'A'ishah! If this opposition and rebellion of
yours continues, the people will fight you and a great sedition will
start." 'A'ishah said: "You low fellow of the Banu 'Amir Tribe! Cut
shorts your wounds! Who is there to dare fight the wife of the
Prophet?"37 Here ended the dialog between 'A'ishah and Abu al-Aswad,
without her 35. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/57, Description of Nahj
al-balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid 2/81, History of at-Tabari 5/178.

36. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Hujurat, Verse 5.

37. Balaghat an-nisa' 9, al-'Iqd al-farid 3/98, al-Bayan wa at-tabyin,
published by as-Sandubi 2/209-210.

being influenced by his words. She remained firm in her decision and
proceeded from Hafr Abu Musa with her army, and on reaching near Basra,
she halted there.

Speeches by 'A'ishah's commanders Indeed 'Uthman altered the just
regime of Islam. 'A'ishah 'A'ishah's army entered Basra and chose
al-Mirbad, one of the large squares of the city, for her camp. 'Uthman
ibn Hunayf al-Ansari who was appointed as governor of Basra by the
caliph 'Ali, Again sent some deputies to al-Mirbad38 to talk with the
commanders of 'A'ishah's army and find out their purpose. When 'A'ishah
saw that her army and the people of Basra had gathered all in the same
spot, she used this opportunity to deliver an exciting oration to them,
saying:

"O people! Though 'Uthman, emir of the believers, was once diverted
from the path of right and justice, and injured the Prophet's
companions, and appointed corrupt and inexperienced youths to the
affairs, and supported perverse and corrupt individuals who were
subjected to God's wrath and rejected by the people, and though he had
allotted public pastures to himself and Banu Umayyah, yet, despite all
these acts, when the people protested to him and reminded him of the
serious consequences of his deeds, he took their advice and became
penitent of his wicked acts and washed himself with the water of
repentance and cleansed himself of his sins.

But a number of people, without paying attention to his repentance and
regret, shed his innocent blood and killed him and in doing so they
smeared their hands with greater sins; for, they killed him like a
sacrifice camel, in his sacred garment of caliphate, in a month in which
war and blood shed are forbidden, namely the month of Dhu al-Hijjah, and
in a city, namely Medina, the respect for which has been declared
incumbent on all by Islam.

Remember, O people, that the Quraysh are the real agents of 'Uthman's
assassination, and by his death they have made themselves the target of
their own arrows, and with their fist they have covered their own mouths
with blood. Through 'Uthman's death they did not attain their goal and
gained no benefit. I swear to God, that such a calamity will befall them
that it will annihilate them, a fire-kindling and destructive calamity!
A calamity that will awaken sleepers and will throw up the sitters from
their seats.

Indeed our just God will have them dominated by a people for this
injustice

38. al-Mirbad was outside the city of Basra, and it was a center for
cattle-dealers. so that the smallest pity will not be shown to them, and
they will be tortured with the severest and most painful
chastisements.

O people! 'Uthman's guilt was not such as to deserve death. Moreover,
you compelled him to repent, and without taking his repentance into
consideration, you rushed upon him and shed his innocent blood. Then
without consulting the people, you swore allegiance to 'Ali, and helped
him to usurp the seat of the caliphate. Do you suppose that I should be
angry in your favour at the whips and abuses of 'Uthman but that I
should remain silent today and not be angry about the swords that you
have brought down upon him? O people! Be wary that 'Uthman was killed in
his innocence. It Is up to you to discover his assassins and kill them
wherever you find them. Then you can hold a council and elect one of
those who had been nominated as caliph by 'Umar. But none of the
assassins of 'Uthman39 should be allowed to have the smallest role in
the question of Caliphate participate in or the council for electing the
caliph."40

az-Zuhri says when 'A'ishah's oration ended, Talhah and az-Zubayr, too,
rose and addressed the people as follows: "O people! Every sin has
repentance, and every sinner can regret his sin and turn back, as a
result of which repentance he will be purified and forgiven though
'Uthman was guilty, yet his sin was repeatable and forgivable. We had no
intention him, and make him repent. But a number of ignore and riotous
people decided to kill him and dominated us gentle, patient and
peaceable individuals and consequently they killed him."

When Talhah and az-Zubayr reached this point, the people of Basra began
to protest, and cried out: "Talhah! When your letters arrived for us,
they had a very biting tone. Their contents were quite contrary to what
you are saying to day!" Here az-Zubayr in order to calm down the people
began to speak and said: "O people! I have not written you any letter
about 'Uthman if there has been a letter sent to you, it is by others."
Then he followed up his precious remarks in order to show the innocence
of 'Uthman at a greater length, and severely criticized 'Ali and his
followers.41

**Protests to the speakers**

You have kept your wives at home and have made 'A'ishah Umm al-
Mu'minin your leader!

39. She meant 'Ali as an assassin of 'Uthman.

40. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/51-60, Description of Nahj al-balaghah of
Ibn Abi al-Hadid 2/499.

41. History of at-Tabari 5/178.

After the fiery speeches of 'A'ishah and her army commanders at
al-Mirbad, some of the audience rose and protested openly. 1-at-Tabari
who quotes the speeches of 'A'ishah's commanders says: At this time, a
man of the 'Abd al-Qays family rose and said: "Be quiet, az-Zubayr! And
let me speak to inform the people of what is necessary." 'Abd Allah, son
of az-Zubayr angrily said to him: "O 'Abdi! It is not up to you to
speak!" But he paid no attention to 'Abd Allah's reprimand, and
addressing 'A'ishah's army, he said: "You group of Emigrants42 have
attained the greatest honor and excellence in your lives. It was you who
first gave a positive answer to the call of the Prophet.

Other people followed your example in embracing Islam and welcomed it
with all their heart and soul. When the Prophet departed his life to
join the visage of God, you chose a man among your selves and swore
allegiance to him. We did not oppose you even though you did not consult
us and took the step without informing us, and we gave our consent to
your choice.

His life came to an end, and he chose one of you as caliph, and again
you swore allegiance to him without informing us. We submitted to you
and agreed to show him allegiance. He, too on departing this world,
placed the choice of a caliph in the hands of six people who worked as a
council, and then you elected 'Uthman from among those six and swore
allegiance to him. But you disapproved of his ways soon after and
protested against his deeds and went so far as to smear your hands with
his blood, whereas you had consulted us neither in his election as
caliph, nor about his death. Then you rushed to 'Ali's house, implored
and even forced him to accept the caliphate, despite his unwillingness
and you swore allegiance to him. You have done all these without our
knowledge and advice. But I do not know why you have now risen in
sedition against him and have prepared to fight him. Has 'Ali betrayed
and encroached upon Muslim property and wealth, or acted contrary to
right, or committed a deed disapproved by you? No! He is innocent of all
charges! 'Why, should we fight him?"

At this moment 'A'ishah's soldiers were so enraged at this man's words
of truth that they decided to kill him. But his kith and kin rose in his
defense and helped him to escape. But the matter did not end here, and
the next day a fight took place between 'A'ishah's army and that man's
tribe, seventy of whose members were killed unchivalrously.43

When Imam 'Ali heard of this matter, he became very vexed, and composed
an elegy in their memory the translation of which is as follows: 42.
Emigrant (or Muhajirun) was a name given to a companion of the Prophet
who had embraced Islam in Mecca and had migrated to Medina. Helpers (or
Ansar) were those companions who aided the Prophet in Medina.

43. History of at-Tabari 5/178.

"The injustice done to the Rabi'ah is both sorrowful and regrettable,
The Rabi'ah who were always obedient to their leader; and submissive,
Indeed they were always supporters of right and truth;

And offered their blood in the way of God."44 2-Again at-Tabari quotes
Nasr ibn Muzahim, saying: Jariyah ibn Qudamah stood before 'A'ishah's
army and said: " 'A'ishah! I swear to God that the sin of shedding
'Uthman's blood was less than your riding this cursed camel, coming out
of your house and entering the field of battle like men! 'A'ishah! You
possessed worth and respect in the Islamic society, but with this action
your respect has gone with the wind, and smashed your greatness and
reverence, and you have exposed yourself to death; for, he who fights
you, will not abstain from shedding your blood. 'A'ishah! If you have
covered all this distance at your own will return home from this very
spot. However if they have dragged you despite your unwillingness, ask
for the Muslims' aid, to deliver you from those who have forced you to
come here."45

3-at-Tabari continues to write: When Jariyah finished talking, a young
man of Banu Sa'd rose and addressed Talhah and az-Zubayr saying:
"az-Zubayr! Were you not a friend and supporter of the Prophet? Talhah!
Was it not you who defended your prophet zealously against the enemies'
swords? But what has happened today that has changed all friendship and
loyalty to injustice and treason? I shall never co-operate with you
people who have left your women at home and have dragged the wife of the
Prophet here, and I shall not approve of this action of yours."

The young man then stood aside from the army and composed a poem the
translation of which is as follows: "I swear to God that it is wholly
unfair to let your wives stay at home, and drag the Prophet's wife to
the battlefield. It was 'A'ishah's duty to sit at home and preserve her
own honor; and yet she let herself be dominated by the desire to wander
in the desert and gallop about on camel back,

She has no goal but to let all the Muslims who are like her children,
fight one another with swords and spears so that she may watch them.
Talhah and az-Zubayr ruined her respect and prestige. These are their
evil goals and their ill-omened ideals."46

4-at-Tabari adds: At this time a young man of the Juhaynah tribe went
to Muhammad ibn Talhah who was an ascetic and inquired the identity of
'Uthman's assassins. Muhammad said: " 'Uthman's blood lies with three
people: One-third lies with this litter- riding lady, another third lies
with the man who is on that red-haired camel (Talhah), and the remaining
third on

44. History of at-Tabari 5/204.

45. History of at-Tabari 5/176.

46. History of at-Tabari 5/176.

**'Ali's neck."**

The young man laughed on hearing those words of Muhammad, and composed
poem the translation of which is as follows:

"I inquired about the assassination of a person who was refused burial
in a Muslim's cemetery ('Uthman) and asked Talhah's son for an
explanation. He answered: His blood is one the neck of three people: One
is the litter-rider; the second is the camel-rider, And the third is
'Ali ibn Abi Talib. As for us, we were desert dwellers and nothing to do
with these affairs. I said in answer: You are right in saying that
litter-rider and camel-rider are 'Uthman's assassins,

But concerning 'Ali, You are mistaken and have gone astray!"47

47. History of at-Tabari 5/176.


