Part Two : Battle of Al-jamal
=============================

**The first battle begins**

'A'ishah's soldiers beheaded some and cunningly killed others.

at-Tabari says; when 'A'ishah's army entered Basra, 'Uthman ibn Hunayf,
'Ali's governor, came forward and addressing the army, said: "What is
your objection to 'Ali That gives you a reason for rising up against
him?" They said: "Our first objection is that he has no superiority over
us at all, but he wants to govern us, and this is not acceptable.
Secondly he has done something that leaves room for every objection and
criticism."

'Uthman ibn Hunayf said: "I am the governor of this city by 'Ali's
order, and have no personal view or authority. Give me a period of grace
to write a letter to the commander of the faithful to inform him of your
demands and proposals and see what he says and what instruction he
gives." They accepted 'Uthman's suggestion, and made and agreement to
which they called God as witness, thus reinforcing the pact. 'Uthman
wrote to 'Ali about this matter, but within two days 'A'ishah's army
disturbed the peace of the city, and rushed upon 'Uthman and arrested
him. Then they whipped him and plucked out the hair of his head and
face.48

Some other historians like al-Ya'qubi, al-Mas'udi and the author of al-
Isti'ab49 have described the event as follows: A peace agreement was
concluded between 'A'ishah's army and 'Uthman ibn Hunayf to the effect
that both sides should abstain from war and bloodshed, and allow 'Uthman
to govern Basra as before and keep order there until the arrival of 'Ali
to negotiate with the opponents himself or to express his view in
writing. The peace agreement was written for and by both forces, and
then on the basis of this pact 'Ali's governor ordered his supporters
and soldiers to lay down their arms in order to make peace and order
more attainable.

But within a few days on a very cold and rainy night a number of
'A'ishah's soldiers commanded by 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr attacked the
governor's house in Basra, arrested 'Uthman, 'Ali's governor, and then
raided the treasury,

48. History of at-Tabari 5/178.

49. This event is also narrated in al-'Iqd al-farid. scattered the
guards and killed forty of them.50 al-Mas'udi gives the number of the
killed in addition to the wounded at seventy, of whom fifty were
beheaded in front of others after their arrest in order to frighten the
people.

at-Tabari and the author of al-Isti'ab say: After the arrest of 'Uthman
ibn Hunayf, they sent Aban, son of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan to 'A'ishah to
decide his fate, 'A'ishah ordered his death and said: Aban! Behead
'Uthman ibn Hunayf who is of the Ansar in vengeance of your father
'Uthman ibn-Affan who was assassinated by the Ansar." When the order for
the execution of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was announced, a woman went to
'A'ishah and said: "O Umm al- Mu'minin! I beg you in the name of God not
to disregard the respect due to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf who is one of the
friends and companions of the Prophet, but connive at his death."
'A'ishah was impressed by the words of that woman, and gave the order to
bring back Aban. Aban returned to 'A'ishah who said to him: Abstain from
killing 'Uthman and put him in prison.

Aban said: " 'A'ishah! If I had known that you intended to mitigate
'Uthman's punishment and change his death to imprisonment, I would not
have come back except after carrying out your first order and beheading
him to avenge my father." It was then that according to the counsel of
Mujashi' ibn Mas'ud, they dealt 'Uthman forty strokes of the whip, and
plucked away the hairs of his head, face and eyelashes in a pitiable
way, and then threw him into a dungeon.51 al-Ya'qubi, the well-known
historian, narrates that after the raid on the governor's palace and
arrest of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, 'A'ishah's army raided the treasury of
public funds and pillaged everything there, Thus the first battle of
'A'ishah's army ended with their victory and they took possession of the
governor's palace, the treasury and had complete control of the city of
Basra.

**The second battle begins**

O God! Be our witness, for, you are just and the redresser. Hakim
at-Tabari says: The matter of the capture of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was
reported to Hakim ibn Jabalah52 who was one of the highly-placed elders
of Basra. He went to 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr with some people of Basra
who 50. al-Isti'ab in the translation of Hakim ibn Jabalah.

51. History of at-Tabari 5/182.

52. Hakim ibn Jabalah was an honest and religious man of the 'Abd Qays
tribe and its chief, also according to some historians he was also a
companion of the Prophet. (Usd al-ghabah 2/39-40) were of the 'Abd
al-Qays and Bakr ibn Wa'il tribes and asked him to carry out the terms
of the peace pact which they had violated, and according to its purport
'Uthman ibn Hunayf should be transferred from prison to the governor's
palace and allowed to rule Basra as before until the arrival of 'Ali.
Hakim ibn Jabalah ended his talk with these words: " 'Abd Allah! I swear
to God that if I should find some friends and helpers, I would fight you
severely for violating your pact and killing a number of innocent
Muslims in order to avenge their blood. 'Abd Allah! You do not fear God
for putting the Muslims to the sword and shedding their blood."

'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr said: "Hakim! We killed them in retaliation of
'Uthman's assassination and shed their blood." Hakim said: " 'Abd Allah!
Fear God and this wrath! For, none of them were 'Uthman's assassin, and
none of them took a part in it." 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr said: "Hakim!
To be brief our last word is that so long as 'Uthman ibn Hunayf does not
depose of 'Ali as caliph, and does not adopt immunity from him, we will
not set him free from prison." Here Hakim turned his face to heaven and
said: "O just God! Be a witness that I have communicated to these people
all the necessary advice and benevolent wishes. But they took no
counsel. You are a just and a true witness."

Then Hakim turned to his friends and said: "I consider it my duty to
fight these people, and any of you, who does not regard this combat as
his duty, can leave the rank of our friends." Saying this, he and his
friends attacked 'A'ishah's army and thus a bloody battle ensued between
them. In the heat of the fight, a man of 'A'ishah's army took Hakim by
surprise and brought his sword down upon his leg, cutting it off at the
forced. Hakim picked up the severed leg and threw it hard at the man's
neck, knocking him down and then hopping on one leg, threw himself on
the man and killed him, and then leaned against his body. At that moment
a passerby asked him who had brought that calamity upon him, Hakim said:
"This same man that I am using as a cushion." But as Hakim's wounds were
so serious and mortal he died where he was.53 at-Tabari says: After
'A'ishah's army killed Hakim they decide to kill 'Uthman ibn Hunayf.
'Uthman said: "You know that my brother, Sahl ibn Hunayf is the governor
of Medina. If you kill me, he will destroy all your families and
relatives in Medina." So they waived aside his execution and set him
free.54

53. History of at-Tabari 5/182 al-Isti'ab, an account of Hakim ibn
Jabalah.

54. History of at-Tabari 5/181.

**Civil war begins**

Friends of the Prophet's! Don't miss the prayer, don't miss the
prayer!

'A'ishah's army was victorious in the first and second battles and they
captured the whole city of Basra, but this was followed by civil war and
intense internal clashes. For, Talhah was trying to secure the
distinction of acting as congregational leader of the first prayer after
victory, which would serve as a sign of approving his nomination as
caliph. az-Zubayr, too, was making an effort for the same purpose, and
thus violent tension and a dispute arose between them for this prayer
Imamate, and lasted so long that the time for prayer was about to
expire, and so the people in the congregation began shouting loudly:
"Prayer! Prayer! Friends of the Prophet! Don't miss the prayer, and
beware of missing it!" But the dispute went on until 'A'ishah herself
intervened, and ordered both Talhah and az-Zubayr to retire from the
altar and the congregational prayer. She let Muhammad son of Talhah act
as leader for one day, and 'Abd Allah son of az-Zubayr for the next
day.

The author of Tabaqat says: The dispute did not end even with
'A'ishah's proposal for, another disagreement arose as to who should act
as leader of the first prayer. So when one of them stood at the altar,
the other pushed him away to take his place. It was then decided to
solve the question by drawing lots. Muhammad ibn-Talhah won the lot and
so the first prayer was performed with his Imamate, and it was in the
same prayer that he recited the first verse of the Quranic chapter
al-Ma'arij meaning: "One demanding demanded the chastisement which must
befall the unbeliever." By doing so he intended to reproach 'Abd Allah
by means of this verse for his pride and humiliate him for his own
victory.55

The author of al-Aghani says: A poet composed a poem about the
difference which arose between Talhah and az-Zubayr and their sons
concerning the Imamate of the prayer, the translation of which is as
follows: "These two youths disputed on the question of alter and prayer
Imamate and this was a sign of their desire for position. Their father,
Talhah and az-Zubayr are extremely ambitious and eager for position,
what do I have to do with Talhah and az-Zubayr? For, their leader 'Ali
is now accessible to me. Talhah and az-Zubayr are deceived by their
mothers. And Ya'la ibn Umayyah has led them towards the abyss of
destruction and misfortune."56

55. Tabaqat 5/39, saying also about them that Talhah and az-Zubayr
sealed the public fund treasury of the Muslims.

56. al-Aghani 11/120 has quoted Abu Mikhnaf, and al-Mas'udi, has
narrated the dispute about the prayer in Muruj adh-dhahab.

**Where the truth is revealed**

Alas! My back is broken!

az-Zubayr

At-Tabari, quoting Jawn ibn Qutadah, says: I was with az-Zubayr when a
rider on horseback came and greeted him, and az-Zubayr returned the
greeting. Then the man said: " 'Ali's army has now reached a certain
point, but it is poorly equipped, small in number, and full of fear and
alarm." Then another horseman came and after saluting az-Zubayr said:
"Emir! 'Ali's army is advancing and has reached such and such a point.
But when they heard of your number and military equipment, they were
frightened and returned the way they had come."

Az-Zubayr said: "Be quick! What are you saying? Your words show your
falsehood and flattery, for even if 'Ali could only find a stick, he
would fight with that stick and would not abandon his course." Jawn ibn
Qutadah adds: 'Ali's army had almost reached near Basra when another
horseman arrived and said: "O Emir! 'Ali's army is hastening towards you
and 'Ammar is with him. I was him myself and talked with him." Az-Zubayr
said: "You must be mistaken! 'Ammar could not be in 'Ali's army."

The horseman said: "I swear to God, O Emir, there is no mistake, 'Ammar
is definitely in 'Ali's army." Az-Zubayr said: "I swear to God, that God
would not place 'Ammar in 'Ali's army!" The horse man said: "And I swear
to God that he was in 'Ali's army." The more az-Zubayr denied this
point, the more the horseman insisted on his point about 'Ammar being
present in 'Ali's army. When az-Zubayr saw the man's insistence, he
ordered one of his intimates to go to 'Ali's army and investigate the
matter. Jawn ibn Qutadah says: The man went and returned soon after and
said: "Az-Zubayr! I swear that what the man has said is quite true. I
saw 'Ammar myself in 'Ali's army." Now az-Zubayr realized that this was
true and so he cried out involuntarily: "Alas! My back is broken and my
nose is rubbed in the dirt and he trembled so violently that his weapons
shook on his body."

Jawn says: On seeing this scene I seemed to have been suddenly awakened
from oblivion and said to myself: "Woe upon me who wanted to fight under
the authority of this man, and be killed for his sake, whereas he
realizes his own perversity and deviation from the Prophet to make him
tremble so."57 (Indeed the Prophet had spoken of 'Ammar as a measure and
criterion of truth, and the presence of 'Ammar anywhere would be an
evidence of the rightfulness of that party. It was for this reason that
az-Zubayr was badly alarmed at the presence of 'Ammar in 'Ali's army.)58
Talhah and az-Zubayr are in doubt about their objective While we have
still not recognized our way, we are acting as guides to others.

At-Tabari quotes 'Awf al-A'rabi: Talhah and az-Zubayr were in the
mosque of Basra when a man entered and, addressing them, said: "For
God's sake, tell me, has the Prophet of God instructed you about this
war and uprising?" As Talhah had no answer to give he feigned ignorance
and went out of the mosque. Then the man turned to az-Zubayr and
repeated the same question, and asked whether they were acting on their
own initiative. Az-Zubayr said: "No, we have no order or instruction
from the Prophet about this matter. The reason why we have come to Basra
is that a huge amount of public funds have been collected from your
city, and we have come to take our share of it."

After narrating the above story, he quotes Abu 'Amrah, az-Zubayr's
personal slave and steward, as saying: After the people of Basra swore
allegiance to Talhah and az-Zubayr, the latter addressed the people of
Basra and said: "If you provide me with one thousand armed warriors, I
shall never give 'Ali the chance to enter Basra, and I shall destroy his
forces in one surprise assault." But the people of Basra gave no answer
and showed no agreement. When az- Zubayr saw this, he said to them: "O
people! This is the mischief and sedition of which the Prophet used to
speak, warning us of it."

Abu 'Amrah says: I protested to az-Zubayr and said: "O az-Zubayr! Why
do you hasten towards an act which you call mischief and sedition?"
Az-Zubayr said: "Be quiet! Though we show the way to others, yet we are
perplexed about distinguishing our own way, and are in doubt and waver
in carrying out our decision. All through my life, I have always paid
attention to the consequence of my deed, but in this matter I cannot
realize the

57. History of at-Tabari 5/250.

58. For the Prophet's words refer to al-Isti'ab Usd al-ghabah, Siyar
an-nubala' and Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd.

consequence."59

Again at-Tabari quotes 'Alqamah ibn Waqqas60, saying: "In those days
when Talhah, az-Zubayr and 'A'ishah were moving along with their army
towards Basra to fight 'Ali, I carefully watched Talhah's face and found
him to be always very uneasy and worried. He used to sit all by himself
pensive and deep in thought. One day I asked him why he was so pensive
and what had made him so uneasy, and if he did not like to rise up and
fight against 'Ali, he could easily retire and go home." Talhah answered
him as follows: " 'Alqamah! Once we Muslims were united and unanimous
against the enemies, but today, we are unfortunately divided into two
opposite groups, facing each other like two iron mountains and calling
each other to fight." Then Talhah ended his remark by saying: "
'Alqamah! In the incident of 'Uthman's assassination I have committed a
mistake which is irreparable unless my blood is shed in the way of
avenging his blood."61 These two pieces of evidence taken from a
reliable historical source show clearly that Talhah and az-Zubayr were
wholly doubtful about their goal, and did not really have any faith in
it, and wavered about their actions, and feared the consequence of their
deeds, and sometimes they involuntarily expressed this fear and
anxiety.

But Imam 'Ali, unlike them, had perfect faith in his goal, and in his
sermons and orations, he said: "I am convinced that God will aid and
support me in this war, and victory will be granted to us. For I am
convinced that I am right and innocent in this war, and there is not the
slightest doubt and anxiety in my deeds, and I am fully aware of what I
am doing."


I would indeed be your son on condition that you abandon fighting and
bloodshed.

Zayd ibn Sawhan

1-A letter to Zayd bin Sawhan 62 59. History of at-Tabari 5/184.

60. 'Alqamah ibn Waqqas al-Laythi, was born in the Prophet's time, and
also took part in the battle of al-Khandaq, and died in the time of
caliphate of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan in Medina. (Usd a-ghabah 4/15)

61. at-Tabari 5/183, al-Mustadrak 3/372. Here Talhah explicitly admits
his share in 'Uthman's murder, and yet how can he demand 'Ali to pay for
'Uthman's blood?

62. Zayd's by-name was Abu Salman or Abu Sulayman. He lived in the
Prophet's time, and was a chaste man of learning who acted as chief of
his clan. His two brothers are Sa'sa'ah and Sayhan.

It is said that the Prophet said of him: "Zayd? What a Zayd! Jundab?
What a Jundab!" When they asked him the reason for this remark, he said:
"There are two persons in my ummah who possess a special distinction:
One is Zayd whose hand will enter heaven before other parts of him. The
other is Jundab whose sword separates right from wrong." According to
the Prophet's prediction At-Tabari quotes Mujalid ibn Sa'id, saying:
'A'ishah wrote to Zayd ibn Sawhan who was a virtuous scholar and a
companion of the Prophet as follows: "This is a letter from 'A'ishah
daughter of Abu Bakr and wife of the Prophet to her own chaste and good
son, Zayd ibn Sawhan. Dear Son! I expect every help and cooperation from
you, and on the receipt of this letter hasten to us for assistance and
victory. If you refuse this request, at least abandon 'Ali's side and
abstain from aiding him."

Zayd answered 'A'ishah's letter as follows:63

"This is a letter from Zayd ibn Sawhan to 'A'ishah, daughter of Abu
Bakr and consort of the Prophet. 'A'ishah! I am indeed your loyal and
obedient son but on condition that you abandon this dangerous action and
go back home the way you have come. If you reject my suggestion and
advice, I will not only be your son, but I will also be the first person
to oppose and fight you." It was in connection with this letter that
Zayd ibn Sawhan uttered the following humorous and historical sentence:
"May God bless 'A'ishah for her deal with us. She entrusted us with her
own task of housekeeping and took over our task of fighting and
jihad."

**2-A letter to Hafsah**

Abu Mikhnaf says: When 'A'ishah learnt of the arrival of 'Ali's army at
Dhu Qar, she wrote the following letter to Hafsah, 'Umar's daughter and
another wife of the Prophet: "Hafsah! Glad tidings for you! 'Ali who had
left Medina with his army and arrived at Dhu Qar, on hearing about our
military strength and equipment, is frightened and doubtful and does not
advance one step. Today 'Ali resembles a shy and frightened horse that
is so perplexed that he cannot retreat for fear of annihilation nor
advance for fear of being killed." When Hafsah received this letter, she
assembled her servants, slaves and her female relatives and asked them
to sing in chorus and with the accompaniment of tambourines the purport
of 'A'ishah's letter. When the other women and freed girls (Banat
at-Tulaqa')64 who were opposed to 'Ali heard of this, they rushed to
Hafsah's house and joined the festive party.

When Umm Kulthum, 'Ali's daughter, was informed of this matter, she
veiled herself and with a group of female relatives, entered in Hafsah's
house incognito, and sat in a corner. After some minutes she unveiled
herself, and on seeing her Hafsah was so embarrassed and ashamed that
she began to express her penitence for her unworthy conduct.

Umm Kulthum said: "Hafsah! It is not unlike you and 'A'ishah to act and
Zayd's hand was lost in the battle of Jalula and he himself was killed
in the battle of al-Jamal, and Jundab with one blow killed a sorcerer
who showed wrong in the garment of right. 63. at-Tabari description of
Nahj al-balaghah 2/81, al-'Iqd al-farid, Jamharat rasa'il al-'Arab
1/379. 64. What is meant by "freed girls" is that their fathers were of
the Umayyads whom the Prophet had freed in the conquest of Mecca.

support each other in hostility towards my father 'Ali, in the same way
that you collaborated in molesting the Prophet of God, to the extent
that a chapter of the Qur'an descended in your reproach." 65 Hafsah
said: "Umm Kulthum, may God bless you. Forgive me, and reprimand me no
more!" Then she gave the order to tear up 'A'ishah's letter in Umm
Kulthum's presence.66

**'Ali's army moves from Medina**

Many a learned person, who is armed with the weapon of knowledge, has
been thrown into the abyss of annihilation by ignorance.

So far we have described how various parties were formed in opposition
to Imam 'Ali, how these groups formed a coalition and mobilized an army
to fight him and how this army, called 'A'ishah's army, proceeded from
Mecca to Basra and captured that city. It is now time to visit Medina
and 'Ali's army and follow its movement from Medina to Basra and see
what is happening there.

When Imam 'Ali was informed of 'A'ishah's uprising and Talhah and az-
Zubayr's opposition and the departure of their army to Iraq, he ordered
the Emigrants, Ansar and other Muslims to assemble in the mosque of
Medina, and addressing them said: "O people! 'A'ishah has raised the
banner of opposition to me and mobilized an army against me and is now
proceeding with that army towards Iraq. Talhah and az-Zubayr, too, have
violated their pact with me and joined 'A'ishah, since Talhah is her
cousin and az-Zubayr is her sister's husband. Talhah and az-Zubayr's
motive in this opposition is their desire to become rulers and caliphs.
If they succeed in this goal and secure that position, an intense
difference is surely bound to arise between them, since each of them has
the ambition to become caliph and is prepared to vanquish the other to
attain this goal and destroy him. But I am sure that these two will not
succeed in getting that position.

As for 'A'ishah, that camel-riding woman, I swear to God that in this
journey she will not cross a desert and mountain without stepping on the
path of wrong and sin. She will drag herself and her friends towards
annihilation in this course. I swear to God that in this war one-third
of 'A'ishah's army will be destroyed, one third will flee and the rest
will become penitent. 65. What is meant, is Chapter at-Tahrim in which
'A'ishah and Hafsah are reproached in verse four, saying: "1f you both
turn to Allah, then your hearts are already inclined to this; and if you
back up each other against him..."

66. Ibn Abi al-Hadid's description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/157.

O people! 'A'ishah is that same woman who is barked at by the dogs of
al- Haw'ab (a matter that according to the Prophet's prediction is the
clearest sign of her being wrong and sinful.)

As for Talhah and az-Zubayr, I swear to God that they themselves know
well that they are led astray and are proceeding in the way of sin. They
know for sure that they are guilty of violating their pact with me. Oh!
Many a learned person who, despite being armed with the weapon of
knowledge, has been thrown into the abyss of destruction by his
ignorance and his knowledge is of no use to him. May God aid us, and not
leave us to ourselves!"

Then Imam 'Ali ended his speech with these words: "O people! Know that
today a great mischief and sedition is afoot, and the instigator of it
is that same unruly and rebellious group, of whom the Prophet of God has
repeatedly spoken about and warned us of. He predicted their riot and
sedition for us. O people! It is now our obligation to vanquish the
rioters and rebels and remove them from the earth and from the amidst
the Muslims, and thus extinguish this mischief and sedition. Where are
the sentinels of right and truth? Where are those loyal and violent men?
Where are those who can distinguish right from wrong, the unjust and
corrupt from the just and honest?

O people! Did I wrong the Quraysh? What differences did I have with
them to rouse the riot and rebellion against myself? I swear to God that
I will tear away the thick screens of wrong and reveal the fine visage
of right from behind it. I will make the Quraysh weep and groan. Tell
them nothing and let them wait as much as they desire at their misery
and ruin, and lament and weep for their unhappiness and
helplessness."67

Thus ended the first oration of Imam 'Ali about this matter. On the
second and third days, he too delivered fiery sermons at the mosque of
Medina to prepare the public for a declaration of war on the last day,
and after mobilizing an army he issued the order for departure from
Medina.

al-Mas'udi says: 'Ali appointed Sahl ibn Hunayf al-Ansari to act in his
own place in Medina in dealing with the affairs there, and departed for
Iraq with seven hundred warriors. Of this number, four hundred belonged
to the great veteran groups of Islam, namely the Emigrants and Ansar,
and seventy of them had participated in the battle of Badr under the
Prophet and were called "Badr veterans", and the rest were the Prophet's
companions and friends who were greatly respected by the Muslims.

Thus 'Ali prepared his army and proceeded at first towards Mecca and
then towards Iraq until they reached a spot called ar-Rabadhah.68 67.
Irshad of ash-Shaykh al-Mufid 118, Sermons 102,103, and 107 of Nahj
al-balaghah. 68. Muruj adh-dhahab 2/367. This chapter and the greater
part of the next chapter are additions.

'Ali's army in ar-Rabadhah O God! Make their plan null and void.

Imam 'Ali and his army reached ar-Rabadhah the first halting-place and
stopped there for few days. 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, who had been appointed
as governor of Basra by the Imam, had been seized and maltreated by the
'A'ishah's army. After he was expelled from the city, he hastened to ar-
Rabadhah and met 'Ali there.

at-Tabari quoting Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah, narrates this meeting of
'Uthman with 'Ali as follows: 'Uthman, coming from Basra to 'Ali,
reached 'Ali's army at a place called ar-Rabadhah, he met the Imam
without the hairs of his head and face which had been plucked out by
'A'ishah's soldiers, and said sorrowfully: "O Imam! On the day you
dispatched me to Basra as governor I was an old man of white hair and a
long beard, but today I return to you looking like a young and hairless
man." 'Ali said: "O 'Uthman! Be patient since God will reward you for
bearing this discomfort and suffering." Then the Imam addressed his army
and said: "O people! Talhah and az-Zubayr have violated their pledge and
incited the people against me. It is surprising how they showed
agreement to Abu Bakr and 'Umar and obeyed those two caliphs, whereas
they oppose me. I swear to God that these two know well, that I am not
inferior to the last two caliphs." Then 'Ali cursed Talhah and az-Zubayr
in these words: "O God! Make their plan null and void, and break up the
basis of their acts! O God! Punish them for their deeds!" 69

From there 'Ali wrote a letter to his governor of Kufah, 'Abd Allah ibn
Qays, known as Abu Musa al-Ash'ari and said: "Abu Musa, a number of
people have violated their allegiance with me, and have put some of my
friends and followers to the sword and killed them. They have kindled a
big fire of riot and sedition among the Muslims and broken the pillars
of peace and order. Abu Musa! You as a governor must support me in the
way of right. When you have received this letter, mobilize a number of
people of Kufah and dispatch them to me to aid me in this critical
situation, to fight these unjust, riotous and perfidious adventurers,
and put them in their place."

In addition to this letter, 'Ali wrote another letter to the people of
Kufah asking them for their assistance. But Abu Musa paid no attention
to the Imam's letter, and not only gave no positive answer to it, but
also warned the people of Kufah against helping 'Ali. 'Ali's messengers
returned from Kufah in disappointment. 'Ali wrote another letter to Abu
Musa, severely reproaching

69. History of at-Tabari 5/186.

him and criticizing his attitude. Then 'Ali moved his army from
ar-Rabadhah, which was directed towards Mecca, and proceeded towards
Iraq. 70

**'Ali's army in Dhu Qar**

He, who comes to me and aids me, will be responding to the call of God.
'Ali proceeded with his army from ar-Rabadhah and reached Dhu Qar, the
next stopping place, and from there he wrote another letter to the
people of Kufah, and gave it to his son, al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, to carry
it to them and inform them of its content and rouse them for assistance.
Al-Hasan departed for Kufah and read his father's letter to them and
persuaded them to offer their help. He carried out his mission well and
obtained good results; for, a large number of people were influenced by
his words and hastened to join 'Ali's army.

At-Tabari quoting Ibn Abi Layla narrates the event as follows: 'Ali
wrote a letter to the people of Kufah stating the following points: "In
the name of God. O people of Kufah! As I am aware of your faith and
belief in God, and His prophet, I prefer you to others and in turning to
you I have halted in the vicinity of your city. Any of you, who help me,
will be acting upon his religious duty and will be aiding right and
justice." 71 Abu at-Tufayl narrates that after 'Ali had dispatched his
letter to the people of Kufah predicted to us that twelve thousand and
one citizens of Kufah will give him a positive answer and will rise to
aid him. Abu at-Tufayl adds that the forces, which arrived from Kufah
were exactly the same number that Imam 'Ali had predicted.72

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih says: When the people of Kufah who joined 'Ali's army
reached the Dhu Qar camp, Imam 'Ali addressed them as follows: "In the
name of God! Infinite praise is to the God of the world and its people,
and God's perpetual praise and blessing be upon Muhammad, the seal of
all prophets! O people! On the day when mischief and sedition ruled over
the world of humanity especially over the Arabs, and on the day when
mankind was trampled upon under the pressure of disunion war and
bloodshed; on the day when fear and anxiety were dominant everywhere,
the kind and beneficent God sent His prophet, Muhammad to the people of
the world. And through him, He removed all corruption and bloodshed from
amongst them, and turned disunion and hypocrisy into love and loyalty,
and put an end to social gaps and

70. History of at-Tabari 5/184,189-190.

71. History of at-Tabari 5/186.

72. History of at-Tabari 5/199.

class differences, He granted safety and security to fearful and
dangerous roads, and uprooted old rancours and enmities from the hearts.
Then in His satisfaction with the Prophet's endeavors and deeds, He
called him to Himself and dispatched him to the eternal world. He
welcomed him there and bestowed upon him the noblest place in heaven.
But with the sunset of the light of prophethood a great and terrible
calamity fell upon all Muslims, the greater part of which fell upon his
household and his kith and kin. After the Prophet of God, Abu Bakr held
the rein of public affairs, and during his rule he treated the people
somewhat well, and they were relatively satisfied with him. After Abu
Bakr, 'Umar succeeded him as a ruler and he followed Abu Bakr's way.
After those two, 'Uthman became ruler and caliph and held the control of
the Muslims' affairs, but he adopted a way, which aroused public wrath,
to the extent that they decided to kill him, which they eventually
did.

Then you turned to me and with your insistence and forced me to accept
this position. I pressed my hands together in refusal, but you forced
them open, and the farther I withdrew my hand, the harder you pulled
them towards yourselves and the morel begged you to excuse me, the more
you insisted upon your demand, saying: We will accept none but you for
this position. You people resembled thirsty and sore-hearted camels
coming upon water and crowding eagerly around it, and you rushed upon my
house as if you intended an assassination. Finally I was compelled to
accept your proposal and you swore allegiance to me. Talhah and
az-Zubayr held my hand in allegiance to me, but not long afterwards they
departed from Medina on the pretext of making a pilgrimage, but instead
of being in the House of God, they emerged in Basra where they incited
riot and sedition, torturing the Muslims and killing a number of them. I
swear to God that they know well that I am not inferior to the preceding
caliphs."

Then the Imam added: "If I were to unveil the truth, I would speak more
of this matter, and clarify certain facts." Then he looked up at heaven
and said: "O God! Be my witness that they have not observed the respect
due to kinship, and have violated their pact with me, and have
instigated the people with hostility towards me. O God! Make their plan
null and void and punish them for their deeds as quickly as possible."
73

**'Ali's next speech in Dhu Qar**

They are that some unruly group who swore allegiance to me and then
violated it.

73. al-'Iqd al-farid 4/318.

The time for rest at Dhu Qar came to an end and 'Ali decided to move
his army. But before departure he delivered another oration, which is
quoted by Ibn 'Abd al-Barr as follows: "O people! God has made jihad
obligatory for every Muslim since jihad is the means of aiding religion
and without it the affairs of this world and the next cannot be put in
order. O people! Today I am faced with four people who have joined
hands: Talhah s as the cleverest and most generous of all, az-Zubayr as
the bravest of all people, 'A'ishah as the most obeyed commander among
the Muslims.

Ya'la ibn Umayyah as the most seditious and rebellious of all people. I
swear to God that their protest to me is out of place, since I have
committed no wrong or improper action, and have not encroached upon
Muslims' property, and have not followed my whim and fancy.

O people! They are claiming a right from me, which they themselves have
destroyed, and demand from me the blood that they themselves have shed.
By God, it was indeed they who smeared their hands with 'Uthman's blood
and I did not take the slightest part in his assassination. They are the
same people whom the Prophet called tyrannical, rebellious and an unruly
group. Indeed what tyranny is higher than their murdering 'Uthman, but
they claim his blood from the innocent and from those that had nothing
to do with it? What rebellion is higher than violating their pact and
allegiance with me after confessing my justice and merit and swearing
allegiance to me?

My only consolation of the heart is that God has left them no room for
protest, and He is aware of their treacherous thoughts and intentions. I
swear to God that Talhah, az-Zubayr and 'A'ishah is fully aware that I
am in the right and they are led astray. Nevertheless I will invite them
to follow the right and justice, peace and conciliation. If they accept
my invitation, I will pardon them and will connive at their guilt and
blunder. But if they continue their unruliness and disobedience, I will
respond to them with sharp swords since it is the sword, which is the
greatest supporter of right and the destroyer of wrong."74


