Ali's Army At the Az-zawiyah Halting-place
==========================================

'A'ishah! Fear God and return home.

'Ali left Dhu Qar and reached the stopping place of az-Zawiyah near
Basra and stayed there for a few days. At this point which was his third
halting place

74. al-Isti'ab on Talhah, al-'Iqd al-farid, History of the battle of
al-Jamal, al-Aghani 11/119.

and camp, certain events occurred. From here he wrote a letter to the
enemy commanders in Basra, quoted by Sibt ibn al-Jawzi as follows: "In
the Name of God. This is a letter from 'Ali, commander of the faithful,
to Talhah and az-Zubayr and 'A'ishah. Salutations to you! O Talhah and
az- Zubayr, you yourselves know well that I had no desire to be a caliph
and ruler. But there was too much insistence by the people compelling me
to accept this great responsibility and at last I shouldered this heavy
duty and agreed to be a caliph.

You two also swore allegiance to me most willingly. Today I
interpellate and ask you why, despite your utmost willingness and option
for allegiance on that day, you violate your pact and allegiance? Fear
God, and repent the sin of perfidiousness. If you swore allegiance to me
unwillingly, then I have the right to protest to you, since it shows
that you are hypocrites, you acted upon something in which you had no
faith, thus pretending agreement with me, while you opposed me at
heart.

O Talhah! Great Emigrant! O az-Zubayr! Warrior of the Quraysh! If you
had opposed me before swearing allegiance it would have been better and
nobler of you than swearing allegiance to me on that day and breaking it
today. 'A'ishah! You too have disobeyed God's command and disregarded
the order of your husband, the Prophet of God, since you have left your
house contrary to the order of God and His prophet. You intend to
undertake a task, which is not related to you, and yet you imagine that
in this way you will establish peace and tranquility among the Muslims.
Alas! How mistaken you are and how far from truth!

Tell me, 'A'ishah, what has a woman to do with campaigning? What place
has a woman in rising to fight men? 'A'ishah! The fact is that you
intend to kindle the fire of mischief and sedition amidst the Muslims
and shed their innocent blood.

'A'ishah! You imagine that you have risen up to avenge 'Uthman's blood.
What have you to do with 'Uthman's blood? It has nothing to do with you
to claim vengeance for his blood, since he belonged to the Banu Umayyah
tribe and you are of the Taym tribe. Furthermore, was it not you who
issued the verdict of his death yesterday and cried out: 'Kill this
stupid, Jewish fellow, since he has turned away from Islam!' How is it
then, that today you have risen up to avenge his blood?

'A'ishah! Fear God and return home. Do not tear away your veil of
chastity!"

This was a brief account of 'Ali's letter to the commanders of
'A'ishah's army, Talhah and az-Zubayr, written from az-Zawiyah, near
Basra. They read this moving, logical letter but left it unanswered.
Some historians write: 'A'ishah wrote the following answer to 'Ali: "O
son of Abu Talib. We are beyond protest and reproach and we will never
obey you! Do whatever you can, and spare no effort against us!" 75 It is
stated in the history of Ibn A'tham al-Kufi that Talhah and az-Zubayr
gave no written answer to 'Ali's letter but sent a verbal answer as
follows: "O 'Ali! You have chosen a very hard way and consider it
incumbent upon you to proceed on it. Nothing will satisfy you but in
making us obedient to your command. But we shall never obey you 'Ali!
Proceed on your way and do your utmost against us!"

Anyhow Imam 'Ali, gained no result from his letter by which he wished
to advise the commanders of 'A'ishah's army to adopt a way for the
establishment of peace, and received no pacific answer. Therefore he
departed with his army until he entered the city of Basra. Dear readers,
so far, the way the two opposing forces were formed, and their movements
towards Basra and their entry into that city have been narrated from
various history books and reliable sources. We leave the matter here,
and return to the first event of the battle of al-Jamal, and narrate
previous happenings for the second time on the basis of the descriptions
given by Abu Mikhnaf, a well- known historian who is well-informed about
the reports and conditions of Iraq, so as to confirm and clarify the
previous accounts.

**A letter of Talhah and az-Zubayr to the governor of Basra**

Governor of Basra! Evacuate for us as quickly as possible the
Governor's house in Basra! The well-known historian, Abu Mikhnaf76
writes in his famous book "History of the battle of al-Jamal" Talhah,
az-Zubayr and 'A'ishah hastened towards Basra until they reached Hafr
Abu Musa near Basra. From there they wrote a letter to the governor of
Basra, 'Uthman ibn Hunayf, as follows: " 'Uthman! We are coming to
Basra! Upon our arrival evacuate and prepare the governor's house for
us, and transfer the control of the city to us, and consider yourself
dismissed as governor!"

'Uthman informed al-Ahnaf ibn Qays who was one of the elders of Basra
and well-known for his wisdom of the purport of the letter, and said to
him: "al-Ahnaf, Talhah and az-Zubayr's army has reached the vicinity of
Basra and the Prophet's consort, too, is with them and for her sake the
people from every direction will join that army. What is your opinion on
this matter?" al-Ahnaf said: " 'Uthman! These are the same individuals
who instigated the Muslims

75. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/55-62, Jamharat rasa'il al-'Arab 1/379,
History of Ibn A'tham 174.

76. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/55-62, Jamharat rasa'il al-'Arab 1/379,
History of Ibn A'tham 174.

against 'Uthman and shed his blood. Today they are turning to us
without shame to claim from us 'Uthman's blood. With such an intention
if they enter our city, they will create division and hostility among
the citizens and will put us all to the sword and kill us. 'Uthman! You
are the governor of this city and the people are obedient to you. Make
use of your strong position and declare war, and attack the enemy with a
number of Basra warriors. For if they are given the opportunity to enter
Basra the people will obey them and disobey you!"

'Uthman said: "al-Ahnaf! I, too, realize that our policy is to rise and
fight. But what can I do? I fear riot and sedition and have no desire to
start it with my own hand. I wish for peace and tranquility, and I can
take no step until I receive 'Ali's instruction." After al-Ahnaf, Hakim
ibn Jabalah came to 'Uthman and informed him of the content of the
letter of 'A'ishah's army commanders. Hakim confirmed al- Ahnaf's
suggestion and encouraged 'Uthman to rise up and fight 'A'ishah's army,
but he met with the same response that al-Ahnaf had received. When Hakim
found his suggestion to be of no avail, he said: "O 'Uthman! If you are
not prepared to rise and fight permit me to rise up against them with
the members of my tribe. If I succeed in forcing them to surrender to
Imam 'Ali and bring them under his command and allegiance, all the
better, but if they show no submission we will fight them without asking
for your help." 'Uthman said: "Hakim, I have no fear of war and death to
dissuade me from fighting or to leave you alone. But I am on principle
against fighting the Muslims and opposed to mischief and sedition.
Otherwise I would heartily favour combat and take the lead in this
matter."

Hakim said: "Yes, peace and tranquility are good, but I swear to God
that you are well aware that if they enter Basra they will win public
support and dismiss you from your position."

But however much Hakim insisted upon a combat, 'Uthman did not yield to
his proposal.

**Imam 'Ali's letter to his governor of Basra**

No one is worthier than 'Ali for the caliphate. Imam 'Ali was in
ar-Rabadhah when he learnt of the arrival of 'A'ishah's army at the
vicinity of Basra. So he wrote the following letter to his governor of
that city: "This is a letter from the servant of God, 'Ali commander of
the faithful, to his governor 'Uthman bin Hunayf. Unjust and unruly
individuals, who have concluded a pact with God and then violated it,
are now turning against you! Satan has made them so proud and deceived
them so much that they proceeded contrary to God's satisfaction, but
God's punishment is more painful and His scourge of vengeance is severer
and more smashing! 'Uthman, invite those who have entered Basra towards
obedience to the existing government and to the fulfillment of their
pact with me. If you receive a positive and pacific answer, it is
incumbent upon you to show them respect, but if they refuse and insist
upon their opposition, then fight them, until God judges between you and
them, the Just God governs with justice. I have written this letter in
ar-Rabadhah, and with God's aid I myself will soon join you. The scribe
of the letter is 'Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi'77. Dated the 36th of Hijrah.
Abu Mikhnaf says: When 'Uthman received 'Ali's letter, he summoned two
distinguished persons, namely Abu al-Aswad ad-Du'ali78 and 'Imran ibn
Hasin and commissioned them to contact 'A'ishah's army commanders and
investigate the cause and purpose of their uprising.

Abu al-Aswad and Imran visited the camp of 'A'ishah's army at Hafr Abu
Musa, at first they got in touch with 'A'ishah, discussing the matter
and offering counsel. 'A'ishah said: "You had better see Talhah and
az-Zubayr and discuss the matter with them, too." Abu al-Aswad and Imran
went to az-Zubayr and talked with him. Az-Zubayr said: "We have two
objectives in this uprising of ours:

1-To avenge 'Uthman's blood and kill his assassins

2-'Ali must abdicate as caliph, to be replaced by someone else on the
vote of the Muslims' council."

They answered: "As for avenging 'Uthman's blood, it is not the people
of Basra who have killed him to become liable for his blood. Az-Zubayr!
You know well yourself who and where his assassins are! You and your
friend Talhah and 'A'ishah who have hoisted the banner of vengeance
today, were the most stubborn enemies of 'Uthman, and it was you who
persuaded people to kill him! As for 'Ali's abdication how can you
depose him from his position as caliph and deprive him of his
indisputable right when you have welcomed him with open arms and sworn
allegiance to him, and when there did not exist the slightest
disinclination? Az-Zubayr! It is really surprising that on the day the
Prophet departed this life and the people swore allegiance to Abu Bakr,
you refused to do so, and raising your sword exclaimed that no one is
worthier and

77. 'Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi' was from Medina and freed by the Prophet
and adopted as his son. 'Ali made him his own scribe and treasurer.
Tahdhib at-tahdhib 6/15, account 20.

78. Abu al-Aswad, Zalim was a son of 'Amr ibn Sufyan ibn Jundal, known
as ad-Du'ali, of the ad- Du'al tribe, a branch of Kananab tribe. Ibn
Khallikan says he was a great companion of the Prophet and a friend of
'Ali, and fought under 'Ali in the battle of Siffin. Imam 'Ali taught
him Arabic grammar and syntax and Abu al-Aswad compiled it on a
scientific basis. He died at the age of eighty-five in the caliphate of
'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz in Basra. Wafayat al-a'yan 2/216-219, Fihrist of
Ibn an-Nadim 60-62.

heritable than 'Ali to be caliph. But today you oppose him in this
manner! Where is that friendship and support; and why this opposition
and hostility?" When az-Zubayr found himself condemned in the presence
of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf's envoys and had no answer to give to their
protests, he said: "You had better talk to Talhah too, and hear what he
says." Abu al-Aswad and 'Imran went to Talhah and found him to be a very
hard and seditious man who had no purpose but to kindle the fire of war
and mischief. So they returned in disappointment to 'Uthman and informed
him of what had passed. Abu al-Aswad, too, composed a poem on this
occasion the translation of which is as follows:

"O son of Hunayf knows that the enemy's army has no goal but war! You,
too, should rise and stand up and get ready to fight them! Endeavors
hard to pound those people and show perseverance in your way! We talked
with az-Zubayr and found no flexibility in his talk; But Talhah was even
sharper and was proceeding on the wrong path! His remoteness from peace
resembled the distance between heaven and earth!

Their best words were ugly sharp and seditious. They threatened us
violently but their threat was very trifling and worthless to us." 79
When Abu al-Aswad finished reciting his poem, 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was
deeply impressed by it and said: "Yes! I swear to the two holy cities
(Mecca and Medina) that I will fight these people as you have
suggested." Then he ordered a general mobilization and the slogan of
"Get ready for war" echoed in Basra. The people armed themselves and
surrounded their governor 'Uthman ibn Hunayf. The Basrans army moved
towards al-Mirbad, which was one of the large squares of Basra where
'A'ishah's army had encamped, and the two forces came face to face in
the same square.

**Fiery speeches**

Be aware, O people, that 'Uthman was killed in his innocence! Now seize
his assassins!

**A man of the Banu Jashm tribe speaks**

The forces of Basra and 'A'ishah's army faced each other in al-Mirbad
square. A man of the Banu Jashm tribe arose from among the Basra forces
and 79. al-Imamah wa as-siyasah 1/60-61, Ibn A'tham 180, al-'Iqd
al-farid 4/313, Muruj adh-dhahab and al-Kamil of Ibn al-Athir 5/184-185,
History of al-Ya'qubi 2/157, Abu Mikhnaf in the book of al-Jamal.

after introducing himself addressed the people of Basra, saying: "O
people! These men have come from Mecca to confront you, not in fear of
insecurity and flight from chaos, since they live in a city which is a
safe place of refuge for everyone, and where all creatures overjoy peace
and tranquility, and where even wild birds, animals and beasts are safe
against injury by human beings. So they have not come here for fear, but
to avenge 'Uthman's blood, rushing like a destructive torrent upon our
city, whereas. We people of Basra had no share in 'Uthman's murder. O
people! Listen to me and send back this army the same way they came! If
you fail to show such valor and courage such a fire of war will be
kindled among you that it will never be extinguished, and its flames
will swallow all your lives and existence." When the man uttered his
last phrase, a number of the Basra people threw stones at him and
silenced him.

**Talhah speaks**

Abu Mikhnaf says: After the remark of that man of the Banu Jashm tribe.
Talhah stood up and silencing the noise and uproar of the people, which
echoed in the square said: "O people of Basra! You all know that 'Uthman
ibn-Affan was a noble and virtuous man who had a fine and brilliant
record in Islam. He belonged to the same group of the Emigrants about
whom the verse of ar- Ridwan descended, of the same Emigrants with whom
God was pleased, and of whose excellence and personality the Qur'an has
spoken of. Yes, 'Uthman was of the group of Emigrants and a friend of
Prophet's and Muslim leaders. But he changed his ways at the end of the
period of his caliphate, and sometimes diverted from the course of
justice. We warned him of this and protested to him. He accepted our
words and expressed repentance, and once more resumed the course of
justice, but of what use?

That man, who is now usurping the rein of the Muslims' affairs without
their satisfaction and knowledge, rushed upon him and killed him in his
innocence. A number of corrupt and bold people, too, assisted him in
this unjust action. 'Uthman was indeed respected by all Muslims and was
killed innocently. O people of Basra! We have come here to avenge the
blood of that chaste and innocent man, and seize his assassins and kill
them, so that the Muslims may recover their lost authority and
independence, and elect through a council a caliph for themselves. For,
governing and caliphate are the right of all people, the person who has
seized this position by force and bullying, is will shake and
collapse."

**Az-Zubayr speaks**

After Talhah, az-Zubayr stood up and began to speak. Like Talhah, he,
too, spoke of 'Uthman's innocence and accused 'Ali of being his
assassin, and confirmed everything that Talhah had stated.

Here a number of the people of Basra arose, and protesting to
az-Zubayr, said explicitly: "Talhah! Az-Zubayr! Was it not you who swore
allegiance to 'Ali and concluded the pact of submission to him? Why did
you swear allegiance to him yesterday, and violate your pact to day?"
They said in answer: "We did not swear allegiance willingly, and were
forced to do so, and thus no one has the right of allegiance and
obedience from us so as to protest and charge us of perfidy." Here
intense differences arose among the people of Basra and there ensued a
great uproar; for, a number who supported Talhah and az-Zubayr confirmed
their claims saying: "They are right! They are right!" While another
group refuted their words and said that these two are telling lies and
are sly and cunning in their claims.

**'A'ishah speaks**

Abu Mikhnaf says: The arguments and uproar of the people went on for a
long time until 'A'ishah intervened to calm them down. She mounted her
camel and stopped in front of them and addressing them in a loud voice,
said: "O people! That is enough! Stop talking and be silent! Silent!"

When they hear her words, they became quiet and ended their
argument-mg. When silence reigned once more in the square of al-Mirbad,
she began to speak and said to the people of Basra: "O people! 'Uthman
as emir of the faithful had deviated from the course of right and
justice and molested the companions of the Prophet. He brought corrupt
and inexperienced youths to power, and patronized wicked and perverse
individuals who were subjected to the wrath of the Prophet and banished
by him. The Muslims protested to him and warned him of the serious
consequences of his deeds. He, in his turn, accepted the people's advice
and counsel, and expressed regret for his ugly acts and washed away his
polluted past with the water of repentance, and cleansed himself from
his sins and blunders. However, a number of people killed him without
paying attention to his repentance, and shed the blood of that chaste
and innocent man. By his death they committed several sins: they
assassinated him like a sacrifice camel while he was dressed in the
sacred garment of caliphate, in the sacred month of Dhu al-Hijjah when
war and blood shed is forbidden, and in the city of Medina, the respect
for which is incumbent upon all in Islam!

Know O people! With 'Uthman's murder the Quraysh made themselves the
target of their own arrows, and smeared themselves with his blood with
their own hands. 'Uthman's death did not bring them any closer to their
goal and it was of no avail to them. By God! Such a calamity will
descend upon them that it will annihilate them, a fire-raising and
destructive calamity, a calamity that will awaken the sleepers and make
the sitters leap up! O people! Firstly 'Uthman's guilt was not such as
to deserve death, and secondly you made him repent, and then without
paying attention to his repentance, you rushed upon him and shed his
innocent blood. Then you swore allegiance to 'Ali and made him usurp the
seat of caliphate.80

Do you suppose that I should be angry in your interest to wards
'Uthman's whips and abuses, but that I should refrain from anger and
remain silent in 'Uthman's interest for the strokes of swords that you
brought down upon him? O people! Know that 'Uthman was killed
innocently, and it is now up to you to find his murderers wherever they
are and kill them. Then, through the council you can choose as caliph
one of those who had been nominated by 'Umar. But none of 'Uthman's
assassins should participate in the council for the election of the
caliph or have the smallest share."

Abu Mikhnaf says: When 'A'ishah ended this oration, the people arose
like a wave in uproar. Someone said: "What 'A'ishah said is true."
Another charged 'A'ishah with error, saying that she had no right to
leave her house. A third person said: "It is not for her to interfere in
social matters." Thus each person had something to say and the noise and
uproar of the people became so loud that disputes were started. People
started hitting each other throwing dust and pebbles at each other.

Thus the people of Basra were divided into two distinct groups,
arraying themselves in two opposite fronts. One group supported 'Uthman
ibn Hunayf, as governor of Basra, and another group showed sympathy to
'A'ishah, and thus with her brief oration she was able to win some
public support and add a number of soldiers to her army.

**The first battle**

O God! Be a witness that I offered every argument to these two! Abu
Mikhnaf says: The incidents in al-Mirbad came to an end and the people
scattered, but Talhah and az-Zubayr took a number of soldiers with them
to go and arrest 'Uthman ibn Hunayf and seize Dar al-Imarah (the
governor's house) in the center of the city. But they were faced with
stubborn resistance by 'Uthman's forces who were familiar with the
locality, and who before the raid by 'A'ishah's army they had taken
control of all streets and alleys and used them as barricades.

When 'A'ishah's army was unable to advance to the center of the city,
they changed their course towards the gardens and squares of the city.
But the army of Basra blocked their way, and a hard battle took place
between the two forces. In this clash, Hakim ibn Jabalah and members of
his tribe fought most

80. 'A'ishah's words really reacted on herself and her two commanders,
Talhah and az-Zubayr valiantly and attacked 'A'ishah's army inflicting a
severe defeat on them and driving them back as far as the Banu Mazin
cemetery. Here 'A'ishah's army took a defensive position until a
reinforcement of cavalry arrived form the main camp to aid them, and the
defeated force under the protection of the cavalry moved by the Basra
dam towards az-Zabuqah (outside the city) and from there to a marshy
desert called Dar ar-Rizq and encamped there. Thus in the first battle
the governor of Basra won victory and drove back 'A'ishah's army. Abu
Mikhnaf continues to say: 'Abd Allah ibn Hakim who was a chief of the
Tamim tribe and had already been written to by Talhah and az-Zubayr
about 'Uthman's assassination, asking his aid in their rebellion against
'Uthman, came to Talhah, and showed him the letters and said: "Talhah!
Was it not you who wrote us these letters inciting us to kill
'Uthman?"

Talhah said: "Yes, these letters are from us." 'Abd Allah said:
"Talhah! It is amazing that yesterday you encouraged us in these letters
to kill 'Uthman, and you eventually killed him with your own hands,
whereas today you have come to us claiming to avenge his blood. Talhah!
I swear to God that you have no goal but this world and to have a
worldly position, wrong motivation has made you rise up and start war
and bloodshed. Other wise, why was it that yesterday you swore
allegiance to 'Ali and did so most willingly, whereas to day you oppose
him and violate your pact with him. Worst of all you have come to start
riot and mischief in our city and make us your accomplices in this
sedition."

Talhah said: " 'Abd Allah! My allegiance to 'Ali was not based on
willingness. When the people swore allegiance to 'Ali, he invited me to
follow their example and I was compelled to take his hand in allegiance.
If I had refused his call, in addition to being deprived of the right of
election as caliph, I would also have lost my life, since the people
would have risen up against me and destroyed me."

Abu Mikhnaf says: Thus ended the first day, the next day both sides got
ready for combat and arrayed themselves for battle. Here 'Uthman ibn
Hunayf and a number of his friends went to Talhah and az-Zubayr and
began to advise them and warn them of the serious consequences of
division and violating a pact. But Talhah and az-Zubayr, without taking
his advice, said openly: "O son of Hunayf! We have come here to avenge
'Uthman's blood and nothing can stop us in this purpose."

'Uthman ibn Hunayf said: "What have you to do with 'Uthman's blood? His
sons and cousins have priority over you in avenging his death. Where are
they? I swear to God that your vengeance is nothing but a pretext. The
truth, is that you had desired the position of caliph and ruler, and did
your utmost to secure it, but the Muslims paid no attention to you and
favored 'Ali. Thus you are filled with rancor and enmity towards 'Ali
and you are being burnt by the flames of envy, all of which have led you
to opposition and perfidy, resorting to the pretext of avenging
'Uthman's blood in order to cover up your envy and the lead in inciting
the people against 'Uthman and you criticized him more violently than
anyone else."

At these words of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf both Talhah and az-Zubayr began to
abuse and insult him savagely and even defamed his mother's name
shamefully.

'Uthman looked at az-Zubayr and said: "What can I say? Your mother
Safiyah had a kinship with the Prophet and so for his sake I must be
excused of mentioning her name." Then he glanced at Talhah and said: "O
Talhah, son of Sa'bah! Your account with me is higher than the use of
words; only the sword can settle it and I will punish you for your
obscene insults." Then 'Uthman looked up towards heaven and said: "O
God! Be a witness that I offered every argument to these two and left no
room for any excuses." Saying this he attacked them and thus declared
war. A hard battle ensued between the two forces, and after much
fighting and bloodshed both sides agreed to conclude a peace agreement
and put and to the fighting.

**Peace and a peace treaty**

Both armies concluded a pact with God to act upon what they had
written. As we mentioned in the last chapter, a severe battle took place
between the two sides in their first confrontation, ending with the
death of a number, and the victory of the governor of Basra and his
forces. Abu Mikhnaf says: After this combat (which we have called the
first battle) the commanders of both armies agreed to conclude a peace
treaty on certain conditions and write them down in order to cease
fighting until the arrival of 'Ali. Thus this treaty was drawn up and
signed by the commanders of both sides.

The text of the treaty which consisted of five articles was as follows:
"This is a treaty concluded by 'Uthman ibn Hunayf and his friends with
Talhah and az-Zubayr and their supporters, both sides bind themselves to
act up on its terms and respect them. 1-Neither side has the right to
molest the other or disturb their peace and tranquility. 2-Both sides
have the right of natural and social benefits, and each side can equally
make use of rivers, public pastures, roads, streets and Muslim markets
to meet their needs, without molestation by the other side. 3-'Uthman
ibn Hunayf will be in charge of disciplinary and administrative affairs
of the city, the governor's palace, mosque and congregation prayer
matters, and have control of the public funds, as he had before.

4-Talhah and az-Zubayr will have the freedom of residence in Basra, and
they can, without any hindrance choose a site for their camps and dwell
freely in any part of the city they wish.

5-This treaty is valid and enforceable as of this date until the
arrival of 'Ali in Basra, and after 'Ali's arrival Talhah and az-Zubayr
are free either to act loyally in their allegiance to 'Ali or to choose
between peace and war." The following phrase was added at the end of the
peace treaty: "Both sides bound themselves to act upon the terms of the
treaty in the same way that a pact is concluded by the prophets with
God, and thus they made their treaty stronger and firmer." The peace
treaty was signed by both sides and peace and tranquility were restored
'Uthman ibn Hunayf took his forces from Dar ar-Rizq, where war and peace
had been made, to the city Dar al-Imarah, and ordered his followers to
lay down their weapons and return to their homes to rest and look after
the wounded.

**The second battle**

O friends of the Prophet! Do you not fear God?

For the second time Talhah and az-Zubayr violate their pact The Basrans
army fully observed the terms of the cease-fire and peace treaty, and
the city of Basra once more regained its pre-war tranquility and normal
conditions. But Talhah and az-Zubayr soon violated their peace treaty in
the same way that they had violated their allegiance with 'Ali. They
came to the conclusion when 'Ali arrived within a few days, they could
not stand up against him with their small number and inadequate
equipment, since 'Ali possessed a greater number and better
equipment.81

So these two spent a wakeful night discussing the steps to be taken. At
last they decided to break their promise in the same way that they had
violated their pact with 'Ali, and secretly ask the chiefs of Arab
tribes and Basrans leaders to help and co-operate with them. Therefore
Talhah and az-Zubayr wrote letters to the above personalities, inviting
them to avenge 'Uthman's blood, depose 'Ali from office and expel the
governor from Basra. 81. It seems that they had no intention for peace
from the beginning, but as soon as they realized that they could not
resist the governor of Basra, they pretended to desire peace so that
after the cease-fire they could surprise him and carry out their evil
intentions.

The tribes of al-Azd, Dabbah and Qays 'Aylan gave positive answers to
this call and swore allegiance to them promising help. Only a few people
of these three tribes disagreed, and withdrew into concealment. Talhah
and az-Zubayr sent another letter to Hilal ibn Waki', chief of the Banu
Tamim tribe, inviting him to collaborate, but he sent no answer and
abstained from meeting them. So they decided to visit Hilal themselves.
But he refused to admit them and concealed himself. His mother protested
and reproached him saying: "Hilal! It is disgraceful of such a
personality as you to hide him from such distinguished guests and refuse
to see two great Quraysh personalities." She kept on talking until he
yielded and opened his door to Talhah and az-Zubayr and sat down to
discuss matters with them. He was finally sufficiently influenced by
their arguments and by their insistence so that he agreed to swear
allegiance to them and promise them help and collaboration. Then the two
houses of Banu 'Amr and Banu Hanzalah which were two great branches of
the Tamim tribe followed Hilal ibn Waki', their chief, and swore
allegiance to Talhah and az-Zubayr.

Of the Tamim tribe only the house of Banu Yarbu' who were true and
loyal friends of Imam 'Ali, refused to join the others in allegiance and
also the house of Banu Daram who were another branch of Banu Tamim. In
this way Talhah and az-Zubayr managed to win the support of most of the
Basrans tribes.

**The second battle begins**

When the commanders of 'A'ishah's army found out that they were
superior in men, weapons and strength they gave the orders on one cold,
dark, windy rainy night for the men to conceal their weapons under their
garments and proceed toward the Jami' Mosque. They arrived there right
at the time of the Morning Prayer.

At that moment 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was at the altar and about to begin
the congregational prayer. The companions of Talhah and az-Zubayr went
forward and dragged him away from the altar and put az-Zubayr in his
place. The public fund guards on hearing what was happening in the
mosque, hastened to aid 'Uthman, and dragged az-Zubayr out of the altar
and replaced 'Uthman there. But az-Zubayr's companions once more pulled
away 'Uthman and then replaced him by az-Zubayr. The guards rushed in
for the second time and brought 'Uthman back to the altar and drove away
az-Zubayr. This dispute about who would be the leader of the
congregational prayer lasted so long that the time for prayer was about
to expire. The congregation raised their voices from every side,
shouting: "O Muslims! Fear God, the sun is rising! O friends of the
Prophet! Fear the wrath of God, for, the time for prayer is almost
over!"

After all these struggles, as az-Zubayr's companions were better
prepared and more determined. They won the field and captured the altar
and az-Zubayr acted as leader of the prayer, at once he ordered the
arrest of 'Uthman ibn Hunayf. His companions pulled out their hidden
swords and attacked 'Uthman's followers and after a brief clash between
Marwan and 'Uthman, az- Zubayr's followers captured 'Uthman and the
public fund guards who numbered seventy, they beat and tortured 'Uthman
so savagely that he nearly died there. They plucked out the hairs of his
head and face and even his eyebrows and eyelash. Thus victory was won by
'A'ishah's army in this conflict, which took place after the conclusion
of the peace treaty, and Basra, came under their control.


