An Account of the War Prisoners
===============================

O commander of the faithful! I went away as an old man and now I return
as a youth! Abu Mikhnaf says: Contrary to the peace terms 'A'ishah's
army raided the governor's house and the Muslim treasury, they took the
governor of Basra and the public fund guards as prisoners. They were
taken to 'A'ishah for her to issue a verdict and decide what should be
done with them. 'A'ishah declared her decision about them as follows:

**The fate of the guards**

'A'ishah issued the following verdict about the guards: She summoned
az- Zubayr and said: "These are the men who have drawn their swords
against you and have defended 'Uthman ibn Hunayf and the public funds. I
leave it to you to put them to the sword, and thus to their death." Abu
Mikhnaf says: Upon this order az-Zubayr, aided by his son 'Abd Allah,
beheaded these men like sheep and placed their bodies in a row. He says:
In addition to these seventy men who came to aid 'Uthman, another number
had stayed to defend the treasury and refused to surrender it to Talhah
and az-Zubayr. But az-Zubayr attacked them at night and after scattering
them captured the treasury, and arrested fifty more of the guards and
beheaded them cruelly in the people's presence and laid their bodies
alongside the other seventy.

Abu Mikhnaf says: According to Saq'ab ibn Zuhayr the number of the
guards who were killed on that day reached four hundred. He adds: the
first trick which occurred in Islam was the trick played by Talhah and
az-Zubayr upon 'Uthman ibn Hunayf and the first group of innocent
Muslims who were cruelly killed publicly were the guards of Basra. This
was the tragic fate of the guards of the public treasury.

Abu Mikhnaf says again: After dispersing or arresting the guards, the
forces of Talhah and az-Zubayr entered the treasury, and on seeing all
the gold, silver and riches, az-Zubayr joyfully recited this verse of
the Qur'an concerning the spoils of war: "Allah promised you many
acquisitions which you will take, then He hastened on this one for you
and held back the hands of men from you, that it may be a sign for the
believers." 82 Then he added: "We deserve all this wealth more than the
people of Basra." At once his soldiers began to pillage and plunder and
carry everything away that was in the treasury. But on the day that Imam
'Ali won victory he returned all the public property back and divided it
among the Muslims.

**The fate of the governor of Basra**

Abu Mikhnaf narrates as follows what happened to 'Uthman ibn Hunayf,
governor of Basra: They took him to 'A'ishah who summoned Aban son of
'Uthman ibn 'Affan and ordered him to behead 'Uthman in revenge for the
murder of his father. As a justification for such a verdict she said
that though 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was not concerned in the murder of
'Uthman ibn 'Affan, he was still one of the Ansar, and the Ansar had a
share in his assassination. Therefore, the death of any of the Ansar is
permissible in retaliation. When 'Uthman found himself within one step
of death, he addressed 'A'ishah and her friends and said: "You know that
my brother Sahl ibn Hunayf is the governor of Medina, and if you kill me
I swear to God that he will not keep quiet and will put to the sword all
the members of your household and tribe to avenge me, and will leave
none of you alive. Fear God and think of the abjectness and misery of
your house, and the serious consequences of my death."

'Uthman's words produced the desired effect, and fearing Sahl's
retaliation, they decide to forego 'Uthman's execution.

Abu Mikhnaf says: After conniving at 'Uthman's death, the commanders of
'A'ishah's army set him free from prison and allowed him either to
remain in Basra or to leave to join 'Ali's army. 'Uthman chose the
second alternative and left Basra travelling until he reached Imam
'Ali's army. When he saw the Imam, tears flowed from his eyes and he
said: "O commander of the faithful! On the day that I left your presence
I was a white-haired old man, whereas today I look like a young man with
no hair at all." Imam 'Ali was so moved and vexed at this treatment
given to 'Uthman by the enemies that involuntarily he said: "We are from
God and we return to Him", a phrase which is used in the time of
uneasiness and calamity, and he repeated it three times.

82. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Fath, Verse 20.

**The third battle**

This battle is called the small battle of al-Jamal Abu Mikhnaf Upon the
first days of 'A'ishah's army's arrival in Basra, some violent clashes
took place between them and 'Uthman ibn Hunayf's forces in which a large
number of Muslims were killed, and it all ended with the signing of a
peace treaty. But very soon Talhah and az-Zubayr violated the peace
treaty, and in raiding the governor's palace and treasury, they caused
another battle which ended in the expulsion of 'Ali's governor from
Basra and the death of his guards. But this was followed by a third
clash, which we will describe below. When Hakim ibn Jabalah learnt of
the arrest and expulsion of 'Uthman and the death of the guards, he and
three hundred men of his tribe prepared themselves for a fight and moved
to towards 'A'ishah's army and so 'A'ishah mounted her camel to face the
opponents with her army. A hard battle took place historians call the
Small al-Jamal, while 'Ali's battle with them is called the Great
al-Jamal.

During the combat a man of the al-Azd tribe attacked Hakim ibn Jabalah
and with his sword cut off one of his legs. Hakim picked up his own
severed leg and threw it violently at the man and knocked him down. Then
he dragged himself towards the man and threw himself on him and
suffocated him under his own heavy body. Hakim himself, too, was passing
through his last moments of life when a man happening to pass by asked
him who had brought down such a calamity upon him. Hakim said: "This man
who is acting as my cushion!" The passer-by looked down and noticed the
corpse of the al-Azdi fellow under Hakim's half-dead body. Thus valiant
Hakim met his death as a martyr in the way of right and truth.

Abu Mikhnaf says: All of Hakim's followers who were three hundred in
number were killed including his three brothers. So the third battle
ended with the victory of 'A'ishah's army and Basra came under their
complete control. At this time all the fighters of Basra including those
who had fought 'A'ishah's army surrendered and joined her army.

**Internal differences**

Talhah and az-Zubayr began to dispute over the question of acting as
leader of the congregational prayer.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid When 'Uthman ibn Hunayf was driven out of Basra and
Hakim ibn Jabalah and his followers were killed, the city of Basra went
completely under the control of Talhah and az-Zubayr. Now, no more
disputes could be expected, but as it happened, internal differences
produced clashes. Each of these two commanders tried to act as leader of
the congregational prayer, while the other one refused to stand behind
his colleague to perform the prayer, since such a submission meant
giving priority to the other. Differences rose high and reached a
dangerous point until 'A'ishah herself intervened, settling the matter
by making both Talhah and az-Zubayr to temporarily lay aside their claim
of acting as leader of the congregational prayer, and by allowing their
sons instead to act as prayer leader. Each one was to take turns, one
day for Muhammad son of Talhah, and the next day for 'Abd Allah son of
az-Zubayr.

But Ibn Abi al-Hadid, the al-Mu'tazili scholar says: To remove
differences between Talhah and az-Zubayr, 'A'ishah ordered that 'Abd
Allah son of az- Zubayr should act as provisional prayer leader until
she should reach her provisional prayer leader until she should reach
her final decision after the ultimate victory and then choose one of
those two to act as the permanent caliph and ruler.

**Another dispute**

Another difference arose between Talhah and az-Zubayr about the right
of each to the title of Emir so as to be addressed and greeted by the
people. Abu Mikhnaf says in connection with these matters that
historians have differed some say that as 'A'ishah had made az-Zubayr
Emir of the army, she addressed only him as Emir, other historians state
that the title of Emir was used for both Talhah and az-Zubayr in
addressing and greeting them.83

**Letters and messages**

Az-Zubayr! What factor changed your friendship into hostility? Imam
'Ali At-Tabari says: When 'Ali ibn Abi Talib heard of the movement of
'A'ishah's army, he left Medina with his forces for az-Zawiyah and from
there towards Basra. 'A'ishah's army, too, were informed of 'Ali's
movement and went forward from Basra to face them. They both reached a
point which later came to be called "the palace of 'Ubayd Allah ibn
Ziyad", and arrayed themselves facing one another.

On the first three days no clashes took place between the two armies
and during this time only 'Ali sent letters of ultimatum to 'A'ishah's
army or sent 83. All the above points are from Abu Mikhnaf quoted from
Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/497-501.

envoys to them or made direct contact with them. He made every possible
endeavour to prevent fighting and bloodshed by dissuading them from
mischief and sedition.84

**A letter to Talhah and az-Zubayr**

At-Tabari confines himself to the above account and does not give the
texts of the ultimatums and negotiations. But parts of these letters and
talks have been quoted by Ibn Qutaybah, Ibn A'tham and Sayyid ar-Radi.
Among the letters written by Imam 'Ali in those days to Talhah and
az-Zubayr is a letter carried by 'Imran ibn Hasin to them, the text of
which is as follows: "After praising God and greeting His prophet, O
Talhah! And O az-Zubayr! You know well, despite your concealing the
truth, that I did not seek public favour and had no desire for their
allegiance. It was the people who sought me and desired to swear
allegiance to me. I did not offer my hand until they offered theirs in
allegiance. You two came to me without being invited and concluded a
pact of allegiance with me. I had no power to compel public allegiance
through fear, and they volunteered to come froward for this pact and
chose me for this position. If you two have willingly sworn allegiance
to me, then you can come back as soon as possible and express regret of
your treachery, and repent your guilt and sin.

But if your allegiance was based on unwillingness and you really
intended disobedience and sin, them you exposed yourself to protest and
blame by this action. For, why did you resort to simulation to pretend
having faith when there was no compulsion for it, and adopt the way of
hypocrisy? As for your dissimulation, I swear to God that it is nothing
but a futile pretexts for others who are weaker than you and lower in
power and position, had a greater right over you for fear and
dissimulation, but they never speak of dissimulation and do not break
their promise. Your excuse for this breach of faith and your pretext for
war and bloodshed is to accuse me of 'Uthman's murder and exonerate
yourselves.

To clarify the truth it would be fitting to make an inquiry of those
who have kept aloof from me and you and of those who take neither your
side nor mine, and when they name the assassins of 'Uthman, then those
who are guilty, are liable to punishment in proportion to their guilt
and their share in this crime. Therefore O Talhah and O az-Zubayr! You
two old men! Come away from this wrong and dangerous decision and a bend
such adventures and pretexts and abstain from war and bloodshed!

Talhah! Az-Zubayr! Today you are only afraid of shame and disgrace, but
if you do not take my advice, tomorrow on resurrection day that shame
and disgrace will be your share in addition to the fire of hell!"85 84.
History of at-Tabari 5/199.

85. Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah 3/122, al-Imamah
wa as-siyasah 65, published by Mustafa Muhammad, History of Ibn A'tham
173.

**A message to az-Zubayr**

In addition to the letter written to Talhah and az-Zubayr, Imam 'Ali
dispatched his cousin 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas especially to az-Zubayr
and before leaving gave him the following instruction! " 'Abd Allah! In
this mission you must not meet Talhah, since he is a conceited, selfish
and inflexible man! He is an extremely wicked and mischievous man, who
resembles a bull has its horns ready to tear up the belly of every
passer-by, He is so ignorant that he regards every hard and dangerous
task to be easy. 'Abd Allah! You must get in touch with az-Zubayr, since
he is somewhat milder and patient. In your meeting tell him: 'Ali, son
of your uncle says: O az- Zubayr! How was it that you recognized me in
Hejaz and swore allegiance, but in Iraq you forgot me and resorted to
estrangement? Az-Zubayr! How was it that you altered your former way,
and turned your old affection to me onto enmity and perfidy?" 86

Ibn 'Asakir adds a point here and says: 'Ali sent a message to
az-Zubayr, saying: "O az-Zubayr! Did you not swear allegiance to me
willingly on that day? What has made you consider shedding my blood
legitimate today and regard the combat with me as something obligatory
and a definite duty for yourself?"

Ibn 'Abbas says: I carried out my mission and delivered 'Ali's message
to az-Zubayr, but he only uttered a vague sentence in answer, saying:
"We are in fear, but we cherish the desire to be caliphs." Again Ibn
'Abbas says: Before az-Zubayr began to speak, az-Zubayr's son who took
part in our talk turned to me and said: "Tell 'Ali that there are
several questions between you and us. We claim 'Uthman's blood from you.
We want you to give the choice of the Caliph to a council in the way
adopted by the second caliph and retire yourself. We say two members of
the council appointed by the second caliph, namely Talhah and az-Zubayr,
are in agreement whereas you are in the minority and the majority of the
Muslims and Umm al-Mu'minin 'A'ishah favour us in their votes and view.
For these reasons in the question of caliphate you do not have the
slightest right or expectation."87

The sharp-witted scholar, Ibn 'Abbas, says: On receiving that answer
from 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr I realized that they had no intention for
peace and 86. This phrase is used as a popular saying meaning: "How did
this come about?" Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/73-74, al-'Iqd
al-farid 4/314, al-Aghani 16/127, History of Damascus 5/363- 365.

87. This answer has been attributed to az-Zubayr himself by Ibn 'Abd
Rabbih in al-'Iqd al-farid 4/314. But Ibn Abi al-Hadid has attributed it
to 'Abd Allah son of az-Zubayr in the Description of Nahj al-balaghah
2/169, and Ibn 'Asakir in the History of Damascus 5/263. The tone of the
answer shows it to belong to 'Abd Allah not to az-Zubayr.

that their only goal was war and bloodshed. So I returned to 'Ali and
informed him of the matter.

**'A'ishah's message**

Once more 'Ali summoned 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Abbas and dispatched him to
'A'ishah in the company of Zayd ibn Sawhan, and instructed them to
deliver the following message: " 'A'ishah! God's order to you is to stay
in your house till death, and never leave it. But what can I do? A
number of people have deceived and taken you out of your house, and made
you harmonious and unanimous with them in the attainment of their goal,
and as a result of your collaboration with them a number of Muslims have
gone astray and exposed themselves to danger and destruction, and are
involved with an ill-omened fate.

'A'ishah! You must return home from here and keep away from war and
bloodshed among the Muslims. 'A'ishah! Take care! If you do not return
home and if you do not extinguish the fire of disunion that you have
kindled, there will follow a fiery and destructive war which will
swallow a large number of people. 'A'ishah! Your responsibility is very
heavy! Fear the wrath of God! And repent this great sin! God accepts the
repentance of His servants, and pardons their sins. 'A'ishah let not
your kinship with Talhah and your affection for 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr
drag you towards the fire of hell, and let not family prejudice lead you
to the punishment of hell."88

This was a brief account along with samples of the letters and messages
sent by Imam 'Ali to prevent war and bloodshed and to put an end to all
excuses and pretexts by the commanders of 'A'ishah's army.

**Answers of Talhah and 'A'ishah**

'Ali's envoys went to 'A'ishah and delivered his message. 'A'ishah said
in answer: "I will not talk to 'Ali, nor give an answer to his message;
for, I do not possess 'Ali's fluent power of speech nor his eloquence,
and I cannot resist him in this." 'Ali's envoys returned to him and
repeated the words of 'A'ishah.89 Some historians say that Talhah said
to his followers: "Rush upon 'Ali's army, and pay no attention to the
words of his envoys! For you do not possess the power of controlling
your mind and keeping your own beliefs against the eloquence of 'Ali. So
you are likely to be quickly influenced by his words and lose your own
ideas and opinions."90

Thus Talhah resorted to sophistry and false reasoning to answer 'Ali's
logical words.

88. Translation of History of Ibn A'tham 175.

89. History of Ibn A'tham 175.

90. History of Ibn A'tham 175.

Inciting declarations Defend your women and children. 'Abd Allah ibn
az-Zubayr 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr says:

As already mentioned, in those three days when the armies of 'Ali and
'A'ishah were facing each other ready for combat, 'Ali wished to employ
every possible means to extinguish the fire of riot and war. But unlike
'Ali, 'A'ishah's army invited the people to fight and used fiery and
inciting words for this purpose.

One of these inciting orations was delivered by 'Abd Allah ibn
az-Zubayr to rouse his army, in which he said: "O people! Be alert! 'Ali
son of Abu Talib has killed 'Uthman, the rightful caliph, and today he
has mobilized a fully equipped army against you, intending to vanquish
you and hold the rein of your affairs, and conquer your city. You must
concentrate your forces and fight valiantly, and defend your land and
home against the invasion and encroachment of 'Ali and his army, and
protect your honour and independence and your women and children.

O people of Basra! How can you submit to such an abasement and
abjectness as to allow the people of Kufah to invade your home and drive
you out of your city and land? O people! Rise and show anger to those
who are enraged with you! Fight those who are ready to combat with you!
O people! 'Ali does not consider anyone but himself worthy of being
caliph. I swear to God that if he wins victory over you, he will destroy
your religion and your world!" 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr used many such
futile and false words to incite the people and insistently went to such
far-fetched excesses. Al-Hasan ibn 'Ali answers The words of 'Abd Allah
ibn az-Zubayr were heard by Imam 'Ali, and he said to his son, Hassan:
"My son! Rise and give an answer to 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr."

Imam al-Hasan stood up and after praising God, said to the people: "O
people! You heard what 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr said about my father. He
has accused my father of 'Uthman's assassination and has uttered other
futile and baseless words, too, whereas all of you know what slanders
az-Zubayr, his father, had uttered about 'Uthman, and what obscene and
biting words he had used about him, and what charges he levelled at him!
You all remember that during 'Uthman's life and caliphate, Talhah had
become so insolent to him that he raised a banner above the treasury and
actually declared his opposition to him. With such a record of
misconduct to 'Uthman, how can they attribute his assassination to my
father and slander him? If I were to speak about those two men and their
deeds, I could say much more and clarify greater facts.

But concerning his claim that 'Ali has usurped the position and governs
the people without their satisfaction. I have a proper objection to
offer about his father against his improper and false protest. I say
that his father violated his pact with my father without any excuse
whatsoever and to account for this unworthy act he says that he had
sworn allegiance to my father without any willingness and desire of his
own. Such a statement does not only fail to make his action permissible,
but it also proves his guilt and sinfulness, since this statement is at
the same time a confession of his allegiance and an exposure of his
wickedness in violating his pact, showing himself to be a perfidious
man. But what 'Abd Allah says in surprise about the domination of the
Kufah forces over the army of Basra is comical and laughable, since
there is no surprise in the domination of right over wrong and in
vanquishing the latter. Naturally when right steps into the arena, wrong
takes to flight and retreats.

Therefore what he has said about 'Uthman's followers is nothing really
but false reasoning, since we have no dispute with the followers of
'Uthman at all. Our only object is to fight that camel-riding woman and
her friends who have in fact no connection with 'Uthman and his
friends."91

**'Ali's last speech**

If were to be killed a thousand times in battle, it is far sweeter than
dying once in a soft bed. Imam 'Ali In those three days Imam 'Ali used
his entire endeavour to establish peace and tranquility and employed all
his power to attain this holy goal. But unfortunately he did not succeed
in this purpose and his envoys to 'A'ishah's army returned in
disappointment and informed 'Ali of Talhah and az-Zubayr's final
decision to fight.

Then 'Ali rose to address his army and for the last time delivered the
following oration, after praising God and greeting the Prophet he said:
"My friends! I gave three days' respite to these people and warned them
of perfidy, and proved their injustice and rebellion, hoping that they
would abandon their ignorant decision, but they exhibited no shame and
did not alter their decision. Now they have sent me a message to be
ready to fight and to tolerate their swords and spears.

'They declare that wrong desires have made 'Ali proud and his carnal
desires 91. Translation of the History of Ibn A'tham 174, History of
al-Jamal by ash-Shaykh al-Mufid 158-159.

have misled him. Woe upon those who utter such words! May their mother
mourn for them for proceeding on the wrong path. As I have no fear of
war, their threat of sword and spear produces no fear in me. Indeed he
who has invited me towards swords and spears has not gone wrong in this,
since I have been familiar with these weapons from the very beginning
like the tribe of Banu Qarah.92 Those who have witnessed my smashing
assaults and combats and have felt the force of my blows, must prepare
themselves for my sword. No, I have no need to be prepared, since lam
the same son of Abu Talib who has smashed the strong ranks of heathens,
and scattered them. Today, too I attack them with the same valiant heart
and strong arm, and I will smash their ranks.

O people! I have faith in my goal, and proceed only in the way of truth
and justice. So I am certain that God will grant me victory and success.
O people! You know that death is man's last destiny, and overcomes
everyone, and none can escape from its clutches. Even if one is not
killed in war, he will die a natural death. So it is far better to die
in the offer one's blood for His satisfaction.

I swear to 'Ali's God that if I were to be killed a thousand times in
the battlefield, it would be far more pleasant to me than to die in a
soft bed." Then 'Ali looked up at heaven and said: "O God! Talhah broke
his pact with me and trampled upon it. He roused the people against
'Uthman to kill him, and then accused me of his murder. O God! Give him
no respite! O Merciful and Kind God! Az-Zubayr severed his ties of
kinship with me and violated his allegiance, and supported my enemies! O
God! Protect me from their evil in any way that you know!"

When 'Ali ended his oration, he descended from the pulpit and according
to Ibn A'tham the two armies approached each other. 'Ali reviewed his
army, which was now twenty thousand strong, while Talhah's forces were
thirty thousand.93

**'Ali announces his military program**

My friends! You should not begin the fight! Imam 'Ali At-Tabari says
the armies of 'Ali and 'A'ishah faced each other on Thursday, 15th of
Jumada ath-Thani (Jumada II) in the year 36 of the Hijrah 92. Qarah were
a branch of the Quraysh who were skillful archers and famous for this
among the Arabs, so their name had become proverbial in archery. 93.
Translation of History of Ibn A'tham 175, Ibn Abi al-Hadid.

and arrayed themselves for battle.94 They spent three days in the state
of preparedness, and no clash occurred between them during this time. In
those three days 'Ali's whole efforts were directed towards securing
peace, but he was unable to attain this goal and realized that a war is
inevitable. Therefore he drew up a plan of action for his army and
announced it to all his soldiers.

Historians give the full details of this plan. For example al-Hakim in
al- Mustadrak and al-Muttaqi in Kanz al-'ummal quote the uncle of Yahya
ibn Said as follows: On the day of the battle of al-Jamal, 'Ali
announced in a loud voice to his soldiers: "O people! Do not start
shooting at the enemy or attacking them with your swords and spears and
do not take the lead in fighting and bloodshed. Treat them kindly and
speak with them gently. O people! If in this dangerous situation a
person adopts the way of salvation, he will be happy and blessed on the
day of resurrection."

A narrator of this plan says: We were in the state of waiting until the
noon of the same day, and abstained from action in accordance with
'Ali's order. But unlike us, 'A'ishah's army made loud cries of "O
avengers of 'Uthman! Rise up!", and their cries echoed in that desert.
Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah carried the banner in front of his father's
army and stood on a high spot watching the enemy's army and hearing
their cries. The Imam called him and asked him what they were saying and
why their voices were so loud. Muhammad said: "They are shouting the
slogan of "Avengers of 'Uthman", to incite the people to attack and
fight." 'Ali raised his arms in prayer and said: "O God! Today throw the
assassins of 'Uthman down on the dust of abjectness and vanquish
them!"95

Some historians say that when the two armies came face to face on that
day 'Ali addressing his followers said: "So long as the enemy has not
started fighting, you must abstain from action and not take the lead. We
praise God that we are in the right and our abstention from taking the
lead in the combat is another evidence of our rightfulness." Then he
added: "When fighting begins, do not kill the wounded with spears and
after being victorious do not pursue those who flee. Do not strip the
dead of their clothes and do not damage their bodies and limbs. When you
reach the enemy's houses, do not act immodestly and do not encroach upon
their honour, nor pillage their wealth and property."96 Here al-Mas'udi
adds that 'Ali said to his followers: "Do not seize as spoils of war
their wealth and property except what you capture in the enemy's
military camp and battlefield. Do not molest their women even if they
abuse 94. History of at-Tabari 5/199, al-Aghani 16/126.

95. al-Mustadrak 3/371, Kanz al-'ummal 6/85, Tradition 13/11.

96. History of al-Ya'qubi 2/157-160, Muruj adh-dhahab 5/188-201,
Translation of the History of Ibn A'tham 173-175, al-Aghani 16/127,
Description of Nahj al-balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid 2/43 and 81 quoted
from Abu Mikhnaf.

you and insult your good and great men; for, they have a low intellect
and their words are vain and worthless. The Prophet of God forbade us
from hurting and molesting women even though they were heathens and
infidels. Therefore the smallest injustice and molestation of women and
even reproaching them is absolutely forbidden."

**'Ali gives ultimatum through the Qur'an**

My son had no fear of them and invited them to the Qur'an. A bereaved
mother When 'Ali ibn Abi Talib was unsuccessful in his efforts to create
peace and tranquility he decided to seek the aid of the Qur'an and give
ultimatum to the enemy through it. So he held up a Qur'an and said in a
loud voice: "Who is willing to hold this Qur'an and invite the enemy to
it, thus exposing himself to a sure death and martyrdom?" At this moment
a young man, who was dressed in a white and embroidered garment, stood
up and said: "O 'Ali! I heartily and lovingly welcome death in this
cause!"

For the second time 'Ali addressed the people and said: "Who is
prepared to stand along against that army and invite them to the Qur'an
without fearing certain death in this cause?" The young man said again:
"O Commander of the faithful! May my life be offered to you! In this
mission I have no fear of spear, sword or death." Imam 'Ali handed him
the Qur'an and dispatched him towards the enemy. He invited 'A'ishah's
army to the Qur'an, but they rushed upon him and cut off his right arm
and threw it down. That courageous youth picked up the Qur'an with his
left hand and continued to invite them to the Qur'an. Again they rushed
upon him and severed his left arm. He placed the Qur'an on his breast
while blood was flowing down from his shoulders, and died.97

at-Tabari narrates this story as follows: 'Ali asked his followers:
"Who can hold up this Qur'an face the enemy and invite them to obey its
commands, and be so steadfast and self-sacrificing that if they cut off
one of his hand, he would use his other hand and if they severed that
hand too, he would hold it between his teeth and deliver the message of
the Qur'an?" A very young man rose and said: "O 'Ali! I am ready! Let me
carry out this mission." 'Ali repeated his proposal, but no one except
that valiant youth volunteered to undertake that 97. Kanz al-'ummal
6/85' Tradition 1313, History of at-Tabari 5/205 and Ibn al-Athir.

task, which meant certain death. 'Ali addressed that self-sacrificing
youth and told him to hold up the Qur'an and walk to the enemy, telling
them that the Qur'an would act as judge and arbitrator between the two
sides, and its decrees would be binding upon them all, and thus
bloodshed and fratricide would be avoided.

The young man carried out his mission thoroughly so that even after his
hands were cut off, he held the Qur'an between his teeth and continued
to deliver his message until he died. It was after this incident that
Imam 'Ali said: "I have given them every opportunity and now fighting is
incumbent upon us."98 The bereaved mother of that youth, in mourning for
her son composed an elegy the translation of which is as follows: "O
God! Be a witness that this youth invited their Muslims towards you and
he recited the Qur'an to them without fearing their swords. Their mother
('A'ishah) was amongst them and saw their wicked deeds and watched their
oppression and tyranny.

This mother did not only not forbid them from following this path which
was bound to end in misery and destruction; but also incited and
encouraged them towards injustice, and instead of using henna and
indigo-leaves, she dyed their hair with blood." Abu Mikhnaf says this
poem was composed by Umm Dhurayh in mourning for her young son. Ibn
A'tham, too, says that this young man was from Kufah and of the house of
Majashi'. His hands were cut off by a servant of 'A'ishah and killed by
him.


