Ammar Speaks With 'a'ishah and Her Army Commanders
==================================================

'A'ishah! It was you who gave the orders for 'Uthman's death. 'Ammar
One day the Prophet turned to 'Ammar and said: " 'Ammar! You will be
killed by a tyrannical people and an unruly army." 99 Since the day the
above historical phrase was uttered by the Prophet about 'Ammar, he was
regarded by the Muslims as a model of right and justice, and whenever he
was present in an army, he was considered as a living example of 98.
History of at-Tabari 5/24, al-Kamil of Ibn al-Athir 2/104, Translation
of History of Ibn A'tham and Abu Mikhnaf quoted from Ibn Abi al-Hadid's
Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/431. 99. The holy Prophet often spoke
to the Muslims of the exalted position of 'Ammar and that is why the
companions had a particular respect for 'Ammar.

truth and rightfulness, while the opposing army's wrongness became
evident. For this reason Imam 'Ali sent 'Ammar to 'A'ishah and her
military commanders to speak with and advise them, hoping that they
would be influenced by his counsel or at least they would consider it as
an additional ultimatum.

Al-Mas'udi narrates this topic as follows:

In the battle of al-Jamal, a litter of strong, hard wood was made for
'A'ishah covered with felt and cowhide and surrounded by chain-mail as
protection from all dangers and an iron curtain around it, making the
litter look like a strong and invincible fort. They placed it on a
well-known camel of Ya'la ibn Umayyah, named 'Askar. She sat in the
middle of the litter and the camel moved in front of the military
column. When 'Ammar saw this scene, he halted between the two armies and
addressing 'A'ishah's army said: "O people! You have not treated your
prophet fairly to leave your women behind the curtains and drag his
consort to the battlefield facing swords." Then approaching 'A'ishah's
litter, he said to her: " 'A'ishah! What do you want of us?" 'A'ishah
answered:" 'Uthman's blood!"

'Ammar said: "May God kill unruly and unjust people who claim blood
without having the slightest right." Then 'Ammar addressed the people
and said: "You are better acquainted with those who had a part in
'Uthman's murder and you know well in which army his assassins are
present. Indeed you know perfectly well that 'Uthman's murderers are the
same people who have started this dispersion and war under the pretext
of avenging his blood." At this moment showers of arrows were sent by
the enemy towards 'Ammar, and he sang the following poem:

" 'A'ishah! You started the war and bloodshed,
All these stormy waves of events are caused by you.
It was you who issued the order for 'Uthman's death,
It was you who gave a verdict for his infidelity."

Arrows continued to pour down on 'Ammar. He whipped his horse and
galloped away from the hostile army and returning to 'Ali he said: "O
Commander of the faithful, how long are we to wait? As I can see, these
people have prepared nothing for you but war." 'Ali gives his last
ultimatum God! Be a witness! O friends of mine, offer all arguments to
them.

'Ali employed all the possible means to establish peace and used
various ways to bring reason to the enemy and left no avenue unexplored.
1-He wrote letters to their commanders, warning them of perfidy, war and
bloodshed. 2-He sent messages to 'A'ishah and her army commanders,
inviting them to peace and tranquility. 3-He made a direct contact with
the enemy commanders, giving them counsel and advice. 4-He sent the
Qur'an to the enemy, inviting them to act upon its verdict as a way of
solving differences.

5-He prepared a military plan for his followers, recommending such a
kind and pacific behaviour and treatment towards the enemy that would
have softened the most stubborn of them towards peace and order.
6-Lastly he dispatched 'Ammar who was in the words of the Prophet a
criterion of right and justice to reason with 'A'ishah and her army and
invite them to peace.

These were the points, which were discussed, in previous chapters on
the basis of reliable historical evidence. The last opportunity which
'Ali gave the enemy for peace was that in retaliation for their attacks
upon his envoys, he advised his own army to show patience, and fortitude
and warned them not to start the fight and said: "O Just God! Be a
witness and O friends, be patient and let the enemy be given every
chance, leaving them no room for pretext." But despite all his efforts
for peace the enemy showed a greater insistence upon war. Historians
describing this final ultimatum of 'Ali and the obstinacy of 'A'ishah's
army, write as follows: al-Hakim says in al-Mustadrak: "az- Zubayr,
commander of 'A'ishah's army ordered his archers to shoot arrows
collectively at them. Al-Hakim adds that this order was a declaration of
war and an order for attack issued by az-Zubayr.

Ibn A'tham and many other historians write: In the battle of Hunayn the
Prophet picked up a handful of earth and threw it at the enemy, saying
may they be disgraced! 'A'ishah, too, imitated this gesture of the
Prophet and used it against the Muslims in the battle of al-Jamal, and
in throwing a handful of pebbles at 'Ali's army, she said: "May they be
disgraced!"

At this moment a man of 'Ali's army reproached 'A'ishah and said: "

'A'ishah! It was not you who threw earth at 'Ali's army; it was the
hand of Satan that made you commit such an ugly act."100 After this
actual declaration of war 'A'ishah's army formally began their assaults.
Abu Mikhnaf and other historians write: Shooting at 'Ali's forces were
begun by 'A'ishah's army. His forces cried out: "O Commander of the
faithful! 100. Translation of the History of Ibn A'tham 171-180,
Description of Nahj al-balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/85.

Our patience is at an end. They are exhausting and extirpating us!
Issue the order for defense!" At this time they brought to 'Ali's tent
the body of a man who was covered with the arrows of the enemy and said:
"O Amir al- Mu'minin! This is the corpse of one of your devoted friends
destroyed by the enemy." The Imam looked up at heaven and said: "O God!
Be a witness!" Then he turned to them and said: "Be patient! Let the
enemy be given every opportunity for peace!"

Again they carried in another corpse and said: "O Emir! This is so and
so who was killed by the enemy's arrows!" Once more 'Ali looked up at
heaven and said: "O God Almighty!" You are a true Witness' and again
this time 'Ali did not issue the command to begin the fighting, and said
to his followers: "You must show a greater fortitude against the enemy's
injustice and aggression, and give more proof of your rightfulness by
giving them every opportunity to turn to peace." At that moment 'Abd
Allah ibn Badil al-Khuza'i who was a companion and friend of the
Prophet, brought the bloody corpse of his brother 'Abd ar-Rahman and
placing it down in front of 'Ali said: "O 'Ali! This is my brother who
has been killed unchivalrously by the enemy!"

'Ali who had given the enemy every opportunity to make peace, saw him
faced with an accomplished wrong action and was left with no alternative
but war. So he uttered the holy phrase "We are from God and return to
Him," and put on the Prophet's chain mail named "Dhat al-Fudul" and wore
his turban and mounted the Prophet's mule named "Duldul."101 Then he
tied his famous sword, named "Dhu al-Faqar" to his belt. He gave the
Prophet's black banner, named "Uqab" to his son, Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyah, and said to his dear sons "al-Hasan and al-Husayn": "My
sons! As you were deeply loved by the Prophet of God and are related to
him, I have exempted you from the task of bearing the banner102 and have
entrusted it to your brother Muhammad."

Thus the Imam prepared himself for the combat and addressing the army,
recited the following verse of the Qur'an: "Do you think that you would
enter the garden while yet the state of those who have passed away
before you has not come upon you; distress and affliction befell them
and they were shaken violently so that the Apostle and those who
believed with him said: When will the help of Allah come! Now surely the
help of Allah is nigh."103 And then 'Ali, leaving for the battle,
uttered this prayer: "May God give us

101. Translation of the History of Ibn A'tham 168, at-Tabari 1/1783
printed in Europe, Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd printed Beirut 1/491,
al-Baladhuri 1/511 in the Ansab al-ashraf says that this mule was a gift
sent to the Prophet by al-Maquqis, king of Alexandria, and it was alive
until the time of Mu'awiyah.

102. A banner-bearer is usually in a greater danger in war than other
soldiers, and so Imam 'Ali, wishing his sons to be safer, did not give
them this task.

103. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter al-Baqarah, Verse 214.

all fortitude and perseverance and bring us victory, and support us in
critical moments and perilous events." 'Ali's meeting with az-Zubayr
Az-Zubayr! You will unjustly fight 'Ali! The Prophet The two armies
arrayed themselves, facing each other ready for combat. At this time
'Ali, proceeded towards 'A'ishah's army and called az-Zubayr to come
forward and said: "az-Zubayr! What is your reason in bringing forth such
a huge army to this land?" Az-Zubayr said: "As I do not consider you
worthy of the position of caliph, I have come here to depose you."

'Ali said: "az-Zubayr! What you say is nothing but a pretext; for I am
not inferior to 'Uthman as a caliph. You used to be a good man of the
house of 'Abd al-Muttalib and were related to our house. But on the day
your son 'Abd Allah assumed position, he caused division and dispersion
between us. Az- Zubayr! I am surprised that you claim 'Uthman's blood
from me whereas you yourself are his assassin. May God bring down the
most painful suffering and the worst calamity upon the one who has shown
the most hostility and rancor to 'Uthman. Az-Zubayr! Do you remember the
day when you and I were together and the Prophet passed by, he turned to
me saying: A day will come, 'Ali, when this cousin of yours will fight
you unjustly!"

Az-Zubayr now remembered the words of the Prophet and said: "O 'Ali! I
swear to God that henceforth I will not fight you." Saying this, he
turned to his son 'Abd Allah and said to him:" 'Abd Allah! I am very
apprehensive of the course we have adopted and I fear its consequences.
Let me say explicitly that I do not feel inclined to fight 'Ali."

'Abd Allah said: "Father! On the first day you took a steadfast step in
this course and there was no sign of hesitation and anxiety in your
visage. But today you seem to have changed your mind and have allowed
anxiety to penetrate your heart. Maybe it is the hoisted banners and
drawn swords of 'Ali's army that have frightened you to yield to doubt
and anxiety. Yes, father the truth is that on seeing yourself face to
face with death, you prefer flight and withdrawal to fighting, otherwise
there is no doubt about the sanctity of the objective." 'Abd Allah
resorted to many such futile arguments with his father to the extent
that the latter shouted angrily: Woe upon such a son as you who insists
upon his father's misery and destruction! Son! Do you compel me to fight
'Ali while I have sworn never again to fight him? What can I do with
this oath?

'Abd Allah said: "It is easy, father! Break your oath, and as an
expiation set free Sirjis, your slave to satisfy God!"

Az-Zubayr followed his son's suggestion and as atonement for violating
his oath to 'Ali, he freed his slave and returned to his army and
prepared himself for combat. Ibn A'tham al-Kufi, too narrates the
meeting of 'Ali with az-Zubayr as follows: On meeting him 'Ali said:
"az-Zubayr! For what reason have you raised the banner of opposition to
me?" az-Zubayr answered: "To avenge 'Uthman's blood." 'Ali said: "It was
you and your friend Talhah who killed 'Uthman and his blood is on your
hands. If you are really truthful, place yourselves in the hands of
'Uthman's sons and heirs to kill you in retaliation for their father's
murder, or receive ransom for it."

**The Details of the Event**

At-Tabari narrates this story elsewhere with greater details and adds
that 'Ali met Talhah and az-Zubayr at a spot between the two armies
their horses' necks were side by side, and 'Ali said to them: "O Talhah!
O az-Zubayr! You have gathered together a huge army and have armed and
equipped it fully, while you do not have any excuse or reason to offer
at the threshold of our Just God and are surely to be condemned there.
Fear God and His wrath! You have rendered considerable services and have
engaged in holy wars for the sake of God and for the elevation of
monotheism, Islam and Muslims. Do not waste all those fine services and
hard labors by the creation of mischief, internal disunion and the
carnage of Muslims and do not turn all that reward into guilt and sin,
resulting in fire and punishment. Do not act like that old woman that
tightly wounded several threads together with much labor, and then
unwounded them with even a greater labor.

Talhah! Az- Zubayr! Were we not like brothers who allowed no injustice
and transgression to each other? What has happened now to make you rebel
against me and declare that shedding my blood is legitimate?"

In answer to all this counsel of 'Ali, Talhah said: " 'Ali! Your guilt
is that you roused the people against 'Uthman and unjustly shed his
blood!" 'Ali, in answer, recited this verse: "God will reward each
person according to his deeds." What he meant by this verse was that
punishment will be dealt to the person who has killed 'Uthman, not to
someone else who is unjustly accused. Then 'Ali added: "Talhah! When I
had no part in killing 'Uthman, how can you claim his blood from me? May
God damn those who are guilty of shedding 'Uthman's blood."

Then he turned to az-Zubayr and said: "O az-Zubayr! Do you remember the
day when the Prophet of God passed by me, looked at me, smiled kindly
and I returned his smile? You said: O Prophet of God, Abu Talib's son
does not abstain from ostentation! The Prophet was angry at your words
and told you in reprimand: Be silent, az-Zubayr! 'Ali is far removed
from ostentation. Then he added: az-Zubayr! As you are caviling at 'Ali
today, I swear to God that a day will come when you will fight him
unjustly."

Here az-Zubayr remembered the Prophet's words and feeling penitent, he
said: "If I had remembered these words, I would not have risen against
you. Now even though I have left home with the purpose of fighting you
here, I will abandon this intention. I swear to God that I will no
longer fight you." At-Tabari says: After this conversation 'Ali returned
to his army and said to them: "az-Zubayr has decided not to fight us."
az-Zubayr, too, went to 'A'ishah and said: " 'A'ishah! Since the day I
have known myself, I have taken no step without considering its
consequence, except in this war the result of which is unknown to me and
of the consequence of which lam worried." 'A'ishah said: "az-Zubayr! Say
your last word and explicitly declare your decision."

Az-Zubayr said: "I intend to leave this army to itself and go my own
way." Az-Zubayr's son, who was present, began to reproach his father
severely and said: "Father! Now that you have made the two armies face
each other and when the combat may begin any moment, you are going to
leave them at this critical and dangerous moment and withdraw yourself?
The sight of 'Ali's sword and the enemy's banners carried by valiant
youths must have produced such a fear and anxiety in your heart as to
make you retire from the army." Az-Zubayr answered: " 'Abd Allah! I
swear to God that it is not a question of fear and anxiety. But I have
taken an oath not to fight 'Ali." 'Abd Allah said: "Father, there is an
easy solution. Break your promise and make atonement for it, and then
begin the combat."

Az-Zubayr accepted his son's proposal broke his promises to 'Ali and in
expiation for it freed his slave Makhul, and joined the army once again.
'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Sulayman at-Tamimi has composed a poem about this
story as follows:

"I have never seen a day like this,
For; that man greatly astonished me;
A man who broke his promise,
And freed his slave in expiation of it,
So as to remove from him the sin of perfidy,
But he committed a greater sin with this act.

Another poet, too, of az-Zubayr's army composed the following:

"Az-Zubayr freed his slave Makhul in expiation for his oath so as not
to be perfidious in his faith, But in vain, since with that expiation
the signs of perfidy became more visible on his forehead."

**The fate of az-Zubayr**

I prefer disgrace to the fire of hell. Az-Zubayr Al-Mas'udi writes as
follows:

When the two armies faced each other, 'Ali put down his weapon mounted
the Prophet's personal mule, and proceeded towards 'A'ishah's army and
called forth az-Zubayr. Az-Zubayr put on his battle dress and went
towards 'Ali. When 'A'ishah heard of this matter she felt greatly
worried about az- Zubayr, her sister's husband and commander of her
army, and involuntarily cried out: "Woe for the misfortune of my sister,
Asma', who will become a widow!" They told her not to be uneasy since
'Ali was not armed and had not come forward to fight. 'A'ishah was
relieved to hear this. When az-Zubayr reached 'Ali they embraced and
kissed one another. 'Ali then said: "az-Zubayr! Woe upon you! For what
purpose have you come to this land with this dangerous army? What has
made you raise the banner of opposition to me?" Az-Zubayr answered: "It
is to avenge 'Uthman's blood that has made me resort to this campaign
and war."

'Ali said: "May God destroy him who has had a greater share in
'Uthman's murder. Az-Zubayr! Do you remember the day when the Prophet
said to you? Az-Zubayr! A day will come when you will fight 'Ali."
Az-Zubayr said: "God forgive me! I am penitent of my deed and repent to
you. O God! Pardon my sin! Then he turned to 'Ali and said: God knows
the secret of my heart and is a witness of the truth of my words, that
if I had remembered the Prophet's remark, I would never have resorted to
this uprising, and would not have left my house for war."

'Ali said: "It is not too late yet. You can now withdraw from combat
and return home from here." Az-Zubayr said: "How can I do so and submit
to this great disgrace while the two armies are facing each other, ready
for combat. It is too late; the way is blocked for me to withdraw."

'Ali said: "If you accept this disgrace today, it is far better than to
be involved tomorrow with both disgrace and the burning fire of
abominable hell." Here az-Zubayr was impressed by 'Ali's words and
became penitent of his opposition to 'Ali and decided to retire from
combat, meanwhile murmuring a poem having the following meaning:

"I tolerate disgrace so as to be saved from the abject fire of hell,
How can my weak body resist against burning fires? 'Ali reminded me of a
story that I knew but had forgotten Indeed a war with 'Ali is condemned
by both the religion and the world, And they consider it a great
disgrace. So I said to 'Ali: O Abu al-Hasan! Reproach me no more, for
some of your words Were enough to warn and admonish me?"

Al-Mas'udi continues his narration and says: When 'Abd Allah, son of
az- Zubayr, learnt of his father's decision he said to him: "Father! How
can you leave us at such a critical moment, and take to flight?"
Az-Zubayr said: "My son! 'Ali reminded of a story, which I had forgotten
and that story has dissuaded me from combat." 'Abd Allah said: "No
father, what you said is only an excuse. You are really frightened by
the sharp swords and long spears in the hands of valiant young warriors
of the enemy, making you withdraw from the combat!" Az-Zubayr said: "May
God make such a son as you abject for bringing misery and destruction
upon his father and trying to disgrace him."104 The above answer is
quoted by Ibn A'tham, but according to al-Mas'udi az- Zubayr answered
'Abd Allah as follows:

" 'Abd Allah! You are wrong in your supposition. Fear can never prevent
me from fighting. But today I was reminded of a story, which I had
forgotten with the passage of time. That story admonished and checked me
from fighting 'Ali. Thus I preferred the disgrace of withdrawal from war
to the fire of hell, and so I retired from combat. But my son! Now that
you consider me a coward, I will remove this stain on my character with
a sword and spear. Saying this, he took his spear and rushed swiftly
upon the right wing of 'Ali's army. When 'Ali noticed this angry assault
of az-Zubayr, he ordered his soldier to give him respite and abstain
from injuring him since he was so roused to anger that he did not behave
normally. Az-Zubayr again rushed upon the left win of 'Ali's army, and
then made a violent attack upon the center." Then he cried out:

"How can a person who shows such courage in daringly approaching the
enemy's army be afraid?" Az-Zubayr then retired and proceeded towards a
desert, which was called Wadi as-Saba'. A man said to al-Ahnaf ibn Qays
at-Tamimi who had left Basra to be neutral and had stayed in that
desert: "Look! That is az-Zubayr!" al-Ahnaf said: "I have nothing to do
with az-Zubayr He has created a dispute between two groups of Muslims
and produced war and bloodshed, and now he is safely passing through the
desert and returning to his home and life. Let him go!" At that spot
az-Zubayr dismounted form his horse to perform prayer. At this time a
man named 'Amr ibn Jarmuz105 rushed upon him from behind and killed 104.
History of Ibn A'tham, al-Mas'udi, Description of Nahj al-balaghah by
Ibn Abi al-Hadid 2/170.

105. al-Mas'udi and Abu Mikhnaf narrate that when 'Amr ibn Jarmuz
killed az-Zubayr, he picked up his sword in the hope of a reward and
took it to 'Ali. When 'Ali heard the account, he said: "By God, the son
of Safiyah was not a mean coward, but a blunder caused his destruction
today and produced his misery and fall." Then he held az-Zubayr's sword
and, waving it, said: "O what sorrows this sword has removed from the
Prophet's heart, and how bravely it defended his holy him. Thus the life
of the first commander of 'A'ishah's army was brought to an end, and
from that moment onwards Talhah acted as commander of that army.106

**The fate of Talhah**

Truly 'Uthman's blood is on Talhah's hands.

Marwan Ibn 'Asakir says: Before the commencement of the battle 'Ali
called forth Talhah and said: "O Talhah I ask you in the name of God,
have you not heard the Prophet say: Whoever considers me as his lord
should regard 'Ali as his lord, too? O God! Regard 'Ali's friends as
your friends and his enemies as your enemies."

Talhah said: "Yes I have heard it and remember it clearly." 'Ali said:
"And yet strangely enough you fight me?" at-Tabari writes about this
matter: Before beginning the battle 'Ali met Talhah and said to him: "O
Talhah you are a man who has left his wife at home and brought out the
Prophet's consort to the battlefield and have violated your pact with
me."

Against these protests Talhah only said: "I did not willingly swear
allegiance to you. It was force and the sword that compelled me to do
so." Ibn 'Asakir and adh-Dhahabi write: Abu Raja' says: "I saw Talhah
riding a horse amidst his soldiers and shouting O people be silent and
listen to me. But despite his shouts the noise of the crowd did not die
down. Talhah was vexed at the people's indifference and said: Fie to
these wolfish people who are the flies of hell-fire."

abode!" Ibn Jarmuz said: "O 'Ali! I have killed az-Zubayr, your most
obstinate enemy, and you should honour me with a reward." 'Ali said:
"Ibn Jarmuz I have heard the Prophet say that az-- Zubayr's killer will
burn in the fire." Ibn Jarmuz left 'Ali's presence in disappointment and
composed a poem which he kept on reciting, as follows:

"I cut off az-Zubayr's head and brought it to 'Ali
To win his favour and satisfaction.
But contrary to my expectation he spoke
To me of the burning fire of hell
O! What a perilous promise and
What an ill-omened reward!
Whereas killing or-Zubayr seemed to me
Like a wind broken by a goat!"
106. On az-Zubayr from: at-Tabari 5/199 and 204, al-Aghani 16/126, Abu
Mikhnaf quoting Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/78,
History of Ibn A'tham, Muruj adh-dhahab, Tahdhib at-tahdhib of Ibn
'Asakir 5/364, al-Isti'ab 203 Usd al-ghabah 2/199, History of Ibn al-
Athir 3/94-95, al-'Iqd al-farid 4/322-323, al-Mustadrak 3/366-367, Kanz
al-'ummal 6/82-85, an- Nubala' of adh-Dhahabi 1/38-39, al-Ya'qubi 2/158,
al-Isabah 1/527, Biography No. 2789.

It is stated in the history of Ibn A'tham that Talhah addressed his
army and exclaimed loudly: "O servants of God! Be patient and show
perseverance, since patience and victory are two old friends. Victory is
won by those who show fortitude and steadfastness and they receive the
reward of tolerating hardships." Abu Mikhnaf writes Jundab ibn 'Abd
Allah as saying: "In the battle of al- Jamal, I saw Talhah and his
followers fighting 'Ali, but they were badly wounded and retreated. His
soldiers scattered and fled. He was more wounded than others, and
lifting his sword, he shouted: O servants of God! Be steadfast and
patient. Victory depends on it, and you will receive its reward."

**How Talhah was killed**

al-Ya'qubi, Ibn 'Asakir, Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr in
al-Isti'ab, Ibn al-Athir in al-Kamil and Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani narrate:
When the two armies of 'Ali and Talhah were engaged in fighting, Marwan
who was a commander in Talhah's army said: "If I do not use this
opportunity today to avenge 'Uthman's blood; when can I get another
chance for it?" Saying this, he shot an arrow, which hit Talhah's knee
and cut a vein and he bled so profusely that he collapsed and died, thus
putting an end to his adventurous life. Ibn Sa'd says in Tabaqat: Talhah
himself realized that the mortal wound had been inflicted on him by one
of his own supporters, and in his dying moments he said: "I swear to God
that the arrow, which vanquished me was not sent by 'Ali's army."
Concerning Talhah's death al-Mas'udi writes: During the combat at a
moment when Marwan found Talhah careless of himself, he thought of
avenging 'Uthman. So he exclaimed: "By God it makes no difference
whether I shoot at 'Ali's or Talhah's army." Then he shot at his friend,
Talhah, cutting the vein of his arm and he died as a result of profuse
bleeding.

Ibn Sa'd describes the incident as follows: Marwan noticed a chink in
Talhah's mail as he was among his horsemen, and with a sure aim he shot
an arrow at that target and thus he killed Talhah. Some historians say:
Marwan observed Talhah amidst the army in a critical position and said:
"By God this man was the most obstinate enemy of 'Uthman, and as I have
come to avenge 'Uthman's blood, what would be better then killing his
assassin, and leaving alone all those who are unjustly accused of his
murder. He then shot an arrow at Talhah and killed him."

Al-Mustadrak of al-Hakim, History of Ibn 'Asakir and Usd al-ghabah
write: After killing Talhah, Marwan turned to Aban, son of 'Uthman, and
said: "Aban, I have punished one of your father's assassins for his deed
and have cooled your burning heart."

Ibn A'tham gives more details about Talhah's death and says: During the
combat Marwan said to his slave: "I am surprised that this Talhah was
one day the staunchest enemy of 'Uthman and incited the people to kill
him and spared no effort in this way until he shed his blood. But today
he has risen to avenge his blood and has joined the rank of 'Uthman's
friends and sons! I intend to kill this capricious and hypocritical man
and deliver the Muslims from his wickedness and remove his ill-omened
shadow from over these unfortunate people. You boy, must stand before me
so that I can watch him from behind. If you play your part well, I shall
be pleased and will set you free as a reward for this service."

The slave, who longed to be freed, did as he was told acting like a
shield for Marwan's ambush, and at a suitable moment Marwan shot a
poisoned arrow at Talhah and split his thigh.

Historians say: When Talhah found himself unable to do anything for his
mortal wound, he said to his slave: "You can at least carry me to the
shelter of a tree to relieve me from this intense heat of the sun." The
slave said: "O master! There is no tree in this desert nor a shelter
where can I carry you to? Now Talhah said sadly: No one in the Quraysh
tribe has been as unfortunate as me. Alas! My blood is wasted, and my
killer is unknown! O God! Where did this burning arrow come from? Who
brought down this misery and death upon me? This arrow was not sent by
the enemy. What can I do? This was my destiny!"

al-Mada'ini says: After Marwan's arrow hit the target and knocked
Talhah down, Talhah withdrew from the battlefield and found a quiet and
safe place to rest, whenever the soldiers of 'Ali's army approached, he
asked for mercy and imploringly said: "I am Talhah and am under your
asylum. Is there not a chivalrous man amongst you to show me clemency
and save me from death?" al-Hasan al-Basri, referring to Talhah's
request for mercy, says that he had no need for it, since he was
included in a general amnesty and before the commencement of the battle
'Ali had ordered his soldiers not to kill the wounded.

Historians say that after Talhah was killed by his friend Marwan, his
body was buried in Sabkhah, one of the squares of Basra.

Ibn 'Abd Rabbih, Ibn 'Abd al-Barr and adh-Dhahabi say: Talhah was the
first man of 'A'ishah's army to be killed who had acted as commander of
that army after az-Zubayr's retirement. Thus the second commander met
his death, but his death produced no fear in the warriors of 'A'ishah,
since the banner of this army was in fact the camel, which carried
'A'ishah's litter and went ahead of the army. Thus with Talhah's death
the attention was drawn to the camel and the warriors surrounded it and
fought as violently as before.107 107. at-Tabari 5/204, al-Ya'qubi
2/158, Ibn A'tham, Tahdhib, History of Ibn 'Asakir 7/84-87, al- Isti'ab
207-208, al-Isabah 2/222, Biography No. 4266, al-'Iqd al-farid 4/321,
Abu Mikhnaf, al- Mada'ini quoting Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj
al-balaghah 2/421.


