The Combat of 'abd Allah and Al-ashtar
======================================

Woe upon Asma' who will mourn for her son!

At-Tabari quotes 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr saying: In the battle of
al-Jamal I received thirty-seven sword and spear wounds. Although on
that day our army resembled a black mountain in number and seemed
invincible, yet we suffered such a defeat and rout the like of which I
know in no war. He adds: In that battle as soon as someone took the
bridle of 'A'ishah's camel, he was killed. Although I had received
thirty-seven wounds, I had to take her camel's bridle; and when she
asked who I was, I told her I was 'Abd Allah son of az-Zubayr. As
'A'ishah knew that anyone who took the bridle, would not have a safe
125. History of at-Tabari 5/295.

126. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/261, printed Egypt, Futuh of Ibn
A'tham. Naba Cultural Organization

escape, she cried out involuntarily: "Woe upon my sister Asma' who will
sit mourning for her son!" 'Abd Allah says: At this moment my glance
fell upon Malik al-Ashtar. I recognized him and came into grips with
him. Both of us fell down, and then I shouted: "O people! Kill Malik!
Kill him even if it would mean my death, too!" On hearing my voice, a
number of men from both armies gathered around and each group tried to
defend its mates. They were engaged in fighting when al-Ashtar and I
separated, but there was such a confusion that I could not get hold of
the bridle again.

Al-Waqidi, too, describes the fight between 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr
and Malik al-Ashtar as follows: 'Abd Allah entered the field and
standing opposite 'Ali's army he challenged a fighter. Malik al-Ashtar
stepped forth from 'Ali's army and when these two champions faced one
another, 'A'ishah asked her attendants who was going to fight 'Abd
Allah. They told her it was al-Ashtar.

On hearing that name she twisted with pain and cried out: "Woe upon
Asma'!" A terrible combat followed between these two valiant and strong
warriors, inflicting on each other many wounds with their swords until
they could use their swords no more, and so they grappled with each
other. Although Malik was older and in state of hunger (since in war he
had eaten nothing for three consecutive days) yet he knocked down 'Abd
Allah and sat on his chest. At this moment the ranks of both armies
broke, and 'Abd Allah's friends rushed to help him, and Malik's
supporters hastened to the aid of Malik. 'Abd Allah kept on shouting: "O
people! Kill Malik even if I may be killed with his death." But the
battlefield was in such a state of chaos and confusion that the fighters
could not recognize each other, so after a rather long struggle 'Abd
Allah freed himself from the clutches of Malik al-Ashtar and without
continuing the combat retired from field.

The author of al-'Iqd al-farid quotes 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr at the
end of that story, saying: "Malik seized and threw me into a pit and
said: 'Abd Allah, if it were not for your kinship with the Prophet, I
would cut you to pieces."127 At-Tabari, quoting 'Alqamah, says: One day
I said to Malik al-Ashtar: "How was it that you who did not like
'Uthman's murder, took part in killing thousands of people in the battle
of al-Jamal?" He answered: "As 'A'ishah's forces broke their pact with
'Ali after swearing allegiance to him, that perfidy and opposition to
'Ali aroused me to this combat. But Ibn az-Zubayr's guilt was greater
than that of others since he incited 'A'ishah to fight 'Ali and also
made his father rebel against 'Ali at a time when both 'A'ishah and
az-Zubayr intended to abandon fighting. But Ibn az-Zubayr persuaded them
to continue the combat. So I prayed to God to let me seize him and
punish him for his deed, and God, too, fulfilled my wish. When I came
across him in the heat of the 127. az-Zubayr was the son of Safiyah, the
Prophet's aunt, and thus Ibn az-Zubayr was his close relative and it was
for this reason that Malik did not kill 'Abd Allah.

battle, I took the opportunity and by standing up on the stirrup of my
horse I dealt him a heavy blow of my sword and knocked him down."

One day 'Alqamah asked Malik: Was it 'Abd Allah who cried out in the
battle of al-Jamal: "Kill Malik even though I be killed with his death?"
Malik answered: "He did not utter these sentences since I did not kill
'Abd Allah, and gave him only one stroke of the sword; for, there was
something in my mind which roused my affection for him and caused me to
abstain from killing him." Then Malik added: "It was for 'Abd ar-Rahman
ibn 'Attab who uttered that sentence about killing both him and Malik,
even if Malik's death meant his death, too. But there was such a
confusion reigning over the battlefield that 'Abd Allah's friends did
not recognize me, otherwise they would have killed me."

At-Tabari says in the battle of al-Jamal 'Abd Allah received many
injuries and threw himself among the dead soldiers. They found him after
the combat ended and treated him for his wounds. Although 'Abd Allah was
not killed in the battle of al-Jamal, yet owing to his many injuries and
wounds he was deprived of the power if fighting, and thus after Talhah
and az-Zubayr the third commander of 'A'ishah's army, too, was
vanquished. But their overthrow did not break the resistance of
'A'ishah's army and did not put an end to fighting and bloodshed. For,
in this battle all the attention centered on 'A'ishah's camel and much
blood was shed at its side, since many soldiers were killed around it,
and in front of this same camel the heads of many champions and warriors
of Basra fell to the ground like autumn leaves.

As long as that camel was on its feet and moved on, fighting continued,
but with the fall of the camel. the combat, too, came to an end.128 The
battle at its height O victorious army! Kill the enemy! 'A'ishah's army
O Avengers of 'Uthman's blood, rise up! 'A'ishah's army

At-Tabari says: The right wing of 'Ali's army attacked the left wing of
'A'ishah's army and a hard combat took place. 'A'ishah's forces, most of
whom were of the al-Azd and Dabbah tribes, retreated and took refuge
with 'A'ishah and gathered around her litter.129 128. History of
at-Tabari 5/210-211 and 204, Description of Nahj al-balaghah 871,
al-Kamil of Ibn al-Athir 3/99, al-'Iqd al-farid 4/326 (published by
Li-jant at-ta'lif), History of Ibn A'tham, Muruj adh-dhahab.

129. History of at-Tabari 5/207.

Abu Mikhnaf says: 'Ali ordered Malik al-Ashtar to attack the enemy's
left wing, and Malik carried out the order. The ranks of both armies
broke, and 'A'ishah's soldiers retreated towards 'A'ishah's position.
After this defeat of the left wing, all the men of the Dabbah, al-Azd,
'Adi, Najiyah, Bahilah and the others turned towards 'A'ishah's camel
and surrounded it to protect it. It was then that the assaults of 'Ali's
army naturally turned to this point where the combat became intense,
resulting in the final defeat of 'A'ishah's army.130 Al-Mada'ini and
al-Waqidi, two famous historians, write:

The lines and ranks of 'A'ishah's army broke with the severe assaults
of 'Ali's forces, and 'A'ishah's soldiers gathered around her camel and
litter. The men of the al-Azd and Dabbah tribes in particular who formed
her main army fought most valiantly. They became the main target of the
assaults of 'Ali's army and were besieged within a small circle, the
axis of which was 'A'ishah's camel: In this attack 'A'ishah's men
offered a strong defense, resulting in a bloody combat, in which many
heads and hands were cut off, and many bellies were ripped open. And yet
these two tribes swarmed around the camel and fought so stubbornly that,
despite this heavy fighting, they did not show the slightest fear, nor
was their determination shaken in the least. They acted like an iron
wall around 'A'ishah and the camel, and defended them with all their
strength.

At last 'Ali's voice rose loudly and, addressing his army, he said:
"Woe upon you! Overthrow their banner and cut off the camel's tendon. It
is this devilish camel which has gathered these miserable people around
itself So long as that camel is on its feet, bloodshed will continue and
none will remain alive! Be quick, and cut the camel's tendon to end all
this killing!"

With 'Ali's order the swords were raised higher to attack the center of
the circle, and at last the ill-omened camel was thrown down.

Historians say the circle of fighting became narrower and the combat
was continued around 'A'ishah's camel: The fighters circled so swiftly
around it so that they resembled a millstone. The armies deep in number
kept on attacking each other, and there echoed the noise and shouts of
the people and above all the roar of camel Hattat Majashi'i shouted: "O
people! Defend your mother! Defend 'A'ishah! Take care of your mother!
Your mother is in great danger now." There was such a fright and panic
around the camel that in this chaotic mingling of the crowd each person
killed another without knowing him. 'Ali's men made repeated assaults
and with every assault the people scattered, but again others filled
their place. At last 'Ali cried out: "O people! Shoot the camel and kill
that damned animal!" Upon this order many arrows were shot at it and its
whole body was covered with them. But as its body had been protected
with felt and wood and chain mail, the camel was not hurt, and the
arrows penetrated the covers only, so the animal looked like a
porcupine. 130. Ibn Abi al-Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah
2/88.

**The slogans of the two armies**

When 'A'ishah's followers realized the danger and saw their own defeat
and 'Ali's victory, instead of reciting poems and war songs they began
to shout the slogan of "O avengers of 'Uthman's blood! Rise up!"
'A'ishah's whole army adopted this slogan and in one voice they cried it
again and again. Meanwhile 'Ali's followers started crying the slogan of
"O Muhammad" but 'Ali ordered them to change the slogan into "Ya Mansur!
Amit131 instead of "O Muhammad" and the whole army adapted this
praise.132

**The end of the War**

Woe upon you! Cut off the tendon of this devilish camel! A soldier of
'A'ishah's army narrates: "In the battle of al-Jamal a severe defeat and
an unprecedented rout were inflicted on us, while 'A'ishah was in her
litter and her camel looked like a porcupine on account of the number of
arrows shot at it by the enemy."133

Abu Mikhnaf says in this connection: Not only was the camel covered
with arrows, but 'A'ishah's litter, too, became their target and it
looked like another porcupine. When 'Ali noticed that 'A'ishah's camel
had become the axis of the combat and much blood was shed at that point
and many arms were cut off, he ordered Malik al-Ashtar to go and bring
down that ill-omened camel. For, the people had made it a qibla for
themselves and revolved round it as the Ka'bah, and as long as the camel
was on its feet, the battle would not end, and so long as it was alive
everyone would offer his blood and life.134

At-Tabari says: 'Ali shouted from amidst the army: "O people! Direct
your assault towards the camel and bring it down." On his order one of
his men penetrated the enemy ranks and reached the camel and dealt it
several strokes of the sword. The camel roared so loudly and fearfully
that the like of which no one had heard before. Abu Mikhnaf says in this
connection: When 'Ali noticed that all the fighting and bloodshed
centered around the camel only and so long as the camel was alive,
fighting would continue, he ordered his men to attack the camel. At that
moment the camel's bridle was held by the men of the Dabbah tribe. So
a

131. This was a slogan used in the same wars by the Muslims by the
order of the Prophet. It consisted of two phrases: "Ya Mansur" meaning
"O you who are under the protection of God!" and "Amit" means "Kill". So
the two phrases mean as a whole: "You who are aided by God (and are thus
in the right) kill (the unjust and tyrannical enemy)!" (Persian
translator)

132. Ibn Hadid's Description of Nahj al-balaghah 1/87

133. History of at-Tabari 5/218.

134. Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/81.

bloody clash took place between them and 'Ali's soldiers, with the
result that many men of that tribe were killed. 'Ali followed by a group
of his an-Nakha'i and Hamdani men made more violent assaults upon that
central point and scattered the enemy. At that moment he turned to one
of his men called "Bujayr" of the an-Nakha'i tribe and said: "Bujayr!
Now the camel is within your reach. Deal with it!" Bujayr at once
brought down his sword on the camel's thigh.

The camel let out a deep and painful roar and collapsed on its chest.
With the fall of the camel, the warriors fled and scattered in every
direction like a swarm of locusts, 'Ali shouted: "Cut down the ropes
attached to the litter and take it away from the camel." The men did so
and carried the litter to one side. Then by 'Ali's order the camel was
killed, and its carrion was burnt, and the ashes were scattered in the
wind.

As this order seemed strange to the people, Imam 'Ali, relying on the
Book of God in support of his order, uttered the following words: "O
people! This camel was an ill-omened and mischievous animal, resembling
the calf of the Banu Isra'il, causing dispersion and misfortune among
the Muslims, in the same way that the calf did among the children of
Israel, So Moses gave the order to burn that calf and throw its ashes
into the sea." Then the Imam recited the following verse of the Qur'an
quoting the words of Moses:

"And look at your god to whose worship you kept so long; we will
certainly burn it, then we will certainly scatter it a wide scattering
in the sea."135 Indeed the root of mischief should be pulled out and
burnt.136 A few words with 'A'ishah 'A'ishah! I am most hostile kin of
yours.

**Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr ('A'ishah's brother)**

Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr speaks with 'A'ishah With the defeat of
'A'ishah's army the battle of al-Jamal and the war came to an end. Then
'Ali sent Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr to his sister 'A'ishah, to set up a tent
for her and console her and find out whether she had received any injury
in the battle. Muhammad carried out the order and on reaching her litter
he put his head inside it. 'A'ishah asked: "Who are you?" Muhammad said:
"The closest and 135. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter Ta Ha, Verse 97.

136. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter Ta Ha, Verse 97.

yet at the same time the most hostile kin of yours!" 'A'ishah asked:
"Are you the son of the al-Khath'amiyah woman?137 Muhammad said: "Yes."
'A'ishah said: "May my father and mother be sacrificed for you. I thank
God that you have come safely out of the war." Al-Mas'udi says: 'A'ishah
asked his name and he said: "I am Muhammad, the same Muhammad who is the
nearest of your kins and the most hostile of them to you!" Then he
added:" 'A'ishah! 'Ali offers you his consolation and asks whether you
have received any injury in the battle." 'A'ishah answered: "I was
struck only by one arrow, but it was not mortal."

**'Ali speaks with 'A'ishah**

'Ali moves towards 'A'ishah's tent after Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and
stood there by the litter which was near the tent and pointing with a
stick to it, he said: "O Humayra'! Had the Prophet of God ordered you to
start this sedition and shed the blood of the Muslims? Had your husband
not instructed you not to leave your house? 'A'ishah! Those who have
brought you here have been unfair to the Prophet, They have made their
own women to stay at home, but they have taken you to the battlefield
who has been the Prophet's wife and honour and one of the exalted women
of Islam."

At-Tabari says in this connection: Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr took his
sister 'A'ishah to one side away from the army and pitched a tent for
her, 'Ali came and stood behind the tent and spoke a few words with her,
saying: " 'A'ishah! You incited the people to rise against me, and sowed
the seeds of enmity with me in their hearts until they started riots and
bloodshed." 'A'ishah remained silent, for, she had no answer to give.
She uttered only the following sentence: "O 'Ali! Now that you have
defeated us and found power and authority, it is better to forgive."

**'Ammar speaks with 'A'ishah**

At-Tabari and Ibn al-Athir say: When the war ended, 'Ammar met 'A'ishah
and said: " 'A'ishah! You were far removed from God's order! You opposed
Him in Leaving your house contrary to your pact with the Prophet, and in
coming to the battlefield, What a difference between the corner of the
house and a battlefield!" 'A'ishah asked: "Are you Abu al-Yaqzan who is
so outspoken to me?" He said: "Yes." 'A'ishah said: "Indeed, since you
have known yourself, you have uttered nothing but the truth!" 'Ammar
said: "God be praised for helping you to utter a truth in my
favour!"138

137. What 'A'ishah meant by al-Khath'amiyah is Asma' who was of the
al-Khath'am tribe, and one of the wives of Abu Bakr and mother of
Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, and so she was 'A'ishah's step- mother.

138. History of at-Tabari 5/225-226, al-Kamil of Ibn al-Athir 3/102.

**Pardon after victory**

We respect them because of the word of monotheism, which they utter.

**General amnesty**

'Ali's army was victorious and completely dominated the enemy's forces,
which were routed and took to flight. At that time, 'Ali gave the order
to have again recited to his soldiers the text of his order and charter,
which had been read to them before. The public-crier read out the
following proclamation to the people in the field of battle: "O people!
Do not kill the enemy's wounded; do not pursue the fugitives; do not
reproach the repentant. When an enemy soldier lays down his arms, he is
placed under grace, and secure with his life, and he must not be
hurt."

Here 'Ali ordered to have added a very concise, comprehensive and
humane sentence to the charter and to be announced to the people, namely
that all the fighters of the enemy army, whether black or white, and
whether men or women are secure and no one has the right to molest them.
Thus with this brief sentence 'Ali set everyone free and guaranteed a
general amnesty, thereby showing his nobility of character and giving
the benefit of it to all.

The author of Kanz al-'ummal says: When the battle ended the same
charter was, by 'Ali's order, recited to the army for the second time,
but this time some sentences were added to it, namely: "O People! You
have no legitimate right to encroach upon the honour and property of the
enemy. You can only seize from them the things that they have brought to
the battlefield to fight. You must leave the rest of their property for
themselves and their heirs. Outside the battlefield do not take anyone
of the enemy as captive, and do not plunder their wealth and property.
Their property must be divided in accordance with the verdict of the
Qur'an among their children and heirs."

Again by 'Ali's order it was declared to the army not to marry the
enemy's women who had lost their husbands in the war unless they allowed
the lapse of four months and ten days, like other Muslims, in
consideration for their lost husbands. Then they are free to marry them.
'Ali's purpose was that after the war the enemy should be treated like
other Muslims and they should be dealt with according to Islamic
verdicts, since 'Ali considered them to be different from infidels and
heathens in whose case a different verdict was applicable.

**The people's protest and 'Ali's answer**

The method adopted by 'Ali towards the treatment of the enemy after the
war was met with protest by a group in his own army. They came to him in
protest, saying: "O 'Ali! Yesterday you told us to regard shedding the
blood of these people legitimate, but today you forbid us from seizing
their women and property!" In answer to them 'Ali said: "The Islamic
verdict about those who believe in the equal and those who believe in
the words about God's uniqueness and express their faith in Islam is the
verdict of which I have carried out about them."

But some of these objectors were not satisfied with the above answer
and continued their opposition. In order to convince them 'Ali said: "O
people! Now that you insist on treating the enemy like heathens and
infidels, let us draw lots for 'A'ishah who was the chief and commander
of this army, so that the person who wins the lot may carry her away and
keep her a slave like other infidel women."

Here the objectors realized the purpose of 'Ali's order and regretted
and repented their protests. In this way 'Ali silenced them by means of
reasoning and by reliance on their conscience. But to clarify the matter
further, he offered another argument and said: "As the people in
'A'ishah's army seem to worship God and testify to the uniqueness of
God, I respect them for the sake of that belief and that word of
testimony to God's uniqueness and I will treat them like Muslims, and
regard their children as the heirs of their father."

The author of Kanz al-'ummal narrates this story as follows: After the
war ended, 'Ali delivered a sermon to his army, and then 'Ammar ibn
Yasir rose and said: "O Amir al-Mu'minin! The people have some protests
to you about the enemy's property and claim that in fighting any people
or nation and winning victory, they can seize their property as spoils
of war and take their women and children as captives."139 Before 'Ali
could answer 'Ammar ibn Yasir, one of the army men, named 'Ibad Ibn Qays
who was of the house of Bakr ibn Wa'il and was a well-spoken and
eloquent man, rose and, addressing 'Ali, said: "O commander of the
faithful! I swear to God that you did not truly observe equality and
fairness in dividing the property of the Basra people."

'Ali answered: "Woe upon you! How can you say that I have not treated
you fairly and equally?"

The man said: "Because you forbade us from seizing any property of the
Basra people except what we had secured in the field of battle, and you
also forbade us from seizing their women and children." In order to
convince all the protesters, 'Ali addressed 'Ibad Ibn Qays and 139. This
was the custom of pagan times Abu Bakr, the first caliph, too, followed
the same custom and treated those who refused allegiance to him in the
same manner. Refer to the book of 'Abd Allah ibn Saba', Vol. 2, Chapter
One. Similarly Abu Bakr fought those Muslims, who refused to pay the
religious tax of tithe, and issued the verdict of infidels about them,
and divided their property among his army. Those precedents led the
Muslims after the battle of al-Jamal to make the mistake of protesting
against the humane and Islamic ways of Imam 'Ali.

said: "Bakri brother! Are you unfamiliar with the laws of Islam? Do you
not have fathers? We cannot on the pretext that their fathers fought us,
take their children as captives and make them our slaves.

As for the enemy's wealth and women, the property that these people
possess was gained by them at a time when they were not at war with us
and not hostile to us, and when they were Muslims. And the day they
chose the women as their wives, their marriage was affected in
accordance with the command of God and the Islamic ways. As for their
children, they have been born Muslims. Therefore, in view of these
explanations the verdict of Islam about their property, women and
children is exactly what I have declared to you.

Out of their property you can only keep as spoils what you have secured
in the field of battle and in their camps, and confine yourselves and to
their children. If someone engages in war and opposition to us, we
punish only him, and do not attribute his guilt to anyone else, and do
not even consider his children liable to reproof and punishment, Bakri
brother!

I have followed the step of the Prophet of God, and as to the people of
Basra and those who have rebelled against me and started bloodshed and
fratricide, I have adopted the way which was chosen by the Prophet on
the day of the capture of Mecca towards the people of that city. He
restored the property of the Meccan people with the exception of that
which had been seized as spoils of war from the enemy army." 'Ali then
added: "Bakri brother! Do you not know that Dar al-Harb (House of War)
which means the city that is the residence of infidels, and Dar
al-Hijrat (House of migration) which is the dwelling place of the
Muslims are greatly different from each other from the viewpoint of
Islamic laws? For, in Dar al-Harb in the time of war with infidels
whatever is seized of their property, belongs to the Muslims altogether,
whereas in Dar al-Hijrat in the time of war with monotheists or with
those who testify to God's uniqueness, all their property belongs to
themselves except that which is seized in the battlefield.

May God bless you! Be tranquil and avoid the way of protest and
opposition, and insist not on taking 'A'ishah's soldiers as captive,
otherwise you will have to answer one question of mine, namely, which of
you is willing to have 'A'ishah as his share of war prisoners and carry
her to his house as a captive and slave?"

When 'Ali uttered the last sentence there rose uproar from the army,
all of them crying out: "O 'Ali! None of us would wish to do so, and
none will dare to commit such insolence to the Prophet of God as to take
his consort as a slave. O commander of the faithful! You are proceeding
on the right path in your action. It is we who have been guilty of error
in our protest to you. O 'Ali! Your action based on knowledge, and our
objection was due to ignorance. Now we repent our guilt and are penitent
of our protests. May God lead us to welfare and happiness through
you?"

'Ammar ibn Yasir stood up for the second time and, addressing the
soldiers, said: "O people! Follow 'Ali and carry out his order! I swear
to God that he adopts the way of the Prophet in all matters and never
deviates from his course and conduct. 'Ali proceeds the same way which
was taken by the Prophet of God and the Prophet has entrusted him with
all the Muslims' affairs and granted him the power of acting as judge
amidst the people. He introduced him as Aaron son of Imran who acted as
deputy for Moses. He said: O 'Ali! In relation to me you are like Aaron
in relation to Moses, with this difference that after me no other
Prophet will be ordained. O people! This is a great distinction, which
belongs to 'Ali only!"

'Ammar's words ended here, and once more 'Ali began to speak and,
addressing the people, he said: "Obey what I told you and carry Out my
order, for, if you do so, I will lead you with the aid of God to the
right path, eternal happiness and heavens, even though in this course we
will be faced with hardships, bitterness and failures.

As for 'A'ishah, her inner complexes towards me roused her to hurt me,
whereas she would not treat others in that way. Nevertheless now I show
her respect and goodness as I have done in the past and leave her to God
for him to deal with her good and bad deeds.

It is God who decides to punish everyone for his guilt and sin or to
pardon him." At this point the followers of the Imam exclaimed: "Your
are in the right." And they became penitent for their vain protests to
him, and after long arguments about this matter, at last they confirmed
the Imam's view and in obedience to his order and in apology they said:
"O commander of the faithful! We swear to God that all you said about
the division of the property of the enemy's army has been the Verdict of
God, and our protest to your just decision was due to our ignorance. How
fortunate it was that in our protest we did not resort to improper words
that might hurt your feelings said nothing contrary to your
satisfaction!"

Ibn Yasaf who was of 'Ali's army and a man of talent and eloquence,
composed a poem about this matter the translation of which in prose is
as follows:

"O people! The view you expressed about the people of Basra was based
on ignorance, and your opinion was wrong for, the consort of the Prophet
of God cannot take the form of spoils of war, nor could she be made a
slave in a house like other war captives, since such an action is far
removed from conscience and has its source in shortsightedness and
mental deviation. Therefore today you must accept what 'Ali says and
abandon secret talks and hidden protests and whispers. Act upon 'Ali's
view and order, and do not plunder the enemy's property in their houses
nor take possession of it. But what is legitimate for you to keep as
spoils of war, are military weapons, clothes, quadrupeds and other
commodities that you have secured from the enemy in the field of battle,
and you must be satisfied with this legitimate share of the spoils.

O people! 'A'ishah is your mother, too, even though her sins are
greater and her blunders plentiful. She must be respected for the sake
of the Prophet of God, and it is our duty to show respect to her and
preserve her honour and prestige."140

**Why 'Ali fought Talhah and az-Zubayr**

I was afraid that Talhah and az-Zubayr might enslave the servants of
God. Imam 'Ali After Ibn Yasaf finished his recitation of the poem, a
man stood up from among the soldiers and asked why 'Ali had decided to
fight Talhah and az- Zubayr.

'Ali answered: "I decided to fight them because they violated their
allegiance to me and killed the good and innocent servants of God. They
unjustly shed the blood of Hakim ibn Jabalah and the guards of Basra and
the sentinels of the treasury. How it is possible that a group should
stubbornly and unjustly shed the blood of innocent people and their
leader should not rise to defend them? The way I adopted with Talhah and
az-Zubayr is not confined to me; for, if they had resorted to such a
perfidy, riot and bloodshed in the time of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, they,
too, would have risen in defense and fought them.

O people! Even now there are some companions of the Prophet amongst
this crowd to testify to the truth that, whoever refused allegiance to
Abu Bakr, he and 'Umar both threatened him with the sword and brought
him under their allegiance, and forced him again to obey the government
of the time. During the time of the first caliph some people refused
allegiance to him and continued to do so even after the Ansar swear
allegiance, but very soon pressure was exerted upon them and they were
compelled to obey, and although that allegiance was not based on
willingness, they respected their pact, and continued to respect it
right to the end. But what choice had I? Talhah and az-Zubayr freely and
willingly swore allegiance to me. And yet they violated their pact soon
after.

They desired the emirate of Basra and Yemen, but when I realized their
intense desire for these posts, I abstained from agreeing to their
appointment as governor of those cities. Moreover, their hearts were
filled with the love of 140. The sources of this chapter are as follows:
History of al-Ya'qubi: Kanz al-'ummal 6/83-85, Tradition 1302, 1305,
1306, 1307, 1316. Kanz al-'ummal 8/215 to 217, Selections of Kanz 6/15
and 331, Description of Nahj al-balaghah of Ibn Abi al-Hadid 1/63.

wealth and excess, and they coveted Muslim's property, and intended to
enslave their men and women and plunder their wealth. Experience had
proved al this to me and made me fight them and cut their hands from the
life and property of the Muslims and liberate the Muslims from their
corruption and wickedness." Then 'Ali addressed the people of Basra and
reproached them for their ugly and hypocritical deeds and said: "O
people! You were the soldiers and followers of a tongue-tied animal who
began your riots with his voice and intensified your assaults. When that
animal lost his voice and rolled down on the ground, you took to your
heels and fled from the battlefield."

**'A'ishah returns to Medina**

'A'ishah! 'Ali's order is that you should return to your city. Ibn
'Abbas The war ended and general amnesty was declared, and the spoils of
war which had been seized from the enemy in the field of battle, were
divided amongst 'Ali's army. Arguments came to an end, noise and murmurs
died down, and conditions returned to normal. Then 'Ali summoned his
cousin, 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas, and said to him: " 'Abd Allah! Go to
'A'ishah and speak to her secure her satisfaction and make her return to
her city." Ibn 'Abbas says: "I went to 'A'ishah and asked permission to
enter to deliver 'Ali's message. She would not admit me, so I entered
her tent without permission, and placed a mat in a corner and sat
down."

'A'ishah said: "Ibn 'Abbas, I swear to God that I have seen none like
you to ignore the orders of the Prophet as you do. You have entered our
abode without permission and have sat down on our mat without our
leave." According to another narration 'A'ishah said: "Ibn 'Abbas! In
two respects you have erred, and opposed the words of the Prophet. For,
firstly you have sat on my carpet without my permission!"

Ibn 'Abbas said: "You have learnt the injunctions from us, and yet do
you now teach us the Verdict of God? Now 'Ali, Emir of Mu'minin, orders
you to return to your land and city." 'A'ishah said: "May God bless
'Umar who was the Emir of the faithful." Ibn 'Abbas said: "Yes, but
today 'Ali is the Emir of the faithful." 'A'ishah said: "No! No! I will
never accept him to the emirate, and I refuse to obey him."

Ibn 'Abbas said: "Those times have passed and the time when you
appointed and dismissed people has gone by. Today your vote and words
have no worth or influence, and your approval and disapproval are one
and the same." Ibn 'Abbas says: "When I uttered these words, 'A'ishah
began to cry so profusely that I could hear her groans."141 Then she
said: " 'Abd Allah! I am prepared to return to my city. I have no desire
to stay where you are, for, the most hostile city is the one where you
stay."

Ibn 'Abbas said: " 'A'ishah! I swear to God that the reward of the
goodness of us, Banu Hashim, to you was not for you to rise against us.
For, it was we who made you the mother of the faithful, and gave your
father the title of "True Friend"."

'A'ishah said: " 'Abd Allah! You boast of the Prophet before me. And by
his name, you take pride and glory over me?" 'Abd Allah said: "Verily,
we take pride in the existence of someone who if he was from your
household, then you too would have taken pride over us." Ibn 'Abbas
said: "After conversing with 'A'ishah, I approached Imam 'Ali and
informed him about my talks with 'A'ishah. He kissed my forehead and
said: Long live the household where in faculty of speech and in power of
repartee they are one and the same."

Ibn A'tham al-Kufi narrates in "Futuh al-buldan" as such: After the end
of the battle, 'Ali mounted a mule that belonged to the Prophet and
proceeded towards the provisional dwelling of 'A'ishah in Basra, and
after receiving permission he entered and saw 'A'ishah with a number of
Basra women sitting around weeping and groaning.

At that moment Safiyah, daughter of al-Harith ath-Thaqafi142 and
several other women turned to 'Ali and said: "O 'Ali! You killed our
friends and dear ones, and dispersed our group. May God make your
children orphans, in the same way that you made the children of 'Abd
Allah ibn Khalaf orphans, and brought tears to our eyes at his loss?"
Imam 'Ali recognized Safiyah and said in answer: "Safiyah! I don't blame
you for this enmity, since in the battle of Badr, I killed your
grandfather, and in the battle of Uhud your uncle. And in this battle
your husband. If I were a killer of your friends and dear ones, I would
kill all these who are assembled as friends in this house."

Then Imam 'Ali said to 'A'ishah: " 'A'ishah! Why do you not keep your
dogs away from me? Remember that if I were not interested in the good
and welfare of the people, I could at this very moment drive out every
one of those who have hidden themselves in this house, and behead
them."143 Ibn A'tham say: At this point 'A'ishah and the other women
became silent and were unable to utter a word. Then Imam 'Ali addressed
'A'ishah and spoke 141. al-'Iqd al-farid 4/328-329 published by Li-jant
at-ta'lif), Description of Nahj al-balaghah 2/82 printed in Egypt,
History of Ibn A'tham 181, History of al-Ya'qubi 2/213, Muruj adh-dhahab
5/197.

142. Safiyah, daughter of al-Harith ath-Thaqafi is of the Quraysh
tribe, and her connection with the Thaqif tribe is through her husband,
'And Allah ibn Khalaf.

143. 'Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, Marwan and others had hidden themselves
in that house.

reproachingly to her as follows: " 'A'ishah! God had ordered you to
stay in your house and preserve yourself from strangers. But you have
opposed this command of God Almighty, and smeared your hands with the
blood of Muslims and incited the people against me. And unjustly started
a war with me where as you and your house have attained honour and
dignity through you, and us been given the position of Umm al-Mu'minin
by our house. 'A'ishah! Now you must get ready to depart and return to
the house where the Prophet had settled you in and stay there until your
death." Saying this, 'Ali left. Ibn A'tham says: The next day 'Ali sent
his son al-Hasan al-Mujtaba to 'A'ishah where he said: " 'A'ishah! My
father Amir al-Mu'minin says: I swear to God, Who split the seed and I
swear to God, Who created mankind, that if you do not depart at once for
Medina, I shall be forced to do that which I do not want to do."

When 'A'ishah heard this warning, she immediately rose to get ready for
departure. One of the women, noticing 'A'ishah's haste, asked: "
'A'ishah! O Umm al-Mu'minin! 'Abd Allah ibn al-'Abbas came to you and
asked you to depart for Medina, but you refused his proposal and raised
your voice and Ibn 'Abbas left in anger. Then 'Ali came to you, and you
did not exhibit the slightest anxiety. But when this young man to you
and delivered his father's message, you showed great deal of anxiety,
and at once accepted what he said!" 'A'ishah answered: "Yes, my anxiety
was due to the fact that this young man is a son and souvenir of the
Prophet of God and a symbol of the fine qualities of that great man, and
his face reminded me of the visage of the Prophet. Anyone, who wishes to
see what the Prophet looked like, should glance at the visage of this
youth. Moreover he was carrying a message from his father which deeply
frightened me and forced me to depart."

The woman became more curious to find out the true reason, so she said:
" 'A'ishah! I beg you in the name of God Almighty to tell me what was in
'Ali's message that affected you so deeply as to be so worried?"

'A'ishah said: Woe upon you! In one of the wars some precious objects
were brought to the Prophet, and he divided them all among his friends
and companions. We, consorts of the Prophet, asked him to give us a
share and insisted upon it to the extent that 'Ali became angry and
reproached us, saying: "It is enough! It is enough! You have hurt the
feelings of the Prophet of God!" We began to argue with 'Ali and spoke
rudely and sharply to him. 'Ali recited this verse of the Qur'an.

"Maybe, his Lord, if he divorces you, will give him in your place wives
better than you."144 "We were greatly enraged at this, and became ruder
and coarser. Then we saw signs of anger in the face of the Prophet, and
he turned to 'Ali and said: "O 'Ali! Let me give you the authority to
divorce my wives, so that with each 144. The Holy Qur'an, Chapter
at-Tahrim, Verse 5.

divorce the relation between me and her would be severed." The Prophet
did not fix a definite time for this proxy, and this right always
remains valid for 'Ali so that he can divorce the Prophet's wives by
proxy whenever he wants, and bring about separation between us and the
Prophet. So what 'Ali meant by his message was a warning to divorce me
if I did not depart soon, and to deprive me of the position of Umm
al-Mu'minin.145

The author of al-'Iqd al-farid says: After these likes when 'A'ishah
agreed to return to Medina, 'Ali provided her with the necessary travel
equipment, and dispatched her in the company of forty or seventy women
to Medina. At-Tabari says: 'Ali provided 'A'ishah with the best travel
equipment, and granted her a sum of twelve thousand drachmas, and
dispatched her in the company of a number of men and women to Medina. As
'Abd Allah ibn Ja'far146 thought the above sum inadequate, he gave her
another considerable sum and said: "If Imam 'Ali does not agree to the
payment of this sum, I will pay it out of my own wealth." Al-Mas'udi
remarks about 'A'ishah's return: 'Ali ordered 'Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abi
Bakr to accompany 'A'ishah, his sister, to Medina together with thirty
noble women of the tribes of 'Abd Qays and Hamdan.

Al-Ya'qubi and Ibn A'tham, too, mention this point in their history
with the difference that they do not mention the name of 'Abd
ar-Rahman.147 The ill-omened result


