Chapter 1 (repentance)
======================

CONTINUED....

[ 14 ]

يَعْتَذِرُونَ إِلَيْكُمْ إِذَا رَجَعْتُمْ إِلَيْهِمْ قُلْ لاَ
تَعْتَذِرُوا لَنْ نُؤْمِنَ لَكُمْ قَدْ نَبَّأَنَا اللهُ مِنْ
أَخْبَارِكُمْ وَسَيَرَى اللهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ ثُمَّ تُرَدُّونَ
إِلَى عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنتُمْ
تَعْمَلُونَ(( 94 ))

94- THEY WILL GIVE EXCUSES TO YOU WHEN YOU RETURN TO THEM. SAY MAKE NO
EXCUSES. WE WILL NEVER BELIEVE YOU. ALLAH HAS ALREADY INFORMED US OF
YOUR TIDINGS. SOON WILL ALLAH CONSIDER YOUR ACTION, AND HIS MESSENGER.
THEN YOU WILL BE RETURNED TO THE KNOWER OF THE INVISIBLE AND VISIBLE AND
HE WILL INFORM YOU OF WHAT YOU WERE DOING.

سَيَحْلِفُونَ بِاللهِ لَكُمْ إِذَا انقَلَبْتُمْ إِلَيْهِمْ لِتُعْرِضُوا
عَنْهُمْ فَأَعْرِضُوا عَنْهُمْ إِنَّهُمْ وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمهُ
جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ(( 95 ))

95- SOON SHALL THEY SWEAR TO YOU BY ALLAH, WHEN YOU RETURN TO THEM IN
ORDER TO LEAVE THEM ALONE. (TO IGNORE THEIR FAULT AND BETRAYAL) SO TURN
ASIDE FROM THEM, THAT THEY ARE UNCLEAN; AND THEIR ABODE IS HELL-A
RECOMPENSE FOR WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN EARNING.

يَحْلِفُونَ لَكُمْ لِتَرْضَوْا عَ نْهُمْ فَإِنْ تَرْضَوْا عَنْهُمْ
فَإِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَرْضَى عَنْ الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ(( 96 ))

96- THEY WILL SWEAR TO YOU THAT YOU MAY BE PLEASED WITH THEM. EVEN IF
YOU BE PLEASED WITH THEM, ALLAH WILL NOT BE PLEASED WITH A PEOPLE WHO
ARE DEBAUCHERS.

[ 15 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 94 - 96)**

These verses revealed on account of some eighty hypocrites who were
excommunicated when the prophet returned from Tabuk. He forbade the
believers to associate with them, and even to speak to them. Life in
Medina became difficult for them, and they began to make excuses and
swear by Allah in order to reconcile the believers with themselves. So
these verses revealed to tell muslims how to treat them.

**DON'T PAY HEED TO THEIR OATHS AND EXCUSES (VERSE NO. 94)**

The verb, \`\`YAATAZIRUN = THEY WILL MAKE EXCUSES'' is in the future
tense, and implies that God had informed the prophet and his followers
from before that the hypocrites would soon come to them to beg their
pardon.

The prophet is ordered here to reject their excuses; and pay no heed to
their oath. But inspite of all that, the doors of return and repentance
has not been closed upon them, if they would but change their minds and
amend their deed:ِ \`\`And soon will Allah see (CONSIDER) your action,
and his messenger.'' This clause of the verse could also mean that, in
future too, Allah will frustrate your tricks and evil plans as He has
done it before:ِ \`\`Eventually they will swear to you, so that you may
be pleased with them but even so God will not be pleased with them.''

This is because their oaths were merely snares of deception, and traps
of misleading and sedition. Had it not been for the fear of the
believers, their consent and pleasure meant nothing to them, who
believed in nothing themselves.

[ 16 ]

الاَْعْرَابُ أَشَدُّ كُفْراً وَنِفَاقاً وَأَجْدَرُ أَلاَّ يَعْلَمُوا
حُدُودَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 97
))

97- THE (BEDOUIN) ARABS ARE MORE SEVER IN UNBELIEF AND HYPOCRISY, AND
MORE LIKELY NOT TO KNOW THE BOUNDS OF WHAT ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN TO HIS
MESSENGER. AND ALLAH IS ALL-KNOWING, ALL-WISE.

وَمِنْ الاَْعْرَابِ مَنْ يَتَّخِذُ مَا يُنفِقُ مَغْرَماً وَيَتَرَبَّصُ
بِكُمْ الدَّوَائِرَ عَلَيْهِمْ دَائِرَةُ السَّوْءِ وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ(( 98 ))

98- AND OF THE (BEDOUIN) ARABS, IS HE WHO REGARDS WHAT HE SPENDS FOR
THE CAUSE OF ALLAH, AS A (COMPULSORY) FINE!AND WAITS FOR DISASTERS TO
BEFALL YOU. AGAINST THEM IS THE TURN OF EVIL. (DISASTER) AND ALLAH IS
ALL-HEARING ALL-KNOWING.

وَمِنْ الاَْعْرَابِ مَنْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الاْخِرِ
وَيَتَّخِذُ مَا يُنفِقُ قُرُبَات عِنْدَ اللهِ وَصَلَوَاتِ الرَّسُولِ
أَلاَ إِنَّهَا قُرْبَةٌ لَهُمْ سَيُدْخِلُهُمْ اللهُ فِي رَحْمَتِهِ إِنَّ
اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ(( 99 ))

99- AND OF THE (BEDOUIN) ARABS, IS HE WHO BELIEVES IN ALLAH AND THE
LAST DAY, AND REGARDS WHAT HE SPENDS (FOR THE SAKE OF ALLAH) A MEANS OF
APPROACH TO ALLAH AND (OBTAINING) THE PRAYER OF THE MESSENGER.

KNOW YOU THAT IT REALLY IS A MEANS OF APPROACH FOR THEM. SOON WILL
ALLAH ENTER THEM INTO HIS MERCY, THAT ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING,
COMPASSIONATE.

[ 17 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
STONE ِ HEARTED AND FAITHFUL BEDOUINS (VERSE NO. 97)**

Now the argument has moved about faith and hypocrisy among the Bedouin
and nomad Arabs who live in the tents in the deserts. This is to warn
the believers that they should not think that the hypocrites are only
dweller in the towns, and are not found among the Bedouins. The verse
states:ِ \`\` The nomad Arabs who are far from the teaching and
preaching center of Islam, are more likly to be faithless, infidels, and
hypocrites; and to ignore the bounds of what Allah Has sent down to His
Messenger.'' As many may think so; the word, \`\`ALAARAB'' is not the
plural for, \`\`ARAB'' and according to most of the Arabic Dictionaries,
it implies the nomad Arabs who lived in the tents in the deserts.

**VERSE NO. 98 - 99**

To know that all of the Bedouins were not alike; two groups of them
have been made distinct in the above verses:- A group of them due to
their lack of faith regard the obligatory alms as a compulsory fine, and
they look upon it as a burden. They also wait and watch disasters to
befall the believers, so that they might get rid of the payment. Others
of them are true believers, and feel happy that they have some
contributions in solving the problems of poverty and misery in their
community. And they believe that through the payment of such alms-tax,
they get nearer and nearer to God, and will also earn the prayer and
well-wishing of God's Messenger; and they are indeed right in their
motive.

وَالسَّابِقُونَ الاَْوَّلُونَ مِنْ الْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالاَْنصَارِ
وَالَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُمْ بِإِحْسَان رَضِىَ اللهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا
عَنْهُ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ جَنَّات تَجْرِي تَحْتَهَا الاَْنْهَارُ
خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَداً ذَلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ(( 100 ))

[ 18 ]

100- AND THE FIRST OF THE OUTSTRIPPERS, (THE FOREMOST MUSLIMS) OF THE
EMIGRANTS AND THE HELPERS, AND THOSE WHO FOLLOWED THEM IN GOODNESS;
ALLAH IS PLEASED WITH THEM, AND THEY ARE PLEASED WITH HIM. AND HE HAS
PREPARED FOR THEM GARDENS BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW. THEREIN THEY DWELL
FOR EVER. THAT IS A GREAT ATTAINMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FOREMOST MUSLIMS (VERSE NO. 100)**

A mention is made here of three classes of the primeval and forefront
Muslims:- 1- The foremost converts who emigrated to ABYSSINIA and to
MEDINA. They were the vanguards of Islam who endangered their lives
through wonderful self-sacrifices, and suffered for the cause of God
painfully, having no other intention but to please Allah, their Lord
God. They were persecuted wildly by the pagans of Mecca, but none of
them gave up their faith, and when they found it necessary to change
their field of combat, they forsook their home and hearth and even their
wife and children and emigrated to Abyssinia and to Medina! Inspite of
all their sacrifice and suffering, they rejoiced in the pleasure and
concent of their Lord God.

2- The second class of the outstrippers who were also in forefront,
were among the inhabitants of Medina. They accepted Islam by all means,
and provided refuge and shelter for the emigrants, and fought for the
cause of Allah sincerely. They are known as the Helpers in the history
of Islam. They invited the emigrants, welcomed them and gave them help.
They also formed the pivot of the new religious community.

[ 19 ]

3- And the third class of the praise worthy Muslims who are the
pioneers who go before preparing the way for others to follow, are those
who follow the prophet and the emigrants and helpers in their good deeds
and truthful motives, throughout the history of mankind-not only the
companions of the prophet, but men and women in all ages who live a
nobel and pious Islamic life. A Muslim should not forget the verse in
Qura"n saying:ِ \`\`The most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is
the most virtuous of you.''

**WHO WAS THE FIRST BELIEVER IN ISLAM?**

Almost all the commentators have written that the first believer in
Islam was her holiness HAZRAT KHADIJEH the faithful wife to the
messenger of God; and with no doubt the second convert was HAZRAT Imam
Ali who was then a boy of ten or twelve years old. So HAZRAT Ali was the
first Muslim and HAZRAT KHADIJEH the first muslimess.

HAKIM NISHABURI has written in his famous book; (MOSTADRAK MAARIFAT:
PAGE 22):-there is no difference and disagreement among the historians,
that HAZRAT Ali was the foremost and the first of man believers in
Islam. Yet some commentators in opposite sects, have tried to reduce the
importance of his conversion because of his low age; and also to by-pass
the third conversion who was the prophet's adopted son (ZAID), and give
the honour of being the first Muslim to ABUBAKR, their first adopted
kalif, if he really was the fourth convert! And such endeavours are no
more than political struggles.

The famous Sonni scholar, IBN-ABI-ALHADID who has a famous commentary
on Nahjolbalagha has:ِ \`\`In several occasion HAZRAT Ali has made a
mention that he was the first man who believed in the Messenger of God,
and also he was the first man who prayed to God as a Muslim behind the
prophet; while ABUBAKR has never claimed so in all his assertions. No
one would ignore such a great advantage or by-pass it for some one
else.''

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 20 ]

**EMIGRATION**

Emigration is a natural phenomenon of departure from one place of
abode, for life or residence to another. The journey might also be for
some ideals of higher value, such as freedom of belief and assertion. In
19th and 20th centuries several important waves of emigration occured
corresponding to periods of severe economic hardship in certain parts of
the world. One striking example is the Potato Famine in Ireland in
1845-6 which led to massive emigration to the U.S.A. halving of
Ireland's population!

In 19th and 20th century, Nazi persecution of the Jews, led to future
emigration from all over Europe, with the U.S.A. again being the final
destination. So far several countries have been built on the work of
emigrants, notably U.S.A., Canada, Australia, and most recently Israel.
From 1790 to 1960, over 41 millions of emigrants came to the United
States, nearly 90% from the countries of Europe. Even the birds and
animals emigrate when they feel it to be necessary. Bird migration has
facinated man for centuries, but its evolutionary origins, and how birds
are able to navigate over great distance, are two questions to which
even to-day there are only partial answers. The origin of the migrating
habit in birds, just like in men has various reasons. Many migratory
birds abandon their northern homes while the food supply is still ample,
and with the coming of spring they return north, even though more
comfortable living conditions are left behind. The fact is also worth of
deep consideration that birds can find their way over great distances to
exact spots where they habitually nest.

As a matter of fact it is the cause of immigration which gives value to
the immigrant. It might either be physical or spiritual. The emigration
of the foremost Muslims was rather an spritual than physical. Their only
problem was that of their belief in Allah, the only one God, and
renouncing and casting off idolatries and fetishes. Such a belief
agitated their community and made it compulsory for them to leave their
home and hearth and to forsake all that they had for the

[ 21 ]

sake of Allah. They went after freedom-freedom of belief and
worship-freedom of thought and assertion. Therefor their emigration was
among the most valuable immigrations, being only for the sake of God. In
fact, they went out of themselves spiritually, towards their Lord
God-Him who is the Creator of the universe and all that exists.

**THE EARLY CONVERTS OF ISLAM**

Almost all the important historians and commentators of all sects of
Islam have narrated that the first person who accepted Mohammad's
inspired message was his loyal wife HAZRAT KHADIJEH, and so she is
reckoned to be the first Muslim. The second convert was HAZRAT Imam Ali,
the ten or twelve year old cousin of Mohammad who was living his life
with the prophet when he was inspired. When Mohammad asked the boy to
bear witness that there is no God but Allah the Only God, and that
Mohammad is His Messenger in truth, the boy said that before the
testimony he had to see his father and consult with him. The prophet
said to him:ِ \`\`All right! You may do as you like, No compulsion is
there in the religion.''

HAZRAT Ali, the 12 years old boy took leave to go to his father to
consult him, but he stopped at the door of the prophet's house,
pondering over something important with him! He then returned to the
prophet and uttered the testimony and bore the witness; that, \`\`Allah
is the only one God, and that Mohammad is His truthful Messenger.'' The
prophet asked the boy:ِ \`\`why did you change your mind in consulting
with your father about the faith?'' In answer to the prophet,HAZRAT Ali
said:ِ \`\`At the door a thought seized my mind, that, when Allah my
Lord decided to create me, He did not consult my father. Why should I,
then, consult my father when I am asked to worship my Lord and
Creator.'' HAZRAT Ali then established himself as Mohammad's chief
lieutenant, and advisor, and finally his real choice for successor. At a
later incident Mohammad called HAZRAT Ali his brother with all the
advantages of Aaron in

[ 22 ]

relation to Moses. (SEEREH HALABIYEH VOL.1P; 288) The third convert was
Zaid; who was Mohammad's adopted son. Zaid was the son of a chieftain,
enslaved and sold to HAZRAT KHADIJEH, and she offered him as a present
to Mohammad. More than a couple of years elapsed from the first
revelation, until the fourth Muslim joined the group. He was ABUBAKR who
made a living by commerce. He considered himself a friend to Mohammad,
and so he was given a title of, \`\`SEDDIQ''. ABUBAKR, then introduced
to his friend who now claimed to be the Messenger of God, a group of
four men from among his colleagues in commerical business namely:ِ
ABDU-AL-RAHMAN, OTHMA"N, TALHA, ZOBAIR.

ABUBAKR was an influential wealthy man, and made use of his influence
and wealth for improving Islam. Within a period of three years before
Mohammad's public preaching, some fifty persons were converted, among
whom the following were of more fame and reputation:ِ AL,
ARQAM-ABUOBEID-OMMAR'S SISTER AND HER HUSBAND, ABDULLAH
JAAFAR-IBN-ABUTALIB AND OMAR.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

وَمِمَّنْ حَوْلَكُمْ مِّنَ الاَْعْرَابِ مُنَافِقُونَ وَمِنْ أَهْلِ
الْمَدِينَةِ مَرَدُوا عَلَى النِّفَاقِ لاَ تَعْلَمُهُمْ نَحْنُ
نَعْلَمُهُمْ سَنُعَذِّبُهُمْ مَرَّتَيْنِ ثُمَّ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَى عَذَاب
عَظِيم(( 101 ))

101- AND OF THOSE ARABS AROUND YOU THERE ARE HYPOCRITES, AND (ALSO)
FROM THE CITIZENS OF MEDINA, SOME ARE BOUND TO HYPOCRISY. YOU DO NOT
KNOW THEM, BUT WE KNOW THEM. SOON SHALL WE PUNISH THEM TWICE. LASTLY
THEY WILL BE PASSED OVER TO THE GREAT TORMENT.

[ 23 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 101**

The discussion is still on hypocrites, and this time not known to the
people of Medina and all Muslims which were discussed in the previous
verses. These were a group unknown to Muslims who lived round about, in
the deserts and also with them in Medina. They were well known to God,
but Muslims who thought the Bedouins and nomad Arabs were a simple folk,
could not recognize them. Here the verse warns the believers that, there
are certain cunning and sly hypocrites, both among certain TRIBES in the
suburbs, and also in the Medina itself, who have kept themselves
unknown, while their mysterious hands work hard against Islam and
Muslims.

God has promised here to afflict these kind of enemies with a two-fold
punishment. When their tricks are divulged and their real feature is
disclosed to people and are publicly defamed and disgraced, they come to
taste the bitter fruit of their deeds. And their next punishment is in
the life to come, wherein they will join the blazing fire of Hell which
they have kindled it in their very self and soul!

وَ اخَرُونَ اعْتَرَفُوا بِذُنُوبِهِمْ خَلَطُوا عَمَلا صَالِحاً وَ اخَرَ
سَيِّئاً عَسَى اللهُ أَنْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ
رَحِيمٌ(( 102 ))

102- AND OTHERS HAVE CONFESSED THEIR SINS. THEY HAVE MINGLED (THEIR)
GOOD DEEDS; AND OTHER EVIL ONES. PERHAPS ALLAH MAY TURN TO THEM, (IN
MERCY) THAT ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

[ 24 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
EVENT OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 102)**

It is narrated that the above verse was sent down on the occasion of
ABULABBABEH, for the detail of his fault and then repentance, please
refer to volume 2 page 589, under the title of, \`\`A BEAUTIFUL
PENITENCE¨¨. True that the immediate reference here is to ABULABBABEH,
but this is general, and applicable to all the believers who mingle good
deeds with evil ones for their weakness in will, and lack of faith. They
are given the promise of forgiveness, supposing they repent and amend
their deeds and purify their souls so that they may deserve such
forgiveness. As to the clause:ِ \`\`PERHAPS ALLAH MAY TURN TO THEM'' is
meant to keep them in a state of hope and fear, which is an effective
means of training, and purifying the soul of man.

خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا
وَصَلِّ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّ صَلاَتَكَ سَكَنٌ لَّ هُمْ وَاللهُ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ(( 103 ))

103- TAKE ALMS OF THEIR PROPERTIES TO CLEANSE THEM, AND PURIFY THEM BY
IT, AND PRAY ON THEIR BEHALF, THAT YOUR PRAYER IS A COMFORT FOR THEM.
AND ALLAH IS ALL-HEARING, ALL-KNOWING.

أَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ
وَيَأْخُذُ الصَّدَقَاتِ وَأَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 104
))

104- DO THEY NOT KNOW THAT ALLAH IS HE WHO ACCEPTS REPENTANCE FROM HIS
SERVANTS, AND TAKES THE ALMS; AND THAT HE IS THE FORGIVING,
COMPASSIONATE.

[ 25 ]

وَقُلِ اعْمَلُوا فَسَيَرَى اللهُ عَمَلَكُمْ وَرَسُولُهُ
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَسَتُرَدُّونَ إِلَى عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ
فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 105 ))

105- AND SAY:ِ \`\`WORK!'' THEN, SOON, WILL ALLAH OBSERVE YOUR WORK;
AND HIS MESSENGER AND THE BELIEVERS. AND SOON YOU SHALL RETURN TO THE
KNOWER OF THE UNSEEN AND THE VISIBLE. THEN HE WILL INFORM YOU OF WHAT
YOU HAVE BEEN DOING.

**THE COMMENTARY
ALMS; THE MEANS OF PURIFICATION OF MAN AND SOCIETY (VERSE NO. 103)**

Here reference is to one of God's great commandment, which is a means
for purifying man's soul and his society. It is a general law for Muslim
in all ages, that a small part of their wealth and property is to be
spent in some charitable purposes for the sake of God. Through alms
giving, the corruptions and mischiefs that arise from poverty among men
and their society can be removed or at least reduced. So also by such
mutual assistances, man can improve the economical affairs of their
society. Therefore, the alms may purify people, and pave the way for the
apostles, and spiritual teachers, to bring them up-up in ranks much
higher than that of animals.

Allah has bidden His Messenger in this verse to pray for those who pay
their due alms-tax! This implies that, we always have to give our thanks
and gratitude, to those who do something good, even though their good
deed be their duty, or an obligatory fulfilment. Such a behavior will
encourage people to continue doing good.

The verb, \`\`TAKE ALMS'' which is in imperative mood, imply that the
Islamic governor should not wait for people to come and bring their
alms-tax. He may send his functionary delegate to collect their alms.

[ 26 ]

**VERSE NO. 104**

Some of the infringers of Tabuk's expedition, and other sinners begged
the prophet's pardon, and expected him to forgive them their sins; but
forgiving the sins is none of the business of a prophet. It is only God
who can forgive the sins of His servants and none the else. We ought to
know that, the alms are not used for the personal and private use of the
prophet, or the spiritual teacher, and doctors of the law. Alms are
given for the sake of God, and are spent in the way of Him, and in fact
he who takes the alms is only God and no one else; though, apparently
they are given to the poor, needy, way-farer, and etc:ِ

\`\`Do they not know that Allah is He who accepts repentance from his
servants, and Who takes the alms.'' The charity will reach the hand of
God before it has reached the hand of the poor and needy. A pure and
sincere offering for the sake of God, even if it be as little as a date,
will bring large amount of fruits.

**VERSE NO. 105**

In the last verse of this group, the prophet is wanted to tell the
people to work and be hardy and active in doing their duties, and
fulfilling their obligations. If you do anything in public or private,
God will see that and in your eternal life which is sure to come, you
will receive and reap the fruit of your labour. There will Allah open
your eyes to the real truth:ِ \`\`And soon you shall return to the
knower of the invisible, and the visible. Then He will inform you of
what you have been doing.''

و اخَرُونَ مُرْجَوْنَ لاَِمْرِ اللهِ إِمَّا يُعَذِّبُهُمْ وَإِمَّا
يَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 106 ))

106- AND THERE ARE OTHERS WHO HAVE TO WAIT FOR ALLAH'S DECREE. HE WILL
EITHER PUNISH THEM, OR TURN TO THEM (IN FORGIVING THEM). AND ALLAH IS
ALL-KNOWING, ALL-WISE.

[ 27 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 106**

The doubtful case of another category of Muslims are illustrated here,
the end of whom is not clear enough. They are not in the rank to deserve
God's Mercy, and not so low as to lose hope for Salvation. They are held
in suspense for the command of Allah, whether He will punish them, or
turn in Mercy to them.

Examples of them are found among those who fought against the prophet
in the battle of OHUD. They martyred sincere believers and godly men,
such as HAZRAT HAMZIH. But they repented after that and became Muslims,
and continued with a characteristic that was perfectly general. They
were not a bad Muslim henceforth. So they shall have to wait for God to
judge, and issue His decree of either punishment or forgiveness in their
case. There is an important question here that:- What is the difference
between the sinners that are stated in this verse (NO.106), and those
mentioned in verse (NO.102) of the same chapter? Both groups have
sinned, and both have repented; and both parties live in hope and fear,
expecting to receive God's Mercy?

The most probable answer to this question is that, the first group (IN
VERSE NO.102) confessed their sin immediately and repented soon after
their wrong; but the latter group delayed their repentance and
returning. Therefore, the ending of the verse (NO.102), is:ِ \`\`Allah
is All-forgiving Compassionate,'' but the ending of the verse (NO.106)
is:ِ \`\`Allah is, All-knowing, All-wise.''

وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مَسْجِداً ضِرَاراً وَكُفْراً وَتَفْرِيقَا بَيْنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَإِرْصَاداً لِمَنْ حَارَبَ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ
وَلَيَحْلِفُنَّ إِنْ أَرَدْنَا إِلاَّ الْحُسْنَى وَاللهُ يَشْهَدُ
إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ(( 107 ))

107- AND THOSE WHO HAVE TAKEN A HARMFUL MOSQUE OF INFIDELITY, AND
CAUSING DISUNION BETWEEN THE BELIEVERS, AND A PLACE OF AMBUSH FOR HIM
WHO FOUGHT

[ 28 ]

ALLAH AND HIS MESSENGER AFORETIME. AND THEY WILL SWEAR THAT; \`\`WE
INTENDED NOTHING BUT GOOD! AND ALLAH BEARS WITHNESS THAT THEY ARE
LYING.''

لاَ تَقُمْ فِيهِ أَبَداً لَمَسْجِدٌ أُسِّسَ عَلَى التَّقْوَى مِنْ
أَوَّلِ يَوْم أَحَقُّ أَنْ تَقُومَ فِيهِ فِيهِ رِجَالٌ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ
يَتَطَهَّرُوا وَاللهُ يُحِبُّ الْمُطَّهِّرِينَ(( 108 ))

108- NEVER STAND IN IT. A MOSQUE FOUNDED PIETY FROM THE FIRST DAY, IS
MORE DESERVING FOR YOU TO STAND IN IT (IN PRAYER). THEREIN ARE MEN WHO
LOVE TO CLEANSE THEMSELVES. AND ALLAH LOVES THOSE WHO CLEANES
THEMSELVES.

أَفَمَنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَى تَقْوَى مِنْ اللهِ وَرِضْوَان خَيْرٌ
أَمْ مَنْ أَسَّسَ بُنْيَانَهُ عَلَى شَفَا جُرُف هَار فَانْهَارَ بِهِ فِي
نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ وَاللهُ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 109 ))

109- IS HE WHO FOUNDED HIS BUILDING UPON PIETY TO ALLAH AND CONSENT
BETTER, OR HE WHO FOUNDED HIS BUILDING ON THE BRINK OF A CRUMBLING BANK,
WHICH IS READY TO FALL; THEN IT FALLS WITH HIM INTO THE FIRE OF HELL?
AND ALLAH GUIDES NOT A PEOPLE WHO ARE OPPRESSORS.

لاَ يَزَالُ بُنْيَانُهُمْ الَّذِي بَنَوْا رِيبَةً فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ
إِلاَّ أَنْ تَقَطَّعَ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَاللهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 110 ))

110- THE BUILDING THAT THEY HAVE BUILT, IS ALWAYS A POINT OF DOUBT IN
THEIR HEARTS; UNLESS THEIR HEARTS IS CUT OFF INTO PIECES. AND ALLAH IS
ALL-KNOWING, WISE.

[ 29 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
CAUSE OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 107 - 110)**

Before leaving Medina for TABUK, the prophet was asked to honour by his
presence, and inaugurate a new mosque that was built by some hypocrites
and nominal Muslims round them. The prophet postponed the inauguration
till his return from the journey. When he was returning from TABUK a
plot was hatched against his life, but fortunately it failed; that God
had promised in Qura"n to protect His Messenger from people. The prophet
then realized that an intrigue against him was going on between a few
nominal Muslims and the hypocrites who had built the new mosque. Later
on, in Qura"nic literature it was called,\`\`AL-ZARRAR''= the \`\`Mosque
of Dissension''


