The Fate of Thamood (verse No. 61)
==================================

We studied the admonitory story of the people of A"d, which is now
followed by that of the Thamood. The fate of A"d and Thamood, two mighty
peoples of the ancient Arabia, was very awful and shocking. They
rejected God's Message and went on their own evil way; and Allah's wrath
wiped them out as if they had never existed! Salih too, is called their
brother in the above verse for being so compassionate and well-wishing
to his citizens, as a brother of them could have been. Salih's message
in principle was the same as that of other apostles. It was mainly to
believe in the only one true God who

[ 181 ]

created them and settled then on the earth to own it and to flourish
and prepare it to suit life; and also to get rid of all the idols,
fetishes and false gods:ِ \`\`O, my people! Worship Allah! You have no
God other than He, Who made you from the earth and assigned you to
built, cultivate and flourish it.'' Worthy of note is here that; Allah
has not said to have flourished the earth and then given it to us. On
contrary he says that we have to flourish and prepare it for our
settlement.

قَالُوا يَا صَالِحُ قَدْ كُنتَ فِينَا مَرْجُوّاً قَبْلَ هَذَا
أَتَنْهَانَا أَنْ نَّعْبُدَ مَا يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُنَا وَإِنَّنَا لَفِي شَكّ
مِمَّا تَدْعُونَا إِلَيْهِ مُرِيب(( 62 ))

62- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, SALIH! YOU HAVE BEEN A SOURCE OF HOPE AMONG US
SO FAR. DO YOU FORBID US THE WORSHIP OF WHAT OUR FATHERS WORSHIP, WHILE
WE ARE SERIOUSLY IN DOUBT CONCERNING THAT TO WHICH YOU CALL US?''

قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كُنتُ عَلَى بَيِّنَة مِنْ رَبِّي
وَآتَانِي مِنْهُ رَحْمَةً فَمَنْ يَنصُرُنِي مِنْ اللهِ إِنْ عَصَيْتُهُ
فَمَا تَزِيدُونَنِي غَيْرَ تَخْسِير(( 63 ))

63- HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE! WHAT THEN IF I STAND UPON AN EVIDENCE
(CLEAR PROOF) FROM MY LORD, AND THAT HE HAS BESTOWED ON ME A MERCY FROM
HIM. WHO WOULD THEN PROTECT ME FROM ALLAH, IF I DISOBEY HIM? THEREFORE
YOU ADD NOTHING TO ME EXCEPT LOSS.''

وَيَا قَوْمِ هَذِهِ نَاقَةُ اللهِ لَكُمْ آيَةً فَذَرُوهَا تَأْكُلْ فِي
أَرْضِ اللهِ وَلاَ تَمَسُّوهَا بِسُوء فَيَأْخُذَكُمْ عَذَابٌ قَرِيبٌ((
64 ))

[ 182 ]

64ِAND O, MY PEOPLE! THIS IS THE SHE-CAMEL OF ALLAH, WHICH IS A SIGN
FOR YOU. SO LEAVE HER TO GRAZE ON ALLAH'S LAND, AND TOUCH HER NOT BADLY
(DO NOT HARM HER) LEST YOU BE SEIZED BY A NEAR TORMENT.

فَعَقَرُوهَا فَقَالَ تَمَتَّعُوا فِي دَارِكُمْ ثَلاَثَةَ أَيَّام ذَلِكَ
وَعْدٌ غَيْرُ مَكْذُوب (( 65 ))

65- BUT THEY HAMSTRUNG HER! THEN HE SAID:ِ \`\`ENJOY YOURSELVES IN YOUR
HOUSES FOR THREE DAYS (AND THEN GOD'S PUNISHMENT WILL SMITE YOU). THAT
IS A PROMISE NOT TO BE BELIED.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 62 - 65**

The people of Salih tried to pull his leg and throw dust in the eyes of
his followers by the use of flattery:ِ \`\`O, Salih! You have been a
source of hope among us so far.'' This clause of the verse reminds us of
the brilliant title of AMIN= TRUSTWORTHY, given to Mohammad (AS) in his
youth by Qureish and Meccans. His life with the Arabs was so gentle and
righteous that, before his prophetic mission they nicknamed him Amin
which means trustworthy. So he could easily have been elected a king or
a chief of the chiefs if he had only conformed with their caprices and
superstitious gods, but he was born for a much higher mission, and God's
will was eventually done. And so was the case of Salih who lived a life
among Thamood, before his assignment as a Messenger of God. This is why
they flattered him saying:ِ \`\`O, Salih! You have been a source of hope
among us so far, and now you

[ 183 ]

forbid us to worship the gods that our fathers have been worshipping!''
This great prophet of God, without giving up or falling to despair, in a
state of utmost self-possession told them:ِ \`\`What then if I stand
upon evidences and clear proofs from my Lord, and that he has bestowed
on me a Mercy from him. How then can I disobey such a Merciful Lord, and
who can protect me against his wrath, which is the manifestations of
justice, if I disobey Him? O, My People! There is the miraculous
she-camel of Allahِa sign of Him for your consideration. So give up your
monopoly and let God's gifts on the earth be available to all His
creatures. Respect the sign of your Lord, and let her graze in this
extensive pasture that God has made for His creatures, and, harm her
not.'' As to the SHE-CAMEL= NA"GHIH, which was a miracle disclosed by
the prophet Salih, the Holy Qura"n gives no detail. But through some
Islamic traditions we come to know that she had come out of the heart of
a mountain miraculously! She was drinking a large amount of water, and
when she was at the spring the other domestic animals dared not to
approach or touch the water!

And as to the reaction of the obstinate Thamood to the logical
reasoning of their prophet, they rudely hamstrung God's she-camel and
destroyed their own self and soul!:ِ \`\`They hamstrung her! And Salih
said to them:ِ Enjoy yourselves in your houses for three days and then
God's wrath will smite youِa promise not to be belied.''

A respite of three days was given them for further consideration and
perhaps repentance, that God is the Most Merciful and the Compassionate
Forgiver. But they paid no heed, because their hearts were sealed, their
eyes veiled, and their ear were deaf! When three days elapsed an awful
earthquake preceded by a heavy rolling sound, came by night, and turned
their secure and safe homes to their graves and pits of the Hell! In the
morning they were lying on their faces and the powerful was rendered
powerless! It seemed so that the terrible earthquake had eyes to see,
and sight to

[ 184 ]

distinguish friend from foe, because no harm was done to Salih and to
those who believed with him! The verb hamstring has been used
collectively in the above verse, while the traditions imply that only
one man from among Thamood hamstrung the she-camel and disabled her.
This is because the majority of the people of Thamood approved the
action of the individual, and in the sight of Islam, he who agrees by
heart with an action of the others, and encourages and enjoins that
action, he too has actually taken a part in that, and has his own share
of responsibility.

فَلَمَّا جَاءَ أَمْرُنَا نَجَّيْنَا صَالِحاً وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ
بِرَحْمَة مِنَّا وَمِنْ خِزْىِ يَوْمِئِذ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْقَوِىُّ
الْعَزِيزُ(( 66 ))

66- AND WHEN OUR COMMAND CAME, WE SAVED SALIH AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED
WITH HIM BY A MERCY FROM US, FROM THE IGNOMINY OF THAT DAY; THAT YOUR
LORD IS MIGHTY POWERFUL.

وَأَخَذَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا الصَّيْحَةُ فَأَصْبَحُوا فِي دِيَارِهِمْ
جَاثِمِينَ(( 67 ))

67- AND THOSE WHO OPPRESSED, WERE SEIZED BY A (DREADFUL) CRY; AND WHEN
MORNING CAME THEY HAD FALLEN UPSIDEِDOWN (ON THEIR FACES) IN THEIR
HOMES!

كَأَنْ لَّمْ يَغْنَوْا فِيهَا أَلاَ إِنَّ ثَمُودَاْ كَفَرُوا رَبَّهُمْ
أَلاَ بُعْداً لِثَمُودَ(( 68 ))

68- AS IF THEY HAD NEVER DWELT THERE. BEHOLD! THAMOOD DISBELIEVED THEIR
LORD. SO, AWAY WITH THAMOOD. (FROM GOD'S MERCY)

[ 185 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FATE OF THAMOOD (VERSE NO. 66 - 68)**

Here in these verses the end of Thamood and their awful fate is
mentioned which occurred after a respite of 3 days that was given them:ِ
Your Mighty and powerful Lord saved Salih and those who believed with
him from the ignominy of that terrible day, and the oppressors were
seized by a dreadful rolling sound like that of a thunderbolt. The sound
was so terrible and so destructive that all of them fell upside down
upon their faces and died! Down with Thamood! Away with Thamood!

The punishment of the unbelievers and oppressors is not only physical.
They are also punished spiritually, and are afflicted by various
psychological and mental diseases, and also by social disgraces and
humiliations, while the case of the righteous people is always
different. According to some Islamic traditions; Thamood were destroyed
by a thunder bolt which was a very great discharge of lightning
accompanied by an enormous and heavy rolling sound! Any how, they passed
away at once and as if they had never existed!

وَلَقَدْ جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا إِبْرَاهِيمَ بِالْبُشْرَى قَالُوا سَلاَماً
قَالَ سَلاَمٌ فَمَا لَبِثَ أَنْ جَاءَ بِعِجْل حَنِيذ(( 69 ))

69- AND THERE CAME OUR MESSENGERS TO ABRAHAM WITH GLAD-TIDINGS. THEY
SAID:ِ PEACE! HE ANSWERED PEACE. THEN IT TOOK NO LONG WHEN HE CAME WITH
A ROASTED CALF. (TO ENTERTAIN THEM)

[ 186 ]

فَلَمَّا رَأَى أَيْدِيَهُمْ لاَ تَصِلُ إِلَيْهِ نَكِرَهُمْ وَأَوْجَسَ
مِنْهُمْ خِيفَةً قَالُوا لاَ تَخَفْ إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَى قَوْمِ
لُوط(( 70 ))

70- BUT WHEN HE SAW THAT THEIR HANDS WENT NOT TOWARDS IT, (THEY DID NOT
TOUCH THE ROAST) HE DISLIKED THEM AND CONCEIVED A FEAR OF THEM.

THEY SAID DON'T FEAR. WE ARE SENT AGAINST THE PEOPLE OF LOT.

وَامْرَأَتُهُ قَائِمَةٌ فَضَحِكَتْ فَبَشَّرْنَاهَا بِإِسْحَاقَ وَمِنْ
وَرَاءِ إِسْحَاقَ يَعْقُوبَ(( 71 ))

71- AND HIS WIFE WAS STANDING BY. SO SHE LAUGHED. WE THEN GAVE HER THE
GLAD-TIDINGS OF (GIVING BIRTH TO) ISAAC AND AFTER ISAAC TO JACOB.

قَالَتْ يَا وَيْلَتَا أَأَلِدُ وَأَنَا عَجُوزٌ وَهَذَا بَعْلِي شَيْخاً
إِنَّ هَذَا لَشَىْءٌ عَجِيبٌ(( 72 ))

72- SHE SAID:ِ \`\`WOE IS ME! SHALL I BEAR A CHILD WHILE I AM AN OLD
WOMAN AND THIS MY HUSBAND IS AN OLD MAN!? THIS IS INDEED SOMETHING
STRANGE.''

قَالُوا أَتَعْجَبِينَ مِنْ أَمْرِ اللهِ رَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ إِنَّهُ حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ(( 73 ))

73- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`DO YOU WONDER OF ALLAH'S ORDER? THE MERCY OF ALLAH
AND HIS BLESSINGS ARE ON YOU, O, PEOPLE OF THE HOUSE, THAT HE IS THE
GLORIOUS, THE PRAISE WORTHY.''

[ 187 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
AN EPISODE IN THE LIFE STORY OF THE IDOL BREAKER (VERSE NO. 69 -
73)**

The life story of ABRAHAM has been written here and there, in the Holy
Qura"n with details and clear explanation; but in the above verses
reference is made to that part of his life which is connected with that
of his nephew Lot. In fact, the story of Lot has been narrated here with
a brief reference to an episode in the life of his uncle ABRAHAM:ِ
\`\`And there came our Messengers to ABRAHAM with glad-tidings.''
Although the narration about the stranger guests of ABRAHAM is given in
brief, the few verses are so eloquent and comprehensive, and also
self-explanatory, that we can apprehend all the series of events and
necessary details that has been taken for granted in it:ِ The arch
prophet of God received his unacquainted guests with salutation of
peace, and immediately placed before them a meal of roasted calf for
their luncheon. But the guests were angels who had turned their outward
form to that of young men. When ABRAHAM saw that their hands went not
towards it, and they did not touch the roast meat, he disliked it and
conceived a feeling of mistrust, mingled with fear concerning the
strangers.

This was because, if hospitality is refused in the East, it means that
those who refuse it, do no good to the host. The angels got the hint,
and soon presented themselves that they were angels and sent down
against the wicked people of Lot in the Sodom and Gomorrah. They added
to have had a good news for ABRAHAM too, who would become the father and
grandfather of two other apostles namely Isaac and Jacob. ABRAHAM was
very anxious and annoyed from the evil conducts of the inhabitants of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and was very eager to have their problem solved some
how. So the arrival of the angels was also a good news for him in that
relation, which was besides the good news of

[ 188 ]

being the fountain head of God's apostles. ABRAHAM'S wife (SA"RAH) who
was standing by, could hardly believe the news, that was to bear a child
in that old age of no less than a hundred years, and from a husband much
older than that. But when she made sure that the strangers were only
angels, she became so happy that she laughed. Her laughter might also
have been due to wonder and amazement that she said! \`\`Woe is me!
Shall I bear a child while I am an old woman, and this my husband is an
old man!?'' Then the angels assured her that God's intention will be
done and His Mercy and blessings will touch the people of the house. The
Arabic, Ahlul-bait, translated here to people of the house, is a
respectful addressing the household of ABRAHAM and Mohammad in Qura"nic
language.

فَلَمَّا ذَهَبَ عَنْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الرَّوْعُ وَجَاءَتْهُ الْبُشْرَى
يُجَادِلُنَا فِي قَوْمِ لُوط(( 74 ))

74- THEN WHEN FEAR LEFT ABRAHAM AND THE GOOD NEWS REACHED HIM, HE
PLEADED WITH US FOR THE PEOPLE OF LOT.

إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَحَلِيمٌ أَوَّاهٌ مُنِيبٌ(( 75 ))

75- THAT ABRAHAM WAS PATIENT, OFTEN SIGHING, AND RETURNING. (TO
ALLAH)

يَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ أَعْرِضْ عَنْ هَذَا إِنَّهُ قَدْ جَاءَ أَمْرُ رَبِّكَ
وَإِنَّهُمْ آتِيهِمْ عَذَابٌ غَيْرُ مَرْدُود(( 76 ))

76- O, ABRAHAM! PLEAD NOT ON THIS MATTER, THAT YOUR LORD'S DECREE HAS
ALREADY BEEN ISSUED; AND THERE WILL COME UPON THEM AN UNREJECTABLE
TORTURE.

[ 189 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 74 - 76**

When Abraham's fear vanished by receiving the good news of having a
prophet son and grandson, (ISAAC & JACOB) and made sure that the
strangers were God's Messengers who had come to punish the sinful cities
of Sodom and Gomorah, he began to plead with God and dispute with the
angels for the wicked people of Lot. Abraham was not sure enough that
the people of Lot had already been judged, and that, God's decree had
been issued. This was why he began to haggle with the angels over the
sinful people, for being a Compassionate and a tender-hearted man. But
when they told him plead not on this matter that God's decree has
already been issued, he ceased arguing and kept quiet, sighing.

وَلَمَّا جَاءَتْ رُسُلُنَا لُوطاً سِىءَ بِهِمْ وَضَاقَ بِهِمْ ذَرْعاً
وَقَالَ هَذَا يَوْمٌ عَصِيبٌ(( 77 ))

77- AND WHEN OUR MESSENGERS CAME TO LOT HE WAS ANNOYED AND WAS GRIEVED
ON ACCOUNT OF THEM, AND SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS A HARD DAY''

وَجَاءَهُ قَوْمُهُ يُهْرَعُونَ إِلَيْهِ وَمِنْ قَبْلُ كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ هَؤُلاَءِ بَنَاتِي هُنَّ
أَطْهَرُ لَكُمْ فَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَلاَ تُخْزُونِ فِي ضَيْفِي أَلَيْسَ
مِنْكُمْ رَجُلٌ رَشِيدٌ(( 78 ))

78- AND HIS PEOPLE WHO WERE DOING EVIL DEEDS BEFORE, CAME RUNNING
TOWARDS HIM.

HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE! HERE ARE MY DAUGHTERS. THEY ARE CLEANER FOR
YOU (IF YOU MARY THEM). BEWARE OF ALLAH AND DO NOT DISGRACE ME WITH
REGARD TO MY GUESTS. IS THERE NOT A RIGHTِMINDED MAN AMONG YOU?''

[ 190 ]

قَالُوا لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا لَنَا فِي بَنَاتِكَ مِنْ حَقّ وَإِنَّكَ
لَتَعْلَمُ مَا نُرِيدُ(( 79 ))

79- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`YOU KNOW WELL THAT WE HAVE NO RIGHT (LIKING) TO
YOUR DAUGHTERS, AND YOU KNOW WELL WHAT DO WE WANT!''

قَالَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي بِكُمْ قُوَّةً أَوْ أَوْءَاِوي إِلَى رُكْن
شَدِيد(( 80 ))

80- HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, WOULD THAT I HAD POWER AGAINST YOU, (I WISH I
COULD SUPPRESS YOU) OR COULD TAKE REFUGE IN A STRONG SUPPORT.''

**THE COMMENTARY
THE INDECENT LIFE OF THE PEOPLE OF LOT (VERSE NO. 77 - 80)**

According to some Islamic traditions, Lot was working in his farmland,
when he saw some handsome young men coming to him. The strangers
requested to be his guests for a couple of days. Morally he was obliged
to entertain any guest, and knew it a religious duty; but here the case
was differentِThe extraordinary beauty of the young stranger boys, and
the addiction of his people to the evil passion of homosexuality, would
be so difficult to handle; and such considerations filled him with
anxiety and stress. So he said to himself:ِ \`\`To-day is a hard and
troublesome day!'' Lot had no other option but to take his guests at
home from a way that they could not be seenِperhaps in the dark of the
night. In their way home, Lot informed the young strangers of the evil
perversion of his people who sought sexual satisfaction in aberrant
ways.

It is narrated that Allah had instructed the angels not to punish

[ 191 ]

the town's folk before three witnesses testify their guilt. When Lot
and his guests reached home safely his wife who was a disbeliever gave
some signals to the chiefs of the rascals, informing them of what was
going on in their house! So the heads of the homosexuals rushed towards
the house of Lot. The apostle found himself very helpless when he saw
his house besieged by the devils who were inflamed with the evil passion
of homosexuality. He went out and said to them:ِ \`\`O, my people!
Disgrace me not in front of my guests. Is there not a right-minded man
among you? Here are my daughters; they are cleaner for you.''

**\`\`HERE ARE MY DAUGHTERS''**

Lot had no more than three daughters and most probably the intruders
were the chiefs of the mischief makers, and were not very many, that Lot
offered to sacrifice his daughters in order to save the chastity of his
young guests. Some commentators have taken the offer of his daughters
otherwise, which is not a strong reasoning. They say:ِ \`\`My daughter
or my son in the tongue of a venerable man like the apostle of God, who
is in fact the spiritual father of people, may mean any young girl or
young man of the town; and thus Lot encouraged them to go after the
girls instead of the boys, and keep on with chastity.'' But in answer to
their prophet, the wicked people said:ِ \`\`You know that we have no
interest and liking in your daughters, and you well know what do we
want!''

What else could he do in that critical situation? He told them that he
wished he had enough power to crush the rascals and smash them, or at
least he could have a reliable support to rely on. But soon it was
proved that the most powerful and the most reliable support was there,
and everywhere, and even ready to protect His faithful servants. Then
his guests declared themselves to be angels, and Messengers of God, who
were sent down to punish the people of Lot. They assured Lot not to fear
any more, that, these rascals can not even touch you!

[ 192 ]

قَالُوا يَا لُوطُ إِنَّا رُسُلُ رَبِّكَ لَنْ يَصِلُوا إِلَيْكَ فَأَسْرِ
بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْع مِنْ اللَّيْلِ وَلاَ يَلْتَفِتْ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ
إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَكَ إِنَّهُ مُصِيبُهَا مَا أَصَابَهُمْ إِنَّ مَوْعِدَهُمُ
الصُّبْحُ أَلَيْسَ الصُّبْحُ بِقَرِيب(( 81 ))

81- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, LOT! WE ARE YOUR LORD'S MESSENGERS. THEY SHALL
NEVER TOUCH YOU. SO SET FORTH WITH YOUR KINSFOLK IN THE DEAD OF THE
NIGHT, AND LET NONE OF YOU LOOK BEHIND. EXCEPT YOUR WIFE, THAT SHE HAS
TO SUFFER THE FATE OF THE OTHERS. THEIR APPOINTED TIME IS THE MORNING.
IS THE MORNING NOT NEAR?''

فَلَمَّا جَاءَ أَمْرُنَا جَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا
عَلَيْهَا حِجَارَةً مِّنْ سِجِّيل مَنْضُود(( 82 ))

82- THEN WHEN OUR DECREE WAS ISSUED WE TURNED ITS HIGHEST TO ITS LOWEST
AND RAINED UPON IT BAKED CLAY (AS HARD AS STONE) ONE UPON ANOTHER.

مُسَوَّمَةً عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ وَمَا هِيَ مِنْ الظَّالِمِينَ بِبَعِيد(( 83
))

83- (THE RAIN OF BAKED CLAY WAS) MARKED BY YOUR LORD, AND IT IS NOT FAR
FROM THE OPPRESSORS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF THIS GROUP OF OPPRESSORS (VERSE NO. 81 - 83)**

At last when the angels saw that Lot was mentally in a great stress and
is in trouble about the existing situation, they disclosed themselves
and declared their mission as the Messengers of God, saying:

[ 193 ]

\`\`O, Lot! We are your Lord's Messengers. So don't worry, that, they
will never touch you.'' As it is revealed in the S 54:33, Lot did warn
his wicked people of God's wrath and the coming of an awful day for
their punishment, but they paid no heed to the warning and proceeded to
take away his handsome guests! As they came forth suddenly their eyes
were all blinded and in that darkness they heard a voice saying:ِ
\`\`Now taste you my wrath and believe the warnings! This was the
beginning of their dreadful chastisement....'' However, recognizing the
angels who were in the guise of young beautiful man, revived Lot and
infused a new blood into his veins, and felt a happiness in the depth of
his heartِhis beloved Lord and friend had come to his help.

Then the angels told Lot:ِ \`\`Set forth with your house-hold and the
others who have believed with you in the dark of the night, and let none
of you look behind, except your wife who has to share the fate of those
who are doomed. She will not follow your instruction and will lag behind
among those who perish.'' When Lot and those who believed with him left
the town behind, the terrible event began! The cities and the suburbs
were agitated with irregular vibratory motions due to an awful
earthquake, and by morning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were all
overturned, so that its highest points became its lowest points, and
after that a shower of pellets made of baked clay and hard as stones,
rained upon the inhabitants and piled up on them.

SIJJIL is a compound Persian word Arabicised composed of SANG, and
GILL, which might have been very hard pellets of baked clay.

**HOMOSEXUALITY**

The people of Lot were so awfully chastised for being homosexuals.
Homosexuality among men and woman is unlawful in Islam, and it is
counted among mortal and capital sins, and has retaliatory punishment,
which is death for men, and a hundred whips for women.

[ 194 ]

To prove the act is not that easy in our religion. There must be four
just and virtuous men to witness and to testify that they have seen the
indecent act; or the accused has to confess that he has done so, not
once or twice, but at least four times and in different conditions and
states. When the sin has clearly been proved, he is condemned to death,
and she is to be whipped a hundred lashes.

\*\*\*\*\*

**PEDERASTY**

(Not only Islam, but almost all the religions, and in particular that
of the Jews and Christians have condemned the pederast to death. The
people of Lot were lost on account of pederasty and this is clearly
stated in the Holy Qura"n S 7:80ِ84 as follows:ِ \`\`And also make a
mention of Lot in the Book, when he said to his people:ِ Do you commit
lewdness such that no one in the world ever committed before you!? You
have sexual intercourse with men instead of women! You are indeed a
degenerated people.'' In answer to him Lot's people said:ِ \`\`Banish
him and his followers from your town that they are men who seek to keep
clean.'' Pederasty in the Law of Moses, which is the law of Christians
too; has been declared as a heinous and major sin, and the pederast is
condemned to death. With reference to LEVITICUSِ20:13 we read:ِ

\`\`If a man has sexual relations with another man or a boy, they have
done a disgusting thing and both of them shall be put to death. They are
responsible for their own death.'' TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

**WHY HOMOSEXUALITY IS UNLAWFUL?**

Although sex aberration prevails widely in the West, so that its
impudence and inviolability has generally been violated, and in some
countries like England, it has officially been declared as lawful, yet
its increase will not decrease its ugliness and evil consequences in
man's society.

[ 195 ]

Some may reason that they do not see any medical objection in that sort
of sexual intercourse; while most of the doctors of Medicine have come
to it as the source of the mysterious disease of Aids which nowadays is
the general topic of conversation. Anything which is perverted from its
natural way will go wrong and reach a cul-de-sac, or point of Fall. He
who continues with such evil deeds will soon lose his affections to the
opposite sex and this sort of a disease is indeed a calamity in the
physical and spiritual life of both sexes. And also as another
consequence of this evil act, man will obtain the feelings of woman and
vice versa. Such people are eventually attracted to alcoholic beverages,
and then captivated by intoxicants.

\*\*\*\*\*

**LOT IN THE BIBLE**

The above story of Lot and the punishment of Sodom and Gomorrah, has
also been narrated in the Bible, but in a primitive tongue and
literature, and in some cases abusing to God and His apostles! Comparing
the two narrations will easily prove to our dear reader that the
difference is not that of a learned narrator and an unlearned writer. It
rather is the difference between God and man! GOD APPEARS TO ABRAHAM IN
GUISE OF MAN! GENESIS ِ 18 ABRAHAM hurried into the tent and said to
Sa"rah:ِ \`\`QUICK! Take a sack of

[ 196 ]

your best flour and bake some bread. Then he ran to the herd and picked
out a calf that was tender and fat, and gave it to a servant who hurried
to get it ready.'' There under the tree he served them and they ate!
Then they asked where is your wife Sa"rah? She is there in the tent;
answered he. One of them said:ِ \`\`Nine months from now I will come
back and your wife Sa"rah will have a son!''

Sa"rah was behind the door of the tent listening. ABRAHAM and SA"RAH
were very old, and Sa"rah had stopped having her monthly period. So she
laughed to herself and said:ِ \`\`Now that I am an old woman and worn
out, can I still enjoy sex?'' 13ِThen the Lord asked ABRAHAM:ِ \`\`Why
did Sa"rah laugh and say can I really have a child when I am so old? Is
anything too hard for the Lord? As I said, nine months from now I will
return and Sa"rah will have a son.'' Sa"rah was afraid and she denied to
have laughed! But the Lord said, yes you did laugh.


