Felicity and Wretchedness(verse No. 105 - 108)
==============================================

A particular scene of the Day of Resurrection has been illustrated here
in which word and speech is of no use! In that particular stage of Dooms
Day, no one will speak except by God's permission. A seal is set upon
their mouths, (S36:65) and instead of their tongues; their instruments
of actions, such as their hands and feet, will speak to God about their
guilts! The Day of Last Judgment is a highly serious and awe-inspiring
day, before the greatest of all judges Who knows everything hidden or
open, and has such an authority that no one dares to question, speak

[ 213 ]

in self-defence or intercede for others; unless God permits him to do
so. In such that critical situation, speaking is meaningless, because
word is a means to display a hidden thought, or disclose an idea or a
suggestion; but when everything is exposed to view, there will remain no
room for any word or speech to express one's thought. In that stage of
the long Day of Judgement, it is man and his deeds on the carpet, and
the deeds are all exposed to view, and have form and shape to be seen by
all. When that day comes all the truths and facts are uncovered and
unveiled, and nothing there is exactly similar to what we see here in
this world.

According to some other verses of Qura"n, there are also stages to
pass, in which people will talk to each other and to angels and
apostles, and even to Allah. Eventually and by the end of the judgement;
people are classified in two groups:ِ some of them are fortunate and
blessed, and the other group are wretched and unfortunate, according to
what they have been doing in this world. The unfortunate ones will go to
Hell, wherein for them is sighs and sobs, moanings and wailings. And the
blessed ones are fortunate enough to join Paradise, and its gardens of
bliss, wherein they receive uninterrupted gifts and blessings from their
Lord. Both parties will remain in their abode for ever, except as God
wills.

ABOUT the Arabic, ©KHA"LIDIN¨ that we have translated to, ©DWELL FOR
EVER¨ there is a hot controversy among the commentators and theologians.
Some have concluded that the punishment referred to, are on condition of
the endurance of the heavens and earth, which are not eternal beings.
Therefore the penalties too, are not eternal and forever and finally the
inhabitants of Hell will move up to live in Paradise. The other
theologians hold that, if the above condition exists, it exists for both
parties, and inhabitants of Paradise too must have an end. But there is
also a second condition in the above verses that, ©EXCEPT AS GOD WILLS¨
which may solve the problem easier. That is to say if God wills. he can
give an end to the penalties and change the condition and position of
both, raising the inhabitants of Hell up to

[ 214 ]

the Gardens of Bliss if He wills, and promote the inhabitants of
Paradise, in accordance to the Law of Evolution, to a higher grade of
life. And this idea agrees more with the limitless Mercy and infinite
power and knowledge of God. A reason to support the latter suggestion is
the ending of the above verse (NO.108) that says:ِ

\`\`A GIFT THAT WILL NOT BE CEASED''

This implies that the gifts of God that are bestowed upon the
inhabitants of Paradise are uninterrupted, and they shall never be
ceased, be they bestowed in the Paradise or elsewhere in the new heavens
and earth. Some people and critics have objected on the matter of
KHOLOOD=everlasting of penalties, saying:ِ \`\` What sort of a justice
is this, that man for a short period of life time, of doing good or bad,
should taste an eternal punishment or reward!?'' To answer this question
we have to consider a few points first:ِ

1ِ That eternal punishments is not applied to all the sinners and
guilties. There are a certain group of people who have immersed in their
passions, caprices, and vanity so that they do nothing but sin; and even
if they continue for ever they continue with sinnings, and they never
change their minds. They have indeed sold their self and soul to Satan,
and have closed all the windows and loopholes of rescue and salvation
upon themselves. These are the very incarnation of Badness and Devil!
And after all, in the Hell, there is not an apparent flaming Fire; and
one who lives there he burns with his inner fire, that he has earned its
fuel through his life history.

2ِ The relation of a sin and its punishment, is not a quantitative or a
timely relation. It rather is a qualitative relation that exists between
deeds and rewards, be they positive or negative.

3ِ The punishments in the Dooms Day are the natural effects of sins and
wrongs. The torments and agonies that the sinners suffer is the direct
and natural effect, and the fruit of their deeds. As an example, think
of a man who is a drunkard and within a week drinks so much that he is
inflicted with a severe ulcer in the stomach, which it

[ 215 ]

will not be cured throughout his life. Does any body object here that
the standard with which the sin has been measured for the ulcer
punishment is not based on justice? Another instance of this can be a
driver, who observes not the safety precautions, and in an instance
through an accident, he becomes blind for life! How do we want to
concern and judge the cause with effect here? On the contrary to the
said instances we may have a farmer who sprinkles a handful of flower
seeds upon a large piece of fertile land, and after a period of time the
whole extensive land is seen to have been covered with tens of thousands
of beautiful flowers of various colours! What is the relation between
that handful of seeds, and that extensive beauty of the flowers, and
what has the effect to do with the cause?

**THE MEANS OF PROSPERITY AND MISERY**

Prosperity is something that all peoples are in search of it, and is
defined as successful progress and true happiness. It consists of having
the means of development, and also spiritual and physical development in
the path of Man's evolution. The antonym for prosperity is, ©FAILURE¨,
misery, misfortune, and etc, the main cause of which is having no means
of development and progress. Having the means and instruments for a
thing, and using it not, is another question.

Prosperity and wretchedness are not instinctive, natural, and inborn
gift or loss. Man has the faculty and power of being fortunate, if he
works for it for having Free-Will. If he decides to be prosperous he
must work for it and earn it, and if he does not avoid being wretched
who can deliever him. In fact, life is what we make it, and God will
help those who help themselves. \`\`Among the good means, and suitable
instruments for obtaining prosperity;'' our prophet has said; \`\`Are a
virtuous good spouse, an extensive good house, a fair neighbour, and a
good mount.''

[ 216 ]

فَلاَتَكُ فِي مِرْيَة مِّمَّا يَعْبُدُ هَؤُلاَءِ مَا يَعْبُدُونَ إِلاَّ
كَمَا يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُهُمْ مِّنْ قَبْلُ وَإِنَّا لَمُوَفُّوهُمْ
نَصِيبَهُمْ غَيْرَ مَنقُوص(( 109 ))

109- BE NOT THEN IN DOUBT CONCERNING WHAT THESE MEN WORSHIP THEY
WORSHIP NOTHING BUT WHAT THEIR FATHERS WORSHIPPED FROM BEFORE. AND WE
SHALL GIVE THEM THEIR SHARE IN FULL AND UNDIMINISHED.

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ فَاخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ وَلَوْلاَ
كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِنْ رَّبِّكَ لَقُضِىَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَفِي
شَكّ مِنْهُ مُرِيب(( 110 ))

110- AND VERILY WE GAVE MOSES THE BOOK, BUT DIFFERENCES AROSE THEREIN.
AND HAD IT NOT BEEN FOR A WORD THAT PRECEDED FROM YOUR LORD, IT WOULD
HAVE BEEN JUDGED BETWEEN THEM. AND THEY ARE STILL SUSPICIOUSLY IN DOUBT
OF IT.

وَإِنَّ كُلاًّ لَّمَّا لَيُوَفِّيَنَّهُمْ رَبُّكَ أَعْمَالَهُمْ إِنَّهُ
بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ(( 111 ))

111- AND CERTAINLY YOUR LORD WILL REWARD THEM ALL, THEIR DEEDS IN FULL,
THAT HE IS AWARE OF WHATEVER THEY DO.

فَاسْتَقِمْ كَمَا أُمِرْتَ وَمَنْ تَابَ مَعَكَ وَلاَ تَطْغَوْا إِنَّهُ
بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ (( 112 ))

112- SO, CONTINUE (WITH PERSEVERANCE) AS YOU ARE COMMANDED, TOGETHER
WITH THOSE WHO HAVE REPENTED WITH YOU; AND DO NOT TRANSGRESS, THAT HE
SEES WHATEVER YOU DO.

[ 217 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
CONTINUE WITH PERSEVERANCE (VERSE NO. 109 - 112)**

These verses were sent down to console and strengthen our prophet, and
the believers who had repented with him. They were also instructed to
fear not the large number of enemies, and to stand firm in front of
them; that God would help and support them in time:ِ \`\`Be not then in
doubt concerning what these people worship.'' Their worship was not
based on study and knowledge. They merely imitated their fathers, and
their creed was not a religion, but some sort of a culture they imitated
from one another. They rejected the Message of God and denied the
prophets and went on their own way of evil and perversion, and so said
Allah to them:ِ

\`\`Soon shall we give them their share of torment which is the natural
effect of their own deeds. We shall repay them their wrongs and
oppressions, in full and undiminished.'' And once again to comfort his
prophet, Allah, says:ِ \`\`O, prophet! It is not only your people who
have fallen in variance concerning you and your Book.'' So was the case
with the people of Moses tooِthe Israelites:ِ \`\`And we also gave Moses
the Book, but differences arose therein. And had it not been for a word
that preceded from your Lord, it would have been judged between them.''
In other word; if We do not hasten to punish your people, we deem that
more advisable; because it might be that some of them in future repent
and turn to good purposes.

\`\`So be you , o, Mohammad steadfast, and continue your undertakings
with perseveranceِyou and those who have repented with you; and do not
transgress....'' This verse (NO.112) was the hardest of all the verses
that were sent down to our prophet (AS). So when he was asked:ِ \`\`Why
did your hairs grow grey so soon?'' He answered:ِ \`\`The chapter of
Hood turned me old! And he referred to the said verse, which is
sometimes called the verse of patience and perseverance.''

[ 218 ]

Patience and perseverance which imply a holding fast to a purpose, aim,
or to a course of actions; is considered among the most important means
and principles of any success. There is a Persian proverb saying:ِ
\`\`Patience is bitter but bears sweet fruit.'' William Shakspeare too,
in his Othello has :ِ \`\`How poor are they, that have no patience,
\`\`What wound did ever heal, but by degree?'' So, if Mohammad's
patience and perseverance whitened his black hairs, it also led to his
extraordinary success, and this was for the said verse of Hood which
told him to attempt the end and never stand in doubt: There are four
important instructions to be accomplished in the said verse. These are
as follows:ِ

1ِ To stand firm and resolute, and to follow the object with
perseverance, giving no way to feebleness.
2ِ Work hard and do it only for the sake of Allah your Lord.
3ِ Encourage your followers to be steadfast too, with you.
4ِ Do not transgress and keep within due bounds observing reasonable
limits.

The above four instructions have a general application on all men, and
on all ages, and are not peculiar to Mohammad's life time, and his
disciple.

وَلاَ تَرْكَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّكُمُ النَّارُ وَمَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ ثُمَّ لاَ تُنصَرُونَ (( 113
))

113- AND LEAN NOT ON THOSE WHO OPPRESSED, LEST THE FIRE SEIZE YOU; THAT
THERE IS NO PROTECTOR FOR YOU OTHER THAN ALLAH; AND THEN YOU WILL NOT BE
HELPED.

[ 219 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
LEANING UPON THE OPPRESSORS (VERSE NO. 113)**

The above verse is one of the basic programmes for man's social,
political, military, and religious affairs. It addresses all Muslims in
general, and as a definite duty for them, saying:ِ

\`\`Lean not upon the oppressors, lest the Fire seize you, and you will
have no one to protect you except Allah.'' Here a few points are to be
considered:ِ

1ِ To LEAN upon somebody, means to rely, to depend, to incline, to
befriend, as to receive or give support. It also implies to trust, to
have confidence, and to conform in conducts, and also obedience.

2ِ It is evident that one must not take part, or help any oppressor in
their oppression. Then we must know that leaning on them will take away
from us our self-confidence, self-reliance, and self-respect.

3ِ Leaning on the oppressors will strengthen them, and increase their
power and influence, and will spread their oppression wider and wider.

So also, reliance on the oppressors will serve to hide the ugliness and
abomination of sin, oppression, and cruelty.

4ِ Avoiding oppression and the sinful oppressors, does not necessarily
mean to stop mutual transactions with them, or leaving them with their
injustice, free and unattended and warning them not of the viles and
evils of their hateful deeds. The word oppressor is also applicable to
the idolaters and to all the polytheists; but not limited to them. Any
body who applies to injustice, corruption, evil deeds, and any of the
capital and deadly sins, is called an oppressor in Qura"n's language and
literature.

وَأَقِمْ الصَّلاَةَ طَرَفِيَ النَّهَارِ وَزُلَفاً مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ إِنَّ
الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّيِّئَاتِ ذَلِكَ ذِكْرَى لِلذَّاكِرِينَ((
114 ))

[ 220 ]

114- AND PERFORM PRAYERS AT THE TWO ENDS OF THE DAY (MORNING AND
EVENING) AND IN THE FIRST HOURS OF THE NIGHT; THAT GOOD DEEDS MAKE AMEND
FOR BAD ONES. THAT IS A REMINDER FOR THE MINDFUL.

وَاصْبِرْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 115 ))

115- AND BE PATIENT, THAT ALLAH WILL NOT WASTE THE REWARD OF THE GOOD
DOERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
PRAYER AND PATIENCE (VERSE NO. 114 - 115)**

Here reference is made to two important Islamic commandments which are
in fact the soul of faith, and the basis of Islam:ِ \`\`Perform the
prayer at the two ends of the day, and in the first hours of the
night.'' This refers to the prayers that are incumbent upon all Muslims
to perform. There are five canonical prayers for a Muslim to perform
which follows:ِ

1ِ The MORNING PRAYER which is to be performed at down when the light
is up but before the sunrise.

2ِ The NOON PRAYER that is performed immediately after noon.

3ِ The EVENING PRAYER which is usually performed after the noon prayer
and before the sun-set:

4ِ Then there is the, SUNSET PRAYER which is performed just after the
sunset.

5ِ And finally we have to perform the night prayer when the glow of the
sunset has disappeared, committing ourselves to God before sleep.
[ 221 ]

**COLLECTING THE PRAYERS**

We usually perform our prayers simultaneously, collecting the noon
prayer with the evening prayer, and the sunset prayer with that of the
night. We Shiites, perform them together and at once, and we do that
with the permission of our prophet. In the famous book, SAHIH
TERMAZIِV:1ِP:354. it has been written that the prophet himself was
doing the same, without being in danger, fear, or rain. He used to do
that, because he didn't want any hardship for his followers. Now-a-days,
that our social life, particularly in the plants and factories, have
turned to be hard and complex; if some one has bound himself to perform
his prayers in proper time and separately, he may not be able to do them
all. So to make use of the remissions, will make us more steadfast in
our prayers and worship.

The ending clause of the above verse, refers to the cleansing property
of the prayer:ِ \`\`Good does make amend of the evil ones.'' Here, good
deed primarily refers to the prayer, but it includes all kinds of
worship such as fasting, alms giving, pilgrimage, strive for the sake of
God, and supplications. It is by these precepts that we may keep away
from evil deeds. We read elsewhere in the Holy Qura"nِ S 29:45, that:ِ
\`\`Recite what has been inspired to you of the Book and perform the
prayers, that the prayer may restrain you from shameful deeds and bad
conducts.'' Here in this verse, the neutralizing effect of worship is
referred to, that may render the evil deeds ineffective, and purify us
from our sins.

**THE IMPORTANCE OF THE PRAYER**

The Daily Prayer have unquestionable importance in the sight of Islam.
Salma"n Farsi has narrated:ِ \`\`I saw the prophet shaking a branch of
tree on which all the leaves were dry. When he shook the branch, all the
leaves fell upon the ground. The prophet said:ِ

[ 222 ]

O, Salman! Don't you want to ask me why did I do so? I said yes, your
holiness! if you don't mind. The prophet then said:ِ When a Muslim
performs the ablution (VOZOO) well, and then establishes his daily
prayers, his sins will fall down as the dry leaves fell down by my shock
on the branch.'' In another tradition, our prophet has said:ِ \`\`The
Daily Prayers are like a stream of water that flows at one's door. If
such a person washes himself five times a day, in such a flowing stream,
will there remain any dirt or stain upon his body? Such is the case with
the prayers, that he who regularly performs them, there will remain no
sin with him uncleared and unforgiven.''

The above verse (NO.114) has been said to be one of the most hopeful
verses of Qura"n. Following the commandment of prayer, there comes the
next important order which is: HAVING PATIENCE. When man is encountered
with something hard and unusual, some may lose control and become
nervous, and some other may stand firm and resisting. Then also might be
a third group of people who not only resist with perseverance, that they
are thankful to their Lord too; for their faith in God, and that,
hardship will make man's possibilities productive. In their sight;
difficulties are meant to rouse, not discourage. And the fourth group of
believers who are of course rare, are those who eagerly and with love,
fight against troubles and try to neutralize the effects of troubles and
misfortunes that may have afflicted them. They are promised to have the
final success.

فَلَوْلاَ كَانَ مِنْ الْقُرُونِ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ أُوْلُوا بَقِيَّة
يَنْهَوْنَ عَنْ الْفَسَادِ فِي الاَْرْضِ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا مِّمَّنْ
أَنْجَيْنَا مِنْهُمْ وَاتَّبَعَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مَا أُتْرِفُوا فِيهِ
وَكَانُوا مُجْرِمِينَ(( 116 ))

116- WHY WERE THERE NOT AMONG THE GENERATIONS BEFORE YOU, ANY UPRIGHT
MEN TO PREACH AGAINST

[ 223 ]

CORRUPTION IN THE EARTH, EXCEPT A FEW OF THOSE WHOM WE RESCUED FROM
AMONG THEM. AND THOSE WHO OPPRESSED FOLLOWED THEIR WORLDLY PLEASURES,
AND THUS BECAME GUILTY.

وَمَا كَانَ رَبُّكَ لِيُهْلِكَ الْقُرَى بِظُلْم وَأَهْلُهَا مُصْلِحُونَ
(( 117 ))

117- AND YOUR LORD IS NOT TO DESTROY THE TOWNS UNJUSTLY, WHEN THEIR
INHABITANTS ARE RIGHTEOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE GOVERNING FACTOR OF CORRUPTION IN THE SOCIETY (VERSE NO. 116 -
117)**

In the above two verses, a principle which will guarantee to save
society from corruption and destruction has been propounded. As far as
there are some thoughtful and virtuous men in a society, who forbid evil
and enjoin good deeds; and who stand stout against evil without being
tempted by worldly pleasures and lusts, their community will not yield
to corruption and perdition. On the other hand when indifferences
prevail and no one in a society shows any reaction against evil deeds,
and the phrases:ِ ©NOT MY BUSSINESS¨ and, ©IT IS NONE OF YOUR BUSSINESS¨
is often heard here and there; the society will decay, and eventually
shall be doomed. Our Lord is not to destroy a town unjustly, when its
inhabitants are moving on their way to righteousness and truth. God is
too Merciful to destroy a people, so far as, there be a hope of
repentance and amendment for them. In the shade of such a hope, God's
Grace and Mercy will withhold and delay their punishment and misfortune,
to give them a respite to put things aright.

So there must be some defensive forces in every population and society
to stand against the invasion of evil forces. As a matter of fact,

[ 224 ]

the community is an example of a human body in all aspects and
respects. The man body which moves a long span of life, through a world
filled with hazards, has a remarkable system of defenses against
accidents and disease. The invasion of the body by the infectious
agents, such as microbes has been likened to war.

There are local skirmishes at the point of attack, followed later by
generalized battles. In this war the cells and the chemical constituents
of blood represent the defending forces or armies against the invaders.
The white cells may be compared to the infantry, which does the
hand-to-hand fighting, and which mops up after the action. The invading
bacterias direct a chemical attack against the body tissues. They
produce a chemical substance called toxins, or poisons, which may be a
damaging or even fatal. These substances may be picked up from the site
of the local invasion, and may be carried through the whole body.
Against the \`\`poison attack'' there is chemical defense. The invaded
tissues soon begin producing a substance called antibodies which
counteract the effects of the invading germs. There are several kinds of
antibodies. The antitoxins directly neutralize the toxin: the
agglutinins cause the invading bacteria to clump together and become
inactive; the opsonins ©soften up¨ the bacteria for the attacks of the
white cells, and the bacteriolysins dissolve the germs.

However if the body loses the local skirmish, the defending forces may
be overwhelmed, and the invading forces make a break through.
Fortunately our body has also a second line of defenseِthe physicians
tell us. The whole society of mankind too is just like our body. If the
defensive forces who act against evil deeds vanish and be vanquished,
the microbs that carry the germs of social disease will directly invade
the community and conquering it, they grow up and begin their swift
reproductions, to ruin the whole society of mankind. Here is where the
important social role of those who are called,

[ 225 ]

©BAQIYYAT¨ in the above verse (NO.116) can be apprehended. They are a
rare group of godly and virtuous persons, who stand firm in their fight
with social microbes. They are pious, and are not tempted by their lusts
and the worldly pleasures. They bravely and with good knowledge forbid
evil deeds and enjoin piety and good conducts. They are leaders that
have the faculty and virtue that can save a nation from disaster or
perdition.

وَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لَجَعَلَ النَّاسَ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلاَ
يَزَالُونَ مُخْتَلِفِينَ(( 118 ))

118- AND HAD YOUR LORD WILLED, HE WOULD HAVE MADE PEOPLE ONE SINGLE
NATION, BUT THEY SHALL CONTINUE TO DIFFER FOREVER.

إِلاَّ مَنْ رَّحِمَ رَبُّكَ وَلِذَلِكَ خَلَقَهُمْ وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَةُ
رَبِّكَ لاََمْلاََنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنْ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ
(( 119 ))

119- EXCEPT THOSE ON WHOM YOUR LORD HAS MERCY, AND FOR THAT END HAS HE
CREATED THEM.

AND THE WORD OF YOUR LORD IS FULFILLED THAT; I SHALL FILL UP THE HELL
WITH JINNS AND MEN ALL TOGETHER.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 118 - 119**

The theme in the above verses, is the conflict and differences that
always exists among mankind, and which arises, to some extent, from
Man,s FREE WILL:ِ

\`\`Had your Lord willed, he would have made people one single nation,
but

[ 226 ]

they shall continue to differ for ever.'' Allah could have easily made
His servants Monotheists and good doers by force-majeure; but such a
faith and conduct, worths nothing and deserves no reward or praise for
being the contrary to Free-Will. So, many of our differences are caused
by our limited Free-Will, and when our selfishness and moral wrongs are
added to, our difference increase, and then dissension and disagreement
in opinion and religion will move us towards the battle-fields and
blood-shed! In this conflict, Satan, his companions, and evil spirits,
will fan the fire of variances and add fuel to it, and therefore both
parties are involved in the punishment, and they fill up the Hell
collectively:ِ

\`\`And the word of your Lord is fulfilled that; I shall fill up the
Hell with Jinns and Man all together.'' A few points are here to be
considered:ِ

1ِ Without having a Free-Will, Man can not take any step towards moral
and spiritual evolution and development. This is made clear through the
verses in S 91:8ِ

\`\`By the soul and He who shaped it; and inspired it with the
knowledge of its wrong and right. Blessed is he who purified it, and
failed he who has corrupted it.

2ِ What is the purpose of Man's creation?''

To this question, there are three answer in the Book with different
wordings, but the same meaning:ِ

\* In the S 51:56, we have:ِ \`\`I did not create man and jinn except
to worship Me''

\* In the S 67:2 we read:ِ \`\`It is he who created death and life in
order to test you to make known which one of you is the best in
deeds.''

\* And finally we have S 11:119:ِ \`\`Except those on whom your Lord
has Mercy, and for that end has He created them.''

If we study the said three verses which contain the purpose of our
creation, we find no difference in them, because nothing can ever exist
without being a manifestation of God's Mercy to some extent and to some
how.

Rumi has referred to the above verses in his great Mathnavi by
saying:ِ

[ 227 ]

\`\`I did not create man to profit from him. I rather created my
servants to bestow on them, my gift and Mercy.''

وَكُلاًّ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ مِنْ أَنْبَاءِ الرُّسُلِ مَا نُثَبِّتُ بِهِ
فُؤَادَكَ وَجَاءَكَ فِي هَذِهِ الْحَقُّ وَمَوْعِظَةٌ وَذِكْرَى
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 120 ))

120- AND ALL THAT WE RELATE TO YOU OF THE STORIES OF THE MESSENGERS, BY
IT WE STABILIZE YOUR HEART, AND TO YOU HAS COME IN THIS, THE TRUTH, AND
ADMONITION, AND A REMINDER FOR THE BELIEVERS.

وَقُلْ لِّلَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ اعْمَلُوا عَلَى مَكَانَتِكُمْ إِنَّا
عَامِلُونَ (( 121 ))

121- AND SAY TO THOSE WHO DO NOT BELIEVE; DO WHAT-EVER IS WITHIN YOUR
POWER, WE SHALL BE DOING TOO.

وَانتَظِرُوا إِنَّا مُنتَظِرُونَ (( 122 ))

122- AND YOU WAIT WATCHING, WE SHALL WAIT AND WATCH TOO.

وَللهِِ غَيْبُ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُ الاَْمْرُ
كُلُّهُ فَاعْبُدْهُ وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَيْهِ وَمَا رَبُّكَ بِغَافِل عَمَّا
تَعْمَلُونَ(( 123 ))

123- AND TO ALLAH BELONGS THE UNSEEN IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND TO
HIM WILL RETURN ALL AFFAIRS. SO WORSHIP HIM, AND PUT YOUR TRUST IN HIM,
THAT YOUR LORD IS NOT NEGLIGENT OF WHAT YOU DO.

[ 228 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THERE ARE FOUR USES IN STUDYING THE STORIES OF THE PROPHETS (VERSE NO.
120 - 123)**

1ِ They are used to stabilize the prophet's heart, making him resolute,
firm, and steady in his Divine Mission.

2ِ The narratives are truthful lessons to teach man the physical and
spiritual truths of life. We can learn by studying such stories, the
causes of success and failure, and the reasons for prosperity and
misfortune. These, and many more matters have been propounded in their
stories for man's further considerations.

3ِ These stories include advices, admonitions, and warnings, to awaken
the conscience of those who are in search of prosperity and salvation.

4ِ And finally, these stories are also reminders for the believers, so
as to make them continually thoughtful and regardful of their own fate,
by studying that of the predecessors.

By the end, reference is made to the infinite knowledge and limitless
power of the All-mighty, that; there is nothing secret or exposed, seen
or unseen, out of the realm of His knowledge and control. That there
exists nothing which depends not on Him in all aspects! So much so,
that, every affair will return to Him for final decision.

**THE END OF SUREH HOOD (11)**

[ 229 ]

**سوره يوسف
JOSEPH**

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الر تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ (( 1 ))

1- A.L.R. HERE ARE THE SIGNS OF THE PERSPICUOUS BOOK.

إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ قُرْآناً عَرَبِيّاً لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ (( 2
))

2- WE HAVE SENT IT DOWN, AN ARABIC READING (QURA"N) THAT YOU MAY LEARN
WISDOM.

نَحْنُ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ أَحْسَنَ الْقَصَصِ بِمَا أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ
هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ وَإِنْ كُنتَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِ لَمِنْ الْغَافِلِينَ (( 3
))

3- WE RELATE TO YOU THE MOST BEAUTIFUL OF STORIES BY INSPIRING TO YOU
THIS QURA"N, WHILE BEFORE THIS, YOU WERE OF THOSE WHO KNEW IT NOT.

[ 230 ]


