An Introduction To the Sureh of Joseph
======================================

With the exception of a few ending verses, the SUREH is completely
taken up with the story of JOSEPH, the best and beloved son of JACOB. In
this story the main character is a real one, and not a fictitious. It is
called the most beautiful of stories for its many amazing features and
wonderful incidents, and the many ups and downs of human life, and
changes of man's circumstances. It is a touching and teaching story that
is appealed to by man and women of all classes. It is a story of faith,
piety, and virtueِthat of a father's deadly grief, and his blinding
bitter tears for his lost beloved son, and his patience, and his trust
and hope in his Lord. It is the story of the jealousy and ignorance of
brothers, and the ardent love and high running passion of a young queen,
for a beautiful young man of piety and virtue, whom the Egyptain women
called the noble angel. (S 12:31) It is the story of a desolate lad
fallen at the bottom of a desolate well, who has no one to help him
except God, his Merciful Lord, and also, \`\`The marvellous working of
God's eternal purpose in his plan as unfolded to us on the wide canvas
of history.''

And eventually the story of forgiveness and reconciliation that
replaces vengeance and hatred.

**THE MOST BEAUTIFUL STORY IS BEFORE YOU (VERSE NO. 1 - 3)**

AِLِRِ: For the meaning of the abbreviated letters, please refer to S
2:1=V.1ِP.30 The purpose of revealing this chapter is said to make us
learn wisdom, of course, by using our faculties of thought and insight:ِ
\`\`We have sent it down, as an Arabic Qura"n that you may learn
wisdom.'' The Arabic, ©QURA"N¨ means a readingِthat which is readِor
written or printed matter intended to be read. The Arabic language is a
very rich one in words, phrases, idioms, parables, hints, verses, and
prose. It is the most suitable means to

[ 231 ]

convey the inspirations of God to Man:ِ \`\`We relate to you the most
beautiful of stories....'' Some commentators understand the adjective
clause, ©MOST BEAUTIFUL¨ is attributed to the whole Book,in order to
qualify the proper noun, ©QURA"N¨ and some others attribute it to the
story of JOSEPH.

**THE ROLE OF NOVELS IN THE HUMAN LIFE**

One may ask why a sacred Book with the purpose of spiritual training,
should contain so many tales and stories of the past, and biographies of
this apostle and that prophet? In answer to this question; we should
think of Man's history as a laboratory, and a workroom devoted to
experimental study in all fields of life. It is the history that can
show us the realities of man's life. Through the history, man can see
the causes of the raise and fall of nations, and the reasons for their
prosperity and misfortune. The history is a mirror in which we can see
the complete body of Man's society and almost all his social affairs. Of
course, our history book to be studied, must be free of flatteries and
void of falsehood and excessive praises. It should be without lies, and
superstitions. This is why, the best works of the poets, writers, and
scholars, are found among their narratives. A good story in prose or
verse, audio or visual, is the most effective means of conveying a
matter or a meaning to mankind. The story is also more apprehensible to
all classes of men and women.

إِذْ قَالَ يُوسُفُ لاَِبِيهِ يَا أَبَتِ إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَحَدَ عَشَرَ
كَوْكَباً وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ رَأَيْتُهُمْ لِي سَاجِدِينَ (( 4 ))

4- WHEN JOSEPH SAID TO HIS FATHER:ِ \`\`O, MY FATHER! I SAW (IN MY
DREAM) ELEVEN STARS AND THE SUN AND THE MOON. I SAW THEM PROSTRATE
THEMSELVES TO ME!''

[ 232 ]

قَالَ يَا بُنَىَّ لاَ تَقْصُصْ رُؤْيَاكَ عَلَى إِخْوَتِكَ فَيَكِيدُوا
لَكَ كَيْداً إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ لِلاِْنسَانِ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ (( 5 ))

5- HE SAID:ِ \`\`MY SON! DO NOT RELATE YOUR DREAM TO YOUR BROTHERS,
LEST THEY PLAN A PLOT AGAINST YOU THAT SATAN IS TO MAN A MANIFEST
ENEMY.''

وَكَذَلِكَ يَجْتَبِيكَ رَبُّكَ وَيُعَلِّمُكَ مِنْ تَأْوِيلِ
الاَْحَادِيثِ وَيُتِمُّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَى آلِ يَعْقُوبَ كَمَا
أَتَمَّهَا عَلَى أَبَوَيْكَ مِنْ قَبْلُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْحَاقَ إِنَّ
رَبَّكَ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ(( 6 ))

6- AND SO WILL YOUR LORD ELECT YOU AND TEACH YOU TO INTERPRET THE
PHENOMENONS, (LIKE DREAMS AND FAMINES) AND WILL COMPLETE HIS FAVOUR TO
YOU, AND UPON THE HOUSEHOLD OF JACOB, AS HE PERFECTED IT BEFORE TO YOUR
FATHERS, ABRAHAM AND ISAAC, THAT YOUR LORD IS ALL-KNOWING, WISE.

**THE COMMENTARY
A GLEAM OF HOPE AND THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLES (VERSE NO. 4 - 6)**
