Attention To Others More Than God
=================================

Monotheism is not restricted only to the oneness of God. It must be
applied and extended to all the aspects of our life. As an instance; a
monotheist does not rely on anyone other than Allah, and will seek
refuge in no one but his Lord. I do not want to say that they ignore the
natural means of life, and always adhere to supernatural powers; but I
say; they do know that the head of the thread lays in God's hand of
power and knowledge. This principle might be ignored by common people or
by a layman, but the nearer stationed men of God do not ignore it, and
if they do, it will be reckoned as a sin which deserves some sort of a
punishment. Joseph forgot this principle for instance, and as a
recompense, he was to remain in the jail for several years!

[ 262 ]

وَقَالَ الْمَلِكُ إِنِّي أَرَى سَبْعَ بَقَرَات سِمَان يَأْكُلُهُنَّ
سَبْعٌ عِجَافٌ وَسَبْعَ سُنْبُلاَت خُضْر وَأُخَرَ يَابِسَات يَا أَيُّهَا
الْمَلَأُ أَفْتُونِي فِي رُؤْيَايَ إِنْ كُنتُمْ لِلرُّؤْيَا تَعْبُرُونَ
(( 43 ))

43- AND THE KING SAID:ِ \`\`I DO SEE (IN MY DREAM) SEVEN FAT KINE
DEVOURING THEM SEVEN LEAN ONES. LIKEWISE SEVEN GREEN EAR OF CORN AND
SEVEN WITHERED. O, YOU CHIEFS! TELL ME THE MEANING OF MY VISION, IF YOU
EXPOUND THE DREAMS.''

قَالُوا أَضْغَاثُ أَحْلَام وَمَا نَحْنُ بِتَأْوِيلِ الاَْحْلاَمِ
بِعَالِمِينَ(( 44 ))

44- THEY SAID:ِ (THESE ARE) CONFUSED DREAMS; AND WE KNOW NOT THE
INTERPRETATION OF NIGHT MARES.

وَقَالَ الَّذِي نَجَا مِنْهُمَا وَاِدَّكَرَ بَعْدَ أُمَّة أَنَا
أُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِتَأْوِيلِهِ فَأَرْسِلُونِي(( 45 ))

45- AND SAID THE ONE OF THE TWO WHO HAD BEEN SAVED:ِ REMEMBERING
(JOSEPH) AFTER A LONG TIME, I WILL INFORM YOU OF ITS INTERPRETATION,
THEN SEND ME FORTH.

يُوسُفُ أَيُّهَا الصِّدِّيقُ أَفْتِنَا فِي سَبْعِ بَقَرَات سِمَان
يَأْكُلُهُنَّ سَبْعٌ عِجَافٌ وَسَبْعِ سُنْبُلاَت خُضْر وَأُخَرَ
يَابِسَات لَّعَلِّي أَرْجِعُ إِلَى النَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 46
))

46- JOSEPH! O, YOU THE TRUTHFUL! EXPOUND TO US (THE DREAM OF) SEVEN FAT
KINE, EATING THEM SEVEN LEAN ONES, AND OF SEVEN EARS OF GREEN CORN, AND
(SEVEN) OTHERS WITHERED; THAT I MAY RETURN TO PEOPLE SO THAT THEY MIGHT
KNOW.

قَالَ تَزْرَعُونَ سَبْعَ سِنِينَ دَأَباً فَمَا حَصَدْتُّمْ فَذَرُوهُ
فِي سُنْبُلِهِ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا مِمَّا تَأْكُلُونَ(( 47 ))

[ 263 ]

47- HE SAID:ِ \`\`YOU SHALL SOW SEVEN YEARS AS WAS YOUR WONT. THEN WHAT
YOU REAP LEAVE IT IN THE EAR, EXCEPTING A LITTLE WHICH YOU EAT.''

ثُمَّ يَأْتِي مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ سَبْعٌ شِدَادٌ يَأْكُلْنَ مَا
قَدَّمْتُمْ لَهُنَّ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا مِّمَّا تُحْصِنُونَ(( 48 ))

48- THEN THERE COMES AFTER THAT SEVEN HARD YEARS (OF FAMINE IN WHICH)
THEY SHALL EAT WHAT YOU HAVE STORED FOR THEM, EXCEPT A LITTLE WHICH IS
TO BE RESERVED. (FOR SEEDS)

ثُمَّ يَأْتِي مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ عَامٌ فِيهِ يُغَاثُ النَّاسُ وَفِيهِ
يَعْصِرُونَ(( 49 ))

49- THEN THERE SHALL COME A YEAR IN WHICH THE PEOPLE WILL HAVE ABUNDANT
WATER AND IN WHICH THEY SHALL PRESS. (JUICE AND OIL)

**THE COMMENTARY
THE EVENT OF KING'S DREAM (VERSE NO. 43 - 49)**

Joseph stayed in the prison for years lonely and forgotten. His
occupation and engagement was self-development and teaching and
preaching the prisoners. Then a small incident changed his fate
completely:ِ The king of Egypt whose name was, ©VALID-IBN-RAYYA"N¨ and
whose prime minister was titled, ©AZIZ¨ dreamt a dream which he was very
interested to know its meaning, but none of his advisors could explain
it. The king dreamt of seven fat kine devouring them seven lean ones,
and likewise seven green ear of corn, and seven withered.

The king deemed of his dream that there would be a revolution in his
country through which the weak class of people; such as the

[ 264 ]

farmers, labourers, and slaves, would revolt and eat up the higher
classes! So he was very anxious to know the real interpretation of his
dream. Then the cup-bearer remembered his former fellow-prisoner,
\`\`Joseph'' after several years that had passed; and reported his skill
in the interpretation of dreams to the king. He was then sent by the
king to Joseph to ask him of the interpretation:ِ \`\`Joseph! O, you the
truthful! Expound to us the dream of seven fat kine, eating them seven
lean ones, and of seven ears of green corn and seven others being
withered.''

In his expounding Joseph showed what would happen in future of
abundance and famine, and also the measures to be taken for dealing with
the coming calamity of drought. He said that:ِ They could have seven
years of abundant harvest, with attentive and assiduous cultivation, and
that there would follow seven years of dreadful drought, which would
consume all their stored reserved food and sustenances. So they had to
be careful, said Joseph to the cup-bearer, and during the famine not to
consume all their food, and preserve some for seeds to be sowed again.
\`\`Then there shall come a year'', continued Joseph, in which the
people will have abandont water, either by rain, or the river of Nile
may bring fertilizing waters and slits from its upper sources:ِ

\`\`Then there shall come a year in which the people will have abundant
water and in which they shall press.'' The phrase, ©THEY SHALL PRESS¨ in
the ending of the above verse (NO.49) may imply a very abundant year,
following the seven years of famine; in which the vine and olive trees
that have suffered from the drought revive and yield their juice and
oil.

وَقَالَ الْمَلِكُ ائْتُونِي بِهِ فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُ الرَّسُولُ قَالَ
ارْجِعْ إِلَى رَبِّكَ فَاسْأَلْهُ مَا بَالُ النِّسْوَةِ اللاَّتِي
قَطَّعْنَ أَيْدِيَهُنَّ إِنَّ رَبِّي بِكَيْدِهِنَّ عَلِيمٌ (( 50 ))

[ 265 ]

50- AND THE KING SAID:ِ \`\`BRING HIM, (i.e.JOSEPH) TO ME. BUT WHEN THE
MESSENGER CAME TO (TAKE) HIM,'' HE SAID:ِ \`\`GO BACK TO YOUR LORD AND
ASK HIM, WHAT WAS THE CASE OF THE WOMEN WHO CUT THEIR HANDS? VERILY MY
LORD KNOWS THEIR GUILE.''

قَالَ مَا خَطْبُكُنَّ إِذْ رَاوَدتُّنَّ يُوسُفَ عَنْ نَفْسِهِ قُلْنَ
حَاشَ للهِِ مَا عَلِمْنَا عَلَيْهِ مِنْ سُوء قَالَتْ امْرَأَةُ
الْعَزِيزِ الاْنَ حَصْحَصَ الْحَقُّ أَنَا رَاوَدتُّهُ عَنْ نَفْسِهِ
وَإِنَّهُ لَمِنْ الصَّادِقِينَ(( 51 ))

51- (THE KING CALLED THE WOMEN TO HIS COURT AND) HE SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT WAS
YOUR AFFAIR WHEN YOU SOUGHT TO ENTICE JOSEPH?'' THEY SAID:ِ \`\`GOD SAVE
US! WE KNOW NO EVIL OF HIM.'' THE AZIZ'S WIFE SAID: \`\`NOW HAS THE
TRUTH COME TO LIGHT. I SOLICITED HIM, AND HE IS THE TRUTHFUL.''

ذَلِكَ لِيَعْلَمَ أَنِّي لَمْ أَخُنْهُ بِالْغَيْبِ وَأَنَّ اللهَ لاَ
يَهْدِي كَيْدَ الْخَائِنِينَ (( 52 ))

52- THIS IS TO MAKE HIM KNOW THAT I DID NOT BETRAY HIM IN HIS ABSENCE,
AND THAT ALLAH WILL NOT GUIDE THE GUILE OF THE TREACHEROUS.

وَمَا أُبَرِّءُ نَفْسِي إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لاََمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلاَّ
مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّي إِنَّ رَبِّي غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 53 ))

53- AND YET I DO NOT ACQUIT MY CARNAL SOUL (OF BLAME), THAT THE CARNAL
SOUL OF MAN INCITES TO EVIL, UNLESS MY LORD BESTOWS HIS MERCY, THAT MY
LORD IS ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

[ 266 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
JOSEPH IS ACQUITTED OF ALL CHARGES (VERSE NO. 50 - 53)**

Joseph interpreted the king's dream so logically and reasonably that
attracted the attention of the king and all his courtiers. Pharaoh came
to know in brief that, Joseph was much more than a slave prisoner, and
had been imprisoned some how in a mysterious way and guiltless. He
therefore became eager to have a visit with him. So he sent the
cup-bearer to fetch him from the prison. In his way, the cup-bearer was
thinking that his former fellow-prisoner would be overjoyed at the
summon of the king, but in time he found him different. Joseph did not
want to accept the scornful forgiveness of the king. By now he was
entirely dependant upon his Lord God, and showed no enthusiasm or
eagerness to the call! First of all he wanted to be free of any charge
in the sight of the public, and, after all if once again he had to be
exposed to the evil solicitations of the ladies, he would prefer to
remain in that prison. On the other hand if he was to do a great work
for the people of Egypt, he had to have confidence and assurance of not
being interrupted by the guile of the courtiers, and the wile of women.
To him his nobleness and prestige was far more important than occupying
the position of a minister, or AZIZ, in the court of Pharaoh. He
therefore said to the king's messenger:ِ

\`\`Go back to your lord and ask him what was the case of the woman who
cut their hands?'' It is worthy of note here, that Joseph discreetly
omitted any particular mention of Zulaikhah who in fact had been the
cause of his imprisonment and most of the troubles. When the king
received the message of Joseph and considered his request, and also his
reluctance; he compared him with the flatterers who had surrounded him,
and became more attracted to Joseph's personality. He soon called the
ladies to a meeting and asked:ِ

[ 267 ]

\`\`What was your affair when you sought to entice Joseph?'' Here the
sleepy conscience of the ladies leapt up and all of them testified to
Joseph's honesty and innocence. In that wonderful meeting of justice and
confession, although Zulaikhah was present, the other ladies took the
lead and grudgingly they all acknowledge the innocence and honesty of
Joseph; but they held a discreed silence about Zulaikhah who stood there
calm and quiet, gazing at the others! At once Zulaikhah interrupted the
ladies, and made a speech frankly and full of enthusiasm. She; without
any fear or feeling of restriction, acknowledged her own guilt
saying:ِ

\`\`Now is the turn of truth, which has already come to light. I
solicited him. I sought to seduce and entice him, and he is completely
guiltless, and is indeed a truthful man!'' She then tried to reveal to
Joseph that; during his absence, she had always been constant and firm
in her love and fidelity. She continued and said:ِ

\`\`I confessed that, in order to make known to Joseph that; I have
never been false to him in his absence, and I know that Allah will never
guide the guile and trick of betrayers. True that I accused him with a
false charge, but I did that in a state of blind passion, and to his
face. Yet I do not acquit myself of blames, because the carnal soul of
human incites to evil, unless my Lord who is Forgiving and Merciful, may
bestow His Mercy upon us.''

Her speech was as if she asked for pardon and Mercy, with the hope to
obtain the capacity for having a true love as Joseph could understand
it!

**BEGINNING OF PART 13
OF THE HOLY QURA"N**

وَقَالَ الْمَلِكُ ائْتُونِي بِهِ أَسْتَخْلِصْهُ لِنَفْسِي فَلَمَّا
كَلَّمَهُ قَالَ إِنَّكَ الْيَوْمَ لَدَيْنَا مَكِينٌ أَمِينٌ(( 54 ))

[ 268 ]

54- AND THE KING SAID:ِ \`\`BRING HIM TO ME. I WILL ELECT HIM FOR
MYSELF.'' THEN WHEN HE SPOKE TO HIM, HE SAID:ِ \`\`TO-DAY YOU ARE
HONOURED AND TRUSTED WITH US.''

قَالَ اجْعَلْنِي عَلَى خَزَائِنِ الاَْرْضِ إِنِّي حَفِيظٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 55
))

55- HE SAID:ِ \`\`ASSIGN ME IN CHARGE OF THE RESOURCES OF THE LAND, FOR
I AM A WELL PRESERVER AND WELL KNOWER.''

وَكَذَلِكَ مَكَّنَّا لِيُوسُفَ فِي الاَْرْضِ يَتَبَوَّأُ مِنْهَا حَيْثُ
يَشَاءُ نُصِيبُ بِرَحْمَتِنَا مَنْ نَشَاءُ وَلاَ نُضِيعُ أَجْرَ
الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 56 ))

56- AND SO DID WE ESTABLISH JOSEPH IN THE LAND (WE GAVE HIM POWER AND
AUTHORITY) TO MAKE HIS OFFICE WHEREVER HE WILLED. WE BESTOW OUR MERCY ON
WHOM WE WILL, AND WE WASTE NOT THE REWARD OF GOOD-DOERS.

وَلاََجْرُ الاْخِرَةِ خَيْرٌ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَكَانُوا يَتَّقُونَ((
57 ))

57- YET THE REWARD OF THE HEREAFTER IS FAR BETTER FOR THOSE WHO
BELIEVED AND WERE PIOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
JOSEPH, THE TREASURER OF EGYPT (VERSE NO. 54 - 57)**

Now we come to the point of Joseph's beautiful story when he was
completely acquitted of all charges and accusations and all were sure of
his honesty and innocence. People knew that the cause of his

[ 269 ]

imprisonment was merely his piety and virtue. By now it had been known
that he possessed great faculties and extraordinary knowledge and high
skill in management. So the king of Egypt brought him out of the Jail
and gave him the highest rank of honour and esteem, and trusted him the
most!:ِ \`\`And the king said:ِ Bring him to me that I may elect him for
myself''. Then when Joseph spoke to the king, he said to Joseph:ِ
\`\`To-day you are honoured and trusted with us.''

Joesph then asked the king to assign him in charge of the resources and
treasures of the whole land of Egypt. To justify his request, Joseph
claimed to have been a very well preserver of sustenances, and also
having a wide variety of knowledge. In fact Joseph was not praising
himself by saying that; he rather introduced himself to make it easy for
the king in order to put the right man in the right position. Later on
he proved to be right in his claim by organizing reserves in years of
plenty against the years of famine to come. During his management he
always undertook the hardest and the most unpopular tasks himself, and
did not put it upon the shoulders of the other staff.

The king accepted his requests by all means, and gave him the plenary
authority that he wanted:ِ \`\`And so did We establish Joseph in the
land with power and authority to make his office wherever he willed.''
Let us now consider the wonderful and mysterious hand of God working
powerfully on his plans:ِ A believer and faithful boy whose brethren
cast him into a well to get rid of him; is raised up, and upper, and
becomes the most trusted dignitary of the king of the greatest empires
of the world of the day. He gradually won the position of the Aziz of
Egypt, and eventually became the governor of Egypt without any rival!
And yet his reward is promised to be given him in the life to come.

True that some people will receive their rewards for good-deeds in this
present mortal life, but this is not general and for all. Some people
may indeed deserve a great reward for what they do in this short life,
but they don't get it. God through his justice and Mercy will

[ 270 ]

not waste the reward of the good-doer. He will give them their due in
full measure in the life to come:ِ \`\`We waste not the reward of the
good-doers. The reward of the Hereafter is far better for those who
believed and were pious.''

وَجَاءَ إِخْوَةُ يُوسُفَ فَدَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَعَرَفَهُمْ وَهُمْ لَهُ
مُنكِرُونَ(( 58 ))

58- AND JOSEPH'S BROTHERS CAME AND ENTERED BEFORE HIM. THEN HE KNEW
THEM, BUT THEY DENIED HIM. (THINKING HOW COULD OUR JOSEPH BE IN SUCH A
HIGH POSITION)

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَمَّا جَهَّزَهُمْ بِجَهَازِهِمْ قَالَ ائْتُونِي بِأَخ لَّكُمْ مِنْ
أَبِيكُمْ أَلاَ تَرَوْنَ أَنِّي أُوفِي الْكَيْلَ وَأَنَا خَيْرُ
الْمُنزِلِينَ
</p>

(( 59 ))

59- AND WHEN HE FURNISHED THEM WITH THEIR PROVISIONS, HE SAID:ِ
\`\`BRING TO ME YOUR OTHER BROTHER (THAT YOU SAID YOU HAVE HIM AT HOME)
FROM YOUR FATHER. DON'T YOU SEE THAT I HAVE GIVEN YOU THE FULL MEASURE
(I HAVE GIVEN YOU HIS SHARE TOO) AND THAT I AM THE BEST OF HOSTS.''

فَإِنْ لَمْ تَأْتُونِي بِهِ فَلاَ كَيْلَ لَكُمْ عِندِي وَلاَ
تَقْرَبُونِ (( 60 ))

60- THEN IF YOU BRING HIM NOT TO ME, (TO PROVE THAT YOU REALLY DO HAVE
ANOTHER) THERE SHALL BE NO RATION FOR YOU. SO DO NOT APPROACH ME AT
ALL.

قَالُوا سَنُرَاوِدُ عَنْهُ أَبَاهُ وَإِنَّا لَفَاعِلُونَ(( 61 ))

61- THEY SAID, SOON SHALL WE REQUEST HIS FATHER TO LET HIM COME. THIS,
WE WILL SURELY DO.

[ 271 ]

وَقَالَ لِفِتْيَانِهِ اجْعَلُوا بِضَاعَتَهُمْ فِي رِحَالِهِمْ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَعْرِفُونَهَا إِذَا انقَلَبُوا إِلَى أَهْلِهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَرْجِعُونَ (( 62 ))

62- AND HE SAID TO HIS SERVANTS PUT THEIR MONEY INTO THEIR PACKS SO,
THAT, THEY FIND IT WHEN THEY RETURN TO THEIR HOUSEHOLD THAT, THEY MAY
RETURN (TO US).

**THE COMMENTARY

JOSEPH'S PROPOSAL TO THE BRETHREN (VERSE NO. 58 - 62)**

For seven years of good raining and abundant water, the condition of
farming in Egypt was very well, and everything was in abundant and more
than enough. Joseph in that period managed to construct the necessary
stores and preserving places. He then ordered the farmers to sell their
extra corns to the government, and do not keep whatever was in addition
to their needs.

The seven years of plenty and full supply elapsed and there came the
years of hungry famine throughout the land of Egypt; and extended like a
violent flood to the neighbouring countries such as Canaan. People set
forth from here and there in search of food, and many went to Egypt to
obtain some sustenances. Joseph's preprations and reserves was more than
enough to meet the calamity. Now in that hardship of famine and
scarcity, Joseph began to think seriously of his poor old father, and of
Benjamine his brother, and the other cruel and unkind sons of his
father. He thought if the brethren had treated Benjamine as they had
treated himself. Joseph was thinking so, when a list of some foreigners
who had come from Canaan to buy corn , was brought to him. He scanned
the least, and trembled at once for seeing the names of his ten step
brothers in it!! In a state of joyous surprise he ordered his servants
to bring the ten strangers to him, whose names he had marked in the
list. Of course

[ 272 ]

Joseph did not tell his men who they were, or that he knew them at all.
The brethren had been driven out of Canaan by the calamity of famine to
find something for sustenance:ِ \`\`And Joseph's brethren came and
entered before him. Joseph knew them but they denied Joseph.'' Although
they saw the governor of Egypt in his splendid Egyptian array, being in
shape and form exactly like their brother eaten by the wolf, they could
not believe him to be Joseph the Dreamer! How could that slave boy whom
they sold him at the price of a few silver coin have been reached to
that high rank and glorious position, in a foreign country like Egypt!?
They even could not believe to see Joseph alive after what they had done
with him!

Joseph treated his brethren in a large and noble way as he used to
treat all the servants of God. He took the lead, and then gradually
entered into a conversation with them, without telling them who he was.
He enquired about their family and occupation. They said that they had
an old father who was of the apostles of God, and that he was downcast
with sorrow and grief for losing a beloved son he had! Joseph asked for
some detail of the father's grief, and they answered:ِ \`\`He was a
sweet handsome boy when he came with us to play in the desert. We left
our dear little brother with our stuff and went racing. A wolf then
attacked and devoured our brother; but we still have another brother who
is of the same mother as him.''

Joseph expressed a deep sympathy to the ten brethren, and furnished
them with whatever of provisions that they expected, in full measure;
and in addition, the share of their absent brother. In their departure,
Joseph said to them:ِ \`\`Bring to me your other brother that you said
you have, in next time you come. See that I have given you a ration for
him too. If you bring him not to me, you shall have no more measure of
corn from me, nor you do come near me.'' It was very important for
Joseph that they would come back bringing Benjamine with them. For that
purpose he said to his servants:ِ \`\`Put their money or whatever their
capital for trade was, in such a

[ 273 ]

way that they could find it when they reached home.'' Some have asked
why did Joseph not sent a message or a letter some how to his father to
save him from his deep sorrow, or why he did not introduce himself to
his brothers sooner, and showed so much patience in that? To answer
that; the commentators say:ِ \`\`Joseph was an apostle who worked
according to God's Inspiration. He had no permission from God to present
himself then; perhaps, because, his family was under a test and trial of
God.''

فَلَمَّا رَجَعُوا إِلَى أَبِيهِمْ قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا مُنِعَ مِنَّا
الْكَيْلُ فَأَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا أَخَانَا نَكْتَلْ وَإِنَّا لَهُ
لَحَافِظُونَ (( 63 ))

63- WHEN THEY RETURNED TO THEIR FATHER, THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, OUR FATHER!
THE MEASURE IS WITHHELD FROM US, (UNLESS WE TAKE OUR BROTHER) SO SEND
OUR BROTHER WITH US, THAT WE MAY HAVE THE MEASURE AND WE ARE GUARDIANS
FOR HIM.''

قَالَ هَلْ آمَنُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ إِلاَّ كَمَا أَمِنتُكُمْ عَلَى أَخِيهِ
مِنْ قَبْلُ فَاللهُ خَيْرٌ حَافِظاً وَهُوَ أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ(( 64
))

64- HE SAID:ِ \`\`SHOULD I TRUST YOU WITH RESPECT TO HIM, AS I TRUSTED
YOU WITH RESPECT TO HIS BROTHER BEFORE? (WHILE YOU KNOW WELL WHAT YOU
HAVE DONE) ALLAH IS THE BEST OF GUARDIANS AND HE IS THE MOST MERCIFUL OF
THE MERCIFULS.''

وَلَمَّا فَتَحُوا مَتَاعَهُمْ وَجَدُوا بِضَاعَتَهُمْ رُدَّتْ إِلَيْهِمْ
قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا مَا نَبْغِي هَذِهِ بِضَاعَتُنَا رُدَّتْ إِلَيْنَا
وَنَمِيرُ أَهْلَنَا وَنَحْفَظُ أَخَانَا وَنَزْدَادُ كَيْلَ بَعِير ذَلِكَ
كَيْلٌ يَسِيرٌ (( 65 ))

[ 274 ]

65- AND WHEN THEY OPENED THEIR GOODS, THEY FOUND THEIR CAPITAL FOR
TRADE RETURNED TO THEM! THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, OUR FATHER! WHAT ELSE DO WE
WANT? THIS IS OUR MONEY RETURNED TO US. WE NOW CAN GET (MORE) FOOD FOR
OUR FAMILY, AND TAKE CARE OF OUR BROTHER (AND IN THE SAME TIME) WE SHALL
GET AN EXTRA CAMEL-LOAD (OF CORN). THAT IS EASY TO GET.''

قَالَ لَنْ أُرْسِلَهُ مَعَكُمْ حَتَّى تُؤْتُونِ مَوْثِقاً مِنْ اللهِ
لَتَأْتُونَنِي بِهِ إِلاَّ أَنْ يُحَاطَ بِكُمْ فَلَمَّا آتَوْهُ
مَوْثِقَهُمْ قَالَ اللهُ عَلَى مَا نَقُولُ وَكِيلٌ (( 66 ))

66- HE SAID:ِ \`\`I WILL NEVER SEND HIM WITH YOU, UNTIL YOU MAKE A FIRM
COVENANT WITH ALLAH TO BRING HIM BACK TO ME, UNLESS IT BE SO THAT YOU
ARE ENCOMPASSED. (HELPLESS)'' THEN WHEN THEY MADE THEIR SOLEMN COVENANT,
HE SAID:ِ \`\`ALLAH SHALL BE THE GUARDIAN OVER WHAT WE SAY.''

**THE COMMENTARY

AT LAST THE FATHER AGREED (VERSE NO. 63 - 66)**

The brethren returned to Canaan happy and full-handed, but they were
anxious about their future, that they could not obtain any more corn if
they could not take Benjamine with them. The only way that they could
please the governor of Egypt, and prove to him that they were not liars;
was to take their younger brother. When they returned home, they
reported to Jacob whatever had

[ 275 ]

happened in their journey. And yet, they did not know how to take the
lead, for urging their father to let benjamine go with them. Jacob could
not trust his sons any more, for what they had done to Joseph. Anyhow,
they dared to say:ِ \`\`O, our father! The measure is with held from us,
unless we take our brother Benjamine. If you let him come, we can have
our ration increased, and we promise to take a good care of him.'' The
reaction of the old broken father, who could never forget his dear
Joseph was a flat refusal:ِ \`\`Should I trust you with respect to him,
as I trusted you with respect to his brother?'' The only protection that
now Jacob could trust was that of his Lord. So he continued, saying:ِ

\`\`Allah is the best of Guardians, and He is the most Merciful of the
mercifuls.'' The brothers opened their packs and baggages and to their
amazement they found their money returned to them! This increased their
courage to ask more earnestly their father to release their younger
brother. They insisted on their assertion and reasoned, saying:ِ \`\`O,
our father! What else do we want? Here is our money returned to us! We
now can purchase more food for our family by the money, and at the same
time we can get an extra camel-load of corn easily.''

Jacob refused, that, he who has been stung by a snake, fears of a black
and white thread! His children insisted, and finally he agreed to hand
over Benjamine on condition:ِ \`\`I will never send him with you, until
you make a firm covenant with Allah to bring him back to me, unless it
happens that you are encompassed and helpless.'' The brethren agreed and
made the covenant as Jacob wanted, and the old, sad father permitted
Benjamine to attend the journey with the brethren who were now on their
declining ages. At the end of the covenant Jacob emphasized that; Allah
shall be the Guardian over what we say.

[ 276 ]

وَقَالَ يَا بَنِىَّ لاَ تَدْخُلُوا مِنْ بَاب وَاحِد وَادْخُلُوا مِنْ
أَبْوَاب مُتَفَرِّقَة وَمَا أُغْنِي عَنكُمْ مِنْ اللهِ مِنْ شَيْء إِنْ
الْحُكْمُ إِلاَّ للهِِ عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَعَلَيْهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ
الْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ (( 67 ))

67- AND HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY SONS! DO NOT ENTER THROUGH ONE SINGLE GATE,
BUT ENTER (THE TOWN) BY DIFFERENT GATES. AND I CANNOT BE OF ANY
ADVANTAGE TO YOU AGAINST ALLAH'S WILL, THAT NONE CAN COMMAND EXCEPT
ALLAH. IN HIM I HAVE PUT MY TRUST, AND IN HIM, SHOULD ALL THE TRUSTERS
PUT THEIR TRUSTS.''

وَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا مِنْ حَيْثُ أَمَرَهُمْ أَبُوهُمْ مَّا كَانَ يُغْنِي
عَنْهُمْ مِنْ اللهِ مِنْ شَيْء إِلاَّ حَاجَةً فِي نَفْسِ يَعْقُوبَ
قَضَاهَا وَإِنَّهُ لَذُو عِلْم لِّمَا عَلَّمْنَاهُ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ (( 68 ))

68- AND WHEN THEY ENTERED AS THEIR FATHER HAD ORDERED THEM, IT WAS OF
NOT ANY PROFIT TO THEM AGAINST ALLAH'S WILL, EXCEPT A WISH IN JACOB'S
HEART (SOUL) THAT IT WAS FULFILLED; AND HE POSSESSED A KNOWLEDGE THAT WE
TAUGHT HIM, BUT MOST OF THE PEOPLE DO NOT KNOW.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 67 - 68**

The children of Israel eventually took their younger brother with the
permission of their father, and set out on their journey to Egypt for
the second time. Jacob their father was a man of knowledge and
experience and gave them some instructions that how should enter the
town. He said:ِ

[ 277 ]

\`\`O, my sons! Do not enter the town through one single gate, but
enter by different gates.'' As to question why did Jacob ask his sons to
enter the gates separately? There are two or three views here, that all
can be true:ِ 1ِ Consider that eleven tall, handsome men, all strangers,
with different dress, and different language, without any visa, or
formal approval of officials, or of a superior, entering a town at once
and from one gate!! Do they not attract the attention of the citizens,
and even their suspicions? By entering separately, they would attract
less suspicion.

2ِ In the East, particularly in Jewish custom, they forbid showing up,
like many persons of the same family going together for fear of ©the
evil eye¨.

Anyway, the brethren travelled to Egypt once again. They observed their
father's instruction of entering the town separately though it did not
profit them the least, against Allah's plan. It only could be a
consolation to Jacob some how.

وَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَى يُوسُفَ آوَى إِلَيْهِ أَخَاهُ قَالَ إِنِّي
أَنَا أَخُوكَ فَلاَ تَبْتَئِسْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ (( 69 ))

69- AND WHEN THEY ENTERED BEFORE JOSEPH; HE SEATED

[ 278 ]

HIS BROTHER BESIDES HIMSELF, SAYING:ِ \`\`I AM YOUR BROTHER, (JOSEPH)
SO DO NOT WORRY OF WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN DOING.''

فَلَمَّا جَهَّزَهُمْ بِجَهَازِهِمْ جَعَلَ السِّقَايَةَ فِي رَحْلِ
أَخِيهِ ثُمَّ أَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ أَيَّتُهَا الْعِيرُ إِنَّكُمْ
لَسَارِقُونَ(( 70 ))

70- AND WHEN HE FURNISHED THEM WITH THEIR PROVISIONS, HE PUT A
DRINKING-CUP IN HIS BROTHER'S PACK. THEN A CRIER CRIED:ِ \`\`O, YOU,
CAMELEERS, YOU ARE THIEVES!''

قَالُوا وَأَقْبَلُوا عَلَيْهِمْ مَاذَا تَفْقِدُونَ (( 71 ))

71- THEY SAID; WHILE TURNING TO THEM, \`\`WHAT HAVE YOU LOST?''

قَالُوا نَفْقِدُ صُوَاعَ الْمَلِكِ وَلِمَنْ جَاءَ بِهِ حِمْلُ بَعِير
وَأَنَا بِهِ زَعِيمٌ(( 72 ))

72- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WE HAVE LOST THE KING'S GOBLET, AND HE WHO BRINGS
IT, SHALL RECEIVE A CAMEL-LOAD (AS A REWARD); THAT, I GUARANTEE.''

قَالُوا تَاللهِ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتُمْ مَّا جِئْنَا لِنُفْسِدَ فِي الاَْرْضِ
وَمَا كُنَّا سَارِقِينَ(( 73 ))

73- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BY ALLAH, YOU KNOW THAT WE CAME NOT TO MAKE
MISCHIEF IN THE LAND, AND WE ARE NOT THIEVES.''

قَالُوا فَمَا جَزَاؤُهُ إِنْ كُنتُمْ كَاذِبِينَ(( 74 ))

74- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT IS ITS RECOMPENSE IF YOU WERE LIARS?''

[ 279 ]

قَالُوا جَزَاؤُهُ مَنْ وُجِدَ فِي رَحْلِهِ فَهُوَ جَزَاؤُهُ كَذَلِكَ
نَجْزِي الظَّالِمِينَ(( 75 ))

75- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`ITS RECOMPENSE IS HIM IN WHOSE BAG IT IS FOUND. HE
SHALL BE (YOUR BONDS-MAN) AS ITS RECOMPENSE. SO DO WE PUNISH THE
OPPRESSORS.''

فَبَدَأَ بِأَوْعِيَتِهِمْ قَبْلَ وِعَاءِ أَخِيهِ ثُمَّ اسْتَخْرَجَهَا
مِنْ وِعَاءِ أَخِيهِ كَذَلِكَ كِدْنَا لِيُوسُفَ مَا كَانَ لِيَأْخُذَ
أَخَاهُ فِي دِينِ الْمَلِكِ إِلاَّ أَنْ يَشَاءَ اللهُ نَرْفَعُ دَرَجَات
مَّنْ نَّشَاءُ وَفَوْقَ كُلِّ ذِي عِلْم عَلِيمٌ (( 76 ))

76- THEN HE BEGAN WITH (THE SEARCH OF) THEIR SACKS, BEFORE HIS
BROTHER'S SACK, AND (AT LAST) HE TOOK IT OUT OF HIS BROTHER'S BAGGAGE.
SO DID WE PLAN FOR JOSEPH; BECAUSE BY THE KING'S LAW HE HAD NO RIGHT TO
SEIZE HIS BROTHER, EXCEPT THAT GOD WILLED. WE RAISE THE GRADES OF THOSE
WHOM WE WILL, AND ABOVE ALL THOSE WHO HAVE KNOWLEDGE THERE IS (ONE WHO
IS MORE) KNOWING.


