A Plan To Detain Benjamine (verse No. 69 - 76)
==============================================

At last the brethren presented themselves to the AZIZ of Egypt (JOSEPH)
once again and said:ِ We did fulfill our promise, and got the agreement
of our father for bringing our younger brother to you. Joseph received
them with pleasure, and invited them to his dinner, and accommodated
them two by two, when Benjamine became the odd one.

[ 280 ]

Benjamine's eyes overflowed with tears, and when Joseph asked him why
so? He said:ِ \`\`If my brother Joseph was alive he would have his
dinner with me, and it was his custom to dine with me.'' Joseph said to
Benjamine, you may come and have dinner with me if you don't mind! By
all means I want to, said Benjamine because you are exactly same as my
brother Joseph, in all physical and spiritual aspects! Joseph who was
touched by certain emotions of joy, mingled with grief, said to his
brother:ِ \`\`Then come and take dinner with me, and I will consider and
adopt you as my own brother.'' And so did Joseph create a chance of
privacy with Benjamine and in their private chat, he said to him:ِ \`\`I
am Joseph, your own brother! Do not worry of what they have been
doing.'' Joseph said to him who he really was, and what had happened in
that long period of his absence. Then he asked Benjamine if he liked to
remain with him there in Egypt? He said to his brother Joseph:ِ \`\`Of
course I do, but our brothers will not let you to detain me here,
because they have made a solemn covenant with father to take me back to
him in any price.''

Joseph emphasised to keep his identity secret for the time being, and
also to take things easy if something strange and abnormal was done with
respect to him, for he had some plans to be executed in order to with
hold Benjamine. The plan has been explained in the next verses:ِ
\`\`When he furnished them with their provisions, he put a drinking cup
in his brother's pack. Then a crier cried; O, cameleers! You are
thieves!'' Joseph put that plan the detail of which is given in the
following verses, into execution by the leave of Allah and with a
three-fold purposes:ِ

1- To touch the brethren with a temporary awe in order to wake up their
minds and drowsy conscience.

2- To make them ashamed of their past behaviour and to return to God in
repentance.

[ 281 ]

3- It would also give him an excuse and authority to retain Benjamine
and to bring their aged father into Egypt. After-all; if, Joseph wanted
to judge the theft, according to the Pharaoh's Law, he had to beat his
innocent brother severely, and then put him in the prison; and this
punishment was very unjust. This is why the verse (NO.76) states that:ِ
\`\`By the king's law Joseph could not seize and detain his brother.''

Joseph was an apostle and man of God, and could not have carried out
that sort of a plan without Allah's permission, or otherwise, in order
to withhold his brother. Therefore the search of the baggage and
investigations, went on under his direct control and supervision:ِ
\`\`Then he began with the search of their sacks, before his brother's
sack, and at last he took it out of his brother's baggage!!'' When the
drinking-cup was found in the baggage of Benjamine, the brethren were
struck with astonishment! They were indeed perplexed, but even then,
they did not hide their inner hatred and grudge for Joseph and
Benjamine; and called both of them thieves! They could not think that
Joseph could be before them in another guise, or at least they were not
ashamed of Joseph's Lord who is always and every where present. They all
rushed to reproach Benjamine, asking him, why did he so disgrace the
house of Israel by committing that theft? In answer to them Benjamine
said:ِ \`\`The same hand that put your money back in your packs, has now
put the cup in mine!'' He said so, but the brethren did not understand
what did he mean by saying that.

قَالُوا إِنْ يَسْرِقْ فَقَدْ سَرَقَ أَخٌ لَهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ فَأَسَرَّهَا
يُوسُفُ فِي نَفْسِهِ وَلَمْ يُبْدِهَا لَهُمْ قَالَ أَنْتُمْ شَرٌّ
مَكَاناً وَاللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا تَصِفُونَ (( 77 ))

77- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`IF HE STEALS, VERILY A BROTHER OF HIM

[ 282 ]

(i.e. JOSEPH) STOLE BEFORE; BUT JOSEPH CONCEALED IT IN HIS SOUL, AND
DID NOT REVEAL IT TO THEM. HE JUST SAID:ِ YOU ARE IN A WORSE CASE, AND
ALLAH KNOWS BETTER, WHAT YOU DESCRIBE.''

قَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الْعَزِيزُ إِنَّ لَهُ أَباً شَيْخاً كَبِيراً
فَخُذْ أَحَدَنَا مَكَانَهُ إِنَّا نَرَاكَ مِنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 78 ))

78- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, AZIZ! HE HAS AN OLD, AGED FATHER. SO TAKE ONE OF
US IN HIS PLACE, THAT WE SEE, YOU ARE OF THE GOOD-DOERS.''

قَالَ مَعَاذَ اللهِ أَنْ نَّأْخُذَ إِلاَّ مَنْ وَجَدْنَا مَتَاعَنَا
عِنْدَهُ إِنَّا إِذاً لَظَالِمُونَ(( 79 ))

79- HE SAID GOD FORBID, THAT WE SHOULD SEIZE ANY ONE EXCEPT HIM WITH
WHOM WE HAVE FOUND OUR PROPERTY. IF WE DO THAT, WE MUST THEN BE OF THE
OPPRESSORS.

**THE COMMENTARY
WHY WAS THE SELFِSACRIFICE OF THE BRETHREN NOT ACCEPTED? (VERSE NO.
77 - 79)**

The brothers easily accepted that Benjamine had committed the theft,
and had ruined their record and reputation in the sight of AZIZ. To
acquit themselves of the guilt, they said:ِ \`\`If the boy steals, it is
not very strange, because a brother of him, too, stole before!'' Thus
they tried to draw a red line of separation between

[ 283 ]

themselves and their two step-brother. Joseph was vexed by their false
charge, but kept his control, and divulged not his identity and other
secrets. The poor chaps knew not that they all were in the power of
Joseph, who slowly whispered to himself and said:ِ \`\`You are in a
worse case, and Allah knows better what you describe.'' Joseph knew well
that his step brothers had all lost their very self and soul, and he
wanted to have mercy on them. He never deemed of taking vengeance of
them, and was only driving at making them to repent, and return to God.
When Benjamine was arrested, they trembled with fear of their father's
wrath, with whom they had made a solemn covenant to return Benjamine
back to him. They found themselves indeed helpless, not knowing what was
to be done at all.

Therefore they earnestly begged the AZIZ of Egypt, who was now Joseph;
to take one of them instead of Benjamine for having an old and aged
father, who could not endure the deathful shock of what had happened to
his son. But Joseph knew many things beyond the work of nature, that the
brethren could not know it, and he therefore rejected their request,
saying:ِ \`\`God forbid, that we should seize anyone except him with
whom we have found our property. If we do that, we must then be of the
oppressors.'' Worthy of note is here that Joseph did not accuse his
brother of theft here, and mentioned him as; \`\`Him with whom we found
our property.'' Accusing Joseph of theft by his brothers, goes back to
his childhood. As a child his mother died, and his aunt nursed him. When
he grew up and became a young boy, Jacob his father called him back to
live with them. His separation was very distressful to his aunt, and
therefore she tied a belt round his waist that was a relic venerated
because of its association with Isaac the apostle of God. So when Joseph
went back to live with his father, his aunt accused him of stealing the
belt in order to be able to detain Joseph in her house, according to
Jacob's religion and Law.

[ 284 ]

فَلَمَّا اسْتَيْئَسُوا مِنْهُ خَلَصُوا نَجِيّاً قَالَ كَبِيرُهُمْ
أَلَمْ تَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ أَبَاكُمْ قَدْ أَخَذَ عَلَيْكُمْ مَّوْثِقاً مِنْ
اللهِ وَمِنْ قَبْلُ مَا فَرَّطتُمْ فِي يُوسُفَ فَلَنْ أَبْرَحَ الاَْرْضَ
حَتَّى يَأْذَنَ لِي أَبِي أَوْ يَحْكُمَ اللهُ لِي وَهُوَ خَيْرُ
الْحَاكِمِينَ (( 80 ))

80- SO WHEN THEY DESPAIRED OF HIM, THEY WENT ASIDE TO CONFER
TOGETHER:

THE ELDEST OF THEM SAID:ِ \`\`DO YOU NOT KNOW THAT YOUR FATHER TOOK
FROM YOU A COVENANT BY ALLAH, AND HOW DID YOU EXTRAVAGATE BEFORE,
REGARDING JOSEPH? THEN I WILL NEVER MOVE OUT OF THE LAND, UNTIL MY
FATHER PERMITS ME, OR ALLAH DECIDES FOR ME, THAT HE IS THE BEST OF
JUDGES.''

ارْجِعُوا إِلَى أَبِيكُمْ فَقُولُوا يَا أَبَانَا إِنَّ ابْنَكَ سَرَقَ
وَمَا شَهِدْنَا إِلاَّ بِمَا عَلِمْنَا وَمَا كُنَّا لِلْغَيْبِ
حافِظِينَ(( 81 ))

81- RETURN YOU ALL TO YOUR FATHER, AND SAY:ِ \`\`O, OUR FATHER! YOUR
SON COMMITTED A THEFT! AND WE TESTIFY ONLY TO WHAT WE KNOW; AND WE COULD
NOT GUARD AGAINST THE UNFORESEEN.''

وَسْئَلِ الْقَرْيَةَ الَّتِي كُنَّا فِيهَا وَالْعِيرَ الَّتِي
أَقْبَلْنَا فِيهَا وَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ (( 82 ))

82- AND ASK THE TOWNSFOLK WITH WHOM WE HAVE BEEN, AND ALSO OF THE
CARAVAN IN WHICH WE RETURNED, AND WE SPEAK THE TRUTH.

[ 285 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE BRETHREN RETURNED TO THEIR FATHER ASHAMED (VERSE NO. 80 - 82)**

The brethren did their best to bring back Benjamine with them but they
failed. Things were arrayed so naturally that they found themselves
indeed helpless. When they abandoned to despair of releasing him, they
held a meeting to confer together to make known what else could they do.
Jacob's eldest son whose name was Reuben, in their conference said:ِ
\`\`Brothers! Have you forgotten that we have given a pledge to our
father, and that pledge was in the name of God, and we have not
forgotten what we did to Joseph before. We are now bound both to God and
His apostle, who is our own father. As for me; I shall never leave this
land, and will remain here as pledged, until our father orders me to; or
Allah opens out some other way. But you all go back and tell our father
of what we really know, and what we saw with our eyes. Say to him that
your son committed a theft and we could not guard against the
unforeseen. If he believed you not, you can tell him to ask the
townsfolk with whom we were, or the caravan by whom you travelled back,
because the theft had widely been spread!''

قَالَ بَلْ سَوَّلَتْ لَكُمْ أَنفُسُكُمْ أَمْراً فَصَبْرٌ جَمِيلٌ عَسَى
اللهُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَنِي بِهِمْ جَمِيعاً إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَلِيمُ
الْحَكِيمُ(( 83 ))

83- HE (i.e.JACOB) SAID:ِ \`\`RATHER YOUR CARNAL SOULS HAVE TEMPTED YOU
TO SOME AFFAIR. (EVIL DEEDS) THEN PATIENCE IS BEAUTEOUS. MAY IT BE THAT
ALLAH BRINGS THEM ALL BACK TO ME, THAT HE IS THE ALL-KNOWING,
ALL-WISE.''

[ 286 ]

وَتَوَلَّى عَنْهُمْ وَقَالَ يَا أَسَفَى عَلَى يُوسُفَ وَابْيَضَّتْ
عَيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْحُزْنِ فَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ(( 84 ))

84- AND HE TURNED AWAY FROM THEM AND SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT A PITY FOR JOSEPH!
AND HIS EYES TURNED WHITE WITH GRIEF WHICH HE CHOKED IT WITHIN HIM.''

قَالُوا تَاللهِ تَفْتَأُ تَذْكُرُ يُوسُفَ حَتَّى تَكُونَ حَرَضاً أَوْ
تَكُونَ مِنْ الْهَالِكِينَ(( 85 ))

85- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BY ALLAH YOU CONTINUE WITH REMINDING JOSEPH, TILL
YOU ARE CONSUMED OR GET PERISHED.''

قَالَ إِنَّمَا أَشْكُو بَثِّي وَحُزْنِي إِلَى اللهِ وَأَعْلَمُ مِنْ
اللهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 86 ))

86- HE SAID:ِ \`\`I ONLY COMPLAIN OF MY ANGUISH AND SORROW TO ALLAH,
AND I KNOW FROM ALLAH WHAT YOU DO NOT KNOW.''

**THE COMMENTARY
I KNOW SOMETHING OF GOD'S MERCY THAT YOU DON'T. (VERSE NO. 83 - 86)**

The children of Israel returned to Canaan perplexed, grieved, and
mentally disturbed, for leaving their brothers behind, and their sad,
and anxious, old father in front. In the first sight Jacob apprehended
that there could be some bad news. He perceived their confused features,
but did not see Benjamine and Reuben among the group!!? When they gave
him the detail of what had happened to Benjamine, an anger which was
mingled with grief seized the man of God. He shouted saying:ِ \`\`No! It
cannot be that! Benjamine, can never steal!''

[ 287 ]

Jacob was a man of knowledge and experience. He knew his children very
well, and in particular Benjamine, of whose innocence and piety he was
sure enough. He therefore, did not believe of what the brethren said,
and frankly called it a cockِandِbull story! To him it was a false and
forged tale that could not even mark a slight scratch upon the innocence
and piety of Benjamine. He was angry, why were his sons yielded with
nonchalant ease, giving their innocent brother to slavery!? Why did they
not defend their brother that finding the cup in his baggage could not
justify his stealth; and more reasons was needed to prove the theft? But
very soon the old man of God held his control and said:ِ \`\`Patience is
beauteous. I commend me and my children to the care of my Merciful Lord.
I only complain of my anguish and sorrow to Allah. May it be that Allah
brings them all back to me, that he is All-knowing, All-wise'' Jacob had
an unwavering faith in Allah which served to stuck him to a greater hope
instead of being abandoned to despair! So he said:ِ \`\`May it be that
Allah brings them all back to me, and that; I know of Allah what you
boys do not know.''

Of course Jacob's anguish and grief for the loss of his Joseph was
great. Continuous tears had turned his world even physically darkِdark
amide the blaze of noon, and irrecoverably dark, that he, in that
knocking down anguish had lost his sight entirely! He bore his tearful
and unshareable grief in silence; and complained to no one, but to his
Merciful Lord:ِ \`\`I only complain of my anguish and sorrow to Allah. I
know of Allah what you know not.''

At last he turned away from them saying:ِ \`\`Alas! what a pity for my
Joseph; then his eyes whitened with tears of the grief which he
swallowed and choked it within him.''

Seeing that; his anxious sons said to him:ِ \`\`By Allah you continue
with reminding Joseph, untill you are consumed or get perished.''

[ 288 ]

But a flash of divine light sparkled in the depth of his pure heart, by
the perfect faith that he had in God! The light told him that all would
be well. Your lost Joseph will returned to you to give an end to your
grief and sorrow. Your cold and sad hut will soon turn into a splendid
and joyous mansion in a glorious gardenِyou have faith! Sincere and pure
faith in Allah, the Merciful. the Compassionate.

يَا بَنِىَّ اذْهَبُوا فَتَحَسَّسُوا مِنْ يُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ وَلاَ
تَايْئَسُواْ مِنْ رَوْحِ اللهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يَيْئَسُ مِنْ رَوْحِ اللهِ
إِلاَّ الْقَوْمُ الكَافِرُونَ(( 87 ))

87- O, MY SONS! GO ON, AND SEARCH OUT FOR JOSEPH AND HIS BROTHERS; AND
DESPAIR NOT OF ALLAH'S MERCY, THAT NO ONE WILL DESPAIR OF ALLAH'S MERCY,
EXCEPT THE INFIDEL PEOPLE.

فَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ قَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الْعَزِيزُ مَسَّنَا
وَأَهْلَنَا الضُّرُّ وَجِئْنَا بِبِضَاعَة مُزْجَاة فَأَوْفِ لَنَا
الْكَيْلَ وَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّ اللهَ يَجْزِي الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ ((
88 ))

88- SO WHEN THEY ENTERED BEFORE HIM, (i.e.BEFORE JOSEPH) THEY SAID:ِ
\`\`O, AZIZ! THE DISTRESS (OF THE FAMINE) HAS AFFLICTED US AND OUR
FAMILY, AND WE HAVE COME WITH A LITTLE CAPITAL OF TRADE. SO GIVE US FULL
MEASURE, AND BE CHARITABLE TO US, THAT ALLAH WILL REWARD
CHARITABLES.''

قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُمْ مَّا فَعَلْتُمْ بِيُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ أَنْتُمْ
جَاهِلُونَ(( 89 ))

89- HE SAID:ِ \`\`HAVE YOU KNOWN WHAT YOU DID TO

[ 289 ]

JOSEPH AND HIS BROTHER WHEN YOU WERE IGNORANTS?''

قَالُوا أَئِنَّكَ لاََنْتَ يُوسُفُ قَالَ أَنَا يُوسُفُ وَهذَا أَخِي
قَدْ مَنَّ اللهُ عَلَيْنَا إِنَّهُ مَنْ يَتَّقِ وَيَصْبِرْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ
لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 90 ))


90- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`ARE YOU INDEED JOSEPH!?''

HE SAID:ِ \`\`I AM JOSEPH AND THIS IS MY BROTHER. ALLAH HAS INDEED MADE
US OBLIGED (BY HIS FAVOUR AND GRACE). IT IS SO THAT WHOEVER AVOIDS EVIL,
AND IS PATIENT, ALLAH WASTES NOT THE REWARD OF THE GOOD-DOERS.''

قَالُوا تَاللهِ لَقَدْ آثَرَكَ اللهُ عَلَيْنَا وَإِنْ كُنَّا
لَخَاطِئِينَ(( 91 ))

91- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BY ALLAH, GOD HAS ELEVATED YOU OVER US, AND WE HAVE
BEEN GUILTY.''

قَالَ لاَ تَثْرِيبَ عَلَيْكُمْ الْيَوْمَ يَغْفِرُ اللهُ لَكُمْ وَهُوَ
أَرْحَمُ الرَّاحِمِينَ(( 92 ))

92- HE SAID:ِ \`\`TO-DAY NO REPROACH IS ON YOU. ALLAH WILL FORGIVE YOU
THAT HE IS THE MOST MERCIFUL OF THE MERCIFULS.''

اذْهَبُوا بِقَمِيصِي هَذَا فَأَلْقُوهُ عَلَى وَجْهِ أَبِي يَأْتِ
بَصِيراً وَأْتُونِي بِأَهْلِكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 93 ))

93- GO YOU WITH THIS SHIRT OF MINE, AND LAY IT ON MY FATHER'S FACE, HE
WILL RECOVER HIS SIGHT. AND BRING ME YOUR FAMILY ALL TOGETHER.

[ 290 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
TRY, AND DESPAIR NOT, FOR DESPAIR IS THE CONCLUSION OF THE INFIDELS.
(VERSE NO. 87 - 93)**

The cruel famine was acting oppressively in the neighbouring countries
of Egypt, such as Canaan. Jacob once again directed his sons to go to
Egypt, and this time their main object being to find Joseph and his
brothers. Jacob's sons were amazed to hear that from their father, for
thinking how could Joseph be found in Egypt, while his very life was
under question for them!? Jacob said:ِ \`\`My sons! Go on, and search
for Joseph and his brothers, and despair not of Allah's Mercy that no
one shall despair of Allah's Mercy except the infidels.'' While there is
life there is hope, and above the cloud with its shadow, is the star
with its light. So a believer should never despair of Allah, because
despair is the conclusion of infidels.

The brethren went to Egypt according to their father's direction, and
this was their third journey to the land. This time they were different
and cautious to see AZIZ, for the charge of theft. Their only
consolation was now their father's emphasis upon losing no hope of God's
Mercy, and also a letter, that it is narrated, Jacob had written to the
AZIZ of Egypt. They also had spent most of their capital for trade, and
had a little amount of money to buy anything like corn. So they had to
appeal to AZIZ for charity. Anyhow they reached the capital of Pharaoh's
country, and presented themselves to AZIZ, saying:ِ \`\`O, AZIZ! The
distress of famine has afflicted us and our family, and we have come
with a little capital of trade. Please do give us full measure by being
charitable to us, that we see that you are of the good doers.'' They
said so, and meanwhile they handed over the letter that Jacob had
written to AZIZ.

[ 291 ]

The brethren had been ordered to go in search of Joseph as their main
goal; but they directly went to AZIZ in search of corn, for having no
hope to find Joseph anymore. In his letter, Jacob had given his thanks
to the AZIZ of Egypt for being so kind and gentle to them. He had also
introduced himself as being an apostle of God and the grand-son of
ABRAHAM, and finally had asked AZIZ to release Benjamine, that he was
sure that his son would never steal anything high or low, and there must
have happened some misunderstandings.

The brothers were struck with astonishment, when they saw that AZIZ
kissed the letter, and put it upon his eyes; and then read it, while his
tears rolled down his cheek and dropped upon the letter!! The letter
rendered AZIZ so impatient that he could no more conceal his identity;
and then, he smiled so that their Joseph's pearly white teeth apeared in
AZIZ'S mouth, and gave them a great shock by which they remembered
Joseph the truthful; and all that they had done of evil to him!
Following that smile of consolation AZIZ said to them:ِ

\`\`Have you known what you did to Joseph and his brother, when you
were IGNORANTS!?'' The great reverence that AZIZ showed for Jacob's
letter; and his teeth shown by smile, that was exactly the resemblance
of their brother's in beauty; induced in them that AZIZ could be their
lost Joseph! They exclaimed:ِ

\`\`Are you indeed Joseph!?'' and AZIZ said!
\`\`Yes! I am Joseph and here is Benjamine my brother with me.'' The
brother drowned in their tears and enthusiasm said:ِ
\`\`By Allah, God has elevated you over us, and we have been
guilty.''
And so the brethren frankly confessed their sinning and wrong doings,
and submitted to Joseph's superiority and being the elect of God.
The sorrow gave its place to a real happiness, because piety and
patience is loved and rewarded by God. Joseph behaved his brothers

[ 292 ]

very gently and ignored all their wrongs and said:ِ \`\`Go you now with
the shirt of mine, and cast it on the face father to recover his sight,
and bring him to me with all your families.'' The brethren had at first
tried to cover their crime by taking the blood stained shirt of Joseph,
which plunged Jacob into a long grief and anguish. Now Joseph's shirt
could be the bezoar-stone or the antitoxin of his first, shirt by which
Jacob's sight was restored, and his grief and anguish was ended! Joseph
emphasized on the brother who had taken the first bloody shirt to Jacob,
to take the second shirt too. Now it was so that Joseph served his food
with the brethren in the same table. The brothers were ashamed and could
not look on the eyes of Joseph for the feel of guilt. So they said to
Joseph that it was very difficult for them to look at his face and dine
with him, because they could not forget what they had done to their
brother before.

In order to restore their confidence and self-reliance, Joseph said to
them:ِ \`\`My brothers! I am proud now to serve my dinner with you and
on the same table, because the Egyptians used to consider me a slave boy
who has through climbing the steps of progress, attained their kingdom
and kingship; but now-a-days when they see my brothers and my father,
they have made sure that I am not a slave boy as they thought, but on
the contrary I am of the progeny of the prophets. And thus Joseph
infused new life, new hope and self-reliance into the brethren!''

وَلَمَّا فَصَلَتِ الْعِيرُ قَالَ أَبُوهُمْ إِنِّي لاََجِدُ رِيحَ
يُوسُفَ لَوْلاَ أَنْ تُفَنِّدُونِ(( 94 ))

94- WHEN THE CARAVAN DEPARTED THEIR FATHER SAID:ِ \`\`I SMELL THE SMELL
OF JOSEPH IF YOU TAKE ME NOT FOR A DOTARD!''

قَالُوا تَاللهِ إِنَّكَ لَفِي ضَلاَلِكَ الْقَدِيمِ (( 95 ))

95- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`BY ALLAH YOU ARE IN YOUR OLD ERROR.''

[ 293 ]

فَلَمَّا أَنْ جَاءَ الْبَشِيرُ أَلْقَاهُ عَلَى وَجْهِهِ فَارْتَدَّ
بَصِيراً قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُلْ لَكُمْ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ مِنْ اللهِ مَا لاَ
تَعْلَمُونَ (( 96 ))

96- THEN, WHEN THE BEARER OF GOOD NEWS CAME, LAID IT ON HIS FACE, AND
HE REGAINED HIS SIGHT. HE SAID:ِ \`\`DID I NOT SAY TO YOU THAT I KNOW
FROM ALLAH THAT WHICH YOU DO NOT KNOW?''

قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا اسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
خَاطِئِينَ (( 97 ))

قَالَ سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبِّي إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ
الرَّحِيمُ (( 98 ))

98- HE SAID:ِ \`\`SOON WILL I ASK MY LORD TO FORGIVE YOU, THAT HE IS
ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.''


