Eventually God's Mercy Did Its Work (verse No. 94 - 98)
=======================================================

Jacob's sons who could not contain in themselves, took Joseph's shirt
and travelled back to Canaan by a caravan. On the other hand, in Canaan,
the house of Jacob was full of sorrow, grief and anxiety. As soon as the
caravan left Egypt something strange happened in the house of Jacob; for
the old man suddenly changed expressions and hopefully and happily
said:ِ \`\`If you do not take me as an old dotard again, I feel the
scent of Joseph!'' He said so, but his household denied him and said:ِ
\`\`By Allah, you are still in your old error. Years have already passed
away after the death of Joseph, and you still think of his return, and
this means that you live only with your fancies and imaginations!''

[ 294 ]

They did not know that the clean and pure heart of Jacob was now some
sort of a mirror which could reflect many facts and truths of various
kinds. Jacob always believed that his Joseph was alive, and that his
dream would prove true. He did not abandon to despair at all for having
faith in God and God's justice in His general plan. Several days
elapsed, and then, a herald announced the approach of a commerical
caravan from Egypt; and soon after the announcement, Jacob's sons
hurried from the caravan to their old father, carrying the strangely
good news. In front of all, was the bearer of the shirtِthe same son who
had brought the blood-stained shirt many years past. Now the doors and
the walls seemed to be joyful. The sky was happy and the earth looked to
be cheerful. Everything around was expressing pleasure and delight.
Jacob whose thankful gaze was fixed in the heavens seemed to be vivid
and and lively. The shirt was laid upon his face and at once he regained
his sight, and once again he could see the beauties of the world round
him. The old man of God who was comforted by the news and regained his
sight by the shirt, said to those who were around him:ِ

\`\`Did I not tell you that I know from Allah that which you don't
know?''

When Jacob said that, he knew of God that which they knew not,
everything was against him, and his sons and his household had accused
him of being an old dotard; but now things proved different. The present
scenery had touched them to the quick and they felt a scratching anxiety
in their heart. They now remembered their evil deeds and sinful acts of
the past years, and sincerely repented, saying:ِ \`\`O, our father!
Please ask forgiveness for our sins, that we have indeed been guilty.''
The old sea-hearted man of God, did not reproach his sons at all, and
promised to pray to God to forgive them very soon; but not instantly,
because Joseph was the most injured party and had to be consulted with;
although he had already forgiven his cruel brothers!

[ 295 ]

**HOW DID JACOB FEEL THE SCENT OF JOSEPH?**

Some commentators understand it as a miracle to prove Joseph and
Jacob's prophethood; but the Holy Qura"n is silent in this case. We
believe the incident to be some sort of thought transference, which
technically it is called ©telepathy¨ and is known as apparent
communication from one mind to another, otherwise than through the
channels of senses. The story of the shirt and the scent of Joseph, has
opened an important file and record in Persian literature. As an
instance; the great poet, SAADI, has composed that:ِ

Jacob was asked; \`\`You felt the scent of his shirt from Egypt,

Why did you not see him in Canaan's well!?''

And he answered; \`\`We sometimes sit on the highest point of the Dome
(i.e.WE HAVE VERY EXTENSIVE FIELD OF SIGHT)

And sometimes we cannot see the front of our foot!'' Their likeness is
the likeness of a man who walks in a wide desert; in a very dark night
in which the heavy clouds prevent even a star to flicker; but sometimes
a flash of lightning strikes down and alights all the desert and the
traveller is able to see here and there and this and that.

فَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَى يُوسُفَ آوَى إِلَيْهِ أَبَوَيْهِ وَقَالَ
ادْخُلُوا مِصْرَ إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ آمِنِينَ(( 99 ))

99- THEN WHEN THEY ENTERED BEFORE JOSEPH HE EMBRACED HIS PARENTS, AND
SAID:ِ \`\`WELCOME TO EGYPT IN SECURITY IF ALLAH WILLS.''

وَرَفَعَ أَبَوَيْهِ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَخَرُّوا لَهُ سُجَّداً وَقَالَ يَا
أَبَتِ هَذَا تَأْوِيلُ رُؤْيَاي مِنْ قَبْلُ قَدْ جَعَلَهَا رَبِّي حَقّاً
وَقَدْ أَحْسَنَ بِي إِذْ أَخْرَجَنِي مِنْ السِّجْنِ وَجَاءَ بِكُمْ مِّنَ
الْبَدْوِ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَنْ نَّزَغَ الشَّيْطَانُ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَ
إِخْوَتِي إِنَّ رَبِّي لَطِيفٌ لِّمَا يَشَاءُ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَلِيمُ
الْحَكِيمُ(( 100 ))

[ 296 ]

100- AND HE RAISED HIS PARENTS HIGH ON THRONE, AND THEY ALL PROSTRATED
THEMSELVES FOR HIM. AND HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY FATHER! THIS IS THE
EXPLANATION OF MY DREAM OF LONG AGO, THAT MY LORD HAS MADE IT TO COME
TRUE. HE HAS INDEED BEEN GRACIOUS TO ME WHEN HE TOOK ME OUT OF THE
PRISON, AND BROUGHT YOU OUT OF THE DESERT, AFTER SATAN HAD MADE MISCHIEF
BETWEEN ME AND MY BROTHERS; THAT MY LORD IS KIND TO WHOM HE WILL, FOR HE
IS ALL-KNOWING. ALL-WISE.''

رَبِّ قَدْ آتَيْتَنِي مِنْ الْمُلْكِ وَعَلَّمْتَنِي مِنْ تَأْوِيلِ
الاَْحَادِيثِ فَاطِرَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ أَنْتَ وَلِىِّ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالاْخِرَةِ تَوَفَّنِي مُسْلِماً وَأَلْحِقْنِي
بِالصَّالِحِينَ(( 101 ))

101- O, MY LORD! YOU HAVE GIVEN ME OF THE KINGDOM, AND TAUGHT ME OF THE
INTERPRETATION OF PHENOMENONS. O, YOU THE CREATOR OF HEAVENS AND EARTH.
YOU ARE MY GUARDIAN IN THIS WORLD AND IN THE HEREAFTER. LET ME DIE A
MUSLIM (IN FULL SUBMISSION TO YOU), AND JOIN ME WITH THE RIGHTEOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF THE EVENT OF JACOB, JOSEPH AND HIS BROTHERS (VERSE NO. 99 -
101)**

Jacob comforted with the good news, regained his sight with the shirt,
and set out with his whole family on a journey from Canaan to

[ 297 ]

Egypt. This journey was different from the previous ones in that, the
whole caravan was of the same family; full of joy, drowned in hope and
thanks to their Lord who relieved them from their grief and anguish. In
Egypt, Joseph welcomed them with much honour and high respect. He
embraced them and treated his parents with special honour, and seated
them on the throne of dignity. Then they all prostrated themselves to
Allah in order to give their sincere thanks and pure gratitude to Him,
for all the favour and Grace that God had bestowed upon them.

Some commentators have taken the pronoun, ©HIM¨ in the clause;
©PROSTRATED THEMSELVES FOR HIM¨ to refer to Joseph, which may mean that
Jacob and his sons prostrated themselves before Joseph, and to Joseph!
Be it far from him! The pronoun, ©HIM¨ in this clause of the verse
returns to God. A monotheist believer will never prostrate himself to
anyone or anything, other than Allah, the only one God; and in that
occasion of sincere thanks giving, Jacob, Joseph, and all their family,
prayed to Allah the Only one God, and prostrated themselves before Him
to show their thanks and gratitude; and therefore the pronoun, ©HIM¨ in
the said clause of verse No.100 refers to God and no one else.

According to GENESIS 35:18, Joseph's mother Rachel had long been died
and Jacob had taken Leah, Joseph's aunt for his wife. Joseph accomodated
all his family in comfort settlement, and lodged his parent with himself
saying:ِ

\`\`Welcome to Egypt in safety and security with God's speed.'' He then
said to his father:ِ \`\`This is the explanation of my dream of long ago
that my Lord has made it to come true. He then by a short sermon said:ِ
\`\`God has indeed been gracious to me when he took me out of the
prison, and brought you out of the desert; after Satan had made mischief
between me and my brothers, that my Lord is kind to whom He wills, that
He is All-knowing, All-wise.'' Here when Joseph makes a mention of God's
favour to him he does not say that God brought me out of the well! He
rather says, God brought me out of the prison, and brought my family
from the deserts to Egypt; because he didn't want to despise his
brothers for their

[ 298 ]

mischief. He looks upon them as having been misled by Satan. Joseph
then turns to God in prayer, taking no credit to himself at all, and
shows that whatever of knowledge and position has he obtained, has been
through the favour and Grace of God Who is the Creator of the skies and
the earth, and all that exists in them. He said:ِ \`\`O, my Lord! You
have given me of the kingdom, and you have taught me of the
interpretation of phenomenons....'' This prayer of Joseph implies that:ِ
\`\`Whatever I have obtained of position and knowledge, it is from you
and you have given it to me. You are the only Creator of me, of heaven
and earth and of all. You are my guardian, and I have submitted, and
commited myself to your care.'' And finally Joseph prays for being
joined to the great family of the righteous and true believers, as he
was rejoined to his own family.

ذَلِكَ مِنْ أَنْبَاءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهِ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا كُنتَ
لَدَيْهِمْ إِذْ أَجْمَعُوا أَمْرَهُمْ وَهُمْ يَمْكُرُونَ(( 102 ))

102- THAT IS OF THE NEWS OF THE UNSEEN THAT WE INSPIRE IT TO YOU. AND
YOU WERE NOT WITH THEM WHEN THEY DECIDED UPON THEIR PLAN, AND WERE
SCHEMING. (THEIR PLOTS)

وَمَا أَكْثَرُ النَّاسِ وَلَوْ حَرَصْتَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 103 ))

103- AND MOST OF PEOPLE ARE NOT BELIEVERS EVENTHOUGH YOU BE EAGERLY
DESIROUS.

وَمَا تَسْأَلُهُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ هُوَ إِلاَّ ذِكْرٌ
لِلْعَالَمِينَ(( 104 ))

104- AND YOU ASK THEM NO REWARD FOR IT. IT IS NOT, BUT A REMINDER FOR
THE WORLDS.

[ 299 ]

وَكَأَيِّنْ مِّنْ آيَة فِي السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ يَمُرُّونَ
عَلَيْهَا وَهُمْ عَنْهَا مُعْرِضُونَ(( 105 ))

105- AND HOW MANY A SIGN THERE IS IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, WHICH THEY
PASS THEM BY; AND TURN AWAY FROM THEM.

وَمَا يُؤْمِنُ أَكْثَرُهُمْ بِاللهِ إِلاَّ وَهُمْ مُشْرِكُونَ(( 106
))

106- AND MOST OF THEM DO NOT BELIEVE IN ALLAH WITHOUT BEING
POLYTHEISTS.

أَفَأَمِنُوا أَنْ تَأْتِيَهُمْ غَاشِيَةٌ مِنْ عَذَابِ اللهِ أَوْ
تَأْتِيَهُمُ السَّاعَةُ بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 107 ))

107- DO THEY THEN FEEL SECURE OF COMING UPON THEM A COVERING OF ALLAH'S
PUNISHMENT SUDDENLY, WHILE THEY ARE UNAWARE?

**THE COMMENTARY
MOST OF THE CLAIMANTS ARE POLYTHEISTS! (VERSE NO. 102 - 106)**

The prophet is addressed here that; the story of Joseph which consists
of so many useful lessons, warnings, complications and results, ways of
proper thinking, and correct conclusions; has been ended here. It will
easily show how man proposes and God disposes. Consider what did the
brethren desire, and what actually happened! This story with all its
strange features, and attractive ups and downs, has been inspired to you
from the Lord of the visible world, and invisible beings. It has not
been expounded before whatever by the Bible, or those who had seen it,
or the later historians. But inspite of such an exposition and such a
convincing illustration, most of people will not believe, even though
you be eagerly desirous.

When the children of Israel, who were grown in the school-house

[ 300 ]

of prophethood, were so strayed from the direct path of truth, how can
you expect the common people and the laymen to overcome their carnal
desires, and caprices, and become virtuous believers? You therefore
should not lose hope, and cease endeavour, just because people do not
believe. So be not fearful in the path of truth, for the lack, and low
number, of its followers. The unbelievers have no excuse for their
faithlessness, because you ask no reward of them for your teaching and
training. It rather is a universal invitation and a free and open table
for all. Signs of Allah are scattered throughout the creation, conveying
primary meaning of monotheism, and yet they pass it over and pay no
heed! They do have eyes but they do not see, and they do have ears but
they hear not the word of truth.

Throughout the nature, nothing is simple and unimportant. The sunset
and the sun rise, the crescent, and the flickering stars, the spring and
the winter, day and night, life and death, and the amazing order that
prevails in the universe, are all signs of the All-knowing, Merciful
God. Each leaf of the plants is a great book that illustrates the
wonders of God, if one is willing to know! Even the fall of an apple can
lead us to the great laws and secrets of creation if we pay heed. But
even the believers are not far from polytheism, and they knowingly or
unknowingly associate some fetishes or false partners with God! Such
partners might be their apostles, saints, priests or some rulers. Even
pretence, has been counted as some sort of a polytheism in the doctrine
of our prophet, and is strictly forbidden.

قُلْ هَذِهِ سَبِيلِي أَدْعُو إِلَى اللهِ عَلَى بَصِيرَة أَنَا وَمَنِ
اتَّبَعَنِي وَسُبْحَانَ اللهِ وَمَا أَنَا مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 108 ))

108- SAY:ِ \`\`THIS IS MY WAY, THAT I CALL (MANKIND) UNTO ALLAH WITH
PERCEPTION; ME AND WHOEVER FOLLOWS ME. AND GLORY TO ALLAH! I AM NOT OF
THE POLYTHEISTS.''

[ 301 ]

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالا نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ مِّنْ
أَهْلِ الْقُرَى أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الاَْرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ
كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَدَارُ الاْخِرَةِ خَيْرٌ
لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ (( 109 ))

109- AND WE SENT NOT BEFORE YOU (AS APOSTLE), EXCEPT MEN OF THE
TOWNSFOLK IN WHOM WE INSPIRED. HAVE THEY NOT TRAVELLED IN THE LAND SO AS
TO SEE HOW WAS THE END OF THOSE (WHO LIVED) BEFORE THEM? AND CERTAINLY
THE ABODE OF THE LIFE TO COME IS BETTER FOR THOSE WHO AVOID EVIL. DO
THEY NOT UNDERSTAND?

حَتَّى إِذَا اسْتَيْئَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ كُذِبُوا
جَاءَهُمْ نَصْرُنَا فَنُجِّىَ مَنْ نَّشَاءُ وَلاَ يُرَدُّ بَأْسُنَا عَنِ
الْقَوْمِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ (( 110 ))

110- (THE APOSTLES INSISTED UPON THEIR ASSERTION, AND THE UNBELIEVERS
UPON THEIR DENIAL) UNTIL WHEN THE MESSENGERS DESPAIRED, AND DEEMED THAT
THEY WERE TAKEN AS LIARS; THERE CAME TO THEM OUR HELP, SAVING WHOEVER WE
WILLED, AND OUR SCOURGE WILL NOT BE WARDED OFF FROM THE GUILTY,
PERSONS.

لَقَدْ كَانَ فِي قَصَصِهِمْ عِبْرَةٌ لاُِّوْلِي الاَْلْبَابِ مَا كَانَ
حَدِيثاً يُفْتَرَى وَلَكِنْ تَصْدِيقَ الَّذِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ
وَتَفْصِيلَ كُلِّ شَيْء وَهُدىً وَرَحْمَةً لِقَوْم يُؤْمِنُونَ (( 111
))

111- VERILY THERE ARE LESSONS IN THEIR STORIES TO BE TAKEN BY MEN WHO
ARE THOUGHTFUL.

IT IS NOT A NARRATIVE WHICH IS FORGED, BUT, RATHER

[ 302 ]

A CONFIRMATION OF WHAT WAS BEFORE IT, AND A DETAILED EXPLANATION OF
EVERYTHING (WHICH IS NEEDED FOR THE PROSPERITY OF MANKIND), AND ALSO A
GUIDANCE AND A MERCY TO A PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE MOST LIVELY LESSONS TO BE TAKEN (VERSE NO. 108 - 111)**

In the first verse of this series, the prophet is ordered to announce
his course, and declare his way clearly to man, that he invites all the
mankind to Allah with perfect knowledge and perception.

The central fact and the pivot of Islam in the physical and spiritual
world is to hold fast to the ONENESS of God with Whom nothing is in
competition or partnership. In other word serving and worshipping the
only one true God, who is named Allah, is the way and the line of
Mohammad the Messenger of God (AS). Not only Mohammad himself, but all
his truthful followers who are Muslims, follow the same way which leads
to Monotheism. Therefore our prophet and his followers are far from
polytheism, and they associate nothing and no one with Allah. And so was
the way trodden by Jacob and Joseph. In their story we have read that
even in the prison, Joseph preached Monotheism, and called prisoners to
leave the idols and worship the only true and one God, and avoid
ascribing any partners to Him.

There has always been the question that why men were chosen as God's
apostles, and not the angels? The commentator's answer to this is
that:ِ

\`\`Any creature other than man, be it an angel or a jinn, has no
personal experience of man's affairs, or man's feelings, or man's
instincts, and therefore

[ 303 ]

cannot be an apt spiritual teacher for mankind in the truest sense of
the word. So, God inspired into His chosen men from among the townsfolk,
so that they could see things truer than the ordinary persons:ِ

And We sent not before you as apostles, except men of the townsfolk in
whom we inspired. (OUR MESSAGE)'' Men were the most suited to convey the
Message of God to other men. Had the messengers been angels, they could
not have been accepted as examples for other men. Therefore men were
chosen and inspired to, by God, and were provided with evidences and
clear signs, and then sent as the Messengers of God for the guidance of
mankind.

The next verse points at some critical moments in the prophet's life.
The apostles insisted upon their assertions and doctrine, and the
infidels upon their denial and resistance; so much so, that the prophets
lost their hopes of being able to guide anyone else from among their
people. And the apostles considered themselves branded as liars by the
unbelieving world! When so, God's help came at once, and the believers
were delievered from persecution, and the sinners were seized in
punishment; and doors were opened for those who were inclined to repent
and return.

The last verse is a perfect mirror that reflects all sides of the story
of Joseph, and the other prophets in which there are a wide variety of
useful lessons for man to follow:ِ

\`\`Verily there are lessons in their stories to be taken by men who
are thoughtful....'' In this mirror one can see the factors of success
and failure, abjection and honour. It shows all the experiences of the
past nations concised; as if, it lengthens the short life of an
individual to be as long as the life of the whole mankind! A story like
that of Joseph is not an imaginary tale or a fiction. The people of the
Book have it in their scripture, and here it is confirmed in its
principles, and with such an illustration that can be found no where
else. This is because all the events and incidents that are described
here, are mere truth and as they have happened.

[ 304 ]

O, our Merciful Lord! Grant us seeing eyes and hearing ears, and wise
heart with thoughtful mind, in order to find our proper way, out of the
experiences left for us from the fates of the predecessor.

**THE END OF SUREH JOSEPH (12)**

[ 305 ]

**سوره رعد THUNDER**

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

المر تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَالَّذِي أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَّبِّكَ
الْحَقُّ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ (( 1 ))

1- A.L.M.R. THESE ARE THE SIGNS (VERSES) OF THE BOOK. (QURA"N) AND THAT
WHICH IS SENT DOWN TO YOU FROM YOUR LORD, IS TRUTH; BUT MOST OF THE
PEOPLE DO NOT BELIEVE.

اللهُ الَّذِي رَفَعَ السَّمَاوَاتِ بِغَيْرِ عَمَد تَرَوْنَهَا ثُمَّ
اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي
لاَِجَل مُّسَمّىً يُدَبِّرُ الاَْمْرَ يُفَصِّلُ الآيَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ
بِلِقَاءِ رَبِّكُمْ تُوقِنُونَ(( 2 ))

2- ALLAH IS HE WHO RAISED THE SKIES WITHOUT PILLARS, THAT YOU CAN SEE.
HE THEN SAT UPON THE THRONE, (OF POWER TO CONTROL EVERYTHING) AND
SUBDUED THE SUN AND THE MOON, EACH ONE RUNNING UP TO AN APPOINTED TERM.
HE DISPOSES THE AFFAIR, EXPLAINS THE SIGNS, THAT YOU MAY MAKE SURE OF
MEETING YOUR LORD.

[ 306 ]

وَهُوَ الَّذِي مَدَّ الاَْرْضَ وَجَعَلَ فِيهَا رَوَاسِىَ وَأَنْهَاراً
وَمِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ جَعَلَ فِيهَا زَوْجَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ يُغْشِي
اللَّيْلَ النَّهَارَ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِّقَوْم يَتَفَكَّرُونَ((
3 ))

3- AND IT IS HE WHO SPREADS OUT THE EARTH, AND SETS THEREON FIRM
MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS. AND OF EVERY FRUITS HE MADE TWO PAIRS. HE MAKES
THE NIGHT TO COVER THE DAY. VERILY IN THESE (PHENOMENONS) THERE ARE
SIGNS FOR THE PEOPLE WHO THINK.

وَفِي الاَْرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُتَجَاوِرَاتٌ وَجَنَّاتٌ مِنْ أَعْنَاب وَزَرْعٌ
وَنَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَان يُسْقَى بِمَاء وَاحِد وَنُفَضِّلُ
بَعْضَهَا عَلَى بَعْض فِي الاُْكُلِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِقَوْم
يَعْقِلُونَ (( 4 ))

4- AND THERE ARE NEIGHBOURING TRACTS ON THE EARTH, AND GARDENS OF
GRAPES AND SOWN FIELDS (WITH CORN) AND PALM TREES, GROWN OUT OF A SINGLE
ROOT OR OTHERWISE, WATERED WITH THE SAME WATER, AND YET WE EXCEL SOME OF
THEM OVER THE OTHER, FOR EATING! VERILY IN THESE ARE SIGNS FOR A PEOPLE
WHO APPREHEND.

**THE COMMENTARY

THE SIGNS OF GOD IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH (VERSE NO. 1 - 4)**

The Sureh begins with saying that there is no room for any doubt, that
whatever of verses of Qura"n has been inspired to you, are mere truth,
and of surety from your Lord, but most of the fanciful

[ 307 ]

people will not believe it! When man is left alone in freedom, and
follows not a truthful leader, he will soon go astray, following his own
caprices, and eventually will have the worst of fates. The attentions
are then attracted to the greatness and importance of the skies, and the
planets that are supported on no visible pillars, which implies that
there are invisible forces like the gravity that holds them on their
orbits, in order to spin or move on.

**PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM**

When the verse under discussion (NO.2) revealed to our prophet, the
Ptolemaic System of geocentric theory was the accepted explanation of
the planetry motions.... In the simplest form of the system, each planet
was supposed to move uniformly in a small circle, while the center of
the circle moved along the circumference of a larger circle, which was
centered in the earth. Such combination of circular paths centered in
the earth, were intended to produce the observed looped courses of the
five bright stars around the heavens, and the apparently variable speeds
of sun and moon as well. With correct specification, it should be
possible to predict the places of those bodies among the stars for any
desired date. This was the main purpose of the system.

The Ptolemaic system remained the accepted explanation of the working
of the universe for about 1500 years! Finally in the 17th century the
work of JOHANNES KEPLER proved that Ptolemaic System was untenable, and
that the planets revolved around the sun rather than around the earth!
Many centuries after the Ptolemaic theory it was proved that, each of
the planets that are in the heavens, move in their orbits without any
pillar or support, and are stationed in their orbits, by the attractive
and centrifugal forces, one dependant on the planet's mass and the other
on its speed of movement.

[ 308 ]

An interesting tradition has been narrated from Hazrat Imam Ali (AS)
who said:ِ \`\`These stars that are in the skies are cities like the
cities on the earth, and each star is connected to the other star by a
pillar made out of light beam!'' After the statement on the creation of
the heavens and the earth, mention is made of their subjugation:ِ \`\`He
then sat upon the throne of power to control them and so he subdued the
sun and the moon, which are running up to an appointed term.''

All the planets obey the natural laws that God has legislated for them,
and all of them serve man and other living creatures that live in the
planets round about. In them all, are signs that God cares for man. and
for all his creatures and creations. Allah also explains His signs both
in nature, and by His revelations which are sent down to Man through
God's Messengers, so as to ensure Man that he has to return ultimately
to his Lord, and also he has to answer for his actions. The verses then
turn the attention of man from the skies down to his home which is the
earth:ِ \`\`It is Allah Who spread the earth upon the huge body of
oceans, and set upon the earth firm mountains and He caused the rivers
to flow down. He created all the fruits in pairs, and caused the night
to cover the day to provide the means of rest and repose.'' When the
earth spins around its pivot, the mountains help the gravity to hold the
air sphere over the globe, so as to keep everything that is on the earth
still and motionless; and besides that, the mountains are the stores and
sources of water for Man's irrigations and cultivations.

The clause of the verse that:ِ OF EVERY FRUIT HE MADE TWO PAIRS implies
the sex in plants, that they too, have their reproductive means of male
and female, just like the animals. On the other hand, the life of the
creatures on the earth depends much upon the difference of the night and
day, which are other signs showing the knowledge and the ordainment of
God. Without the day

[ 309 ]

light no perfect work can be done, and without the dark night no good
sleep and rest can be obtained. Besides that; a continuous sunshine or
darkness, will result in an extraordinary heat or coldness, which will
easily remove the life out of the earth. The last verse (NO.4) refers to
some botany and geological points, that each one is a sign of a
predetermined order that prevails. That of the neighbouring tracts of
the earth with different qualifications, some with salty soil and some
of fertile sweet land; a part being soft and another part hard! Each of
them are made suitable for certain use and products, in order to satisfy
Man's and other creature's needs and necessities.

Then the reference is made to gardens with various fruits and harvests,
such as grapes, dates, and corns, and etc; the plants of which are grown
in different manners, some out of a single root, and some otherwise; and
many form into bunches. All such variety of fruits and products, are
watered with the same water, and fed with the same soil, and nourished
with the same sun light and heat, while some of them excel some others
in being eatable. All these are the signs of God which may prove that
Resurrection and meeting our Lord's Mercy, in another life to come, is
something sure and very easy for Him to do.

**SCIENTIFIC MIRACLES OF QURA"N**

There are amazing verses in the Qura"n that uncovers many hidden
scientific laws and rules! As an instance we may refer to the above
verse (NO.3) once again:ِ

\`\`And of every fruit we have created two pairs.'' The verse clearly
alludes to sex in plants, like the animals and all living creatures, who
are made of male and female. So also, in other verses Allah has said to
have made the sun, the moon, the stars, and the heavens and the earth;
with all that exists in them, subservient to Man! This implies that man
is the most developed creature of the world, and can make use of
everything for his own benefit and welfare, if he falls not down, and
lowers himself not than the beasts!

[ 310 ]

وَإِنْ تَعْجَبْ فَعَجَبٌ قَوْلُهُمْ أَءِذَا كُنَّا تُرَاباً أَئِنَّا
لَفِي خَلْق جَدِيد أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ
وَأُوْلَئِكَ الاَْغْلاَلُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَأُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ(( 5 ))

5- AND IF YOU WONDER, INDEED WONDERFUL IS THEIR SAYING:ِ WHEN WE ARE
TURNED TO DUST, DO WE GET INTO A NEW CREATION? THEY ARE THOSE WHO
DISBELIEVE THEIR LORD, AND THEY ARE THOSE AROUND WHOSE NECKS ARE CHAINS,
AND THEY ARE THE COMPANIONS THE FIRE, THEY ABIDE IN IT FOREVER.

وَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالسَّيِّئَةِ قَبْلَ الْحَسَنَةِ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ
مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ الْمَثُلاَتُ وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَذُو مَغْفِرَة لِلنَّاسِ
عَلَى ظُلْمِهِمْ وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَشَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ(( 6 ))

6- AND THEY ASK YOU TO HASTEN ON BADNESS ERE GOODNESS! (i.e, TO HASTEN
FOR PUNISHMENT BEFORE MERCY AND FORGIVENESS) YET MANY EXAMPLES (OF OUR
PUNISHMENTS) HAS ALREADY PASSED BEFORE THEM, AND THAT YOUR LORD IS
FORGIVING TO PEOPLE ON THEIR OPPRESSION; AND (ALSO) YOUR LORD IS STERN
IN PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY**

Here the immediate reference is to the life after death, showing the
incident of the new creation and Resurrection to be believed, entirely
depending on the faith in God, and His oneness in power,

[ 311 ]

knowledge, and all the other attributes:ِ \`\`If you wonder, indeed
wonderful is their saying that; when we are turned to dust, do we get
into a new creation?'' What sort of a difference can be found between a
creation and the renewal of the creation? If we could have a true and
reasonable faith in God, and some recognition of His power, plans, and
purposes; we could not deny or even doubt the life after death, because
destination is always connected with the origin. Disbelief in life to
come is disbelief in God, and is due to the various yokes of servitude,
which is around the neck of the unbeliever, the yokes which may
eventually lead him to the fire of Hell!

Consider Allah, our Merciful Creator for a while that how has He
cherished and brought us up!? How has He nurtured us with care, and how
has He showed us His signs in the nature, and through revelations and by
His Messengers! If we consider these matters, we can easily see our
Lord's mysterious hand and marvellous work, and amazing plans, and there
remains no room in us for any doubt what so ever.

Why should we think that when we are dead and turned into dust, we
exist no more, and we start not with another new kind of creation!? When
one creation has already been possible what difficulty can there be in a
next one, or in the renewal of the same? If we deny such an evident
matter, it is no more than an obstinate and rebellious denial, which is
caused by the yokes of servitudes to superstitions, falsehood, and
carelessness, that we may have around our neck!

The next verse (NO.6) points to another illogical word of the infidels
that by way of taunt say:ِ

\`\`If there is indeed a punishment waiting, then let it come on now!
The sooner the better!''

Qura"n says:ِ \`\`Why do they prefer God's punishment over His Mercy!?
Have they not heard of the terrible punishment of those who have passed
away before them, in order to keep it in their minds as examples!?''

God's stern punishment prevents not His Mercy and Forgiveness, and so
is the case with His Mercy and Grace which

[ 312 ]

prevents him not of His just punishment, to leave the oppressors alone
to do whatever they want.

وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ
رَبِّهِ إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنذِرٌ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْم هَاد(( 7 ))

7- AND THE UNBELIEVERS SAY:ِ \`\`WHY HAS A SIGN NOT BEEN SENT DOWN TO
HIM FROM HIS LORD? YOU ARE ONLY A WARNER, AND THERE IS A GUIDE FOR EVERY
PEOPLE.''


