Excuses Again (verse No. 7)
===========================

As a matter of human rights, people do have the right of asking God's
apostles to manifest some miracles, to assure their hearts and to
support their prophethood. But the oppositions to the prophet were not
with the intention of a good will, or willing to find the truth. Their
request for certain and ridiculous miracles was due to their obstinacy,
and unreasonable adherance to some false ideas. Instead of the search of
truth, they searched for excuses! On the other hand, inspite of
revealing hundreds of wonderful miracles, our prophet never claimed to
have been able to do whatever he liked! He always insisted upon his
assertion that, no one can do anything against God's will, and miracles
too, are in the hand of God, without Whose permission none of the
prophets could bring one. Therefore, the prophet was a warner and a
bearer of good-tidings for the believers.

Of course whenever there was a real need for doing a miracles the
prophets prayed to God and asked it in order to guide people to the path
of truth, and God answered and gave them what they asked. As to the last
clause of the verse:ِ \`\`You are only a warner, and there is a guide
for every people.'' It points at two different tasks of warning and
guidance.

[ 313 ]

A.warner tries to direct those who go astray in the straight way of
God; but the duty of a guide, is to lead on the straight path. Therefore
the guide leads the followers of the prophet to the methodical way of
the prophet. The prophet makes the way out, and the guide or Imam, leads
people in the way trodden by the prophet. Traditions have been related
by successive witness of all sects, that the prophet said:ِ \`\`I am the
warner and Ali is the guide.'' Fakhr-Al-Razi the famous Sonni
commentator has narrated in his great commentary book V.19ِP.14 that,
IBN-ABASS, has said that the prophet pointed at his own chest and said:ِ
\`\`I am the said warner in this verse (NO.7)'' The prophet then put his
hand upon Hazrat Imam Ali, and said:ِ \`\`O, Ali! you are the guide
mentioned here; and after me, those who are guided, are guided by
you.''

اللهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَحْمِلُ كُلُّ أُنثَى وَمَا تَغِيضُ الاَْرْحَامُ
وَمَا تَزْدَادُ وَكُلُّ شَيْء عِنْدَهُ بِمِقْدَار(( 8 ))

8- ALLAH KNOWS WHAT EVERY FEMALE BEARS; AND WHAT THE WOMBS FALL SHORT
OF, AND WHAT THEY EXCEED. AND EVERYTHING WITH HIM HAS A MEASURE.

عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ وَالشَّهَادَةِ الْكَبِيرُ الْمُتَعَالِ(( 9 ))

9- THE KNOWER OF THE UNSEEN AND THE VISIBLE, THE GREAT, THE HIGHEST

سَوَاءٌ مِّنْكُمْ مَنْ أَسَرَّ الْقَوْلَ وَمَنْ جَهَرَ بِهِ وَمَنْ هُوَ
مُسْتَخْف بِاللَّيْلِ وَسَارِبٌ بِالنَّهَارِ(( 10 ))

10- IT MAKES NO DIFFERENCE FOR HIM WHETHER ONE OF YOU WHISPERS OR
SPEAKS ALOUD, AND HE WHO IS HIDDEN BY THE NIGHT, OR IS MOVING ABOUT IN
DAY.

[ 314 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD'S INFINITE KNOWLEDGE (VERSE NO. 8 - 10)**

Here, mention is made of some of God's attributes that completes the
discussion of Monotheism, as well as that of the Resurrection Day. The
word is on the infinite knowledge of Allah, which is the source of the
great and wonderful order that prevails throughout the universe, and the
wonders existing in all the being things!:ِ \`\`Allah knows what every
female bears, and what does a womb fall short of, and what does it
exceed.''

The secrecy of a female's womb is a good instance to point at God's
infinite knowledge, and His perception of the hidden or exposed facts;
because, even the female herself does not know what is hidden in her
womb, of a female or a male, a well formed or malformed; a single
creature or a couple? Is it to be born short of the standard period of
nine months, or exceeds that length of time?

It does not make any difference for God, whether something is hidden or
exposed. Our most hidden thoughts and motives are known to Him, that
things visible or invisible are the same for God to see! This is because
seen and unseen are based on relativity, according to the sense of sight
of creatures. For example, we, mankind, own some sensual faculties like
the sense of sight, or the sense of hearing. The range of view in our
vision is limited. Our visible spectrum has wave lengths between 3800
and 8000 Angstroms, and we cannot see beyond these two extremes, i.e.
infra red and ultraviolet. (Angstrom is a minute unit of length equal to
one hundred-millionth of a centimeter used in expressing the length of
light waves.) So, whatever is beyond our visible spectrum we call it the
unseen, and the invisible world. So is the case with our sense of
hearing, and other faculties that we have. But, because the glorified
Substance of our Lord is infinite and limitless, seen and unseen are the
same for Him, and He can see both of them the same!

[ 315 ]

**EMBRYOLOGY**

The fetus; its wonders, laws, and stages of development, have been
repeatedly pointed to in the Holy Qura"n, making the undeniable proofs
of Monotheism and God's infinite knowledge of the seen or unseen.
Embryology is a young science the development of which has recently been
rapid and sure, revealing many secrets to mankind about his own
creation. All these informations are good and reasonable lessons on the
vital subject of monotheism.

**THERE IS A MEASURE FOR EVERYTHING**

In many verses we read that everything and every affair has a measure.
Anything, be it physical or spiritual has certain extremes, or utmost
points or borders, which is dangerous to exceed or transgress. In other
word, nothing in this world exists without a measure or without an
account. As an example we may mention the blood which circulates in our
veins. It consists of some twenty or more elements, all of which must
have a certain amount or number! An increase or decrease of that amount
or number will result in a dangerous fault and failure, which manifests
itself in some sort of a disease! Such an account is not only in man's
blood, but in everything that can exist! Therefore, if man wants to live
free of defects and faults he must observe the medium in between the two
settled extremes of all things and all affairs.

لَهُ مُعَقِّبَاتٌ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ يَحْفَظُونَهُ
مِنْ أَمْرِ اللهِ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْم حَتَّى
يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنفُسِهِمْ وَإِذَا أَرَادَ اللهُ بِقَوْم سُوءاً فَلاَ
مَرَدَّ لَهُ وَمَا لَهُمْ مِّنْ دُونِهِ مِنْ وَال(( 11 ))

11- FOR HIM (FOR EVERY PERSON) THERE ARE ATTENDANTS (ANGELS) BEFORE HIM
AND BEHIND HIM, TO PROTECT HIM BY THE COMMAND OF ALLAH. VERILY, ALLAH
WILL NOT CHANGE

[ 316 ]

WHAT IS WITH A PEOPLE, UNTIL THEY CHANGE WHAT IS IN THEM. AND WHEN
ALLAH INTENDS EVIL TO A PEOPLE, NO ONE CAN WARD IT OFF, AND BESIDES HIM
THERE IS NO PROTECTOR FOR THEM.

**THE COMMENTARY
MAN'S INVISIBLE GUARDS (VERSE NO. 11)**

The pronoun, ©HIM¨ in the beginning of the above verse, returns to
mankind, which implies that Allah is the protector and the guardian of
His servants, and cares much for them. He surrounds man with His
infinite knowledge and Mercy, and protects him from many hazards and
fatal incidents, but His protection is not without condition. Man may go
to throw himself into an abyss, or to commit suicide either physically
or spiritually. Therefore God helps those who help themselves. It is not
right for man to do all the evils he wants and then expect his Lord to
take care of him not to fall! The verse implies that Allah our Merciful
Lord has appointed a group of angels to attend to man's protection
alternately in day and night, guarding man against accidents and
afflictions by God's leave.

Many calamities and disasterous events threatens man from all round
him, and particularly during his childhood, when he has not enough
information regarding the dangers round about, and yet we see them grown
and matured sound and safe! Hazrat Imam Sadiq (AS) has said:ِ

\`\`There lives no God's servant, unless two angels guard him and
protect him from hazards and perils, but when God's decree is issued,
the angels yield him to their fate.''

The same tradition is also found among the saying of Hazrat Imam Ali
(AS) in the NAHJOLBALA"GHEHِNO.201.

The verse under discussion (NO.11) also implies that; as a

[ 317 ]

universal Law of Allah, changes always begin in the inner self of man,
and then extends to outside:ِ \`\`Allah will not change what is with a
people until they change what is in them.'' In other word, man's fate
lays in his own hand, and his life is what he makes it. Any change in
man's fortune or misfortune depends on his inner self. It is therefore a
general Islamic Law that every external change in our life and condition
of being, depends on our internal changes, and we should not look for
the causes of our misfortunes and failures outside the realm of our self
and soul.

هُوَ الَّذِي يُرِيكُمُ الْبَرْقَ خَوْفاً وَطَمَعاً وَيُنْشِىءُ
السَّحَابَ الثِّقَالَ(( 12 ))

12- IT IS HE WHO SHOWS YOU THE LIGHTNING (WHICH CAUSES) FEAR AND HOPE.
AND HE CREATES HEAVY CLOUDS.

وَيُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ مِنْ خِيفَتِهِ
وَيُرْسِلُ الصَّوَاعِقَ فَيُصِيبُ بِهَا مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَهُمْ يُجَادِلُونَ
فِي اللهِ وَهُوَ شَدِيدُ الْمِحَالِ(( 13 ))

13- AND THE THUNDER CELEBRATES HIS PRAISE, AND (SO DO) THE ANGELS WITH
AWE. AND HE SENDS THE THUNDERBOLT AND THEN STRIKES WITH IT WHOM HE
WILLS. AND THEY DISPUTE ABOUT ALLAH WHO IS MIGHTY IN POWER.

لَهُ دَعْوَةُ الْحَقِّ وَالَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ لاَ
يَسْتَجِيبُونَ لَهُمْ بِشَىْء إِلاَّ كَبَاسِطِ كَفَّيْهِ إِلَى الْمَاءِ
لِيَبْلُغَ فَاهُ وَمَا هُوَ بِبَالِغِهِ وَمَا دُعَاءُ الْكَافِرِينَ
إِلاَّ فِي ضَلاَل(( 14 ))

14- FOR HIM IS THE CALL OF TRUTH. AND THOSE WHOM THEY CALL BESIDES HIM
DO NOT ANSWER THEM ON ANYTHING. (THEY ARE) LIKE HE WHO STRETCHES OUT HIS
PALMS TO THE WATER SO AS TO REACH HIS MOUTH, AND IT

[ 318 ]

REACHES IT NOT. AND THE PRAYER OF THE UNBELIEVERS IS NOT EXCEPT IN
ERROR.

وَللهِِ يَسْجُدُ(1) مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ طَوْعاً
وَكَرْهاً وَظِلاَلُهُمْ بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالاْصَالِ(( 15 ))

15- AND FOR ALLAH PROSTRATES WHOEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH,
WILLINGLY OR UNWILLINGLY, AND THEIR SHADOWS TOO, IN THE MORNING AND
EVENINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
SOME OTHER SIGNS OF GOD'S GREATNESS (VERSE NO. 12 - 15)**

Once again, reference is made to some natural phenomenons, in order to
show some of God's greatness and to shine the light of faith in the
believer's heart moving them on:ِ \`\`It is He who shows you the
lightning which causes fear and hope.'' The scope of God's Grace and
Mercy is so vast and extensive that, even in the miseries and
misfortunes there can be found again and againe His Mercy and
generosity! An instance of this which is mentioned here, is the fearful
force and fire of lightning in which there is also the hope of good and
abundant crops in the rain which will come out of the clouds among which
the lightning flashes.

**THE BLESSING OF LIGHTNING AND THUNDERِBOLT**

We know that the lightning flashes is caused by the contact of two
pieces of positively and negatively charged clouds; just like the
sparking of two hot and cold bare electric wire in contact. When a
positively charged piece of cloud, approaches the earth which is
negative relative to the cloud, a flash of lightning is created, and it
is

[ 319 ]

then dangerous because the earth acts as a negative terminal causing an
immense amount of current to flow. There are also many profits for man
in the lightning, some of which are as follows:ِ

1- Man's benefit of irrigation....Due to the great amount of heat that
the lightning may cause, a great amount of the air is burnt, serving to
reduce the air pressure, and we know that it is the low pressure of air
that makes it raining.

2- The great amount of heat produced by the lightning serves to make
heavy water (H2 O2) which is the killer of microbes and remover of the
plant infections.

3- Through the high degree of the created heat, rain droplets will
carry carbonic acids, and when they fall upon the earth they fertilize
the soil. Then there is the interesting next verse, saying:ِ

\`\`And the thunder celebrates His praise, and so do the angels with
awe.'' Some of the philosophers have understood that all the existing
particles that make the building blocks of the universe have some sort
of wisdom and understanding and all of them intelligently celebrate the
praise of their Creator and glorify His name! Rumi too, in his great
book (MATHNAVI) has clearly composed that:ِ

\`\`All the constituent particles of the world cry out loudly that:ِ we
can hear, we can see, and we can speak. We are all endowed with
intelligence, but with you strangers we keep quiet.'' Therefore it is
not strange to hear that the thunder bolt too may have some sort of a
tongue to celebrate the praise of its Creator. In the verse NO.15 we
read:ِ

\`\`And for Allah prostrates who ever is in the heavens and the earth,
willingly or unwillingly....'' Prostration in this case may mean, being
humble and submitting. Some creatures prostrate themselves for Allah,
through their nature and by following the natural laws, and some other
creatures like the angels, man and Jinns, prostrate themselves before
Him according to their creeds and religious laws.

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 320 ]

**MORE ABOUT THE LIGHTNING**

(One of the most awe-inspiring of all the displays of nature is a
blinding flash of lightning followed by the deafening roll of thunder. A
great deal of what we know about lightning-flashes is due to the work of
a South African scientist, Sir BASIL SCHONLAND who took many photographs
of lightning, using a special camera with fast moving films. According
to what Sir Basil has discovered, lightning is associated with thunder
clouds. In the formation of the clouds a mass of warm air moves upward
which carry a considerable amount of moisture in the form of water
vapour. As the mass rises, it gets cooler and can get less water vapour
then it could when it was warmer. Finally the vapour condenses to tiny
droplets of water that forms clouds. The water droplets that form in
thunder clouds become supercooled, down toِ40³F, which are turned to
tiny lumps of ice. Some of the frozen droplets fuse with others to form
small hail-stones.

These start falling, but continually bump into supercooled droplets
moving upward. Billions of such encounters between water droplets and
hail-stones produce in the cloud the electrical charge which finally
brings about the flashes of lightning. At each encounter with a droplet
the hail-stone acquire a negative charge. At the same time a minute
splinter of ice cracks off from the water droplet as it freezes and
carries a positive charge. As the positively charged splinters rise in
the cloud, the negatively charged hail-stones fall towards the bottom,
where it is warmer, and so they melt into large drops of water. This
process may continue for an hour.

During this time the whole cloud is a huge dynamo, continuously
generating nearly a million of Kilovolt of electricity. It acts too,
like a storage battery, with positive terminal at the top, and the
negative terminal perhaps several miles below! Between the two there may
be a voltage difference of hundred million volts. While the main
charging process has been taking place, a smaller packet of positive
charge has been built up at the base of the cloud, below the negative
pole. Here occurs the triggering action that sets off the lightning
flash. As lightning strikes; the energy that is liberated, heats the
air

[ 321 ]

through which it passes, and the air suddenly expands. The pressure
wave travels outward and gives a sensation of sound to anyone that can
hear. Lightning is sometimes beneficial to man by helping to provide
food for growing plants. Plants are in need of nitrogen which is
absorbed by the roots, not in pure form, but in nitrogen containing
compounds, called nitrates. There is plenty of nitrogen in the air, but
it is useless to the plants unless it can be made to combine with other
elements to produce the precious nitrates....a difficult task. Now every
flash of lightning causes a certain amount of nitrogen in the air to
unite with oxygen. After several further steps, the nitrogen is made
available to the plant in the form of the nitrates which it can absorb.
Lightning accounts for only a comparatively small part of the nitrogen
used by plants. Much more is made available by the bacteria found on
certain plants, or by nitrate mine from natural deposits, and by man
made fertilizers.

Lightning also causes a great deal of dangers, as a result of heating
and expansion, when it passes through wood by which enormous current
heats up the part of the wood through which its routes lie and causes it
to expand many times. As a result the wood may split.

When lightning strikes, it may follow a very complicated path. A stroke
of lightning once hit a large elm in front of a country house. From the
tree it jumped to the house just below the eaves, and went through the
wall to an iron bed where on a man was sleeping. By great good luck he
was unharmed. The principle protection against lightning is the
lightning rod which was invented by Benjamine Franklin. It consists of a
metal rod extending up from the roof, or some other high point of the
building. It is connected by a heavy wire to a metal plate buried in the
ground. Thus the lightning will not take a destructive path if it
strikes the house.

**FROM:ِ FATHOMING THE MYSTERIES OF NATURE'S
FIRE WORKS. BY:ِ JAMES STOKLEY
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

[ 322 ]

قُلْ مَنْ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ قُلِ اللهُ قُلْ
أَفَاتَّخَذْتُمْ مِّنْ دُونِهِ أَوْلِيَاءَ لاَ يَمْلِكُونَ لاَِنفُسِهِمْ
نَفْعاً وَلاَ ضَرّاً قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الاَْعْمَى وَالْبَصِيرُ أَمْ
هَلْ تَسْتَوِي الظُّلُمَاتُ وَالنُّورُ أَمْ جَعَلُوا للهِِ شُرَكَاءَ
خَلَقُوا كَخَلْقِهِ فَتَشَابَهَ الْخَلْقُ عَلَيْهِمْ قُلْ اللهُ خَالِقُ
كُلِّ شَيْء وَهُوَ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ (( 16 ))

16- SAY:ِ WHO IS THE LORD OF THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH? SAY:ِ ALLAH .
SAY:ِ HAVE YOU THEN TAKEN OTHER GUARDIANS BESIDES HIM THAT THEY HAVE NO
POWER TO PROFIT OR HURT (EVEN) THEMSELVES? SAY:ِ ARE THE BLIND AND THE
SEEING EQUAL? OR IS DARKNESS EQUAL WITH LIGHT? OR HAVE THEY ASSOCIATED
WITH ALLAH PARTNERS THAT HAVE CREATED LIKE HIS CREATION, SO THAT BOTH
CREATIONS HAVE APPEARED TO THEM ALIKE? SAY:ِ ALLAH IS THE CREATOR OF ALL
THINGS, AND HE IS THE ONLY ONE, THE SUBDUER.

**THE COMMENTARY
WHY IDOLATRY? (VERSE NO. 16)**

The verse which is composed in the form of question and answer, tries
to remind the polytheists of their mistakes and wrong judgement. Here
the prophet is told to ask them;

\`\`Who is the cherisher Lord of the heavens and the earth?'' And the
prophet is not to wait for the idolaters to answer that question, that
the answer is clear and easy, that there is no Creator other than
Allah.

[ 323 ]

Then through a parable the believers and the unbelievers are compared.
The faithful is likened to light and a man who can see, and the
faithless to darkness and a man who is blind. The verse also implies
that Lordship is connected with being worshipped. It is not so that God
may create something and then sit aside, leaving the creature alone and
unattended. God's bestow of existence is ever continuous, and every
creature gets existence from God's Sacred Essence newly and instant by
instant.

أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَسَالَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِهَا
فَاحْتَمَلَ السَّيْلُ زَبَداً رَّابِياً وَمِمَّا يُوقِدُونَ عَلَيْهِ فِي
النَّارِ ابْتِغَاءَ حِلْيَة أَوْ مَتَاع زَبَدٌ مِثْلُهُ كَذَلِكَ
يَضْرِبُ اللهُ الْحَقَّ وَالْبَاطِلَ فَأَمَّا الزَّبَدُ فَيَذْهَبُ
جُفَاءً وَأَمَّا مَا يَنفَعُ النَّاسَ فَيَمْكُثُ فِي الاَْرْضِ كَذَلِكَ
يَضْرِبُ اللهُ الاَْمْثَالَ(( 17 ))

17- HE SENT DOWN WATER FROM THE SKY. THEN IT FLOWED (IN RIVER BEDS)
ACCORDING TO ITS CAPACITY. THEN THE TORRENT CARRIED ON A SCUM. AND SOME
OF THE MATERIALS ON WHICH THEY INFLAME IN THE FIRE (TO BE MELTED), TO
OBTAIN ORNAMENT OR COMMODITY, GIVE UP SCUM THE LIKE OF IT.

SO DOES ALLAH STRIKE (THE PARABLE OF) TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD. AS FOR THE
SCUM, IT WILL BE OUT CAST, AND WHAT PROFITS PEOPLE WILL REMAIN IN THE
EARTH. SO DOES ALLAH STRIKE THE SIMILITUDES.

[ 324 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
A MINUTE ILLUSTRATION OF TRUTH AND FALSEHOOD (VERSE NO. 17)**

The style of the Holy Qura"n, and its mode of expressing thought in
language, and exhibiting the spiritual and physical matters, is
sometimes through striking parables, some of which are found in the
above verse (NO.17). It begins with:ِ \`\`Allah sent down water from the
sky.'' The life giving water which is the source of all movements will
flow in different channels and beds according to their capacities. Some
form great streams or rivers which may irrigate big pieces of farm
lands. Some are clear crystalline brooks coming out of springs so good
to drink. The heavy rain keeps the rivers and valleys in flood which
carries the scum that has only a great show on top of the flood. The
scum is not only found on the top of the floods. The metal ores too,
when heated to melt is covered with scum for having a lot of impurities,
but the fire will separate the gold from the dross.

This parable of water and scum that can induce general conception, has
a likeness to truth and falsehood. The scum will not last on the top of
the water, and that which profits man like water itself will remain in
the earth, just as the falsehood vanishes and the truth looms and
remains. God may test His servants through difficulties and ups and
downs of life to make known what is vain and useless and what is
valuable and useful. God's Grace and Mercy is like the rain which all
can receive it. It rains equally over fertile and barren lands through
which the garden will produce fruit and flower, but the barren and salty
soil gives out nothing, or at the best it may produce some thorn.

[ 325 ]

**SOME POINTS TO NOTE**

The recognition of truth and falsehood, which is the knowing of
realities and imaginations, may sometimes create difficulties and
complexities for man. Qura"n gives some signs for truth and falsehood so
that one may know them easier. Some of the signs are as follows:ِ

.ِTruth is always useful like the clean, clear, crystal water that
springs out of a spring, where as falsehood is always useless and
vain.

.ِFalsehood is very noisy, showy, pretentious, futile, and it is
characterized by ostentation, while the truth is noiseless, humble,
heavy, meaningful and active.

.ِThe truth is self-reliant, but falsehood takes reputation and
validity from truth.

.ِFalsehood apears in many forms, and in various guises in different
languages.

.ِIn the above verse we read that:ِ \`\`Only those things will remain
that profit man, and those things which are useless like the scum will
be out cast.''

The parable of truth and falsehood likened to water and scum is not
confined in time and space, and it comes true every where and every time
in various forms.

[ 326 ]

لِلَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ الْحُسْنَى وَالَّذِينَ لَمْ
يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَهُ لَوْ أَنَّ لَهُمْ مَّا فِي الاَْرْضِ جَمِيعاً
وَمِثْلَهُ مَعَهُ لاَفْتَدَوْا بِهِ أُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ سُوءُ الْحِسَابِ
وَمَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ(( 18 ))

18- FOR THOSE WHO OBEYED THEIR LORD (THEIR REWARD IS) GOODNESS, AND
THOSE WHO DO NOT OBEY HIM, HAD THEY POSSESSED ALL THAT IS IN THE EARTH,
AND THE LIKE OF IT TO OFFER AS ATONEMENT, (IT WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED AND)
FOR THEM IS A BAD RECKONING, AND THEIR ABODE IS THE HELL, AND SO BAD A
CRADLING.

**THE COMMENTARY
THOSE WHO ACCEPTED THE INVITATION OF TRUTH (VERSE NO. 18)**

This verse refers to those who accepted the invitation of truth, and
obeyed their Lord. It also mentions those who turned away and disobeyed
Allah:ِ

\`\`For those who obeyed their Lord, their reward is goodness, and
those who do not obey him.... there is a bad reckoning.'' Goodness
means, excellence, virtue, anything serviceable and fit, and all sorts
of prosperity which ultimatly end in Paradise and Gardens of Bliss. Such
is the reward of those who believed and obeyed their Lord. On the
contrary the unbelievers who have turned away in disobedience, their
abode is Hell, so bad a cradling that no atonement for its rescue is
found even if they give the whole globe and the like of it. Many verses
in Qura"n imply that people are of two groups in the Day of Doom. Some
are encountered with exactingness in summing their accounts, and so they
will have to answer for whatever they did; be it little or large, and
this is indeed a bad reckoning. Others are

[ 327 ]

taken easy in their reckoning, and their faults are looked upon with a
good amount of tolerance and connivance. This is because in their lower
life here, they have dealt people with easiness and were gentle, kind,
and forgiving towards their subjects who were dependent upon them.

أَفَمَنْ يَعْلَمُ أَنَّمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَّبِّكَ الْحَقُّ
كَمَنْ هُوَ أَعْمَى إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُوْلُوا الاَْلْبَابِ(( 19 ))

19- IS HE WHO KNOWS THAT WHAT HAS BEEN SENT DOWN TO YOU FROM YOUR LORD
IS TRUTH, LIKE HIM WHO IS BLIND? ONLY THE THOUGHTFULS WILL TAKE
ADMONITION.

الَّذِينَ يُوفُونَ بِعَهْدِ اللهِ وَلاَ يَنقُضُونَ الْمِيثَاقَ (( 20
))

20- THOSE WHO FULFIL THEIR COVENANT WITH ALLAH, AND BREAK NOT THEIR
PROMISE.

وَالَّذِينَ يَصِلُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيَخْشَوْنَ
رَبَّهُمْ وَيَخَافُونَ سُوءَ الْحِسَابِ(( 21 ))

21- AND THOSE WHO CONNECT TO THOSE WITH WHOM ALLAH HAS COMMANDED THEM
TO CONNECT, AND FEAR THEIR LORD, AND DREAD THE BAD RECKONING.

22- AND THOSE WHO KEPT PATIENT FOR THE SAKE OF ALLAH AND PERFORMED THE
PRAYER, AND GAVE ALMS FROM THE SUSTENANCE WHICH WE GRANTED THEM,
SECRETLY OR OPENLY; AND WHO WARD OFF EVIL WITH GOOD DEEDS. THEY

[ 328 ]

ARE THOSE FOR WHOM IS THE GOOD (AND ETERNAL) ABODE.

جَنَّاتُ عَدْن يَدْخُلُونَهَا وَمَنْ صَلَحَ مِنْ آبَائِهِمْ
وَأَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ يَدْخُلُونَ
عَلَيْهِمْ مِّنْ كُلِّ بَاب (( 23 ))

23- (THEIR SAID ABODE WILL BE) GARDENS OF EDEN, IN WHICH THEY SHALL
ENTER WITH THOSE WHO WERE RIGHTEOUS, OF THEIR FATHERS AND THEIR WIVES,
AND THEIR OFFSPRINGS. AND THE ANGELS WILL COME TO THEM FROM EVERY
GATE.

سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِمَا صَبَرْتُمْ فَنِعْمَ عُقْبَى الدَّارِ (( 24
))

24- (AND THE ANGELS WILL SAY TO THEM) PEACE BE UPON YOU FOR BEING
PATIENT. HOW EXCELLENT IS THEN YOUR ETERNAL ABODE.


