The Eight Doors of Paradise (verse No. 19 - 24)
===============================================

To complete the previous verses, some details are given here, beginning
with the fact that, those who can see and understand are not equal to
those who are blind and perceive not, and so are the faithful and
faithless not similar to each other, and also those who understand and
those who understand not. Almost all the commentators understand that
this verse (NO.19) invites people to gain knowledge, and learn more and
more, because those who are void of knowledge are none the better than
those who are blind. Then there comes the second verse of the above
group (NO.20) that

[ 329 ]

points at a brief outline of the order which those who have a mind to
grasp, and an eye to perceive will pursue. They are:ِ

.ِThose who fulfil their covenant with Allah and break not their
promises.

.ِTheir next programme is connection with those whom Allah has
commanded to connect with. Man should always have a firm connection and
fair relation with his Creator, His apostles, teachers and learned
people, his own parent, family and friends, the society, and even
himself. This is because man is a social creature, and is not created to
live alone and in seclusion like the hermits.

.ِThey are the God-fearing, pious persons who avoid evil deeds in order
to be nearer and dearer to God.

.ِThey are watchful over their behaviour for their dread of a bad
reckoning and record of deeds which will make their whole life in the
world to come.

.ِPatience and perseverance is their creed when they encounter with
trouble and hardship.

.ِThey take care to observe well their daily prayers.

.ِThey are generous in charity whether in secret or open, and give alms
from the sustenance which God has bestowed on them which consists of all
sorts of physical and spiritual possessions and powers and faculties.

.ِAnd finally they are not a vengeful people, and they do their best to
turn evil away with doing good. When they do something wrong, they
immediately after it; do something good, in order to cancel the effect
of their evil deed, and to correct their wrong. In other word it is not
their creed to answer bad for bad. If a friend, or even a foe makes a
mischief, they admonish him practically and by doing something good to
them. The above eight sorts of conducts are in other word, eight gates
of the Paradise, because the result and reward of the said righteous
persons, be they man or woman, is the promised paradise of God. It is a
destination and eternal abode made out of pure Mercy and mere bliss of
our Gracious Lord. In Paradise the righteous will reunite with

[ 330 ]

their nears and dears like their parents, wife, and children, not due
to their blood relations, but for the sake of their righteousness and
piety.

وَالَّذِينَ يَنقُضُونَ عَهْدَ اللهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مِيثَاقِهِ
وَيَقْطَعُونَ مَا أَمَرَ اللهُ بِهِ أَنْ يُوصَلَ وَيُفْسِدُونَ فِي
الاَْرْضِ أُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ (( 25
))

25- AND THOSE WHO BREAK ALLAH'S COVENANT AFTER HIS COMPACT, AND CUT
ASUNDER WHAT ALLAH COMMANDED TO JOIN WITH, AND MAKE MISCHIEF IN THE
LAND; THEY ARE ON WHOM IS THE CURSE, AND FOR THEM IS THE BADNESS OF THE
(LAST) ABODE.

اللهُ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ وَفَرِحُوا
بِالْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فِي الاْخِرَةِ
إِلاَّ مَتَاعٌ(( 26 ))

26- ALLAH BROADENS THE SUSTENANCE FOR WHOM HE WILL, AND STRAITENS (IT
FOR WHOM HE WILL). AND THEY REJOICED IN THIS LOWER LIFE (IN THIS WORLD),
AND THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD (IN COMPARISON WITH THE LIFE) IN THE
HEREAFTER IS ONLY A TRIFLING ENJOYMENT.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE CRIMINAL MAMMONIST (VERSE NO. 25 - 26)**

Here the reference is to the contrast between evil and good, virtuous
and vicious, Godly and Godless and etc. to complete the aforementioned
verses and argument:ِ

[ 331 ]

\`\`Those who break Allah's covenant after it is ratified....'' The
weak points of the supporters of falsehood are of three classes that are
mentioned in brief as follows:ِ

.ِThey have broken their covenant with Allah.

.ِThey have cut their connection with those whom Allah wants them to
join.

.ِThe above two sins of them, result in their corruption and making
mischief in the land.

The next verse implies that it is God who sustains all His creatures.
To some He gives abundance and to some He gives in limited measure,
according to His plan and wisdom. God's sustenance is not only the
necessary food and drink for nourishment. It rather includes all means
for their physical, spiritual, moral, and intellectual development,
according to their needs and capacities. Here we ought to know that; if
Qura"n says; increase and decrease of our sustenances is under the
control of Allah, it does not mean that God will increase or decrease it
without any account or reason. Allah wants His servants to obtain their
sustenance by work and endeavour and through the natural means and
instruments which is given to man. God does not fulfil his intentions
through unnatural ways and has rules and regulations for every affair.

The ending of the above verses imply that life in this world compared
with that of the next is not of any importance to be mentioned, because
this our life here is a stepping-stone for our next life that begins
after death.

**WHO IS THE MISCHIEF - MAKER IN THE LAND**

Mischief which is a translation for the Arabic, ©FASA"D¨ is the antonym
of compensation, service, and good, and it is applied to all kinds of
corruption. Any harm, damage, trouble or vexation caused by human agency
can be counted as mischief. In otherword all the disorders and
disturbances, and going to the extremes in the society are known as
making mischief in the land. In the Holy Qura"n the

[ 332 ]

word, ©FASA"D¨ appears in various forms and shades of meaning.
Sometimes we read it to be equal to fighting against God and His
Messenger, (S 5:33) and sometimes it means to destroy and destruct farm
and farmer, (S 2:205). In cases it is taken as breaking the covenant
with Allah, (S 2:27). In the S10:91, Pharaoh has been called a
mischief-maker in the land. Therefore we come to the conclusion that the
word, FASA"Dِ©MOFSED-FIL-ARZ¨ or the mischief-maker in the land has a
wide variety of shades of meaning, and their guilts too is of various
grades and importance, and accordingly the punishments decreed for them
varies from light to heavy.

وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ
رَّبِّهِ قُلْ إِنَّ اللهَ يُضِلُّ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ مَنْ
أَنَابَ(( 27 ))

27- AND THE UNBELIEVERS SAY:ِ WHY HAS A SIGN NOT BEEN SENT DOWN TO HIM
FROM HIS LORD!?

SAY:ِ ALLAH LEAVES TO STRAY WHOM HE WILL, AND GUIDES TO HIMSELF HE WHO
TURNS (IN REPENTANCE).

الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُمْ بِذِكْرِ اللهِ أَلاَ
بِذِكْرِ اللهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ(( 28 ))

28- THOSE WHO BELIEVED, AND THEIR HEART IS ASSURED BY THE REMEMBRANCE
OF ALLAH. BEHOLD! BY THE REMEMBRANCE OF ALLAH, THE HEARTS CAN BE
ASSURED.

الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَى لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ مَآب
(( 29 ))

29- THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, FOR THEM IS CLEANLINESS
AND GOOD END.

[ 333 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
GOD'S REMEMBRANCE COMFORTS THE HEART. (VERSE NO. 27 - 29)**

Although the unbelievers had seen many miracles of the prophet, again
and again they used to bring flimsy excuses, and asked for other signs
and new miracles. They expected the prophet to sit indoor, out of any
work, and waiting for them to go asking for new wonders and amazing
works of giants and Jinns to amuse them! This was when the prophet had
clearly announced that he was only a warner and a giver of glad-tidings
to the pious believer. He knew his duty to convey God's Message to His
servant:ِ \`\`Say:ِ Allah leaves to astray who he will and guides to
himself who turns in penitence.'' In fact their shortage was not on the
part of miracles, but rather for their lack of faith. They had some sort
of a disease in their heart which was manifesting in the form of
suspicion and doubt. God will indeed guide those who return to him in
repentance and with the intention of amendment, and correcting their
wrongs. But Allah has said that He will leave to stray those who
deliberately close their eyes and insist to go wrong. In other word, if
you do not turn to God yourself, He will not force you to do that.
Therefore, you have better to cease evil, and turn to your Lord in
penitence and supplication, tearing off the cover of ignorance, vanity,
and pride, which has covered your eyes and wisdom. Then you may observe
the beauties of truth and the infinite kingdom of God.

The next verse, (NO.28) implies that; comfort and confidence of the
heart, and relief of mental distress, can be obtained through the
rememberance of God.

Then mention is made of the end of those who believe in Allah and do
righteous deedsِthey shall abide forever in the beautiful houses of
prosperity and rest in the gardens of bliss in the cleanest of

[ 334 ]

lives with all blesses and bounties.

**SOME POINTS TO NOTE**

Anxiety and disturbance of mind, has always appeared as a calamity in
the life of man. On the other hand, confidence and comfort has been a
lost object of man, and to find it out, uncountable amount of work has
been done without the necessary effect. Statistics have shown that when
cholera has attacked a people six person out of ten have died by fear
and anxiety, and only four people were the direct victims of cholera
itself! In general, anxiety and fear plays a vital role in man's stage
of safety and health, and also in fortunes and misfortunes. In this
relation, Qura"n, in a short verse shows how man may overcome the
anxiety and disturbance of his heart; to reach a state of confidence and
assurance:ِ \`\`Behold! By remembrance of Allah hearts can be
assured.''

Anxiety may have various causes like:ِ .ِVague past. .ِUnknown and
obscure future. .ِWeakness against natural calamities. .ِFeeling to be
vain and useless. .ِSuspicion and fancies. .ِWorldliness and being too
much engrossed and occupied in the concerns of this world. On the other
hand, faith in God is always accompanied by self confidence, asceticism,
and piety. In faith there is hope, and where there is hope there is
life. The belief in the resurrection is also a means that removes the
fear of death and going to nothingness. So if a believer, whole
heartedly turns attention to God, and His power, wisdom and mercy,
knowing His presence everywhere and in every time, willing to help his
servant, what can disturb such a mind and make such a heart anxious?

<p dir="rtl">
كَذَلِكَ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ فِي أُمَّة قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ قَبْلِهَا أُمَمٌ
لِّتَتْلُوَا عَلَيْهِمْ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَهُمْ
</p>

[ 335 ]

يَكْفُرُونَ بِالرَّحْمَنِ قُلْ هُوَ رَبِّي لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَإِلَيْهِ مَتَابِ(( 30 ))

30- SO DID WE SEND YOU AMONG A NATION, BEFORE WHOM OTHER NATIONS HAVE
PASSED AWAY, SO AS TO RECITE TO THEM THAT WHICH WE INSPIRE TO YOU, AND
THEY BELIEVE NOT IN THE MERCIFUL.

SAY:ِ HE IS MY LORD. THERE IS NO GOD BUT HE. IN HIM I HAVE PUT MY
TRUST, AND TO HIM IS MY RETURN.

وَلَوْ أَنَّ قُرْآناً سُيِّرَتْ بِهِ الْجِبَالُ أَوْ قُطِّعَتْ بِهِ
الاَْرْضُ أَوْ كُلِّمَ بِهِ الْمَوْتَى بَلْ للهِِ الاَْمْرُ جَمِيعاً
أَفَلَمْ يَايْئَسِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ لَّوْ يَشَاءُ اللهُ لَهَدَى
النَّاسَ جَمِيعاً وَلاَ يَزَالُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا تُصِيبُهُمْ بِمَا
صَنَعُوا قَارِعَةٌ أَوْ تَحُلُّ قَرِيباً مِّنْ دَارِهِمْ حَتَّى يَأْتِىَ
وَعْدُ اللهِ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ (( 31 ))

31- AND IF IT WAS A QURA"N BY WHICH THE MOUNTAINS WERE MOVED, OR THE
EARTH WAS RENT ASUNDER, OR THROUGH IT THE DEADS COULD BE SPOKEN WITH.
(THEY WOULD NOT BELIEVE INSPITE OF ALL THAT) BUT EVERYTHING IS SUBJECT
TO ALLAH'S WILL. DO THE BELIEVERS NOT KNOW THAT IF ALLAH HAD WILLED HE
WOULD HAVE GUIDED PEOPLE ALL TOGETHER? (BUT COMPULSORY GUIDANCE IS NO
GUIDANCE)

AND EVERY NOW AND THEN THE UNBELIEVERS ARE AFFLICTED WITH A CALAMITY,
DUE TO WHAT THEY HAVE

[ 336 ]

FABRICATED, OR IT ALIGHTS CLOSE TO THEIR HOMES, UNTIL ALLAH'S PROMISE
COME TO PASS, THAT ALLAH WILL NOT FAIL HIS PROMISE.

وَلَقَدْ اسْتُهْذِىءَ بِرُسُل مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ فَأَمْلَيْتُ لِلَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا ثُمَّ أَخَذْتُهُمْ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ عِقَابِ(( 32 ))

32- AND THE MESSENGERS BEFORE YOU TOO WERE SCOFFED AT, AND I RESPITED
THE UNBELIEVERS, THEN I SEIZED THEM (SUDDENLY). SO; HOW WAS MY
REQUITAL?

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 30)**

Commentators have narrated that the first of the above verses (NO.30)
was revealed in the occasion of HUDAYBEYEH PEACE TREATY, which occured
on 6 A.H. In that treaty when the prophet dictated to Hazrat Imam Ali to
write the document in the name of Allah the Merciful, the idolaters
rejected, saying:ِ \`\`We do not know who the Merciful, (RAHMA"N) is!
There also was a hot controversy about the title of, Mohammad (AS)''.
The pagans insisted to remove the title of, ©MESSENGER OF GOD¨. They
said:ِ \`\`If we knew you to be the Messenger of God, we would not fight
against you.'' To this effect some of the prophet's disciples became
very angry with the heathens and asked the prophet to permit them to
wage a sacred war against the Meccans. So the situation in HUDAYBEYEH
became very critical, and the prophet through an amazing management
succeeded to extinguish the burning fire that was almost kindled. The
peace treaty of HUDAYBEYEH is an important event in the history of
Islam, that Qura"n has referred to in variouse verses, among which this
is one.

[ 337 ]

**MORE ABOUT HUDAYBEYEH PEACE TREATY**

(Owing to the importance of the incident of HUDAYBEYEH, for the kind
notice of our dear readers, we give more detail about the event. I have
quoted the following narration from the important references like: 1)
SEEREH-IBN-HESHA"M. 2) KA"MIL-IBN-ASIR, V2:138 and BOHAR-AL-ANVA"R,
V20:353. On the 13th of march 628 A.D.= ZILQAAD 6.AH. the prophet set
out along with a party of 1400 men to perform the rites of the Lesser
Pilgrimage, (UMREH). In order to show to all, that his only object of
the journey is the pilgrimage, the prophet and all his followers wore
the white GARB of the which is named, ©EHRA"M¨. They also separated and
marked several camels to be sacrificed as one of the rituals. They made
for Mecca, and travelled as far as Esfan, a place between JOHFEH and
MECCA.

When the Meccans were informed of Mohammad's approach in accompany with
what they took it for a large army, and ready for a surprise attack;
they were agitated and called for an emergency mobilization, and
immediately prepared a good defensive force. A battalion of their armed
forces wore clothes made out of leopard's skin, which to them it meant,
©defence up to death¨! They also took with them their wives and children
as a vowe not to turn their back to Muslims in the fight. Then they sent
a cavalry of 200 warriors commanded by Khalid-ibn-Valid. to bar the way
and not let Mohammad and Muslims to enter Mecca.

When the prophet was informed of their preprations, he said:ِ \`\`Woe
is unto GHORAISH! War has eaten these people! Why do they not leave me
alone with the rest of Arabs? Then if the Arabs destroyed me they lose
nothing. If I vanquished them no harm is done to GHORAISH. Upon my Lord
I will fight for the cause of Allah so long as I live; either to win or
to die on it.'' Then, Aslam who was well acquainted with the round about
and the ways to Mecca, by the order of the prophet, led Muslims through
some zigzags, and unusual ways across the hilly county, to a plane at

[ 338 ]

the north edge of the SACRED TERRITORY. (HARAM) called HUDAYBEYEH, one
day of march to the north of Mecca. There in the Hudaybeyeh, at once the
camels stopped going forward inspite of being threatened and encouraged!
Muslims said the poor creatures were thoroughly exhausted, but the
prophet said:ِ \`\`No! Not so as you think. Rather He who prevented the
elephants of ABRAHA to approach the house of God has halted the camels.
We shall station here. To-day I will observe our bonds of relationship
by considering all the enemy's request.'' Then delegations and
messengers were sent and exchanged between two parties, Meccan beat
KHARASH-IBN-OMAYEH, the prophet's representative to them savagely and
wounded him harshly, but the prophet showed patience. After that,
GHORAISH sent a cavalry of fifty soldiers on patrol about the camp of
Muslims in order to kidnap some believers to keep them as hostages! But
Muslims were in full attention, and captured all of them and took them
to the prophet hands tied. To show his good will to Ghoraish, the
prophet pardoned them all and let them free to go back. This gentle
behaviour of the prophet had a very good effect on both friend and
foe.

Following the release of the cruising group of the enemy, the prophet
ordered OMAR-IBN-KHATTA"B to go to Mecca, and have a talk with the
idolaters. Omar refused to obey the prophet with the objection that he
had not an influential family in Mecca to support him in hazards. Omar
then nominated OTHMA"N-IBN-AFFAN his simple hearted friend to go on that
errand!

OTHMA"N, accepted the dangerous task, and at first he went to one of
his influential relatives named ABA"N-IBN-SAEED and sought his refuge.
He then conveyed the prophet's message to the pagans which they strictly
rejected. For having the respite of ABA"N the idolater gave the
permission of performing the rites of HAJJ, but when he refused their
favour, saying:ِ \`\`Without the prophet, I won't do it!'' His denial
made the idolaters very angry. So they beat him hardly and put him in a
jail! Then a rumour spread everywhere, that Ghoraish had killed OTHMA"N
who was the prophet's minister. The believers said, \`\`If that be true
we

[ 339 ]

won't leave here until we avenge him and punish the pagans.'' Then the
prophet stood at the shade of a big tree that was there, and Muslims
came to him one by one and pledged to fight over for his cause till the
last beat of their heart. The oath of fealty was taken under that tree
with much enthusiasm, any great sincerity. This was a wonderful
demonstration of faith in that critical occasion. So the following verse
of Qura"n revealed to that effect:ِ Q S 48:18ِ19 \`\`Allah was pleased
with the believers when they took an oath of fealty to you under the
tree. He knew what was in their hearts, and so He sent down tranquility
to them, and He rewarded them with a near victory, and with many gains
that they shall acquire besides. Mighty is Allah and wise.''

In the Islam's history this is known as the, PLEDGE OF PLEASURE OR THE,
PLEDGE OF UNDER THE TREE. When GHORAISH heard of the pledge they
trembled with fear and soon after they sent SOHAIL-IBN-AMR with full
authority on an embassy to negotiate on a peace treaty. The prophet who
was indeed a peaceful kind and compassionate man welcomed Sohail and
after a long meeting and discussion both parties compounded and agreed
on the following articles:ِ

.ِThe two parties were to abandon all sorts of hostilities against each
other for a period of 10 years.
.ِMuslims performance of the rites of pilgrimage was to be postponed
for the next year.
.ِMohammad had to send back any Meccans who would come to him without
the consent of his protector or guardian. This term did not include the
free Muslims.
.ِAll the tribes and individuals were free to enter into alliance with
either of the two parties.

Mohammad (AS) himself was illiterate and therefore at the prepration of
the above peace document HAZRAT IMAM ALI (AS) was the clerk who wrote
whatever the prophet dictated. When he began to write the peace pact in
the name of Allah the

[ 340 ]

Merciful, the pagans objected saying we know not who the Merciful is!
So they wrote it in the name of Allah. Then the prophet told HAZRAT IMAM
ALI to write:ِ \`\`This is an agreement between Mohammad the Messenger
of God and SOHAIL-IBN-OMAR.'' Sohail objected and said:ِ \`\`Had we
recognized you as a Messenger of God, we would not have so much troubles
with you, therefore blot out your title from the compact and just write
down:ِ From MOHAMMAD-IBN-ABDULLAH. The prophet said to HAZRAT ALI (AS);
write it as they want. But Imam Ali said to the prophet:ِ It is indeed
very painful and difficult for me to erase the title of truth from your
name, that I have not the least amount of doubt that you are God's
Messenger. So I beg you to exempt and excuse me from erasing your
title.'' So the prophet blotted off his title of; ©MESSENGER OF GOD¨
with his own hand, and then sighed and said to HAZRAT ALI (AS):ِ \`\`O,
Ali! There will come a time when the same thing will happen to you, and
you shall be compelled to blot out your title too!''

This prediction was realized in the Battle of Seffain, when HAZRAT ALI
was compelled to erase his rightful and legitimate title of
AMIR-AL-MOAMENIN the detail of which is to be read in all the history
books of Islam.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 31)**

A group of the idolaters had a meeting held in front of KAABEH to
discuss their problems with Mohammad (AS) who ridiculed their idols and
claimed to be the Messenger of God. They asked the prophet to take part
in that meeting, and to answer some questions they had. With the hope of
guiding them out of that spiritual darkness they were in, the prophet
went to them, and after some arguments they said to Mohammad (AS):ِ
\`\`If you really want us follow you and be a good Muslim, then move
the

[ 341 ]

mountains by your Holy Qura"n, and make spirings of water to gush out
of them; in order to prepare enough farm lands for all of us.'' They
then added:ِ \`\`Have you not cited in your Qura"n that the mountains
obeyed David and the winds were subservient to Solomon, and Jesus Christ
raised the dead!? If you are a truthful prophet, then raise up our fore
grand father, GHASI-IBN-CLUB so that we may ask him if you are right.''
Then the above verse (NO.31) was sent down in answer to them saying:ِ
\`\`Whatever you do for them they will not believe you; even if you
bring down to them a Qura"n by which the mountains could be moved, or
the earth could be rent asunder, or through it the deads could be raised
to speak with them, they would not believe you inspite of all that and
more!''

In God's infinite power, things like moving the mountains, and raising
the deads to speak is more than easy, but God always knows better what
is to be done and what is not to be done. He is not waiting for His poor
creatures to dictate to Him what to do or how to do a work. Those who
believe in Him are sure enough that God will arrange things and order
His world for the best. After all; the duty of a Messenger of God, is to
convey God's Message, and warn people against evil deeds, and to prove
to them that evil has its eventual evil consequences, although man may
not see that for a certain time.

Truth is light and behaves like light. If you throw some ashes upon a
bright point on which the sun shines, you won't be able to conceal the
light by your handful of ashes because the light will jump upon your
ashes. So is the case with Mohammad's truth. He found it not necessary
to do the work of a tractor in moving the mountain or digging a well to
gush water out. He was the last of the prophets and the Message that had
been revealed before him through the successive apostles that were sent
to mankind one after another. Therefore the advent of prophet Mohammad
(AS) was the stepping-stone for the unification of the world, and God's
will be done.

[ 342 ]

**WHY THE STRESS FALLS SO MUCH ON AL - RAHMA"N (THE MERCIFUL?)**

Arabs did not like the word Merciful to be attributed to God, and it
was not customary among them to call Allah with such attributes. On the
contrary the prophet always gave special emphasis to this name
(AL-RAHMA"N) because he believed that God's Mercy covers all His
creatures and includes all, be they believers or unbelievers! He
naturally wondered why the people believed not in a Lord whose Mercy
embraces all His creatures and is something general. Another point to
note here is that; some people by reference to the above verse (NO.31),
say; that the prophet Mohammad (AS) has had no miracle other than
Qura"n! We have repeatedly mentioned in this our book that a miracle is
to uncover the face of a truth, and it is not a play-toy or a boasting
means in the hands of a prophet. Such childish miracles that the
obstinate pagans asked for, like turning the mountains into gold and
silver or moving them forward and backward were only objections for
hiding their feeling of disapproval and opposition, which was supported
by mere ignorance. Had he turned the mountains into gold for them, gold
would become cheaper than stone or soil.

The last verse (NO.32) is a good support for the idea that the pagans
were only scoffing at the prophet by asking for such miracles:ِ

\`\`And the Messengers before you, too, were scoffed at....''

أَفَمَنْ هُوَ قَائِمٌ عَلَى كُلِّ نَفْس بِمَا كَسَبَتْ وَجَعَلُوا للهِِ
شُرَكَاءَ قُلْ سَمُّوهُمْ أَمْ تُنَبِّئُونَهُ بِمَا لاَ يَعْلَمُ فِي
الاَْرْضِ أَمْ بِظَاهِر مِنْ الْقَوْلِ بَلْ زُيِّنَ لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
مَكْرُهُمْ وَصُدُّوا عَنْ السَّبِيلِ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللهُ فَمَا لَهُ
مِنْ هَاد (( 33 ))

33- THEN HE WHO STANDS (ON WATCH) OVER EVERY SOUL AND ALL THAT IT
EARNS? (IS HE LIKE HIM WHO CANNOT BE

[ 343 ]

SO?) AND YET THEY ASCRIBED TO ALLAH PARTNERS! SAY:ِ NAME THEM! OR DO
THEY INFORM HIM OF WHAT HE KNOWS NOT IN THE EARTH? OR BY THE APPEARANCE
OF (MEANINGLESS) WORD? RATHER THEIR FOUL DEVICE HAS BEEN ADORNED FOR THE
UNBELIEVERS, AND ARE BARRED FROM THE WAY.

AND WHOM ALLAH LEAVES TO STRAY, NO ONE CAN GUIDE HIM.

لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَلَعَذَابُ الاْخِرَةِ أَشَقُّ
وَمَا لَهُمْ مِنْ اللهِ مِنْ وَاق(( 34 ))

34- FOR THEM IS A TORMENT IN THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD, AND THE TORMENT OF
THE LAST, (i.e. THE LIFE TO COME) IS HARDER. AND THERE IS NO PROTECTOR
FOR THEM FROM ALLAH.

**THE COMMENTARY
HOW DO YOU COMPARE IDOLS WITH GOD!? (VERSE NO. 33 - 34)**

The argument goes back to monotheism once again; that, how would you
compare the Lord God, who is the guardian of all the creatures, standing
on watch over every soul and all that it earns, with an inanimate idol
which is carved out of a stone!? It seems as if the verse wants to say:ِ
\`\`God stands overhead watching with full knowledge of what we do,
while He keeps an account of our conducts and a record of what we have
earned. Then how can we associate any partner with such a sacred and
supreme being!?'' The verse then says:ِ \`\`Just

[ 344 ]


