A Place of Ambush For Who?
==========================

In the above verse (NO.107) Qura"n has called the said mosque of
dissension, as a place of ambush for him who fought Allah and His
Messenger afore time. Who was that? All historians have narrated that he
was named, ©ABUA"MIR¨ a Christian priest in the Pagan Era, with high
influence in the tribe of KHAZARJ. He acted as a herald foretelling the
near advent of Mohammad, the last of the apostles, and gave the glad
tiding of his coming very soon! After the glorious victory of the
prophet in the Battle of Badr, Abua"mir fled to Mecca and encouraged the
idolaters to wage a war against Mohammad. He promised the pagans that he
had very many friends and disciples in Medina and if you besiege Muslims
they will rush out to help you!

[ 30 ]

He succeeded to convince the idolaters, and planned the tactics, and
led the pagan forces to Ohud to fight against Allah and His Messenger!
After the battle of Ohud, ABUA"MIR went to Heracleus, the Roman Emperor,
and urged him to wage a war against Muslims whom he called them to be
enemies of Jesus Christ (AS)! The prophet then gave him the title,
\`\`DEBAUCHER'' finally he wrote a letter confidentially to the
hypocrites of Medina, giving them the good news that soon will he come
in accompany with a great force to give an end to Mohammadanism, once
and for all! In his confidential letter he had asked the hypocrites to
build a central place for the political endeavours that he led. To this
effect, the hypocrites, after a lot of consultations, agreed to build a
new Mosque and keep its control in their own hands. This was to be a
place of ambush for ABUA"MIR and a center of gathering for his follower;
but Mohammad was inspired by the above verses, and by destructing the
Mosque of Dissension, and burning it to ashes, everything went upside
down for the hypocrites and the enemies of God!

**MAKING AN IDOLِHOUSE OUT OF THE MOSQUE (VERSE NO. 107)**

Another group of insidious evil-doers is now mentioned. When the
prophet emigrated from Mecca, he rested four days in QUBA"ِa village in
the suburb of Medina, about three miles to the south-east. During this
short period of his rest, the holy prophet built a mosque in the village
which is known as the, \`\`mosque of piety''. It was a simple small hall
built of primeval constructional materials, but was indeed founded upon
piety and love for God. It now exists in a magnificent form, with the
highest esteem for being the first mosque in Islam and for being
constructed by Mohammad the Messenger of God and a group of his truthful
companions and disciples. During his subsequent stay in Medina the
Messenger of God frequently came to QUBA", and stood in prayer in that
sacred mosque.

As we mentioned above under the occasion of the revelation,

[ 31 ]

some of the hypocrites who were in league with the said treacherous
ABUA"MIR, decided to build another mosque in QUBA", somewhat bigger and
possessing more splendor, than the existing mosque of piety. They wanted
their new and developed mosque to replace that of the prophet for the
following purposes:ِ

1- To injure the prophet and his followers, and to impair and lessen
the value of the simple mosque of piety in sight of people.

2- To strengthen the principle of blasphemy and disbelief in order to
drive people back towards their former heathenism.

3- To create dissension and disagreement of opinion among Muslims.

4- And to establish a place of ambush for the said ABUA"MIR who was a
sworn enemy of the prophet and his religion. Strange, that they wanted
to wrap all these mischiefs and devilish motive in the covering of a
splendid newly built mosque.

God forbade His Messenger to stand in prayer in that mosque of
Dissension, built by some debauchers upon deceit, pretence, and
hypocrisy; instead of piety and Godliness.

The attendants of a mosque can give value to it and not its beautiful
walls and attractive ceiling, or luxurious lustres and shades of lamps:ِ
\`\` A mosque founded upon piety from the begining is more becoming for
you to stand in it in prayer. There are men in it who love to purify
themselves; and Allah loves those who purify and clean themselves.'' A
true Muslim must be clean in body, pure in mind, and sincere in heart.
His intention should always be Allah, and his religion pure of worldly
gains.

**VERSE NO. 109**

Then the argument comes to a conclusion by the comparison of two kinds
of men:ِ one of them builds his life on piety, virtue, and love, which
is like building a house upon a firm foundation of rock that will never
be shaken.

[ 32 ]

The second man builds his house on the brink of a crumbling bank which
is apt to fall and demolish. It soon falls down with its constructor,
and both plunge into the Fire of Hell! So; which one of the two men is
better than the other?

In fact those who take protectors other than Allah, and who are not
reliant upon their compassionate Lord, are like a spider who builds a
web which is indeed the flimsiest of houses, if they could only know.

The incident of the mosque of dissension must always be a learning
lesson for Muslims. They should not be deceived by the appearances of
things- all that glitters is not gold- They must know and recognize
hypocrisy and infidelity in their various shapes and under various veils
and converings, in any place and position. Using religion against
religion is not something new in the history of mankind. This weapon has
always been used by the unjust rulers and cruel governors and
influentials of hypocrisy. Colonist and colonizers, and lawless rulers,
and Godless diplomats, have always supported false apostles, and
deceiving saints, and self- sold priest, to make the stands of their
rulership firm, and to justify their unjust dictatorship and to make
lawful their unlawful deeds.

A true Muslim who sees everything through the light of God should not
be decieved by the innocent outside and the cheating appearance of those
who have a sinful out side, like the devils and Godless influentials.

إِنَّ اللهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ
بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ
وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْداً عَلَيْهِ حَقّاً فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالاِْنجِيلِ
وَالْقُرْانِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنْ اللهِ فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا
بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُمْ بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ
الْعَظِيمُ(( 111 ))

**111- VERILY ALLAH HAS BOUGHT OF THE BELIEVERS THEIR**

[ 33 ]

SELVES AND THEIR POSSESSIONS; THAT FOR THEM IS (IN RETURN) THE
PARADISE. THEY FIGHT IN THE WAY OF ALLAH, THEN THEY KILL OR GET KILLED.
THIS IS A PROMISE BINDING UPON HIM IN TRUTH. (THE PROMISE IS WRITTEN) IN
THE BIBLE, AND IN THE GOSPEL, AND IN THE QURA"N. AND WHO IS MORE
FAITHFUL TO HIS COVENANT THAN ALLAH? THEN REJOICE IN THE BARGAIN YOU
HAVE MADE WITH HIM. AND THAT IS THE GREAT ATTAINMENT.

التَّائِبُونَ الْعَابِدُونَ الْحَامِدُونَ السَّائِحُونَ الرَّاكِعُونَ
السَّاجِدُونَ الاْمِرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَالنَّاهُونَ عَنْ الْمُنكَرِ
وَالْحَافِظُونَ لِحُدُودِ اللهِ وَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 112 ))

112- THE REPENTERS, THE WORSHIPPERS, THE PRAISERS, THE TOURISTS, THE
BOWERS, THE PROSTRATORS. THE ENJOINERS OF GOOD, THE FORBIDDERS OF EVIL,
AND THE OBSERVERS OF THE BOUNDS OF ALLAH. AND GIVE GLAD- TIDING TO THE
BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
A UNIQUE BARGAIN (VERSE NO. 111)**

Here is a similitude to express the position of the believing warriors
and martyrs. In this parable Allah is the buyer, believers are the
sellers, and the material of transaction, on the side of the believers
is their will and wealth; and on the side of Allah is an eternal

[ 34 ]

prosperous life in Paradise.

Principally this bargain is the Islamic doctrine of Redemption, which
is also a prescript of the Bible as well as the original Gospel. Any
other view of redemption like christ's atonement is rejected by Islam.
In Qura"nic instructions no one will suffer for some other's sins, and
every one is held in pledge of his own deeds. Therefore in Mohammad's
religion; deliverance from the bondage of sins is only possible through
repentance and recompense by doing good deeds. Good works accompanied by
penitence will blot out and clean up the stains of man's sins, and not
through other people's merits. It is our self- surrender and strive in
the way of Allah, that counts for our salvation. This self- surrender
and strive may need fighting for the sake of Allah which may result in
killing or being killed. So there must be sincerity in our strive, be it
physical or spiritual. Every endeavour must be pure and in the way of
Allah, and never for the worldly gain or personal prestige. Then in such
a pure and divine bargain of God with man, the seller will gain an
eternal prosperity in Paradise, which is a unique profit and a very
great attainment:ِ

\`\`Allah has bought of the believers their selves and their
possessions, and in return for them is the Paradise.''

**VERSE NO. 112**

The above mentioned believers who sell their will and wealth; or in
other word who sell their mortal life in order to purchase an eternal
prosperous one, are qualified with nine qualifications which follows:ِ

1- They are the repenters, who feel and show regret and sorrow for
having done anything wrong.

2- They are worshippers, who pay divine honours to Allah through their
prayers and supplications.

3- They are the praisers, who glorify God by homage, and

[ 35 ]

express heartily a high belief in God and sincere opinion in His
apostles; and give thank for God's uncountable bounties, and blessing.

4- They wonder here and there in devotion to the cause of Allah, and
travel from one centre of worship to another, where they can learn
something new about their beloved Lord.

The Arabic. \`\`SA"-EH'' translated to, \`\`TOURIST'' has a wide
variety of meaning:ِ Some commentators have understood it to mean,
\`\`FASTING'' in this verse (NO.112).

5- They are the bowers, who bend their head and body in reverence,
submission, respect, and gratitude, in front of God. They express their
humility, worship, and greetings, by bowing down.

6- They are the prostrators. They recline with face on the ground in
humble adoration, in order to show their utmost humility to God.

7- They invite and encourage people to do good deeds.

8- They advise and urge people to avoid evil deeds.

9- And finally they observe the bounds of Allah.

They are moderate in all their behaviours and transpass not the limits
that are set by Allah for them.

مَا كَانَ لِلنَّبِىِّ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنْ يَسْتَغْفِرُوا
لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ وَلَوْ كَانُوا أُوْلِي قُرْبَى مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا تَبَيَّنَ
لَهُمْ أَنَّهُمْ أَصْحَابُ الْجَحِيمِ(( 113 ))

113- IT WAS NOT FOR THE PROPHET AND THOSE WHO HAVE NEVE ,STSIEHTYLOP
EHT ROF SSENEVIGROF KSA OT DEVEILEB THOUGH THEY BE NEAR KINS, WHEN IT
BECAME CLEAR TO THEM THAT THEY ARE THE COMPANIONS OF THE FIRE.(HELL)

وَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لاَِبِيهِ إِلاَّ عَنْ مَوْعِدَة
وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ للهِِ
تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لاََوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ(( 114 ))

[ 36 ]

114- AND ABRAHAM'S ASKING FORGIVENESS FOR HIS FATHER WAS NOT EXCEPT FOR
A PROMISE HE HAD MADE TO HIM. BUT WHEN IT BECAME CLEAR TO HIM THAT HE
WAS AN ENEMY TO ALLAH, HE SEPARATED FROM HIM. (ABANDONED) VERILY ABRAHAM
WAS KIND FORBEARING.

**THE COMMENTARY

OCCASION OF THE REVELATION**

A group of the believers said to the prophet:ِ \`\`Will you not ask
forgiveness for our fathers who have died polytheists and idolaters?''
The above verses revealed to this effect.

**DON'T BEFRIEND ENEMIES (VERSE NO. 113)**

The verse clearly states that the believers should not ask God's
forgiveness for polytheist and idolaters. This implies that they should
not perform the prayer for them when they die, even though they be of
their near relations. When it has been made clear that an enemy of God
has been damned, and will eternally abide in damnation and Hell, what is
the use of wasting time on praying for him, and asking a forgiveness
that will not be granted him? Sent forth a green grass to your grave.
You send it forward, for, no one will bring it afterwards. Besides;
asking forgiveness for the polytheists and heathens is a sign of love
for them; and how should a true believer love a body who has
deliberately rejected God?

[ 37 ]

**VERSE NO. 114**

People have asked:ِ \`\`why should have ABRAHAM asked forgiveness for
his father, when he threatened him of stoning'' :ِ \`\`O, ABRAHAM! Do
you really hate my gods? If you desist not I will stone you. Now you get
away and leave me.'' QURA"NِS 19:46 In answering such a question the
above verse (NO.114) states that, ABRAHAM'S plea was only for a promise
he had made to him because he still hoped him to leave the idols and
adhere to the true and Only one God. ABRAHAM was a tender- hearted and
kind to all creatures. When he made sure that his father would not
believe, he abandoned him and went away, and did not returned to him at
all.

وَمَا كَانَ اللهُ لِيُضِلَّ قَوْمَا بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَاهُمْ حَتَّى
يُبَيِّنَ لَهُمْ مَّا يَتَّقُونَ إِنَّ اللهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْء عَلِيمٌ(( 115
))

115- AND ALLAH IS NOT (GOING) TO LEAD A PEOPLE ASTRAY AFTER HE HAS
GUIDED THEM, UNTIL HE MAKES CLEAR TO THEM WHAT HAVE THEY TO AVOID, THAT
ALLAH KNOWS EVERYTHING.

إِنَّ اللهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ يُحْىِ وَيُمِيتُ وَمَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مِنْ وَلِىّ وَلاَ نَصِير(( 116 ))

116- TO ALLAH BELONGS THE KINGDOM OF THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH. HE
GIVES LIFE AND MAKES TO DIE. (HE ORDAINS LIFE AND DEATH) AND FOR YOU;
BESIDES ALLAH, THERE IS NOT ANY GUARDIAN, NEITHER A HELPER.

[ 38 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 115 - 116)**

Before some of the commandments that are incumbent upon the believers
to perform, were sent down or preached; some of the believers had died.
Some of the disciples asked the prophet after the fate of such a
believer who had died before the issue- say, they died without any
fasting, or abstained not from alcoholic drinks. The questioners thought
that they would be punished for their shortcomings, and the above verses
revealed to negate such ideas.

**PUNISHMENT AFTER DISTINCTION**

The first of the two above verses points to a general law, that so far
as God has not issued an order or a commandment, and it is not made
clearly known, He will not punish His servants for not following it:ِ
\`\`Allah is not going to lead a people astray and towards punishment;
until He makes clean to them, what is to be done, and what is not to be
done.''

In other word; God holds no one responsible for a decree that it is not
made known to him. Some may understand from this verse that, what the
wisdom of man enjoins, must conform to the Divine Law in order to be
valid; but this assertion is utterly wrong. The above verse has left the
matter of validity of a commandment, to its being made known. Therefore
it makes no difference whether it is made known to man by an apostle, or
by wisdom,- in both cases the issue is legally and religiously
acceptable, and it suffices the responsibility for performance. The
second verse implies that the kingdom of heavens and earth and all
things, even that of life and death, is laid in the hands of God, and
therefore, you have better to put up your trust in him, that you have
not any helper or protector other than Allah.

[ 39 ]

لَقَدْ تَّابَ اللهُ عَلَى النَّبِىِّ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالاَْنصَارِ
الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ فِي سَاعَةِ الْعُسْرَةِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا كَادَ
يَزِيغُ قُلُوبُ فَرِيق مِنْهُمْ ثُمَّ تَابَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّهُ بِهِمْ
رَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 117 ))

117- VERILY ALLAH TURNED IN MERCY TO THE PROPHET AND EMIGRANTS AND
HELPERSِTHOSE WHO FOLLOWED HIM IN THE HOUR OF HARDSHIP, WHEN SOME OF
THEM WERE ON THE POINT OF LOSING HEART. THEN HE TURNED IN MERCY TO THEM
(TOO), THAT HE IS THE COMPASSIONATE, PITIFUL TO THEM.

وَعَلَى الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ خُلِّفُوا حَتَّى إِذَا ضَاقَتْ
عَلَيْهِمْ الاَْرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ أَنفُسُهُمْ
وَظَنُّوا أَنْ لاَ مَلْجَأَ مِنَ اللهِ إِلاَّ إِلَيْهِ ثُمَّ تَابَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَتُوبُواْ إِنَّ اللهَ هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 118
))

118- (AND ALSO ALLAH TURNED IN MERCY) TO THE THREE WHO STAYED BEHIND
(DURING TABUK EXPEDITION), AFTER THE EARTH WITH ALL ITS VASTNESS BECAME
STRAIT FOR THEM, AND (EVEN) THEIR SOULS BECAME STRAIT FOR THEM(THEY
COULD NOT EVEN CONTAIN IN THEMSELVES), AND THEY THOUGHT THAT THERE WAS
NO REFUGE FROM ALLAH, EXCEPT IN HIM.

THEN HE TURNED IN MERCY TOWARDS THEM THAT THEY MIGHT REPENT; FOR ALLAH
IS THE FORGIVING THE COMPASSIONATE.

[ 40 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 117 - 118)**

The immediate reference of the above two verses is to four of the
believers who wavered in going to Tabuk due to their weakness of human
nature, but the Grace of God came to their help to overcome their
weakness. The lesson with their case is a general one, and for all ages.
One of the said four men was named, \`\`ABUHASIMEH'' who stayed behind
TABUK expedition,but after a delay of ten days, he at once came to
himself, and set out as quick as possible, and fortunately reached in
time and the prophet welcomed him. The second group consisted of three
men, namely; KAAB, MARARAT and HELA"L, who did not join the expedition,
but they were indeed believers. They wavered for lack of will, and when
the prophet returned from the journey, they were excluded from the life
of community. It became so difficult for them to live that the spacious
earth seemed constrained to them, and even in their own souls they had a
feeling of constraint!

No late, when they realized that they could not flee from God, and that
they could find no refuge any where else, except repentance, and showing
it some how in their deeds. Due to the importance of the general lesson
that can be taken from their affair in all ages, at the end of the
comments you will read more about them in a translator's note.

**SOCIAL BESIEGE OF THE SINNERS (VERSE NO. 117)**

Here is a mention of infinite Mercy of God, which has overshadowed, not
only the prophet and the Emigrants and Helpers, but all the believers
and generally all His creatures.

[ 41 ]

Both the Emigrants and helpers were true supporters of Islam, and had
proved their faith in the various battle fields, by great sacrifices. On
the other hand, they were only mankind like any other, and were no
exceptions of the weak points of human nature. So a few of them wavered
for want of stanch will and were dismayed by dangers and difficulties
that faced them. Therefore some of them practically faild in their
duties, and naturally they had to answer for their condition of lagging
behind. As per order of the prophet, the three were excluded from the
life in community, and even their wives abandoned them, so that the
earth inspite of its vastness, turned to a small prison in their sight,
and they even found their very self and existence something like a small
jail!

**THE HOUR OF HARDSHIP**

The expedition of TABUK has been called that of the \`\`HARDSHIP'' and
hence in the above verse, ©THE HOUR OF HARDSHIP¨. Muslims were never in
so much difficulty and hardship as they were in the incident of TABUK:ِ
It was a hot summer time and also a time of great famine. Besides that,
it was the season of harvest for the little products that they could
have produced. On the other hand, the distance of TABUK from Medina was
a very long one, and they had not enough mounts to carry them, and had
to use their animals alternately. Even some of them had no shoes to
wear, and had to walk by bare feet upon the hot gravels of the desert!
As for food, they could not even provide for few dates for daily meal!
After all, this time the enemy was not a chief Arab tribe: He was the
Roman Emperor, who was one of the two super power of the time in the
world!

TABUK was the farthest point that the prophet travelled to. There was a
large fortified castle with very thick walls, towers, battlements,
surrounded by a moat which was named TABUK, and the land around the
castle was also named after the great building as TABUK.

The land around TABUK was the common border of the Eastern

[ 42 ]

Rome with Arabia. The Romans for the fear of Islam's daily progress,
mobilized 40 thousands of forces to vanquish the new religious movement,
or at least to stop its progress. Due to his inevitable long absence
from Medina, and for fear of the hypocrite's plots and conspiracy, the
prophet deputed HAZRAT Imam Ali (AS), as his successor in Medina,
although he was indeed in need of such that veteran commander and
warrior, as he was.

\*\*\*\*\*

**A MUSLIM IN COMFORT AND HIS PROPHET IN HARDSHIP!**

(One of those who sought excuses, and did not join the, \`\`ARMY OF
HARDSHIP'' was a luxurious and reveller Muslim with wives and
concubines, and many palm groves and farm lands. He was named, \`\`ABU
KHAISAMIH''.

When the prophet and his army left Medina, ABU KHAISAMIH was busy with
his farm lands and palm groves. Some ten days had elapsed from the
prophet's journey towards TABUK, when ABU KHAISAMIH was busy in his
farm. He perspired a lot, by hard work, and being tired he went home to
have a rest. At home he was entertained by his two beautiful young
wives, under the shadow of green trees. The delicate fruit and cold
silvery water, and the beauties entertaining him turned his thought upon
the prophet and his Muslim brothers who were by now amid the deserts in
that hot Arabian summer, with their lack of food and even a glass of
pure water. They were to confront with Roman Empire only for the cause
of God. ABU KHAISAMIH, after a while in his deep thought; suddenly
jumped up, without touching the food and drink that was in front of him,
and said to his wives:ِ \`\`What sort of a believer am I? The apostle of
God, in that hardship, and I in so much ease and entertainment! I, among
you pretty ones, and the Messenger of God, among his thirsty and hungry
followers in that awfully hot desert! Upon my God! I will sit besides
none of you, and I will drink no cold water until I join the prophet and
share his troubles and hardship.'' He then mounted his swift horse and
rode away at a gallop until he reached the prophet and declared his
repentance and begged his pardon. The prophet welcomed him with a
meaningful smile and embrace.

[ 43 ]

**AN APPROPRIATE PUNISHMENT**

Those who had not gone in the expedition of TABUK, when saw that no
harm was done, and Muslims returned with success, they became ashamed of
themselves. They went to the prophet with various excuses that they
really couldn't! Among them there were three whose case differed in the
sight of the Messenger of God (AS). They were true believers and
therefore no one had expected them to leave the prophet in that
hardship. They had only followed Satanic Temptations and to some extent
their laziness. They were named:ِ

1- KAAB-IBN-MA"LIK 2- MA RA"RAT-IBN-RABIE and 3- HALA"L-IBN-OMAYEH. All
the three were the prophet's friends, companions, and loved him
sincerely.

IBN-HESHA"M has narrated the incident from ABDULLAH the son of
KAAB-IBN-MALIK as follows:ِ

\`\`My father became very old and eventually blind, and I sometimes
took his hand for a walk and having a chat. In one of these days he said
to me:ِ Dear son! I had always been with the prophet, both at peace and
at war. At the incident of TABUK, I was in the best of conditions, and
for the first time in my life I had two horses to mount. I was willing
to go in the journey of TABUK, but with not enough resolution. I could
not make up my mind! Any day that I decided to join the army, I delayed
for next day and when it was tomorrow, I again could not decide! So I
procrastinated until it was too late to do anything at all! Then I knew
at once that I had missed the opportunity and the army was gone too far
to be reached to!

When I walked through the town, I saw only two groups of men who had
not gone with the prophet:ِ 1- Those who were indeed weak or sick and
could not afford it; and 2- Those who were unbelievers and hypocrites,
and this made me more ashamed. When the prophet returned from TABUK, he
went directly to his mosque as usual. When I went to see the prophet, he
asked me:ِ KAAB! What did prevent you from joining us? I said to him:ِ
To tell you the truth, I have not any excuse! I was in the best of modes
and conditions. Even if I please you with creating excuses, how

[ 44 ]

can I please Allah with that. The prophet said to me:ِ You are right.
Now you go and wait for Allah to judge and decide upon you. Next day the
prophet issued an order that no Muslims were allowed to associate with
me and other two friends of mine with the same case! (HALA"L and
MRA"RAT)

Every body obeyed the order, and no one even spoke to us a word! The
other two mates came not out of their houses, but I sometimes did go to
the Mosque to perform my daily prayer behind the prophet, though no one
spoke to me a word! I sometimes gazed at the prophet, and he too, did
so; but no words uttered! Lovers can communicate a century of talks
through a twinkle or a look! Then my eyes overflowed with tears, and I
left the prophet's mosque.

Thus fifty days elapsed, when from the top of the wall I called my
neighbour whose name was, \`\`ABUQATA"BIH''; He was also my cousin. I
said to him:ِ My cousin! Will you say the truth and testify how much I
do love the Messenger of God!? He kept silent and I repeated my word!
Then I swore him by prophet's life to break his silence and answer me.
In a short sentence he said:ِ God and His Messenger know that better.
Next day to my astonishment a page came to me and gave me a sealed
letter from the king of OSFAN! In the letter it was written:ِ Report is
given to me that Mohammad has oppressed you, and we know that your
social position and good reputation among Arabs is higher to be despised
by this and that! So, get up at once and come to us, and we shall
respect you as you deserve it.

When I read the letter and got out its containt, I exclaimed:ِ Woe is
me! I am fallen in a misfortune and my Lord is examining me by that. Now
a heretic king seduces me to leave my God and His Messenger, and go to
him! I then burnt the king's letter in front of his Messenger, and
said:ِ This is my answer to your king's invitation. Then an order was
issued by the prophet that we had to leave our wives without giving them
a divorce! Now my wife who was my only friend on the earth had to leave
me alone and she did.

After the new issue; me and my two mates went on the top of the
mountain

[ 45 ]

called SAALA, and lived there under a tent. After a few days of fast
and prayer on top of the mountain, we said to each other:ِ Every one in
our town has parted company with us. Why should we not do the same with
each other and live alone with our Lord?'' KAAB-IBN-MA"LIK continued his
exciting story thus to his son ABDULLAH:ِ So we decided to keep apart
from each other, and get on with our prayers and supplications
separately. When we did so, our hearts broke out and our eyes overflowed
with bitter tears. Our broken heart did well, because God contains not
in the whole universe but may get room in a broken heart to live in
there!

Lo! There was a call from the foot of the mountain:ِ GLAD TIDINGS! GOOD
NEWS! O,KAAB! O, SON OF RABIE! O, HALA"L! Allah has forgiven all of you
three! You are now as sinless as a newly born child! We all prostrated
to give our sincere thanks to our Lord! I then took out my garment and
gave it to the herald as a present; and we all went down to the prophet
who said:ِ GOOD TIDINGS FOR YOU ALL! God has forgiven all your sins ever
since you were born from your mother!


Kaab ended his story to his son saying:ِ When I saw that God forgave me
for saying the truth, I vowed never to speak untrue words, and I think I
have not failed so far in my vow:ِ And Allah turned in Mercy to the
three after the earth with all its vastness became strait for them....''
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللهَ وَكُونُوا مَعَ
الصَّادِقِينَ(( 119 ))

119- O,YOU WHO BELIEVE! BEWARE OF ALLAH AND BE WITH THE TRUTHFULS. [ 46
]

THE COMMENTARY


