The Believer and the Parties (verse No. 36)
===========================================

Various reactions and responses of people to the Holy Qura"n, is

[ 346 ]

discussed in this verse. So was it that some truthful people rejoiced
in it, and some selfish and obstinate persons rejected the Message. A
group of the Jews and Christians were happy because they found it in
conformity with their own scriptures. The verse then criticizes some of
the religious sects who deny and reject some parts of the Holy Qura"n.
They believe in some passages and disbelieve in some other passages. The
Arabic word AHZA"B is the plural for HEZB, which denotes to a party, but
connotes to religious sects, groups, or clans. It may also refer to the
pagans an polytheists in Arabia who made an alliance against the prophet
and his followers. But the verse in general is taken to mean that, there
are persons among all sects who apprehend a portion of God's truth, but
reject whatever does not suit them, and conforms not with their caprices
and material gains. Inspite of all that Qura"n is the universal message
of God to mankind, and its main and general commandment is to worship
Allah, and prostrate not before any other being.

وَكَذَلِكَ أَنزَلْنَاهُ حُكْماً عَرَبِيّاً وَلَئِنِ اتَّبَعْتَ
أَهْوَاءَهُمْ بَعْدَمَا جَاءَكَ مِنْ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَكَ مِنْ اللهِ مِنْ
وَلِىّ وَلاَ وَاق(( 37 ))

37- AND SO DID WE SEND IT DOWN AS A COMMANDMENT IN ARABIC. AND IF YOU
FOLLOW THEIR CAPRICES AFTER WHAT OF KNOWLEDGE HAS COME TO YOU, THERE IS
NO PROTECTOR FOR YOU AGAINST GOD, NOR A DEFENDER.

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلا مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ
أَزْوَاجاً وَذُرِّيَّةً وَمَا كَانَ لِرَسُول أَنْ يَأْتِىَ بِآيَة إِلاَّ
بِإِذْنِ اللهِ لِكُلِّ أَجَل كِتَابٌ (( 38 ))

38- AND VERILY WE HAVE SENT MESSENGERS BEFORE YOU,

[ 347 ]

AND GAVE THEM WIVES AND OFFSPRINGS. AND IT WAS NOT IN THE POWER OF A
MESSENGER TO BRING A SIGN (MIRACLE) EXCEPT WITH THE PERMISSION OF ALLAH.
FOR EVERY TERM THERE IS A BOOK. (A RECORD)

يَمْحُوا اللهُ مَا يَشَاءُ وَيُثْبِتُ وَعِنْدَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ (( 39
))

39- ALLAH BLOTS OUT (CANCELS) WHAT HE WANTS, AND CONFIRMS (WHAT HE
WILL). AND WITH HIM IS THE MOTHER OF THE BOOK. (THE MAIN RECORD)

وَإِنْ مَّا نُرِيَنَّكَ بَعْضَ الَّذِي نَعِدُهُمْ أَوْ نَتَوَفَّيَنَّكَ
فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلاَغُ وَعَلَيْنَا الْحِسَابُ(( 40 ))

40- WHETHER WE SHOW YOU SOME OF WHAT WE PROMISE THEM, OR CALL YOU TO US
(CAUSE YOU TO DIE); THEN ON YOU IS TO CONVEY (OUR MESSAGE) AND ON US
LAYS THE RECKONING.

**THE COMMENTARY
DEFINITE AND INDEFINITE EVENTS (VERSE NO. 37 - 40)**

\`\`And so did We send it down as a commandment in Arabic....'' For the
word, \`\`ARABIC'' a two-fold meaning is understood; 1ِ It may allude to
the Semitic language of the Arabs, which is the prevailing speech of
Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Egypt and North Africa.
2ِ It also means an expressive, clear, and eloquent, word. Therefore
the phrase; \`\`as a commandment in Arabic'', may also mean the
commandments that are clear, expressive, eloquent and noble, or all
these qualifications collectively. The next clause of the verse, \`\`And
if you

[ 348 ]

follow their caprices....'' may imply; even the prophet who is
infalliable, if he should go wrong and follow the caprices of this and
that, inspite of the knowledge given him, God will not protect him
against the bad consequences of his deeds! And in the God's judgement no
one shall help or defend him against God's punishment. The next verse
(NO.38) is to answer the fault-findings of the prophet's opposers who
used to say:ِ \`\`What sort of a prophet is this who eats and drinks and
walks in the streets and who has wives and children like all of us!'':ِ
\`\`And verily We sent Messengers before you, and gave them wives and
offsprings....'' FIXED AND UNFIXED RECORD (VERSE NO. 39)

The Arabic, UMM-UL-KITA"B in a direct translation may be the Mother of
the Book. But it has several connotation; such as the; main record, the
principle tablet, where upon the essence of God's Will and law and all
the affairs have been written. The general fate of creatures, and the
occurence of all events will happen in two stages, or two phases. One of
the two stages is unfixed and can be altered, but the second stage is
fixed and not changeable. These two stages are some how like two boards
or two recording books. In one of the boards whatever is written can be
blotted off or be replaced by some other words or letters, but in the
second one, it is not possible to change or erase that which is written
there. At least no creature can alter that, because nothing is
impossible through the infinite power and knowledge of God. Here, to
make the matter more readily understandable, we explain it through an
example:ِ

We may say, if a man eats a certain kind of poison, he shall
immediately die. But we also know that there is antipoison for that to
nullify its effects, and by serving it the poisoned will be saved. The
whole event which is related to the said poison and antitoxin has its
record in the temporary and changeable board or book . Now if we

[ 349 ]

consider the death of the poisoned with all its cause and effect, such
as eating the poison and having no access to the antitoxin, the death
here is certain, and it will be recorded in the fixed board or memory of
God's knowledge. In other word the knowledge of God works in two stages
of fixed and unfixed which is on condition. IMAM SAJJAD (AS) has said:ِ
I could inform you of all the past and future events, if, there was not
one verse in the Qura"n, (S13:39) which says:ِ Allah blots out and
cancels what He wants and confirms what He wills, and with Him is the
mother of the book.

\*\*\*\*\*

**RAM & ROM**

(The above reasoning of his holiness Ayatullah-al-Ozma" Maka"rim,
reminds me of the two kinds of RAM and ROM memories which are used in
our present generations of computers. These are in use for methods of
accounting and control of all sorts of Data Processings. Ram is the
abbreviation for Random Access Memory, which is a storage device, or a
direct access recording board. It is possible to alter or replace the
words and letters that are written upon the RAM. There is also the ROM
or Read Only Memory which is a record of data or instructions that
cannot be altered or replaced easily in the normal use of the
computer.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)
WHAT IS BADAA?**

One of the hottest disputes that has always gone on between the Shiite
and Sonni, the two main sects of Islam is over the subject that they
technically call it BADAA. Literally it means; appearance, and
clearness. It is also known as penitence and remorse for appearing due
to a sudden change of mind, and coming of a sudden to a new conclusion
or decision. But such apparent meanings and denotations do not apply
to

[ 350 ]

God, because nothing is hidden from Him to be evident and to cause His
change of mind. So also God never makes a mistake to be needed for a
correction. If we attribute mistakes and neglect to God's All-knowing
All-mighty Essence; we have blasphemed, and spoken in irreverent way
about Him. Therefore in the sight of a Shiite, \`\`BADAA'' is some sort
of an abrogation in the natural phenomenas. Many a time we may think
that an event will happen because we see that all the necessary
condition for the happening exist, either social or physical. Or that,
an apostle of God has foretold that such and such would happen, but in
practice it happens not. In such a case we say that the stop or delay is
due to BADAA.

This is some how like the ABROGATION=NASKH in which a religious
commandment is issued, but after a period of time, long or short, the
command is abolished by the apostle or a religious authority, or it is
replaced with a new command. Therefore the two technical terms namely
BADAA and NASKH, which involves of abrogating, or nullifying a
commandment or decision that God has decreed, either in the Law or in
nature, are some sort of a twin-brothers. Instances of these are found
in the lifeِstory of the prophets like Jonah, Jesus and Moses. Jonah
tried to preach and enforce his mission in NINEVEH, but eventually he
was despaired of his people, and made sure that the wrath of God would
seized them. So he left his people and ran away to escape the
punishment. But things happened otherwise! Jonah himself was swallowed
by a large sea whale, and after his departure his people repented and
returned to God through the advices of a learned man they had, and
through God's BADAA their punishment was cancelled.

So was the prediction of Jesus Christ about a marriage, who foretold
that the bride would die at their matrimonial night; but she didn't die,
and lived long! Jesus was questioned about his prediction!? He then
asked the bride if she had given anything in alms or charity to the poor
and needy that very day, and she admitted that she had given a sum for
the sake of God. Jesus then said alms giving is a means to postpone the
coming calamities.

[ 351 ]

ABRAHAM too was commanded to sacrifice his son, Ishmael, but when he
decided to do so, through God's BADAA, he was prohibited from doing
that, because God's decision had been changed!

All these and many other instances show that, BADAA is a truth, and God
may delay a finalized decision or precedes whatever He will. He never
changes His mind or decision for having done a mistake or due to neglect
or default, but due to good purpose, and well-wishing.

أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا نَأْتِي الاَْرْضَ نَنْقُصُهَا مِنْ أَطْرَافِهَا
وَاللهُ يَحْكُمُ لاَ مُعَقِّبَ لِحُكْمِهِ وَهُوَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ(( 41
))

41- DO THEY NOT SEE THAT WE COME TO THE LAND AND SHRINK ITS BORDERS.
AND ALLAH COMMANDS; NO ONE CAN PUT BACK HIS COMMAND, AND HE IS SWIFT IN
RECKONING.

وَقَدْ مَكَرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَلِلَّهِ الْمَكْرُ جَمِيعاً
يَعْلَمُ مَا تَكْسِبُ كُلُّ نَفْس وَسَيَعْلَمُ الْكُفَّارُ لِمَنْ
عُقْبَى الدَّارِ (( 42 ))

42- AND THOSE BEFORE THEM ALSO PLOTTED, BUT ALL PLANNING BELONGS TO
ALLAH. HE KNOWS WHAT EVERY SOUL EARNS, AND SOON THE UNBELIEVERS WILL
KNOW THE ENDING ABODE.

وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَسْتَ مُرْسَلا قُلْ كَفَى بِاللهِ
شَهِيداً بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ(( 43
))

43- AND THE UNBELIEVERS SAY:ِ YOU ARE NOT AN APOSTLE. SAY:ِ ENOUGH IS
ALLAH FOR A WITNESS BETWEEN ME AND YOU, AND HE WITH WHOM IS THE
KNOWLEDGE OF THE BOOK.

[ 352 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
MEN AND SOCIETIES WILL PERISH, BUT GOD REMAINS (VERSE NO. 41 - 43)**

The verses here, refer to the stubborn and still-necked oppositions of
the prophet questioning them:ِ Do they not see that We come to the land
and shrink its borders? It is evident that the shrinkage here applies to
the inhabitants of the land, and to the earth. It refers to Mecca which
was the seat of power of the most stubborn enemies of the prophet. So
much so that the prophet and his companions were forced to immigrate to
Medina. After the immigration there was a hard struggle between Mecca
and Medina, and gradually the paganism power collapesd, and by and by
the foundation of their unrightful authority sapped, and truth made its
way everywhere with irresistible force. This was because Allah is the
commander in chief of all affairs and orders, and there is no one and no
power to stand against His commandment or change his decision unless He
himself will.

Some commentators like TABARSI; have narrated from Hazrat Imam Sadiq
that by shrinkage and reducing the borders of the land in the above
verse, the loss of scholars, the learned, and men of knowledge and
wisdom is meant. The argument continues by saying that Mohammad is not
the only prophet against whom people have conspired:ِ And those before
them also plotted (against their apostles) but plots and plans belong to
Allah who knows whatever every soul earns. They conspired against the
Messenger of God, but Allah frustrated them in their plans, so that the
bad end and the worst of the abodes became theirs.

Mohammad's opposition and enemies gave him the noble title of,
\`\`AMIN'' which means trustworthy and righteous, and they acknowledged
his great noble character, but they denied his prophethood, and stood

[ 353 ]

firm against his message and mission, so that God through His universal
plan debased them and rendered their devilish plots ineffective. When
they denied him as an apostle and rejected his doctrine, Mohammad (AS)
was not discouraged. He rather stood firmer and put his trust in God,
and said:ِ Enough is Allah for a witness between me and you, and also he
with whom is the knowledge of the Book. There are many traditions
narrated by various sources that HAZRAT IMAM ALI (AS) was introduced by
the prophet to have been, \`\`he with whom was the knowledge of the
Book.'' This is not difficult to believe, because HAZRAT IMAM ALI joined
the prophet as a child, and left the prophet when he died with his head
at the bosom of Ali (AS). Imam Ali was always and everywhere present
with the prophet, and the Messenger of God taught him all the secrets,
hints, comments, and ambiguities of the Book of God. All Muslims
throughout the ages have admitted that Hazrat Ali has been the first and
the best in the knowledge of Qura"n after our prophet, and this can
easily be proved through his words and sermons, and speeches.

**THE END OF SUREH THUNDER (13)**

[ 354 ]

**سوره ابراهيم
ABRAHAM**

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الر كِتَابٌ أَنزَلْنَاهُ إِلَيْكَ لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ
إِلَى النُّورِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ إِلَى صِرَاطِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَمِيدِ ((
1 ))

1- A.L.R. A BOOK WHICH WE HAVE SENT IT DOWN TO YOU, THAT YOU MAY TAKE
PEOPLE OUT OF DARKNESSES INTO LIGHT, WITH THE PERMISSION OF THEIR LORD;
TO THE WAY OF THE ALL-MIGHTY, THE PRAISE WORTHY.

اللهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ وَوَيْلٌ
لِلْكَافِرِينَ مِنْ عَذَاب شَدِيد(( 2 ))

2- ALLAH IS HE TO WHOM BELONGS WHATEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS AND WHATEVER
IS IN THE EARTH. AND WOE TO THE UNBELIEVERS OF THE SEVERE PUNISHMENT.

الَّذِينَ يَسْتَحِبُّونَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا عَلَى الاْخِرَةِ
وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَيَبْغُونَهَا عِوَجاً أُوْلَئِكَ فِي
ضَلاَل بَعِيد (( 3 ))

3- THOSE WHO LOVE THE LIFE IN THIS WORLD, MORE THAN THE HEREAFTER, AND
DEBAR OTHERS FROM THE PATH OF ALLAH, AND MAKE IT CROOKED. THEY ARE IN A
FAR ERROR.

**THE COMMENTARY**

[ 355 ]

**LEAVING DARKNESS, TO GO TO LIGHT (VERSE NO. 1 - 3)**

As for the abbreviated letters please refer to volume one page 30 of
this book. All the moral, spiritual and physical objects of the Holy
Qura"n lays in this verse (NO.1) which is to take Man out of various
darknesses, leading them to the unique light of Monotheism. In this
verse the word darkness is used in plural, where on the light is
singular, to mean that all the goodnesses, cleanlinesses, and pieties
and virtues, belief and faithfulness can exist only in the light of
Monotheism, and all will shape into a form of oneness, and unite
together and relate to each other.

On the contrary darkness which is the symbol of evil sin, dirt,
oppression and disbelief is scattered here and there and everywhere. Of
course coming out of the various darknesses and going into the light
must be with the permission of God who is the main source of all
goodness and beauty. The next verse points to some attributes of Allah
who is the source of all power and knowledge, and is far above all
creation in position which entitles Him to all praises. Then in the last
verse, (NO.3) reference is made to the unbeliever who loves this mortal
life more than the eternal life to come, and whose crooked mind searches
for something crooked in Allah's straight path in order to debar other
people from the right way of truth.

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَّسُول إِلاَّ بِلِسَانِ قَوْمِهِ لِيُبَيِّنَ
لَهُمْ فَيُضِلُّ اللهُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَهُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ (( 4 ))

4- AND WE DID NOT SEND ANY MESSENGER EXCEPT (SPEAKING) IN THE LANGUAGE
OF HIS OWN PEOPLE, IN THEN ORDER TO MAKE CLEAR TO THEM. (ALLAH'S
MESSAGE) ALLAH

[ 356 ]

LEAVES IN ERROR WHOM HE WILL, AND GUIDES WHOM HE WILL, AND HE IS
ALL-MIGHTY, ALL-WISE.

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسَى بِآيَاتِنَا أَنْ أَخْرِجْ قَوْمَكَ مِنْ
الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ وَذَكِّرْهُمْ بِأَيَّامِ اللهِ إِنَّ فِي
ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِّكُلِّ صَبَّار شَكُور(( 5 ))

5- AND VERILY WE SENT MOSES WITH OUR SIGNS, THAT, BRING YOUR PEOPLE OUT
OF DARKNESSES TO LIGHT, AND REMIND THEM OF THE DAYS OF ALLAH. SURELY IN
THAT, THERE ARE SIGNS FOR EVERY THANKFULL PATIENT.

وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ
أَنجَاكُمْ مِّنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ يَسُومُونَكُمْ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ
وَيُذَبِّحُونَ أَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَيَسْتَحْيُونَ نِسَاءَكُمْ وَفِي ذَلِكُمْ
بَلاَءٌ مِنْ رَّبِّكُمْ عَظِيمٌ(( 6 ))

6- AND (REMEMBER) WHEN MOSES SAID TO HIS PEOPLE:ِ REMEMBER YOU THE
FAVOUR OF ALLAH, WHEN HE DELIVERED YOU FROM PHARAOH'S FOLK; WHO
SUBJECTED YOU TO THE EVIL TORTURE, SLAUGHTERING YOUR SONS AND SPARING
YOUR WOMEN (FOR SPECIAL SERVICES), AND IN THAT, THERE WAS A GREAT TRIAL
FROM YOUR LORD.

وَإِذْ تَأَذَّنَ رَبُّكُمْ لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لاََزِيدَنَّكُمْ وَلَئِنْ
كَفَرْتُمْ إِنَّ عَذَابِي لَشَدِيدٌ(( 7 ))

7- (AND ALSO REMEMBER) WHEN YOUR LORD PROCLAIMED:ِ IF YOU WERE
THANKFUL, I WILL INCREASE YOU, (MY BOUNTIES) AND IF YOU BE THANKLESS,
VERILY MY PUNISHMENT IS SEVERE.

[ 357 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CRITICAL DAYS OF LIFE (VERSE NO. 4 - 7)**

At the beginning of their missions the prophets have to deal with own
people, and they usually choose their first companions from among them
too. They therefore had to deliver Message in the language which was
current among their people, so as to make it clear enough for them. Then
through translation and communication the Message would reach other
nations, according to their capacities. In this respect Qura"n which is
the Message of God, wonderfully comes down and goes up with the minds,
and according to various classes and degrees of understanding and
knowledge. It covers all sort of mankind from the simplest up to the
most advanced of them!

After clarifying the Message of God, and explaining it so that it is
readily understandable for all, the duty of an apostle is completely
fulfilled, and they are not responsible for the acceptance or rejection
of their people:ِ \`\`.... Then Allah leaves in error whom He will, and
guides whom He will.'' And he whom Allah guides or leaves him in his
error, is a matter according to God's Wisdom and justice, and includes,
evil-doers, oppressors, and etc. The next verse (NO.5) points to the
advent of Moses and his challenge with Pharaoh, who had kept his people
in the spiritual and mental darknesses. Moses was assigned by Allah to
take the Israelites of the black dark shadow of Pharaoh. He was ordered
to remind them of the Days of Allah:ِ

\`\`We sent Moses with our signs, and told him to bring your people out
of darknesses, and remind them of the Days of Allah.'' AYYA"MOLLAH=the
Days of Allah may mean the days in which God's Grace and Mercy was
specially shown to a nation or to a group of people. This is where every
day belongs to God, and no day or night can exist void of God's Mercy.
From among the Days of Allah we may

[ 358 ]

also name the Day when HAZRAT ALMAHDI appears, the Day that we die, and
the Resurrection Day. In the next verse Moses or Mohammad, reminds the
Israelites of one of the most important Days of Allah in their history,
and that was the PASS OVER in which the children of Israel were saved
from the rigor and tyranny of Pharaoh and his folk who used to kill
their sons and keep their woman for low services:ِ \`\`.... Remember you
the favour of Allah, when He delivered you from Pharaoh's folk who
subjected you to evil tortures....'' Although there are many Days of
Allah in the long history of the children of Israel, the verse (NO.6)
refers to the day in which by the Pass Over they were rescued from the
bondage of Pharaoh, and obtained their freedom. This implies that
FREEDOM is one of the great bounties of Allah, and days in which freedom
is obtained, and the Independence Days of nations too, is one of the
Days of Allah.

وَقَالَ مُوسَى إِنْ تَكْفُرُوا أَنْتُمْ وَمَنْ فِي الاَْرْضِ جَمِيعاً
فَإِنَّ اللهَ لَغَنِىٌّ حَمِيدٌ(( 8 ))

8- AND MOSES SAID:ِ IF YOU AND WHOEVER IS IN THE EARTH, ALL TOGETHER
DISBELIEVE, ALLAH IS FREE OF WANT; THE PRAISEWORTHY.

أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَبَأُ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ قَوْمِ نُوح وَعَاد
وَثَمُودَ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُهُمْ إِلاَّ اللهُ
جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَرَدُّوا أَيْدِيَهُمْ فِي
أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَقَالُوا إِنَّا كَفَرْنَا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُمْ بِهِ
وَإِنَّا لَفِي شَكّ مِّمَّا تَدْعُونَنَا إِلَيْهِ مُرِيب(( 9 ))

9- HAS THE REPORT OF THOSE WHO WERE BEFORE YOU NOT COME TO YOU? THE
PEOPLE OF NOAH, طD, THAMUD, AND THOSE AFTER THEM, WHOM NO ONE KNOWS
EXCEPT ALLAH. THEIR MESSENGERS CAME TO THEM WITH EVIDENCES, BUT

[ 359 ]

THEY HELD THEIR HANDS ON THEIR MOUTHS AND SAID:ِ WE BELIEVE NOT IN WHAT
YOU HAVE BEEN SENT TO. (IN YOUR MISSION) AND WE ARE IN DOUBT AND
SUSPICION OF WHAT YOU CALL US TO.

قَالَتْ رُسُلُهُمْ أَفِي اللهِ شَكٌّ فَاطِرِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ
يَدْعُوكُمْ لِيَغْفِرَ لَكُمْ مِّنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَيُؤَخِّرَكُمْ إِلَى
أَجَل مُّسَمّىً قَالُوا إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِّثْلُنَا
تُرِيدُونَ أَنْ تَصُدُّونَا عَمَّا كَانَ يَعْبُدُ آبَاؤُنَا فَأْتُونَا
بِسُلْطَان مُبِين(( 10 ))

10- THEIR MESSENGERS SAID:ِ IS THERE ANY DOUBT IN ALLAH? THE CREATOR OF
HEAVENS AND EARTH! HE CALLS YOU TO FORGIVE YOU YOUR SINS, AND DEFER YOU
UP TO THE APPOINTED TERM.

THEY SAID:ِ YOU ARE NO MORE THAN (MORTAL) HUMAN LIKE OURSELVES, WHO
WANT TO PREVENT US FROM WHAT OUR FATHERS USED TO WORSHIP. THEN BRING US
SOME PERSPICUOUS PROOF.

**THE COMMENTARY
IS THERE ANY DOUBT IN GOD? (VERSE NO. 8 - 10)**

The first of the above group of verses imply that if you give thanks
for what Allah has bestowed upon you it is for your own good, and your
gratitude serves to increase God's favour and bounties, but if you turn
away and blaspheme in your disbelief, it ends to your own loss. No one
can ever harm Allah, and people's disobedience, and rejection will cause
their own perdition. In other word, if all men

[ 360 ]

gather together against Allah, they cannot detract from His infinite
power an electron weight. God does not depend upon his creation and
creatures for anything, and His glory and dignity cannot be questioned
by anyone. Then the next verse applies to the destiny of the past
nations, such as the people of Noah, A"d and Thamud whose life and fate
can teach man, many useful lessons:ِ \`\`.... Their Messenegers came to
them with evidences, but they held their hands on their mouths and
said:ِ We believe not in what you have been sent to!''

Many Messengers have been sent to man, but the life story of most of
them are unknown to us, and even we do not know the names of most of
them. It is narrated that Allah has sent 124 thousand apostles in order
to guide mankind and lead them from darkness to light:ِ \`\`The people
of Noah, A"d, Thamud, and those after them, whom no one knows except
Allah.''

\`\`.... They said you are no more than mortals like ourselves, who
want to prevent us from what our fathers worshipped....'' That is to
say; even if we admit that there exist a God and we have to worship him;
ok; our father's ways of worship satisfy our spiritual needs. What
authority do you have to turn us away from the creed of our fathers!?
The Arabic, SHAKK and RAIB are to some extent synonyms and we therefore
have translated them to doubt and suspicion. The unbelievers related
their disbelief to doubt and suspicion, and thus in the next verse the
apostles ask them:ِ \`\`Is there any doubt about Allah who is the
Creator of the heavens and the earth?''

[ 361 ]

This implies that if we study the creation of the heavens and the
earth, and the wonderful order which is enforced throughout the
universe, not only God's existence can easily be proved, His attributes
too can be known with enough evidences. So the object of the prophet's
mission is also mentioned in the same verse (NO.10) that:ِ

\`\`.... Calls you to forgive you your sins, and defer you up to your
appointed term.''

In fact, there are two aims in the missions of the apostles. The first
one is to clean those who follow them with their round about from sins
and guilts so as to entitle them to the forgiveness of God and His
salvation. The second object of the prophet's mission is to help man to
live long enough up to his appointed and natural term down here in this
life, so that he might have the chances of developing his spiritual
faculties. These two said objects are cause and effect because man's
unnatural deaths are more than his natural deaths! According to a
tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (AS), those people who die by their
sins, guilts, oppression and evil deeds, are far more in number than
those who die a natural death and live long up to their appointed
term.

قَالَتْ لَهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ إِنْ نَّحْنُ إِلاَّ بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ
وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ يَمُنُّ عَلَى مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَمَا كَانَ
لَنَا أَنْ نَأْتِيَكُمْ بِسُلْطَان إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَعَلَى اللهِ
فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ(( 11 ))

11- THEIR MESSENGERS SAID:ِ TRUE THAT WE ARE HUMAN BEINGS LIKE YOU, BUT
ALLAH WILL OBLIGE THOSE OF HIS SERVANTS WHOM HE WILL, (BY BESTOWING HIS
GRACE ON THEM) AND WE CAN NEVER BRING YOU ANY MIRACULOUS PROOF EXCEPT
WITH THE PERMISSION OF ALLAH, AND BELIEVERS HAVE THEIR TRUSTS IN
ALLAH.

[ 362 ]

وَمَا لَنَا أَلاَّ نَتَوَكَّلَ عَلَى اللهِ وَقَدْ هَدَانَا سُبُلَنَا
وَلَنَصْبِرَنَّ عَلَى مَا آذَيْتُمُونَا وَعَلَى اللهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ
الْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ(( 12 ))

12- AND WHY SHOULD WE NOT PUT OUR TRUST IN ALLAH, AND YET HE HAS SHOWED
US OUR WAY. (TO PROSPERITY) AND WE DEFINITELY WILL ENDURE PATIENTLY YOUR
PERSECUTING US; AND ON ALLAH THE RELIANTS PUT THEIR TRUST.


