Put Your Trust Only in Allah (verse No. 11 - 12)
================================================

In these two verses the prophets answer the pretexts of the unbelievers
by which they cloaked the real condition. When they objected why should
you be mortal men like ourselves and not angels or other supernatural
creatures, the prophets said:ِ \`\`True that we are human beings like
you, but Allah will oblige those of His servants whom He will.'' In
other word they said; \`\`God has obliged us by bestowing upon us the
honour of conveying His Message to His servants. We cannot bring you any
miracles unless God will, and our duty is only to convey God's Message
of truth. Even if angels were sent to you as Messengers instead of men,
the angels too, depend entirely upon our Lord God, and they could have
nothing to reveal of themselves.''

This is where all the prophets that we know them, have had enough
miracles to illustrate and prove their truth. Their divine doctrine too,
is one of the prophet's miracles, in the sight of those who have the
faculty of understanding. Finally the apostles said to their enemies and
oppositions; if you deny our truthfulness, and reject our call to
Monotheism, we have already put our trust in Allah, and the believers
too, have their trust in Him ; and ultimately it is Allah who judges and
decides. So, even if you persecute us we will endure that with
patience.

[ 363 ]

**THE PHILOSOPHY OF TAVAKKOL**

The Arabic TAVAKKOL which is rooted in VAKIL is generally translated
to, \`\`PUTTING TRUST IN ALLAH'', but it has many shades of meaning like
getting an agent, attorney proxy, lawyer proxy and etc. Generally it
means to empower some one to act for some one else, or chosing one who
can manage another's affair. It is evident that man will elect someone
to do something on his behalf, when he is helpless and is afflicted in a
dark deadlock, or in a state of inaction or indecision, resulting from
the opposition of equally powerful persons or factions. So putting trust
in Allah is apt, when man in difficulties, hostilities, complexities of
affairs, and in deadlocks has been rendered ineffective himself. Here he
should have trust in his Merciful Lord whom nothing can frustrate,
renewing his endeavours, and resolutely get to work harder and strive
more hopefully.

As a matter of fact, man should always and in any condition, throughout
his life rely on God, and make sure that the doors of hope and God's aid
is always open to him, and that Allah will come to his help in proper
time. But man should also know that putting trust in God, does not mean
stopping strive and getting out of work, that God will help those who
help themselves. Having trust in God, serves to increase man's stability
and resistance in hardship and troubles. It will induce patience in the
soul of man, in difficulties and reasures him that he is not alone in
the critical conditions.

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لِرُسُلِهِمْ لَنُخْرِجَنَّكُمْ مِّنْ
أَرْضِنَا أَوْ لَتَعُودُنَّ فِي مِلَّتِنَا فَأَوْحَى إِلَيْهِمْ
رَبُّهُمْ لَنُهْلِكَنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 13 ))

13- AND THE UNBELIEVERS SAID TO THEIR MESSENGERS, WE WILL EXPEL YOU OUT
OF OUR LAND, UNLESS YOU RETURN TO OUR CREED. THEN THEIR LORD INSPIRED TO
THEM THAT, WE WILL DEFINITELY DESTROY THE OPPRESSORS.

[ 364 ]

وَلَنُسْكِنَنَّكُمْ الاَْرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَافَ
مَقَامِي وَخَافَ وَعِيدِ (( 14 ))

14- AND WE WILL RESIDE YOU IN THE LAND AFTER THEM. THAT IS (THE REWARD)
FOR HE WHO FEARS MY POSITION AND WHO FEARS MY THREAT.

وَاسْتَفْتَحُوا وَخَابَ كُلُّ جَبَّار عَنِيد(( 15 ))

15- AND THEY ASKED (ALLAH) FOR VICTORY. AND EVERY STUBBORN TYRANT WAS
DISAPPOINTED.

مِّنْ وَرَائِهِ جَهَنَّمُ وَيُسْقَى مِنْ مَّاء صَدِيد (( 16 ))

16- HELL IS BEFORE HIM, AND HE IS GIVEN TO DRINK STINKING WATER.

يَتَجَرَّعُهُ وَلاَ يَكَادُ يُسِيغُهُ وَيَأْتِيهِ الْمَوْتُ مِنْ كُلِّ
مَكَان وَمَا هُوَ بِمَيِّت وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِ عَذَابٌ غَلِيظٌ (( 17 ))

17- WHICH HE WILL SIP BUT CANNOT EASILY SWALLOW IT! AND DEATH ASSAILS
HIM FROM EVERYWHERE AND YET HE DIES NOT, AND STILL A HARSH TORMENT
AWAITS HIM.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE FATE OF THE STUBBORN TYRANT (VERSE NO. 13 - 17)**

When the obstinate unbelievers knew their own weakness in thought and
logic, they left reason and adhered to threat and force-majeure and
relied upon their physical power. They said to their Messengers:ِ \`\`We
will expel you out of our land, unless you RETURN to our creed of
idolatry.'' The transgressors whose only belief were in materialism;
thought

[ 365 ]

that threat and force can easily put down the righteous. By this
motive, they offered their Messengers two options:ِ either to be
expelled from their home town by force, or conformity to their evil
creed of idolatry. Here the phrase, \`\`RETURN TO OUR CREED'' does not
mean that the prophets, previous to their prophetic mission were
idolaters. They were always against idolatry, but they had no authority
to act and to preach against them when they were not God's Messengers.
So they were silent. Now the idolaters wanted them to accept their creed
or at least to keep quiet, and leave people alone with their idols.
God's reaction against the threat of the heathens was that, He inspired
to His Messengers:ِ \`\`We will definitely destroy the oppressors.''
This was because it is in the general plan of Allah that, the good will
at last inherit the earth and the evil shall be blotted out.

When the prophets were wearied, and their patience and tolerance were
entirely exhausted, they prayed to their Lord God for a victory over the
stubborn tyrants and obstinate transgressors. Soon their prayer was
answered, and their stubborn opposition were frustrated and disappointed
in their hastility. They vanguished in disgrace and Hell became their
permanent abode, in which instead of clean and crystalline cold water,
they were given to drink stinking water, which they sipped, but could
not easily swallow. There in the Hell, even the door of escape by
annihilation is closed to them.

مَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّهِمْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَرَمَاد
اشْتَدَّتْ بِهِ الرِّيحُ فِي يَوْم عَاصِف لاَّ يَقْدِرُونَ مِمَّا
كَسَبُوا عَلَى شَيْء ذَلِكَ هُوَ الضَّلاَلُ الْبَعِيدُ(( 18 ))

18- THE LIKENESS OF THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE THEIR LORDِTHEIR WORKS IS LIKE
ASHES ON WHICH THE WIND BLOWS IN A STORMY DAY. NO POWER HAVE THEY OVER
ANYTHING OF WHAT THEY HAVE EARNED, THAT'S THE FAR ERROR.

[ 366 ]

**THE COMMENTARY ASHES IN THE BOSOM OF A TEMPEST (VERSE NO. 18)**

An expressive parable has been struck here to illustrate the work of
the ungodly, and it completes the past argument about the end of the
heathens:ِ \`\`Their work is like ashes on which the wind blows in a
stormy day.'' The deeds of the unbelievers in themselves generally have
little weight and value, just like the ashes. And as the ashes cannot
stand against a fast moving wind, specially in a stormy day, so is the
act of the ungodly which is more easily blown about here and there by
the wrath of God. They obtain no fruit of what they plant, and sooner or
later they shall come to know that they have been carried far away from
what they had in their mind.

The ashes are not adhesive particles and even with the aid of water we
connot make the substance tenacious so as to be apt to adhere to each
other. And so is the work of those who believe not in their Lord
Creator, for being not co-ordinated or related to one another. In the
contrary the spirit of unity and oneness can be observed in all the
works of those who believe. Their conducts is a manifestation of
Monotheism and godlyness. Ashes are also very light, empty, and void of
useful contents, so much so that no living creature ever makes a nest or
room among the ashes. So in the fruitless work of the unbelievers and
useless and vain deeds of the godless people for having no truthful
intention or reasonable aim and object.

As an instance of this we, may refer to the HUMAN-RIGHTS, which
now-a-days have fallen on the tip of the tongues. The same rights were
also observed by the prophets, but the difference between the two
observances is more than the difference between the earth and the
heavens?

[ 367 ]

When a superpower claims of supporting the human rights he has not any
human stimulus or moral objection to incite them to this sort of
activity. Their aim in that is merely pretence and political, and their
work in the fields of human rights is a cloak to cover their own human
criminals! They speak eloquently of the human rights, but their hands up
to the elbow has been submerged in the human blood!

**THE ANNULMENT OF DEEDS**

The abolition and annulment of good deeds due to disbelief in God, has
been a general topic of controversy among the Muslim scholars. Some ask
what of the great inventors and discoverers like Alva Edison and Pastur?
Do they go to Hell!? Do they have any reward at all in the life to come?
To answer this question we say:ِ

In Islamic Doctrine the aim, intention, and stimulus of an act is no
less important than the act itself. Therefore it depends to some extent
that, why the good-doer or the inventor has done that work?

1- Sometimes the aim of the inventor is to invent a destructive means
like the atomic bomb. Of course his invention may also have some
byِproducts, which benefits mankind. Here in this case it is evident
that what sort of a reward the inventor deserves.

2- Sometimes an inventor may invent something with the object of being
famous, wealthy or have a position. In this case the best reward for
such an inventor is to reach his object of being famous or rich and
etc.

3- The third group of inventors may have human stimulus spending their
whole life in the corner of a laboratory in order to serve mankind and
improve social life of humanity. They toil and work hard for the welfare
of their fellow creatures. These are of two groups as to their faith and
intentions:ِ They might be either believer in God or

[ 368 ]

unbelievers. If they are believers and have laboured in their
investigations for the sake of God and to seek their Lord's pleasure,
their reward is immense and God knows how to deal with them. They will
have as their rewards such Graces and Bounties of God in the life to
come that no ear has ever heard, no eyes have ever seen, and no mind has
thought of.

But if they believe not in God, and have done so only for the sake of
humanity and to improve the life and social condition of mankind, then
they have done good deeds and are among the good doers, and the verses
like S 12:90 applies to them that:ِ \`\`ALLAH WASTES NOT THE REWARDS OF
THE GOOD-DOERS.'' Here we should not forget that the acceptance of a
deed or a conduct by Allah differs from giving wages and rewards for a
work. God might be well pleased with a little work which is done by a
servant, with utmost sincerity and good purity and intention; and on the
other hand he wastes not the reward of the good doers, though their
intention be not as pure and sincere as it should be. Good is the fruit
of good, and the product of bad is bad.

أَلَمْ تَرَى أَنَّ اللهَ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ
إِنْ يَشَأْ يُذْهِبْكُمْ وَيَأْتِ بِخَلْق جَدِيد(( 19 ))

19- DO YOU NOT SEE THAT ALLAH HAS CREATED THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH IN
TRUTH? IF HE WANT HE WILL TAKE YOU AND BRING A NEW CREATION. (IN PLACE
OF YOU)

وَمَا ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللهِ بِعَزِيز(( 20 ))

20- AND THIS IS NOT DIFFICULT FOR ALLAH.

[ 369 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE CREATION IS RIGHTFUL (VERSE NO. 19 - 20)**

The prophet is addressed here to be an example for all, that:ِ
\`\`Don't you see that Allah has created the heavens and the earth
rightfully?'' The Arabic, \`\`HAGH'' which is usually translated to,
\`\`RIGHT'' or \`\`TRUTH'' has a wide variety of meanings and
connotations such as; correct, proper, with aim, conformed to justice,
according to fact and truth, as it should be, and etc.

Here we may take it to mean; having a right or just claim according to
laws. Or that the creation of the universe is based on calculation,
engineering, with every particle in it having aim, object and a duty to
perform! And that nothing has ever been created in vain. Therefore God's
Creation is rightful and not wrong or in vain. There is aim and purpose,
law and regulation in the creation of everything, be it an atom or a
solar system. Those who do not want to conform themselves with the
conventions of the world, they must give place to others who do so:ِ

\`\`If Allah wishes, He will take you away and bring a new creation in
place of you.'' The Arabic, \`\`AZIZ'' which here we have translated to
difficult, is one of the attributes of Allah with shades of meanings
like; Mighty, Great, and having mastery, power, and triumph over
something.

وَبَرَزُوا للهِِ جَمِيعاً فَقَالَ الضُّعَفَاؤُا لِلَّذِينَ
اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُنَّا لَكُمْ تَبَعاً فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُّغْنُونَ
عَنَّا مِنْ عَذَابِ اللهِ مِنْ شَيْء قَالُوا لَوْ هَدَانَا اللهُ
لَهَدَيْنَاكُمْ سَوَاءٌ عَلَيْنَا أَجَزِعْنَا أَمْ صَبَرْنَا مَا لَنَا
مِنْ مَّحِيص(( 21 ))

21- AND THEY ALL APPEAR BEFORE ALLAH: THEN THE WEAKS

[ 370 ]

WILL SAY TO THE PROUD; \`\`WE WERE YOUR FOLLOWER. CAN YOU NOW AVAIL US
ANYTHING AGAINST THE PUNISHMENT OF ALLAH?'' THEY SAY:ِ \`\`IF ALLAH HAD
GUIDED US, WE TOO WOULD HAVE GUIDED YOU. NOW WHETHER WE BE IMPATIENT OR
KEEP QUIET, IS ALIKE; WE HAVE NO WAY TO RESCUE.''

وَقَالَ الشَّيْطَانُ لَمَّا قُضِىَ الاَْمْرُ إِنَّ اللهَ وَعَدَكُمْ
وَعْدَ الْحَقِّ وَوَعَدْتُّكُمْ فَأَخْلَفْتُكُمْ وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ
عَلَيْكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَان إِلاَّ أَنْ دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي
فَلاَ تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ مَّا أَنَا بِمُصْرِخِكُمْ وَمَا
أَنْتُمْ بِمُصْرِخِىَّ إِنِّي كَفَرْتُ بِمَا أَشْرَكْتُمُونِ مِنْ قَبْلُ
إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ (( 22 ))

22- WHEN THE MATTER IS JUDGED, (AND THE DECREE IS ISSUED) SATAN WILL
SAY:ِ \`\`ALLAH PROMISED YOU A PROMISE OF TRUTH AND I PROMISED YOU TOO,
BUT I FAILED YOU MY PROMISE; AND I HAD NO AUTHORITY (POWER) OVER YOU. I
ONLY CALLED YOU AND YOU ANSWERED ME. SO DO NOT BLAME ME, AND BLAME
YOURSELVES. I AM NOT YOUR RESCUER AND NEITHER YOU ARE MY RESCUER. I HAVE
DISBELIEVED IN YOUR ASSOCIATING ME WITH ALLAH FROM BEFORE.'' VERILY FOR
THE OPPRESSORS THERE IS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

وَأُدْخِلَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جَنَّات تَجْرِي
مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِمْ
تَحِيَّتُهُمْ فِيهَا سَلاَمٌ (( 23 ))

[ 371 ]

23- AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS WILL BE ADMITTED TO
GARDENS (OF BLISS) BENEATH WHICH STREAMS FLOW; THEREIN THEY DWELL WITH
THE PERMISSION OF THEIR LORD. THEIR SALUTATION IN THERE IS,
\`\`PEACE=SALA"M.''


**THE COMMENTARY
THE FRANK CONVERSE OF SATAN WITH HIS FOLLOWERS (VERSE NO. 21 - 23)**

In the Final Judgement when God's decree is issued, there will be a hot
dispute between the inferiors and superiors, the leaders and the leaded;
and between Satan and his followers:ِ \`\`The weaks will say to the
proud:ِ We were your followers. Can you now avail us anything against
the punishment of Allah?'' These weak inferiors who were misled, and did
not see that every soul is held in pledge of his own deeds; will turn to
their superintendents, like the false priests and evil leaders who
misled them, and ask them to do something to rescue them. But they
receive plain answers that:ِ \`\`If Allah had guided us, we too would
have guided you. Now we are all in the same trouble, and whether we show
patience or not, it is the same, and we all have no way to rescue.''

**SOME POINTS TO CONSIDER**

In relation to the above verse (NO.21) there are some questions to be
answered:ِ

1- \`\`Are we not appearing to Allah here in this world, that the verse
says; they all will appear to Him!?''

[ 372 ]

Most of the commentators have understood it to mean that; in this world
almost all the people do not feel that they are in the presence of
Allah, and He always and every where sees them, as well as their deeds
and sorts of movements, but in the world to come the case is different,
and there, everybody feels the existence of God, and is sure that Allah
observes him and all his movements. Some other commentators have
understood it; to imply the raise out of graves and to stand in the
Supreme Court of Judgement.

2- What is the meaning of the clause:ِ \`\`If Allah had guided us, we
too would have guided you. (VERSE NO.21)'' Most of the commentators say;
the guidance here is that which ends to salvation or deliverance from
eternal damnation.

3- The verse also implies that those who blindly imitate others with
devilish power, and follow them, are fools with lack of disposition whom
Qura"n has called the, \`\`WEAKS''. So the fate of them will eventually
be similar to the fate of their examples or leaders. Then another scene
of the spiritual punishment of the transgressors and the follower of
Satan is brought to light:ِ \`\`When the matter is judged Satan will
say:ِ Allah promised you a promise of truth, and I promised you too, but
I failed you my promise....''

After the Final Judgement, Satan will show his real face to his
followers who relied on the power of evil and mischief. He frankly says
to them:ِ \`\`It was your own fault that you trusted me and my promises.
I had no power to force you. I just invited you and you answered me and
accepted my invitation. You took me for a god while you knew that I had
already rebelled against the true God who is your Creator and my
Creator! Now you are not to blame me, but have to blame yourselves, and
must carry the consequences of your own deeds:ِ I have disbelieved in
your associating me with Allah from before.''

[ 373 ]

أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللهُ مَثَلا كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً كَشَجَرَة
طَيِّبَة أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاءِ(( 24 ))

24- DO YOU NOT SEE HOW HAS ALLAH STRUCK A SIMILITUDE THAT: A CLEAN GOOD
WORD (LIKE, \`THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT ALLAH') IS LIKE A CLEAN GOOD TREE;
IT'S ROOT IS FIRMLY (STANDING IN THE EARTH) AND ITS BRANCHES ARE IN THE
SKY.

تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِين بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا وَيَضْرِبُ اللهُ
الاَْمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ (( 25 ))

25- IT BRINGS ITS FRUIT ALWAYS WITH THE PERMISSION OF ITS LORD.

AND ALLAH STRIKES THE SIMILITUDES FOR PEOPLE, PERHAPS THEY BECOME
MINDFUL.

وَمَثَلُ كَلِمَة خَبِيثَة كَشَجَرَة خَبِيثَة اجْتُثَّتْ مِنْ فَوْقِ
الاَْرْضِ مَا لَهَا مِنْ قَرَار(( 26 ))

26- AND THE PARABLE OF AN EVIL WORD IS LIKE AN EVIL (CORRUPT) TREE,
UPROOTED FROM THE EARTH HAVING NO STABILITY.

يُثَبِّتُ اللهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الاْخِرَةِ وَيُضِلُّ اللهُ الظَّالِمِينَ وَيَفْعَلُ
اللهُ مَا يَشَاءُ(( 27 ))

27- ALLAH STABILIZES THOSE WHO BELIEVE, WITH STABLE WORD IN THIS
WORLD'S LIFE; AND IN THE HEREAFTER. AND ALLAH LEAVES THE OPPRESSORS TO
STRAY, AND ALLAH DOES WHATEVER HE WILL.

[ 374 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE GOOD, CLEAN TREE AND THE BAD, UNCLEAN TREE (VERSE NO. 24 - 27)**

Here is another stage to illustrate truth and falsehood, belief and
disbelief, clean and unclean, through an expressive and meaningful
parable:ِ \`\`.... A clean good word is like a clean good tree....''
Some commentators understand the, \`\`KALAMATAN TAYYEBAT'' which we have
translated to, \`\`good clean word'', to mean the divine word of truth,
oneness, and purity which is, \`\`LA"-ELAH-ELA-ALLAH=There is no God
except Allah.''

Some other know it to mean, divine word or Message of God. Some think
it to mean the true and sincere believers. Jesus Christ is also called
the word of God by some Muslim scholars. In this parable, a word of
truth and goodness which comes from a true Divine Religion, is like a
goodly tree which is fruitful, and has beauty, pleasure, and stability,
and will not bend or break in the storm, because it has its root firmly
fixed in the earth. And the evil tree in this similitude is one having
the opposite of the above qualifications:ِ

\`\`....Its root is firmly fixed in the earth, and its branches are in
the sky.'' To summarize the qualifications of the said clean good tree,
it may have the following endowments:ِ 1- It is a living thing with
growth and various movements.

2- It is clean in all aspects, with having beauty and giving pleasure
to the observer. Its fruit and flower, its root and branch, are all
clean. Even its shade is clean and attractive for birds, man, and
animal.

3- It has a designed and calculated system. Its various parts like its
roots, branches, blossom, stem, fruit and etc., each have a duty to
perform and they know well what to do.

4- Its root is firmly fixed in the earth so that no wind can bend or
break it. Its branches reach high in the sky to catch the sun's
radiation

[ 375 ]

as much as possible, and to get rid of the dirts that are found upon
the earth.

5- Such a clean good tree is fruitful and produces its abundant fruit
in time, and according to the natural laws, that is in fact God's
permission. An so, and the same, is the word of truth having all the
qualifications mentioned above and much more. So is the word of truth,
be it an apostle, or a truthful believer, or even a word like
(LA"-ELAH-ELLA-ALLAH) or any other Message or commandment of our Lord.

Also the opposite to the word of truth, and to the clean good tree, has
been referred to in the above parable and verses. The resemblance of the
contrast and contradiction of the two kinds of tree and words, can be
followed out in all the above mentioned details.

أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللهِ كُفْراً
وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ(( 28 ))

28- DO YOU NOT LOOK AT THOSE WHO REPLACED ALLAH'S BOUNTY WITH
BLASPHEMY, AND DROVE THEIR PEOPLE INTO THE HOUSE OF PERDITION.

جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ(( 29 ))

29- THE HELL WHICH THEY JOIN IT, AND SO BAD A REPOSE.

وَجَعَلُوا للهِِ أَندَاداً لِّيُضِلُّوا عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ قُلْ تَمَتَّعُوا
فَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَى النَّارِ(( 30 ))

30- AND THEY SET UP COMPEERS (EQUALS) TO ALLAH, TO MISLEAD (PEOPLE)
FROM HIS WAY. SAY:ِ \`\`ENJOY YOURSELVES. THAT YOUR DESTINATION IS
TOWARDS THE FIRE.''

[ 376 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF INGRATITUDE (VERSE NO. 28 - 30)**

Here an instance of the said evil tree is mentioned in a figurative
language:ِ \`\`Those who change the bounty with blasphemy and
ingratitude, and lead their people into the house of perdition....''
They are the evil heads of unbelief, and the leaders of polytheism, who
scatter people from around the prophet and bar them from the way of God.
They eventually take their followers with themselves into the house of
perdition which is in the Hell. An instance of this happened in the very
beginning of Islamic era, when the Omayids by various plans and plots,
conspiracies and coup d' إtats; replaced the truthful Divine Leaders of
Islam, like HAZRAT ALI, and HAZRAT IMAM HUSSAIN, with Devils like
Moaviyeh and Yazid! The worst of their ingratitude was in their setting
up compeers and equals to Allah, and replacing the most important of
bounties which is Monotheism, with blasphemy and polytheism. So they
joined their deserved destiny which is the house of perdition.

Worthy of note here; being thankful is not only to repeat saying,
\`\`thank you''. The misuse of a bounty is the worst of ingratitudes
with regards to it. A manifest ingratitude and blasphemy of human being
in our age, is their misuse of all the natural, industrial, and
scientific power that man has earned through ages of strive and
investigations, in the corners of unequipped laboratories and dark study
rooms. Instead of using all the wonderful inventions, discoveries, and
knowledge for the welfare and prosperity of mankind, they have used it
in the battle fields and for destructive purposes, and so they have led
mankind to the houses of perdition, ruin, and utter loss. Consider what
was the results and consequences of the first and the second world war
for mankind. See how much of man's lives, capitals, resources, and
powers was destroyed in such calamities, and destructive way of
Satan:ِ

[ 377 ]

\`\`Do you not look at those who replaced Allah's bounty with
blasphemy, and drove their people into house of perdition.''

قُلْ لِّعِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يُقِيمُوا الصَّلاَةَ وَيُنفِقُوا
مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ سِرّاً وَعَلاَنِيَةً مِّنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِىَ
يَوْمٌ لاَّ بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلاَ خِلاَلٌ (( 31 ))

31- SAY TO MY SERVANTS WHO HAVE BELIEVED, TO PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND
GIVE ALMS OF OUR SUSTENANCE THAT WE HAVE GIVEN THEM, IN PRIVATE AND
PUBLIC; BEFORE A DAY COMES IN WHICH THERE IS NEITHER BARGAIN NOR
FRIENDSHIP.

اللهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ
السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنْ الثَّمَرَاتِ رِزْقاً لَّكُمْ
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمْ الْفُلْكَ لِتَجْرِىَ فِي الْبَحْرِ بِأَمْرِهِ وَسَخَّرَ
لَكُمُ الاَْنهَارَ(( 32 ))

وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ دَائِبَيْنِ وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ
اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ(( 33 ))

33- AND HE SUBJECTED TO YOU THE SUN AND THE MOON, PURSUING THEIR
COURSES STEADFASTLY, AND SUBJECTED TO YOU THE NIGHT AND DAY.

وَآتَاكُمْ مِّنْ كُلِّ مَا سَأَلْتُمُوهُ وَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ
اللهِ لاَ تُحْصُوهَا إِنَّ الاِْنسَانَ لَظَلُومٌ كَفَّارٌ(( 34 ))

[ 378 ]

34- AND HE GAVE YOU OF ALL THAT YOU ASKED HIM. AND IF YOU COUNT ALLAH'S
BOUNTY, YOU CANNOT NUMBER IT. INDEED MAN IS OPPRESSIVE, UNGRATEFUL.


