Al-hijr (hijr Was an Inhabited Town)
====================================

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الر تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ وَقُرْآن مُّبِين (( 1 ))

1- A.L.R. THESE ARE THE VERSES OF THE BOOK, AND THE (SIGNS) OF THE
PERSPICUOUS QURA"N. (READING)

رُّبَمَا يَوَدُّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْ كَانُوا مُسْلِمِينَ (( 2 ))

2- MANY A TIME THE UNBELIEVERS WILL WISH TO HAVE BEEN MUSLIMS.

ذَرْهُمْ يَأْكُلُوا وَيَتَمَتَّعُوا وَيُلْهِهِمْ الاَْمَلُ فَسَوْفَ
يَعْلَمُونَ(( 3 ))

3- LET THEM EAT AND ENJOY THEMSELVES, AND VAIN DESIRES KEEP THEM
UNAWARE, AND SOON THEY SHALL COME TO KNOW. (THE RESULTS)

وَمَا أَهْلَكْنَا مِنْ قَرْيَة إِلاَّ وَلَهَا كِتَابٌ مَّعْلُومٌ(( 4
))

4- AND WE NEVER DESTROYED A TOWN, EXCEPT THERE WAS A KNOWN BOOK,
(RECORD) FOR IT.

[ 396 ]

مَّا تَسْبِقُ مِنْ أُمَّة أَجَلَهَا وَمَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ (( 5 ))

5- NO NATION CAN EXPEDITE ITS TERM, NOR DELAY IT.

**THE COMMENTARY
VAIN DESIRES (VERSE NO. 1 - 5)**

Here it begins with a reference to the Book which is the Glorious
Qura"n.... a reading which is qualified by the adjective, \`\`MOBINE''
The Arabic, \`\`MOBINE'' which is translated to perspicuous, means;
plain to understanding, and expressing things clearly, or it may mean
that the Book is not obscure or ambiguous. The next verse (NO.2)
contains a warning for the stubborn opposers of Mohammad's doctrine or
Islam, who are determined not to give way for being obstinate as a
mule:ِ \`\`Many a time the unbelievers will wish to have been
Muslim.''

In other word those who stick fast to falsehood, and deliberately break
God's Law, sooner or later will know what a great mistake have they
done! When they see the consequences of rejecting Islam and faith; again
and again they will wish to have submitted to their Lord and obeyed His
Messengers. But they have no power to return, and no chance to repent.
Then with a pounding tone the verses are continued saying:ِ \`\`Let them
eat and enjoy, and let their vain desires keep them asleep and unaware,
and soon they will know the result.''

Disbelievers foolishly rely upon the physical pleasures, and bodily
needs and enjoyments, just as the cattle do! They are not aware of the
limitless spiritual bounties and happiness, that may await them in the
invisible worlds. Negligence and ignorance has covered their eyes, so
much, that they are no better than a blind in seeing their position.
Vanity and pride has filled their hearts and locked their minds! But
when death comes to them; it slaps them so hard on the face, that opens
their eyes widely. Then they come to know how far have they gone astray,
and how rudely have they spoiled the most

[ 397 ]

valuable capital of their life! They do eventually come to know; when
they cannot help! They will know the medicine when their patient has
died! In fact, every individual, as well as every nation, will have an
end after a certain term during which they have time to set the
foundations of an eternal happiness for themselves, and perhaps for some
others. But when their time is over, and their term is passed; they
shall have no more opportunity either for repentance or compensation.

**VAIN DESIRES ARE CAUSES OF NEGLIGENCE**

Hope and desires are power of movement for the wheels of life. If hope
and desire die in Man's heart only for a single day, all the wheels of
life will stop spinning. The order of being shall be deranged, and no
one finds any reason for his work and endeavour. Hope is among the
greatests of God's Mercy and Grace. Without hope and desire no mother
would suckle her baby, and no farmer would sow a seed. But when hope and
desire go to extreme; it causes calamity and misfortune. Hope is like
rain, if the sky abstain from raining, it will cause famine and
scarcity. If it rain in excess, it will ruin and demolish. Hazrat Imam
Ali (AS) has said:ِ \`\`My greatest fear for you Muslims, is to follow
your caprices and to have vain desires.''

وَقَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِي نُزِّلَ عَلَيْهِ الذِّكْرُ إِنَّكَ
لَمَجْنُونٌ (( 6 ))

6- AND THEY SAID; O, YOU TO WHOM THE REMINDER (QURA"N) HAS BEEN SENT
DOWN! YOU ARE MAD.

لَّوْ مَا تَأْتِينَا بِالْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنْ الصَّادِقِينَ ((
7 ))

7- WHY DON'T YOU BRING TO US THE ANGELS IF YOU ARE OF THE TRUTHFULS?

[ 398 ]

مَا نُنَزِّلُ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ وَمَا كَانُوا إِذاً
مُنْظَرِينَ (( 8 ))

8- (LET THEM KNOW THAT) WE DO NOT SEND DOWN THE ANGELS EXCEPT BY TRUTH,
AND THEN THEY WOULD NOT BE RESPITED.

**THE COMMENTARY
REQUEST FOR SEEING ANGELS (VERSE NO. 6 - 8)**

The first of the above verses implies how stubborn and shameless the
enemies of Mohammad (AS) were! In a taunting language and scornful
remarks they addressed the Messenger of God, O,YOU WHO! and accused him
of being mad and possessed, saying:ِ

\`\`O, you to whom the Qura"n has been sent down, you are mad!'' when
those who have a little wisdom confront with a man of great wisdom, they
call him mad because their criterion for measuring an extensive
knowledge is only their own little wisdom. So the pagan Arabs accused
our prophet of madness and magic, and being possessed by Jinns and
supernatural spirits; because he seriously spoke of a higher moral and
spiritual things, that they could not apprehend. The seculars and
materialists measure everything with material units and standards, and
cannot believe that some one might ignore all his material interests and
profits, and give his life and everything to sacrifice, for the sake of
a moral or spiritual goal!! But, contrary to his opposition, our prophet
had a wonderfully deep faith in his own truthfulness, and mission.

When his enemies offered to give him the greatest of ranks and wealth
that could be possible among the Arabs, and also to marry him with the
most beautiful girls that could be found there, in order to leave them
with their idols and idolatries; Mohammad (AS) said to them:ِ

[ 399 ]

\`\`If you set the sun upon my right shoulder, and the moon upon my
left, I will not stop pursuing my aim and message even for a while!''
Every now and then the pagans invented a new pretext for not accepting
the prophet's call, such as asking to see the angels and requesting for
ridiculous miracles:ِ \`\`Why don't you then bring to us the angels if
you are truthful?'' They did say why does he not bring down an angel to
them but in fact they neither believed in the angels nor even in God,
and just they made flimsy excuses, and nothing else!

And after all; angels are not play toys, to be sent to satisfy the
fancies of Man. They come, when they are sent, to execute God's decrees,
or else, in certain duties like, punishing, rewarding, taking lives, or
guiding through inspiration. Therefore when they come to an unbeliever,
they do not come with gladِtidings! The people of Lot, dwelt in the
Sodom and Gommorah, saw the angels in this world, when they had come to
overthrow their towns and take their souls. (S11:81) Mary the virgin
too, saw the angel of God in the form of a man, who gave her the good
news of having Jesus Christ.

إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ(( 9 ))

9- IT IS WE WHO HAVE SENT DOWN THE REMINDER (QURA"N) AND WE ARE ITS
PROTECTOR.

**THE COMMENTARY
ALLAH WILL PROTECT QURA"N OF ALL EMBEZZLEMENTS (VERSE NO. 9)**

Allah has promised to prevent and render ineffective any act of
sabotage, destruction, alteration and change in His Book. This promise
which is for the confidence of His Messenger and the assurance of
Muslims, is:ِ \`\`It is We Who have sent down the Qura"n, and We are its
protectore.'' Therefore the sacred book of Muslims, which is called
Qura"n,

[ 400 ]

(THE READING) is not left unsupported or without a guard, that one may
cover its body with mud; or blow out its beam and flame easily. The Book
is similar to a sun that will never set. The eternal care of God will
protect his own Book through all ages. This promise of protection has
proved to be true, in the past 15 centuries. Unbelievers have always
attacked the Glorious Qura"n in different conditions, and with various
means and weapons. They have done their best to corrupt or to undervalue
it, or to negate or reduce its effect, but have always failed. As to the
meaning of protection in this verse, there has been various views:ِ

1ِSome have taken the protection of God to mean against alterations and
tampering with the Book; adding or omitting in the passages, which was
done with the Bible.

2ِSome other commentators have said; God's protection is against
opposition's misleading reasonings and logics. But all the above
suggestions and views may apply as well and equally.

Therefore all the Muslim commentators, scholars and doctors of the Law
were, and are, of opinion that, not the least alteration, or perversion
has ever been done in this Holy Book, after it has been revealed to our
prophet; and that, the Book which is now in our hands is exactly the
same as that which was in the hands of our prophet and his disciples.
That heavy thing which our prophet frequently said:ِ \`\`I leave among
you two heavy things; the Book of Allah, and my nearest kins.''

All the great commentators and theologians of Islam, such as SHAIKH
TOOSI, SAYYED MORTAZA", IBN BABUYEH, TABARSI, KA"SHIF-AL-GHETA", and
MOHAGHIGH YAZDI, have laid a great stress upon the matter that there has
been no change at all in the Holy Qura"n; and each have their own
reasoning for that. Even those few persons who have thought of some
change in the book they talk of some verses to have been omitted or
lost, and think of no change or perversion to have occured. Many books
have been written during the past fifteen centuries, with accepted
reasons proving that the present Qura"n is exactly the

[ 401 ]

same thing that our prophet left behind. In many important museums,
throughout the world, there are many manuscripts of Qura"n, which are
written in the first and second centuries of Islam, and there also
exists Qura"n written by Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) and other saints that are
exactly the same as the present Book.

وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فِي شِيَعِ الاَْوَّلِينَ (( 10 ))

10- AND WE ALSO HAVE SENT MESSENGERS BEFORE YOU AMONG THE PRIMEVAL
SECTS.

وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِّنْ رَسُول إِلاَّ كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ(( 11
))

11- AND NO MESSENGER CAME TO THEM, EXCEPT THAT THEY MOCKED AT HIM.

كَذَلِكَ نَسْلُكُهُ فِي قُلُوبِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ(( 12 ))

12- SO DO WE DRIVE IT (BY AND BY) INTO THE HEARTS OF THE SINNERS.

لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَقَدْ خَلَتْ سُنَّةُ الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 13 ))

13- (AND YET) THEY DO NOT BELIEVE IT, AND SO WAS THE METHODICAL WAY OF
THE PRIMEVALS.

وَلَوْ فَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ بَاباً مِّنَ السَّمَاءِ فَظَلُّوا فِيهِ
يَعْرُجُونَ (( 14 ))

14- AND IF WE OPEN ON THEM A DOOR OF THE SKY SO AS TO ASCEND THROUGH IT
FREQUENTLY.

لَقَالُوا إِنَّمَا سُكِّرَتْ أَبْصَارُنَا بَلْ نَحْنُ قَوْمٌ
مَّسْحُورُونَ (( 15 ))

15- THEY WILL SAY; OUR EYES HAVE BEEN JUGGLED, AND WE ARE A PEOPLE
BEWITCHED.

[ 402 ]


**THE COMMENTARY

OBSTINACY AND DENIAL OF SENSIBLES (VERSE NO. 10 - 15)**

This is to give consolation to the Messenger of God and his followers,
that before them too, God had sent Messengers among the primeval sects,
but they were so obstinate and ignorant that they rejected the apostles,
and denied what was clear and perceptible. They even ridiculed and
mocked at the prophets, so as to ruin their prestige and render their
influence ineffective.

When they found themselves so weak in knowledge and wisdom, that could
not respond and react correctly to the call and action of the
Messengers; they resorted to mockery and ridiculous accusations. They
could throw dust on the eyes of the common people and lay man, because
the prophets lived in poverty, and wore old and patched, though very
clean, clothes, while they themselves came out in splendour and glory.
They wore magnificent clothes and rode beautiful Arabic horses for show,
with slaves and servants in their left and right. They were so plunged
in the luxuries and passions, that insisted upon their false and
superstitious ideas against the truth that had come to them from their
Merciful Lord. In fact, they had destroyed their ship of return and
repentance behind themselves, for believing not in God.

The Arabic, \`\`SHIAYA"N'' is the plural of SHE-AT which is translated
here to, sects. It implies a class, a kind, or a group, of people having
a common line of leadership or a distinctive doctrine. In the religion
it may mean a follower or a party dissenting from a parent church. It
may also mean a religious division. A sect of Islam call themselves the
\`\`SHIITES'', who believe Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) and eleven of his
progenies in a direct line, are the real and truthful successors of our
prophet. The primeval sects were organized bodies who acted against
their prophets:ِ \`\`They do not believe and so was the methodical way
of the primevals.''

[ 403 ]

The unbelievers continued with their falsehood and superstitions, in
such an obstinate and determined way, inspite of all the clear signs
brought to them; that even if Allah would open a gateway for them to
ascend through the skies, they would think that the truth was an
illusion, and the reality is mere craft and sorcery. They would
therefore say; In our way up to the skies you covered our eyes! And if
they make sure that they have really been raised up, they would consider
it a sorcery and magic, and will say you have bewitched our whole
self!

وَلَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا فِي السَّمَاءِ بُرُوجاً وَزَيَّنَّاهَا
لِلنَّاظِرِينَ (( 16 ))

16- AND VERILY WE HAVE SET THE (12) CONSTELLATIONS OF ZODIAC IN THE
SKY, AND ADORNED IT FOR THE BEHOLDERS.

وَحَفِظْنَاهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْطَان رَّجِيم (( 17 ))

17- AND WE HAVE GUARDED THEM FROM ALL ACCURSED SATANS.

إِلاَّ مَنِ اسْتَرَقَ السَّمْعَ فَأَتْبَعَهُ شِهَابٌ مُبِينٌ(( 18 ))

18- EXCEPT HE WHO LISTENED SECRETLY (EAVES DROPPED) THEN PURSUED HIM A
CLEAR SHOOTING-STAR.


**THE COMMENTARY
DEVILS ARE DRIVEN AWAY BY SHOOTINGِSTARS (VERSE NO. 16 - 18)**

In the first verse, reference is made to the apparent constellation
which is a spot on the face of heavens, to give us some account of how
great the universe is; and how greater is the Creator and designer of

[ 404 ]

the billions of million celestial bodies that exist. The Arabic,
\`\`BORJ'' literally means appearance and tower; and the towers of the
sky is a technical term which refers to the 12 constellations of the
path of sun which is called the, \`\`ZODIAC'':ِ (for more information
about the ZODIAC please refer to the translator's note at the end of
this article) \`\`And verily We have set the 12 constellations of Zodiac
in the sky, and adorned it for those who behold.'' In a dark night, have
a look at the sky and see the beautiful twinkling stars that are
scattered in groups, and constellations and configurations, united in
one luster throughout the sky overhead. The configurations of stars are
so arrayed and arranged that one like the great mystic, ATTAR NISHA"BURI
may think they have held a meeting, and are staring at us and whispering
to each other! Just like the Sufis in robe, calm and quiet they are
wandering day and night in search of their own Creator. Some of them
seem to be inviting us to themselves, and some others are so shining
that we may think they are coming toward us. Some of them also dimly cry
from the depth of the heavens, as if they want to say; \`\`O, Man we are
here!''

This attractive and poetical scenery that may seem something ordinary
and natural in the sight of some people due to repetition of view, is
far more fascinating and bewitching that one may think of! In times when
the moon appears among them with all its beauty and glory, it gives new
aspect to the view. After the sun-set they begin to appear one after the
other, as if they come on the stage from behind a curtain, and finally
they conceal themselves at the sun rise. The face and feature of the sky
is so beautified that for centuries it has attracted the eye and
attention of Man, specially the learned man of wisdom and knowledge! The
next verse points to God's care for the sky:ِ \`\`And We have guarded
them against all accursed Satans, except those who eavesdropped, then
pursued him a clear shootingِstar!''

[ 405 ]

**HOW THE DEVILS ARE WARDED OFF?**

The last verse is one of those about which the commentators have
discussed a lot:ِ 1ِ Some of them like author of, \`\`Al-ZALA"L'' have
by-passed it saying; We cannot apprehend the meaning of the verse now.
So they have abstained from commenting it, and say; What is Satan? How
does he want to eavesdrop? And what does he want to listen to it
secretly? All these are among the Divine Unseen and applying to it will
come to no result; and will only occupy our mind and thought in vain!
But we are of opinion that Qura"n is a Book, revealed to develop man
spiritually as well as physically. Therefore, nothing is written in this
Book which is not related some how to Man's life and fate. So taking
such positions in relation to Qura"n is not right.

2ِ Some of the commentators of Qura"n, specially the pristine writers,
have taken the apparent literal denotation of the words as true. To them
the sky here is the high blue ceiling which is held overhead the globe,
and by SHAHA"B the real shootingِstar is meant, which is a transient
celestial body that enters the earth's atmosphere with great velocity,
incandescent with heat generated by the resistance and friction of the
air. And also Satan is the famous accursed Jinn who is Man's avowed
enemy, willing to eavesdrop, or stand under the eaves to listen to
whispers or talks to misuse them.

Science has already proved that, all the speeches and conversations of
man may go up through sound waves at the upper sections of the
atmosphere. So is the case with the light waves or photons, which take
with them all the actions and features of man and animal, and all.
Therefore, if an intelligent living creature could go up having the
necessary equipments or faculties, he would be able to hear and see, or
in other word, to detect what men over the earth say or do! But the task
is not so easy and the eavesdropper is unfortunate for being encountered
with great showers of meteors that turn into shootingِstars when they
enter the upper layers of the earth's atmosphere. (More about the
METEORS, we have written in V.3ِP.124ِ126)

To explain the verse allegorically; the characters are taken as

[ 406 ]

symbols. Then the sky might be the spiritual heavens wherein the angels
live, and the shootingِstars are the truthful believers like the
prophet's companions. Then the evil-doers and the followers of Satan try
to make mischief and cause disorder and confusion in the spiritual
matters, but the godly men like the shootingِstars rush upon them, their
weapons being logic and reason, and render their efforts ineffective.

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE ZODIAC**

Like the other celestial bodies in the heavens, the sun seems to be
moving constantly and besides its daily rise and set it also seems to be
changing its position with respect to other stars. This is because our
earth moves around the sun at a speed of 18 miles a second in an
elliptical path, and it takes about a year to complete its journey.
Since we are not conscious of the fact that the earth is moving around
the sun, the sun seems rather to us to be moving around the sky to the
east little by little each day. So in the course of one year, the sun
completes its eastern circuit, and the stars that becomes visible in
this way are always changing because of the sun's steady eastward
motion. This apparent path of the sun is a great circle of the celestial
sphere, which is divided into 360 degrees. Since our year is about 365
days long, the sun appears to move toward the east approximately one
degree a day. The yearly path of the sun around the heaven is known as
the, \`\`ECLIPTIC.'' Inclined at an angle of 23(( ))1(( ))2(( )) degrees
to the celestial equator, the ecliptic crosses it at two points 180
degrees apart. At these two points where the ecliptic and equator meet,
our day is equal to our night in length.

The ecliptic is the central line of a band of 16 degrees in width in
the heavens, and it is known as ZODIAC. It is divided into twelve parts
or signs of 30 degrees each. They are named as follows:ِ

[ 407 ]

1ِRam 2ِBull 3ِTwins 4ِCrab 5ِLion 6ِVirgin 7ِScale 8ِScorpion 9ِArcher
10ِGoat 11ِWaterCarrier 12ِFish It will be noted that the eleven of the
twelve names we have just given, refers to members of the animal
kingdom; and hence the name ZODIAC which means in Greek, \`\`the circle
of animals.''


**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

وَالاَْرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِىَ وَأَنْبَتْنَا
فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْء مَّوْزُون(( 19 )) 19- AND THE EARTH, WE SPREAD
IT OUT, AND SET IN IT IMMOVABLES (FIRM MOUNTAINS) AND WE PRODUCED IN IT
OF EVERYTHING WELLِPROPORTIONED. وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ
وَمَنْ لَّسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ (( 20 ))

20- AND WE SET IN IT LIVELIHOOD FOR YOU AND FOR THOSE WHOM YOU SUSTAIN
NOT. وَإِنْ مِّنْ شَيْء إِلاَّ عِنْدَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ
إِلاَّ بِقَدَر مَّعْلُوم(( 21 ))

21- AND THERE IS NOTHING EXCEPT ITS TREASURES (BULK STORES) IS WITH US,
AND WE SENT IT NOT DOWN EXCEPT IN KNOWN (APPROPRIATE) MEASURE.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE TREASURES OF EVERYTHING IS WITH ALLAH (VERSE NO. 19 - 21)**

Some of the wonderful signs of creation is pointed to here:ِ \`\`We
spread out the earth and set the immovables in it.'' In this verse the
earth is said to have been spread out perhaps,

[ 408 ]

like a carpet. This probably alludes to its coming out of the waters
gradually:ِ \`\`We set in the earth firm mountains, and produced in it
of everything well proportioned (WELL MEASURED).'' The Arabic, RAVA"SI
literally means immovable, the other shades of which are firmly fixed,
stationary, steadfast, and all these shades of meanings are the
qualifications of the mountains, that are set or planted in the earth to
keep it steady against viberations. Our globe has various motions like
its revolution in the orbit around the sun, or its rotation on its axis,
and its movement with the solar system through the space. Therefore, the
mountains which are heavy and fixed firmly in the earth act as weights
and nails to keep everything steady. They resist interviberations of the
earth, and stand firm against powerful winds and storms.

\*\*\*\*\*

**MORE ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF MOUNTAINS**

(Mountains are important and useful almost in all features of human
life. They have, and they had great military significance. As an
example, the Alps long protected the Roman Empire from invaders to the
north, and during the world war one and two, the same mountains helped
to isolate Switzerland from the conflict that engulfed the rest of
Europe. The economic importance of the mountains is manifold. Their
forests provide most of the wood uses in lumber, paper, and other
products. Mountain streams provide much of the water power that
generates electricity. Mountains are the greatest source of minerals
such as gold, tin, copper, and lead, because the formation of mineral
deposites is related to mountain building.

High mountain ranges influence the circulation of the atmosphere, so
that cool air may be trapped on one side, and warm air on the other.
This is especially true of the HIMALAYA which prevents

[ 409 ]

cool northern winds from reaching India.

Because the average temperature decreases about 1³F for every 300Ft,
increase in elevation, mountainous area are generally cooler than
adjacent low lands. For this reason, along with their great natural
beauty, and their seclusion, mountains are important for recreation.


**QUOTED FROM INTERNATIONAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

To return back to our commentary, the verse (NO.19) ends in :ِ \`\`....
And We produced in the earth of everything well-proportioned.'' What a
nice and appropriate qualification for the word; EVERYTHING. As the
means of life and livelihood is not limited to vegetables and minerals,
use is made of the common noun, \`\`SUSTENANCE''. It might be something
physical like food and clothes, or mental, such as belief, confidence
and tranquillity, or spiritual, like knowledge, wisdom, love and various
faculties and power. Allah provides sustenance not only for man, but for
other moving creatures that man does not know them.

[ 410 ]

وَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ فَأَنْزَلْنَا مِنْ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً
فَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمُوهُ وَمَا أَنْتُمْ لَهُ بِخَازِنِينَ(( 22 ))

22- AND WE SENT THE WINDS FERTILIZING (THE CLOUDS) THEN WE SENT DOWN
FROM THE SKY WATER. THEN WE GAVE IT TO YOU TO DRINK, AND YOU ARE NOT ITS
TREASURER.

وَإِنَّا لَنَحْنُ نُحْىِ وَنُمِيتُ وَنَحْنُ الْوَارِثُونَ(( 23 ))

23- AND IT IS WE, WHO GIVE LIFE AND MAKE TO DIE; AND WE ARE THE
INHERITORS.

وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا الْمُسْتَقْدِمِينَ مِنْكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْنَا
الْمُسْتَأْخِرِينَ (( 24 ))

24- AND VERILY WE HAVE KNOWN YOUR PREDECESSORS, AND WE KNOW THOSE WHO
COME AFTER.

وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ إِنَّهُ حَكِيمٌ عَلِيمٌ(( 25 ))

25- AND THAT, YOUR LORD WILL GATHER THEM TOGETHER; AND HE IS ALL-WISE,
ALL-KNOWING.


