The Role of Wind and Rain (verse No. 22 - 25)
=============================================

Following the argument about the secrets of the creation manifested
through the heavens and the earth, Zodiac, and the stars, mountains and
minerals, vegetables and plants, livelihood and sustenance, and life and
death; here mention is made of the role of the Wind and Rain in the
nature:ِ \`\`And We sent the winds fertilizing the clouds, then we sent
down water from the sky.'' The Arabic, \`\`LAWA"QIH'' is the plural of,
\`\`LEGHAH'' which means to

[ 411 ]

impregnate, by infusing active principles into something else to render
it fruitful and fertile. The wind performs this task for many plants and
uni-sexual trees like the dateِpalm. Here in this verse, in a beautiful
metaphor the wind's fertilizing quality has been applied to its relation
with the clouds, that they become pregnant with water, in order to
produce all kinds of fruits, cereals, and vegetables. As to the phrase,
\`\`YOU ARE NOT ITS TREASURE may mean, you have no control over the
original sources of the rain, such as the formation of the clouds, and
fecundating them with water, or even distributing the showers over the
wide surfaces of the earth in time and in measure.

Then the argument goes to life and death which is a prelude to
Resurrection Day, and that, the real cause of our existence and our life
and death, is nothing and no one, but Allah the All-mighty, All-knowing,
Creator. The ending of the verse alludes to the fact that, God is the
real inheritor of every one and everything:ِ \`\`To Allah belongs the
heritage of the heavens and the earth and he knows whatever you do.'' S
3:180 All that we own here are ours in trust only, and finally they
revert to Allah to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and in the
earth. Death and life is a proof that the creatures of this world, have
nothing of themselves, and they owe whatever they have to Allah their
Creator.

وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الاِْنْسَانَ مِنْ صَلْصَال مِنْ حَمَإ مَّسْنُون(( 26
))

26- AND VERILY WE HAVE CREATED MAN OF A CLAY OF SLIME.

وَالْجَانَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِنْ قَبْلُ مِنْ نَّارِ السَّمُومِ(( 27 ))

27- AND THE JINN, WE CREATED HIM BEFORE (MAN) FROM A HOT FIRE.

[ 412 ]

وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقُ بَشَراً مِّنْ
صَلْصَال مِّنْ حَمَإ مَّسْنُون(( 28 ))

28- AND WHEN YOUR LORD SAID TO THE ANGELS:ِ I AM GOING TO CREATE A MAN
OF A CLAY OF SLIME.

فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُّوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ
سَاجِدِينَ(( 29 ))

29- SO, WHEN I COMPLETED HIM (FINISHED HIS BODY) AND BREATHED IN HIM OF
MY SPIRIT, THEN ALL OF YOU PROSTRATE YOURSELVES FOR HIM.

فَسَجَدَ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ (( 30 ))

30- THEN (WHEN MAN WAS CREATED) THE ANGELS PROSTRATED THEMSELVES, ALL
OF THEM TOGETHER.

إِلاَّ إِبْلِيسَ أَبَى أَنْ يَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ(( 31 ))

31- EXCEPT IBLIS, (SATAN) WHO REFUSED TO BE WITH THOSE WHO
PROSTRATED.

قَالَ يَا إِبْلِيسُ مَا لَكَ أَلاَّ تَكُونَ مَعَ السَّاجِدِينَ (( 32
))

32- HE SAID; O, IBLIS! WHAT WAS WRONG WITH YOU THAT YOU WERE NOT WITH
THOSE WHO PROSTRATED?

قَالَ لَمْ أَكُنْ لاَِّسْجُدَ لِبَشَر خَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ صَلْصَال مِّنْ
حَمَإ مَّسْنُون (( 33 ))

33- HE SAID; I AM NOT GOING TO PROSTRATE FOR A MAN WHOM YOU CREATED OF
A CLAY OF SLIME.

قَالَ فَاخْرُجْ مِنْهَا فَإِنَّكَ رَجِيمٌ (( 34 ))

34- HE SAID; THEN GET OUT OF IT, THAT YOU ARE DISCHARGED.

[ 413 ]

وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكَ اللَّعْنَةَ إِلَى يَوْمِ الدِّينِ(( 35 ))

35- AND THAT THE CURSE SHALL BE ON YOU UP TO THE DAY OF DOOM.

قَالَ رَبِّ فَأَنْظِرْنِي إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ(( 36 ))

36- HE SAID; MY LORD! THEN RESPITE ME UP TO THE RESURRECTION DAY.

قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنْ الْمُنْظَرِينَ(( 37 ))

37- HE SAID; YOU ARE THEN OF THOSE WHO ARE RESPITED.

إِلَى يَوْمِ الْوَقْتِ الْمَعْلُومِ(( 38 ))

38- (NOT UP TO THE RESURRECTION DAY) BUT TILL A DAY AND A KNOWN TIME.

قَالَ رَبِّ بِمَا أَغْوَيْتَنِي لَأُزَيِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ فِي الاَْرْضِ
وَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ (( 39 ))

39- HE SAID; MY LORD! FOR YOUR LEADING ME ASTRAY, I WILL ADORN (EVIL)
FOR THEM IN THE EARTH, AND SEDUCE ALL OF THEM.

إِلاَّ عِبَادَكَ مِنْهُمْ الْمُخْلَصِينَ (( 40 ))

40- EXCEPT THOSE OF YOUR SERVANTS AMONG THEM WHO ARE PURE.

قَالَ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ عَلَىَّ مُسْتَقِيمٌ (( 41 ))

41- HE SAID; THIS IS A DIRECT WAY TO ME.

إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلاَّ مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ
مِنْ الْغَاوِينَ(( 42 ))

[ 414 ]

42- THAT; YOU SHALL HAVE NO POWER OVER MY SERVANTS, EXCEPT HIM WHO
FOLLOWED YOU FROM AMONG THE STRAYS. وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمَوْعِدُهُمْ
أَجْمَعِينَ(( 43 ))

43- AND VERILY HELL IS THE PROMISED ABODE FOR THEM ALL.

لَهَا سَبْعَةُ أَبْوَاب لِكُلِّ بَاب مِّنْهُمْ جُزْءٌ مَّقْسُومٌ(( 44
))

44- FOR IT THERE ARE SEVEN GATES, AND EACH GATE IS FOR A SEPARATE GROUP
OF THEM.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE CREATION OF MAN (VERSE NO. 26 - 44)**

Here the creation of Man is explained with some more detail. \`\`We
created Man of a clay of slime.'' And the Jinns that among whom is the
respited IBLIS or SATAN, were created from a hot fire. God has breathed
of His own spirit in Man, and for that sacred essence, has ordered the
angels to admit Man's superiority and prostrate themselves for him! All
the angels have obeyed the order, except IBLIS who was a Jinn in the
race, but an angel in the rank. He refused to prostrate himself for
thinking that fire is superior to earth, and therefore he to Adam. So
Allah cursed him for his refusal, and deposed him from his rank for his
pride and vanity. When so, IBLIS asked for s respite up to the
Resurrection Day. He was granted the respite, but not for that long
length of time he had asked for. When he was sure that he would not die
so soon, he swore to seduce Man as far as possible.

The Arabic, \`\`SALSA"L'' means clay or dry mud, usually used in
pottery. It is earth in general, as representing the elementary
particles of the human body.

[ 415 ]

We also ought to know that IBLIS or SATAN was in the position of an
angel, though he was a Jinn; due to his long record of service and
worship. (S 18:49) His arrogance and pride puffed him up, and caused him
to rebel and renounce the authority of his Merciful Creator; and so he
lost all his rank and dignity within a couple of hours! This is what
pride will do to any soul, and not only to that of Satan. In Man's
history too, there are many examples, that pride and haughtiness has
ruined down, and collapsed many a man in great power! They drowned their
people in blood and soil, by their arrogance and vain pride; and
themselves too, collapsed with others!

Another point to consider in relation to the above group of verses, is
that; the importance of Man is not for his shape and body, but it is for
the breathing of God's spirit into the body of man. This holy spirit has
given him the superiority over other creatures, even the angels. This
was what IBLIS ignored, or perhaps did not see it at all, and therefore
he arrogantly said to Allah:ِ

\`\`You made man out of clay and me of fire. I am better than him!''
Vanity, pride, and jealousy! Even so, the poor banished Jinn, had no
reason that the fire is nobler and better than the earth; and could not
justify his superiority at all. He asked God for a respite, with the
intention of proving his superiority over man by enmity and fight. To
prove his knowledge is more than that of man through seduction and
deception, fraud and doubleِdealing. The respite that was granted him
was not what he wanted and up to the Resurrection Day. He was only
respited for a period of man's probation upon earth. Even his respite
and all his endeavour will not do what he aims at! This is because
Satanic Temptations have no effect on sincere believers who have put
their trust upon God in purifying themselves from the stains of evil.

Satan arrogantly said to Allah; \`\`Be-ma"-Aghvaitiani=for putting me
in the wrong!'' This was while he was led astray by his own pride,
arrogance, and ignorance; and yet he attributed that calamity to Allah!
On the contrary, Adam and Eve were seduced by Satan who swore to be

[ 416 ]

their well wisher. But they knew that they owned a free-will and a
power of choice. So they attributed their sin to themselves saying:ِ
\`\`Our Lord! We have oppressed ourselves! So if You forgive us not, and
have not your Mercy upon us, we shall indeed be lost.'' (S 7:23)
Therefore, IBLIS was cursed and damned for his pride and disobeying his
Lord, and he was deprived of God's Grace and Mercy; Where Adam and Eve
were forgiven and returned to their former high position.

إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّات وَعُيُون(( 45 ))

45- BUT THOSE WHO ARE PIOUS (WILL BE) IN GARDENS (OF BLISS) AND
FOUNTAINS.

ادْخُلُوهَا بِسَلاَم آمِنِينَ(( 46 ))

46- ENTER IT IN PEACE AND SECURITY.

وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنْ غِلّ إِخْوَاناً عَلَى سُرُر
مُتَقَابِلِينَ(( 47 ))

47- AND WE SHALL REMOVE WHATEVER OF ILL-WILL (SUCH AS HATRED, JEALOUSY,
DEEP-SEATED ENMITY, GRUDGE, AND etc.) IS LEFT IN THEIR CHESTS, SO THAT
THEY RECLINE AS BROTHERS ON COACHES FACE TO FACE.

لاَ يَمَسُّهُمْ فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَمَا هُمْ مِّنْهَا بِمُخْرَجِينَ(( 48
))

48- NO DISCOMFORT WILL TOUCH THEM IN IT, NEITHER SHALL THEY BE DRIVEN
OUT OF THERE.

نَبِّىْء عِبَادِي أَنِّي أَنَا الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 49 ))

49- INFORM MY SERVANTS THAT I AM ALL-FORGIVING COMPASSIONATE.

[ 417 ]

وَأَنَّ عَذَابِي هُوَ الْعَذَابُ الاَْلِيمُ (( 50 ))

50- AND THAT MY PUNISHMENT IS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE MAIN BOUNTIES OF PARADISE (VERSE NO. 45 - 50)**

In the previous verse, Allah has explained the consequences of Satanic
Temptation, and the fate of Satan's followers, and how the seven doors
of the Hell shall be opened to them. Now to observe the principles of
comparison and contrast which are main factors in training and
purifying; the argument goes to PARADISE and the gardens of bliss which
can be entered in through eight different gates. First of all stress is
put on piety and virtue if one is willing to enter the promised abode of
bliss qualified by peace and security.

Then mention is made of other bounties in Paradise. These are more or
less spiritual; that Allah will remove all the rancours and malignity
from the hearts of the inhabitants of Paradise, (NO.47) making them real
and truthful brothers. There in Paradise, no discomfort or trouble will
ever touch them and they abide therein for ever. There will also be no
sense of toil, fatigue, or weariness. In the next verse (NO.49) Allah
says to his prophet:ِ

\`\`Inform my servants that I am All-forgiving, Compassionate.'' God's
Grace and Mercy, always precedes His wrath and punishment. But if we
deliberately reject our Lord's Mercy and Forgiveness, we have then to
accept His justice, and await his painful punishment for our sins and
oppressions, which is hard to endure. We therefore must beware of
defying God's Law; or else, we have to await His Justice.

[ 418 ]

**LET US CONSTRUCT A PARADISE HERE**

The principle bounties of Paradise are the main bounties of this life
here too. It seems that the above verses want to notify that, we too can
make a Paradisiacal life here for ourselves, by observing the principles
valid in the Divine kingdom, which are as follows:ِ If we remove the
hatreds and enmities from our heart; If we support the principles of
brotherhood and friendship among us; If we get rid of extra formalities
which are the causes of disunion and separation among us; If we return
the peace and security to our communities; And if we assure all people
that no one bothers their fame, prestige, personality, and social
positions, as well as their lawful income;

Then we all will find ourselves living in a PARADISE.

وَنَبِّئْهُمْ عَنْ ضَيْفِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ(( 51 ))

51- AND INFORM THEM OF THE GUESTS OF ABRAHAM.

إِذْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ فَقَالُوا سَلاَماً قَالَ إِنَّا مِنْكُمْ
وَجِلُونَ (( 52 ))

52- WHEN THEY ENTERED HIS PRESENCE AND SAID PEACE, (i.e.THEY SALUTED)
HE SAID WE ARE AFRAID OF YOU. (THIS WAS BECAUSE, THEY DID NOT TOUCH THE
FOOD THAT ABRAHAM OFFERED THEM TO EAT!)

قَالُوا لاَ تَوْجَلْ إِنَّا نُبَشِّرُكَ بِغُلاَم عَلِيم(( 53 ))

53- THEY SAID:ِ FEAR NOT. WE (ARE HERE TO) GIVE YOU THE GOOD NEWS OF
HAVING A SON WITH HIGH KNOWLEDGE.

[ 419 ]

قَالَ أَبَشَّرْتُمُونِي عَلَى أَنْ مَّسَّنِيَ الْكِبَرُ فَبِمَ
تُبَشِّرُونَ (( 54 ))

54- HE SAID; DO YOU GIVE ME (SUCH A) GOOD NEWS WHILE OLD AGE HAS
TOUCHED ME! THEN ON WHAT (ACCOUNT) ARE YOU GIVING ME THE GOOD NEWS?

قَالُوا بَشَّرْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ فَلاَ تَكُنْ مِّنَ الْقَانِطِينَ (( 55
))

55- THEY SAID; WE GAVE YOU THE GOOD NEWS IN TRUTH, SO DO NOT BE OF
THOSE WHO HAVE ABANDONED TO DESPAIR.

قَالَ وَمَنْ يَقْنَطُ مِنْ رَّحْمَةِ رَبِّهِ إِلاَّ الضَّالُّونَ(( 56
))

56- HE SAID; AND WHO DESPAIRS OF HIS LORD'S MERCY EXCEPT THE STRAYS!?

قَالَ فَمَا خَطْبُكُمْ أَيُّهَا الْمُرْسَلُونَ(( 57 ))

57- HE SAID; THEN, WHAT IS YOUR COMMISSION O, MESSENGERS?

قَالُوا إِنَّا أُرْسِلْنَا إِلَى قَوْم مُّجْرِمِينَ(( 58 ))

58- THEY SAID; WE ARE SENT TO A GUILTY PEOPLE. (TO DESTROY THEM ALL)

إِلاَّ آلَ لُوط إِنَّا لَمُنَجُّوهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ (( 59 ))

59- EXCEPT THE FOLK OF LOT, WHOM WE SHALL DELIVER ALL.

إِلاَّ امْرَأَتَهُ قَدَّرْنَا إِنَّهَا لَمِنَ الْغَابِرِينَ (( 60 ))

60- EXCEPT HIS WIFE THAT WE HAVE ARRANGED TO BE OF THOSE WHO STAY
BEHIND. (TO PERISH)

[ 420 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE UNACQAINTED GUESTS (VERSE NO. 51 - 60)**

From now on we have a brief reference to an incident of Abraham and his
nephew, Lot, and to some other great apostles, and their mutinous
people:ِ \`\`And inform them of the guests of Abraham, when they came to
him and saluted by saying, \`\`PEACE''.'' His guests were angels in the
guise of men with uncommon appearance. When they refused Abraham's
hospitality, and did not even touch the food that he and his wife
prepared for them, Abraham felt some sort of awe, due to suspicion and
anxiety. This was because, it has always been a custom of the Eastern
People that when some one eats what they call the salt and bread of some
one else, he restrains himself from harming the host for owing fidelity
and observance of duty. So Abraham said to his unknown guests:ِ

\`\`We are afraid of you!''

Soon the angels removed Abraham's awe, by introducing themselves and
giving the prophet a very good news too!

The birth of a son endowed with knowledge and wisdom, in the old age to
a man who has had no children was indeed a wonderful glad-tiding.

So when Abraham revived from a state of suspicions and anxiety, he
asked the angels a question about their mission:ِ

\`\`He said, then, what is your commission o, Messengers?'' They
informed Abraham that, they were sent to destroy the guilty people of
Lot. Meanwhile they assured Abraham that they would deliver the folk of
Lot, except his wife who had to perish among the guilties.

[ 421 ]

فَلَمَّا جَاءَ آلَ لُوط الْمُرْسَلُونَ(( 61 ))

61- THEN WHEN THE MESSENGERS CAME TO THE FOLK OF LOT;

قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ قَوْمٌ مُّنْكَرُونَ (( 62 ))

62- HE SAID; YOU ARE A PEOPLE UNKNOWN! (TO US)

قَالُوا بَلْ جِئْنَاكَ بِمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَمْتَرُونَ(( 63 ))

63- THEY SAID; WE HAVE COME TO YOU WITH WHAT THEY INCLINE NOT TO
BELIEVE; (THEY ARE DOUBTFUL IN IT)

وَأَتَيْنَاكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ (( 64 ))

64- AND WE HAVE COME TO YOU WITH (AN INEVITABLE) TRUTH, AND WE DO SPEAK
TRULY.

فَأَسْرِ بِأَهْلِكَ بِقِطْع مِنْ اللَّيْلِ وَاتَّبِعْ أَدْبَارَهُمْ
وَلاَ يَلْتَفِتْ مِنْكُمْ أَحَدٌ وَامْضُوا حَيْثُ تُؤْمَرُونَ(( 65 ))

65- THEN, DEPART WITH YOUR FOLK IN THE DEAD OF NIGHT, AND YOU GO IN
THEIR REAR; AND LET NONE OF YOU LOOK BACK, AND (ALL OF YOU) GO TO WHERE
YOU ARE COMMANDED.

وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَيْهِ ذَلِكَ الاَْمْرَ أَنَّ دَابِرَ هَؤُلاَءِ مَقْطُوعٌ
مُّصْبِحِينَ (( 66 ))

66- AND WE REVEALED THIS MATTER TO HIM, THAT BY THE MORNING; THE LAST
REMNANT OF THOSE (GUILTY PEOPLE) WOULD BE CUT OFF.

[ 422 ]

وَجَاءَ أَهْلُ الْمَدِينَةِ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ (( 67 ))

67- AND THE TOWNSFOLK CAME TO HIM REJOICING. (AT NEWS OF THE HANDSOME
YOUNG MEN)

قَالَ إِنَّ هَؤُلاَءِ ضَيْفِي فَلاَ تَفْضَحُونِ (( 68 ))

68- HE SAID; THESE ARE MY GUESTS, SO DISGRACE ME NOT.

وَاتَّقُوا اللهَ وَلاَ تُخْزُونِ(( 69 ))

69- AND BEWARE OF ALLAH AND MAKE ME NOT ASHAMED

قَالُوا أَوَلَمْ نَنْهَكَ عَنْ الْعَالَمِينَ(( 70 ))

70- THEY SAID; DID WE NOT FORBID YOU (TO SPEAK ON BEHALF) OF ALL?

قَالَ هَؤُلاَءِ بَنَاتِي إِنْ كُنْتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ(( 71 )) 71- HE SAID;
HERE ARE MY DAUGHTERS IF YOU WOULD BE DOING.

لَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سَكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ (( 72 ))

72- BY YOUR LIFE, THEY ARE IN THEIR INTOXICATION PERPLEXED. (WANDERING
IN THEIR MADNESS)

فَأَخَذَتْهُمْ الصَّيْحَةُ مُشْرِقِينَ(( 73 ))

73- THEN IN THEIR SUNRISE A (DEATHFUL) CRY SEIZED THEM.

فَجَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً
مِّنْ سِجِّيل (( 74 ))

74- WE THEN TURNED ITS HIGHER (PLACES) TO ITS LOWER, AND RAINED ON THEM
STONES OF CLAY.

[ 423 ]

إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِلْمُتَوَسِّمِينَ (( 75 ))

75- VERILY IN THAT (EVENT) THERE ARE SIGNS FOR THE PRUDENTS. (WHO
UNDERSTAND BY HINTS)

وَإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيل مُّقِيم(( 76 ))

76- AND IT IS ON THE ROAD STILL REMAINING. (THE TRACES OF ITS RUINS
STILL EXIST IN THE ROAD)

إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 77 ))

77- VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN FOR THE BELIEVERS.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE FATE OF THE GUILTIES AMONG THE PEOPLE OF LOT (VERSE NO. 61 -
77)**

The argument is still about the guests of Abraham, who left him and
went to the folk of Lot, still in the guise of young handsome men. At
first Lot did not know who the strangers were; so that he said to them;
You are a people unknown to us! (NO.62) They had come to him in the form
of young men. Lot who was aware of the homosexual tendencies of his
townsfolk, feared to entertain them, but he could not help, that they
had already come to him, and the apostle's strictly ethical behaviour
prevented him to repel or reject a guest who had entered his house. The
news of the arrival of the young handsome strangers spread widely in the
town, and inflamed the vicious people. They rushed towards the house of
Lot, rejoicing!

Lot found himself in a real trouble, not knowing how to defend and push
back the Devils who were blinded with mad passion. He therefore started
to entreat them to be gentle and begged them not to disgrace him in the
sight of his guests. His argument with his people reached to such a
deadlock that the poor apostle offered his two daughters in order to
rescue his two guests, but his crazy opponents

[ 424 ]

who were staggering in their intoxication said:ِ \`\`Did we not forbid
you to speak on behalf of all? You know well that we have no interest in
your daughters and you know what do we want!'' Lot had frequently
admonished and warned his people against their unnatural crime. So, they
had notified him to stop criticizing them or speaking on behalf of other
people. Lot found himself indeed helpless, when at once the strangers
introduced themselves, and said to him; \`\`Don't worry, that, we are
the Messengers of your God! We have come to you with what they were in
doubt to happen at all.''

Soon after the angels introduced themselves, God's decree was made
known to Lot that; the destruction of his vicious people was inevitable;
and it would be accomplished before next morning, and that; the last
remnant of them would be cut off. It was also revealed to him that the
believers who followed him, would all be rescued. In this respect his
wife was an exception, who had to perish with those who would stay
behind. Following Allah's inspiration to Lot, the angels said to him:ِ
\`\`Depart with those believers who followed you in the dead of night,
and you walk in their rear, and let none of you look behind; and them
all of you go to where you are commanded to go.''

More detail of the events of that very night can be quoted from the
Bible; GENESISِ19; \`\`Lot went outside and closed the door behind
himself, and begged them not bother his guests. But they said to Lot:ِ
Get out of our way you foreigner! Who are you to tell us what to do.
They then pushed Lot back and moved up to break down the door. But the
two men inside reached out; pulled Lot back into the house and shut the
door. Then they struck all the men outside with blindness, so that they
could not find out their way!'' Then in the next sunrise, a deadful cry
seized them, and their towns were turned upside, down; and a shower of
clay-stone rained on them!

The Arabic, \`\`SAYHAT'' translated to, \`\`deathful cry'' was some
sort of a mighty blast, or a violent wind like effect consisting of a
wave of increased, followed by a wave of decreased, atmospheric pressure
produced by something like a bomb explosion; or as accompanied by a
harsh earthquake, or a high volcanic eruption!

[ 425 ]

And so the two cities of Lot's people, that are known to have been,
Sodom and Gommorah were utterly destroyed. Some traces of the ruins of
the cities remained to teach lessons, and were known at the life of our
prophet (AS) on the highway between Arabia and Syria.

وَإِنْ كَانَ أَصْحَابُ الاَْيْكَةِ لَظَالِمِينَ(( 78 ))

فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمَا لَبِإِمَام مُبِين(( 79 ))

79- THEN WE TOOK VENGEANCE ON THEM, AND BOTH ARE ON THE FRONT WAY
MANIFEST.(EVIDENT)

وَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْحِجْرِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ (( 80 ))

80- AND VERILY THE COMPANIONS OF HIJR BELIED THE MESSENGERS.

وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ آيَاتِنَا فَكَانُوا عَنْهَا مُعْرِضِينَ(( 81 ))

81- AND WE BROUGHT TO THEM OUR SIGNS, BUT THEY TURNED AWAY FROM IT.

وَكَانُوا يَنْحِتُونَ مِنْ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتاً آمِنِينَ(( 82 ))

82- AND THEY WERE HEWING THE MOUNTAINS INTO HOUSES, TO BE SECURE.

فَأَخَذَتْهُمْ الصَّيْحَةُ مُصْبِحِينَ(( 83 ))

283- BUT A (DEATHFUL) CRY SEIZED THEM ABOUT MORNING!

فَمَا أَغْنَى عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ(( 84 ))

84- AND AVAILED THEM NOT WHAT THEY WERE EARNING.

[ 426 ]


