The End of Two Oppressing People (verse No. 78 - 84)
====================================================

Here again the story of two peoples, namely the companions of AIKAT,
and the companions of AL-HIJR has been pointed to. AIKAT means an
uncontrolled bushy forest, overgrown with plants, weeds, lotus and etc.
As to the question; Who were the Companions of AIKAT? No clear answer is
given. But elsewhere in the Qura"n (S 25:176ِ191) it is cited that their
prophet was HAZRAT SHUAIB, and that their major sin was fraud, and
trickery in measure and scale. Therefore, Aikat must have been the name
of an inhabited place in Madian, close to some bushy forest. Its people
lived a wealthy and luxurious life, and so, pride, vanity, and
negligence overtook their minds, and they began to make mischief in the
land. Their great prophet, Shuaib warned them, and admonished them to
repent and return; but they frankly belied Shuaib, and ridiculed his
preaching. Then they incurred the wrath of God upon themselves, by doing
evil deeds, and corrupting the land. When their end came a sudden very
hot weather seized them, and soon after, a dreadful thunderbolt
destroyed them all, as if they had never lived there on the earth!

The second group of people that were destroyed in this narration are
called the companion of HIJR. AL-HIJR, which denotes stone and rocky
tracts, is a geographical name. There is a place called by this name,
(HIJR), some 150 miles north of Medina, in the highway to Syria. This
place is known to be where the companions of Al-Hijr used to live. They
are also called the people of Thamud, and the Messenger sent to them was
named SALIH. They lived in a hilly and mountainous region, hewing the
mountains into houses in order to live therein safe and secure; but when
the wrath of God touched them, their strongholds availed them nothing.

[ 427 ]

وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلاَّ
بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لاَتِيَةٌ فَاصْفَحِ الصَّفْحَ الْجَمِيلَ((
85 ))

85- AND WE CREATED NOT THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, AND WHATEVER IS BETWEEN
THEM, EXCEPT BY TRUTH; (WITH A RIGHT PURPOSE) AND THAT THE HOUR
(RESURRECTION DAY) WILL SURELY COME. THEREFORE, OVERLOOK (THEIR FAULTS)
WITH A NICE PARDONING.

إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْخَلَّقُ الْعَلِيمُ (( 86 ))

86- VERILY YOUR LORD; HE IS THE ALL-KNOWING CREATOR.

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعاً مِنْ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْآنَ الْعَظِيمَ((
87 ))

87- AND VERILY WE HAVE GIVEN YOU, THE SEVEN (VERSES OF THE OPENING
CHAPTER) FOR REITERATION, AND THE GREAT QURA"N.

لاَ تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَى مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجاً
مِّنْهُمْ وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
(( 88 ))

88- DO NOT STRAIN YOUR EYES TO WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN TO SOME COUPLES OF
THEM TO ENJOY. AND GRIEVE NOT OVER THEM, (ON THAT ACCOUNT). AND LOWER
YOUR WING FOR THE BELIEVERS.

وَقُلْ إِنِّي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْمُبِينُ(( 89 ))

89- AND SAY; \`\`I AM A PERSPICUOUS WARNER.''

[ 428 ]

كَمَا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَى الْمُقْتَسِمِينَ(( 90 ))

90- LIKE WHAT WE SENT DOWN UPON THE SCHISMATICS. (THOSE WHO SOUGHT TO
PRODUCE DIVISION IN RELIGION)

الَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْآنَ عِضِينَ(( 91 ))

91- THOSE WHO BROKE QURA"N INTO PIECES. (ACCORDING TO THEIR FANCIES,
BELIEVING IN SOME VERSES AN DISBELIEVING IN SOME OTHER)


**THE COMMENTARY
THE SCHISMATICS (VERSE NO. 85 - 91)**

Once again the argument returns to the Source and Destination, which is
having faith in the Monotheism and Resurrection, and Final Judgement. In
order to prove His oneness, He presents the creation as a reasoned
approach to the matter, because God's plan, justice, and rightful
purpose, can be seen in every creature and in the whole creation:ِ
\`\`And We created not the heavens, and the earth and whatever is
between them, except in truth and with a rightful purpose; and that the
hour of judgement will surely come to pass.''

God's creation, whatever you think it might be, is created for a right
and just purpose. Everything is created as it should have been created,
and in the most proper way. Therefore, no one should think that anything
is wrong in God's creation, or it is without an account, or void of an
aim. There is aim, there is plan, and there is right and justice, in
anything that is created by God; and all of these are proofs that the
Creator of all is one. Another point to note is that the great universe
is not created in vain, or to do for the few days of our short life
here, which is full of troubles, sins, oppressions, and discomfort.
There is an eternal and

[ 429 ]

good time coming in which justice-goodness, and truth will prevail. To
this effect the ending of the verse, (NO.85) bids the prophet to
overlook their faults with kindness and forgiving or bear and forbear
and be sure that there is an appropriate reaction for every action. Some
commentators understand that the above instruction of overlook and
forgiveness, was later on abrogated by the commandment of JIHAD, or the
Sacred Fight for the cause.

Then reference is made to the first chapter of Qura"n, called, the
\`\`OPENING OF THE BOOK''. It consists of seven verses which are
frequently repeated and reiteraited in our Daily Prayers saying:ِ
\`\`And verily We have given you the seven for reiteration and the great
Qura"n. (ITSELF)'' Besides the seven verses for the prayer, there is the
Great Glorious QURA"N itself, which is indeed the greatest gift of God
for Mankind, and specially for Muslims. There are many gifts like;
strength and health, rank and wealth, honor and respect, and etc., but
none of them can be compared in value with the glorious Qura"n, which is
the main source of confidence and tranquility, and the principle cause
of the spiritual peace and consent.

Then the prophet is instructed, not to care for what some of the
worldly minded seculars have earned and enjoy:ِ \`\`Do not strain your
eyes to what We have given to some couples of them to enjoy, nor grieve
on that account.'' Here in this verse the prophet is addressed not to
grieve over certain couples of people who enjoy some of God's bounties,
and who are puffed up with pride and vanity. In the first instance this
instruction was addressed to our prophet, but in fact it applies to all
the believers. It reminds us of the famous proverb:ِ \`\`O, Door! I am
telling you, that the wall may listen.'' The verse NO.88 ends in the
phrase:ِ \`\`Lower your wing for the believers.'' This is a metaphor
from a bird who lower her wing in a tender love for her chickens.

In the verse NO.89, the Arabic, \`\`MOBINE'' that we have translated to
perspicuous, implies both; clearness and clarification, or something
which is not obscure and which is plain to the understanding.

[ 430 ]

فَوَرَبِّكَ لَنَسْأَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 92 ))

92- THEN BY YOUR LORD! WE WILL QUESTION THEM ALL;

عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 93 ))

93- OF WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN DOING.

فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 94 ))

94- SO PROCLAIM WHAT YOU ARE COMMANDED TO; AND TURN AWAY FROM THE
POLYTHEISTS.

إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ(( 95 ))

95- WE WILL SUFFICE YOU FOR THE SCOFFERS.


الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ ((
96 ))

96- THOSE WHO SET UP WITH ALLAH ANOTHER GOD WILL SOON COME TO KNOW.

وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ (( 97 ))

97- AND VERILY WE KNOW THAT YOUR CHEST (HEART) STRAITENS AT WHAT THEY
SAY.

فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُنْ مِّنَ السَّاجِدِينَ (( 98 ))

98- THEN CELEBRATE THE PRAISE OF YOUR LORD, AND BE OF THOSE WHO
PROSTRATE THEMSELVES. (BEFORE ALLAH)

وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّى يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ (( 99 ))

99- AND WORSHIP YOUR LORD UNTIL CERTAINTY COMES TO YOU.


[ 431 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
PROCLAIM YOUR DOCTRINE (VERSE NO. 92 - 99)**

In these ending verses of the chapter, \`\`HIJR'' the immediate
reference is to the schismatics, and those who ridiculed the scriptures
in any form, and divided the Book of Allah into bits. Or those who
believed in parts of the Book, and rejected other parts of it. They all
are promised to be brought to a court of just judgement; and would have
to answer for all that they have done. In a general sense of meaning,
the verse; \`\`Of what they have been doing.'' (NO.93), implies that man
shall be questioned for all his deeds. Then there comes an instruction
for the prophet; not to be slow or sluggish by the uproars of the
infidels, and the clamour of the polytheists and idolaters, that Allah
will suffice him for the scoffers. Even if the whole world could help
one another against the man of God, and scoff at him to despise him;
God's Grace will raise him up, and His protection will overcome every
averse effort. Therefore, the prophet is strictly told to proclaim his
doctrine and Message, and to make known by announcing in public places
the principles of his religion and the whole school of his teaching, and
in the meanwhile fear no one on that account, because Allah is with
him.

And finally the prophet is wanted to celebrate the praise of God and
prostrate himself before him, and continue worshipping Allah until
certainty would come to him.

In other word, it is said to him, worship your Lord throughout your
life time, until you reach your destination which is the certainty
....the hour that is certain for all, and it is the death, which turns
man to another sort of creation or as Qura"n says:ِ \`\`To a new
creation''. Man has the greatest capacity for evolution and development.
He starts from the Zero point of nothingness, and goes towards
infinity;

[ 432 ]

and the wheels of development and evolution, will never stop in his
case! In this respect and goal, the worship of Allah is a great and
useful means to insure his gradual progress.

**THE END OF SUREH AL-HIJR (15)**

[ 433 ]

**سوره نحل
THE BEE**

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

أَتَى أَمْرُ اللهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا
يُشْرِكُونَ(( 1 ))

1- ALLAH'S COMMAND HAS (ALREADY) COME; SO NOT SEEK TO HASTEN IT. GLORY
TO HIM AND FAR IS HE ABOVE (THE PARTNERS) THAT THEY ASSOCIATE (WITH
HIM).

يُنَزِّلُ الْمَلاَئِكَةَ بِالرُّوحِ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَى مَنْ يَشَاءُ
مِنْ عِبَادِهِ أَنْ أَنذِرُوا أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ أَنَا
فَاتَّقُونِ(( 2 ))

2- HE SENDS DOWN THE ANGELS WITH SPIRIT FROM HIS ORDER (BY HIS
COMMAND??) UPON WHOM HE WILL OF HIS SERVANTS, TO WARN THAT; THERE IS NO
GOD BUT I, THEN BEWARE OF ME.

[ 434 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE PUNISHMENT IS NEAR (VERSE NO. 1 - 2)**

A great part of this chapter (Sِ16) revealed in Mecca when there was a
great conflict between the Messenger of God and the pagan idolaters.
When the prophet threatened the heathens with God's punishment; in a
taunting language and with scornful remarks the pagans said:ِ \`\`If
there is a God as you say, and He is the only one true God, why does He
not punish us for our sins once and for all?'' They did not know the
fact, that God's command of punishment has already been issued, and it
is a part of His general plan in creation. This command is in the form
of a natural Law; that there is a reaction for every action, and that
the outcome of evil deeds, is nothing but evil.

Through their superstitious beliefs, they even thought that, if there
could be any punishment, their idols would intercede with God on their
behalf. Therefore the first verse of this chapter will draw a red cross
upon such false ideas and schools of thought, saying:ِ \`\`Allah's
command has already come. Therefore do not seek to hasten it. Glory be
to Him, and far is Allah above the partners that they ascribe to
Him.''

As to the meaning of the, \`\`SPIRIT'' that is sent down with the
angels (NO.2), it might mean inspiration, Qura"n, and prophethood, which
are all the life giving spiritual power, that incite courage, and induce
hope and strive in Man.

خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ تَعَالَى عَمَّا
يُشْرِكُونَ(( 3 ))

3- HE CREATED THE HEAVENS AND EARTH WITH TRUTH. FAR IS HE ABOVE (THE
PARTNERS) THAT THEY ASSOCIATE.

[ 435 ]

خَلَقَ الاِْنسَانَ مِنْ نُّطْفَة فَإِذَا هُوَ خَصِيمٌ مُّبِينٌ(( 4 ))

4- HE CREATED MAN OF A (TRIFILING) SPERM-DROP, AND YET HE IS AN OPEN
INIMICAL (TO HIS CREATOR).

وَالاَْنْعَامَ خَلَقَهَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا دِفْءٌ وَمَنَافِعُ وَمِنْهَا
تَأْكُلُونَ(( 5 ))

5- AND THE CATTLE, HE CREATED THEM FOR YOU. IN THEM, THERE IS CLOTHING;
AND OTHER BENEFITS, AND OF THEM YOU EAT.

وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا جَمَالٌ حِينَ تُرِيحُونَ وَحِينَ تَسْرَحُونَ(( 6 ))

6- AND THERE IS GLORY IN THEM FOR YOU WHEN YOU BRING THEM BACK FOR
REST, (IN THE EVENING) AND SEND THEM OUT TO PASTURE. (IN THE MORNING)

وَتَحْمِلُ أَثْقَالَكُمْ إِلَى بَلَد لَّمْ تَكُونُوا بَالِغِيهِ إِلاَّ
بِشِقِّ الاَْنفُسِ إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ(( 7 ))

7- AND THEY CARRY YOUR HEAVY LOADS UNTO A LAND, THAT YOU WOULD NOT
REACH IT WITHOUT SELF-HELP IN HARDSHIP. VERILY YOUR LORD IS KIND,
COMPASSIONATE.

وَالْخَيْلَ وَالْبِغَالَ وَالْحَمِيرَ لِتَرْكَبُوهَا وَزِينَةً
وَيَخْلُقُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 8 ))

8- AND HORSES, AND MULES, AND ASSES, (HE CREATED FOR YOU) TO RIDE THEM,
AND (ALSO THEY ARE YOUR) ADORNMENTS. AND HE WILL CREATE (FOR YOU) WHAT
YOU KNOW IT NOT. (AT THE MOMENT)

[ 436 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE VARIOUS PROFITS OF ANIMALS (VERSE NO. 3 - 8)**

In order to pluck up polytheism by the roots, and attract the
attentions Monotheism, here two different ways are followed. At first,
by reasoning on the wonderful order of creation, and then on the
expression of sentiments and mental attitudes, man is reminded of God's
infinite bounties and favours, that are bestowed on him; perhaps he may
leave evil and grasp the goodness in God:ِ \`\`He created the heavens
and earth with truth. Far is He above the partners that they associate
with Him.'' As to the phrase; \`\`All are created with truth'', in this
wide world nothing is created for play or for nothing. There is plan,
purpose and design behind the creation of everything.

Then reference is made to the origin and to the creation of Man himself
saying:ِ \`\`He created man of a trifling sperm-drop, and yet he is an
open inimical, and full of hostility and dispute!

The origin of Man is physically trifling and lowly for begining with a
sperm-drop; and then after his various stages of creation one after
another, the creator blows of His spirit in Man and the things will turn
otherwise. He will have amazing faculties, immense capacity, and strange
power and ability! These will cause him to have Free-will to some
extent, and obtain authority and responsibility. All these
qualifications serve to raise him to the rank of the VICEGERENT of God
upon the earth.... a rank which is higher in grade than that of the
angels. So, all the material things, cattle, animals, and living
creatures, will be made subservient to Man, in order to use them in
various just and truthful purposes:ِ

\`\`And the cattle, He created for you. There is clothing and other
benefits, and of them you eat.'' The Arabic, \`\`DEF'' means any kind of
covering and clothing, most of which are made out of the wool, fur and
skins of the animals.

[ 437 ]

It is remarkable that the reference is not only made to the physical
profits of the cattle and animals. When the cattle go to pasture in the
morning and return to its fold or sheep-cote in the evening, their
collective movement will incite confidence and happiness in the owner.
He will have a sense of power and wealth when he sees the beauty, and
hears the ringing sound of the bells that are hung from the neck of his
sheep, goats, cows and camels.

In the next verse, another profit that man takes from the animals has
been referred to. \`\`And they carry your heavy loads to a land that you
would not reach it without self-help in hardship. Verily your Lord is
Kind, Compassionate to you.'' The beasts of burden, such as the horse,
mule, ass, and camel, have helped a lot so far in the history of man's
journey and transport. In the life time of our prophet Allah promised to
create for Man's carriage and transport means and carriers that were not
known to Man:ِ \`\`.... And We will create for you, besides the beasts
of burden, what you do not know them.''

Now, Allah's promise has been carried out and Man has obtained more and
more comfort in his travelling and transportations. There has been many
changes in the history of Man's transport. Horses and mules gave their
place to the carriage. The carriage turned to tramway and trains; then
there came modern beautiful cars in the road, and amazing aeroplanes
have conquered the sky ways. At any given point of time, many of such
inventions were unknown to Man, nor can we guess what will happen
to-morrow, and what sort of a bird and BORA"GH will move us up to the
stars in the future:ِ

\`\`And He created for you horses, mules, and asses to ride and to be
your adornments. And He will create for you in future what you know it
know to-day.''

وَعَلَى اللهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ وَمِنْهَا جَائِرٌ وَلَوْ شَاءَ
لَهَدَاكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ(( 9 ))

9- AND IT IS UP TO ALLAH TO SHOW THE RIGHT WAY. AND

[ 438 ]

(SOME WAYS) OF THEM ARE DEVIATED PATHS. AND IF HE HAD WILLED, HE WOULD
HAVE GUIDED YOU ALL TOGETHER.

هُوَ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ مِنْ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً لَّكُمْ مِّنْهُ شَرَابٌ
وَمِنْهُ شَجَرٌ فِيهِ تُسِيمُونَ (( 10 ))

10- IT IS HE WHO SENT DOWN WATER FROM THE SKY; FROM IT IS YOUR DRINK,
AND FROM IT (GROWS) THE CROPS ON WHICH YOU GRAZE YOUR CATTLE.

يُنْبِتُ لَكُمْ بِهِ الزَّرْعَ وَالزَّيْتُونَ وَالنَّخِيلَ
وَالاَْعْنَابَ وَمِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاََيَةً
لِقَوْم
يَتَفَكَّرُونَ(( 11 ))

11-WITH IT (i.e THE RAIN) HE GROWS FOR YOU CROPS, AND OLIVES. AND
DATE-PALMS, AND GRAPES, AND OF ALL SORTS OF FRUITS. SURELY IN THAT,
THERE IS A SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO THINK.

وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ
وَالنُّجُومُ مُسَخَّرَاتٌ بِأَمْرِهِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِقَوْم
يَعْقِلُونَ(( 12 ))

12- AND HE SUBJECTED TO YOU THE NIGHT AND DAY; AND THE SUN AND THE
MOON. AND THE STARS (SHALL BE) SUBJECTED BY HIS ORDER. SURELY IN THAT
THERE ARE SIGNS FOR A PEOPLE WHO USE WISDOM.

وَمَا ذَرَأَ لَكُمْ فِي الاَْرْضِ مُخْتَلِفاً أَلْوَانُهُ إِنَّ فِي
ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لِّقَوْم يَذَّكَّرُونَ(( 13 ))

13- AND WHAT HE HAS CREATED FOR YOU IN THE EARTH, THEIR COLOURS BEING
DIFFERENT. SURELY IN THAT THERE IS A SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO RECOLLECT.

[ 439 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
O, MAN! EVERYTHING CAN BE MADE SUBSERVIENT TO YOU. (VERSE NO. 9 -
13)**

In the first stage of the above revelation, it refers to a great
spiritual favour of Allah that He has accepted our guidance as a right
upon Himself! He has said:ِ \`\`It is a duty incumbent upon Allah, to
show His servants the right way which leads directly to Him, and ends to
Man's salvation and prosperity; On condition that man himself is willing
to avoid evil, and may want to tread the path of truth. So God has to
show the right way, and man has to set foot.'' God has created Man, and
has endowed him with various powers and faculties, to help him to
develop; and to unfold gradually as a flower from a bud, with the
difference that Man decides to develop by his own Free-Will; but
animals, and vegetations, develop by their nature and through their
instinct.

Therefore to equip man for his self-impelled, and intentional progress,
God has endowed him with wisdom and power of thinking. He also has sent
Messengers with Book of Guidance to Man for more help. Yet, inspite of
all that, there are still some by-paths, and side-roads, that are not
direct and might mislead or pervert men:ِ \`\`And it is up to Allah to
show you the right way, but some of the roads are deviated ways!'' If
Allah had willed, he would have guided all men in the straight path of
Monotheism, but a guidance through force-majeure is not reckoned a
guidance, and it is not valid in the sight of Wisdom and justice.

Then the verses apply to some physical bounties of Allah that are
bestowed on Man; such as the rain through which he can have his
drinking, grow crops to eat or to graze his cattle, bringing up olives,
date-palms, grapes, and thousands of all sorts of fruits, and other
produces with various colours, tastes smells, and uses!

Among the great bounties of God, mention is made of the sun, the moon,
the night, and the day, each of which having immense profits

[ 440 ]

for man. God has subjected them to Man, and the stars too, shall be
subjected in proper time, and by God's will and order. \`\`And He
subjected to you the night and day, and the sun and the moon; and the
stars shall be subjected by His order.'' For those who think and
reflect, and for those who may use their brain and wisdom; there are
many signs and symptoms in the above mentioned bounties, in order to
find the way.

God's physical and spiritual bounties are so mingled with each other,
that one cannot separate them. From among all; the faculty of thinking,
wisdom, and recollection, are three bounties among the great ones, if we
could but use them in proper way. Qura"n almost all the time addresses
men of thought and wisdom, and men of study and reflection, because it
has sprout out of a land on which prevailed ignorance, and lack of
knowledge and information.

وَهُوَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ الْبَحْرَ لِتَأْكُلُوا مِنْهُ لَحْماً طَرِيّاً
وَتَسْتَخْرِجُوا مِنْهُ حِلْيَةً تَلْبَسُونَهَا وَتَرَى الْفُلْكَ
مَوَاخِرَ فِيهِ وَلِتَبْتَغُوا مِنْ فَضْلِهِ وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ((
14 ))

14- AND IT IS HE WHO SUBJECTED TO YOU THE SEA THAT YOU MAY EAT OUT OF
IT FRESH MEAT; AND YOU TAKE OUT OF IT ORNAMENT WHICH YOU WEAR IT.

AND YOU SEE THE SHIP CLEAVING THROUGH IT SO THAT YOU MAY SEEK OF HIS
BOUNTY, AND PERHAPS YOU MAY GIVE THANKS.

وَأَلْقَى فِي الاَْرْضِ رَوَاسِىَ أَنْ تَمِيدَ بِكُمْ وَأَنْهَاراً
وَسُبُلا لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ(( 15 ))

15- AND HE CAST IN THE EARTH FIRM MOUNTAINS, LEST IT SHOULD SHAKE YOU
(BY ITS MOVEMENTS), AND STREAMS, AND ROADS, THAT YOU MAY BE GUIDED.

[ 441 ]

وَعَلاَمَات وَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ(( 16 ))

16- AND MARKS; AND BY THE STARS (TOO) THEY ARE GUIDED.

أَفَمَنْ يَخْلُقُ كَمَنْ لاَّ يَخْلُقُ أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ(( 17 ))

17- IS THEN HE WHO CREATES LIKE HIM WHO CREATES NOT? WILL YOU NOT THEN
PAY HEED?

وَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَةَ اللهِ لاَ تُحْصُوهَا إِنَّ اللهَ لَغَفُورٌ
رَحِيمٌ(( 18 ))

18- AND IF YOU COUNT THE BOUNTIES OF ALLAH, YOU WILL NOT BE ABLE TO
NUMBER IT. VERILY ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE MOUNTAINS, SEAS, AND STARS (VERSE NO. 14 - 18)**

The above verses point to another important part of Allah's bounties
which are innumerable. It begins with the oceans that are among the
greatests of the sources of food, ornaments, and other useful materials.
Now that the population has increased so fast, man has anxiously turned
his attention on the new sources of food and energy. Therefore, diving,
and sea and oceanic researchers, have obtained a new importance and a
great value. Here, in these verses; the wave of argument goes from the
crest down to the bottom, and from the large and great things like the
sun, and the moon, and the stars, to the small thing like the delicate
flesh of fishes, although no larger a thing in the universe is less in
importance than the smaller ones! Here is another wonder of the creation
and creator, that such a delicate, and finely made and formed

[ 442 ]

fresh fleshes, should be produced from salt water!

After the reference to the bounties of the sea, mentiom is made of the
mountains, which are the main sources of mines and minerals, and many
other profits for Man.

The mountains serve like great heavy weights to balance and control the
vibrating movements of our home which is the earth. It works as a
steadying agent to keep winds. As a matter of fact, the mountains, the
rivers, the roads, and many other things, are also used as some sort of
a sign-post or a land mark, to guide man here and there in his extensive
home, which is the earth. In the old times, before the compass was found
or invented, people in their long distance journeys and voyages made use
of the poles stars to find their way on. The stars have always been used
as a sign-post of guidance in the dead of night. They also have served
to beautify the ceiling of our temporary home here:ِ

\`\`.... And by stars too they are guided.'' It is not only the pole
star that has been the sign-post or light-house of guidance for man. We
can only find our way by the light of stars, and we should not forget
that the sun is a star too, by the light of which we may see the front
of our foot. God's favours to man are indeed infinite and innumerable:ِ
\`\`And if you count the bounties of Allah, you will not be able to
number and count them.''

At the ending of the verses the conscience of Man is called to

[ 443 ]

judge and to issue a rightful decree about his Creator:ِ \`\`Is then he
who creates like him who creates not? Will you not then pay heed!?''

وَاللهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تُسِرُّونَ وَمَا تُعْلِنُونَ(( 19 ))

19- AND ALLAH KNOWS WHAT YOU CONCEAL AND WHAT YOU REVEAL.

وَالَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ لاَ يَخْلُقُونَ شَيْئاً وَهُمْ
يُخْلَقُونَ(( 20 ))

20- AND THOSE WHOM THEY CALL APART FROM ALLAH (i.e.THEIR FALSE GODS) DO
NOT CREATE ANYTHING, AND THEY THEMSELVES ARE CREATED.

أَمْوَاتٌ غَيْرُ أَحْيَاء وَمَا يَشْعُرُونَ أَيَّانَ يُبْعَثُونَ(( 21
))

21- THEY ARE DEADS, LIFELESS, AND DO NOT KNOW WHEN SHALL THEY BE RAISED
UP.

إِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَالَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاْخِرَةِ
قُلُوبُهُمْ مُّنكِرَةٌ وَهُمْ مُّسْتَكْبِرُونَ(( 22 ))

22- YOUR GOD IS (THE ONLY) ONE GOD. AND THOSE WHO DO NOT BELIEVE IN THE
HEREAFTER, THEIR HEART IS DENIER AND THEY ARE (PUFFED) WITH PRIDE.

لاَ جَرَمَ أَنَّ اللهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ
إِنَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْمُسْتَكْبِرِينَ(( 23 ))

23- WITHOUT ANY DOUBT, ALLAH KNOWS WHAT THEY CONCEAL AND WHAT THEY
REVEAL; THAT HE DOES NOT LOVE THE ARROGANTS.

[ 444 ]


