The Lifeless Gods, With Lack of Common Sense (verse No. 19 - 23)
================================================================

Here a third attribute of God is pointed to; and that is, His infinite
knowledge and wisdom. Then once again stress is put upon God's creative
power:ِ \`\`Those whom they call apart from Allah, do not create
anything, and they themselves are created.'' In other word, Allah is the
only Creator and the ultimate reality; and anything other than Him is
created, and is created by Him.

Therefore, out of wisdom are, those who worship any other than God. The
idols, and the celestial bodies that they used to worship, were all
inanimate material things and dead bodies. Even the prophets, saints,
and heroes that they deified, were all mortals, and have already died.
This was because in themselves, they were lifeless; and so, everything
testifies that there is only one true Eternal God. We cannot conceal or
reveal anything that we may have it in the heart, or at the tip of our
tongue, unless God knows that far better than ourselves! We have
frequently mentioned in our book, that idol and idolatries is not
confined to bowing down in front of some images carved out of stone or
wood; or worshipping false gods, and fetishes. Anything and anyone, on
whom you rely apart from Allah; and that you think in his hands lays our
fate, he is a real idol. Even those persons who depend upon the
super-powers, and who put their trusts on them, expecting their help in
emergency cases, and dark days; they too, are real idolaters and are
actual polytheists. We may ask them if their deified super-powers and
gods, have ever created anything; or even do they have the knowledge of
what may happen to them next day!? All their fetishes, false gods, and
deified men, will eventually be raised up from their graves to stand in
the court of God's Final

[ 445 ]

judgement, while they cannot tell when that awful day will be. There;
their followers will know their inability and weakness. Belief in God
and belief in Resurrection Day are mingled. He who believes in God, and
all the great good attributes of Him, cannot believe that Man is created
in vain, and as a play-toy, and he will be left alone and unquestioned.
If they deny or reject God's guidance and Law, they, infact don't want
to know. They refuse to know the realities of life, and they are so
because of their arrogance, pride, and vanity. Reasons for Monotheism
and Resurrection Day are abundant if they want to be reasonable.

وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ مَّاذَا أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ قَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ
الاَْوَّلِينَ(( 24 ))

24- AND WHEN IT IS SAID TO THEM; WHAT HAS YOUR LORD SENT DOWN? THEY
SAID; PRIMEVAL FICTITIOUS TALES.

لِيَحْمِلُوا أَوْزَارَهُمْ كَامِلَةً يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَمِنْ
أَوْزَارِ الَّذِينَ يُضِلُّونَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ عِلْم أَلاَ سَاءَ مَا
يَزِرُونَ(( 25 ))

25- THEY WILL HAVE TO CARRY THEIR OWN BURDENS (OF SIN) COMPLETELY, IN
THE RESURRECTION DAY; AND SOME OF THE BURDENS OF THOSE WHOM THEY MISLEAD
WITHOUT ANY KNOWLEDGE. BEHOLD! TOOِBAD IS THE LOAD THEY BEAR.

قَدْ مَكَرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَأَتَى اللهُ بُنْيَانَهُمْ مِّنَ
الْقَوَاعِدِ فَخَرَّ عَلَيْهِمْ السَّقْفُ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ وَأَتَاهُمْ
الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 26 ))

26- VERILY THOSE BEFORE THEM ALSO PLOTTED, BUT ALLAH CAME (TO DESTROY)
THEIR BUILDINGS FROM THE

[ 446 ]

FOUNDATIONS; THEN ITS CEILING FELL UPON THEM FROM OVERHEAD, AND THE
TORMENT CAME TO THEM FROM WHERE THEY DID NOT KNOW!

ثُمَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُخْزِيهِمْ وَيَقُولُ أَيْنَ شُرَكَائِيَ
الَّذِينَ كُنْتُمْ تُشَاقُّونَ فِيهِمْ قَالَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ
إِنَّ الْخِزْىَ الْيَوْمَ وَالسُّوءَ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ(( 27 ))

27- THEN IN THE RESURRECTION DAY, HE WILL DISGRACE THEM, AND WILL SAY;
WHERE ARE MY PARTNERS, FOR WHOM YOU WERE HOSTILE (TO THE BELIEVERS)?
THOSE WHO WERE ENDOWED WITH KNOWLEDGE WILL SAY:ِ TO-DAY, DISGRACE AND
MISERY ARE ON THE UNBELIEVERS.

الَّذِينَ تَتَوَفَّاهُمْ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ ظَالِمِي أَنفُسِهِمْ
فَأَلْقَوْا السَّلَمَ مَا كُنَّا نَعْمَلُ مِنْ سُوء بَلَى إِنَّ اللهَ
عَلِيمٌ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 28 ))

28- THOSE WHOSE LIFE THE ANGELS TAKE, WHILE THEY HAVE OPPRESSED
THEMSELVES, OFFER SUBMISSION SAYING; WE WERE NOT DOING ANY THING BAD!

YES, YOU WERE! AND ALLAH KNOWS WELL WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN DOING.

فَادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا فَلَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى
الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ(( 29 ))

29- SO ENTER YOU THE GATES OF HELL, TO LIVE THEREIN FOR EVER; WHAT A
BAD ABODE IS THAT OF THE ARROGANTS.

[ 447 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF REVELATION (VERSE NO. 24 - 29)**

It is written in the, MAJ-MA-AL-BAYA"N that; the immediate reference of
the first verse here, (NO.24) is to the sixteen SCHISMATICS, who were
divided in four group, and groups of four; each group standing in one of
the main roads of Mecca during the pilgrimage period, in order to turn
the minds of the pilgrims against Mohammmad and his new religion. They
dishonestly used to say, Mohammad has forged a series of lies mingled
with some fairy-tales of old and presents them as Message of Allah to
Man, and instead of miracles as a proof of his prophethood! THOSE WHO
CARRY THE LOADS OF OTHER PEOPLE TOO.

When a group of the learned Jews and some of the arrogant disbelievers
were asked about the prophet and his Divine Book of inspiration; without
reflecting upon the question or having a good back ground of that
knowledge, some of the pagan Arabs too, repeated the same thing that the
learned but spiteful Jews, unjustly said:ِ

\`\`These QURA"NIC VERSES are nothing but fairy-tales of old!'' They
arrogantly pretended that these were not something new to them. In this,
they not only deceived their own conscience, but they also misled others
who felt some affections towards them. They even claimed that they could
bring the like of it, if they wanted to; but more than fifteen centuries
elapsed, and no one could bring even a chapter the like of it! In fact
the ungodly men of power and wealth were not against the existing
superstitious religion and their false gods. They were against the
truthful religion that challenged with their fancies and caprices; and
which, endangered their material profits, their ranks, and their social
privileges. Such persons will have a two-fold punishment:ِ one for
carrying the burden of their own sins, and the second for misleading
other people:ِ

[ 448 ]

\`\`They will have to carry their own burden of sin completely in the
Day of Doom, and also they have to carry some of the burden of those
whom they mislead....'' True that no bearer of burden will bear the
burden of another, but the sin of misleading other is the sin of the
misleader himself. The followers of the misleaders are also of two
classes or two groups.... sometimes a group of people may deliberately
and with awareness, follow an oppressor leader for a certain physical
interest. In such a case they will have to carry their own burden of sin
besides some load for their voluntarily obedience.

But there might be a second group too, who are unaware and ignorant,
and are seduced by the evil leaders to do some wrong. Such followers may
have a good faith and intention, and do that evil for the sake of God.
In such cases too, the followers are not acquit of blame, and they still
have to carry their own burden of sins. On the other hand the punishment
of their leaders will be a two-fold one. The next verse (NO.26) implies
that the plots of the unbelievers are not a new thing:ِ \`\`Those before
them also plotted and designed, but Allah destroyed their construction
of conspiracy and evil purpose from the foundation, so that its ceiling
fell upon them from overhead and perished them in disgrace.''

In all ages wicked men tried to plot against God's way, but they always
failed, because Allah frustrated them in their plots and plans by
collapsing the evil structures that they built against the godly. So was
their punishment in this temporary life; but their greatest misfortune
will afflict them later in the life to come. This comes when they have
to stand before the seat of God's judgement in the Day of Doom. There,
the ungodly are gathered before the seat of judgement, and are
questioned of their false gods and the partners that they worshipped
apart from Allah, but they are not able to reply in their state of
disgrace and disappointment.

The next verse (NO.28) gives us some information of the ungodly and
disbeliever's death-bed:ِ \`\`Those whose life the angels take, while
they have oppressed themselves; they offer submission and say; we were
not doing anything wrong!''

[ 449 ]

Those who died in a state of rebellion against God, they have, in fact,
oppressed their own self and soul. When they are questioned of their
sins and evil deeds, they resort to flimsy excuses that, our sins were
not real sins, because we have done it in a state of ignorance, and our
motive was not wrong! But here the Judge is Allah who knows every secret
of the souls, and what have they concealed in their heart, and souls,
and what is open in the tip of their tongue. Therefore, their false plea
before Allah is of no use or value, and they shall be doomed to an
everlasting punishment.

وَقِيلَ لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا مَاذَا أَنْزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ قَالُوا خَيْراً
لِّلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ وَلَدَارُ
الاْخِرَةِ خَيْرٌ وَلَنِعْمَ دَارُ الْمُتَّقِينَ(( 30 ))

30- AND IT WILL BE SAID TO THOSE WHO WERE PIOUS; WHAT IS IT THAT YOUR
LORD HAS SENT DOWN? THEY SAID:ِ \`\`GOODNESS! (ALL GOOD) FOR THOSE WHO
DO GOOD IN THIS WORLD, THERE IS GOODNESS, AND CERTAINLY THEIR HOME IN
THE HEREAFTER WILL BE FAR BETTER; AND WHAT A GOOD ABODE IS THAT OF THE
PIOUS.

جَنَّاتُ عَدْن يَدْخُلُونَهَا تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الاَْنْهَارُ
لَهُمْ فِيهَا مَا يَشَاءُونَ كَذَلِكَ يَجْزِي اللهُ الْمُتَّقِينَ(( 31
))

31- (THEIR ABODE IS IN THE) ETERNAL GARDENS OF BLISS. (i.e. PARADISE)
THEY SHALL ENTER IT. STREAMS FLOW BENEATH IT. FOR THEM IS THERE,
WHATEVER THEY MAY WANT. SO DOES ALLAH REWARD THE PIOUS.

[ 450 ]

الَّذِينَ تَتَوَفَّاهُمُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ طَيِّبِينَ يَقُولُونَ سَلاَمٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ ادْخُلُوا الْجَنَّةَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 32 ))

32- THOSE WHOSE LIFE THE ANGELS TAKE (WHILE THEY ARE) CLEAN; (THE
ANGELS WILL SAY TO THEM) PEACE BE ON YOU. ENTER YOU THE PARADISE FOR
WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN DOING.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE FATE OF THE CLEANSED (VERSE NO. 30 - 32)**

During the time of pilgrimage when people from all around, rushed to
Mecca to perform the rites of HAJJ Mohammad's advent was the general
topic of conversations and questions. When the polytheists were asked
about Qura"n, they answered; we are of opinion that these writing are
some fairy-tales of ancient, that are composed and fabricated newly.
When the same question was asked of a pious man; unlike the ungodly, he
would answer; \`\`All good!''....good in this life for those who follow
the Law, and far better for them in the Hereafter. Our Lord is mere
goodness, pure truth and All-mercy and from such a sacred Essence,
nothing can come out but good and beauty. The Holy Book that our Lord
has inspired to our prophet is a light to guide us; is a medicine to
cure our mental disease, and it is a guidance to salvation and
prosperity; so also a measure of distinction between truth and
falsehood.

Then word moves about the abode of the good-doers and the godly, in the
life to come:ِ \`\`They will live in the eternal gardens of bliss
(PARADISE) with streams flowing underneath its trees, and for them
therein is whatever they may wish.'' The reference here is not only to
the physical bounties of the

[ 451 ]

promised Paradise. In brief and through a hint, it is pointed out that,
the inhabitants of Paradise can have whatever pleases them, besides the
best of the physical means of life. Elsewhere in the Qura"n (S43:71) we
read:ِ \`\`To them will be passed dishes and goblets of gold. They will
have in there all that their souls could desire, and all that the eyes
could delight in.'' The pious ones or those who die having been
cleansed, are clean from all sorts of polytheism, of pride and
oppression, and of all kinds of evil and sin.

The Arabic, \`\`TATAVAFFA"HOM'' is a fine touch to the incident of
death, which implies that the angels come to receive and to take over
the soul of man. In other word; death is not the end of man's life. It
rather is a glorious new beginning for the believers, and a very bad
start and commencement for the faithless.

هَلْ يَنظُرُونَ إِلاَّ أَنْ تَأْتِيَهُمْ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ أَوْ يَأْتِىَ
أَمْرُ رَبِّكَ كَذَلِكَ فَعَلَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ وَمَا
ظَلَمَهُمْ اللهُ وَلَكِنْ كَانُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ(( 33 ))

33- DO THEY EXPECT ANYTHING EXCEPT THE ANGELS COMING TO THEM, (TO OVER
TAKE THEIR SOULS) OR THE COMMAND OF YOUR LORD COME? SO DID THOSE BEFORE
THEM. AND ALLAH DID NOT OPPRESS THEM, BUT THEY THEMSELVES WERE
OPPRESSING.

فَأَصَابَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا عَمِلُوا وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَّا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ(( 34 ))

34- THEN THE BAD CONSEQUENCES OF WHAT THEY DID, AFFLICTED THEM; AND
ENCOMPASSED THEM THAT AT WHICH THEY WERE MOCKING.

[ 452 ]

وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا لَوْ شَاءَ اللهُ مَا عَبَدْنَا مِنْ
دُونِهِ مِنْ شَيْء نَّحْنُ وَلاَ آبَاؤُنَا وَلاَ حَرَّمْنَا مِنْ دُونِهِ
مِنْ شَيْء كَذَلِكَ فَعَلَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَهَلْ عَلَى
الرُّسُلِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ(( 35 ))

35- AND THE POLYTHEISTS SAID:ِ \`\`HAD ALLAH WILLED, WE WOULD NOT HAVE
WORSHIPPED ANYTHING APART FROM HIM; NEITHER WE NOR OUR FATHERS. AND NOR
WOULD HAVE WE FORBIDDEN ANYTHING WITHOUT (A PERMISSION FROM) HIM. SO DID
THOSE BEFORE THEM. IS THERE THEN (ANY DUTY) UPON THE MESSSENGERS EXCEPT
PERSPICUOUS CONVEYANCE? (OF THE MESSAGES)

وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّة رَّسُولا أَنِ اُعْبُدُوا اللهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ فَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ هَدَى اللهُ وَمِنْهُمْ مَّنْ
حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلاَلَةُ فَسِيرُوا فِي الاَْرْضِ فَانْظُرُوا كَيْفَ
كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ(( 36 ))

36- AND VERILY WE RAISED IN EVERY NATION A MESSENGER (TO TELL THEM)
THAT, WORSHIP ALLAH, AND AVOID FALSE GODS. THEN THERE ARE SOME OF THEM
WHOM ALLAH GUIDED AND OF THEM WERE SOME WHO DESERVED STRAYING. SO TRAVEL
IN THE EARTH AND PERCEIVE HOW WAS THE END OF THE BELIERS.

إِنْ تَحْرِصْ عَلَى هُدَاهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَهْدِي مَنْ يُضِلُّ
وَمَا لَهُمْ مِّنْ نَاصِرِينَ(( 37 ))

37- IF YOU ARE SO EAGER FOR THEIR GUIDANCE, THEN KNOW THAT ALLAH WILL
NOT GUIDE HIM WHO LEAVES TO STRAY; AND THERE IS NOT ANY HELPERS FOR
THEM.

[ 453 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
PROPHET'S DUTY IS OPEN ANNOUNCEMENT. (VERSE NO. 33 - 37)**

In a threatening language the verses address the unbelievers and
polytheists that, what do they expect to meet? Are they waiting for the
angels of death to come to overtake their souls, giving an end to their
foolish endeavours and injurious attempts? Or are they waiting for
Allah's command for their punishment to be issued? In other word; they
wait doing nothing for their own good until death seizes them, or some
punishment in this life touches them, so that they lose all their
chances of return, and opportunities of repentance. Those who lived
before them also did the same things till they met their doom, while God
did not oppress them the least, but they themselves were oppressing.
They only got the natural results of their own deeds, and the reaction
of their actions. So the bad consequences of their evil deeds afflicted
them!

The next verse (NO.35) points at another weak and baseless objections
of the polytheists, who say; had Allah willed we would not have
worshipped anything apart from Him; nor would we have forbidden anything
without His permission, such as our taboos. This is an out of date
reasoning that has been circulated throughout time an space in ages.
Some of the weak minded sinners say:ِ \`\`Why did not God force all His
servant to worship him alone, and to follow His direction?''

Such an assertion denies Man's limited Free-Will, which is the
foundation of ethics. Violating the laws and regulations of Free-Will,
is against the general plan of God for Man's life and results. On the
other hand; the duty of a prophet is to announce their Messages openly,
and to convey. Then it is up to the people to accept or reject the call
according to their Free-Will. The Main object of all the prophet's
mission and message is, to worship none but the only one true God....the
Creator of the whole

[ 454 ]

universe whom they call Allah. And secondly, not to follow the evil
ways of rebellion and resistance against God's Law and plans. In other
word, be not insolent nor follow the insolent.

Those who move and work against the natural laws, and reject the
religious Laws that God has legislated for Man, and close their inner
eye and ear on the prophet's call, they themselves are the main cause of
their misery and misfortune, and even if a prophet be much eager to
guide them, that eagerness will be of no use to them, because a water
well should gush forth from the bottom. Therefore our prophet is
addressed here by the last verse (NO.37) saying:ِ \`\`If you are so
eager for their guidance, know that Allah will not guide him who
deserves to be left to stray; and such people will have no one to help
them.''

وَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللهُ مَنْ
يَمُوتُ بَلَى وَعْداً عَلَيْهِ حَقّاً وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ(( 38 ))

38- AND THEY SWORE BY ALLAH THE MOST EARNEST OF THEIR OATHS, THAT,
ALLAH WILL NOT RAISE UP HE WHO DIES. YES! (HE WILL) IT IS A PROMISE
(BINDING) UPON HIM TRULY; BUT MOST OF THE PEOPLE DO NOT KNOW.

لِيُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا كَاذِبِينَ(( 39 ))

39- (THE AIM OF RESURRECTION IS) TO MAKE CLEAR TO THEM THAT IN WHICH
THEY DIFFER, AND THAT THE UNBELIEVERS MAY KNOW THAT THEY WERE LIARS.

إِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا لِشَىْء إِذَا أَرَدْنَاهُ أَنْ نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ(( 40 ))

40- OUR WORD TO SOMETHING THAT WE INTEND IT TO BE; IS NOTHING EXCEPT WE
SAY TO IT \`\`BE AND IT WILL BE.

[ 455 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 38 - 40)**

A polytheist owed something to a Muslim and evaded paying him back. The
Muslim said that he would get it back....if not here....in the
hereafter. The polytheist swore by Allah, that God would never raise
anyone after his death, and there is not Hereafter at All; and hence the
verse:ِ \`\`They swore by Allah the most earnest of their oath that
Allah will not raise up he who dies.'' The strongest oath of the pagan
Arabs was by Allah, whom they believed as the Supreme Being, and their
weaker oaths were by HOBAL or other important idols they worshipped.

The Arabs knew no reason why should Allah raise them after death; as
they knew no reason for their creation in this world too. Here in this
case the answer of Qura"n is that:ِ \`\`Allah will also convince the
unbelievers that they were liars and beliers.'' The Resurrection Day is
a day in which the secrets are revealed. Of course the life after death
has many other aims and objects, from among which we may mention; Man's
evolution and development. The execution of JUSTICE. And giving true aim
and object to our present life. So also the continuance of God's Mercy
and Grace can be another reason for our life after death.

\*\*\*\*\*

**ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE (VERSE NO. 40)**

By ESSENCE here in the following passage I understand; that which is
the answer to the question:ِ \`\`What is it?'' In other word Essence is
that in being which underlies all the outward manifestations, and is
permanent and unchangeable. Here in this verse we read:ِ

\`\`Our word to something we intend it to be, is that we say to, \`\`IT
be, and, \`\`IT will be!

[ 456 ]

Here I understand that the Essence of all things exist in the knowledge
of God, the only Supreme Being whose Essence and Existence are one, and
indivisible. In other word; the Essence of anything that comes to
existence or being, already exists in the knowledge of God. For short
nothing comes out of nothing. And also we should not forget here that
God's knowledge, Essence, and existence, are all one and the same
thing.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

وَالَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا فِي اللهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا
لَنُبَوِّئَنَّهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَلاََجْرُ الاْخِرَةِ
أَكْبَرُ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ(( 41 ))

41- AND THOSE WHO EMIGRATED IN ALLAH, AFTER THEY HAVE BEEN OPPRESSED,
WE SHALL SETTLE THEM IN THIS WORLD GOODLY. (IN A GOOD SETTLEMENT) AND
THE REWARD OF THE HEREAFTER WILL BE GREATER IF THEY COULD KNOW.

الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَعَلَى رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ(( 42 ))

42- THOSE WHO ENDURED (WITH PATIENCE) AND PUT THEIR TRUST ON THEIR
LORD.


**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 41 - 42)**

When, SOHAIL, AMMA"R, BALAL, and KHOBBAB, were converted among the
first Muslims; they were tortured and persecuted harshly, by their
faithless masters. Sohail told the Pagans:ِ \`\`I am very old and my
being among you will be of no use to you. Even if I go from here and be
against you, I am not able to harm you aught. Then take all my wealth,
and let me go to Medina and live there with our prophet.'' They agreed,
and Sohail gave them whatever of

[ 457 ]

property he had, and emigrated to Medina. Some Muslims there, told
him:ِ \`\`you made a bargain with a very high profit;'' and to that
effect the above verses revealed:ِ \`\`Those who emigrated IN Allah
after they were oppressed, We shall....'' Emigration is usually
accompanied by troubles and endurance. There is not a good merit for
such sufferings, and their reward is limited to the experiential lessons
that the sufferer may take. But when the emigration is for the sake of
God, the case is different, and it has a great merit and honour. Here
the sufferer has only two options; either to leave his Lord, or his
comfort and welfare. When some one leaves his home and hearth, and all
his possession, and goes alone to his Lord, such an emigration is of a
high value and his exile is entitled to the highest honour. And such was
the case of the early Muslims who emigrated to ABYSSINIA, and later on
to Medina.

وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالا نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَسْئَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 43 ))

43- AND WE DID NOT SEND BEFORE YOU (AS MESSENGERS) EXCEPT MEN TO WHOM
WE INSPIRED. THEN ASK OF THOSE WHO ARE WELL VERSED IN THE SCRIPTURES, IF
YOU DO NOT KNOW.

بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَالزُّبُرِ وَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ لِتُبَيِّنَ
لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ(( 44 ))

44- (WE SENT OUR MESSENGERS BEFORE YOU) WITH EVIDENCES AND SCRIPTURES.
AND WE SENT DOWN TO YOU THE RECITAL, (QURA"N) IN ORDER TO MAKE CLEAR FOR
PEOPLE. WHAT HAS (ALREADY) BEEN SENT TO THEM; PERHAPS THEY MAY THINK.

[ 458 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
ASK THEN; IF YOU DON'T KNOW (VERSE NO. 43 - 44)**

It seemed very strange to the pagan Arabs, that a man like themselves
who ate, drank, and walked in the streets, should come and say:ِ \`\`I
am the Messenger of God, and have brought to you His Message and Book;
and that, Allah communicates his orders to me through inspiration!''
This was because almost all of them were illiterates and ignorant of
letters and books.


