Who Are the Ahl Alzikr?
=======================

The Arabic, \`\`ZIKR'' which is usually translated to, mention
remembering, memory, recital, or invocation of God, has a wide variety
of meanings. It also means having a great deal of information in various
fields of knowledge. Many of the commentators have understood,
\`\`AHL-AL-ZIKR'' to be the elders and the learned. Some commentators
have taken it to be the doctors of the Bible and the Gospel, or those
who are well verses in the Scriptures. On this basis those who are well
versed in Qura"n; they too are the, \`\`AHL-AL-ZIKR''; and the best and
greatest among them are Mohammad himself, his daughter Fatima, Imam Ali
his soul and self, and his two grand sons, Imam Hasan and Imam Husain
(AS).

[ 459 ]

أَفَأَمِنَ الَّذِينَ مَكَرُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ أَنْ يَخْسِفَ اللهُ بِهِمُ
الاَْرْضَ أَوْ يَأْتِيَهُمْ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ(( 45
))

45- DO THOSE WHO PLOT EVILS FEEL SECURE THAT, ALLAH WILL NOT CAUSE THE
EARTH TO TAKE THEM IN, OR THAT THE PUNISHMENT WILL NOT COME UPON THEM
FROM WHERE THEY DO NOT EXPECT.

أَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ فِي تَقَلُّبِهِمْ فَمَا هُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ(( 46 ))

46- OR THAT HE WILL NOT SEIZE THEM IN THEIR GOING TO AND FRO (TO EARN
MORE). THEN (IF IT BE SO) THEY CANNOT ESCAPE.

أَوْ يَأْخُذَهُمْ عَلَى تَخَوُّف فَإِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ((
47 ))

47- OR MAY HE NOT SEIZE THEM ON GRADUAL WARNING? YOUR LORD IS INDEED
KIND AND COMPASSIONATE.


**THE COMMENTARY
SINS VERSUS PUNISHMENTS (VERSE NO. 45 - 47)**

Many a time, Qura"n mingles sentiments with reasons, to obtain the best
of training effects and results. In the previous verses the prophethood
and Resurrection was under logical discussion; and now through the above
verses, the tyrants and arrogant oppressors are threatened, and warned
of various punishments which may afflict them due to their various sins
and guilts. To put out the light of truth; the wickeds plot evil against
the godly in secret, while God is watching them from above or from near
by.... even nearer than the jugular veins of their neck! He is able to
seize them in any time and in various ways. They might be taken up and
swallowed by the earth, like GHA"RUN in the life time of Moses:ِ

[ 460 ]

\`\`Do those who plot evil, feel secure that Allah will not cause the
earth to take them in.'' Only a vibration of earthquake can split a
mouth in the earth, so as to swallow man with his building and whole
household! Or the sinners may be afflicted by other kinds of torment and
chastisements, which they cannot expect or even dream it! Among these
can we mention mysterious diseases, a sudden loss, an accident in
journey or traffic, or only a slip and sliding, and then misery rides
upon misfortune, and distress upon helplessness! God has also some slow
acting and gradual punishments, which is accompanied by warning and
admonishing to give a chance for return and repentance, but the good end
is for those who avoid evil. When God seized not a sinner urgently he
should beware of gradual warnings, because God's mill grinds slowly but
sure!

أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ مِنْ شَيْء يَتَفَيَّؤُا
ظِلاَلُهُ عَنْ الْيَمِينِ وَالشَّمَائِلِ سُجَّداً للهِِ وَهُمْ
دَاخِرُونَ(( 48 ))

48- DO THEY NOT LOOK AT WHAT ALLAH HAS CREATED, OF MATERIAL; THEIR
SHADOWS MOVE FROM THE RIGHT AND LEFT, PROSTRATING FOR ALLAH WHILE THEY
ARE HUMBLE!

وَللهِِ يَسْجُدُ(1) مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ مِنْ
دَابَّة وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ وَهُمْ لاَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ(( 49 ))

49- AND BEFORE ALLAH PROSTRATE THEMSELVES ALL THE MOVING CREATURES, AND
THE ANGELS, AND THEY SHOW NO PRIDE.

يَخَافُونَ رَبَّهُمْ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ وَيَفْعَلُونَ مَا يُؤْمَرُونَ(( 50
))
50- THEY FEAR THEIR LORD (WHO IS) ABOVE THEM, AND DO WHAT THEY ARE
ORDERED.

[ 461 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
ALL PROSTRATE THEMSELVES BEFORE GOD; EVEN THE SHADOWS! (VERSE NO. 48 -
50)**

The argument returns once again to Monotheism of worship; that no one
worths to be worshipped except Allah the only one true God. The verses
here imply that all the living and non-living creatures prostrate
themselves before God; even their shadows, which move from the right and
left, are showing their submission to Him humbly! Physically,
prostration is to recline with face on the ground, in adoration and
worship. It is in fact the sign and symbol of showing one's submission.
In the above verse, (NO.48) the immediate reference is to material
things which are inanimate, and in the next verse, (NO.49) the act of
prostration is applied to living creatures, such as men, animals, and
angels, in other passages too, the Glorious Qura"n claims that, whatever
exist in the heavens and earth, celebrate the praise of God and
prostrate themselves before him in submission and are humble, and they
do what they are ordered to do!

Although the shadow is physically nothing but the absence of light; it
has many uses and benefits for man, and other moving creatures in the
earth. Shadow will adjust and regulate the amount of light and sunshine,
and control the effects of the sun's various and mysterious radiations,
for the benefit of the living creatures down here. It provides for their
rest and repose. Permanent shining of the sun will cause the flowers and
plants and even the moving creatures to fade, and lose their freshness
or brilliance. Those who have to work or to live in the deserts, for
them, shadow is indeed a Mercy of God; and among the most useful means
of living. After all; the shadow, dim and dark, weak or intense, serves
to help vision and seeing things better and with more detail and
resolution.

By a mystical metaphor anything that exists in this material world, it
is a shadow of its true reality in the heavens! In the last verse
(NO.50) we read:ِ \`\`They fear Lord who is above them and they do what
they are ordered.''

[ 462 ]

Allah's hand of power is above all the hands. The learned, and men of
knowledge and wisdom, as well as all the angels, are aware of this
superiority in power; therefore, they are all watchful not to do
something unjust, to encounter with God's justice and due punishment;
and this is where we may say all of them fear their Lord.

وَقَالَ اللهُ لاَ تَتَّخِذُوا إِلاَهَيْنِ اثْنَيْنِ إِنَّمَا هُوَ
إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَإِيَّاىَ فَارْهَبُونِ(( 51 ))

51- AND ALLAH HAS SAID:ِ \`\`TAKE YOU NOT TWO GODS. VERILY HE IS ONLY
ONE GOD. THEN BEWARE OF ME.''

وَلَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَلَهُ الدِّينُ وَاصِباً
أَفَغَيْرَ اللهِ تَتَّقُونَ(( 52 ))

52- AND TO HIM BELONGS WHATEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH; AND TO HIM
BELONGS THE PERMANENT AND PURE RELIGION. DO YOU THEN CARE FOR ANY OTHER
THAN ALLAH?

وَمَا بِكُمْ مِّنْ نِّعْمَة فَمِنَ اللهِ ثُمَّ إِذَا مَسَّكُمْ الضُّرُّ
فَإِلَيْهِ تَجْأَرُونَ(( 53 ))

53- AND ANY BOUNTY (GOOD THINGS) WHICH IS WITH YOU, IT IS FROM ALLAH.
THEN WHEN A LOSS TOUCHES YOU, TO HIM YOU GROAN (FOR HELP)

ثُمَّ إِذَا كَشَفَ الضُّرَّ عَنْكُمْ إِذَا فَرِيقٌ مِّنْكُمْ
بِرَبِّهِمْ يُشْرِكُونَ(( 54 ))

54- THEN WHEN HE REMOVED THE LOSS FROM YOU, A GROUP OF YOU JOIN
PARTNERS TO THEIR LORD!

لِيَكْفُرُوا بِمَا آتَيْنَاهُمْ فَتَمَتَّعُوا فَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 55
))

55- SO LET THEM SHOW INGRATITUDE FOR WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN THEM, AND ENJOY
THEMSELVES (FOR A WHILE), AND SOON SHALL THEY COME TO KNOW.

[ 463 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
GOD IS ONE, AND HIS RELIGION IS ALSO ONE (VERSE NO. 52 - 55)**

Here again polytheism, and in particular DUALISM, has been rejected:ِ

\`\`Allah has said:ِ Do not take two Gods. Verily He is only one God.''
The pagan Arabs had various idols, and yet they believed in Allah as the
supreme being and Creator of all. They even worshipped pairs of idols,
and took them for male and female, like the two idols that they had
settled on top of the two famous hills in Mecca which were named after
the two idols as, SAFA" and MARVEH. Some of the commentators have
understood this verse to have refered to the Dualism doctrine. Some of
the ancient Persians held the doctrine that the universe is under the
dominion of two opposing principles; a good and an evil, manifested in
the light and darkness. This doctrine is contrasted with monism.
Trinity, and pluralism. The Arabs of the Pagan Era did believe in Allah
as their supreme God, but they also had the intermediary gods, such as
their various idols, in order to conduct all their affairs; and even to
intercede with Allah on their behalf.

The great commentator TABARSI, has a fine touch on the above that:ِ
\`\`Your Lord has ordered you not to worship two deities, and yet you
have created so many gods for yourself. Your caprice is an idol, and
your vain desires another. Your worldly aims and object have also turned
to be your gods; and even you prostrate yourself before another man, as
poor and week as yourself!''

\*\*\*\*\*

**ALLAH**

(When Islam was revealed, a more precise and clearer definition of
Allah was given, that:ِ Allah is the Creator of the whole universe. He
is the only one true God. The God of; ABRAHAM, MOSES, JESUS and
MOHAMMAD. He is the unconditioned Lord of all things. He is Merciful to
all His creatures

[ 464 ]

and to mankind. He guides aright those who submit to Him, and punishes
them for their sins. Allah is not to be compared to any of His
creatures. No image or imagination may be made of Him. Allah has told
men what He expects of them, through his prophets, as His SPOKESMEN.
Allah demands above all, the recognition of His own ONENESS. The
greatest sin and oppression is the worship of any other being, real or
imaginary alongside Him. The old Persian Duality, and the new Christian
Trinity, as well as the other pluralities are all rejected, for being
inconsistent with Allah's absolute unity. God is far greater than the
Man can think of, and at the same time He is nearer to Man than the
jugular vein of his neck. Every one can approach God directly in
personal prayer, and especially in reciting the Holy Qura"n which is the
very speech of God.

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

The next verse (NO.52) implies that; not only Allah is the owner of the
heavens and the earth and whatever is in them, that, to Him belongs the
\`\`VA"SIB'' religion which is pure and permanent. The Arabic VA"SIB,
has various shades of meaning, such as, PERMANENT, i.e. continuing or
enduring in the same state without marked changed; and, \`\`PURE'', i.e.
absolute, and free from what vitiates, weakens, or pollutes. Free from
moral defilement or guilt. Hazrat Imam Sadiq (AS) has understood VA"SIB
to mean VA"JIB, or necessary, essential, and incumbent. The ending of
the verse alludes to the fact that, no one worths being feared of,
except Allah:ِ \`\`Do you then care for any other than Allah?'' Fear of
anyone other than God is considered as some sort of polytheism in Islam.
Evil has no power over man of God. The only logical fear is that of the
wrath of Allah, due to our sins. God is absolute goodness and pure
truth, and nothing can come out of goodness but good. He is the only
power that can be relied on to relieve our distress.

وَيَجْعَلُونَ لِمَا لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ نَصِيباً مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ
تَاللهِ لَتُسْأَلُنَّ عَمَّا كُنْتُمْ تَفْتَرُونَ (( 56 ))

[ 465 ]

56- AND THEY ASSIGN A SHARE OF WHAT WE HAVE GIVEN THEM FOR SUSTENCE TO
THOSE WHO DO NOT KNOW. (i. e THEIR IDOLS) BY ALLAH! YOU WILL BE
QUESTIONED OF WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN FORGING.

وَيَجْعَلُونَ للهِِ الْبَنَاتِ سُبْحَانَهُ وَلَهُمْ مَا يَشْتَهُونَ((
57 ))

57- AND THEY ASSIGN DAUGHTERS TO ALLAH! GLORY TO HIM! AND FOR
THEMSELVES (THEY ASSIGN) WHAT THEY LIKE!

وَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِالاُْنثَى ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدّاً وَهُوَ
كَظِيمٌ(( 58 ))

58- AND WHEN ONE OF THEM IS INFORMED OF (HAVING) A FEMALE CHILD, HIS
FACE IS TURNED DARK BLACK, AND HE IS CHOKED (WITH ANGER)!

يَتَوَارَى مِنْ الْقَوْمِ مِنْ سُوءِ مَا بُشِّرَ بِهِ أَيُمْسِكُهُ
عَلَى هُون أَمْ يَدُسُّهُ فِي التُّرَابِ أَلاَ سَاءَ مَا يَحْكُمُونَ((
59 ))

59- HE ESCAPES FROM PEOPLE, BECAUSE OF THE EVIL OF THE BAD NEWS GIVEN
HIM! (HE ASKS HIMSELF); SHOULD I RETAIN HER WITH (SUFFERANCE OF)
CONTEMPT, OR HIDE HER (BURY HER ALIVE)IN THE SOUL!? BEHOLD! HOW BAD DO
THEY JUDGE!

لِلَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاْخِرَةِ مَثَلُ السَّوْءِ وَللهِِ
الْمَثَلُ الاَْعْلَى وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ (( 60 ))

60- FOR THOSE WHO BELIEVE NOT IN THE HEREAFTER, THERE IS THE EVIL
LIKENESS, AND THE MOST SUBLIME LIKENESS (OF ATTRIBUTES) BELONGS TO
ALLAH, AND HE IS ALL-MIGHTY, ALL-WISE.

[ 466 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
WHERE FEMALE BIRTH WAS A SIGN OF SHAME (VERSE NO. 56 - 60)**

Now the argument reflects upon some evil innovations, and shameful
forgeries of the Pagan Arabs:ِ \`\`And they assign a share of what We
have given them for their sustenance to those idols who do not know
anything!'' The Pagan Arabs dedicated a share of what Allah had produced
for their sustenance, in tilth and in cattle, for their idols who were
lifeless carved stones, and had no knowledge at all, even to know what
was offered to them! Neither could they be harmful, nor useful to their
foolish worshippers! Their second evil innovation was that, they
assigned daughters to Allah, who is far clear of material body and
physical attributes. They themself hated having daughters, and believed
that having a daughter would humilate them in their society; and to this
effect they committed female infanticide. Inspite of such motives, they
took the angels to be the DAUGHTERS OF GOD!

The pagan Arab's third evil custom was; when one of them was informed
of having a female child, he would be so angry that his face darkened
and turned black! He sometimes escaped people for knowing his daughter
to be a sign of shame. He did not know how to decide on the matter for
having only two options; either to bury the poor girl alive, or to
retain her as a thing of sufferance and contempt!


**WHY DID THE PAGAN ARAB COMMIT FEMALE INFANTICIDE?**

In their state of perpetual war, sons were a source of power to them.
On the other hand their daughters made them the subject of humiliating
raids. Many a time it happened that in a war their young ladies were
taken as captives by the enemy, and when the war was over; she was not
returned, or she preferred to stay with the enemy and serve him some
how, in the form of a concubine or else. This was due to having an
oppressive husband or master, who could not consider a woman as a human
being! It was such reasons that made the heart-rending female
infanticide customary among the Pagan Arabs,

[ 467 ]

who lived before Mohammad. (AS) This burying bussiness of daughters,
left a black spot of disgrace on the record of Mankind, till the advent
of Mohammad, who worked hard and even fought against that evil custom.
The Messenger of God could convince those wild people that, both man and
women are of the same kind and have the same human rights. Historians
tell us of many heart-breaking instances of this evil custom. an
incident of which follows:ِ In the, AL-QURA"N YOVA"KIBODDAHRِV 2ِP 214
It has been narrated that, a man came to our prophet and converted. A
few days later he came again to the prophet, and asked:ِ \`\`If I have
done a heinous sin will Allah forgive me for my Islam and repentance?''
In answer to him the prophet said:ِ \`\`Allah is All-forgiving
Merciful.'' The man said:ِ \`\`O, Messenger of God! But my sin is a very
great one! The prophet told him:ِ \`\`God's Forgiveness is far greater
than your sin, whatever it might be.'' The new Muslim explained the sin
he had committed thus:ِ

\`\`O, Messenger of God! I was on a far distant journey that my wife,
whom I knew was pregnant, gave birth to a female child. She knew how
much I hated having a daughters. She therefore had concealed her,
telling me that the baby died!'' Four years later when I returned home,
once I saw a beautiful girl in my house who seemed to be very intimate
with my wife. I asked my wife whose daughter was she? The wife said,
that the girl was our neighbour's! But I saw her very aften in our
house, and very friendly with my wife! When my spouse found that I was
very serious to know her, she confessed that she was our own daughter
who was born during my absence in that long journey.''

The man continued saying to the prophet:ِ \`\`That very night I could
not sleep at all for the inconvenience of having a daughter. Now I had a
difficult choice to decide on, either to keep the poor girl as a thing
of sufferance and contempt that would bring disgrace to the family, or
to get rid of her by burying her alive! At last I took my decision and
it was to bury her alive! So next morning, before the sun rise, I went
to her bed and waked her up, and asked her to come with me to our
palm-grove. There I began to dig a grave for her, and when she saw me
perspired and tired of digging, she helped me removing the earth. When
the grave was dug, I cast my daughter in it, and held her with my left
hand not to move, and

[ 468 ]

with my right hand I heapt the soil upon her! She was struggling
continuously, and weeping and saying to me; Father! What are you doing!?
So did I, until she was entirely silent.'' The prophet was shedding
tears all the time that his holiness was listening to the sad story of
the new convert; and finally drying his eyes, he said to the famale
infanticider:ِ \`\`If God's Mercy had not taken precedence of His wrath,
His punishment would have seized you so far!''

Another instance of female infanticide, was that of GHAIS-IBN-ASIM, a
chief of the tribe of BANITAMIM, who confessed to the prophet, saying:ِ
\`\`In the past our fathers practiced female infanticide. I too, got
twelve daughters and buried them all alive, and one after another! My
wife then gave birth to my thirteemth child secretly. This too was a
girl and therefore my wife had given her to her own family to retain and
look after. After a few years I was informed of her existence. I
kidnapped her and buried her alive, while she was entreating me to have
mercy on her!'' The prophet who was shedding hot tears in hearig that;
said to GHAIS:ِ \`\`He who shows no mercy to others, will receive no
mercy! O, GHAIS! You have a very bad day to meet in future.''

GHAIS, said; \`\`O, Messenger of God! What is to be done now, to reduce
the evil consequences of my heinous sins?'' The prophet said:ِ \`\`You
better buy thirteen slaves and set them free.''

With the advent of our prophet Mohammad (AS), Islam strictly prohibited
female infanticide, and declared it to be religiously unlawful as a most
heinous sin. In the Islamic Era no more report has been received or
recorded of such evil deeds. In the last verse of the above group,
(NO.60) the argument reflects again on having faith in Allah and His
just judgement, which is a remedy to all these mental diseases of Man:ِ
\`\`.... And the most sublime likeness of attributes belong to Allah who
is All-mighty, All-wise.'' That is to say:ِ \`\`We should not use any
parable of ourself, when we speak of Allah, because He is above any
comparison, and the highest and noblest attributes belong to Him.''

[ 469 ]

وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللهُ النَّاسَ بِظُلْمِهِمْ مَّا تَرَكَ عَلَيْهَا مِنْ
دَابَّة وَلَكِنْ يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ إِلَى أَجَل مُسَمّىً فَإِذَا جَاءَ
أَجَلُهُمْ لاَ يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ سَاعَةً وَلاَ يَسْتَقْدِمُونَ(( 61 ))

61- IF ALLAH WOULD SEIZE PEOPLE FOR THEIR OPPRESSION, NO MOVING
CREATURE WOULD HAVE BEEN LEFT ON IT. BUT HE RESPITES THEM UP TO AN
APPOINTED TERM. THEN WHEN THEIR TERM CAME THEY CANNOT DELAY IT (EVEN
FOR) AN HOUR, NOR PUT IT FORWARD.

وَيَجْعَلُونَ للهِِ مَا يَكْرَهُونَ وَتَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُهُمْ الْكَذِبَ
أَنَّ لَهُمُ الْحُسْنَى لاَ جَرَمَ أَنَّ لَهُمْ النَّارَ وَأَنَّهُمْ
مُفْرَطُونَ(( 62 ))

62- AND THEY ASSIGN TO ALLAH WHAT THEY DISLIKE IT, (FOR THEMSELVES) AND
THEIR TONGUES DESCRIBE FALSELY THAT FOR THEM IS THE GOOD (END).
NECESSARILY FOR THEM SHALL BE THE FIRE, AND THEY ARE THE PIONEERS (WHO
ENTER THE HELL)

تَاللهِ لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَى أُمَم مِّنْ قَبْلِكَ فَزَيَّنَ لَهُمُ
الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَهُوَ وَلِيُّهُمُ الْيَوْمَ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ
أَلِيمٌ(( 63 ))

63- BY ALLAH WE SENT (OUR MESSENGERS) TO THE NATIONS BEFORE YOU, BUT
SATAN ADORNED FOR THEM THEIR DEEDS, (i.e. MADE THEIR EVIL DEED
FAIR-SEEMING TO THEM) SO HE IS THEIR GUARDIAN TO-DAY, AND FOR THEM IS A
PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

[ 470 ]

وَمَا أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ لِتُبَيِّنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي
اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ وَهُدىً وَرَحْمَةً لِّقَوْم يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 64 ))

64- AND WE DID NOT SEND THE BOOK TO YOU, EXCEPT THAT YOU MAY MAKE CLEAR
TO THEM THAT IN WHICH THEY DIFFER; AND (ALSO AS) A GUIDANCE AND MERCY
FOR A PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE.


**THE COMMENTARY
IF IT WAS ORDERED TO ARREST DRUNKARDS....!? (VERSE NO. 61 - 64)**

After studying the sad story of the female infanticide, a reader may
ask:ِ \`\`Why does God not punish such people for their dreadful crime
soon after, so as to quench the flames of such heinous sins?'' The first
verse of the above group, (NO.61) is to answer this:ِ \`\`If Allah would
seize people for their oppression, no moving creature would be left upon
the earth unpunished!'' The above topic is a Persian proverb that;
\`\`If it was ordered the drunkards to be arrested, all had to go to
jail!'' So also if God had to punish soon after a sin was committed, He
had to turn the earth into an excruciating house. Then Man had to perish
for his sin, and the animals that are created to serve Man, would have
to perish too, by losing their master and support:

Of course this verse does not imply that every one who lives in the
earth is opprossor, and that there are not any good and guiltless
people. But we should know that, when a fire is lit, it burns both, damp
and dry wood. On this motive we have also the verse; S 8:25 in Qura"n
saying:ِ \`\`Fear you of the trials, which affect not in particular only
those of you who have oppressed....''

[ 471 ]

Such a warning is against internal discords and social guilts the bad
results of which may affect and afflict both innocent and guilty.
However Allah does not hasten to punish His guilty servants. If He were
to punish instantly for every evil deed, or any failing, no moving
creature could escape the punishment, because we are almost all
drunkards! God, due to His Infinite Mercy, gives enough time and respite
for amendment, and finding out the way to development and evolution. But
the sinners should not think that God's respite is a sign of His
consent, and they are allowed to do whatever they like. On the other
hand we should reflect on this fact that, the good or bad consequence of
each deed is mingled and accompanied with that deed; and that, there is
a reaction for every action. Our deeds will eventually return back to
us, as the echo of our sounds do. Therefore no good can spring out of
evil.

In the next verse we read:ِ

\`\`By Allah We sent our Messengers to the nations before you, but
Satan adorned for them their deeds....'' God has sent thousands of
apostles of various classes and grades, to cover all ages and all
people, to teach the truth and to show man the straight path of God,
which leads to salvation and prosperity. But Satanic temptations have
always worked against prophethood and prevented a group of people and
caused differences and even enmity among the jarring sects. Many people
have preferred their own ways, or that of their forefathers. Thre are
also other people who know that they are going the wrong way, but to
protect some social privileges they have obtained, they arrogantly
assert themselves and insist upon their assertion. For example they may
say:ِ

\`\`Jesus Christ or Moses, has said this and that, or they have done so
and such; and thus they create differences; and here is Qura"n as a
Criterion for the distinction of wrong and right:ِ \`\`And We did not
send the Book to you except that you may make clear to them that in
which they differ, and also as a guidance and

[ 472 ]

Mercy for a people who believe.'' Therefore, an object of the Holy
Qura"n sent down to our prophet is to guide the people to the true one
God, the faith in whom can lead to the unity of mankind, and guide them
to the right conduct.

وَاللهُ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَحْيَا بِهِ الاَْرْضَ بَعْدَ
مَوْتِهَا إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لِقَوْم يَسْمَعُونَ(( 65 ))

65- AND ALLAH SENT DOWN FROM THE SKY WATER, THEN BY IT HE GAVE LIFE TO
THE EARTH AFTER ITS DEATH. VERILY IN THIS THERE IS A SIGN FOR A PEOPLE
WHO HEAR.

وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِي الاَْنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً نُّسْقِيكُمْ مِّمَّا فِي
بُطُونِهِ مِنْ بَيْنِ فَرْث وَدَم لَبَناً خَالِصاً سَائِغاً
لِلشَّارِبِينَ(( 66 ))

66- AND VERILY THERE IS A (TEACHING) LESSON FOR YOU IN THE CATTLE; WE
GIVE YOU TO DRINK OF WHAT IS IN THEIR STOMACH. (WE TAKE OUT) FROM
BETWEEN DIGESTED FOOD AND BLOOD PURE MILK WHOLE-SOME TO DRINK.

وَمِنْ ثَمَرَاتِ النَّخِيلِ وَالاَْعْنَابِ تَتَّخِذُونَ مِنْهُ سَكَراً
وَرِزْقاً حَسَناً إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لِّقَوْم يَعْقِلُونَ(( 67
))

67- AND OF THE FRUIT OF THE DATE-PALMS AND GRAPES, YOU GET INTOXICANTS,
AND ALSO GOOD SUSTENANCE. VERILY IN THAT IS A SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO USE
THEIR WISDOM.

[ 473 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
WATERS, FRUITS, AND CATTLE (VERSE NO. 65 - 67)**

The natural life and death of the earth, and the role of the rain in
this phenomenon, has been reflected through many verses in the Qura"n:ِ
\`\`Allah sent down from the sky water, then by it gave life to the
earth after its death.'' Water is the main source of life that comes
down from the sky through the shower of rain. When the earth is dry to
extremity, and it is almost dead or say; full asleep; then a shower of
rain which the Persians call it the,\`\`GOD'S MERCY'' is sent down from
the sky that infuses a new blood into the veins of the earth, and LO! It
is covered with green velvet, painted with wonderfully beautiful flowers
and fruits!

And so is the case with our spiritual life, in which our sins nearly
kill our self and soul; but the shower of God's Mercy in the form of
Divine Revelation comes down to infuse new life and spirit to us. In the
next verse, (NO.66) our attention is drown to the cattle, and how much
benefits do we get out of our domestic animals:ِ \`\`And there is a
teaching lesson for you in the cattle; We give you to drink of what is
in their stomach. We take out for you from between their digested food
and blood, pure milk, which is whole-some to drink.''


