How Is Milk Made?
=================

Milk and the products made from it are used as food in almost

[ 474 ]

all nations of the world. The principle source of milk is the dairy
cow, goat,sheep and camel. Because of its extensive use as a food, milk
is subject to stringent regulations defined legally by the Public Health
Services. Milk is composed of three general parts; water, fat, and
solid-not-fat. The latter component is composed of protein, Lactose, and
Minerals. Milk is often called, \`\`NATURAL'S MOST NEARLY PERFECT FOOD''
for it contains nearly all of the essential minerals, especially Calcium
and Phosphorus.

One pint of Cow's milk contains the following component parts:ِA- 385
calories of FOOD ENERGY. B- 17 grams of PROTEIN. C- 0.58 grams of
Calcium. D- 0.44 grams of PHOSPHRUS. E- 750 International Units of
VITAMIN A F- 0.165 milligrams of THIAMINE. G- 0.83 milligrams of
RIBOFLAVIN. H- 4.35 milligrams of NIACIN. I- 7 milligrams of
ASCORBI-ACID. Then in the next verse (NO.67) reference is made to
fruits, and uses of dates and grapes:ِ \`\`And of the date and grapes
you get intoxicants, and good sustenance.''

The Arabic, \`\`SAKAR'' may have other meanings too, but here alcoholic
intoxicant is wanted. It is evident that Qura"n, in this verse has not
permitted to make intoxicants out of date and grapes, because here the
intoxicant is callated with good food or drink (sustenance). We
therefore need not to say that this verse revealed in Mecca, and before
the prohibition of intoxicants. In contrary, the verse implies that
intoxicant is not a good food and it is to be taken as anlawful.

وَأَوْحَى رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنْ اتَّخِذِي مِنْ الْجِبَالِ
بُيُوتاً وَمِنْ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ(( 68 ))

68- AND YOUR LORD INSPIRED THE BEE THAT, TAKE OUT OF THE MOUNTAINS
HOUSES, AND (ALSO) OF THE TREE AND OF

[ 475 ]

WHAT THEY BUILD OF LATTICE-WORK.

ثُمَّ كُلِي مِنْ كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلا
يَخْرُجُ مِنْ بُطُونِهَا شَرَابٌ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ فِيهِ شِفَاءٌ
لِّلنَّاسِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لِقَوْم يَتَفَكَّرُونَ(( 69 ))

69- THEN EAT OF ALL KINDS OF PRODUCES, AND FOLLOW THE WAYS OF YOUR LORD
EASILY. SO, COMES OUT OF ITS STOMACH A DRINK WHICH ITS COLOURS ARE
VARIOUS, THEREIN BEING A HEALING FOR PEOPLE. VERILY IN THAT, THERE IS A
SIGN FOR A PEOPLE WHO THINK.


**THE COMMENTARY
YOUR LORD INSPIRED THE BEE THAT.... (VERSE NO. 68 - 69)**

Here the tune and tone of the verses strangely change, and continuing
with the mention of God's favours and bounties to Man; the speech turns
on the BEE and HONEY, drawing our attention to how the little creature
in such a mysterious way, fulfils God's order, and performs the duty
assigned to him! :ِ \`\`Your Lord inspired the bee to build its home
upon the mountains and trees, and among the habitations of Man on their
lattice-works.'' The Arabic, \`\`VAHY'' literally denotes inspiration
but connotes to induce, or to put a message into the mind or heart by
God. The instinct of creatures too, is some sort of a \`\`VAHY'' or
inspiration that they receive from their Creator. Therefore, here in
this verse the bee's instinct is referred to as God's inspiration.

Now-a-days, Man has much more information about the wonderful
civilization of bees than he had before. The way the bee builds its
wonderful home or the honey-comb, with its hexagonal cells, and so
geometrically perfect, upon the hills, on the trees, or even

[ 476 ]

among the habitations of men, is one of the wonders of nature! The bee,
by its instinct, eats the juice of various kinds of flowers and fruits,
to make within its stomach the honey which it later stores it in those
cells of wax. The bee's process of making honey is no less stranger than
that of the cow's making milk! There are many important and meaningful
points in this verses, some of which are as follows:ِ


**1ِ HOW AND OF WHAT IS HONEY PRODUCED?**

By definition, honey is a sweet, syrupy carbohydrate solution, produced
by the honeybee from flower nectar. The nectar is drawn into bee's
tongue, or labium, and from there it is passed into the honey stomach of
the bee, where salivery enzymes convert the cane suger in the nectar
into dextrose and levulose, two invert sugar. Upon returning to the
hive, the bee pours back the partially digested nectar into a cell of
the comb. Next, \`\`house bees'' cause further chemical changes, by
working the nectar in their mouth. Excess water is evaporated from the
solution as the house bees fan their wings over the cell. Finally the
honey is ready, and the house bees seal the cell with wax.

The flavor and colour of honey are dependent on the flowers from which
the nectar was taken.

**2ِ THE SURE AND EVEN WAYS OF GOD**

Bees have divided themselves in various groups of workers. Each group's
duty is to do a certain part of work to complete the whole process. As
an instance of this, early in the morning, a group of researcher bees,
in the vanguard of the honeybees get out of the hive to find the best
rose-gardens and flowery fields. They then return to report to other
bees what they have discovered. Researchers mark out the way to the
flowery field or farm that have suggested so that their colleague may
easily find the way out:ِ \`\`.... And follow the ways of your Lord
easily.''

[ 477 ]

**3ِ THE PLACE IN WHICH HONEY IS MADE**

The bees drew the nectar by their labium, and pass it into their honey
stomach which is a wonderful little factory. In that factory with the
help of salivery enzyms, the cane sugar in the nectar is converted:ِ
1)into, \`\`DEXTROSE'' which is a kind of crystalline sugar (C6H12O6),
occuring in many plants and in the animal organism.

2) Besides that, the small factory produces a second type of
crystalline sugar out of the nectar which is called, \`\`LEVULOSE'' or
fruit sugar, occuring with difficulty in the honey, and in the most of
the sweet fruits. It is produced by inversion of, \`\`SUCROSE''. Upon
returning to the hive, the bee gushes back the partially processed
nectar into a cell of the comb. It is worthy of note that this SUREH was
revealed in Mecca where there was no plantation or flowers, nor bee and
honey!

\*\*\*\*\*

**WHAT IS GOING ON IN THE BEE - HIVE?**

(During day light hours in the summer, the BEE-HIVE is a scene of
intense, yet orderly activities. A constant stream of workers pass in
and out of the hive entrance. Those who enter, are laden with pollen
(THE MASS OF MICROSPORES IN SEED PLANTS WHICH IS USUALLY IN THE FORM OF
FINE YELLOW FLOUR) and nectar. Those leaving, are headed for flowers
where they can pick up new loads. They sometimes travel to long
distances from their hive in order to reach a particular kind of flower!
Sometimes as far as 8 miles! The field workers are very hardy and active
and tirelessly go about their task so much hard that soon their wings
become tattered, and within a few months they become old and weak and
worn out. Young workers serve as apprenticeship within the hive on
indoor tasks, then they spend a few days near the hive entrance, getting
their

[ 478 ]

bearings, trying out their wings and defending the colony if necessary.
Bees have no defensive soldiers as certain kinds of ants do have. In
times of danger workers are drafted to fight intruders, and they usually
sacrifice their lives by giving their single sting.

The interior of the hive has little waste space. The bulk of the hive
consists of hanging combs of six-sided cells in vertical rows in the
two, placed back to back. Between the rows in the hanging comb, are
narrow passage ways, barely large enough for a bee to squeeze through.
The smallest cells are used as nurseries for worker LAVAE, and pollen
storage. Larger cells function as nurseries for drones, and as bins for
honey. Drones are the males of the honeybee. They have no sting and
gather no honey. They live on the labors of others. The largest cells
are royal suites in which the future queen will born.

The workers who carry on the routine courses of the hive, each perform
a special task. Some are housemaids, keeping the passage ways clean and
free of litter. They also clean and polish each cell before an egg is
placed in it. Others are nursemaids, taking care of the new born bees.
Each of the helpless, blind, and limbless larvae, stretches its head
with open mouth, waiting to be fed with pollen and honey, brought from
the storage bin by the nursemaids! This never ending task is tremendous,
for, the young bees have incredible appetites. Each larvae increases its
weight 1500 times in six days! On the seventh day it stops eating and a
cap is placed over the cell, and the larvae constructs a cocoon. (i.e.
an envelope largely of silk) Then from the cocoon it will emerge as an
adult bee! Other workers serve as carpenters and repairmen, building new
combs and cells, as the population of the hive increases and new storage
bins for mounting the influx of pollen and nectar.

The queen bee does not rule the hive in the usual sense. She is
carefully looked after however, since upon her depends the future
existence of the community. The queen is actually an egg-laying machine,
producing hundreds of thousands of eggs in her lifetime of

[ 479 ]

three or four years. At maximum production, she can lay about 1800 eggs
a day! There is usually only one adult queen in the hive at a time.


**QUOTED FROM INTERNATIONAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
AND OTHER REFERENCES**

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

**4ِ THE COLOURS OF HONEY**

The colour of honey depends on the flowers from which the nectar was
taken. The honey may have a dark brown colour if it is produced from
buck wheat and heather nectar. The light-coloured aromatic honey is
produced from clover, orange, thyme, and sage nectar. We know that
colour increases beauty, shows the food or drink delicious, and incites
the appetite and interest for a food.

**5ِ HONEY IS A HEALING MEDICINE**

Vegetables and flowers are the main sources of many medicines and
drugs, and generally have some sort of curative quality, most of which
are still unknown to Man. Experiences have shown that, honey too, has
many medical benefits and is endowed with many preventive and curative
properties:ِ Honey is easily attracted by the blood, and serves to
refine it. It prevents infections in the stomach. It serves to control
and regulate sleep. It is a cure for constipation. Honey cures coughing,
and is used in curing ulcer of abdomen and duodenum.

Morris Metterling the author of the great work on HONEY BEE has said:ِ
\`\`If to-day the BEES perish suddenly; their death will cause more than
a million kinds of our plants, flowers, and vegetations to die and
destroy! This is because honeybees are essential for the pollination of
many cultivated fruits, including apple cherry, pulm, and pear. They
also pollinate berries and clover.

[ 480 ]

وَاللهُ خَلَقَكُمْ ثُمَّ يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ وَمِنْكُمْ مَّنْ يُرَدُّ إِلَى
أَرْذَلِ الْعُمُرِ لِكَىْ لاَ يَعْلَمَ بَعْدَ عِلْم شَيْئاً إِنَّ اللهَ
عَلِيمٌ قَدِيرٌ(( 70 ))

70- AND ALLAH CREATED YOU, THEN HE TAKES YOUR SOUL AT DEATH. AND THERE
ARE SOME OF YOU WHO ARE PASSED TO THE ABJECT OLD AGE, SO THAT THEY KNOW
NOTHING AFTER KNOWLEDGE. (THEY BECOME FORGETFUL) VERILY ALLAH IS
ALL-KNOWING, ALL-POWERFUL.

وَاللهُ فَضَّلَ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى بَعْض فِي الرِّزْقِ فَمَا الَّذِينَ
فُضِّلُوا بِرَادِّي رِزْقِهِمْ عَلَى مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَهُمْ
فِيهِ سَوَاءٌ أَفَبِنِعْمَةِ اللهِ يَجْحَدُونَ(( 71 ))

71- AND ALLAH EXCELLED SOME OF YOU OVER SOME OTHER IN SUSTENANCE. BUT
THOSE WHO EXCEEDED WILL NOT PASS THEIR SUSTENANCE TO THOSE WHOM THEIR
RIGHT HANDS POSSESS, (THEIR SLAVES) SO AS TO BE EQUAL IN IT. (WITH THEM)
DO THEY THEN DENY ALLAH'S BOUNTY?

وَاللهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجاً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ
مِّنْ أَزْوَاجِكُمْ بَنِينَ وَحَفَدَةً وَرَزَقَكُمْ مِّنْ الطَّيِّبَاتِ
أَفَبِالْبَاطِلِ يُؤْمِنُونَ وَبِنِعْمَتِ اللهِ هُمْ يَكْفُرُونَ(( 72
))

72- AND ALLAH HAS MADE OUT OF YOUR OWN KIND, SPOUSES FOR YOU; AND HAS
MADE OF YOUR SPOUSES CHILDREN AND GRAND-CHILDREN. AND HE SUSTAINED YOU
WITH GOOD SUSTAININGS. DO THEY THEN BELIEVE IN FALSEHOOD, AND BECOME
THANKLESS TO ALLAH'S BOUNTY?

[ 481 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
THE SOURCE OF DIFFERENCES IN SUSTENANCE (VERSE NO. 70 - 72)**

It begins with saying that:ِ \`\`Allah has created you, and He too will
take your soul at death.'' In other word; both our life and death lays
in the hand of God, and they are none of our business. Even we have no
control over the length of our life, and there are some who die young,
and some who are passed to the object old age, so that they lose and
forget all that they knew and had learned! Among all the creatures and
creation, the most wonderful one is the Man who is developed through
many mysterious processes: How the sperm and ova form and join to make
an egg or a seed of Man!? How the egg matures and becomes an embryo in
the uterus!? During the earlier stages, the developing egg which is the
product of fertilization bears no resemblance at all to the baby that is
to be. The creature gradually turns to a child with all its curious
organism and how she grows to intelligence and knowledge. What is its
soul? How is it blown in the child, and how is it taken back at the
death bed!? And what of the body that has to suffer dissolution. All
these transformations in life and nature are evidences of the Infinite
knowledge and power of God, our Creator.

The next verse (NO.71) implies that even our sustenance lays not under
our care and control. We see many weakling and inefficient seeing men
and women, who are superior in wealth and possessions to many sound and
safe and learned persons! After all, a man with superior gift and wealth
will not forget or ignore his superiority, and share a servant or slave
in his wealth, rank, possession and position, so as to be equal with
himself. How dare we then to compare a creature with the Creator who is
the most high? How can we ignore the immense differences that exist
between the Creator and the created!?

[ 482 ]

**IS THE SUPERIORITY IN SUSTENCE JUST?**

To answer the above question we consider two points carefully. 1-
without any doubt, parts of the difference in the wealth and income of
the people depends on the differences of their abilities, potentials,
and activities. This is because the physical and spiritual talents and
abilities are sources of the quality and quantity of Man's endeavour and
activity, be it in the fields of economics or else. Even those whom we
know them to be weakling and inefficient, we see them sometimes with
great wealth and flowing income, and wonder how is that! But when we
carefully reflect on them, we will find them with some strong points of
potential and talent. Therefore, we may conclude that the difference in
incomes is due to the difference in abilities and endeavour, which is of
course bestowed on them though the Grace of God. Every one is created to
do a work, and the inclination of doing that, has been cast into his
heart. Such differences must exist, because they are a part of the
general plan of God.

2- Look at a human body or at a tree. Can these creatures have their
parts and limbs all alike and without any difference? Should our retina,
which is the sensitive membrane of the eye, be as thick, as strong, and
as hard, as the back bone of our foot? Or the rose-leaf becomes as
strong and firm, as the stem or the root of the tree? If we make all men
and women, and all the trees and plants alike, do you think we have done
something right and correct? Of course not. Here, by differences, our
object is the natural differences, which has nothing to do with our
forged and artificial ones like the racial or class differences, that
Man has brought forth with the purpose of colonization and unfair
exploitation. Therefore, these natural differences that exist among men
are among the blessings of God, and are the foundations on which our
existence is built.

The last verse above (NO.72), draws our attention to the creation of
spouses, as being a great favour of our Dear Creator. Woman has been
created as a helper, and as a mate for man in order to find his comfort
with her, and vice verse. Ignoring the sex, both of them are of

[ 483 ]


the same nature, the same moral and the same religious duties and
rights. Therefore she is not to be considered as a source of evil or
sin, as those Christians who escape marriage consider her. The Arabic,
\`\`HAFADAT'' is the plural of, \`\`HA"FID'' which means one who helps
without expecting any reward; but most of the commentators have also
taken it to mean grand children, who are also to be looked upon as
further blessings.

وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مَا لاَ يَمْلِكُ لَهُمْ رِزْقاً مِنْ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ(( 73 ))

73- AND THEY WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH WHAT OWNS NOTHING OF SUSTENANCE
FOR THEM IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, NOR HAVE THEY ANY POWER.

فَلاَ تَضْرِبُوا للهِِ الاَْمْثَالَ إِنَّ اللهَ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنْتُمْ لاَ
تَعْلَمُونَ(( 74 ))

74- SO, STRIKE NO PARABLE FOR ALLAH, (COMPARE NONE WITH HIM) THAT ALLAH
KNOWS, AND YOU KNOW NOT.


**THE COMMENTARY
THINK OF NO SIMILITUDE FOR GOD (VERSE NO. 73 - 74)**

In a taunting language, Qura"n criticizes the polytheists; that, they
worship false gods that can avail them nothing, nor they own any
sustenance for them in the skies or earth. They are also powerless and
can neither harm nor profit them aught. The Arabic, \`\`RIZGH'' which we
have translated to \`\`SUSTENANCE'' implies all that is necessary for
Man and other creature's life and growth, be it physical or spiritual.

[ 484 ]

The second verse concludes that man could not prove any likeness for
God, and compare no one with Him. The Pagan Arabs thought of God as a
king on a throne, with ministers in his left and right, and many
courtiers about him! They took their idols as those nearest and dearest
to God, who could intercede on their behalf with them! Qura"n rejects
all these childish similitudes and comparisons and strictly declares
that God is far from all sorts of comparisons with His creatures. Then
if for our own understanding we must use a similitude we better make use
of the parables that have been struck in Qura"n by God Himself. Man
should never compare God's attributes with those of a Man, because the
difference between the two attributes are infinite. Man should know that
nothing is similar to God, and God is not like anything.

ضَرَبَ اللهُ مَثَلا عَبْداً مَّمْلُوكاً لاَّ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى شَيْء
وَمَنْ رَّزَقْنَاهُ مِنَّا رِزْقاً حَسَناً فَهُوَ يُنفِقُ مِنْهُ سِرّاً
وَجَهْراً هَلْ يَسْتَوُونَ الْحَمْدُ للهِِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ(( 75 ))

75- ALLAH HAS STRUCK A PARABLE; (THAT IS) OF A SERVANT OWNED, (BY HIS
MASTER) WHO HAS NO POWER ON ANYTHING; (HE CAN DO NOTHING) AND ANOTHER
WHOM WE HAVE GIVEN A GOOD SUSTENANCE, SO THAT HE SPENDS OF IT (BY THE
WAY OF CHARITY) SECRETLY OR OPENLY. ARE THE TWO ALIKE? PRAISE BE TO
ALLAH! RATHER MOST OF THEM DO NOT KNOW.

وَضَرَبَ اللهُ مَثَلا رَّجُلَيْنِ أَحَدُهُمَا أَبْكَمُ لاَ يَقْدِرُ
عَلَى شَيْء وَهُوَ كَلٌّ عَلَى مَوْلاَهُ أَيْنَمَا يُوَجِّهُّ لاَيَأْتِ
بِخَيْر هَلْ يَسْتَوِي هُوَ وَمَنْ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَهُوَ عَلَى
صِرَاط مُّسْتَقِيم(( 76 ))

[ 485 ]

76- AND ALLAH HAS STRUCK (ANOTHER) PARABLE:ِ \`\`THAT OF TWO MEN, ONE
OF THEM IS DUMB WITHOUT POWER OF DOING ANYHTING; AND WHO IS A BURDEN
UPON HIS MASTER. WEHEREVER HE DIRECTS HIM, HE BRINGS NOTHING GOOD. IS HE
EQUAL TO HIM WHO ENJOINS JUSTICE, AND WHO IS ON A DIRECT PATH?''

<p dir="rtl">
وَللهِِ غَيْبُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَمَا أَمْرُ السَّاعَةِ إِلاَّ
كَلَمْحِ الْبَصَرِ أَوْ هُوَ أَقْرَبُ إِنَّ اللهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْء
قَدِيرٌ
</p>

(( 77 ))

77- AND TO ALLAH BELONGS THE UNSEEN IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH. AND THE
MATTER OF THE HOUR, (RESURRECTION) IS NOT EXCEPT THE TWINKLING OF THE
EYE, OR IT IS NEARER; (QUICKER) THAT ALLAH HAS THE POWER ON (DOING)
EVERYTHING.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE LIVELY SIMILITUDE OF THE FAITHFUL AND FAITHLESS (VERSE NO. 75 -
77)**

In the first parable above, the likeness of the disbeliever and
polytheist has been illustrated as that of a slave, who is completely
under the power and control of another man; say his slave master. The
slave has no power or authority of anykind in all the aspects of life.
The second man of the parable is a free man who is gifted with power,
wealth and authority. He can easily spend his wealth secretly or openly,
to whoever, and whenever, he wills. Are these two men in the above
parable alike? Of course not. A man who is the servant of God

[ 486 ]

can never live like a man who is the servant of another man himself.
Some of the commentators of Qura"n have understood the above parable in
another way. They say:ِ \`\`In this parable some attributes of Allah
have been compared with those of the idols and false gods whom the
polytheists worshipped.'' The parable implies that; the dominion of the
heavens and the earth, and whatever exists in them belongs to All-mighty
Merciful God who is the creator of All. He bestows His gifts freely on
His creatures as He likes.

In the second parable too, there are two men. One of them is dumb and
can do nothing. He cannot even utter a word or explain a matter. He is
only a burden upon the shoulder of his master, and wherever he directs
him, he brings nothing useful. The second man is sound and safe and he
has authority and power, and always enjoins justice, because he is a
righteous man. Through the two said parables; right and wrong, truth and
falsehood, faithful and faithless, Allah and false gods, have all been
metaphorically, and by way of suggesting a likeness and analogy has been
illustrated. Therefore we may conclude that; Almost all of us are
inclined to hold fast to any little difference that may exist between us
and other men. How dare of us then, to compare some imaginary deified
persons or some false gods with the Gracious God who has created all of
us and all of the

The God Who is most generous in bestowing out of His infinite wealth
and power to whom He will. How should we put the source of all goodness,
and power in one dish of the scale, and an inanimate piece of carved
stone who is void of sense, power, and knowledge, in the second dish to
compare the two?


**THE FREE AND SLAVE**

On contrary to what some people may think, Monotheism is not merely a
matter of belief alone. It has wonderful effect upon all aspects of our
life. In any heart to which Monotheism penetrates, it infuses the heart
with a new kind of life and power, and extends the field and horizon of
human sight. In the aboves verses the polytheist is said to

[ 487 ]

be like a dumb who can do nothing. He cannot even utter a word or
explain a matter. He is only a troublesome burden upon the shoulder of
his guardian, and wherever he directs him to do something, he fails due
to his lack of wisdom, insight and ability. He is not a free human for
being a captive in the paws of superstition, and in the claws of
imagination. He has his destiny in the hands of some fetishes, idols,
and false gods. Wherever he goes, or he is sent to do something, he
fails and brings nothing good with him.

To make it short; Monotheism is not only an idea or merely a motive. It
rather is a pattern, an exemplar. It is a guide, or a model proposed for
a worthy imitation. Making a passing reference to the Monotheists and
polytheists in the begining of the Islamic Era, will make the values of
both of the parties clear.

وَاللهُ أَخْرَجَكُمْ مِّنْ بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
شَيْئاً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ السَّمْعَ وَالاَْبْصَارَ وَالاَْفْئِدَةَ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ(( 78 ))

78- AND ALLAH BROUGHT YOU OUT OF YOUR MOTHER'S WOMBS WHILE YOU KNEW
NOTHING. AND HE MADE FOR YOU EAR AND EYES AND HEART, THAT YOU MAY GIVE
THANKS.

أَلَمْ يَرَوْا إِلَى الطَّيْرِ مُسَخَّرَات فِي جَوِّ السَّمَاءِ مَا
يُمْسِكُهُنَّ إِلاَّ اللهُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِّقَوْم
يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 79 ))

79- DO THEY NOT LOOK AT THE BIRD, SUBJECTED IN THE ATMOSPHERE OF THE
SKY? NO ONE HOLDS THEM UP EXCEPT ALLAH. VERILY IN THAT THERE ARE SIGNS
FOR A PEOPLE WHO BELIEVE.

وَاللهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنْ بُيُوتِكُمْ سَكَناً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِّنْ
جُلُودِ الاَْنْعَامِ بُيُوتاً تَسْتَخِفُّونَهَا يَوْمَ ظَعْنِكُمْ
وَيَوْمَ إِقَامَتِكُمْ وَمِنْ أَصْوَافِهَا وَأَوْبَارِهَا وَأَشْعَارِهَا
أَثَاثاً وَمَتَاعاً إِلَى حِين(( 80 ))

[ 488 ]

80- AND ALLAH HAS MADE FOR YOU A PLACE OF REST OUT OF YOUR HOUSES. AND
HAS MADE FOR YOU ROOMS FROM THE SKINS OF CATTLE THAT YOU MAY FIND THEM
LIGHT, THE DAY YOU BECAMP (WHEN YOU MOVE ON) AND THE DAY YOU STAY. AND
OF THEIR WOOL, AND OF THEIR FUR, AND OF THEIR HAIR, (YOU MAKE TEMPORARY)
FURNITURES AND PROVISIONS FOR A WHILE.

وَاللهُ جَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِّمَّا خَلَقَ ظِلاَلا وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِّنْ
الْجِبَالِ أَكْنَاناً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ سَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُمْ الْحَرَّ
وَسَرَابِيلَ تَقِيكُمْ بَأْسَكُمْ كَذَلِكَ يُتِمُّ نِعْمَتَهُ عَلَيْكُمْ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُسْلِمُونَ(( 81 ))

81- AND ALLAH HAS MADE FOR YOU SHADE OF THE THINGS HE CREATED. (TO
SHELTER YOU FROM THE SUN) AND MADE FOR YOU PLACES OF PROTECTION IN THE
MOUNTAINS. AND MADE FOR YOU SHIRTS TO PROTECT YOU IN YOUR WAR. SO DOES
HE COMPLETE HIS BOUNTY ON YOU, PERHAPS YOU MAY SUBMIT. (TO HIM)

فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ(( 82 ))

82- BUT IF THEY TURN AWAY, THEN YOUR DUTY IS ONLY PERSPICUOUS
CONVEYANCE. (OF GOD'S MESSAGE)

يَعْرِفُونَ نِعْمَتَ اللهِ ثُمَّ يُنكِرُونَهَا وَأَكْثَرُهُمُ
الْكَافِرُونَ(( 83 ))

83- THEY RECOGNIZE THE BOUNTY OF ALLAH, (HIS BLESSINGS AND FAVOURS)
THEN THEY DENY IT, AND MOST OF THEM ARE UNGRATEFUL.

[ 489 ]


**THE COMMENTARY
VARIOUS PHYSICAL AND SPIRITUAL BOUNTIES (VERSE NO. 78 - 83)**

The first verse of the above group alludes to the means of
apprehension, and understanding. At his begining of life, Man has no
knowledge at all. Whatever he knows later, he has learned and earned
after his birth, through the means and instruments that Allah has given
him; such as the ears, eyes, and heart, which is his main faculty of
understanding, and learning. Some scholars are of the opinion that, the
newly born baby has a certain amount and kind of knowledge, such as
knowing his own existence, and knowing the Creator. He apprehends the
fact that one part is smaller than the whole; but his knowledge has not
yet been brought into effect; but he or she has the ability and talent
of knowing these sort of matters. In other word when we were born, we
were not aware of anything, even, our own existence; but the power and
aptitude of knowing was in us.

Of course the outside world does not enter into ourself or soul. With
the help of the means and instruments that are given to us, we may take
pictures, draw forms, and trace things that are outside of us, and then
record or register the out existing forms in our mind, memory, or soul;
whatever we may name the inner store room. Thus the supply of our
knowledge and understanding is formed. Then we may analyse through our
wisdom and thought, so as to discover the true nature, and the inner and
outer relationship of the existing things. We may then mentally separate
the parts of a whole in order to reveal their relation to one another,
and also to the whole.

In the second verse above, (NO.78) the ear has been mentioned prior to
the eye; while we know that the role of the eye is more important in our
apprehensions. This is most probably because the newly born baby makes
use of his ear, before he or she opens the eyes to see.

[ 490 ]


**THE BIRDS SECRETS OF FLIGHT**

Without the use of such a wonderful art, knowledge, and wisdom, neither
a bird can fly in the air, nor an airplane. Who then except Allah is
valid to claim to have done all the wonderful artistry and workmanship
based on science and knowledge, technique and wisdom, to hold the bird
up there so easily!? :ِ

\`\`Do they not look at the bird, subjected in the atmosphere of the
sky? No one holds them up except Allah. Verily in that there are signs
for a people who believe.


