Be With the Truthfuls (verse No. 119)
=====================================

Literally the truthfuls are those who are true in their words and
deeds, and do not lie. They are pious too, and keep their selfish
desires at bay. To understand the meaning of the term technically, we
must refer to the verse NO.177 of the chapter of Cow, (S 2) which
explains the TRUTHFULS and pious with some details. The verse is as
follows:ِ

\`\`Righteousness is not only to turn your faces towards the east and
and the west. True righteousness is rather to believe in Allah and the
Last Dayِand the angels and the Bookِand the prophetsِand who gives his
wealth for love of Allah to;ِ his kinsfolk and orphansِand to the
needies and to the wayfarerِand to those who askِand to ransom the
slavesِand to perform the prayerِand paying the almsِtax, and those who
fulfil their covenant which they have madeِand the patient in distress
and adversity, and in time of war:ِ such are the TRUTHFULS and such are
the PIOUS.''

When the above verse (NO.119) revealed; SALMA"N FARSI, asked the
prophet:ِ \`\`Is this order general or limited?'' The prophet answered:ِ
\`\`The commandment to avoid evil, and to be with the truthfuls, is
common to all. As to the truthful with whom they should abide, it refers
to my brother Ali and his innocent successors up to the Day of Doom.''
This tradition has been related by successive witnesses from among Sonni
and Shiite.

مَا كَانَ لاَِهْلِ الْمَدِينَةِ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُمْ مِنَ الاَْعْرَابِ
أَنْ يَتَخَلَّفُوا عَنْ رَّسُولِ اللهِ وَلاَ يَرْغَبُوا بِأَنفُسِهِمْ
عَنْ نَفْسِهِ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ لاَ يُصِيبُهُمْ ظَمَأٌ وَلاَ نَصَبّ
وَلاَ مَخْمَصَةٌ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَلاَ يَطَئُونَ مَوْطِئاً يَغِيظُ
الْكُفَّارَ وَلاَ يَنَالُونَ مِنْ عَدُوّ نَيْلا إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُمْ
بِهِ عَمَلٌ صَالِحٌ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ(( 120
))

[ 47 ]

120- IT WAS NOT (REASONABLE) FOR THE INHABITANTS OF MEDINA, AND THOSE
IN SUBURBS, OF THE ARABS, TO INFRINGE ON THE MESSENGER OF GOD; NOR TO
PREFER THEIR LIVES TO HIS. THIS IS BECAUSE THERE AFFLICTS THEM NO
THIRST, NEITHER A FATIGUE OR HUNGER IN THE WAY OF ALLAH; NOR DO THEY
TREAD A PATH TO ENRAGE THE UNBELIEVERS, OR RECEIVE ANY INJURY OF AN
ENEMY, EXCEPT THAT A GOOD DEED WILL BE WRITTEN FOR THEM; (IN THEIR
RECORD) THAT ALLAH WASTES NOT THE REWARD OF THE GOOD- DOERS.

وَلاَ يُنفِقُونَ نَفَقَةً صَغِيرَةً وَلاَ كَبِيرَةً وَلاَ يَقْطَعُونَ
وَادِياً إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُمْ لِيَجْزِيَهُمْ اللهُ أَحْسَنَ مَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ (( 121 ))

121- NOR DO THEY EXPEND ANY EXPENDITURE, (FOR THE CAUSE OF ALLAH) BE IT
SMALL OR LARGE; NOR DO THEY TRAVERSE ANY LAND, BUT IT IS WRITTEN DOWN TO
THEIR CREDIT THAT ALLAH MAY REWARD THEM THE BEST OF WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN
DOING.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE STRIVER'S DIFFICULTIES ARE NOT LEFT UNREWARDED (VERSE NO. 120 -
121)**

Again the immediate reference is to the expedition of TABUK, but the
lesson is general and for all Muslims in all ages. The lesson is that we
should not hold our life dearer than that of the prophet nor, desert

[ 48 ]

him in the hour of danger. If physically we are not related to the
prophet now, and in the future, but spiritually Muslims have the
connection for ever. This is because he is the leader and the Messenger
of God, and on him depends the existence of Islam and Muslims. Therefore
to leave the prophet alone in the hazards, even though spiritually, it
will endanger the very existence of the believers and their community.
The day in which the verse was sent down, Medina was the only capital of
Islam and the center of the Muslim gathering, and this is why Medina and
its suburbs have been mentioned. However this issue is not limited to
Medina and the outlying parts of it. It is rather the duty incumbent
upon all Muslims throughout the ages, to love their leaders, and to
protect their lives and prestige and influence by all means.

The verse then implies that; whatever of sufferings, hardships, or
injuries that we endure, or whatever we offer of our resources in the
way of Allah, all goes to our credit, and our reward will be far greater
than anything we do for the cause of God. Here the verse alludes to
seven certain difficulties that we may confront with them in our course
of physical and spiritual endeavours and strives. These instances are as
follows:ِ

1- Thirst that was something common in that hot Arabian deserts.

2- Fatigues, or any tiredness resulting from hard works or journeys in
the way of God.

3- Hunger.

4- Treading a dangerous path which can enrage the infidels.

5- Receiving any injury from the enemies of God.

6- And a couple of individual acts of heroism are mentioned in the next
verse, such as spending of resources in the way of Allah, and,

7- Or dashing across a valley, or going on a journey like TABUK or
traversing any other land.

All these sufferings and hardship are credited to our account and are
registered in our record, in order to be paid back and rewarded by a far
greater amount. All of the said sufferings will serve to raise our
spiritual grade in the eternal life to come.

[ 49 ]

وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنفِرُوا كَافَّةً فَلَوْلاَ نَفَرَ مِنْ
كُلِّ فِرْقَة مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ
وَلِيُنذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَحْذَرُونَ(( 122 ))

122- THE BELIEVERS SHOULD NOT GO FORTH (TO WAR) ALL TOGETHER. WHY
SHOULD NOT A BODY OF EACH DIVISION OF THEM STAY BEHIND (WITH THE PROPHET
IN MEDINA) TO STUDY DEEP IN RELIGION, IN ORDER TO PREACH THEIR PEOPLE
WHEN THEY RETURN TO THEM (FROM THE BATTLE-FIELDS) SO THAT THEY MAY TAKE
HEED.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 122)**

After the revelation of the aforementioned verses, that criticized some
of the Muslims on account of the TABUK expedition, it so happened that,
when an expedition was organized with the aim of fighting the enemy or
some rebels; Muslims rushed to go forth all together leaving the prophet
alone in Medina. So the above verse was sent down as a new instruction
for Muslims that it is not necessary for all of you to go forth at once
and all together. Some should stay with the prophet at the source of
inspiration, and listen carefully and study deeply the Divine Law, in
order to teach those who were busy in the fields, when they return.

Sometimes it also happened that most people in a tribe or village
rushed out to the capital, to see the prophet and to learn from him the
Law and Qura"n. So the verse is also giving an advice to such people,
that they should not leave their hearth and home all together with the
aim of learning theology and religious knowledge and belief. It will
suffice their need if only a body of them leave their home and make for
Medina to learn what is needed and come back teaching those who had
remained behind.

[ 50 ]

**FIGHT IGNORANCE AND INFIDELS**

The above mentioned verse also alludes to an important fact, that,
fighting may be inevitable, but it should not always be so glorified
that could result to the exclusion of other important things, like
learning and education. This is because in the sight of God the ink of
the learned and the scholar is dearer than the blood of the martyrs!
Muslims warriors had better to divide in two groups. One party had to go
forth in the field, to fight the enemy when the prophet himself was not
leading the army and remained in the capital. And the next party had to
stay with the prophet to learn theology, in order to teach the other
fighters when they returned from the battle- field. Of course in this
case both the learners, and the teachers, were soldiers and warriors!
Learning wisdom and knowledge is also some sort of fighting against the
devil of ignorance, and is no less important in the sight of Allah, than
fighting against heathenism.

Therefore some of the believers were ordered to remain in Medina with
the Messenger of God, for the purpose of study and learning, so that
they could teach the warriors later on.

The verse under discussion also implies that a group of muslims, always
have to go for learning in the centers of education and knowledge, and
in the place where wisdom and theology is being taught, in order to
learn something and come back to teach their citizens. This order will
remind us of the famous tradition related from our prophet who said:ِ
\`\`Seek knowledge even if you find it in China.'' On the other hand,
this verse clearly implies how important learning and teaching is in the
sight of God and in Islam. Here a group of Muslims are ordered to leave
JAHA"D, which is one of the most important commandments and attend the
classes for learning and then teaching what is learnt. This is why
Muslims are the pioneers and pillars of science and knowledge in the
world.

One of the expounders of the holy Qura"n has a remarkable

[ 51 ]

comment here in this verse- he says:ِ

\`\`I was in TRIPOLIS for study, when the governor there who had a good
knowledge of Islam, said to me: why does Persian government exempt the
theological Students of Qom, from military services, while this sacred
service is more becoming to them, and befits them? The commentator,
Remembered the above verse and told the governor:ِ The believers should
not go forth all together. Rather a body of each division of them should
stay behind with the prophet in Medina to learn theology and learn the
knowledge of religion and belief in order to preach and teach the
others. As a matter of fact, in any field of knowledge and branch of
science, some students must study deep to become expert in order to
satisfy the needs of their community; and the knowledge of religion and
belief is not an exception among the fields of knowledge.''

يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ يَلُونَكُمْ مِنْ
الْكُفَّارِ وَلْيَجِدُوا فِيكُمْ غِلْظَةً وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللهَ مَعَ
الْمُتَّقِينَ(( 123 ))

123- O, YOU WHO BELIEVE! FIGHT THE UNBELIEVERS WHO ARE NEAR TO YOU.
(LET NOT THE FARTHER MAKE YOU FORGET THE NEARER) AND THEY SHOULD FIND IN
YOU SOME HARSHNESS. (FIRMNESS) AND KNOW THAT ALLAH IS WITH THOSE WHO ARE
PIOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
CATCH THE NEARER ENEMIES (VERSE NO. 123)**

It is true that when the conflict becomes inevitable, we have to
contend against all enemies, but a better tactic may sometimes be, to

[ 52 ]

clean the surroundings first and get rid of the nearer enemy; and then
proceed to the next groups who are farther. Of course there are
exceptions in everything. The odds are that the farther enemy might be
more dangerous than the nearer. In such cases we may attend to the
farther, or even contend against both parties simultaneously, and in the
same rush.

The second order in this verse is that the believers should show up a
staut and stiff resistance to the infidel enemy. This is because the
unbelievers are not spiritually a firm people in dangerous incidents.
They are a compound of cowardice, greed, timidity and ignobility; and
when they find their interests, and in particular their life in danger
they leave every one and everything in order to save themselves.

وَإِذَا مَا أُنزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ يَقُولُ أَيُّكُمْ
زَادَتْهُ هَذِهِ إِيمَاناً فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فَزَادَتْهُمْ
إِيمَاناً وَهُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ(( 124 ))

124- WHENEVER A CHAPTER IS SENT DOWN; OF THEM IS HE WHO SAYS:ِ
\`\`WHICH ONE OF YOU HAS THIS INCREASED IN BELIEF?''

AS FOR THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED, THEIR BELIEF IS INCREASED, AND THEY
REJOICE.

وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ فَزَادَتْهُمْ رِجْساً إِلَى
رِجْسِهِمْ وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كَافِرُونَ(( 125 ))

125- BUT AS FOR THOSE IN WHOSE HEART IS A DISEASE; IT ADDED UNCLEANNESS
(ABOMINATION) TO THEIR UNCLEANNESS, AND THEY DIED WHILE THEY WERE
UNBELIEVERS.

[ 53 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE EFFECTS OF QURA"N UPON CLEAN AND UNCLEAN HEARTS (VERSE NO. 124 -
125)**

Here again reference is made to another symptom of the believers and
the unbelievers:ِ When a chapter of Qura"n is sent down, and it is
supposed to increase the faith of Muslims, (as it is mentioned elsewhere
in the Book) some of the unbelievers mock at the revelation and say:ِ
\`\`Did it increase any of you in faith?'' By that, they wanted to prove
ineffectiveness for the revelation in order to lower and reduce its
importance in the sights! But indeed the verses did affect the hearts of
both of the parties, by increasing the faith of one and decreasing that
of the other. The unbelievers and hypocrites who were spiritually sick
in heart, got more doubts by the verses in their heart and eventually
they died faithless and doubtful.

On the other hand, the believers were happy and rejoiced in having new
message and truthful guidance from their Lord. The new revelation served
to increase their faith as well as their gratitude and thankfulness.
This implies that a good programme, and knowledge, and know how, alone
is not enough to make a man prosperous or to lead him to salvation. In
him there must exist a readiness and a willing background for the
important change. The word of God is just like the rain that makes a
land with necessary merits productive, while it spoils the seeds sown in
a salty and unprepared land. Or its likness is the likeness of the sun
light which gives the healthy eyes vision and more enlightment, and
causes more pain in a diseased eye.

The pious and thoughtful people may take new lessons out of every verse
or every word of Allah, but the thoughtless evil- doer may

[ 54 ]

add more obstinacy to theirs, by reading the same chapter or verses!
The Arabic, \`\`REJS'' which can be translated to; \`\`UNCLEANNESS'' or
\`\`ABOMINATION'' is the inevitable fruit of hypocrisy and unbelief. It
will cause a feeling of disgust hatred, doubt, or other shamefully vile
characters. The verse also implies that the foremost Muslims were
infused with new life and energy by reciting the verses of the glorious
Qura"n, but now we see that our contaminated thought and mind, prevents
us from getting the life giving light. The mirror of our heart has been
covered with rust and dust, and reflects not the Divine light and we
can't see the beautiful face of truth in the mirror.

We seek refuge in Allah from the obscurity of our hearts that lets not
the word of God and the Divine light penetrate in us!

أَوَلاَ يَرَوْنَ أَنَّهُمْ يُفْتَنُونَ فِي كُلِّ عَام مَرَّةً أَوْ
مَرَّتَيْنِ ثُمَّ لاَ يَتُوبُونَ وَلاَ هُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ(( 126 ))

126- DO THEY NOT SEE THAT THEY ARE TRIED ONCE OR TWICE IN EVERY YEAR?
YET THEY DO NOT REPENT, NOR ARE THEY ADMONISHED

وَإِذَا مَا أُنزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ نَظَرَ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَى بَعْض هَلْ
يَرَاكُمْ مِنْ أَحَد ثُمَّ انصَرَفُوا صَرَفَ اللهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ
بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لاَ يَفْقَهُونَ(( 127 ))

127- AND WHENEVER A CHAPTER IS SENT DOWN, SOME OF THEM LOOKED UPON SOME
OTHER. DOES ANY ONE SEE YOU? THEY THEN TURN AWAY. (LEAVING THE PROPHET
REHEARSING THE CHAPTER OF QURA"N NEWLY REVEALED)

ALLAH HAS TURNED THEIR HEARTS (FROM THE TRUTH) BECAUSE THEY ARE A
PEOPLE WHO DO NOT UNDERSTAND.

[ 55 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 126 - 127**

The argument still goes on with the hypocrites and infidels: Every year
at least once or twice they were tried by various trials, such as
afflictions, miracles issued by the prophet, and clear signs and
reasons, through which they could see the hands of God, but they paid no
heed to it, and took no lesson from the incidents. Inspite of all their
blasphemies, the doors of God's Grace and Mercy was kept open to them
through such trials, but they deliberately ignored the chances of
rescue, and continued with their disobedience and contumacy.

Whenever a chapter of Qura"n was sent down and the prophet began to
recite it to the audience, they looked down upon it with disfavour or
contempt, by having a glance around them, saying:ِ \`\`Does anyone see
you?'' and leaving the assembly of the holy prophet. The reason and
cause of their contumacy was that God had turned their heart from the
truth, for being ignorant and paying no heed to the warnings. So their
obstinate resistance and lack of knowledge and understanding, deprived
them of God's Grace and His light of guidance.

لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 128
))

128- VERILY THERE HAS COME TO YOU A MESSENGER FROM YOURSELVES; YOUR
SUFFERING GRIEVES HIM. SOLICITOUS IS HE OVER YOU, AND TO THE BELIEVERS
HE IS AFFECTIONATE, MERCIFUL.

فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْاْ فَقُلْ حَسْبِيَ اللهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ(( 129 ))

[ 56 ]

129- BUT IF THEY TURN AWAY, SAY:ِ \`\`ALLAH IS SUFFICIENT FOR ME. THERE
IS NO GOD BUT HE. ON HIM I HAVE PUT MY TRUST. HE IS THE LORD OF THE
GREAT THRONE.''

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 128 - 129**

Some of the commentators believe that these verses are the last ones
that were inspired to our holy prophet. They begin with the:ِ clause
\`\`Verily there has come to you a Messenger from yourselves.'' He is of
you and belongs to yourself and soul. He knows all your pains,
difficulties, and sufferings. Your grief will grieve him, and he
rejoices at your prosperity. If you go headlong to ruin, his tender
heart will be full of sorrow and grief for the believers. In this short
verse, four qualifications are attributed to Mohammad (AS):ِ

1- Your sufferings and hardships grieve him.
2- He is solicitous over you and he tenderly wishes to guide you to
salvation and felicity.
3&4- He is affectionate and Merciful to all believers. In the next and
the last verse, God consoles His prophet and gives him comfort; not to
get disappointed if they pay no heed, and accept no advice, or reject
the light of truth. Even if all of them turn away, Allah alone is enough
for youِthe Lord that there is no God but Heِthe Lord of the great
throne.

**THE END OF SUREH REPENTANCE (9)**

[ 57 ]

**سوره يونس
JONAH**

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL THE COMPASSIONATE

الر تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْحَكِيمِ(( 1 ))

1- A.L.R. THESE ARE THE SIGNS OF THE BOOK OF THE WISE.

أَكَانَ لِلنَّاسِ عَجَباً أَنْ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى رَجُل مِّنْهُمْ أَنْ
أَنْذِرِ النَّاسَ وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَنَّ لَهُمْ قَدَمَ صِدْق
عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ قَالَ الْكَافِرُونَ إِنَّ هَذَا لَسَاحِرٌ مُبِينٌ(( 2
))

2- WAS IT STRANGE TO MANKIND THAT WE INSPIRED A MAN OF THEM TO WARN
PEOPLE, AND GIVE GLAD- TIDINGS TO THOSE WHO BELIEVE,THAT THEY SHALL HAVE
RECORD OF TRUTH (A SURE REWARD FOR THEIR ENDEAVOURS) WITH THEIR LORD.
THE UNBELIEVERS SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS AN EVIDENT SORCERER.''

[ 58 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE MESSAGE OF THE PROPHET (VERSE NO. 1 - 2)**

The abbreviated letters are dealt with before in the chapter two of the
Book, where we concluded that they are mystic symbols, or some sort of
code between God and His Messenger. About these letters we have no clear
authoritative explanation, yet we shall discuss them again in due
position, and will give some new views and more detail about them. The
second verse points at one of the frequent objections of the unbelievers
who wondered how a man like them should carry a message from Allah the
Creator and the Lord of the whole universe!? It seemed very strange to
them that the creator of heavens and earth should speak to the lowly man
through a Messenger or anything else. In their astonishment they could
only attribute the phenomenon to sorcery and magic!

In the above verse there is a fine answer or a hint, that:ِ \`\`OUR
MESSENGER IS OF THEM'':ِ

\`\`Was it strange to mankind that we have inspired a man of them, to
warn people....'' A man like unto them who knows their sufferings, who
feels their pains, who sees their difficulties, and who understands
their spiritual and physical needs, and the shortcomings of their
society. The Arabic, \`\`GHADAM-AL-SEDQ'' is defined in three shades of
meaning, by different commentators;

1- That it may mean that faith and truth has an old record and their
faith and truthfulness in belief and deeds are all recorded to be
rewarded.

2- It may also denote or connote the believer's rank and position. That
is to say; they will have a high position in the presence of Allah for
their truthfulness.

3- And thirdly, it may mean leading and leader; implying that a

[ 59 ]

truthful leader like Mohammad (AS) they have got, who will lead them to
salvation and prosperity. All the three shades of meanings may end to
the same conclusion. As to the question:ِ \`\`Why did they attribute the
signs of God presented by Mohammad (AS) ,to sorcery?'' We may say:ِ
\`\`It was due to their failure in their challenge to bring one, the
like of it.'' They also did not understand the fact that sorcery and
magic were the projection of their own minds and fancies, while the
signs of God in the form of miracles, Qura"nic verses, and wisdom, were
the enduring truth from Allah.

إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّام ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُدَبِّرُ الاَْمْرَ مَا
مِنْ شَفِيع إِلاَّ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِذْنِهِ ذَلِكُمُ اللهُ رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُوهُ أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ(( 3 ))

3- VERILY YOUR LORD IS ALLAH, WHO CREATED THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH IN
SIX DAYS (PERIODS). THEN HE APPLIED TO THE EMPYREAN. HE ARRANGES THE
ORDER. THERE IS NO INTERCESSOR EXCEPT AFTER HIS PERMISSION. SUCH IS
ALLAH YOUR LORD, SO WORSHIP HIM. WILL YOU NOT THEN MIND?

إِلَيْهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ جَمِيعاً وَعْدَ اللهِ حَقّاً إِنَّهُ يَبْدَأُ
الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ لِيَجْزِىَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ بِالْقِسْطِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَهُمْ شَرَابٌ مِّنْ
حَمِيم وَعَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ(( 4 ))

4- TO HIM IS YOUR RETURN, ALL TOGETHER. (THIS IS) ALLAH'S PROMISE IN
TRUTH. VERILY HE ORIGINATES THE CREATION THEN RENEWS IT, IN ORDER TO
RECOMPENSE JUSTLY THOSE WHO BELIEVED AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS.

[ 60 ]

AND THOSE WHO DISBELIEVED; FOR THEM IS DRINK OF BOILING WATER, AND
PAINFUL PUNISHMENT FOR WHAT THEY DISBELIEVED.

**THE COMMENTARY
THEISM AND RESURRECTION (VERSE NO. 3 - 4)**

Following some hints to inspiration and prophethood, two important
tenets which are taught by the apostle are put on the carpet. These two
important principles are; Man's origin and destination:ِ \`\`Your Lord
is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six days, and then he
applied to the Empyrean:ِ ''

**IN SIX DAYS**

The creation in six days here is a metaphorical expression. Time in
Qura"nic literature is based on relativity, because in S 22:47 it is
cited that a day in sight of God is like a thousand years of our
reckonings, and in another verse the comparison is with fifty thousands
of our solar years. Therefore the six days may mean six period of time,
or in six epochs of evolution.

On the other hand the Arabic, \`\`ARSH'' translated here to empyrean,
means a ceiling or a high throne or seat used by a king. Its connotation
implies royal authority or power, such as saying Queen Elizabeth II
succeeded to the throne in 1952. Therefore in our translation we have it
as God's application to the Empyrean, after His creation of the heavens
and the earth, to show that God's creation was a prelude to His work,
and His protection Maintenance, and authority is continued for ever and
is practised constantly.

The next verse points to Resurrection which is God's promise in truth,
that He will raise up the dead to give them their due rewards,

[ 61 ]

and to show them the fruit of their deeds what so ever. Allah has
originated the creation, and the Originator is also able to renew and to
revive as He does that to plantations in the spring. God creates and
moves the creatures at the begining and leads them in the path of
evolution and development. Then by making man to die, He takes him into
another kind of creation, and eventually restores him to a much
developed physical life.

هُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ الشَّمْسَ ضِيَاءً وَالْقَمَرَ نُوراً وَقَدَّرَهُ
مَنَازِلَ لِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السِّنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ مَا خَلَقَ اللهُ
ذَلِكَ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ يُفَصِّلُ الاْيَاتِ لِقَوْم يَعْلَمُونَ(( 5
))

5- HE IS WHO MADE THE SUN SHINING AND THE MOON A LIGHT (REFLECTOR), AND
ARRANGED PHASES FOR HER, SO THAT YOU MIGHT KNOW THE NUMBER OF THE YEARS,
AND THE RECKONING (OF TIME).

ALLAH CREATED NOT THOSE (CELESTIAL BODIES), EXCEPT RIGHTEOUSLY. (THERE
WAS EVERY RIGHT AND REASON FOR THEIR CREATION) HE EXPLAINS THE SIGNS FOR
A PEOPLE WHO KNOW.

إِنَّ فِي اخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَمَا خَلَقَ اللهُ فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ لاَيَات لِقَوْم يَتَّقُونَ(( 6 ))

6- VERILY, IN THE ALTERNATION OF NIGHT AND THE DAY; AND WHATEVER ALLAH
CREATED IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH, THERE ARE SIGNS FOR A PEOPLE WHO AVOID
EVIL.

[ 62 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
A FEW SIGNS OF GOD'S GREATNESS (VERSE NO. 5 - 6)**

More details of the aforementioned verses are given here in which the
sun is introduced as a light emitting source, and the moon as a light
reflector. Not only the sun and moon, that everything in God's creation
has use and purpose, beauty and grace, and fits into his universal
design. In these verses, the sun is shown in its glory and splendour,
and the moon in its beauty and attraction, and both of them are the
signs of God's infinite and amazing power and knowledge of creation and
His limitless Mercy and Grace.

The sun, not only warms the bed of all the creatures, but also it
nourishes all plants and animals. As an immense source of energy, it
causes all the movements upon the earth, even those of the winds and the
waves, and flow of streams and the eruption of springs. If the sun cease
shining over the earth, soon every moving creature will die in the dark
of the night. The moon too, with its poetical beauty, and spritual
loveliness is our lamp in the night, and our water pump in the day,
which its gravital attraction causes the lowِtide and highِtide of the
seaِa vital natural phenomena for the life of plantations.

here phases are arranged so that we may easily know the number of the
years and the seasons, and use it in our time reckoning as a natural
calendar.

Not only the celestial bodies, but whatever is in the heavens and in
the earth, be it large or small, it is a sign, and a well polished
mirror that reflects the power, the purpose, the knowledge, and the
general plan of God who is indeed all in all. Only those can see the
marks and signs of our Lord in every particle, who have the mirror of
their heart polished by piety and virtue.

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 63 ]

**THE SUN**

The sun is the only STAR that is near enough to our earth to be
observed in detail.

The sun's mean distance from the earth is about 92900,000ِmiles, and it
takes 8.3 minute for a photon of sun's light to reach our earth; where
as the light of the next nearest star requires more the four years to
reach the earth.

Most of the sun's radiation emerges from a layer on its surface, called
PHOTOSPHERE, which is 250 miles thick. The temperature of sun's visible
surface is 11000 F³ or 5750³ ABSOLUTE. Sun's atmosphere consists of
transparent gases which has the red glow seen round the sun during total
eclipse. More than sixty chemical elements have been recognized in the
sun from studies of the normal solar and chromospheric spectra. Almost
all the material elements that are found in the earth, are believed to
be present in the sun, but the lighter elements such as hydrogen
accounts for about 76% of the mass of the sun. Helium is the second
element in abundance which account for 23% of the mass.

The sun like our earth does rotate on its axis, but for being gaseous,
unlike the solid earth, its rotation period is not the same in all
latitudes. The rotation period of the sun becomes longer, as the
distance from the equator increases.

The period is less than 25 days at the equator, and about 27 days at
solar latitude 35³, and as much as 33 days nearer to the poles of the
sun.

**AND THE MOON**

Moon is the earth's only natural satellite. The orbit, relative to the
earth's center, is an almost circular ellipse with the earth at one
focus.

The average distance from the center of the earth is 238857mi. In

[ 64 ]

the our solar system, there are 30 other satellites, but our moon is
larger and more massive than all of them. The moon's diameter is a
little more than (( ))1(( ))4(( )) the earth's diameter, (2160 miles)
and its mass is about one eightieth, (( ))1(( ))80(( )) that of the
earth. The moon's gravity is not great enough to retain an atmosphere,
and so, there is no air around it. The moon and the earth revolve
together once in 27(( ))1(( ))3(( )) days around a point 2900 miles from
the earth's center, and this point revolves around the sun once a
year.

Approximately the same hemisphere of the moon is always towards the
earth. It contains the dark spots that form the imagined face of the,
\`\`MAN IN THE MOON''. Also certain markings near the edge are visible
at time, and turned out of sight at other times The moon is a dark globe
that shines only as it reflects sunlight.

The cycle of its phases from new moon to full, and back to the new
again during the lunar month, results from varying amount of the sunlit
hemisphere that is presented to the earth as the moon revolves around
it. The bright hemisphere is turned away from us at new moon, when it
passes between the earth and the sun. It comes more and more into view
at the crescent, first quarter, gibbous phases successively, until the
round, full, moon appears in the sky. After the full moon; the phases
come in reverse order, when the moon overtakes and passes the sun
again.

In addition to the light of the sun which the moon recieves directly,
it is also illuminated by sun light reflected from the earth. Earth
light on the dark part of the moon is a familiar sight at the crescent
phase, when the earth is in the lunar sky and shows nearly its full
phase. The mount of the moon phases has a length of about 29.5 days.

The surface of the moon is pocked with innumerable craters. These
craters range in size from small pits less than 1 ft. in diameter, to
walled plains about 150 miles in diameter. The wall's slope is more
abruptly to the floor inside, and more gradually to the plain around

[ 65 ]

them. The mountains on the moon are best seen near the terminator, i.e.
the line between the moon's dark and light sides. There, the shadows are
long, and the contrast between the mountain and plain is more
pronounced. Near the moon's south pole, mountains have high peaks up to
26000 ft.

**QUOTED FROM:ِ INTERNATIONALِAMERICANA AND BRITANICA ENCYCLOPEDIA
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا وَرَضُوا بِالْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاطْمَأَنُّوا بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا
غَافِلُونَ(( 7 ))

7- THOSE WHO DO NOT EXPECT TO MEET US AND WERE SATISFIED WITH THE LIFE
OF THIS WORLD, AND RELIED ON IT, AND THOSE WHO ARE UNAWARE (HEEDLESS) OF
OUR SIGNS.

أُوْلَئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمْ النَّارُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ(( 8 ))

8- THOSE ARE THEY, WHOSE ABODE IS THE FIRE (HELL) FOR WHAT THEY HAVE
EARNED.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ يَهْدِيهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ
بِإِيمَانِهِمْ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهِمْ الاَْنْهَارُ فِي جَنَّاتِ
النَّعِيمِ(( 9 ))

9- VERILY THOSE WHO BELIEVE AND DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS, THEIR LORD WILL
GUIDE THEM BY THEIR FAITH, TO THE GARDENS OF BLISS, BENEATH THEM STREAMS
FLOW. دَعْوَاهُمْ فِيهَا سُبْحَانَكَ اللَّهُمَّ وَتَحِيَّتُهُمْ فِيهَا
سَلاَمٌ وَآخِرُ دَعْوَاهُمْ أَنْ الْحَمْدُ للهِِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ((
10 )) [ 66 ]

10- THEIR PRAYER THEREIN IS, \`\`GLORY TO YOU, O, ALLAH'' AND THEIR
GREETINGS THEREIN IS, \`\`PEACE'', AND THEIR OTHER PRAYER IS THAT;
\`\`PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH, THE LORD OF ALL THE WORLD''.


