How To Read Qura"n (verse No. 78 - 100)
=======================================

When have read through the previous verse (NO.89) that:ِ \`\`We have
sent down to you the BOOK that makes clear everything, and that, it is a
guide and a Mercy, and glad tidings to Muslims.'' Following that
information, we now come to know how should we start reading Qura"n.
Elsewhere in the Qura"n it is cited that; \`\`NO ONE TOUCHES IT, EXCEPT
THOSE WHO ARE CLEAN.'' Therefore, for touching such sacred holy words of
God, we have to be clean by performing the ablution which is a
ceremonial washing of the body, or the hands and face; in order to be
free from whatever sullies or defiles. After that; we must beware of
Satanic instigations and temptations that might inspire evil suggestions
in us when we read QURA"N

\`\`Then when you read Qura"n, seek refuge in Allah from the accursed
Satan.'' So, when Muslims want to read Qura"n, first of all they say:ِ
\`\`I seek Allah's protection from the accursed Satan.''

[ 509 ] Then they begin their rehearsal with saying:ِ \`\`In the name
of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate.'' and then they continue
reciting the Holy Book. Satan has no power over those who put their
trust in Allah, but Man is weak at best, and should seek strength for
his will, in Allah's help and protection. Other instructions that are
strictly recommended in reciting Qura"n, includes to sing it in an
expressive musical order, singing word by word in tune and with
distinction. Then he who reads Qura"n must go deeply through, so as to
get the meanings out and to understand the objects. He should have it in
the mind that his Merciful, All-mighty, and All-knowing Lord speaks to
him, when he is reading the Book, or the letters of our beloved to His
lovers.

In order to understand the truth two main factors or means, will be
needed. First; the truth must be revealed and apparent. Secondly there
must be an eye to see the existing truth. A blind eye can see nothing of
the sun, except a little heat. Caprices, imaginations, excessive
enthusiasm and unreasoning zeal, and more important than these, being
chained by vanity, and puffed up with pride; are all veils that cover
the eye and the truth, and prevent man to see its beautiful face. So;
piety is one of the most effective means for those who desire to behold
the inner face and wonderful beauties of Qura"n.

وَإِذَا بَدَّلْنَا آيَةً مَّكَانَ آيَة وَاللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يُنَزِّلُ
قَالُوا إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُفْتَر بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 101
))

101- AND WHEN WE CHANGE ONE VERSE FOR ANOTHER; (ABROGATING A VERSE) AND
ALLAH KNOWS THE BEST, WHAT IS HE SENDING DOWN, THEY SAY; YOU ARE NO MORE
THAN A FORGER, RATHER MOST OF THEM KNOW NOT.

[ 510 ]

قُلْ نَزَّلَهُ رُوحُ الْقُدُسِ مِنْ رَّبِّكَ بِالْحَقِّ لِيُثَبِّتَ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَهُدىً وَبُشْرَى لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ(( 102 ))

102- SAY; THE HOLY SPIRIT HAS BROUGHT IT DOWN FROM YOUR LORD IN TRUTH;
SO AS TO MAKE FIRM THOSE WHO HAVE BELIEVED, AND A GUIDANCE AND GOOD NEWS
FOR MUSLIMS.

وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّهُمْ يَقُولُونَ إِنَّمَا يُعَلِّمُهُ بَشَرٌ
لِسَانُ الَّذِي يُلْحِدُونَ إِلَيْهِ أَعْجَمِىٌّ وَهَذَا لِسَانٌ
عَرَبِىٌّ مُّبِينٌ(( 103 ))

103- AND VERILY WE KNOW, THAT, THEY SAY:ِ \`\`ONLY A HUMAN TEACHES HIM.
(SALMA"N FARSI DICTATES THE QURA"N TO HIM!!!) BUT THE LANGUGE OF THE MAN
TO WHOM THEY POINT IS FOREIGNER, WHILE THIS (QURA"N) IS PERSPICUOUS
ARABIC.

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللهِ لاَ يَهْدِيهِمْ اللهُ
وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 104 ))

104- THOSE WHO DO NOT BELIEVE IN THE SIGNS OF ALLAH; ALLAH WILL NOT
GUID THEM, AND FOR THEM IS A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

إِنَّمَا يَفْتَرِي الْكَذِبَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللهِ
وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْكَاذِبُونَ(( 105 ))

105- ONLY THOSE FORGE LIES WHO DO NOT BELIEVE IN THE SIGNS OF ALLAH;
AND THEY ARE THE LIARS.

[ 511 ]

THE COMMENTARY


THE DEFAMED LIE (VERSE NO. 101 - 105)

The reference here again is to some of the objections of the Pagan
Arabs to the Glorious Qura"n:ِ

\`\`When we change one sign for another, they say; you are no more than
a forger of lies....''

This was because Most of the Pagan Arabs who were almost all
illitrates, knew not what was the aim of Qura"n and the object of the
Messenger of God's mission. This was while Mohammad (AS) with the help
of Qura"n was after establishing a community full of justice with
perfect morale, and free from all sorts of oppression and transgression.
So they could not understand that for a community which is in a state of
transformation and development, abrogation is something necessary.
Abrogating some verses, or replacing an order with another in a
progressive revelation is according to a minute programme checked in all
aspects. How can a doctor cure a disease in the same day and with only
one single prescription?

The next verse follows the same object telling the prophet:ِ

\`\`(SAY TO THEM THAT YOU FORGE NOTHING) and it is the Holy Spirit who
has brought it down from your Lord, to me, in truth, in order to make
firm the believers and to guide the Muslims and to give them
glad-tidings.''

Therefore the verses are all truth, be they abrogated or unabrogated,
basics, or allegoricals. They are all from Allah, and each of them
follow a certain reality.

The above verse (NO.102) imply that by the Revelation God intends to
make the believers firm in their line and object, and to give guidance
and glad tidings to the Muslims. This is because belief is in the heart,
but Islam is in the appearance.

Any how, in order to strengthen the faith of people, use is made
[ 512 ]

of long term and short term, programmes and instructions, and
abrogating an order does not mean derogating it; which may mean
something has been said or written wrongly, or it is inferior to
something else, and it has to be corrected. God forbid that! In the side
of Allah, nothing will be done by mistake or wrongly. Only a whole
matter may be taught to people progressively, and part by part, or
through various classes. An instance of this is the unlawfulness of
alcoholic beverages that was declared step by step.

When the Pagan Arabs made sure that the most eloquent and learned men
among them could not write down even a chapter the like of Qura"n; which
is so eloquent, deep, and meaningful, they postulated that there must be
a very learned and literate man behind the curtain, to teach and dictate
the Quranic verses to Mohammad (AS).

Some commentators have understood the pointed to, teacher, must have
been SALMA"N FARSI, Mohammad's very near disciple. But this does not
read, because we know that SALMA"N joined Mohammad in Medina, while the
verse under discussion was revealed to the prophet in Mecca.

Another man has also been said to have done that, whose name was,
\`\`BALA"M'' who lived in Mecca. He was a sword maker, and a native of
Rome. He was not well versed in Arabic language:ِ

\`\`And verily We know that they say; only a human being teaches him
this Qura"n. But the language of the man to whom they point, is
foreigner, while this Book is perpicuous Arabic. Say the Holy Spirit
(GABRIEL) has brought it down from your Lord in truth to make the
believer firm, and guide the Muslims and give them good-news.''

It is indeed true that, such a book of wonderful eloquency and strange
depth of meaning, cannot flow out from the tongue of a man, specially
illiterate and unable to read and write. Even the most learned and
literate men throughout the ages have failed to bring a chapter the like
of Qura"n. This proves that the book has been sent down to
[ 513 ]

Mohammad, as he himself has said, from God, the All-knowing, who knows
the secrets and mysteries of the universe, that are beyond human
comprehension.

More ridiculous than what the Pagan Arabs have said; is that which some
of the USSR materialists and communists, announced in their Eastern
Congress in 1954. They came to the conclusion that:ِ

\`\`Such a Book as Qura"n, cannot flow out of the brain of one single
man like Mohammad. It rather must have been the fruit of some deep
studies and long strives of a group of learned scholars; and we doubt
the whole Qura"n to have been compiled and composed in Arabian
Peninsula!!! Most assuredly, parts of Qura"n has been written outside
the Arabian territory!!''

The next verse (NO.104) threatens, that, those who do not believe in
the signs of Allah, will not be guided by God, and they will taste a
painful punishment.

This is because the wicked people accuse the man of God of foring lies,
while they themselves are liars and beliers.


مَنْ كَفَرَ بِاللهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ إِيمَانِهِ إِلاَّ مَنْ أُكْرِهَ
وَقَلْبُهُ مُطْمَئِنٌّ بِالاِْيمَانِ وَلَكِنْ مَّنْ شَرَحَ بِالْكُفْرِ
صَدْراً فَعَلَيْهِمْ غَضَبٌ مِّنْ اللهِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ(( 106
))

106- HE WHO DISBELIEVED ALLAH, AFTER HIS BELIEF; EXCEPTING HIM WHO IS
COMPELLED (TO DISBELIEF) WHILE HIS HEART IS SURE. AND HE WHOSE BREAST IS
EXPANDED BY DISBELIEF, ON THEM IS A WRATH OF ALLAH, AND FOR THEM IS A
GREAT PUNISHMENT.

ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ اسْتَحَبُّوا الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا عَلَى الاْخِرَةِ
وَأَنَّ اللهَ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ(( 107 ))

107- THAT IS BECAUSE THEY LOVED THE LIFE OF THIS WORLD
[ 514 ]

MORE THAN THE LIFE TO COME, AND ALLAH WILL NOT GUIDE THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
UNBELIEVERS.

أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ طَبَعَ اللهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ وَسَمْعِهِمْ
وَأَبْصَارِهِمْ وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ الْغَافِلُونَ(( 108 ))

108- THEY ARE THOSE ON WHOSE HEARTS ALLAH HAS SET A SEAL; AND ON THEIR
EARS AND EYES, AND THEY ARE THOSE WHO ARE NEGLIGENT.

لاَ جَرَمَ أَنَّهُمْ فِي الاْخِرَةِ هُمْ الْخَاسِرُونَ(( 109 ))

109- TO THIS EFFECT THEY ARE LOSERS AT THE END.

ثُمَّ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لِلَّذِينَ هَاجَرُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا فُتِنُوا ثُمَّ
جَاهَدُوا وَصَبَرُوا إِنَّ رَبَّكَ مِنْ بَعْدِهَا لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ((
110 ))

110- THEN VERILY TO THOSE WHO EMIGRATED AFTER BEING SEDUCED (WERE DRAWN
ASTRAY BY FORCE) AND WERE PATIENT, AFTER THAT, YOUR LORD IS
ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.

يَوْمَ تَأْتِي كُلُّ نَفْس تُجَادِلُ عَنْ نَّفْسِهَا وَتُوَفَّى كُلُّ
نَفْس مَّا عَمِلَتْ وَهُمْ لاَ يُظْلَمُونَ(( 111 ))

111- THE DAY IN WHICH EVERY SOUL WILL PLEAD FOR HIMSELF (NO ONE THINKS
OF OTHERS), AND EVERY SOUL SHALL BE REQUITED FOR HIS DEEDS, AND THEY ARE
NOT OPPRESSED.


[ 515 ]

THE COMMENTARY


OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 106 - 111)

This verse (NO.106) was revealed on the occasion, that, some Muslims
were severely persecuted, but they stood firm and patient. Among them
were AMMA"R, and his father YA"SER, and his mother SUMAYYE, and also
BALA"L, SOHAIB and KHOBA"B, who were all wildly persecuted. None of them
recanted, and Amma"r's mother (SOMAYYE) was the first martyr of Islam.
Amma"r himself was too young to endure such persecutions, particularly
when he saw how dreadfully his parent were slew in his sight, and thus
the young man was compelled to utter the words that the idolaters
dictated, and his remarks were wrongly construed as recantation. This
was while his heart was full of belief in Allah and His Messenger; and
he never wavered in his faith. When Amma"r was released for his
utterance some of the Muslims blamed him for being apostate. He came to
the prophet after that, and the Messenger of God consoled him for his
sufferance and confirmed his faith saying:ِ

\`\`I know Amma"r better than all. He is full of faith from his tip to
toe, and belief is mingled with his flesh and blood.''


THE APOSTATE IN ISLAM (VERSE NO. 106)

Here the immediate reference is to two groups of people on account of
their faith and fidelity:ِ

1- Those who are arrested and persecuted by their cruel enemy, and in
order to rescue themselves from the deadly tortures, only with the tip
of their tongue, they utter what the enemy dictates, which might be
construed as recantation and rejection of faith. This is while heart is
sure and stable in their faith, and they have not wavered the least.
There is no blame on them, and their action is even praiseworthy,
because in Islamic terms, it is called, \`\`DISSEMBLANCE'' which is a
religious virtue. It is to conceal the real fact, motive, or feeling, by
pretence for the protection of a higher object and purpose.

[ 516 ]

2- The second group are those who deliberately have opened the windows
of their heart on the evil and blasphemy and have changed their course
and direction on purpose. These have incurred the wrath of Allah upon
themselves. They are deprived of God's Grace and Mercy.

The next verse (NO.107) gives reason for their being apostate by
saying:ِ

\`\`That is because they loved the life of this world more than the
life to come.''

And how should Allah guide a people who prefer to be unbeliever, and
delibrately reject God's Mercy of Guidance? When they converted, and
joined Islam, perhaps they lost a little of their secular privileges,
and for that trifle, they recanted! This recantation of them, made Allah
to set a seal upon their hearts and put a veil upon their ears and eyes,
so that they lost their sense of sight and hearing of truth. This was a
penalty for their negligence. In other word, the seal and veil was the
natural effect of their sins and rebellion.

Then there comes the next verse (NO.110), to make clear the fate of
those apostate who repent and return:ِ

\`\`Then, verily to those who emigrated after being seduced and they
then strived (IN JIHAD) and showed patience; after that, your Lord is
all forgiving, compassionate.''

This verse implies that an apostate can be forgiven if he repents and
returns to belief and good deeds.


وَضَرَبَ اللهُ مَثَلا قَرْيَةً كَانَتْ آمِنَةً مُّطْمَئِنَّةً
يَأْتِيهَا رِزْقُهَا رَغَداً مِنْ كُلِّ مَكَان فَكَفَرَتْ بِأَنْعُمِ
اللهِ فَأَذَاقَهَا اللهُ لِبَاسَ الْجُوعِ وَالْخَوْفِ بِمَا كَانُوا
يَصْنَعُونَ(( 112 ))

112- AND ALLAH HAS STRUCK A PARABLE; THAT OF A TOWN WHICH WAS SECURE
AND SURE, ITS SUSTENANCE COMING TO IT ABUNDANTLY FROM EVERY PLACE. THEN
IT BECAME UNGRATEFUL TO THE BOUNTIES OF ALLAH. THEN ALLAH
[ 517 ]

WORE IT THE CLOTHING OF HUNGER AND FEAR, FOR WHAT THEY WROUGHT.

وَلَقَدْ جَاءَهُمْ رَسُولٌ مِّنْهُمْ فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ
الْعَذَابُ وَهُمْ ظَالِمُونَ(( 113 ))

113- AND THERE CAME TO THEM A MESSENGER FROM THEMSELVES, BUT THEY
BELIED HIM. THEN THE AGONY (TORMENT) SEIZED THEM WHILE THEY WERE
OPPRESSORS.

فَكُلُوا مِمَّا رَزَقَكُمْ اللهُ حَلاَلا طَيِّباً وَاشْكُرُوا نَعْمَتَ
اللهِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ إِيَّاهُ تَعْبُدُونَ(( 114 ))

114- THEREFORE, EAT OF THE SUSTENANCE THAT ALLAH HAS PROVIDED FOR YOU,
LAWFUL AND CLEAN, AND BE THANKFUL FOR ALLAH'S BOUNTY IF YOU ARE TO
WORSHIP HIM.


THE COMMENTARY


THOSE WHO WERE UNGRATEFUL WERE AFFLICTED (VERSE NO. 112 - 114)

This chapter is that of the bounties of Allah, either physical or
spiritual. In the above verse we read the result of ingratitude for
God's sustenance through an expressive similitude:ِ

\`\`And Allah has struck a parable; that of a town which was secure and
sure. Its sustenance coming to it in abundance from every where....''

The inhabitants of the town, at length, became thankless ignoring the
true source of the bounties; while their Messenger had told them all
about the truth which they falsified.

Therefore, you Muslims, be not ungrateful like them, and give thanks to
Allah who is the true source of all bounties:ِ

\`\`Then eat of the sustenance that Allah has provided for you, lawful
and clean, and be thankful.''

Being thankless to Allah's sustenance, may include eating and drinking
unlawfuls, such as, the flesh of swine, or the alcoholic
[ 518 ]

beverages; wasting or misusing, refusing to give alms-tax, (ZAKA"T)
which is a rightful share of the poor and the needy in the other's
wealth, and falsely ascribing to Allah any prohibition, or making
superstitious taboos.


IS THAT A SIMILITUDE OR NARRATIVE?

The parable may be taken in general, but because the verbs in the verse
are all in the past tense it might be that the similitude refers to an
event that has happened in the past.

Some commentators see here a reference to the city of Mecca, as a land
which cannot produce food and fruit for being mountainous all around,
where its sustenance comes from other places. But in the history of
Mecca such an event has not been recorded.

Hazrat Imam Sadiq (AS) was of opinion that the immediate reference here
is to an Israelite group who were living in abundance, and through their
thanklessness were seized by famine and misery.

On the other hand the history of Mankind is full of such incidents that
a nation, or a group of people, or a town, lived in abundance; and when
they bacame thankless to God's bounty, they tasted hunger and terror
after security and abundant supplies.


إِنَّمَا حَرَّمَ عَلَيْكُمْ الْمَيْتَةَ وَالدَّمَ وَلَحْمَ الْخِنْزِيرِ
وَمَا أُهِلَّ لِغَيْرِ اللهِ بِهِ فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ بَاغ وَلاَ عَاد
فَإِنَّ اللهَ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ(( 115 ))

115- HE HAS ONLY FORBIDDEN YOU (TO SERVE) CARRION, BLOOD, FLESH OF
SWINE, AND THAT WHICH HAS BEEN CONSECRATED TO OTHER THAN ALLAH. BUT HE
WHO IS CONSTRAINED (TO EAT OF THESE) NOT BEING REBEL, NOR TRANSGRESSOR;
(THERE IS NO BLAME ON THEM, BECAUSE,) ALLAH IS ALL-FORGIVING,
COMPASSIONATE.

[ 519 ]

وَلاَ تَقُولُوا لِمَا تَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُكُمْ الْكَذِبَ هَذَا حَلاَلٌ
وَهَذَا حَرَامٌ لِتَفْتَرُوا عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ لاَ يُفْلِحُونَ(( 116 ))

116- AND DO NOT SAY BY WHAT YOUR TONGUES DESCRIBE FALSELY; THIS IS
LAWFUL AND THIS IS UNLAWFUL, FORGING LIE AGAINST ALLAH; THAT, THOSE WHO
FORGE LIE AGAINST ALLAH WILL NOT PROSPER.

مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 117 ))

117- A LITTLE OF ENJOYMENTS, FOLLOWED BY A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

وَعَلَى الَّذِينَ هَادُوا حَرَّمْنَا مَا قَصَصْنَا عَلَيْكَ مِنْ قَبْلُ
وَمَا ظَلَمْنَاهُمْ وَلَكِنْ كَانُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ(( 118 ))

118- AND AS TO THE JEWS, WE HAVE FORBIDDEN THEM WHAT WE HAVE RELATED TO
YOU BEFORE; AND WE OPPRESSED THEM NOT, BUT THEY OPPRESSED THEMSELVES.

ثُمَّ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لِلَّذِينَ عَمِلُوا السُّوءَ بِجَهَالَة ثُمَّ
تَابُوا مِنْ بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ وَأَصْلَحُوا إِنَّ رَبَّكَ مِنْ بَعْدِهَا
لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ(( 119 ))

119- THEN VERILY YOUR LORD TO THOSE WHO DID WRONG BY IGNORANCE; THEN
REPENTED AFTER THAT, AND BECAME RIGHTEOUS; YOUR LORD IS AFTER IT,
ALL-FORGIVING, COMPASSIONATE.


[ 520 ]

THE COMMENTARY


LIARS WILL NEVER PROSPER (VERSE NO. 115 - 119)

Following the verses about the lawful and clean good food, created for
Man to eat; mention is made of food-stuff that are unclean and
forbidden:ِ

The first of the above group of verses (NO.115) implies that Allah has
forbidden only four articles of food, which are;

1) dead meat (CARRION). 2) blood. 3) flesh of swine. 4) that which has
been consecrated to other than Allah.

For the reasons of the above prohibitions please refer to volume one,
page 183 of this book.

The said four articles of food that are forbidden, are the roots and
main food-stuff in this respect; but there are also others among the
land, air, and sea creatures, that are forbidden to eat in the sight of
Islam.

But even the forbidden food-stuff can be served in the emergency cases;
where Man is compelled to eat, and who has not the intention of
continuing with the food.

Then a warning has been given to Man, in that, he should not create
taboos for selfish ends, and enforce them in the name of Allah by
imagination and caprices; saying this is lawful, and that is
unlawful:ِ

\`\`And do not say by falsely turning your tongues; this is lawful, and
that is unlawful, thus forging lie against Allah; that those who forge
lie against Allah, will not prosper.''

Such a liar may have a little enjoyment, down here in this world; but
very soon a painful punishment would follow their enjoyment.

Carrion is dead meat, or the carcass of cattle that it is not
officially and religiously slaughtered for market, with pronouncing
Allah's name on them.

The next verse (NO.118) implies that some of the prohibitions to
[ 521 ]

the Israelites was a punishment for their hardness of heart, and not a
favour. Due to their inequities and oppressions, and their hindering
people from the straight path of truth, they themselves were prevented
the use of some good things that were formerly lawful to them.

And in the last verse (NO.119) Allah leaves open the doors of
repentance and amendment for those who seek to get rid of misery and
misfortune. Those who did evil deeds through ignorance, but repented and
returned, and stationed among the righteous, they will find Allah
All-forgiving, Compassionate.


إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ أُمَّةً قَانِتاً للهِِ حَنِيفاً وَلَمْ يَكُنْ
مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 120 ))

120- VERILY ABRAHAM WAS A NATION, OBEDIENT TO ALLAH, PURE IN FAITH,
(WITHOUT THE LEAST OF PERVERSION) AND HE WAS NOT OF THE POLYTHEISTS.

شَاكِراً لاَِّنْعُمِهِ اجْتَبَاهُ وَهَدَاهُ إِلَى صِرَاط مُّسْتَقِيم((
121 ))

121- (HE WAS ALSO) THANKFUL FOR HIS BOUNTIES. HE CHOSE HIM, AND GUIDED
HIM TO THE STRAIGHT PATH.

وَآتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَإِنَّهُ فِي الاْخِرَةِ لَمِنْ
الصَّالِحِينَ(( 122 ))

122- AND WE GAVE HIM IN THIS WORLD GOODNESS, (PROSPERITY) AND IN THE
WORLD TO COME, HE IS OF THE RIGHTEOUS.

ثُمَّ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ أَنْ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفاً
وَمَا كَانَ مِنْ الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 123 ))

123- THEN WE INSPIRED TO YOU, TO FOLLOW THE CREED OF ABRAHAM, PURE IN
FAITH, (AS HE WAS) AND HE WAS NOT OF THE POLYTHEISTS.

[ 522 ]

إِنَّمَا جُعِلَ السَّبْتُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ وَإِنَّ
رَبَّكَ لَيَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ(( 124 ))

124- THE SABBAT WAS ORDAINED (BUT TURNED TO A PUNISHMENT) FOR THOSE WHO
DIFFERED IN IT. AND YOUR LORD WILL JUDGE AMONG THEM IN THE RESURRECTION
DAY, IN WHAT THEY WERE DIFFERING.


THE COMMENTARY


ABRAHAM, ALONE, WAS A NATION (VERSE NO. 120 - 124)

Once again mention is made of the champion of Monotheism, and the
fountain-head of truth, HAZRAT ABRAHAM (AS):ِ

\`\`Verily ABRAHAM was a nation....''

Then five qualifications are attributed to the Arch Prophet of God,
namely; 1) He was a nation. 2) He was obedient to Allah. 3) He was
sincere and pure in faith. (HANIF) 4) He never was a polytheist. 5) He
was thankful to God's bounty.

The Arabic, \`\`UMMAT'' means nation, but it has also some
connotations, and other shades of meaning such as; model, pattern,
example for imitation and following.

FERDOWSI in one of his epical poems has:ِ \`\`In the battle-field, a
single veteran warrior equals a field full of men'' And so was ABRAHAM a
nation himself standing alone against his world. He has always been a
corner-stone of unity and truth and he will be so for ages. He was and
he is a fountain-head and the best model for the world of Monotheism,
because he never worshipped anything, and any body, other than his only
one Lord God.

In the last verse (NO.124) the reference is to Sabbath Day and those
who differed in it:ِ

[ 523 ]

\`\`The Sabbath was ordained, but turned to a punishment for those who
broke it and differed in it.''

According to some Islamic traditions, SABBATH has nothing to do with
ABRAHAM. He observed FRIDAY for the weekend holiday. and Moses too, at
first, enjoined the same; but the Israelites differed and objected, and
preferred to hold Saturday for what the Hebrews called SABBATH or Day of
Rest. Now this is the seventh day of the week in the Jewish calendar.

So was it ordained with Law of Moses, but the Israelites inspite of
seeing all those wonderful miracles of Moses, disobeyed him and disputed
with him, so that their hearts were hardened as a stone! Then a group of
them transgressed their own accepted Sabbath Day for which Allah turned
them to APES! They were despised and disgraced, so as to be an example
and a lesson for their generation, and those who would come after them.
But again and again the people of Scriptures differed in the Sabbath and
violated its regulations. A group of the Christians stood with the Jews
in observance of Sabbath; but other Christins differed, and observed
SUNDAY as their day of rest and worship. Their differences will exist up
to the Resurrection Day, in which, God will judge on it and they will
come to know how far have they gone astray from the path and creed of
Abraham.


ادْعُ إِلَى سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
وَجَادِلْهُمْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ
ضَلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ(( 125 ))

125- CALL TO THE WAY OF YOUR LORD BY WISDOM AND GOOD PREACHING, AND
DISPUTE WITH THEM IN A MANNER WHICH IS THE BEST; THAT YOUR LORD KNOWS
BEST WHO HAS STRAYED FROM HIS PATH, AND HE KNOWS BEST THOSE WHO ARE
GUIDED.

[ 524 ]


126- AND IF YOU PUNISHED, THEN PUNISH THE LIKE OF WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN
PUNISHED; AND IF YOU BE PATIENT (FORGIVING) IT IS INDEED BETTER FOR THE
PATIENTS.

وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلاَّ بِاللهِ وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ
تَكُ فِي ضَيْق مِّمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ(( 127 ))

127- AND BE PATIENT. AND YOUR PATIENCE BE NOT EXCEPT FOR ALLAH. AND DO
NOT GRIEVE OVER THEM, NOR DISTRESS YOURSELF OF WHAT THEY PLOT. (AGAINST
YOU)

إِنَّ اللهَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَّالَّذِينَ هُمْ مُّحْسِنُونَ((
128 ))

128- VERILY ALLAH IS WITH THOSE WHO ARE PIOUS AND THOSE WHO DO GOOD.


THE COMMENTARY


