The Four Stages of God's Puunishment (verse No. 16 - 17)
========================================================

In the previous verse (NO.15) it was said that, God is not to punish
His servants, unless he conveys some sort of warning or notice, through
His Messengers, to the sinners and rebels. This is because through His
Infinite Mercy, the compassionate Lord, gives every chance to the wicked
to cease and return, but whenever evil overcomes all good, and the
punishment is rendered inevitable, even then, Allah shows no haste! He
will warn and give notice to the leaders of sin, and wealthy and
powerful revellers of the town, who are plunged into merry making, and
pleasure seeking, through their rank and wealth.

They are first warned and given notice, so as to forge excuses of

[ 541 ]

ignorance and unawareness. Then God's wrath seizes them out of a
sudden, and they will find no way to escape it.

If we study the above verse (NO.16) carefully; we find four sequential
stages for God's punishment to afflict a people:ِ

1ِ Warning and notice.

2ِ Disobedience and debauchery.

3ِ Deserving punishment.

4ِ Punishing and perishing.

The high up revellers of the town, are warned and given notice before
the punishment, because they are usually the main pivots of the society
and population. Almost all the wealthy people are the sources of
corruption in all the communities, for being plunged in sin, passions,
and disobedience.

In the next verse the Flood of Noah has been marked as an epoch of
punishing disbelievers. Then the ending of the verse (NO.17) teaches
that the wicked should not think that, his wickedness is left unnoticed
and he can escape the penalty. God is aware and sees whatever his
servants do, and He is enough to witness that, and no other evidence is
needed to prove the matter:ِ

\`\`.... And enough is your Lord for being aware of, and seeing the
sins of his servants.''


مَّنْ كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعَاجِلَةَ عَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَاءُ
لِمَنْ نُّرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلاَهَا مَذْمُوماً
مَّدْحُوراً(( 18 ))

18- HE WHO WANTS THIS HASTY (WORLD), WE HASTEN FOR HIM THEREIN; GIVING
WHAT WE WILL TO WHOM WE INTEND. THEN WE PREPARE THE HELL FOR HIM TO JOIN
IT, REPROACHED AND REJECTED.

[ 542 ]

وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الاْخِرَةَ وَسَعَى لَهَا سَعْيَهَا وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَأُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُمْ مَّشْكُوراً(( 19 ))

19- AND HE WHO INTENDS THE NEXT WORLD, AND STROVE HIS STRIFE FOR IT,
BEING A BELIEVER, THEN THEY ARE THOSE WHOSE STRIFE SHALL BE THANKED.

كُلّاً نُّمِدُّ هَؤُلاَء وَهَؤُلاَءِ مِنْ عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ وَمَا كَانَ
عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُوراً(( 20 ))

20- WE HELP ALL THESE AND ALL THOSE BY THE GIFT OF YOUR LORD. AND THE
GIFT OF YOUR LORD HAS NOT BEEN PROHIBITED (FROM ANY ONE).

انظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَى بَعْض وَلَلاَْخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ
دَرَجَات وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلا (( 21 ))

21- SEE HOW HAVE WE MADE SOME OF THEM TO EXCEL SOME OTHER, AND FOR THE
NEXT WORLD, GRADES ARE GREATER, AND SO ARE (THE DIVERSITY) OF ITS
RANKS.


THE COMMENTARY


THE WAY OF THOSE WHO SEEK HERE AND HEREAFTER (VERSE NO. 18 - 21)

The first verse refers to those who are only after the enjoyments of
this fast-moving mortal life, ignoring the life to come. They prefer the
transient and temporary things here, over the permanent and everlasting
thing in the Hereafter. God has infinite Mercy and Grace, and will not
prevent them their wishes, as far as it is allowed by His universal
plan.

In the whole existence, TIME is a relative matter, and eternity and
infinite duration prevails. Therefore, transitory things of this life
down here, in which we live on a probation, are of little worth and
value. And worst of that; is, to abtain the fleeting enjoyments, and
momentary
[ 543 ]

pleasures, at the price of an eternal misery, and deprivation of God's
Grace.

Besides the Hell, which is the abode of those who do their best to
obtain the advantages of this quick-passing life; They shall also be
reproached by their own conscience, and by all.

Contrary to the above verse (NO.18), is the next one which refers to
those whose eyes are fixed upon the next world which is everlasting and
of infinite duration:ِ

\`\`And he who intends the life to come, and strives doing his best for
it, being a believer, they are of those whose strife shall be
thanked.''

They too shall have their share of God's Bounty in this life, and yet
their endeavours which are aimed at the life to come, are all accepted
by Allah.

They try hard, because they know that mere wish and sheer desire, is
not enough to obtain salvation. They have to back up their intention
with labour and strife.

It is worthy of note, that, the endeavour of the first secular group is
said to lead them to Hell, while that of the second group will be
thanked by God. In other word, our Merciful Lord will be thankful for
the righteous deeds of the believers!

Of course, this world and its transitory things have not been
reproached or undervalued by the Glorious Qura"n.

In the sight of Islam, this material world is as important as the
physical and spiritual life to come; supposing that we use this world as
a means and not as a goal. This world is a good instrument by which we
may obtain the prosperity of the life to come. This world is a farm land
for sowing seeds, and to harvest it in the next world. So those who
choose the transient enjoyments of here, as their aims and not as a
means; their loss shall be immense, because the temporary life here is
not comparable with the everlasting life after death.

The verses also imply that Man's endeavours play a vital role in his
life, both here and in hereafter. We all ought to know that, life gives
nothing to mortals except through labour and strife. Labour is said to
have a bitter root, but a sweet fruit, and work and endeavour is the
mother of pleasure.

[ 544 ]

The next verse (NO.20) implies that God's Grace and Favour is like the
rain or such as the sunshine that showers down upon all His
creatures:ِ

\`\`We help all these and all those by the gift of your Lord, and the
gift of your Lord has not been prevented from anyone.''

Those who deserve it, and those who deserve it not; will have their
share of God's bounty, but the shares are not the same and equal in
measure. There are so many grades here as well as in the Hereafter. But
the grades are far greater in the world to come, and so are the
diversity of the ranks there!


لاَ تَجْعَلْ مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ فَتَقْعُدَ مَذْمُوماً
مَّخْذُولا(( 22 ))

22- DO NOT ASSOCIATE WITH ALLAH OTHER GOD, TO SIT DOWN REPROACHED,
(AND) ABANDONED.

وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُوا إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
إِحْسَاناً إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِنْدَكَ الْكِبَرَ أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ
كِلاَهُمَا فَلاَ تَقُلْ لَّهُمَا أُفّ وَلاَ تَنْهَرْهُمَا وَقُلْ
لَّهُمَا قَوْلا كَرِيماً(( 23 ))

23- AND YOUR LORD HAS DECREED, THAT, YOU WORSHIP NO ONE EXCEPT HIM; AND
TO DO GOOD TO PARENTS. IF ONE OF THEM OR BOTH ATTAIN OLD AGE WITH YOU,
DO NOT SAY TO THEM; \`\`FIE'' (i.e. EXPRESS NOT DISGUST), AND DO NOT
SHOUT AT THEM, AND SAY TO THEM HONORABLE WORD.

وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنْ الرَّحْمَةِ وَقُلْ رَّبِّ
ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيراً(( 24 ))

24- AND LOWER TO THEM WING OF HUMILITY OUT OF MERCY, AND SAY; \`\`MY
LORD! HAVE MERCY ON THEM AS THEY NURTURED ME WHEN I WAS SMALL.''

[ 545 ]

رَّبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا فِي نُفُوسِكُمْ إِنْ تَكُونُوا صَالِحِينَ
فَإِنَّهُ كَانَ لِلْأَوَّابِينَ غَفُوراً(( 25 ))

25- YOUR LORD KNOWS BEST WHAT IS IN YOUR MINDS. IF YOU BECOME RIGHTEOUS
THEN HE IS FORGIVING TO THOSE WHO TURN TO HIM. (IN REPENTANCE)


THE COMMENTARY


A SERIES OF ISLAMIC COMMANDMENTS

MONOTHEISM AND RESPECT OF PARENTS

VERSE NO. 22 - 25

The above verses are a prelude to a series of important Islamic
Commandments. It begins with the MONOTHEISM, which is the main source of
energy for all sorts of good actions and righteous deeds. It begins
thus:ِ

\`\`Do not associate with Allah other GOD, and sit down reproached and
helpless.''

The verse implies that associating partners to God, will cause weakness
and disgrace. It renders the polytheist blameworthy, and finally the
true Lord God will leave his affairs to be disposed by his false gods;
and will help him not, in his bad conditions and emergency cases.

No one is ever worthy of being worshipped except Allah, Who has created
the whole universe without any partners. He is the Lord and Cherisher of
all the creatures, Who maintains and sustains them all. If we foolishly
turn to false objects of worship, we not only will be reproached by our
conscience and innerself, but we shall have no support to answer our
call in our emergency cases.

It is the heart and the secrets of our innerself, and our motives by
which God will judge us; and not by the words that we have then on the
tip of our tongue.

Then in the second verse (NO.23) we have a very important
[ 546 ]

commandment in which Allah strictly enjoins us to respect our parents,
and be kind to them always.

This is particularly when they attain old age with us. We must be
careful not to shout at them. Not even utter a word of disgust such as,
\`\`FIE''. We are enjoined to be humble to them, and pray to God to have
His Mercy on them:ِ

\`\`And lower the wing of humility out of Mercy and say; My Lord! Have
Mercy on them, as they nurtured me when I was small.''

Father and mother deserve our humble respect and kindness, because they
cherished us in childhood, and always loved us tenderly. It is therefore
a must, to love them in response.


\*\*\*\*\*


WORSHIP GOD ALONE, AND RESPECT YOUR PARENT

(The two commandments that are issued in the above verses (22ِ23), are
found among the ten commandments for which our Lord made a convenant at
the Mount Sinai, with all the children of Israel:ِ

1- I am YAHOVAH the Lord your God. Worship no god but Me.

5- Respect your Father and Mother.

It is also written in O.T.DEUTERONOMY 27:16;

\`\`God's curse on anyone who dishonours his mother or his father.''

And in the O.T.EXODUS 21:15 we read;

\`\`Whoever hits his mother or his father is to be put to death.''

It is also written in the N.T.COLOSSIANS 3:20ِ21;

\`\`O, children! It is your Christian duty to obey and respect your
parent always, for that is what pleases God.''

So also in N.T.EPHESIANS 6:1ِ4, it is cited;

\`\`O, children! It is your duty to obey your parent, for this is the
right thing to do. (Respect your father and mother) is the first
commandment which has a promise added to it; (so that all may go well
with you and you may live long in the land)''

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

[ 547 ]

وَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَى حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلاَ
تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيراً(( 26 ))

26- AND GIVE TO THE NEAR KIN HIS DUE, AND ALSO TO THE NEEDY, AND
WAYFARER, AND SQUANDER NOT LAVISHLY.

إِنَّ الْمُبَذِّرِينَ كَانُوا إِخْوَانَ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَكَانَ
الشَّيْطَانُ لِرَبِّهِ كَفُوراً(( 27 ))

27- VERILY THE SQUANDERERS WERE THE BROTHERS OF SATAN AND SATAN WAS
UNGRATEFUL TO HIS LORD.

وَإِمَّا تُعْرِضَنَّ عَنْهُمُ ابْتِغَاءَ رَحْمَة مِنْ رَّبِّكَ
تَرْجُوهَا فَقُلْ لَّهُمْ قَوْلا مَّيْسُوراً(( 28 ))

28- AND EVEN IF YOU HAVE TO TURN AWAY FROM THEM FOR SEEKING A MERCY
FROM YOUR LORD WHICH YOU EXPECT IT; (i.e. AT THE MOMENT, YOU HAVE
NOTHING HANDY TO PAY IN CHARITY, BUT YOU EXPECT TO RECEIVE SOON) THEN
SPEAK TO THEM KINDLY.

وَلاَ تَجْعَلْ يَدَكَ مَغْلُولَةً إِلَى عُنُقِكَ وَلاَ تَبْسُطْهَا
كُلَّ الْبَسْطِ فَتَقْعُدَ مَلُوماً مَّحْسُوراً(( 29 ))

29- AND DO NOT MAKE YOUR HAND CHAINED TO YOUR NECK, NOR STRETCH IT IN
FULL; (i.e BE NEITHER MISERLY NOR PRODIGAL) SO AS TO BE BLAMEWORTHY AND
DESTITUTE.

إِنَّ رَبَّكَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ إِنَّهُ
كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ خَبِيرا بَصِيراً(( 30 ))

30- VERILY YOUR LORD EXPANDS THE SUSTENANCE FOR WHOM HE WILL, AND
RESTRICTS IT, (FOR WHOM HE WILL) THAT HE IS AWARE OF HIS SERVANTS,
SEEING THEM.


[ 548 ]

THE COMMENTARY


OBSERVE MODERATION (VERSE NO. 26 - 30)

The above verses denote that our near kins, the poor and needy, and the
wayfarer, all have a right to our help, when we can afford. So we must
pay them their due.

The Arabic, \`\`TABZIR'' translated to \`\`squandering'' means to spend
lavishly or wastefully. HAZRAT IMAM SADIQ (AS) has said:ِ

\`\`He who spends anything out of the realm of God's obedience, is a
squanderer.''

In the next verse (NO.27) the squanderers have been qualified as the,
\`\`BROTHERS OF SATAN'' who was ingrateful to his Lord!

The assertion is indeed true; at least, in our own case. The
extravagant expenses at wedding, funerals, feasts, and banquets, which
are merely for ideal show has turned to a misfortune of our day. These
are done in emulation and vying with one another, while we read in our
holy book that in the sight of our Lord the squanderers are the brothers
of Devil. God gave Satan extraordinary wisdom, faculties, and power, but
he misused all that, and thus became thankless to his Lord.

Satan may have innumerable brothers among Man and Jinn; who follow him,
and in their manner and deeds they are incarnation of devil. Each man
may have a mate of devil when he forgets Allah.

The next verse (NO.28) points to some natural obstructions that may
hinder man to pay his due alms and charitable gifts:ِ

\`\`And even if you have to turn away from them....''

You may sometimes have to turn away from the poor and needy for not
being able to pay them their rights. Your possibilities are not enough
at the moment, but you expect to receive the wherewithal in near future.
In such a case, you should at least speak kindly and hopefully to them
giving good-news of near future:ِ

\`\`When you have nothing handy to pay in charity, but you do expect to
receive the wherewithal, then speak to them kindly.''

And finally there comes the injunction of being moderate in
[ 549 ]

expenditure and generosity (V.NO.29):ِ

\`\`And do not make your hand chained to your neck, nor stretch it in
fool.... be neither miserly nor prodigal.''

In other word we should not be so lavish to spend all that we have in
our purse to make ourself destitute and impoverished, nor to withhold
our gracious hand from the just needs of those who have a right to our
help. We should neither live miserly, nor be given to extravagant and
reckless spending.


وَلاَ تَقْتُلُوا أَوْلاَدَكُمْ خَشْيَةَ إِمْلاَق نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُهُمْ
وَإِيَّاكُمْ إِنَّ قَتْلَهُمْ كَانَ خِطْئاً كَبِيراً(( 31 ))

31- AND DO NOT KILL YOUR CHILDREN FOR FEAR OF POVERTY; WE SUSTAIN THEM
AND YOURSELVES. VERILY KILLING THEM WAS A GREAT SIN.

وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوا الزِّنَى إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَسَاءَ سَبِيلا(( 32
))

32- AND DO NOT APPROACH FORNICATION, THAT IT IS INDECENCY AND SO BAD A
WAY.

وَلاَ تَقْتُلُوا النَّفْسَ الَّتِي حَرَّمَ اللهُ إِلاَّ بِالْحَقِّ
وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُوماً فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ سُلْطَاناً فَلاَ
يُسْرِفْ فِّي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مَنصُوراً(( 33 ))

33- AND DO NOT TAKE ANY LIFE THAT ALLAH HAS FORBIDDEN, EXCEPT FOR A
RIGHT CAUSE. AND HE WHO IS KILLED UNJUSTLY, WE HAVE GIVEN HIS HEIR THE
AUTHORITY (FOR RETALIATION); BUT HE SHOULD NOT EXCEED (THE LIMITS) IN
KILLING, THAT HE WAS SUPPORTED.

وَلاَ تَقْرَبُوا مَالَ الْيَتِيمِ إِلاَّ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ حَتَّى
يَبْلُغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَأَوْفُوا بِالْعَهْدِ إِنَّ الْعَهْدَ كَانَ
مَسْئُولا(( 34 ))

[ 550 ]

34- AND DO NOT APPROACH THE PROPERTY OF THE ORPHAN, EXCEPT IN A MANNER
WHICH IS THE BEST (FOR HIM) UNTIL HE OR SHE IS MATURED. AND BE FAITHFUL
TO (YOUR) PROMISE, THAT PROMISE WILL BE QUESTIONED.

وَأَوْفُوا الْكَيْلَ إِذَا كِلْتُمْ وَزِنُوا بِالْقِسْطَاسِ
الْمُسْتَقِيمِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلا(( 35 ))

35- AND GIVE FULL MEASURE WHEN MEASURING; AND WEIGH WITH A STRAIGHT
(CORRECT) BALANCE. THIS IS BETTER, AND THE BEST AT THE END.


THE COMMENTARY


SIX MORE COMMANDMENTS (VERSE NO. 31 - 35)

Here, by the above five verses, six more commandments have been issued,
which are explained in an agreeable and beautiful language. These are as
follows:ِ

1- A dreadful crime which is among the most heinous sins, was being
committed by the Arabs of Pagan Era. They committed the extremely
offensive crime of female infanticide before the advent of our prophet.
In sight of the Pagan Arabs, son was a source of power and honour, but
daughter was a source of shame and disgrace, particularly in the
warfare. (PLEASE READ COMMENTS ON S16:56ِ60 ABOUT FEMALE INFANTICIDE)

Mohammad (AS) declared child infanticide strictly unlawful, and a cruel
unjust act, and a great sin; and since then no report have we received
of such criminals.

Among the Pagan Arabs were also some poor and ignorant people who
slayed their children for fear of poverty. In the above verse, (NO.31)
Allah has forbidden child infanticide in general, and particularly for
economical reasons:ِ

\`\`And do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We sustain them
and yourselves. Indeed killing your children is a great sin.''

[ 551 ]

2- The second major sin that has been seriously forbidden by Islam; is
fornication in general, and adultery in particular:ِ

\`\`And do not approach fornication, that, it is indecency and so bad a
way.''

The verse says; do not approach it, instead of saying do not do it.
This is because gloating in the lust, nudeness, sexual pictures, and
shows, are all means of pulling Man and Woman to fornication, and then
to adultery. Adultery may open many new roads of evil to Man. It will
spoil Man's self-respect, or his respect for others. It will shake and
sometimes destruct, the bases and pillars of the family life; and if it
become prevalent and common in a community, no father will feel any
responsibility for any child, because he cannot make sure that he is the
real father of the child!

Experiences have proved that fornication is the easiest way of
transferring dangerous sexual diseases, such as; GONORRHOEA, SYPHLIS,
and AIDS.

3- The third commandment is to respect the blood of Man, and to avoid
taking the life of others without a rightful and just cause. In the
verse S5:35 after narrating the story of Cane who killed his brother
Abel; Allah has decreed:ِ

\`\`.... On that account; We ordained for the children of Israel that;
if anyone slew a person, unless it be for murder, or spreading
corruption in the land; it would be as if he slew the whole population
(all people). And if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he has saved
the life of the whole people.''

As a matter of fact, killing a person merely for keeping an idea, is to
kill all the people who uphold that belief. Then there comes the matter
of retaliation, the authority for which is in the hand of the deceased's
heir. But he should not go to excess and extremes:ِ

\`\`And he who is killed unjustly, we have given his heir the authority
for retaliation, but he should not exceed.''

The heir is given the right to demand the life of his murdered, through
the law of retaliation, and why should he exceed and go out of bound,
when he is supported by the law!?

4- The next verse (NO.34) applies to the importance of protecting the
properties of the orphans:ِ

[ 552 ]

\`\`And do not approach the properties of the orphans unless....''

Eating the orphan's property is to eat fire, and is spiritually very
dangerous. If it should be approached at all, it should make it the
best, or the better. Hard precautionary measures must be taken until the
orphan is matured, and attains the full age of understanding.

5- The next commandment is to observe promises, which is no less
important than the other commandments:ِ

\`\`And be faithful to your promises, because the promises will be
questioned.''

Most of the social, economical, and political affairs of Man turn about
the pivot of promises and pledges. A promise is a declaration which
gives to the person to whom it is made a right, to expect, and claim the
performance of the promised act. In other word, as the Qura"n has said;
\`\`The promises will be questioned.''

Many a time the promise might be supported by oath, or affirmed by its
form of expression. In any way, the promise is Man's word of faith. Nice
a verse has William Shakespeare in this respect:ِ

\`\`I will take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath;

Who shuns not to break one, will sure crack boath.''

6- And the last and sixth of these commandments, is to observe measure,
and to use scale and balance justly. Giving right and correct measure,
and observing justice in the weight will ultimately give the best of
spiritual and material advantages to the person who gives it. For
example; when the customers see that a shopkeeper is righteous in giving
the rights of people, when he weigh or measures something, it serves to
increase the trust of the customers, and will make up the seller's good
salesmanship.

Qura"n has frequently attacked the use of short weight and dealing with
fraud, or giving too little and taking too much. In S 83:1ِ4 we read:ِ

\`\`Woe unto the stinter who deals in fraud! When they measure
something to take it from people, they take full measure; but when they
have to give by measure or scale to men, they give less than due! Do
they not think that they will be called to account, on a day in which
Man has to stand before the Lord of the worlds.''

[ 553 ]

وَلاَ تَقْفُ مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنَّ السَّمْعَ وَالْبَصَرَ
وَالْفُؤَادَ كُلُّ أُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ عَنْهُ مَسْئُولا(( 36 ))

36- AND DO NOT FOLLOW THAT, OF WHICH YOU HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE. VERILY THE
EAR, THE EYE, AND THE HEART, WILL ALL BE QUESTIONED OF IT.

وَلاَ تَمْشِ فِي الاَْرْضِ مَرَحاً إِنَّكَ لَنْ تَخْرِقَ الاَْرْضَ
وَلَنْ تَبْلُغَ الْجِبَالَ طُولا(( 37 ))

37- AND DO NOT WALK ON THE EARTH PROUDLY, THAT, YOU WILL VEVER CLEAVE
THE EARTH; NOR REACH THE MOUNTAINS IN HEIGHT.

كُلُّ ذَلِكَ كَانَ سَيِّئُهُ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ مَكْرُوهاً(( 38 ))

38- THE SIN OF ALL THOSE ARE HATEFUL IN THE SIGHT OF YOUR LORD.

ذَلِكَ مِمَّا أَوْحَى إِلَيْكَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ الْحِكْمَةِ وَلاَ تَجْعَلْ
مَعَ اللهِ إِلَهاً آخَرَ فَتُلْقَى فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَلُوماً مَّدْحُوراً((
39 ))

39- THOSE (INJUNCTIONS) ARE A PART OF THE WISDOM THAT YOUR LORD HAS
INSPIRED TO YOU. AND DO NOT ASSOCIATE WITH ALLAH OTHER GOD, LEST YOU
SHOULD BE CAST INTO THE HELL, BLAMEWORTHY AND REJECTED.

أَفَأَصْفَاكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ وَاتَّخَذَ مِنْ الْمَلاَئِكَةِ
إِنَاثاً إِنَّكُمْ لَتَقُولُونَ قَوْلا عَظِيماً(( 40 ))

40- HAS YOUR LORD PREFERED FOR YOU SONS, AND TAKEN FROM AMONG THE
ANGELS FEMALES (FOR HIMSELF AS DAUGHTERS)? INDEED YOU ARE SAYING A
(SINFULLY) GREAT WORD!

[ 554 ]

THE COMMENTARY


FOLLOW WITH KNOWLEDGE (VERSE NO. 36 - 40)

The moral precepts, and acts of directing, commanding, and prohibiting,
as parts of Islamic wisdom are still continued here. The first verse
(NO.36) implies:ِ

\`\`Do not follow that which you know it not.'' In other word, follow
things which you well, and you are sure of your knowledge about them,
because the ear, the eye, and the mind are all responsible, and have to
answer for what they do.

The prohibition of doing things without knowledge, has a vast meaning,
and many fields of applications; such as in personal and social affairs,
judgement, testification without enough knowledge of matter, and etc.
Knowledge and enough information is the best means of taking the right
and correct decision in any matter. What can we reason but from what we
know? In the sight our prophet, a man without knowledge is comparable to
the one that is dead. Knowledge is power and as Rumi has composed in a
famous verse:

\`\` O, Brother! You are only what you know;

And for the rest, you are but bone and flesh.''


AN IMPORTANT LESSON FOR ESTABLISHING SOCIAL ORDER

The above instruction (V.NO.36) is so important that ignoring it, will
result in social chaos and anarchy! If it observed well; so many
difficulties which may arise out of gossips, and from much ado about
nothing, hasty and early judgements, and baseless suppositions and
suspicions, will all vanish from Man's life. Being without the necessary
information, and following conjectures which is not based upon firm
knowledge, will avail nothing of truth. Man is not allowed to utter all
that comes to the tip of his tongue with lack of knowledge, that may
[ 555 ]

even ruin the reputation of other people. Acting without enough
knowledge, will slay the spirit of research and investigation in Man. It
is in fact a source of pessimism, the effect of which may depress every
one involved.


To make it short, we may end our discussion of knowledge by a beautiful
Persian proverb, which is very meaningful too:ِ

He who knows not, and knows not that he knows not, he is a fool, let
him live in his double ignorance.

He who knows, and knows not that he knows, he is asleepِwake him up.

He who knows not, and knows that he knows not, deserves beatingِbeat
him.

But he who knows, and knows that he knows, he is a wise manِget to know
him.


DON'T BE PROUD

The next verse, (NO.37) is a fine touch to those who are arrogantly
puffed up with pride:ِ

\`\`Walk not in the earth with pride, that you won't cleave the earth,
or reach the mountain in height.''

Pride is something rejected and blamed in the sight of all nations. It
dines on vanity and sups on contempt, and as William Wordsworth has
composed:ِ

Pride goes before destruction,

And an haughty spirit before a fall.

The verse has not directly pointed to pride and vanity, which is

[ 556 ]

among the most evil characteristics of the unbelievers. It rather
implies that the effects of pride will appear in the actions and
behaviours of the proud and arrogant. It can be seen even in their
manner and style of walking. Qura"n forbids Man to walk with pride, and
wants him to be humble in all his physical and spiritual movements. When
our prophet himself was riding a mount, he would never permit anyone of
his disciples to walk besides him. He always sent them before, and then
he rode after them. Hazrat Imam Ali (AS) too, swept the room himself,
and carried water to his house!

The last verse objects the superstitious motives of the polytheists,
who believed that the angels were the daughters of Allah, and this was
when in their population daughters were considered as some sort of a
disgrace, and even their lives were strictly under question!


وَلَقَدْ صَرَّفْنَا فِي هَذَا الْقُرْآنِ لِيَذَّكَّرُوا وَمَا
يَزِيدُهُمْ إِلاَّ نُفُوراً(( 41 ))

41- WE HAVE USED VARIOUS WAYS (IN EXPLAINING MATTERS) IN THIS QURA"N,
THAT THEY MAY TAKE ADMONITION; AND IT INCREASES THEM NOT, EXCEPT
AVERSION!

قُلْ لَّوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ آلِهَةٌ كَمَا يَقُولُونَ إِذاً لاَبْتَغَوْا
إِلَى ذِي الْعَرْشِ سَبِيلا(( 42 ))

42- SAY; \`\`IF THERE HAD BEEN (OTHER) GODS WITH HIM, AS THEY SAY; IN
THAT CASE THEY WOULD CERTAINLY HAVE SOUGHT OUT A WAY TO THE LORD OF THE
THRONE.

سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يَقُولُونَ عُلُوّاً كَبِيراً(( 43 ))

43- GLORY BE TO HIM. HE IS HIGH ABOVE ALL THAT THEY SAY; GREAT A
HEIGHT.

[ 557 ]

تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالاَْرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ
وَإِنْ مِّنْ شَيْء إِلاَّ يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَكِنْ لاَّ تَفْقَهُونَ
تَسْبِيحَهُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ حَلِيماً غَفُوراً(( 44 ))

44- GLORIFY HIM THE SEVEN HEAVENS AND THE EARTH, AND WHOEVER IS IN
THEM. AND THERE IS NOT A THING THAT DOES NOT CELEBRATE HIS PRAISE, BUT
YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND THEIR CELEBRATION. VERILY HE IS FORBEARING, MOST
FORGIVING.


