How Do They Escape From the Truth (verse No. 41 - 44) How Do They Escape From the Truth (verse No. 41 - 44))
============================================================================================================

The first verse here refers to the obstinacy of some of the polytheists
and idolaters, that inspite of all that evidences and miracles that were
shown to them, they continued with their denial rejection:ِ

\`\`We have used various ways of explaining matter in this Qura"n, and
it increased them nothing except aversion!''

Matters have been explained in Qura"n in all aspects of literature,
through speech, story, parable, and figure and fact, but it increased
them aversion! Belief in the life to come, and piety, are the keys of
the apprehension of God's language in Qura"n.

Here one may ask; if the various methods and styles of saying in Qura"n
has given a reverse result, what is then the result of saying so?

Evidently Qura"n is not sent to a certain group of people, or to
certain period of time. It rather is a BOOK sent down to guide people of
all ages and all places up to the Resurrection Day. True that all the
people are the same KIND, and Mankind; but they are not all the same
[ 558 ]

in the spiritual and physical character. There are many people
throughout ages who like to listen to everything, and to select the best
from among them, to follow up.

The next verse (NO.42) gives a reason to prove the Oneness of God, Who
is the Lord of the Throne of power:ِ

\`\`Had there been other gods besides Him, they would have sought out a
way to the Lord of the Throne.''

This may mean a way to overcome Him, or to overthrow His Throne of
Power. It also could mean that the gods, if they really existed, would
try to get nearer to him, so as to attain a higher position. But Allah
is most high above all that they say. Glory be to Him:ِ

\`\`Glorify Him seven heavens and the earth, and whoever is in them.
And there is not a thing that does celebrate His praise, but you do not
understand their celebration.''

The above verse implies that, all the creatures, be they animate or
inanimate, even the skies and the earth and whatever is in them; all
glorify God, and celebrate His praise.

Therefore the universe is full of activity of singing the praise of
Allah. There is not a thing that does not celebrate the praise of God,
but we do not understand it. Of course there are men of God, who can
hear that, and listen to the lively and lovely melodies of the song of
Praise.

Some commentators are of opinion that the very existence of every
creature is a sign and a witness to God's power, wisdom, Oneness, and
goodness. As an example, a beautiful painting and fine drawing of the
nature or anything else is a sign and a witness of the skill, art,
talent and ability of its artist.

In fact everything celebrate the praise of God; even the wall when
splits and makes a noise. Its noise is the celebration of God's praise.
No bird or beast is hunted, or fallen, except that he has stopped
[ 559 ]

glorifying God. When the birds sing, they sing the praise of their
Creator, and pray for His sustenance!


وَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ جَعَلْنَا بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَ الَّذِينَ لاَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاْخِرَةِ حِجَاباً مَّسْتُوراً(( 45 ))

45- AND WHEN YOU RECITE QURA"N, WE PLACE BETWEEN YOU AND THOSE WHO
BELIEVE NOT IN THE LIFE TO COME, A HIDDEN BARRIER.

وَجَعَلْنَا عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ أَكِنَّةً أَنْ يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي
آذَانِهِمْ وَقْراً وَإِذَا ذَكَرْتَ رَبَّكَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ وَحْدَهُ
وَلَّوْا عَلَى أَدْبَارِهِمْ نُفُوراً(( 46 ))

46- AND WE PUT A COVER ON THEIR HEART NOT TO APPREHEND IT, AND IN THEIR
EARS A HEAVINESS.

AND WHEN YOU MENTION YOUR LORD IN THE QURA"N TO BE THE ONLY ONE, THEY
TURN THEIR BACKS IN AVERSION.

نَّحْنُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَسْتَمِعُونَ بِهِ إِذْ يَسْتَمِعُونَ إِلَيْكَ
وَإِذْ هُمْ نَجْوَى إِذْ يَقُولُ الظَّالِمُونَ إِنْ تَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ
رَجُلا مَّسْحُوراً(( 47 ))

47- WE KNOW BEST, THAT WHAT FOR THEY LISTEN, WHEN THEY LISTEN TO YOU;
AND WHEN THEY WHISPER TO EACH OTHER. WHEN THE OPPRESSORS SAY:ِ \`\`YOU
FOLLOW NOT, EXCEPT A MAN WHO IS BEWITCHED.

انظُرْ كَيْفَ ضَرَبُوا لَكَ الاَْمْثَالَ فَضَلُّوا فَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
سَبِيلا(( 48 ))

48- SEE HOW DID THEY STRIKE SIMILITUDE FOR YOU! AND SO WERE THEY
STRAYED THAT COULD NOT FIND A WAY.

[ 560 ]

THE COMMENTARY


OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 45 - 48)

The verses came down on account of some idolaters who threw stones on
the prophet when he stood in the Sacred Mosque, KAABA, for his night
prayer and reciting Qura"n. In instances, two of the pagans stood at the
prophet's right side, and two other in the left, and all at once began
to whistle, and made other noises, in order to disturb the Messenger of
God in his prayer, and confuse him mentally! Once Abujahl, Abusofya"n,
and the prophet's disbeliever uncle, Abulahab, came among the prophet's
audience: Abujahl whispered to Abusofya"n and Abulahab, saying; \`\`I
can't follow what this man is saying at all!''. I only see him moving
his lips up and down! Abusofya"n whispered to him saying:ِ \`\`I think
there are some points of truth in some of his words!'' The uncle
Abulahab said, not so! He is a magician, and well versed in poetry!


THE HIDDEN BARRIER

In the first verse here we read:ِ

\`\`When you recite Qura"n, We place between you and those who believe
not in the life to come, a HIDDEN BARRIER!''

The barrier is nothing but their own obstinacy and selfishness, their
ignorance and being dogged. It is their pride and vanity that bars them
from apprehension and understanding the life giving Message of their
Creator. They think that they are left alone, and unbridled, and that
they are free to do whatever they want. In fact, the said cover on the
heart of the unbelievers which prevents them from understanding the
truthful Message of God is due to their deliberate rejection of the
truth. On this respect when Our Lord is mentioned as the only one and
true Lord, they turn their backs in aversion.

The next verse (NO.47), refers to some of the unbelievers who joined
the prophet's audiences for evil purposes:ِ

\`\`We know best, that, what for they listen to you....''

They came to the audience, and listened to the recital of Qura"n, but
not with the purpose of learning something. Their main purpose
[ 561 ]

was to scoff at, and to raise objection on it. Then in their private
meetings, they confessed to each other that, their listening to the
prophet was only for show and dissimulation; and they knew the man (The
Messenger of God) to be bewitched!


وَقَالُوا أَءِذَا كُنَّا عِظَاماً وَرُفَاتاً أَئِنَّا لَمَبْعُوثُونَ
خَلْقاً جَدِيداً(( 49 ))

49- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`WHEN WE BECAME BONES, DECAYED AND SCATTERED;
SHALL WE BE RAISED UP AGAIN IN A NEW CREATION?''

قُلْ كُونُوا حِجَارَةً أَوْ حَدِيداً(( 50 ))

50- SAY (TO THEM); BE YOU STONES OR IRON.

أَوْ خَلْقاً مِّمَّا يَكْبُرُ فِي صُدُورِكُمْ فَسَيَقُولُونَ مَنْ
يُعِيدُنَا قُلْ الَّذِي فَطَرَكُمْ أَوَّلَ مَرَّة فَسَيُنْغِضُونَ
إِلَيْكَ رُءُوسَهُمْ وَيَقُولُونَ مَتَى هُوَ قُلْ عَسَى أَنْ يَكُونَ
قَرِيباً(( 51 ))

51- OR A CREATION OF THE KIND WHICH SEEMS GREAT (VERY HARD TO DO) IN
YOUR MIND. THEN VERY SOON THEY WILL SAY:ِ \`\`WHO BRINGS US BACK?''

SAY:ِ \`\`HE WHO CREATED YOU THE FIRST TIME.'' THEN VERY SOON THEY BEND
THEIR HEADS DOWN TO YOU, (IN WONDER) AND SAY:ِ \`\`WHEN IS THAT?'' SAY:ِ
\`\`PERHAPS IT IS NEAR''

يَوْمَ يَدْعُوكُمْ فَتَسْتَجِيبُونَ بِحَمْدِهِ وَتَظُنُّونَ إِنْ
لَّبِثْتُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا(( 52 ))

52- THE DAY IN WHICH HE WILL CALL YOU UP (FROM YOUR GRAVES) AND YOU
WILL ANSWER WITH CELEBRATING HIS PRAISE; AND THINKING TO HAVE NOT
TARRIED BUT A LITTLE.

[ 562 ]

THE COMMENTARY


RESURRECTION DAY WILL DEFINITELY COME (VERSE NO. 49 - 52)

Resurrection Day is always a complementary to Monotheism. In these
verses, three questions or objections, of the skeptics are answered:ِ

Their first and second question was that; \`\`When we became bones,
decayed and scattered, is it possible at all to be raised up to life
once again, and if so, who can do that!?''

The question implies that our prophet has always insisted upon a
corporeal Resurrection, that Man will be raised after his death, both in
body and soul.

The stone, iron, or anything that may seem greater to you, the
All-mighty and All-knowing Creator, who created us at first will
recreate us once again, and will raise us from the graves!

The skeptics considered not that, God has created us from nothing at
first, why then should he fail to renew us or make us once again? We may
say; having some materials of bones and dusts to use in the second
creation, is better than having nothing at all, as it was the case with
first creation. Yet, this sort of reasoning in God is absurd, because to
Him nothing is impossible. This is because, for anything that He likes
to create, He has the handy and wonderful tool of saying, \`\`BE'', and,
\`\`IT WILL BE!'' and that is all He may want to do!

As to the third question, when the sceptic is driven to the corner by
strong reasoning he may say, \`\`O.K.; let us think that Resurrection is
apt to happen, and God will do that; but, when is that going to
happen?''

To say the truth, the relativity of time and space prevents anyone to
predict the exact happening time of the Resurrection.

When death separates out the body of Man from his soul, he shall live
out of time and space! There in that wonderful world, a minute, an hour,
and a year, are all equal and with the same length! So is the case when
Man falls in a deep asleep! Therefore no one can say
[ 563 ]

the actual time, when the deads are raised up, because there is no time
there!

In the new creation, eyes are opened to the truth. So, no one will be
in doubt and delusion as regards the reality of God, and therefore,
every one after his raise from the grave will celebrate the praise of
Allah! Glory be to HIM.


وَقُلْ لِّعِبَادِي يَقُولُوا الَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ
يَنزَغُ بَيْنَهُمْ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ لِلْإِنسَانِ عَدُوّاً
مُبِيناً(( 53 ))

53- AND TELL MY SERVANTS, TO SAY THAT WHICH IS THE BEST; THAT SATAN
SOWS DISCORD AMONG THEM. VERILY SATAN HAS ALWAYS BEEN A MANIFEST ENEMY
FOR MAN.

رَّبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِكُمْ إِنْ يَشَأْ يَرْحَمْكُمْ أَوْ إِنْ يَشَأْ
يُعَذِّبْكُمْ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَكِيلا(( 54 ))

54- YOUR LORD KNOWS YOU THE BEST. HE WILL HAVE MERCY ON YOU IF HE WILL,
OR HE SHALL PUNISH YOU IF HE WILL; AND WE HAVE NOT SENT YOU ON THEM AS A
DISPOSER. (OF THEIR AFFAIRS)

وَرَبُّكَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَلَقَدْ
فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَ النَّبِيِّينَ عَلَى بَعْض وَآتَيْنَا دَاوُودَ
زَبُوراً(( 55 ))

55- AND YOUR LORD KNOWS BEST, THOSE WHO ARE IN THE HEAVEN AND THE
EARTH.

AND VERILY WE HAVE EXCELLED SOME OF THE APOSTLES OVER SOME OTHER; AND
WE GAVE TO DAVID THE PSALMS.

[ 564 ]

قُلْ ادْعُوا الَّذِينَ زَعَمْتُمْ مِّنْ دُونِهِ فَلاَ يَمْلِكُونَ
كَشْفَ الضُّرِّ عَنكُمْ وَلاَ تَحْوِيلا(( 56 ))

56- SAY;ِ \`\`CALL THOSE WHOM YOU THINK (ARE GODS) BESIDES HIM, (AND
YOU WILL SEE THEM) THAT HAVE NO POWER TO REMOVE AN AFFLICTION FROM YOU;
NOR (CAN THEY) MAKE A CHANGE.''

أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ يَبْتَغُونَ إِلَى رَبِّهِمْ الْوَسِيلَةَ
أَيُّهُمْ أَقْرَبُ وَيَرْجُونَ رَحْمَتَهُ وَيَخَافُونَ عَذَابَهُ إِنَّ
عَذَابَ رَبِّكَ كَانَ مَحْذُوراً(( 57 ))

57- THEY ARE THOSE WHO THEMSELVES CALL TO FIND SOME MEANS (TO APPROACH
THEM) TO THEIR LORD; WHOEVER OF THEM BE NEARER. AND THEY HOPE (TO HAVE)
HIS MERCY, AND FEAR HIS PUNISHMENT. VERILY THE PUNISHMENT OF YOUR LORD
IS TO BE AVOIDED.


THE COMMENTARY


LOGICAL ENCOUNTER WITH ALL (VERSE NO. 53 - 57)

The first verse here, may teach us the good method of speaking to each
other and in particular to our opposers:ِ

\`\`Tell my servants to say that which is the best....''

The commandment here bids us to speak fair and politely to all mankind.
Devil always tried to create discord and enmity among us. Our tongue is
the most capable means of kindling the fire of hatred and hostility
among men. A false or unkind word, or a lie may easily destruct a firm
building of friendship and brotherhood. On the other hand politeness
costs nothing and may gain everything. There is a Persian proverb that
says:ِ \`\`The red tongue will give the green head to the wind.''
William Shakespeare has in his King Lear:ِ

[ 565 ]

\`\`Mend your speech a little, lest it may mar your fortune.''

The next verse (NO.54) implies that Muslims should not think that they
are the only people of God who will have salvation, and the other people
are all doomed:ِ

\`\`Allah knows you the best. He will have Mercy on you if He will, and
shall punish you if He will.''

God will never make a mistake, and knows best what to do, and what to
leave. If He has been Graceful to some one that you consider him not to
deserve that Gift, or has He punished some one, some how, that you think
him to be guiltless; you must blame your own knowledge, and not God's
righteous plan, which is above all human wisdom.

The next verse (NO.55) elevates the word upper, that, not only your
Lord knows you the best, but also those who are in the heavens; such as
the angels, and prophets, and saints, and those who have remained down
on the low earth, are well known to Him. So if He has excelled some of
the apostles over some other or has given titles of position to some of
them such as ABRAHAM, the friend of God, or MOSES the Interlocutor to
whom God spoke on mount Sinai, or Jesus Christ the Holy Spirit of God,
or Mohammad the Beloved of God, we should not set up false standards for
judgement. Their merits, and titles are granted to them according to the
needs of the world, and the time, in which they lived. In the life time
of Moses, sorcery was very advanced and he was given the miracle of the
duality of stick / snake.

When Jesus Christ came, the Medical Profession had progressed a lot,
and in the advent of Mohammad the Messenger of God, literature had come
on top among the Arabs.

An example of the gifts given to the apostles is said here to be,
ZOBUR, or PSALMS granted to David. Among the Divine Books the Psalms
have their own speciality and distinguishing marks of song and music,
which is intended to be sung for the worship of Allah and celebration of
his praise.

In the Psalm NO.37, which is all about the destiny of the wicked and of
the good, there is an important promise, that there shall be a
[ 566 ]

good time coming, in which the wicked will disappear, like grass that
dries up, and that, those who trust in the Lord will possess the land.
The Lord takes care for those who obey Him, and the land will be theirs
for ever.


\*\*\*\*\*


THE PSALMS

(The book of \`\`PSALMS'', which is also called, \`\`PSALTERS'' is the
hymn book and prayer book of the Bible. The present form is different
from the original that was sent down to David, because the scholars and
doctors of the Bible have all confessed that the present book of Psalms
has been composed by different authors over a long period of time. These
hymns and prayers have been collected and used by people of Israel in
their worship, and eventually this collection was included in the
scriptures.

With regard to the origin and authorship, modern researches have
determind only that the book was compiled in the period after the exile,
from the writings of many different authors, covering a long span of
history.

These religious songs of adoration, are of many kinds: there are hymns
of praise and worship of God; prayers for help, protection, and
salvation; pleas for forgiveness, songs of thanks giving for God's
blessing, and petitions for the punishment of enemies. These prayers are
both personal and national. Some of them portray the most intimate
feeling of one person, while others represent the needs and feelings of
all the people of God.

The Psalms were used by Jesus Christ, quoted by the writers of the New
Testament, and became the treasured book of worship of the Christian
church from its beginning, and the second only to the Pentateuch, in the
estimation of Jews.

They are all together 150 Psalms grouped into five collections.


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

[ 567 ]

وَإِنْ مِّنْ قَرْيَة إِلاَّ نَحْنُ مُهْلِكُوهَا قَبْلَ يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ أَوْ مُعَذِّبُوهَا عَذَاباً شَدِيداً كَانَ ذَلِكَ فِي
الْكِتَابِ مَسْطُوراً(( 58 ))

58- AND THERE IS NOT A TOWN UNLESS WE DESTROY IT BEFORE THE
RESURRECTION DAY, OR WE PUNISH IT SEVERELY. THAT WAS WRITTEN IN THE
BOOK.

وَمَا مَنَعَنَا أَنْ نُّرْسِلَ بِالاْيَاتِ إِلاَّ أَنْ كَذَّبَ بِهَا
الاَْوَّلُونَ وَآتَيْنَا ثَمُودَ النَّاقَةَ مُبْصِرَةً فَظَلَمُوا بِهَا
وَمَا نُرْسِلُ بِالاْيَاتِ إِلاَّ تَخْوِيفاً(( 59 ))

59- AND NOTHING HAS PREVENTED US TO SEND DOWN THE SIGNS, EXCEPT THAT
THE FOREMOST PEOPLE BELIED THEM; AND WE BROUGHT TO THAMUD (THE GREAT
SIGN OF) THE SHE-CAMEL, TO OPEN THEIR EYES BUT THEY OPPRESSED HER. AND
WE DO NOT SEND THE SIGNS EXCEPT FOR FRIGHTENING.

وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لَكَ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ أَحَاطَ بِالنَّاسِ وَمَا جَعَلْنَا
الرُّؤْيَا الَّتِي أَرَيْنَاكَ إِلاَّ فِتْنَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَالشَّجَرَةَ
الْمَلْعُونَةَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ وَنُخَوِّفُهُمْ فَمَا يَزِيدُهُمْ إِلاَّ
طُغْيَاناً كَبِيراً(( 60 ))

60- AND (REMEMBER) WHEN WE SAID TO YOU THAT, \`\`YOUR LORD HAS
ENCOMPASSED PEOPLE. AND THE DREAM WHICH WE SHOWED YOU WAS NOT EXCEPT A
TRIAL FOR PEOPLE; AND THE CURSED TREE IN QURA"N (IS ALSO A TRIAL). AND
WE FRIGHTEN THEM, BUT IT INCREASES THEM NOTHING BUT GREAT INSOLENCE.

[ 568 ]

THE COMMENTARY


YIELD NOT TO THOSE WHO SEEK EXCUSES (VERSE NO. 58 - 60)

The first of the verses here consists of a wakening advice or warning,
that this present world in which we live now; is not a permanent abode
for us. It will be perished and destroyed, any how; and the everlasting
abode for Man to live in, will be the world and the life to come:ِ

\`\`There is not a town unless we destroy it before the Resurrection
Day, or We punish it severely....''

Eventually this world will come to end, giving its place and to a new
one, with a new creation; and this is destined in the Book of Creation,
which is in fact God's infinite knowledge, and general plan. Therefore
those who reject faith and truth, should know that even if they live
long up to the end of this world, they at last will have to perish and
prepare for a new creation.

The disbeliever may say:ِ \`\`O.K., we are willing to convert, but on
condition that we may observe the signs and miracles that we ask for.''
The answer to this in Qura"n is:ِ

\`\`God can do anything. Nothing is impossible for him. But experiences
have shown that miracles have not proved so effective and promoting in
the past:ِ

\`\`Nothing has prevented us to send down the signs, except that the
foremost people belied it. As an instance we brought to the people of
Thamud the she-camel but they oppressed her!''

The foremost generations treated the signs and miracles presented by
God's apostles, with contempt and insolence. An example of this, was the
she-camel that the people of Thamud hamstrung her, and thereby incurred
the wrath of Allah upon themselves! For more about the incident of the
she-camel, please refer to volume2 of this book, S 7:73

In the last verse (NO.60) we read that; God surrounds all people, and
implies that His forbearance which arises from His Mercy and Compassion,
should never be thought as a sign of His weakness, or diminishing of His
infinite power.

[ 569 ]

We must indeed fear the losing of such a Merciful, Compassionate,
All-grace and beauty Lord, who is our real friend, protector, and
guardian.

Then mention is made of the prophet's dream, and the CURSED TREE.

Some of the great commentators, either Sonni or Shiite, such as
FAKHR-AL-RAZI, GHARTABI, TABARSI, and FAIZ KA"SHA"NI have written in
their famous commentary books, that, our prophet dreamt a curious dream,
that, some monkeys were ascending and descending his pulpit! When the
prophet woke up, he was very sad; so much so, that he rarely smiled
after that dream!

Those monkeys were interpreted to have been the OMMAYID DYNASTY, who
usurped our prophets pulpit of power, and turned it to a throne of
kingship, or better to say, Dictatorship.

Among them was the cruelest, and the most inhuman and merciless of
kings, whose name was YAZID. Perhaps this is why the verse which we
discuss (NO.60), ends in this figurative phrase; \`\`FA, MA" YAZID,OHOM
ELLA TOGHYA"NAN KABIRA"''

YAZID was the dictator king who sat on the throne of Mohammad, and
killed the prophet's most beloved grandson, HAZRAT IMAM HUSSAIN (AS)!
They carried his head upon a spear from KARBALA" to DAMISHGH their
capital city! He took the grand daughter ZAINAB (AS), as captives!

YAZID FORBADE the household of our prophet from access to water! They
were so cruel that, when Imam Hussain (AS) asked them to give a drink of
water to his six month old son (ALI-ASGHAR), who was starving in that
hot Arabian summer; they mocked at Hazrat Imam Hussain, and shot the
baby at his throat and slew him!

As to the CURSED TREE, No commentator has said anything to be more
becoming than the tree too, alludes to Ommayid Dynasty, and those
monkeys who ascended the prophet's pulpit in his dream. The cursed tree,
the commentators say, is a figurative word written in a metaphorical
way, to connote the said monkeys, or the accursed Ommayid Dynasty, and
in particular their champion of cruelty and inhumanity, YAZID.... and
soon the oppressors will come to know in what sort of a change, have
they changed!

[ 570 ]

وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا لاَِدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا إِلاَّ
إِبْلِيسَ قَالَ أَأَسْجُدُ لِمَنْ خَلَقْتَ طِيناً(( 61 ))

61- AND WHEN WE SAID TO THE ANGELS; \`\`PROSTRATE YOURSELVES BEFORE
ADAM.'' THEY ALL PROSTRATED EXCEPT IBLIS. HE SAID; \`\`SHOULD I
PROSTRATE MYSELF FOR HE WHOM YOU CREATED FROM DUST?''

قَالَ أَرَأَيْتَكَ هَذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَىَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ
إِلَى يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لاََحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا((
62 ))

62- HE SAID (AGAIN); \`\`ARE YOU SEEING THIS (CREATURE) WHOM YOU HAVE
HONOURED ABOVE ME? IF YOU LET ME LIVE UP TO THE RESURRECTION DAY, I WILL
ASSUREDLY ROOT UP HIS DESCENDENTS EXCEPT A FEW. (i.e. I BRING ALL OF
THEM UNDER MY SWAY)

قَالَ اذْهَبْ فَمَنْ تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ جَزَاؤُكُمْ
جَزَاءً مَّوْفُوراً(( 63 ))

63- HE SAID; \`\`GO ON! THEN HE WHO FOLLOWED YOU OF THEM, VERILY THE
HELL SHALL BE YOUR REWARD....AN AMPLE REWARD.''

وَاسْتَفْزِزْ مَنْ اسْتَطَعْتَ مِنْهُمْ بِصَوْتِكَ وَأَجْلِبْ
عَلَيْهِمْ بِخَيْلِكَ وَرَجِلِكَ وَشَارِكْهُمْ فِي الاَْمْوَالِ
وَالاَْولاَدِ وَعِدْهُمْ وَمَا يَعِدُهُمْ الشَّيْطَانُ إِلاَّ غُرُوراً((
64 ))

[ 571 ]

THEM. AND SATAN WILL PROMISE THEM NOTHING BUT VANITY.

إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ وَكَفَى بِرَبِّكَ
وَكِيلا(( 65 ))

65- BUT, AS FOR MY SERVANTS; YOU HAVE NO AUTHORITY OVER THEM, AND
ENOUGH IS YOUR LORD FOR A DISPOSER.


THE COMMENTARY


