The Snares of Iblis (verse No. 61 - 65)
=======================================

These verses refer to the disobedience of IBLIS, and his refusing to
prostrate himself before Adam.

Satan is a full example of arrogance, blasphemy, and jealousy, and
these characteristics of him caused his fall. His followers too are
treading his path, and proved his promise to be carried out. He said to
our Lord:ِ

\`\`I will root up Adam's offspring, with the exception of only a few
of them who are pure in faith and sincere in act.''

The first verse in this group (NO.61) asks Man to consider SATAN'S
refusal and rejection:ِ

\`\`And when We said to the angels; prostrate yourselves before Adam.
They all prostrated except Iblis....''

The purpose of prostration here is showing courtesy and respect, and
being humble; and this was because Man has been honoured and excelled
over many of God's creatures, and for this great gift he owes thanks and
higher responsibilities.

When Iblis found himself rejected and discharged from the Divine court,
due to his own arrogance and jealousy; he did not care to repent and
return, and to redress his misfortune! He rather insisted upon his
assertion, saying:ِ

\`\`Are you seeing this creature that you have honoured him above me?
If you let me live up to the Resurrection Day, I will prove that he is
void of any value, and does not worth that honour of you. If you respite
me I will
[ 572 ]

root up his descendents and lead them all astray, except a few of them
who are pure in faith and sincere in act. I can easily bridle them all,
and pull them wherever I want.

Therefore, to create a field of trial for man to show his talent, and
to put to work his faculties, and to be baked in the furnace of
incidents and experiences, in order to attain his deserved development;
God, agreed with Satan's request. Allah respited him not, as he had
asked, up to Resurrection Day, but for the time being during which Man
may live on probation. Following the respite, Allah said to Satan;

\`\`Go on! But know that he who follows you of them, the Hell shall be
your reward, and theirs too. So stir you, whoever of them you can, by
your voice of seduction, deception, and lie. Send against them your
hosts, and share with them their wealth and children, and promise them
though your promise is nothing but vanity and vain!''

Qura"n has put stress upon the fact that Satan has not any authority or
effective power upon Man, unless he deliberately follows him. In
particular, Satan can do nothing to those who are pure in faith and
sincere in act, and put their trust in God. He lays his various traps in
the way of Man. He may seduce some one with his speech, or tempt some
one with allurment.

To say it in a metaphorical way; he has his hosts of cavalry and
infantry here and there, and various kinds of weapons that he may use.
He may make use of the beauty of a woman, or the glory of rank, or the
attraction of wealth, to entice his prey. Devilish armed forces have
many a time been a dangerous means in the hands of the cruel invaders,
and inhuman dictators of the history of Man, such as Nerone, Hitler, and
other wild conquerors, and blood-thirsties.

Satan may frighten his followers from poverty, illness, and death. Some
commentators have understood that Satan's sharing Man in wealth and
children is through usury and giving birth to unlawful children; but we
are of opinion that the words have wider meanings which includes
obtaining any sort of unlawful wealth and children.


رَبُّكُمْ الَّذِي يُزْجِي لَكُمْ الْفُلْكَ فِي الْبَحْرِ لِتَبْتَغُوا
مِنْ فَضْلِهِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيماً(( 66 ))

[ 573 ]

66- YOUR LORD IS HE WHO IMPELS FOR YOU THE SHIP ON THE SEA, SO THAT YOU
MAY SEEK OF HIS GRACE, THAT, HE HAS ALWAYS BEEN COMPASSIONATE TO YOU.

وَإِذَا مَسَّكُمْ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَنْ تَدْعُونَ إِلاَّ
إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ أَعْرَضْتُمْ وَكَانَ
الاِْنْسَانُ كَفُوراً(( 67 ))

67- AND WHEN A TROUBLE TOUCHES YOU ON THE SEA, ALL THOSE WHOM YOU CALL
(OTHER THAN GOD) WILL LEAVE YOU IN THE LURCH, EXCEPT HIM. THEN WHEN HE
SAVES YOU (AND BRINGS YOU BACK) TO LAND, YOU TURN AWAY. AND MAN HAS
ALWAYS BEEN UNGRATEFUL.

أَفَأَمِنتُمْ أَنْ يَخْسِفَ بِكُمْ جَانِبَ الْبَرِّ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِباً ثُمَّ لاَ تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ وَكِيلا(( 68 ))

68- DO YOU THEN FEEL SECURE THAT HE WILL NOT MAKE A PART OF THE EARTH,
TO TAKE YOU IN? OR TO SEND AGAINST YOU A STORM OF SAND (TO BURY YOU),
AND YOU FIND NO ONE TO PROTECT YOU?

أَمْ أَمِنتُمْ أَنْ يُعِيدَكُمْ فِيهِ تَارَةً أُخْرَى فَيُرْسِلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ قَاصِفاً مِّنَ الرِّيحِ فَيُغْرِقَكُمْ بِمَا كَفَرْتُمْ ثُمَّ
لاَ تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا بِهِ تَبِيعاً(( 69 ))

69- OR DO YOU FEEL SECURE THAT, HE WILL NOT SEND YOU BACK (TO THE SEA)
ONCE AGAIN, TO SEND AGAINST YOU A VIOLENT WIND TO DROWN YOU FOR YOUR
INGRATITUDE; THEN NO ONE IS FOUND (EVEN) TO CLAIM YOUR BLOOD-MONEY
(MULCT) FROM US.

[ 574 ]

THE COMMENTARY


INGRATITUDE AGAINST SO MUCH MERCY (VERSE NO. 66 - 69)

Here the immediate reference is to the gains that Man may earn through
sailing a ship on the sea. In such voyages, Man earns material gain by
commerce; social, cultural, and scientific gain, by contact and
communications with other nation; but in spite of all the gifts and
graces of God that he enjoys, he is not a thankful creature!

It is evident that for the sail of a ship upon the sea many systems and
networks should have a joint venture. The water has to be a smooth,
calm, and a suitable path. The density of water, and the ratio of mass
to the volume must be apt; so that some material may float on the water
according to Archimedes Law. On the other hand a motor-power is needed
which in the past was the wind, and in our age there are various sources
of energy in use, such as steam, petrol, atomic power, and etc.

Ships have always been the largest of transport means for Man, and
to-day too, we do have Gigantic ships that are as large as a movable
town.

In spite of all his knowledge and technical skill, power, faculties,
and plans, Man is very weak a creature!:ِ

\`\`When a trouble touches you on the sea, all those whom you call for
help, other than God will leave you in the lurch!''

In fact Man is no where safe except by the protection of God. An
earthquake, a tornado, a shower of rain, a fall of a meteor, a sudden
accident, and the invasion of a few microbs.... and then the
relationship of man with life and with everything is over, and done
with! In such cases the destructing power gives no time to the victim to
utter a request for help or even a farewell to a beloved:ِ

\`\`Do you then feel secure that He will not make a part of the earth
to take you in? Or to send against you a storm of sand to bury you, and
you find no one to protect you?''

[ 575 ]

So if Man flees from the wrath of God, he has no where to go, but, to
God Himself, riding the mount of repentance and return.


وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى
كَثِير مِّمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلا(( 70 ))

70- AND VERILY WE HAVE HONOURED THE SON OF MAN AND CARRIED THEM (BY
TRANSPORTS) ON LAND AND SEA, AND SUSTAINED THEM WITH GOOD CLEAN (FOODS
AND DRINKS) AND EXCELLED THEM OVER MANY OF WHOM WE CREATED; WITH A HIGH
EXCELLENCE.

يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاس بِإِمَامِهِمْ فَمَنْ أُوتِىَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُوْلَئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلا(( 71 ))

71- (REMIND THEM OF) THE DAY IN WHICH WE CALL EVERY GROUP OF PEOPLE
WITH THEIR LEADER (IMA"M); THEN HE WHO IS GIVEN HIS BOOK TO HIS RIGHT
HAND; THEY READ THEIR BOOK (WHICH IS THE RECORD OF THEIR DEEDS), AND
THEY WILL NOT BE OPPRESSED (EVEN THE AMOUNT OF) A SINGLE DATE-THREAD.

وَمَنْ كَانَ فِي هَذِهِ أَعْمَى فَهُوَ فِي الاْخِرَةِ أَعْمَى وَأَضَلُّ
سَبِيلا(( 72 ))

72- AND HE WHO WAS BLIND HERE (IN THIS WORLD), THEN HE SHALL BE BLIND
IN THE WORLD TO COME TOO, AND MORE ASTRAY FROM THE WAY.

[ 576 ]

THE COMMENTARY


MAN THE MASTER - PIECE OF CREATION (VERSE NO. 70 - 72)

The argument is now about the nobility and grandeur of Man who is the
masterpiece of creation. Here Man's eminence has been illustrated
through three important gifts that God has bestowed on him. These are as
follows:ِ

1ِ We have enabled him to transport himself from place to place on land
and sea, (and also on air).

2ِ We have sustained them with good, clean food and drink.

3ِ We have excelled Man spiritually and physically over many kinds of
our creatures.

Mount and means of transport, are among the most important gifts of
God, because, almost all the blessings and bounties are obtained by
movement.

Each group of the creatures have their dominion, on a certain part of
the sea, land, or air. It is only Man who has supreme authority over the
whole Globe; if we may ignore him recently invading the space and other
planets!

Commentators have various ideas and understandings, as to how has Allah
honoured man over the other creatures!?

Some of them point at Man's wisdom and thought as the pivot of his
eminence. Some other believe that Man's faculty of reasoning, speech,
decision, and etc. are the principles, that have established his
authority and governorship over the other creature. But we are of
opinion that all these, and many more are caused Man to become the
vicegerent of God upon the earth. In other word; Allah has honoured man
over almost all His creatures by endowing him with a Holy Spirit blown
in him, and also with intelligence, thought, and various spiritual and
physical faculties. God has enabled man to transport himself from here
to there, by land, sea, and air, with a wonderful speed which has
[ 577 ]

ever increased. This is why, Man has to recognize his own great
position among other creatures, and prepare himself for his real and
eternal life which is yet to come!

Some commentators, in explaining the last phrase of the verse NO.70,
which says:ِ

\`\`We have excelled Man over MANY of our creatures have understood
that the angels are superior to Man.''

But we are of opinion that the word MANY in this case means All, the
creatures including the angels; because in Arabic literature, as well as
in Qura"n, we find so many examples, and instances in which the word,
\`\`MANY'' has been used to mean \`\`ALL''.

On the other hand if the angels were superior to Man, Allah would not
command them to prostrate themselves before Adam.

HAZRAT IMAM ALI (AS) has said:ِ

\`\`God has created three kinds of creatures, namely the angels, man,
and, animal.

Angels are of mere wisdom, and void of passion and anger. Animals have
passion and anger, but they have no wisdom. Man has both faculties;
Wisdom as well as passion and anger. When a Man's wisdom overcomes his
passion, he is higher than the angels.

When Man's passion overcomes his wisdom, he is lower than the
animals.

Therefore if Man puts to work his wisdom, and brings into effect his
faculties, he will excel all the creatures including the angels

The last verse in the above group, (NO.72) implies that those who are
blind in this world, shall be blind in the life to come, too,:ِ

\`\`He who is blind here in this world, shall be blind in the world to
come too, and more astray from the way!''

Those who cannot see the beautiful face of truth in this world, and are
not willing to find a way to salvation; in the life to come, which is
the real life, will not receive the necessary light to see the Grace and
Mercy of God; because they have always moved farther and farther from
the path of truth.

[ 578 ]

If the creation of the skies and earth, and differences of night and
day, and the regular movement of the sun and the moon; and the amazing
order of the solar system, do not lead some one behind the curtain and
veil of the nature, to see the mysterious All-mighty All-knowing hand of
He who controls everything; in the world to come he shall be more astray
than that.

The Arabic, \`\`FATIL'' that we have translated here to,
\`\`DATE-THREAD'' is a thin small skin in the cleft of date-stone which
does not worth a mention for having no value.


وَإِنْ كَادُوا لَيَفْتِنُونَكَ عَنْ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ
لِتَفْتَرِي عَلَيْنَا غَيْرَهُ وَإِذاً لاَّتَّخَذُوكَ خَلِيلا(( 73 ))

73- THEY WERE NEARLY TO ENTICE YOU FROM THAT WHICH WE INSPIRED TO YOU,
HOPING THAT YOU WOULD FORGE AGAINST US SOMETHING ELSE. AND IN THAT CASE
THEY WERE (WILLING) TO TAKE YOU A FRIEND.

وَلَوْلاَ أَنْ ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدْتَّ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ شَيْئاً
قَلِيلا(( 74 ))

74- AND HAD WE NOT CONFIRMED YOU; YOU WERE ABOUT TO INCLINE TO THEM A
LITTLE.

إِذاً لاََّذَقْنَاكَ ضِعْفَ الْحَيَاةِ وَضِعْفَ الْمَمَاتِ ثُمَّ لاَ
تَجِدُ لَكَ عَلَيْنَا نَصِيراً(( 75 ))

75- IN THAT CASE; WE WOULD MAKE YOU TO TASTE A DOUBLE PUNISHMENT OF
LIFE, AND A DOUBLE PUNISHMENT OF DEATH, AND THEN YOU WOULD FIND NO ONE
TO HELP YOU AGAINST US.

[ 579 ]

THE COMMENTARY


VERSE NO. 73 - 75

Our prophet was so very eager to convert the Pagan Arabs, and lead them
to righteous acts and good morals. Almost all the Pagans were
polytheists and some sort of an idolaters. They wanted the prophet to
respect their idols instead of their acceptance of Islam and taking the
prophet to their circle as a friend and intimate. They once asked the
prophet, to leave at least one or two of their important idols unbroken,
either the one called, \`\`HOBAL'' or that one which was erect on top of
the hill, \`\`MARVEH''. Once a group of the tribe of SAGHIF asked the
prophet to omit and violate the commandment of prostration and bowing
down in daily prayers. In answer to them the prophet said:ِ

\`\`There is no use in a prayer that consists not of prostration''

It was after revelation of the above verses that the prophet very often
prayed to his Lord saying:ِ

\`\`My Lord! Do not leave me to myself for a twinkle of an eye.''


\*\*\*\*\*


ALLUREMENT AND THREAT

(Perhaps the following incident of the life of our prophet, which is
narrated by almost all the historians, may help to get the meaning of
the above verses (NO.73ِ75) the better and easier:ِ

As the Muslims gradually gained power in Mecca, they despised the idols
and false gods more severly, and as a result, the idolaters were filled
with rage. The big problem of the worshippers of idols was then,
ABUTALIB, who supported the son of his brother, Mohammad (AS)
infinitely. ABUTALIB, the prophet's uncle was the chief of his clan
called HA"SHIMITES, who were the most important group of the tribe of
QURAISH. He was the custodian of the sacred shrink, \`\`KAABEH'', and
was a man of high eminence and reputation among the inhabitants of
Mecca.

Once the idolaters came to ABUTALIB, with some attractive offers and
proposals. They said to ABUTALIB:ِ \`\`We can suffer your nephew no
more! He despises our gods, mocks at our religion and faith, and insults
our fathers
[ 580 ]

for being the worshippers of idols. Tell your nephew; if he drives
towards wealth, we may make him the richest one in Mecca. If he wants
rank and position, we will elect him to the highest rank which is
possible among us. We also shall give him in marriage any daughter of us
whom he may choose.''

In return we want him to stop contempting our idols, and leave us free
with our forefathers religion, and if you continue to support your
brother's son, we know no other way but to fight against you and to slay
your nephew.

ABUTALIB called Mohammad (AS) and informed him of what the heads of
Ghoraish had said; and added that the time had come that Mohammad had to
be very careful and cautious for his own life, and for the life of his
friends and kith and kin!

For a while Mohammad thought that, perhaps the uncle was afraid of the
threats, and that, he was losing his support. He therefore, very
politely said to the uncle:ِ \`\`Upon Allah my Lord; if the heretics
keep the sun on my right shoulder, and the moon on my left, I will not
stop following my cause, until I either die for it, or my Lord may grant
me victory over them, (and their false gods).'' Then Mohammad's eyes
were overflowed with tears, and thinking perhaps the faithful uncle too
was leaving his support, he said good by, and proceeded to go out.

ABUTALIB called the prophet back, before he could have gone out of the
house, and said to him:ِ

\`\`Dear son! Go on, and do as you are commanded by your Lord, and make
sure that your uncle will never leave you alone. I shall help and
support you as far as I breathe, and my heart beats up and down.''

This incident proves that; even if Mohammad (AS) could show no other
evidences such as, splitting the moon, and raising the dead, and making
the stones and trees to speak, and his wonderful Glorious Qura"n; his
constancy and his firmness of mind, his deep faith in his Divine
Mission, and his patience were enough for reason, that he was indeed the
real Messenger of our God. He always insisted that he was an elect of
God for His Messenger to His servants, and never wavered, and never
showed the least amount of doubt, in his deeds, words, and claims.

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)

[ 581 ]

وَإِنْ كَادُوا لَيَسْتَفِزُّونَكَ مِنْ الاَْرْضِ لِيُخْرِجُوكَ مِنْهَا
وَإِذاً لاَّ يَلْبَثُونَ خِلاَفَكَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا(( 76 ))

76- THEY SOUGHT TO UPROOT YOU FROM THE LAND, IN ORDER TO EXPEL YOU FROM
IT. IN THAT CASE THEY WOULD NOT REMAIN AFTER YOU BUT A LITTLE. (GOD'S
WRATH WOULD DESTROY THEM ALL)

سُنَّةَ مَنْ قَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِنْ رُّسُلِنَا وَلاَ تَجِدُ
لِسُنَّتِنَا تَحْوِيلا(( 77 ))

77- (SUCH WAS OUR) METHODICAL WAY (IN DEALING) WITH THE MESSENGERS WHOM
WE SENT BEFORE YOU; AND YOU WILL NOT FIND ANY CHANGE IN OUR METHODICAL
WAY.


THE COMMENTARY


ANOTHER EVIL PLOT (VERSE NO. 76 - 77)

The heathens of Mecca conspired to get rid of the prophet some how;
possibly to exile, or imprison, him in an isolated place; so as to
prevent him going any further in his spiritual revolution:ِ

\`\`They sought to uproot you from the land of Mecca and either to
exile you or keep you some where in jail and if not possible to stop
your endeavour to slay you. In that case, they themselves would not
remain long after you, and God would punish them severely.''

In the case of our prophet Mohammad (AS) and those apostles who were
sent before him, the heathens planned to uproot them from their lands,
or to stop their progress some how by having them killed, or expelled.
In doing that, they considered not the plans of God, and in fact were
digging their own graves. As the above verses imply, if they
[ 582 ]

could succeed in their evil plan they would not remain long after
frustrating their apostles.

In the case of our prophet, the Pagans of Quraish were fortunate enough
that the prophet himself had decided to emigrate, in order to change his
field of combat, because a great many of the inhabitants of YASRIB had
been converted and sincerely believed in his Message. On the other hand,
the Meccans, never dared to proceed to slay the prophet, although they
frequently threatened to do that. This was because the HASHIMITES, in
Mecca were the most powerful clan among the other tribes. The prophet
himself too, among his followers and disciples, though not many; were so
important as to be taken highly in account; because they were very
sincere and faithful to the Messenger of God. Almost everybody knew
that, killing Mohammad, would be vengeful a crime, and could cause a
fearful bloodshed. So the pagans only did their best to neutralize the
effects of the prophet's teachings and preaching, and frightening his
ordinary followers, like BALA"L, YA"SIR, AMMA"R, and his mother. Their
harsh persecution was not applied to important Muslims like ABUBEKR,
OTHMA"N, and OMAR. In spite of that precautions observed by the pagans,
when the prophet found himself compelled to leave his home town and
emigrate to Medina, it took no long after his escape or exile, that all
those who had an important role in the prophet's emigration, were all
either killed, badly injured, or were taken as captives in the Battle of
Badr; and the promise of God came to pass, that:ِ

\`\`They sought to uproot you from the land (MECCA), in order to expel
you from it.'' In that case, they would not remain after but a little.
(AND GOD'S WRATH WOULD SEIZE THEM)


أَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ لِدُلُوكِ الشَّمْسِ إِلَى غَسَقِ اللَّيْلِ وَقُرْآنَ
الْفَجْرِ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُوداً(( 78 ))

[ 583 ]

78- PERFORM THE PRAYER AT THE DECLINE OF THE SUN, UP TO THE DARKENING
OF THE NIGHT, AND THE RECITAL OF DAWN; THAT THE RECITAL OF DAWN IS
OBVIOUS.

وَمِنَ الَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسَى أَنْ يَبْعَثَكَ
رَبُّكَ مَقَاماً مَّحْمُوداً(( 79 ))

79- AND KEEP AWAKE SOME OF THE NIGHT (IN PRAYER) AS AN EXTRA (WORSHIP)
FOR YOU, THAT YOUR LORD MAY PROMOTE YOU TO A PRAISE-WORTHY POSITION. (AS
A REWARD)

وَقُلْ رَّبِّ أَدْخِلْنِي مُدْخَلَ صِدْق وَأَخْرِجْنِي مُخْرَجَ صِدْق
وَاجْعَلْ لِّي مِنْ لَّدُنْكَ سُلْطَاناً نَّصِيراً(( 80 ))

80- AND SAY:ِ MY LORD! ENTER ME THE ENTRANCE OF TRUTH, AND MAKE MY EXIT
FROM THAT OF THE TRUTH; AND GRANT ME FROM YOUR PRESENCE, A HELPFUL
AUTHORITY.

وَقُلْ جَاءَ الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ
زَهُوقاً(( 81 ))

81- AND SAY:ِ \`\`TRUTH CAME AND FALSEHOOD VANISHED, THAT FALSEHOOD WAS
APT TO VANISH.''


THE COMMENTARY


EVENTUALLY FALSEHOOD WILL VANISH (VERSE NO. 78 - 81)

The commandment in the above verse (NO.78) includes in brief, the
performing time of the five daily canonical prayers. It starts with noon
prayer which is to be performed at the declination of the sun from the
Zenith. Then the next three prayers are done up to the darkening of the
night. The verse ends in the, \`\`RECITAL OF DAWN'' which is the time
for the morning prayer.

[ 584 ]

In Qura"n no detail is given as to the form and words, or parts of the
canonical prayers, and the know how has been taught practically by the
prophet himself.

The last clause of the verse dictates that;ِ \`\`The recital of dawn is
obvious.'' Some commentators have understood that the word.
\`\`OBVIOUS'' refers to the angels of day and the angels of night
guardians, who change their shift at dawn in the morning. Both groups of
the angels will see those who perform their morning prayer.

In the next verse, (NO.79) the prophet has been addressed to perform an
extra after midnight prayer. It is obvious from the phrase, \`\`EXTRA
FOR YOU'' in this verse that; this particular prayer which is known as,
NA"FILAH, or TAHAJJUD, was incumbent upon the prophet himself; but it is
only recommended for the believers to perform, and not necessarily a
part of their religious duty, like the canonical daily prayers.

In the next verse (NO.80) Allah wants us to pray for entry and exit
with truth in all stages of life. In other word; all our works,
carriers, and movements should start with truth and should end with
truth, veracity and genuineness. Truth, correctness, and fidelity, must
always be the main factor of doing all our duties; and this is the
secret and the code of all sorts of victory in the various fields and
stages of life.

According to some Islamic tradition, the extra prayer of after
midnight, is so important a precept, that those who perform it are among
the best of Muslims. Leaving it, is a great loss. Committing sin and
lying may prevent a Muslim to perform it. The prayer is said, it
increases our physical health. The honour and glory of a believer is
said to depend on how he performs the prayer.


وَنُنَزِّلُ مِنْ الْقُرْآنِ مَا هُوَ شِفَاءٌ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَلاَ يَزِيدُ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلاَّ خَسَاراً (( 82 ))

82- AND WE SEND DOWN (SOME) OF THE QURA"N WHICH IS A REMEDY, AND A
MERCY FOR THE BELIEVERS; AND IT INCREASES NOT THE OPPRESSORS EXCEPT IN
LOSS.

[ 585 ]

THE COMMENTARY


QURA"N; THE HEALING PRESCRIPTION (VERSE NO. 82)

In the above verse, the phrase, \`\`OF THE QURA"N'' is taken by some of
the commentators to imply that, certain verses of the Qura"n have the
healing qualification, and not all the verses and the whole Book.

Other commentators have understood that all the verses do have the said
curing effect, and in other word, the verse may mean:ِ

\`\`We have sent down the Qura"n gradually, and any verse or passage
that has been revealed, has some sort of a healing effect, and mercy,
for the believers.''

Among the verses of Qura"n we find remedies for our mental and
spiritual diseases. Some of the verses induce hope in us. Some of them
infuse new energy and new life in the believer. Its glad-tidings on
account of the life to come, and the promise of God's Mercy and
forgiveness, fill our heart with a mysterious happiness.

It is only the oppressors and the rebels against God's Law, who will
suffer loss. This is because the building material of the unbelievers
whom Qura"n has called them the oppressors; has taken another form, and
a second nature, due to their blasphemy, discord, and hypocrisy. They
try to put off the light of truth, and cover the facts and realities of
life by holding the spirit of rebellion in themselves.

The physical and spiritual diseases of Man are some how similar, and in
connection to one another. Both are fatal, and want a physician to cure.
Both kinds might be contagious and may become uncurable.

Qura"n is a healing and reviving prescription for those people who want
to fight against their ignorance, pride and vanity, jealously and
hypocrisy. Qura"n is the remedy and curing medicine for those who are
sick in love with the material world and passions, and its
allurements.

[ 586 ]

A good example to prove the healing effect of Qura"n, is to compare the
Arabs of the Pagan Era, with those Arabs who, a little later became
Muslims. Consider how they overcame and overthrew the supper powers of
the time! (Persians and Romans)

Of course the said prescription can only be effective when it is
sincerely followed, and has been put to action.

If the patient do not use the medicine prescribed by the doctor, he is
far from cure.


وَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَى الاِْنسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأَبِجَانِبِهِ
وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ كَانَ يَؤُساً(( 83 ))

83- AND WHEN WE BESTOW FAVOUR ON MAN, HE TURNS AWAY, AND KEEPS ALOOF
WITH PRIDE; BUT WHEN EVIL TOUCHES HIM, HE ABANDONS TO DESPAIR.

قُلْ كُلٌّ يَعْمَلُ عَلَى شَاكِلَتِهِ فَرَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَنْ هُوَ
أَهْدَى سَبِيلا(( 84 ))

84- SAY:ِ \`\`EVERY ONE ACTS ACCORDING TO HIS OWN MANNER, AND YOUR LORD
KNOWS BEST, THAT, WHO IS THE MOST GUIDED ONE ON THE WAY.


THE COMMENTARY


EVERY ONE FOLLOWS HIS OWN NATURE (VERSE NO. 83 - 84)

The two above verses apply to a deeply rooted ethical disease of
uneducated and unbeliever people. These are pride and despair. When Man
finds himself free of want and independent; he inclines to rebel, and
likes to transgress the established bounds! Soon shall he become puffed
up with pride, and turns away from his Lord, instead of being
[ 587 ]

more and more grateful to Him.

On the contrary a believer knows that, everything comes from God. He is
therefore, thankful and humble when he is free of want. On the other
hand when he suffers a misfortune, he is sure that God will remove his
affliction and is a sure refuge and help. Why should he then give
himself up to despair and lose hope!?


He rather has his bridle cut out or broken from the hands of wisdom and
knowledge, and has given up to passion, anger, caprices, fancies, and
etc., that make out his natural manner and methods; and yet, all these
differ from Man's instinct which he is compelled to follow.


وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الرُّوحِ قُلْ الرُّوحُ مِنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّي وَمَا
أُوتِيتُمْ مِّنَ الْعِلْمِ إِلاَّ قَلِيلا(( 85 ))

85- AND THEY ASK YOU, CONCERNING THE SPIRIT? SAY:ِ \`\`THE SPIRIT IS OF
THE ORDER OF MY LORD, AND YOU ARE NOT GIVEN OF KNOWLEDGE, EXCEPT A
LITTLE.''


[ 588 ]

THE COMMENTARY


