How Is Resurrection Possible (verse No. 98 - 100)
=================================================

Disbelievers look at the incident of the Resurrection Day as something
incredible, and impossible to happen; while Qura"n gives clear proofs,
and perspicuous answer, saying; he who can create something for the
first time, will have no difficulty to create the same thing for a
second or third time. But usually the unbelievers are obstinate enough
to insist upon their assertion of denial, so as to follow their own evil
way, and do what their vain desires and caprices bid them. They don't
want to admit that, the end of persisting in evil is nothing except
evil. So they blasphemed, and rejected the true information that the
prophet gave them about their life here, and their life to come. They
disbelieve God's power of creation and recreation, inspite of seeing
millions of creatures of various kinds that He has created throughout
the universe:ِ

\`\`DO they not think that, Allah Who created the heavens and the
earth, and all that is in them; is able to create the like of them in
another spring of creation; or revive them with memories of their past
life by with-holding their souls?''

The next verse (NO.100) attacks the niggardly who lives miserably to
increase his hoard. Such people wish to have an exclusive control of
[ 606 ]

God's universal Message, by making use of race, or false claim of being
the elect of God:ِ \`\`Say:ِ Even if you owned the infinite treasures of
God's Mercy, in that case too, you would with hold charitable spending
for the fear of being poor!''

God's Message like His Mercy is a universal one, and a certain race
like the Jews, or any other kind and culture cannot claim to be the only
custodians of God's Message. Some people are so covetous and grasping,
that, they even want to monopolize the custody and conveyance of what
they call it the true religion, and God's Message, for themselves and
for their heirs, after them. They pretend to have special permission for
that which has reached them through successive channel of their
forefathers! In their proper channel, the son will succeed the religious
position of his father!!

The above verses clearly prove that in the sight of Islam, the
Resurrection of Man is corporeal, and not spiritual alone, as some have
claimed. In the above verses and many others, stress is put on the
revival of the bones and other materials of the body that have turned to
scattered dusts.

The verse (NO.99) implies that God Who has created the heavens and
earth and whatever is in them, is able to create them, or the like of
them once again. That the Resurrection Day to be sooner or later,
depends on God's universal law that has a timing or term for everything.
Existence has proved to be stage by stage, and every stage of the
existence has a certain term which is fixed.

Here, the principle reason against the disbelievers is God's Power and
Knowledge, which is infinite. We do not say that God has power, or God
has knowledge, so as to differentiate between Him and His power, or
between His power and His knowledge. We rather say that our Lord is
All-mighty, All-knowing, and there is no limit in the prefix, \`\`ALL''
in God's Attributes.


[ 607 ]

وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى تِسْعَ آيَات بَيِّنَات فَسْئَلْ بَنِي
إِسْرَائِيلَ إِذْ جَاءَهُمْ فَقَالَ لَهُ فِرْعَوْنُ إِنِّي لاََظُنُّكَ
يَا مُوسَى مَسْحُوراً(( 101 ))

101- AND TO MOSES WE GAVE NINE CLEAR SIGNS. SO ASK THE CHILDREN OF
ISRAEL WHEN (THE SAID SIGNS) CAME TO THEM. THEN PHARAOH SAID TO HIM;
\`\`O, MOSES I THINK OF YOU TO HAVE BEEN FASCINATED.''

قَالَ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَا أَنزَلَ هَؤُلاَء إِلاَّ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالاَْرْضِ بَصَائِرَ وَإِنِّي لاََظُنُّكَ يَا فِرْعَوْنُ مَثْبُوراً((
102 ))

102- HE SAID:ِ\`\`VERILY YOU HAVE KNOWN THAT, NO ONE HAS SENT DOWN
THESE (NINE MIRACLES), EXCEPT THE LORD OF THE HEAVENS AND EARTH; AS
EVIDENCES AND I THINK YOU, O, PHARAOH, TO BE PERISHING.''

فَأَرَادَ أَنْ يَسْتَفِزَّهُمْ مِّنَ الاَْرْضِ فَأَغْرَقْنَاهُ وَمَنْ
مَّعَهُ جَمِيعاً(( 103 ))

103- THEN HE DECIDED TO UPROOT THEM FROM THE LAND, SO WE DROWNED HIM
AND THOSE (WHO WERE) WITH HIM ALL TOGETHER.

وَقُلْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ لِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اسْكُنُوا الاَْرْضَ
فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ الاْخِرَةِ جِئْنَا بِكُمْ لَفِيفاً(( 104 ))

104- AND AFTER HIM WE SAID TO THE ISRAELITES:ِ \`\`DWELL IN THE LAND.
THEN WHEN THE PROMISE OF THE HEREAFTER COMES TO PASS, WE WILL BRING YOU
ALL TOGETHER.'' (FOR THE FINAL JUDGEMENT)

[ 608 ]

THE COMMENTARY


INSPITE OF ALL CLEAR SIGNS THEY BELIEVED NOT! (VERSE NO. 101 - 104)

Here the reference goes back to the past nations who did the same that
was done to our prophet Mohammad (AS). As an instance Moses went to
Pharaoh with nine clear signs, but eventually Pharaoh said to Moses:ِ

\`\`O, Moses! I think of you to have been fascinated!''

Pharaoh and his chief accused Moses to have been well versed in sorcery
and magic. They also called him to be mad! But Moses tried to convince
them that he was brought up in Pharaoh's court in all the learning of
the Egyptians. How then could he be mad, and when did he learn Egyptian
magic inspite of being under the strict observance of Pharaoh's
courtiers. On the other hand, what he showed as his nine miracles was
far beyond the realm of magic and magician. What has magic to do with
divine miracles!?

He therefore warned Pharaoh not to resist faith in God, or he would be
doomed to perdition.


WHAT WERE THE 9 MIRACLES OF MOSES?

The said nine miracles that Moses showed to Pharaoh and his people were
as follows, according to QURA"N and the BIBLE:ِ


1ِ THE SNAKE

It is written in the QURA"NِS 20:10ِ21, that when Moses went towards
the sacred flame in the bush, he heard the word of God. Allah said to
him:ِ

\`\`What is that in your right hand, O, Moses!?'' \`\`It is my stick''
answered Moses. \`\`On it I lean, with it I beat down fodder for my
flocks, and in it I find other uses.''

Allah said to Moses:ِ \`\`Cast it down'', and when he cast it down; LO!
It became a huge snake, active and in motion! Allah said:, \`\`Seize it
and fear not, for We shall return it to its former condition.''

[ 609 ]

So do we read in the BIBLE, in EXODUSِ3ِ4:ِ

\`\`The Lord said to Moses:ِ \`\`What are you holding in your hand?''

\`\`This is my stick my Lord.'' answered Moses. The Lord said:ِ
\`\`Throw it on the ground.'' When Moses threw the stick on the ground,
it turned into a snake, and Moses ran away from it! Then the Lord said:ِ
\`\`Don't be afraid. Bend down and pick it up from the tail.'' So did
Moses; and the snake became a stick again!


2ِ THE WHITE SHINING HAND

The second of the greater miracles shown to Moses was the WHITE SHINING
HAND, which in the QURA"N S 20:22 is:ِ

\`\`The Lord said to Moses, \`\`Now put your hand in your arm-pit. It
shall come out shining and white without any harm or disease!''

So do we read in the BIBLEِEXODUS 3ِ4

\`\`Once again YAHOVAH spoke to Moses and said; put your hand inside
your robe. Moses did so, and when he took his hand out, it was covered
with white spots like snow!


3ِ7

In Qura"n S 7:13 five of the miracles are pointed to as follows:ِ

\`\`And we sent against them, typhoon, locusts, lice, frogs and blood:
Signs of self-explanatory, but they reacted proudly, and were a people
given up to sin.''

The storm calamity brought on them wholesale death and destruction.
Innumerable locusts attacked their farms and crops. Lice in the form of
fatal epidemic disease and destructive insects spoiled their product.
Frogs raised out of the Nile and increased so wonderfully that
endangered their life! And the Water in Nile turned to something
blood-like, which could neither be used for drink, nor irrigation!

The detail of the above miracles can be found in various passages of
the Holy Qura"n, and also in the BIBLE.

The following is some quotation from the Bible, that may explain in a
good detail, the incidents or miracles mentioned above:ِ

[ 610 ]

EXODUSِ 8: 17 = GNATS

Moses struck the ground with his stick, and all the dust in Egypt was
turned into gnats, which covered the people and their animals. There
were gnats everywhere and the magicians told the king that God has done
this. But the king was stubborn, and again did not listen to Moses!


EXODUS ِ 8 : 6= THE FROG

God ordered Moses and he held his stick over the river, and FROGS came
out in millions, and covered the land of Egypt!

The king called Moses and said:ِ \`\`Pray to the Lord of Israel to take
away these frogs, and I will let your people go with you.'' Then Moses
prayed to the Lord to take away the frog, and the frogs died away! But
again the king became stubborn and did not listen to Moses.


EXODUS ِ 7: 20= THE BLOOD

....In the presence of the king Moses raised his stick and struck the
surface of the river, and all the water in it was turned into BLOOD, and
the fish in the river died. And the water smelt so bad that Egyptian
could not drink; but still the king refused to listen to Moses and
Aaron!


8ِ THE PASSِOVER

The incident of the pass over in the QURA"NِS 2:50 has been written
thus:ِ

\`\`And when We parted the sea for you, and saved you, and drowned
pharaoh's folk, while you were watching.''

The incident of PASS-OVER and RESCUE has been mentioned through many
verses in different chapters of Qura"n such as S 7:136ِS 8:103ِS
42:55ِand S 44:17

We can also read the PASS-OVER in the BIBLE as follows:ِ

[ 611 ]

EXODUSِ12:37 THE PASSOVER

....The Israelites set out on foot from RAMSES for SUKKOTH. They were
about six hundred thousands of Man, not counting the women and children.
The Israelites had lived in Egypt for 430 years.

When Pharaoh, the king of Egypt was told that the Israelites had all
gone and we have lost them as our slaves, he and his officials changed
their minds, and then the king got his war chariots and armed forces to
pursue and arrest the Israelites who were now leaving truimphantly, and
under the protection of their Lord. When the Israelites saw the king and
his forces in pursuit, they were terrified and cried out to God for
help. Moses said to them:ِ

\`\`Don't be afraid! The Lord is with us, stand your ground and you
will see what our Lord will do to save you to-day.'' Then Moses held out
his hand over the sea, and the Lord drove the sea back with a strong
east wind. The sea path was turned to a dry land and the water was
divided in two parts. The Israelites passed the sea with walls of water
on both sides.

When the king and his army pursued them, the Lord said to Moses hold
out your hand over the sea. Moses did so and the water returned to its
normal levels. All the Egyptions in pursuit were drowned, not one of
them left alive!


9ِ MANNA & QUAIL

The nineth miracle of Moses might have been the Manna and Quails, that
was sent to the Israelites for food. About these two kind of food we
read in QURA"NِS 2:57:ِ

\`\`And We the cloud to overshadow you, and sent down to you Manna and
Quails, and said; eat of the good things that We have provided for
you....''

Some commentators understand MANNA to be some sort of a natural honey
that the Israelites could find in bulk in that extensive desert. This
idea is in agreement with what some expounders of the Scripture have
written. (please refer to V.1ِ P:82 of this book)

[ 612 ]

As to the Quail it is said to have been a small kind of BIRD like
pigeon that were found in abundance in that desert. What the BIBLE says
about Manna and Quail is as follows:ِ


EXODUSِ16:1ِ20 MANNA AND QUAIL

The Lord then said to Moses: I have heard the complaint of the
Israelites. Tell them that at twilight they will have meat to eat, and
in the morning they will have all the bread they want.

Moses said to the Israelites:ِ \`\`In this evening a large flock of
Quails flew in; enough to cover the camp, and in the morning there was
dew all round the camp, then when the dew evaportated, there remaind
something thin and flaky on the surface of the desert.'' It was as
delicate as frost. They did not know what it was. Moses said:ِ \`\`This
is the food that Lord has given you to eat.'' The people of Israelites
called the food Manna. It was like small white seed, and tasted like
biscuits made with honey.


وَبِالْحَقِّ أَنزَلْنَاهُ وَبِالْحَقِّ نَزَلَ وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ
إِلاَّ مُبَشِّراً وَنَذِيراً(( 105 ))

105- WITH THE TRUTH WE HAVE SENT IT DOWN, AND WITH TRUTH HAS IT COME
DOWN. AND WE HAVE NOT SENT YOU, EXCEPT AS A BEARER OF GLAD-TIDING AND
WARNER.

وَقُرْآناً فَرَقْنَاهُ لِتَقْرَأَهُ عَلَى النَّاسِ عَلَى مُكْث
وَنَزَّلْنَاهُ تَنزِيلا(( 106 ))

106- AND (IT IS) A QURA"N THAT WE HAVE DIVIDED IT (INTO CHAPTERS AND
SECTION) SO THAT YOU RECITE IT TO PEOPLE WITH PAUSE, AND WE SENT IT
GRADUALLY.

قُلْ آمِنُوا بِهِ أَوْ لاَ تُؤْمِنُوا إِنَّ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ
مِنْ قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ يَخِرُّونَ لِلاَْذْقَانِ
سُجَّداً(1)(( 107 ))

[ 613 ]

107- SAY:ِ \`\`BELIEVE IN IT OR BELIEVE NOT; VERILY THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN
GIVEN KNOWLEDGE BEFORE IT, WHEN IT IS RECITED TO THEM, THEY FALL DOWN ON
THEIR FACES PROSTRATING.

وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّنَا إِنْ كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبِّنَا
لَمَفْعُولا(( 108 ))

108- AND THEY SAY:ِ \`\`GLORY BE TO OUR LORD! THAT THE PROMISE OF OUR
LORD HAS ALWAYS BEEN FULFILLED.''

وَيَخِرُّونَ لِلْأَذْقَانِ يَبْكُونَ وَيَزِيدُهُمْ خُشُوعاً(( 109 ))

109- AND THEY FALL DOWN ON THEIR FACES WEEPING; AND IT INCREASES THEM
HUMILITY.


THE COMMENTARY


THE LOVERS OF TRUTH (VERSE NO. 105 - 109)

The first verse here implies that the content of Qura"n, and its
essential meaning is all truth. Its object and fruit is truth too. Allah
sent the truth down in truth, and the prophet conveyed the truth to Man
with the highest of fidelity, so the book was truth itself, and was
promulgated with truth too. In other word; it was truly sent by God, and
was not forged by anyone. No corruption occured in communicating it to
Mohammad, nor from Mohammad to Mankind. It is in fact a clean, clear,
crystalline water of inspiration, which from the advent of Mohammad, and
up to the Resurrection Day will remain clean, untouched, and not
contaminated. This glorious Divine Light was sent down in a period of 23
years at different time and place and at various circumstances, but
following the same aim and object.

The next verse (NO.107) states that belief or disbelief of some
[ 614 ]

foolish pagans and ignorant heathens will not affect the Glory of God's
light and revelation, because the learned, and men of wisdom and
knowledge who can apprehend the meaning of the verses are humble and
faithful to it.

Here in these verses, those who have been given knowledge before Qura"n
include those who had received the form Scriptures and had kept
themselves away from evil ideas. They find in Qura"n the promises of God
fulfilled. The verse also implies that there is a strong relation
between faith and knowledge, and these two factors of salvation are not
separable from each other.


قُلْ ادْعُوا اللهَ أَوْ ادْعُوا الرَّحْمَنَِ أَيّاً مَّا تَدْعُوا
فَلَهُ الاَْسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى وَلاَ تَجْهَرْ بِصَلاَتِكَ وَلاَ
تُخَافِتْ بِهَا وَابْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ سَبِيلا(( 110 ))

110- SAY:ِ \`\`CALL ON ALLAH OR CALL ON THE MERCIFUL, (IT WILL MAKE NO
DIFFERENCE) WHICHEVER YOU CALL (IS THE ONLY ONE ESSENCE) TO WHOM BELONGS
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL NAMES.''

AND RECITE NOT YOUR PRAYER TOO LOUD, OR TOO LOW, AND TAKE A WAY IN
BETWEEN.

وَقُلِ الْحَمْدُ للهِِ الَّذِي لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَداً وَلَمْ يَكُنْ
لَّهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَّهُ وَلِىٌّ مِّنَ الذُّلِّ
وَكَبِّرْهُ تَكْبِيرا(( 111 ))

111- AND SAY:ِ \`\`PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH WHO WILL NOT TAKE A CHILD,
AND NO PARTNER CAN BE HIS IN THE KINGDOM; AND NO PROTECTOR WILL HE HAVE
DUE TO WANT (OF POWER), AND PROCLAIM GREATLY HIS GREATNESS.

[ 615 ]

THE COMMENTARY


THE LAST EXCUSE (VERSE NO. 110 - 111)

God; whose existence, power, knowledge and work is infinite, and who is
the source of all accomplishments and bounties, and who is the principle
motive and object of all movements, Has various names and Attributes,
each of which points to one of His wonderful fields of action and work.
No one can know the Infinite Essence of God with one or two names, when
the names which we apply to Him, is as limited our knowledge.

Even our prophet who was the whole wisdom and knowledge, said in this
regard, addressing Allah:ِ \`\`We could't know you as we should have
known!''

In other word, God, is an indivisible Sacred Essence, and His great
many beautiful names and Attributes are not something other than His
Sacred Essence. Allah, is a name that includes all the Attributes of
God. Other names of Him may imply the Attributes by which we try to
explain his nature by our weak and limited knowledge. These beautiful
names of God are counted to 99 by the language of Muslims. All the 99
names are the Attributes of the same Essence, and the only one reality
whom we know Him to be our Lord God. If for every name there was one
separate, Essence, then we would have 99 gods, and this is absurd, and
non-sense.

These sacred names are found among the prayers, supplications, and
hymns. Meanwhile we must clear our mind from such falsehood, that; God
has taken a child, or He may have a partner, or he is dependent some how
on the power of His creature. We have to realize that our Lord is the
only one God, and far from any partner.

The ending of the verse (NO.110) is an instruction on account of the
recital of the prayers:ِ

\`\`.... And recite not your prayer too loud, or too low and take a way
in between.''

That which is the most important in prayer is being present
[ 616 ]

spiritually and physically, in front of our Lord in a humble manner.
Therefore to pronounce the prayer too loud or too low may render the
supplicant absent minded. Of course that part of the prayer which is
called, \`\`AZA"N'' must be uttered in a loud voice, because the object
here is to call people, near or far, to the congregational prayer.

There is an important point here to be considered that Allah has told
us:ِ \`\`Recite not your prayer too loudly.''

The verse teaches us to perform our prayer so that the critics, and
disbelievers, may have not an excuse to scoff at us, and at our religion
and worship. It must be performed politely, quietly, reasonably, and not
injurious to other people.

Now-a-days, in the places of worship we see sometimes that when people
are having their rest and repose, the powerful loud speakers that are
installed upon the high minarets of the mosque, very loudly radiate the
recital of the prayer, or the speech of the preacher! Those who wish to
transmit the voice of Islam, like that, with noise and uproar, and as
loud as possible; should know that they are very wrong! Their kind of
propaganda and preaching, will repel people from Islam, instead of
attracting them. No Muslim should ever go beyond the extremes in
anything; even those which seem to be good and are said to be incumbent
upon him.

Another point which is worthy of more consideration here, is the
slogan; \`\`ALLAH-AKBAR'' which means, Allah is Greater.

A Muslim said Allah-Akbar in the presence of Hazrat Imam Sadiq (AS).
Hazrat Imam asked him:ِ \`\`Of what is Allah Greater?'' The Muslim
answered:ِ\`\`From everything!'' Hazrat Imam said to him:ِ \`\`If you
think so you have confined Allah by comparing Him with His
creatures.''

The Muslim asked:ِ \`\`What should I say then?'' Hazrat Imam told him:ِ
\`\`Say:ِ Allah is Greater to be qualified (i.e Allah is
INDESCRIBABLE).


THE END OF SUREH ASRA" (17)


(THE NIGHT JOURNEY)

[ 617 ]


<p dir="rtl">
سوره الكهف
</p>


THE CAVE


<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
</p>

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, THE MERCIFUL, THE COMPASSIONATE

الْحَمْدُ للهِِ الَّذِي أَنزَلَ عَلَى عَبْدِهِ الْكِتَابَ وَلَمْ
يَجْعَلْ لَّهُ عِوَجَا(( 1 ))

1- PRAISE BELONGS TO ALLAH WHO SENT DOWN UPON HIS SERVANT THE BOOK, AND
WILL NOT CAUSE DEVIATION IN IT.

قَيِّماً لِّيُنذِرَ بَأْساً شَدِيداً مِنْ لَّدُنْهُ وَيُبَشِّرَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ أَجْراً
حَسَناً(( 2 ))

2- UNSWERVING (FROM THE TRUTH), SO AS TO WARN A SEVERE PUNISHMENT FROM
HIM, AND TO GIVE GLAD-TIDINGS TO THE BELIEVERS WHO DO RIGHTEOUS DEEDS,
THAT THEIRS SHALL BE A NICE REWARD.

مّاكِثِينَ فِيهِ أَبَداً(( 3 ))

3- WHEREIN THEY SHALL REMAIN FOR EVER

وَيُنذِرَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللهُ وَلَداً(( 4 ))

4- AND TO WARN THOSE WHO SAID ALLAH HAS TAKEN A CHILD.

[ 618 ]

مَّا لَهُمْ بِهِ مِنْ عِلْم وَلاِبَائِهِمْ كَبُرَتْ كَلِمَةً تَخْرُجُ
مِنْ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ إِنْ يَقُولُونَ إِلاَّ كَذِباً(( 5 ))

5- THEY HAVE NOT ANY KNOWLEDGE CONCERNING IT, NOR THEIR FATHERS HAD.
GREAT IS THE WORD (OF BLASPHEMY) THAT COMES OUT OF THEIR MOUTHS. THEY
SAY ONLY A LIE.


THE COMMENTARY


BEGINNING WITH ALLAH AND QURA"N (VERSE NO. 1 - 5)

Allah is praiseworthy for His Infinite Attributes of power, Mercy, and
Grace; but here, the immediate connection of His Praise is with the
Glorious Qura"n that He has sent it down to His Messenger in order to
guide his servants.

The verses here, imply that, Qura"n is not a book of mysteries, dark
points, and ambiguous expressions. It is a Book upright, with clear cut
explanations, easy to be understood and unswerving from the truth. The
way that Qura"n leads Man to, is a straight path and without any
crookedness. It does not mystify people because God's purpose is to give
a clear warning of physical and spiritual dangers through His Book and
Messenger so as to lead His obedient servants to Salvation and
prosperity, by a reward that is beyond the limits of time and space.

As to the Praiseworthiness of God, we should have in our minds that;
God's Greatness and Glory are above anything that we may conceive. But
we must glorify Him and praise His greatness, by using our highest
possible spiritual idea and knowledge, realising that He is worthy of
all praises

Then in the next verse (NO.3) one of the objects of the Book is said

[ 619 ]

to have been the warning of the Christians, or those who say Allah has
taken a child, be he a male like Jesus Christ, and OZAIR, or a female,
as some pagan Arabs thought that the angels are the daughters of God!

Those who claim a child for God, have not the least amount of knowledge
to support their idea or assertion. They indifferently utter a sinful
and monestrous idea without consideing its evil effects! A word that may
help to prove physical body, carnal desires, and sexual needs, for God!
What a great blasphemy is it to say that God has a child; either a son
or a daughter!?

Elsewhere in the Qura"n (S 19:88ِ92) we read:ِ

\`\`They say the Merciful God Has begotten a son. Indeed you have put
forth a thing shockingly wrong! The skies are likely to burst out at
hearing that, and the earth would fain to split asunder, and the
mountains to fall down; that, they should invoke a son for the Merciful.
All those who live in the heavens and in the earth come to the Merciful
as a servant.''


فَلَعَلَّكَ بَاخِعٌ نَّفْسَكَ عَلَى آثَارِهِمْ إِنْ لَّمْ يُؤْمِنُوا
بِهَذَا الْحَدِيثِ أَسَفاً(( 6 ))

6- YOU MAY DESTROY YOURSELF WITH SORROWING OVER THEM, THAT, THEY
BELIEVE NOT IN THIS (DIVINE) NARRATION.

إِنَّا جَعَلْنَا مَا عَلَى الاَْرْضِ زِينَةً لَهَا لِنَبْلُوَهُمْ
أَيُّهُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلا(( 7 ))

7- WE HAVE MADE WHATEVER IS ON THE EARTH AN EMBELLISHMENT FOR IT, (THE
EARTH WAS BEAUTIFIED TO ENHANCE THE INTERESTS FANCIFULLY) IN ORDER TO
TEST THEM, WHICH ONE IS BETTER IN CONDUCT.

وَإِنَّا لَجَاعِلُونَ مَا عَلَيْهَا صَعِيداً جُرُزاً(( 8 ))

8- AND WE WILL MAKE WHATEVER IS ON IT BARREN DUST.

[ 620 ]

THE COMMENTARY


DON'T WORRY! THE WORLD IS A TESTING FIELD. (VERSE NO. 6 - 8)


\`\`You may want to destroy yourself with sorrowing over them, that,
they believe not in this Divine Narration.''(QURA"N)

The history books, and the Holy Qura"n, show that the Divine Leaders
(The apostles) were all upset and sorrowful for those who were astray
among their people, and felt very happy to find them faithful and with
righteous deeds. They sincerely prayed to God for their guidance, and
worked hardly in day and night so as to lead them to the right and
direct path of truth. They preached, advised, warned, admonished, and
gave glad-tidings, to their people in day and night, in public and
private, asking them to repent; to return and to amend. Sometimes our
prophet felt so sad his misled people, that his life was in danger of
the grief.

As we all may know, our prophet in conveyance of his Message, was
encountered with a great deal of oppositions. He was so very eager to
lead Man to Salvation, and a permanent prosperity; but he received
abuse, ill treatment, and persecution. He was doing his best to rescue
his people from the idols and false gods, superstitions, and oppression;
but the more he tried, the less a positive answer he received from the
pagans!

Here in this verse (NO.6), Allah has consoled His Messenger and has
told him not to destroy himself with grieving over the unbelievers.
Enough was for him to pronounce his Message frankly, so boldly, and
clearly. This is because, truth is self-explanatory and like the stream
of water it will find out its way and moves on and on up to its
destination. The prophet had only to sow the seed of truth, a duty which
he fulfilled sincerely, and with courage. Then God made the seed
[ 621 ]

to germinate and grow, although its development was invisible at the
beginning.

The next verse is an illustration of this world as a field of trial:ِ

\`\`We have made whatever is on the earth an embellishment for it, to
enhance the interests fancifully, in order to test them to make known
who is better in conduct.''

All that exists on the earth and serves to increase its beauty and
attraction, is only a temporary show of embellishments, which sooner or
later will fade away and turn into dusts and wastes.

With the wordly goods, such as strength, wealth, rank and position, we
cannot show a man's real value. Man's faith and good conduct are two
important standards by which his success can be judged.

The good of this world can be real good, if we use them as a means of
progress, and not as our goal and object of life. Consider our present
machinery that man has invented for his own welfare, and serve him; but
Man himself has turned to be the slave of his machine!


أَمْ حَسِبْتَ أَنَّ أَصْحَابَ الْكَهْفِ وَالرَّقِيمِ كَانُوا مِنْ
آيَاتِنَا عَجَباً(( 9 ))

9- HAVE YOU THOUGHT THAT, THE COMPANIONS OF THE CAVE (THE SEVEN
SLEEPERS) AND AL-RAGHIM, WERE (SOMETHING) STRANGE AMONG OUR SIGNS?

إِذْ أَوَى الْفِتْيَةُ إِلَى الْكَهْفِ فَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا آتِنَا مِنْ
لَدُنْكَ رَحْمَةً وَهَيِّئىْ لَنَا مِنْ أَمْرِنَا رَشَداً(( 10 ))

10- WHEN THE YOUTHS TOOK REFUGE IN THE CAVE, AND SAID:ِ \`\`OUR LORD!
HAVE OF YOUR MERCY ON US, AND GUIDE US IN OUR AFFAIR.''

[ 622 ]

فَضَرَبْنَا عَلَى آذَانِهِمْ فِي الْكَهْفِ سِنِينَ عَدَداً(( 11 ))

11- THEN WE PREVENTED THEIR EARS (FROM HEARING) IN THE CAVE FOR A
NUMBER OF YEARS.

ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَاهُمْ لِنَعْلَمَ أَىُّ الْحِزْبَيْنِ أَحْصَى لِمَا
لَبِثُوا أَمَداً(( 12 ))

12- WE THEN RAISED THEM UP TO MAKE KNOWN WHICH ONE OF THE TWO PARTIES
WOULD BETTER CALCULATE THE PERIOD OF THEIR STAY.


THE COMMENTARY


