The Inhabitants of Paradise and Hell (verse No. 7 - 8)
======================================================

Disbelief in the eternal life, will result in confidence and love for
this temporal life; both of which are the fruits of disbelief in God as
He really is. When the heart is sealed by sins, man can not expect to
meet with God, or even he desires not such an inevitable meeting. How
can he expect or wish to meet with a one whom he believes not to
exist?

Paying no heed to the signs and symptoms that flickers from every
diredtion and every where, will render him deaf and dead to reasonings
found in the verses that convey God's Message. As a matter of fact, God
speaks by every tongue and through every word, if only man wanted to
understand. Every leaf is a book on which God's signs and verses have
been cited in the sight of a man of knowledge and wisdom. One who
overlooks all these signs, the material things of this temporal life
will attract his attention, and incite his greed and passion so much so
that he entirely relies on this world, and puts his confidence and trust
on it, and, Lo! Suddenly he has to leave all, and meet Him who created
him from nothing! Worthy of note here is that; once again stress is put
on the fact that, amendment and improvement of the community of man and
his social, affairs depends on his belief in God, and in God's Final
Judgement, or else, man will lose his feeling of responsibility for
other people, and will follow the law of the Jungle!

[ 67 ]

**VERSE NO. 9 - 10**

Contrary to those who expect not to meet with Allah, and who have put
their confidence on this material life; are the believers who do
righteous deeds. Their faith is used by Allah, as an effective
instrument of guidance for them, which eventually will lead them to
salvation and prosperity. Good and evil in this material life will grow
up and eventually turn to Gardens of Bliss, or Fire of Hell, in an
eternal life. Therefore the latter group of faithful and good doers,
will finally reach a world full of peace, brotherhood, and love for God.
Therein they shall live an everlasting life of felicity and comfort.
They are pleased and thankful for the great rewards that they have
obtained and glorify their Lord and celebrate His praise every now and
then with pleasure.

Here some notes are worthy of more attention namely:ِ

1- The phrase,\`\`MEETING ALLAH'' is not necessarily seeing Him
visually. It means apprehending His limitless favour, and perceiving Him
through His Grace and Mercy.

2- In the clause, \`\`THEIR LORD WILL GUIDE THEM BY THEIR FAITH'', we
should add here that, the guidance through the light of FAITH, is not
particular to the next life of man. In this present life too, faith will
rescue man from many wrongs, mistakes, deceptions, and slidings, that
are caused by greed, selfishness, caprices, and pride-in other word by
various sins.

3- In the verse NO.9 it is mentioned that,\`\`STREAMS FLOW BENEATH
THEM'' while in other verses it is written that the streams flow beneath
the Gardens at the trees.

This may imply that their palaces or mansions in the Paradise are built
some how upon the streams.

وَلَوْ يُعَجِّلُ اللهُ لِلنَّاسِ الشَّرَّ اسْتِعْجَالَهُمْ بِالْخَيْرِ
لَقُضِىَ إِلَيْهِمْ أَجَلُهُمْ فَنَذَرُ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَرْجُونَ
لِقَاءَنَا فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ(( 11 ))

11- IF ALLAH WOULD HASTEN FOR PEOPLE (TO AFFLICT THEM

[ 68 ]

WITH) EVIL, AS THEY HASTEN FOR GOOD (REWARDS), THEIR TERM WOULD HAVE
BEEN ENDED (VERY SOON). BUT WE LEAVE THOSE WHO EXPECT NOT OUR MEETING
PERPLEXED IN THEIR INSOLENCE.

وَإِذَا مَسَّ الاِْنْسَانَ الضُّرُّ دَعَانَا لِجَنْبِهِ أَوْ قَاعِداً
أَوْ قَائِماً فَلَمَّا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُ ضُرَّهُ مَرَّ كَأَنْ لَمْ
يَدْعُنَا إِلَى ضُرّ مَّسَّهُ كَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِلْمُسْرِفِينَ مَا
كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ(( 12 ))

12- AND WHEN A TROUBLE TOUCHES MAN, HE PRAYS TO US ON HIS SIDE, OR
SITTING, OR STANDING. THEN WHEN WE REMOVE FROM HIM HIS TROUBLE, HE
PASSES ON, AS IF HE HAD NEVER CALLED US OVER HIS TROUBLE THAT TOUCHED
HIM.

THUS IT IS ADORNED FOR THE PRODIGALS WHAT THEY HAVE BEEN DOING.

**THE COMMENTARY
WILD AND SELFِGROWN PEOPLE (VERSE NO. 11 - 12)**

As it is mentioned elsewhere in the Qura"n; There were some obstinate
men who rejected faith with stubborn courage and who, many a time said
to the prophet:ِ \`\`If you are right, then tell your Lord to punish us
as quick as possible, and just now!'' So were these fools sure of
themselves by such opinion that; anything good which befell them was due
to their own merits, and good proceeded not from God; and that they were
able to get rid of the misfortunes which was attributed to God as His
punishment. But if God, who is Merciful to all His creatures, was to
seize us

[ 69 ]

soon after a sin, there would remain no chance for anyone at all, and
we all would be doomed from the begining. God's general Mercy and Grace
will include all His servants and creatures be they believers or
unbelievers. So He does not hasten to punish us, as soon as we sin, and
will give us some respite that we may think it over and perhaps amend
our deeds. He does give us a good respite, but unfortunately we use it
badly, so that it may serve to increase us in rudeness and obstinacy.
Belief in God, lays deep in man's very existence, just like an instinct.
When a trouble touches man, he sincerely appeals to God and prays
ardently for rescue. Almost all sorts of people in the hour of trouble
appeal to Him, but when He removes their trouble from them, they forget
all, and pass on as if they had never called Him for help! Few are those
who change no attitude and the position that they assumed in their
afflication. This is because most of those who have no faith, behave
like animals for being void of reason and wisdom. They don't mind to use
their brain a little and be thankful to their Lord for rescuing them!

وَلَقَدْ أَهْلَكْنَا الْقُرُونَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَمَّا ظَلَمُوا
وَجَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَمَا كَانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا
كَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْقَوْمَ الْمُجْرِمِينَ(( 13 ))

13- AND WE DESTROYED GENERATIONS BEFORE YOU WHEN THEY OPPRESSED; AND
THEIR MESSENGERS CAME TO THEM WITH EVIDENCES; BUT THEY WERE NOT TO
BELIEVE. THUS WE RECOMPENSE A PEOPLE WHO ARE GUILTY.

ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاكُمْ خَلاَئِفَ فِي الاَْرْضِ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ لِنَنْظُرَ
كَيْفَ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 14 ))

14- THEN WE MADE YOU SUCCESSORS IN THE LAND AFTER THEM, IN ORDER TO
OBSERVE WHAT DO YOU DO(HOW YOU BEHAVE).

[ 70 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
YOU AND THE ANCIENT OPPRESSORS (VERSE NO. 13 - 14)**

The verses turn the attention of Muslims to the history of the past
generation throughout ages. The cause of their destruction and ruin has
always been their oppression. \`\`They were oppressors.'' says Qura"n. A
kingdom may be continued with blasphemy; but not with oppression. It
connot keep on unjustly and with cruelty. The Arabic, \`\`ZOLM''
translated to oppression, has a wide variety of meanings, including all
sorts of sins and guilt. Even polytheism in Qura"nic literature, is a
kind of ZOLM, and the worst kind of it.

As to the phrase:ِ \`\`BUT THEY WERE NOT TO BELIEVE'' it may imply that
God will not perish those who are expected to believe later on, or in
future.

وَإِذَا تُتْلَى عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُنَا بَيِّنَات قَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ
يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا ائْتِ بِقُرْآن غَيْرِ هَذَا أَوْ بَدِّلْهُ قُلْ مَا
يَكُونُ لِي أَنْ أُبَدِّلَهُ مِنْ تِلْقَاءِى نَفْسِي إِنْ أَتَّبِعُ
إِلاَّ مَا يُوحَى إِلَىَّ إِنِّي أَخَافُ إِنْ عَصَيْتُ رَبِّي عَذَابَ
يَوْم عَظِيم(( 15 ))

15- AND WHEN OUR CLEAR SIGNS (VERSES) ARE RECITED TO THEM, THOSE WHO
EXPECT NOT OUR MEETING SAID:ِ

\`\`BRING US A QURA"N OTHER THAN THIS, OR CHANGE IT.'' SAY:ِ \`\`IT IS
NOT FOR ME TO CHANGE IT OF MY OWN ACCORD. I FOLLOW NOTHING EXCEPT THAT
WHICH IS INSPIRED TO ME. I FEAR, IF I DISOBEY MY LORD, THE AGONY OF THE
GREAT DAY.'' (OF JUDGEMENT)

[ 71 ]

قُلْ لَّوْ شَاءَ اللهُ مَا تَلَوْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَلاَ أَدْرَاكُمْ بِهِ
فَقَدْ لَبِثْتُ فِيكُمْ عُمُراً مِنْ قَبْلِهِ أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ(( 16
))

16- SAY:ِ HAD ALLAH WILLED, I WOULD NOT HAVE RECITED IT TO YOU, NEITHER
WOULD HAVE TAUGHT YOU IT. I HAVE ALREADY LIVED A LIFE TIME AMONG YOU
BEFORE IT. WILL YOU NOT THEN UNDERSTAND?

فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنْ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللهِ كَذِباً أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِآيَاتِهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ(( 17 ))

17- WHO IS THEN MORE UNJUST THAN HE WHO FORGES A LIE AGAINST ALLAH, OR
BELIES HIS SIGNS? THE SINNERS DO NOT PROSPER INDEED.

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 15 - 17)**

Some idolaters said to the prophet:ِ \`\`It is far difficult for us to
leave aside our great idols, such as HOBAL, LOT or MANOT. If you really
want us to believe and follow you, then bring us another QURA"N, or at
least change that, so as to ignore us leaving the idols.'' In answer to
them the above verses revealed.

The answer is a clear cut and strict one:ِ \`\`I can't do that of my
own accord. There is no least room for your idols and idolatries in my
religion. I will never disobey my Lord because I can't withstand His
rage and wrath. This is because I have no authority of myself. I only
follow that which is inspired to me.''

Mohammad had lived a life time of forty years amongst his people with
utmost piety and virtueِso much so that his people gave him the
beautiful title; AMEEN=TRUSTWORTHY. During the whole life of 40

[ 72 ]

years, he had said nothing of such a Divine Message that he conveyed
later on. Mohammad indeed believed that no one is more unjust than he
who may forge a lie against God or belie His signs and symptoms. God in
His universal plan Has to reveal himself to his creatures, and in
particular to Man who is superior to most of the creatures; and for this
purpose His Messenger is the best means.

The Arabic; \`\`QURA"N'' means reading, but technically it is a term
given to the Sacred Religious Book of Muslims, which God has inspired it
to His Messenger Mohammad (AS). The Book consists of God's Message to
mankind.

The polytheists asked the prophet to either change it or bring another
book that has no objection to idolatry, but he strictly rejected their
request, and how could a truthful man like him change the truth for
falsehood or the right for wrong?

وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مَا لاَ يَضُرُّهُمْ وَلاَ يَنْفَعُهُمْ
وَيَقُولُونَ هَؤُلاَءِ شُفَعَاؤُنَا عِنْدَ اللهِ قُلْ أَتُنَبِّئُونَ
اللهَ بِمَا لاَ يَعْلَمُ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلاَ فِي الاَْرْضِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ(( 18 ))

18- AND THEY WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH, WHAT HURTS THEM NOT, AND NEITHER
PROFITS THEM. AND THEY SAY:ِ \`\`THESE ARE OUR INTERCESSORS WITH
ALLAH.'' SAY:ِ \`\`DO YOU INFORM ALLAH OF WHAT HE KNOWS NOT IN THE
HEAVENS, OR IN THE EARTH? GLORY TO HIM! AND FAR IS HE ABOVE WHAT THEY
ASSOCIATE.''

[ 73 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE NEUTRAL DEITIES (VERSE NO. 18)**

Here again Monotheism is proved by refuting idolatry and polytheism,
and the neutral gods which can neither profit nor harm anyone. To
consent their inner objections and displeasure which hurts them in the
depths of their conscience, they create flimsy excuses, such as they
will intercede for us with God! They don't ponder a while that how can
stock and stone do that!? According to verse NO.3 of this chapter(10),
no intercessor can plead with God, except after His permission. In fact
they were informing God that He had some representatives on earth that
were authorized to intercede with God on behalf of His servants, and yet
God knew them not! Qura"n strictly rejects such ideas that belong to
weak minds, and ironically says:ِ \`\`Do you inform God of what He knows
not in the heaven or earth!?'' This is while God knows the fall of every
leaf, and is aware of the betrayal of the eyes. To prove other powers
which are not controlled by God is to forge lies against God and belying
His truth.

وَمَا كَانَ النَّاسُ إِلاَّ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً فَاخْتَلَفُوا وَلَوْلاَ
كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِنْ رَبِّكَ لَقُضِىَ بَيْنَهُمْ فِيمَا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ(( 19 ))

19- (THERE WAS A TIME WHEN) PEOPLE WERE NOT EXCEPT A SINGLE NATION.
LATER THEY FELL INTO VARIANCE. AND IF THERE WAS NOT A WORD PRECEDED FROM
YOUR LORD, THEIR DIFFERENCES COULD HAVE LONG BEEN JUDGED (SETTLED)
BETWEEN THEM.


[ 74 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 19**

Man's creation is upon unity and Monotheism. It was so at the
beginning, but gradually it turned to Polytheism and variances.
Differences sprang up among them due to their caprices, fancies, race,
nation selfishness; and finally man perverted from the straight path of
unity and truth. They divided into groups of Monotheists and
Polytheists. God could easily and swiftly turn their faces again towards
the truth, by some slaps of punishment and correction, but this is
contrary to His word of FREE WILL given to man.

God's Will and Wisdom which arises from His infinite Mercy, in His
universal plan, gives man some respite, in order to correct his wrong,
and settle his variances reasonably.

وَيَقُولُونَ لَوْلاَ أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْهِ آيَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِ فَقُلْ
إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ للهِِ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنْ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ(( 20 ))

20- AND THEY SAY:ِ \`\`WHY HAS A SIGN NOT BEEN SENT DOWN UPON HIM FROM
HIS LORD?'' SAY:ِ \`\`THE UNSEEN BELONGS TO ALLAH. SO, WAIT YOU. I, TOO,
WILL WAIT WITH YOU.''

**THE COMMENTARY
IMPROVISED MIRACLES (VERSE NO. 20)**

Once again the argument goes on their childish excuses that the


[ 75 ]

unbelievers were bringing about in order to refrain from believing.
Evidently the prophet did accomplish hundreds of miracles, and divine
signs, but what the unbelievers asked for, was something childish and
unobtainable, such as; turn the stones of the mountain into gold!ِchange
the Qura"n so that we may continue with idolatryِor have a palace made
out of gold and silverِor fly like the birds in the skyِor bring a
letter from our Lord to us, and etc., which are mentioned in the Book.
So the prophet answered them that miracles are not in my hand, and I can
not do what ever you want. \`\`The unseen belongs to God and I can do
nothing without His permission''.

And finally he ended the argument by saying:ِ \`\`Now that you are not
going to leave that obstinacy of yours, then wait. I, too, will wait
with youِThen you shall have God's punishment and I; His aid, victory,
and Grace.'' Had they asked for signs and miracles to reveal the truth
to them, God of surety would not abstain from revealing the truth, but
they merely sought excuses by asking that sort of things.

وَإِذَا أَذَقْنَا النَّاسَ رَحْمَةً مِنْ بَعْدِ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُمْ
إِذَا لَهُمْ مَكْرٌ فِي آيَاتِنَا قُلْ اللهُ أَسْرَعُ مَكْراً إِنَّ
رُسُلَنَا يَكْتُبُونَ مَا تَمْكُرُونَ(( 21 ))

21- AND WHEN WE MAKE PEOPLE TASTE A MERCY AFTER A MISFORTUNE THAT
TOUCHED THEM, THEY WILL PLOT AGAINST OUR REVELATIONS.

SAY:ِ \`\`THE SWIFTEST IN PLANING IS ALLAH. VERILY OUR MESSENGERS WILL
WRITE DOWN THE PLOTS THAT YOU MAKE.'' (OUR ANGELS WILL RECORD YOUR
INTRIGUES)

[ 76 ]

هُوَ الَّذِي يُسَيِّرُكُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ حَتَّى إِذَا
كُنْتُمْ فِي الْفُلْكِ وَجَرَيْنَ بِهِمْ بِرِيح طَيِّبَة وَفَرِحُوا
بِهَا جَاءَتْهَا رِيحٌ عَاصِفٌ وَجَاءَهُمْ الْمَوْجُ مِنْ كُلِّ مَكَان
وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ أُحِيطَ بِهِمْ دَعَوُا اللهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ لَئِنْ أَنْجَيْتَنَا مِنْ هَذِهِ لَنَكُونَنَّ مِنْ
الشَّاكِرِينَ(( 22 ))

22- IT IS HE WHO CONVEYS YOU ON THE LAND AND SEA, TILL YOU ARE ON BOARD
A SHIP, AND A FAIR BREEZE MOVES HER ON, AND THEY REJOICE ON THAT; WHEN,
LO! THERE COMES UPON THEM A RAGING TEMPEST, AND WAVES SURGE UPON THEM
FROM EVERY SIDE, AND THEY THINK THEY ARE ENCOMPASSED (BY DEATH),THEY
PRAY TO ALLAH WITH SINCERITY OF RELIGION:ِ \`\`THAT IF YOU DELIVER US
FROM THIS (PERIL) WE SHALL TRULY BE OF THE THANKFULNESS.''

فَلَمَّا أَنْجَاهُمْ إِذَا هُمْ يَبْغُونَ فِي الاَْرْضِ بِغَيْرِ
الْحَقِّ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّمَا بَغْيُكُمْ عَلَى أَنْفُسِكُمْ
مَتَاعَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُكُمْ
فَنُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ(( 23 ))

23- THEN WHEN HE DELIVERED THEM, THEY BECAME INSOLENT IN THE EARTH IN
DEFIANCE OF RIGHT.

O, PEOPLE! YOUR INSOLENCE IS AGAINST YOURSELVES. AN ENJOYMENT OF THIS
LOWER LIFE, AND THEN YOUR RETURN IS TO US, THEN WE SHALL INFORM YOU OF
WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN DOING.

[ 77 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 21 - 23**

In the first verse above, the reference is to the polytheists and their
plot and plan that are hatched ignorantly. When they are surrounded by
troubles and seized by hazards, they turn in awe and helplessness to God
making vowes for rescue. When the hazards are removed and the troubles
past, not only they forget them, but they also disregard their vows and
neglect their fervent prayer to God. As to the phrase:ِ \`\`They plot
against our revelation'' it may mean that, they forge and fabricate some
justifications to silence the blaming voice of their inner self and
conscience, and become content that their rescue was due to some natural
phenomenon, and had nothing to do with God! These poor and ignorant
creatures do not want to admit that God is swifter in plots and plans
than all, and sooner or later will seize them again, and next time their
prayer and plea may get no answer.

The parable in the next verse (NO.22) points at the innate and natural
Monotheism which is hidden and deposited in Man. In adversities, he
turns his thought to the spiritual forces outside his cognizance and
range of sight. But as soon as the adversity is removed and the fire
quenched, he forgets all, and disregards his covenants, and ignores his
promises, getting on with his usual insolence and oppression! Their only
gain is a few days of enjoyment in this lower material life, and then he
is to confront the results of his evil deeds, which are all registered
and recorded.

These verses which are full of wisdom, are not only addressed to the
few disbelievers who made the opposition party against Mohammad the
Messenger of God (AS). It rather is a general lesson to all mankind in
all ages. It is to teach us that we should not forget Him Who is our
real Lord and Saviour, and delivers us when troubles, and

[ 78 ]

waves of misfortune surround us from all sides. We should know that
again and again we may be afflicted by our sins and our wrongs, and
then, no one give us a hand except our Merciful Lord who has created us
all, and that His creatures are always in need of Him, and He loves His
creatures.

إِنَّمَا مَثَلُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَاء أَنْزَلْنَاهُ مِنْ
السَّمَاءِ فَاخْتَلَطَ بِهِ نَبَاتُ الاَْرْضِ مِمَّا يَأْكُلُ النَّاسُ
وَالاَْنْعَامُ حَتَّى إِذَا أَخَذَتِ الاَْرْضُ زُخْرُفَهَا وَازَّيَّنَتْ
وَظَنَّ أَهْلُهَا أَنَّهُمْ قَادِرُونَ عَلَيْهَا أَتَاهَا أَمْرُنَا
لَيْلا أَوْ نَهَاراً فَجَعَلْنَاهَا حَصِيداً كَأَنْ لَمْ تَغْنَ
بِالاَْمْسِ كَذَلِكَ نُفَصِّلُ الاْيَاتِ لِقَوْم يَتَفَكَّرُونَ(( 24
))

24- THE LIKENESS OF THIS LOWER LIFE IS AS THE WATER WHICH WE SEND IT
DOWN FROM THE SKY. THEN THE PLANT OF THE EARTH IS MINGLED BY IT, OF
WHICH MAN AND CATTLE EAT, TILL WHEN THE EARTH TOOK ITS GOLDEN ORNAMENTS
AND DECKED OUT (IN BEAUTY);AND ITS INHABITANTS THOUGHT THAT THEY HAVE
POWER (OF DISPOSAL) OVER IT, THERE COMES OUR COMMAND UPON IT BY NIGHT OR
DAY LAYING IT WASTE AS THOUGH IT DID NOT EXIST YESTERDAY. THUS DO WE
EXPLAIN THE SIGNS FOR A PEOPLE WHO REFLECT.

وَاللهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى دَارِ السَّلاَمِ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلَى
صِرَاط مُسْتَقِيم(( 25 ))

25- AND ALLAH CALLS (HIS SERVANTS) TO THE HOUSE OF PEACE (AND SAFETY
AND HEALTH), AND GUIDES WHOM HE WILL TO THE STRAIGHT PATH.

[ 79 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE PERSPECTIVE OF OUR PRESENT LIFE (VERSE NO. 24)**

The Glorious Qura"n, through this beautiful parable explains the nature
and the perspective of our present life in this world, in order to take
away the cover of vanity and neglect from our eyes. The water is sent
down from the sky through the clouds in drops of rain, and is mingled
with the soil and the radiated power of the sun, serving to make our
farmland pregnant and fruitful by God's wonderful artistry. Then all
sorts of grain, vegetable, and fruit, useful to the creatures are
produced. Our land, our farms, and our orchards and gardens are decked
out in beauty. The poor ignorant farmer or the land lord, may take all
the credits to himself and to their shovel, and may boast for having
power of disposal over all the productions!

But at once a calamity may comeِthe sky may with hold its rain, and
then thirst destroy all the plants and trees. Everything may die for
want of water, heat or light, or even for having these elements more
than they are needed! Even some disease may strip the trees bare, or a
frost or volcanic eruption may ruin every life and beauty, leaving
behind some ugly dusts and ashes!

This is indeed the likeness of our physical life in this lower worldِa
life that only a microbe is enough to destroy it and to waste all hopes
and desires, turning us to a handful of dust.

**VERSE NO. 25**

Contrary to this low and mortal life, there exists an everlasting safe
and sound life, full of all sorts of pleasures, to which Allah is always
inviting us. In this verse the eternally happy life is named, the house
of peaceِthe home of healthِor the abode of safety and security; and
Allah guides to the straight path which leads man to the said abode of
peace. Of course He guides whom He will, according to merits they have
earned.

[ 80 ]

لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا الْحُسْنَى وَزِيَادَةٌ وَلاَ يَرْهَقُ وُجُوهَهُمْ
قَتَرٌ وَلاَ ذِلَّةٌ أُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ فِيهَا
خَالِدُونَ(( 26 ))

26- FOR THOSE WHO DO GOOD, THERE IS GOODNESS AND MORE, AND NEITHER
DARKNESS NOR ABASEMENT WILL COVER THEIR FACES. THOSE ARE THE INHABITANTS
OF PARADISE, THEREIN THEY ABIDE FOR EVER.

وَالَّذِينَ كَسَبُوا السَّيِّئَاتِ جَزَاءُ سَيِّئَة بِمِثْلِهَا
وَتَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ مَّا لَهُمْ مِّنْ اللهِ مِنْ عَاصِم كَأَنَّمَا
أُغْشِيَتْ وُجُوهُهُمْ قِطَعاً مِّنْ اللَّيْلِ مُظْلِماً أُوْلَئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ(( 27 ))

27- AND THOSE WHO EARNED EVILS; THE RECOMPENSE OF AN EVIL DEED IS THE
LIKE OF IT, AND ABASEMENT SHALL COVER THEM. FOR THEM, THEIR IS NO
PROTECTOR FROM ALLAH. AS IF THEIR FACES IS COVERED WITH PIECES OF A DARK
NIGHT. THOSE ARE THE INHABITANTS OF THE FIRE (HELL), THERE TO ABIDE FOR
EVER.


