Feel Not Doubtful About the Final Judgement (verse No. 53 - 56)
===============================================================

THE COMMENTARY

The argument continues with explaining the punishment of the guilty in
this world and in the last. In an interrogative manner the unbelievers
seek to know if the said judgement is really true? and the prophet's
reply is:ِ \`\`Yes indeed! I swear by my Lord, that, it is true and it
will definitely come to pass, and no power can prevent or frustrate
it!'' Then the punishment is so fierce and dreadful that, if a guilty
soul could have all that is in the earth to offer for his ransom, he
would give it with pleasure. But no ransom of any kind is acceptable
from anyone; and the judgement shall be justly passed upon them. The
penalty in the judgement of God is not a matter of

[ 98 ]

vengeance. It is only a matter of justice, and God will not oppress His
servants the least. Penitence may generally lead to some amendment and
compensation; while in the Dooms Day it is not so. The guilty soul has
no chance to compensate for anything. So if the guilties declare or
reveal their regret and penitence it only serves to defame and disgrace
them. Therefore they conceal their penitence and sorrow, when they saw
the punishment, in order to conceal their infamy and disgrace.

يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَاءَتْكُمْ مَّوْعِظَةٌ مِّنْ رَبِّكُمْ
وَشِفَاءٌ لِّمَا فِي الصُّدُورِ وَهُدىً وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 57
))

57- O, PEOPLE! VERILY THERE HAS COME TO YOU AN ADMONITION FROM YOUR
LORD, AND A HEALING (OINTMENT) FOR WHAT IS IN THE BREASTS; AND A
GUIDANCE AND A MERCY FOR THE BELIEVERS.

قُلْ بِفَضْلِ اللهِ وَبِرَحْمَتِهِ فَبِذَلِكَ فَلْيَفْرَحُوا هُوَ
خَيْرٌ مِمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ(( 58 ))

58- SAY:ِ IN THE GRACE OF ALLAH AND HIS MERCY ِBY THATِSHOULD THEY
REJOICE. THAT'S BETTER THAN WHAT THEY AMASS.

**THE COMMENTARY
QURA"N THE GREAT MERCY OF GOD (VERSE NO. 57 - 58)**

Firstly the verses point at the universal Message of God which is
contained in the glorious Qura"n; admonishing Man in going astray, and
inviting him to God's Mercy and forgiveness. Qura"n is said to be a

[ 99 ]

healing ointment for our spiritual diseases, and it is also a guiding
means, and a Mercy for those who believe it. By that, which is said here
to be in the breasts (hearts); our spiritual contaminations are wanted,
such as; stinginess, jealousy, hatred and rancour, cowardice and
timidity, and polytheism and hypocrisy, and etc., that make the mental
or spiritual diseases of Man. This Qura"n provides a healing for such
mental and spiritual diseases. But if the patient accepts it, the remedy
acts, and they will be cured; if they reject the divine prescription, it
will cause their spiritual death!

The verse actually points to 4 stages of development and evolution of
Man, that Qura"n provides, namely:ِ

1ِ The stage of preaching and admonition.
2ِ The stage of cleaning the inner self from the spiritual
contaminations, as mentioned above.
3ِ The stage of guidance and leading.
4ِ And the last stage is, when Man has obtained the merits for
receiving God's Mercy.

It is worthy of note that all the said four stages can be attained by
means of the Glorious Qura"n. The next verse implies that Qura"n is the
best of all the bounties of God. Therefore, Man should grasp the chain
of god, which is His Book, if he wants to be connected with his Lord.
This will lead him in a straight path to God's Mercy and Grace. Instead
of rejoicing in power and wealth amassed, Man should rejoice in God's
Grace and mercy and in His Book of guidance and light. As to the
difference between Allah's Grace and Mercy; some commentators understand
the Grace, to be God's physical bounties, and the God's mercy as His
spiritual gifts.

قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ مَّا أَنْزَلَ اللهُ لَكُمْ مِّنْ رِزْق فَجَعَلْتُمْ
مِنْهُ حَرَاماً وَحَلاَلا قُلْ أَاللهُ أَذِنَ لَكُمْ أَمْ عَلَى اللهِ
تَفْتَرُونَ(( 59 ))

59- SAY:ِ \`\`HAVE YOU SEEN WHAT ALLAH HAS SENT DOWN

[ 100 ]

FOR YOU OF SUSTENANCE, THEN YOU MADE SOME OF IT UNLAWFUL AND SOME
LAWFUL!'' SAY:ِ \`\`DID ALLAH PERMIT YOU (TO DO THAT),OR YOU FORGE
(LIES) AGAINST ALLAH?''

وَمَا ظَنُّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّ اللهَ لَذُو فَضْل عَلَى النَّاسِ وَلَكِنَّ
أَكْثَرَهُمْ لاَ يَشْكُرُونَ(( 60 ))

60- AND THOSE WHO FORGE LIES AGAINST ALLAH; WHAT DO THEY THINK OF (THE
PUNISHMENTS IN THE) RESURRECTION DAY? VERILY ALLAH IS GRACEFUL TO MAN
BUT MOST OF THEM DO NOT THANK.

وَمَا تَكُونُ فِي شَأْن وَمَا تَتْلُوا مِنْهُ مِنْ قُرْآن وَلاَ
تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَل إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُوداً إِذْ تُفِيضُونَ
فِيهِ وَمَا يَعْزُبُ عَنْ رَّبِّكَ مِنْ مِثْقَالِ ذَرَّة فِي الاَْرْضِ
وَلاَ فِي السَّمَاءِ وَلاَ أَصْغَرَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ وَلاَ أَكْبَرَ إِلاَّ
فِي كِتَاب مُبِين(( 61 ))

61- YOU WILL NOT BE IN ANY POSITION, NOR DO YOU RECITE ANY RECITAL OF
IT, (OF QURA"N) NEITHER YOU DO ANY DEED; EXCEPT THAT, WE ARE WITNESSES
OVER YOU, WHEN YOU PROCEED ON IT. (i.e.GOD OBSERVES ALL YOUR THOUGHT,
PRAYERS, AND ACTIONS)

AND HIDES NOT FROM YOUR LORD ANY ATOM'S WEIGHT IN EARTH, NOR IN THE
HEAVENِAND NOT SMALLER THAN THAT, AND NOR BIGGER, UNLESS IT IS
(RECORDED) IN THE PERSPICUOUS BOOK.

[ 101 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
EVERYWHERE HE IS THE OBSERVER (VERSE NO. 59 - 61)**

Here reference is to the forgeries of the unbelievers, and their
artificial restrictions, and false religious sanctions that they
attributed to God. It is God who provides for man's sustenance, such a
wide variety of food and drink, of animals, vegetables, and minerals; in
the land, sea, and air; therefore, no one except Him has the right of
legislation, and saying this is lawful and that is unlawful. In the
verse: S 5:103 (V2ِP176) some of the superstitious heresies of the
idolaters which were part of their creed were discussed on.

They had BAHIRA, a domestic animal given birth to a large number of
young onesِThen if the fifth of them was a female, they had the mother's
ear slit, and she was dedicated to an idol! They also respected VASILA,
a sheep with seven kids or bearing twins. She was set free and declared
as unlawful and was dedicated to a certain idol! :ِ

\`\`Say:ِ Did Allah permit you to do that or you forge lies against
Him?'' Consider the people who forge lies against Allah, and invent
false gods and untrue creeds, and then attribute it to God's religion
and Law. What is their opinion about Resurrection Day and the Final
Judgement of God? Do they not believe that at last they shall be called
to account and have to answer for their deed, or at least there is
always a reaction for every action? Don't they know that God observes
all our thought, movements, and attainments? And that nothing is hidden
from His penetrating invisible eyes? God knows everything and His
knowledge is a record of everything, for being not subject to space and
time. He is Allِknowing and has a constant watchful care over all His
creatures:ِ

\`\`You will not be in any position, nor do you recite any recital of
Our Book (QURA"N), neither you do anything else, except that We are
witnesses over you when you proceed on it.''

[ 102 ]

The three objects of God's awareness that are brought here, point to
Man's thought, speech, and deed. It implies that as Allah sees our
deeds, He also hears our words, and is aware of our thought and
intention. So we have to have good thought, good word, and good deed.

We can learn from the above verses that:ِ

Legislation is only for God to do, and one who makes a law without
God's permission, he has forged a lie against God.
Even a prophet has not the right to set a rule from his own accord and
without the permission of Allah.
From the above verses we may also learn that legislation against the
Divine Law, is the creed of the pagans and the ignorant people.
It has been narrated that whenever the prophet recited the above
verses, he wept and shed hot tears!

أَلاَ إِنَّ أَوْلِيَاءَ اللهِ لاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ(( 62 ))
62- BEHOLD! THAT THE FRIENDS OF ALLAH HAVE NO FEAR ON THEM, NOR SHALL
THEY GRIEVE.

الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَكَانُوا يَتَّقُونَ(( 63 )) 63- THOSE WHO BELIEVED
AND WERE PIOUS.

لَهُمْ الْبُشْرَى فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الاْخِرَةِ لاَ
تَبْدِيلَ لِكَلِمَاتِ اللهِ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ(( 64 )) 64-
FOR THEM IS GLAD TIDINGS IN THE LOWER LIFE (THIS WORLD) AND IN THE LAST.
(THE LIFE TO COME) THERE IS NO CHANCE IN ALLAH'S WORDS. THAT IS THE
GREAT ATTAINMENT.

وَلاَ يَحْزُنْكَ قَوْلُهُمْ إِنَّ الْعِزَّةَ للهِِ جَمِيعاً هُوَ
السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ(( 65 ))

[ 103 ]

65- AND LET NOT THEIR WORDS GRIEVE YOU. VERILY HONOUR BELONGS TO ALLAH.
HE IS THE HEARER, ALLِKNOWING.

**THE COMMENTARY
FAITH BRINGS MENTAL TRANQUILLITY (VERSE NO. 62)**

\`\`THE FRIENDS OF ALLAH HAVE NOTHING TO FEAR, NOR SHALL THEY GRIEVE.''
To get out the meaning of the verse, we first have to know who the
friends of God are:ِ The Arabic, \`\`OWLIA"'' is the plural for
\`\`VALI'' which we have it translated to \`\`FRIENDS'' but it implies
the nearness of two things with having no intermediator or middleman.
The word has also been used as friends, and incharge. Therefore the
\`\`OWLIA"'' of Allah who have no fear and grieve not, are those between
whom and God, there is no distance or medium, and the veil and cover
from their hearts have been removed and taken away. Through their pure
faith and righteous deeds, they can see God so sure and clear, that
there remains no room for doubt in their hearts. In their eyes nothing
is comparable with Allah in value and worth. He who sees the great
Ocean, a droplet can have no importance in his sight, and he who is in
the sunshine, is indifferent to the light of a candle stick. So, how can
there be fear and grieve in a heart which is filled with the love for
God?

The friends of God are free from all the material chains of this world,
and fear, grief, and anxiety, touches them not. Therefore, the true
spiritual comfort and real mental tranquillity is theirs. When Allah is
the mere goodness, Allِmercy, and who never oppresses His creatures the
least, why should then anyone, except the sinners and guilties be afraid
of him?

There is an English proverb saying:ِ \`\`An honest man has nothing to
fear.''

[ 104 ]

On the other hand there is no room for sinning in those who are near to
Him and who love their God with a sincere and pure heart. In the verses
that follow, (NO.62ِ63) the friends of God have been defined by two
distinct qualifications namely, FAITH and PIETY:ِ \`\`Those who believed
and were piousِfor them is glad tidings in this world and in the life to
come.'' They will enjoy of the physical and spiritual bounties of this
present life, and also that of the life to come. And finally in the last
of these verses, Allah consoles His Messenger whose enemies have taunted
him with critical words and scornful remarks: \`\`Let not their words
grieve you, that honor entirely belongs to Allah who hears whatever they
say and knows whatever they do, and can turn back their actions to them
in the form of very hard reactions.''

When God is the source of all beings whatever they be, and the main
cause of all that comes to existence, then in His hand of power must lay
all honors, respects and dignities,and therefore He is the giver of
honor and respect to anyone who is honorable and respectful. To-day;
after the elapse of fifteen centuries, by casting a swift glance to
Mohammad, and all his opponents throughout the history, we can clearly
see who is honoured and who is dishonored and despised. أَلاَ إِنَّ
للهِِ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَنْ فِي الاَْرْضِ وَمَا يَتَّبِعُ
الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ شُرَكَاءَ إِنْ يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلاَّ
الظَّنَّ وَإِنْ هُمْ إِلاَّ يَخْرُصُونَ(( 66 ))

66- O, BEHOLD! TO ALLAH BELONGS WHOEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS, AND WHOEVER
IS IN THE EARTH. AND THOSE WHO FOLLOW FALSE GODS, THEY FOLLOW NOTHING
BUT CONJECTURES, AND THEY ARE ONLY LYING.

[ 105 ]

هُوَ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمْ اللَّيْلَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ وَالنَّهَارَ
مُبْصِراً إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَات لِقَوْم يَسْمَعُونَ(( 67 ))

67- IT IS HE WHO MADE FOR YOU THE NIGHT TO REPOSE IN IT, AND THE DAY
ALIGHT. VERILY IN THAT, THERE ARE SIGNS FOR A PEOPLE WHO HEAR.

**THE COMMENTARY
SOME OF THE SIGNS OF HIS GRANDEUR (VERSE NO. 66 - 67)**

Once again the argument turns to Monotheism and polytheism, which are
the most important matter in Islam to discourse about:ِ \`\`To Allah
belongs whoever is in the earth.''

In other word, all the creatures are subject to God; whatever they be
and whoever they are, Allah has created them, and He owns them. If
therefore any partners from among His creatures are set up and
associated with Him, they are merely false compeers invented by
imaginations and forged by conjectures. No reason can be brought to
prove such false and imaginary ideas. In the second verse above, night
and day are introduced as two signs of God's infinite mercy and
unrejectable Monotheism:ِ \`\`He is who made for you the night to rest
and repose, and made the day visible for your activities.'' If the
alternation of day and night stopped, who can move the earth round about
once again and change a night for day!? We should know that our life is
linked with the alternation of our rest and activity, which depends upon
the alternation of night and day. In the night when everything is calm
and quiet, we may repose and have a rest; and in the day when everything
is visible, there is a chance for our activity and work. Here an ear is
wanted to hear and a heart to reflect.

[ 106 ]

قَالُوا اتَّخَذَ اللهُ وَلَداً سُبْحَانَهُ هُوَ الْغَنِىُّ لَهُ مَا فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَْرْضِ إِنْ عِنْدَكُمْ مِنْ سُلْطَان بِهَذَا
أَتَقُولُونَ عَلَى اللهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ(( 68 ))

68- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`ALLAH HAS TAKEN A SON'' (FOR HIMSELF) GLORY BE TO
HIM! HE IS SELFِSUFFICIENT. TO HIM BELONGS WHATEVER IS IN THE HEAVENS
AND IN THE EARTH. YOU HAVE NO SANCTION (REASON) FOR THIS (IDEA). DO YOU
SAY ABOUT ALLAH THAT WHICH YOU DO NOT KNOW?

قُلْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللهِ الْكَذِبَ لاَ
يُفْلِحُونَ(( 69 ))

69- SAY:ِ \`\`THOSE WHO FORGE LIE AGAINST ALLAH, WILL NOT PROSPER.''

مَتَاعٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ ثُمَّ نُذِيقُهُمْ
الْعَذَابَ الشَّدِيدَ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْفُرُونَ(( 70 ))

70- (THEY MAY HAVE) A LITTLE ENJOIMENT IN THIS WORLD, THEN THEIR RETURN
IS TO US. THEN WE SHALL MAKE THEM TASTE A SEVERE TORMENT FOR WHAT THEY
DISBELIEVED.

**THE COMMENTARY
VERSE NO. 68 - 70**

These verses revealed one of the lies that polytheists have forged
against God, saying:ِ \`\`Allah has taken a son to Himself!'' Why should
he take a son from among his creatures, when everyone and everything
belongs to Him wherever they be? This is a lie, and untruthful statement
that some polytheists have forged against God. The lie was at first
invented by a sect of those who call

[ 107 ]

themselves Christians. They said that Jesus Christ was the son of God.
When they were asked to prove that by giving some reasons, they said:ِ
\`\`He had no father, and therefore God must have been his father?''
They said so; but they did not say; what about Adam and Eve, who had
neither a father nor a mother? can we say God is their mother too!
Thanks to heavens that they say:ِ \`\`God has taken a son!'' and they do
not say:ِ \`\`God was pregnant and gave birth to a son!'' Then after the
Christians, the Arab idolaters of the Pagan Era, said that the angels
are the daughters of God! But the Pagan Arabs too could not say by
reason, whether the angels are male or female!

After all; having a child, be it adopted or begotten, is to satisfy
one's physical or spiritual needs. When God is Selfِsatisfied, which one
of his necessities are to be satisfied by having a son like Jesus
Christ? To sacrifice him, in order to deliver the Christians from the
bondage and consequences of their deadly sins; like Polytheism, murder
adultery, Pederasty, drinking intoxicants, and usury through Christ's
atonement!?:ِ \`\`Glory be to Him? He is selfِsufficient. To Him belongs
whatever and whoever is in the heavens and in the earth. And you have
not any reason to prove such false ideas of yours. And saying so, you
only forge lies against your Lord God, and those who forge lies against
Allah will never prosper.''

Prosperity here may mean successful progress in the physical and
spiritual life. A liar not only deprives himself of such a prosperity;
besides that, his lie itself against God will fail, drowning the liar in
the lagoon of misery and misfortune! He may have through the infinite
Mercy of God a little enjoyment in this lower world and mortal life, but
soon he shall be passed over to an Eternal torment which is the fruit of
his lie and forgery against God.

وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ نُوح إِذْ قَالَ لِقَوْمِهِ يَا قَوْمِ إِنْ
كَانَ كَبُرَ عَلَيْكُمْ مَقَامِي وَتَذْكِيرِي بِآيَاتِ اللهِ فَعَلَى
اللهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ فَأَجْمِعُوا أَمْرَكُمْ وَشُرَكَاءَكُمْ ثُمَّ لاَ
يَكُنْ أَمْرُكُمْ عَلَيْكُمْ غُمَّةً ثُمَّ اقْضُوا إِلَىَّ وَلاَ
تُنْظِرُونِ(( 71 ))

[ 108 ]

71- AND RELATE TO THEM THE STORY OF NOAH:ِ WHEN HE SAID TO HIS PEOPLE;
\`\`O, MY PEOPLE! IF MY POSITION, AND MY ADMONISHING YOU BY THE SIGNS OF
ALLAH IS HARD TO YOU, I HAVE ALREADY PUT MY TRUST IN ALLAH. SO RESOLVE
ON YOUR AFFAIR AND YOUR PARTNERS. THEN LET NOT YOUR AFFAIR REMAIN
DUBIOUS TO YOU. EXECUTE THEN YOUR JUDGEMENT AND GIVE ME NO RESPITE.''

فَإِنْ تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَمَا سَأَلْتُكُمْ مِنْ أَجْر إِنْ أَجْرِي إِلاَّ
عَلَى اللهِ وَأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنْ الْمُسْلِمِينَ(( 72 )) 72- THEN
IF YOU TURN YOUR BACKS, I HAVE NOT ASKED YOU FOR ANY REWARD. MY REWARD
IS ONLY WITH ALLAH. AND I HAVE BEEN ORDERED TO BE OF THE MUSLIMS.
(i.e.THOSE WHO SUBMIT TO ALLAH'S WILL)

فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَنَجَّيْنَاهُ وَمَنْ مَّعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ خَلاَئِفَ وَأَغْرَقْنَا الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِنَا
فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ(( 73 ))

73- THEN THEY BELIED HIM. SO WE DELIVERED HIM AND THOSE WHO WERE WITH
HIM IN THE ARK; AND WE MADE THEM REPLACEMENTS (FOR THOSE WHO WERE
DROWNED BY THE FLOOD). AND WE DROWNED THOSE WHO BELIED OUR SIGNS.

THEN BEHOLD HOW WAS THE END OF THOSE WHO WERE ADMONISHED. (BUT THEY
PAID NO HEED)

[ 109 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
A CORNER OF NOAH'S STRUGGLE (VERSE NO. 71 - 73)**

The above verse is a prelude to the story of some of the prophets in
order to wake up the sleeping conscience of the unbelievers. It takes
the lead by reference to a part of the story of Noah and his struggle
against the unbelievers. Noah's continuous preaching in that long life
of him, had turned to a cause of offence to his wicked people. So he
said:ِ \`\`O, My people! If my admonishing you by the signs of Allah is
hard and offending to you, then know that I have already put my trust in
Allah.'' He did not fear of anything or anybody in delivering his
message, and plainly told his people to condemn him to death if they
willed! But he also asked them to be front and direct, and be not
dubious in their affair and decision. \`\`Judge and execute your
judgement'', he said to them, \`\`And give me no respite.'' He had his
Lord with him, and seriously believed that his Lord could always and in
any case help him.He therefore stood firm and steadfast in the contest,
and ridiculed the power and influence of his opponents. He showed such a
serious indifference of himself that the influence, power, and strife,
of his opponents were despised and counted to nothing. These had not any
importance in his sight because he had entirely relied upon his Lord
God.

And so was our prophet Mohammad, when he began his mission in Mecca,
among the powerful pagans who had all united against him. They reviled
him, persecuted him, and finally banished him; but he did not stop his
divine work of calling people back to God. He bravely delivered his
message and feared no one for having his confidence in Allah. Noah, our
prophet, and all men of God, work only for the sake of God; and for the
good of people. They expect nothing of rewards, either physical or
spiritual from people. So, if people reject them they

[ 110 ]

lose nothing because they ask nothing as reward from people:ِ

\`\`If you turn away, I have not asked you for any reward. My reward is
only with Allah.'' And finally the success has always been their,
because God will not leave alone these who have faith in Him. So, Noah
delivered his message bravely and was saved from the flood, while these
who disbelieved him were all perished and gave their places to the
believers who took refuge in the Ark.

ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِ رُسُلا إِلَى قَوْمِهِمْ فَجَاءُوهُمْ
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَمَا كَانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا بِمَا كَذَّبُوا بِهِ مِنْ
قَبْلُ كَذَلِكَ نَطْبَعُ عَلَى قُلُوبِ الْمُعْتَدِينَ(( 74 ))

74- THEN WE RAISED AFTER HIM MESSENGERS TO THEIR PEOPLE. THEY CAME TO
THEM WITH CLEAR SIGNS; BUT THEY WERE NOT MEN TO BELIEVE THAT WHICH THEY
HAD BELIED BEFORE. SO DO WE SEAL THE HEARTS OF THE TRANSGRESSORS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE APOSTLES AFTER NOAH (VERSE NO. 74)**

After pointing at the story of Noah in brief, reference is made to the
apostles who were sent to their people after him. Arch prophets like
Abraham, and other apostles such as, SALIHِHOODِLOTِand JOSEPH, were
sent to their people one after another. They all had come with
evidences, and admonished their people with clear signs. But the
obstinate and contumacious people who had not accepted the former
prophets, rejected the latters too, and again they defied the Message
of

[ 111 ]

God and rejected His Law. Their rejection was due to their
transgression, and their enmity with the apostles, for which God sealed
their hearts and made it impervious to truth!

ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ مُّوسَى وَهَارُونَ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ
وَمَلَئِهِ بِآيَاتِنَا فَاسْتَكْبَرُوا وَكَانُوا قَوْماً مُجْرِمِينَ((
75 ))

75- THEN WE RAISED AFTER THEM, MOSES AND AARON TO PHARAOH AND HIS
CHIEFS, WITH OUR SIGNS; BUT THEY SHOWED PRIDE AND WERE A GUILTY
PEOPLE.

فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ الْحَقُّ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا قَالُوا إِنَّ هَذَا لَسِحْرٌ
مُبِينٌ(( 76 ))

76- SO WHEN THE TRUTH CAME TO THEM FROM US, THEY SAID:ِ \`\`THIS IS
NOTHING EXCEPT CLEAR SORCERY.''

قَالَ مُوسَى أَتَقُولُونَ لِلْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَكُمْ أَسِحْرٌ هَذَا
وَلاَ يُفْلِحُ السَّاحِرُونَ (( 77 ))

77- MOSES SAID:ِ \`\`SAY YOU SO ABOUT THE TRUTH THAT HAS COME TO YOU?
IS THIS A SORCERY? WHILE SORCERERS DO NOT PROSPER!''

قَالُوا أَجِئْتَنَا لِتَلْفِتَنَا عَمَّا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَنَا
وَتَكُونَ لَكُمَا الْكِبْرِيَاءُ فِي الاَْرْضِ وَمَا نَحْنُ لَكُمَا
بِمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 78 ))

78- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`HAVE YOU COME TO US TO TURN US AWAY FROM WHAT WE
FOUND OUR FATHERS UPON; SO THAT SUPERIORITY MIGHT BE OF YOU TWO, IN THE
LAND? WE WILL NOT BELIEVE IN YOU.''

[ 112 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
A PART OF THE STRUGGLES OF MOSES AND AARON (VERSE NO. 75 - 78)**

Moses had his Message for Pharaoh and all the Egyptians, as well as the
Israelites who were enslaved there. But in these verses the immediate
reference is to Pharaoh and his chiefs who were the central pivot around
which all the affairs turned in Egypt. They were the ones addressed by
Moses at the begining, but they rejected him and denied his Divine
Message. This was because their life was drowned in luxury, pride, and
oppression. Usually the wicked are arrogants and prefer falsehood and
pride over humility and truth. So, they not only rejected Moses and his
brother with all the evidences that they had with them. But accused them
too, for having lusts of power, sorcery, and creating disorder and
causing insecurityِthat very things which they had come to put down!
They charged Moses to have come to gain power and superiority by means
of sorcery and magic!

So, in his defensive discourse he said to them:ِ

\`\`Say you so about the truth that has come to you, while sorcerers do
not prosper.'' What sort of similarity could they see in Moses and a
sorcerer?

Sorcery, which is the use of power gained from evil spirits, and some
deception, is exactly opposite to truth. Sorcery which is mere falsehood
will eventually fail, and the truth shall prevail. These two are in
likeness, like the seaِfoam and seaِwater. The foam will come up to show
its power and pride, leaving the water behind, but the foam will soon
vanish, and what remains firm and stout is the truthful water.

وَقَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ ائْتُونِي بِكُلِّ سَاحِر عَلِيم(( 79 ))

79- AND PHARAOH SAID:ِ \`\`BRING TO ME ALL THE LEARNED SORCERERS.''

فَلَمَّا جَاءَ السَّحَرَةُ قَالَ لَهُمْ مُّوسَى أَلْقُوا مَا أَنْتُمْ
مُّلْقُونَ(( 80 ))

80- THEN WHEN THE SORCERERS CAME; MOSES SAID TO

[ 113 ]

THEM:ِ \`\`CAST YOU DOWN WHAT YOU MAY CAST.''

فَلَمَّا أَلْقَوْا قَالَ مُوسَى مَا جِئْتُمْ بِهِ السِّحْرُ إِنَّ اللهَ
سَيُبْطِلُهُ إِنَّ اللهَ لاَ يُصْلِحُ عَمَلَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ(( 81 ))

81- SO, WHEN THEY CAST DOWN, MOSES SAID:ِ \`\`WHAT YOU HAVE BROUGHT IS
SORCERY, AND ALLAH WILL SOON ANNUL IT, THAT ALLAH WILL NOT AMEND THE
DEED OF THE CORRUPTORS.''

وَيُحِقُّ اللهُ الْحَقَّ بِكَلِمَاتِهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُجْرِمُونَ((
82 ))

82- AND ALLAH VINDICATES THE TRUTH BY HIS WORDS EVEN THOUGH THE
GUILTIES MIGHT DISLIKE IT.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE SECOND FIELD OF CONFLICT (VERSE NO. 79 - 82)**


When Pharaoh observed some of the miracles of Moses like the serpent
and the brilliant white hand, which were not without effect upon his
chiefs and courtiers, he thought of some practical answers for that. He
therefore called up to his court all the learned sorcerers and skilled
magicians of Egypt. He intended to nullify the work of Moses and render
it ineffective in the sight of his community.

Moses said to them:ِ \`\`What you have done is sorcery and God will
soon annul it because Allah will not amend the deed of the corruptors.''
The sorcerers had put their knowledge and skill in the service of a
tyrant king whose life was spent in luxury, vanity, oppression, and

[ 114 ]

corrupting himself as well as the society and community. So, evidently,
in such a contest and conflict between right and wrong, the victory will
belong to truth; because Allah has promised to vindicate the truth by
His words, and to prevail it over falsehood.

فَمَا آمَنَ لِمُوسَى إِلاَّ ذُرِّيَّةٌ مِّنْ قَوْمِهِ عَلَى خَوْف مِّنْ
فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَئِهِمْ أَنْ يَفْتِنَهُمْ وَإِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ لَعَال فِي
الاَْرْضِ وَإِنَّهُ لَمِنْ الْمُسْرِفِينَ(( 83 ))

83- SO NO ONE BELIEVED IN MOSES EXCEPT AN OFFSPRING OF HIS PEOPLE, FOR
FEAR OF PHARAOH AND HIS CHIEFS, LEST THEY SHOULD PUT THEM IN TRIAL. AND
VERILY PHARAOH TURNED HAUGHTY IN THE LAND, AND HE WAS OF THE
PRODIGALS.

وَقَالَ مُوسَى يَا قَوْمِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ آمَنْتُمْ بِاللهِ فَعَلَيْهِ
تَوَكَّلُوا إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُّسْلِمِينَ(( 84 ))

84- AND MOSES SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE! IF YOU HAVE BELIEVED IN ALLAH,
THEN ON HIM PUT YOUR TRUST, IF YOU ARE MUSLIMS.'' (SUBMITTED TO HIS
WILL)

فَقَالُوا عَلَى اللهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا رَبَّنَا لاَ تَجْعَلْنَا فِتْنَةً
لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 85 ))

85- AND THEY SAID:ِ \`\`IN ALLAH HAVE WE PUT OUR TRUST. OUR LORD! MAKE
US NOT (AN OBJECT OF) TRIAL FOR THE OPPRESSING PEOPLE.'' (i.e. DO NOT
LET THE OPPRESSORS TO PERSECUTE US)

وَنَجِّنَا بِرَحْمَتِكَ مِنْ الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ(( 86 ))

86- AND DELIEVER US THROUGH YOUR MERCY FROM THE UNBELIEVING PEOPLE.

[ 115 ]


