The Third Stage of Combat Between Moses and the Tyrant of Egypt (verse No. 83 - 86)
===================================================================================

The commentators are of two kinds of opinion regarding the pronoun,
\`\`HIS'' in the phrase, \`\`HIS PEOPLE.'' Some have taken it to
PHARAOH, because the majority of the Egyptions refused to believe. Only
a few of Pharaoh's folk believed in Moses and his message among whom we
may name the sorcerers, A"SIYEH,the wife to pharaoh who nursed and
brought up Moses as a child, and the famous courtier Qura"n has called,
\`\`the believer of pharaoh's folk.'' Pharaoh himself too, ultimately
believed when he was drowning, but too late to be accepted. The second
group of commentators have taken the pronoun, \`\`HIS'' to refer to
Moses:ِ They understand that the first and primeval believers to Moses,
were a small group of youngsters from among the Israelites, and then
gradually all his people believed, though most of them proved not to be
sincere and pure in their faith.

The first lesson that Moses taught the believers; was to put their
trust in Allah and rely entirely on Him:ِ \`\`And Moses said:ِ O, MY
PEOPLE! If you have believed in Allah, then on HIM put your trust.''
Putting trust in Allah is not to sit in solitude and in a remote from
the society, doing nothing and waiting for God to do everything for you,
and say that I have relied on my Lord, and have all confidence in HIM.

To put trust in God is rather to work harder as far as possible and
meanwhile ask for His help too. The Arabic, \`\`FITNAT'' which we have
translated to, \`\`trial'' has various shades of meaning. Its root
meaning is, \`\`TEMPTATION'' and other shades are,
trialِpunishmentِtumultِoppressionِdiscordِ seditionِand also civil
war.

The Israelites here in their prayer, \`\`MAKE US NOT AN OBJECT OF

[ 116 ]

TRIALS'' may have meant:ِ \`\`Do not make us the object of punishment
and oppression at the hand of our powerful enemies.''

وَأَوْحَيْنَا إِلَى مُوسَى وَأَخِيهِ أَنْ تَبَوَّأَا لِقَوْمِكُمَا
بِمِصْرَ بُيُوتاً وَاجْعَلُوا بُيُوتَكُمْ قِبْلَةً وَأَقِيمُوا
الصَّلاَةَ وَبَشِّرْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 87 ))

87- AND WE INSPIRED MOSES AND HIS BROTHER TO PROVIDE FOR YOUR PEOPLE
HOUSE IN EGYPT, AND MAKE YOUR HOMES CLOSE AND OPPOSITE TO EACH OTHER,
AND PERFORM THE PRAYER, AND GIVE GLAD TIDINGS TO THE BELIEVERS.

وَقَالَ مُوسَى رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ آتَيْتَ فِرْعَوْنَ وَمَلَأَهُ زِينَةً
وَأَمْوَالا فِى الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا رَبَّنَا لِيُضِلُّوا عَنْ
سَبِيلِكَ رَبَّنَا اطْمِسْ عَلَى أَمْوَالِهِمْ وَاشْدُدْ عَلَى
قُلُوبِهِمْ فَلاَ يُؤْمِنُوا حَتَّى يَرَوْا الْعَذَابَ الاَْلِيمَ(( 88
))

88- AND MOSES SAID:ِ \`\`OUR LORD! YOU HAVE GIVEN PHARAOH AND HIS
CHIEFS SPLENDOUR AND POSSESSIONS IN WORLD'S LIFE. OUR LORD! SO THEY
MISLEAD (people) FROM YOUR WAY. OUR LORD! DESTROY THEIR WEALTH AND
HARDEN THEIR HEARTS, THAT THEY WILL NOT BELIEVE UNTIL THEY SEE A PAINFUL
PUNISHMENT.''

قَالَ قَدْ أُجِيبَتْ دَعْوَتُكُمَا فَاسْتَقِيمَا وَلاَ تَتَّبِعَانِّ
سَبِيلَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ(( 89 ))

89- HE SAID:ِ YOUR PRAYER IS ANSWERED, SO BE YOU STEADFAST AND FOLLOW
NOT THE WAY OF THOSE WHO KNOW NOT.

[ 117 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
THE CONSTRUCTING PERIOD FOR REVOLUTION (VERSE NO. 87 - 89)**

Moses and his brother are commanded to provide houses close and
opposite to one another, in order to facilitate their union, and solve
their social problems more easily. This order implies that the
Israelites had been scattered here and there, throughout the land, and
every now and then, they could have been attacked or arrested by the
king's police without the others knowing it. Moses had to remain in
Egypt for a while, so as to teach his doctrine to the Israelites, and
prepare them to leave there and make for the promised land. This
intention was strictly against the interest of Pharaoh and his chiefs
who had enslaved the minority of people for their hard works and
difficult and base services. Besides that; after his victory over the
sorcerers, his Message had to have enough time to work out, that there
had appeared signs of victory by the conversion of the sorcerers, and
even A"SIYEH the wife to Pharaoh and some of her maid servants.

Then the verses allude to the main causes of Pharaoh and his courtiers
rebellion and trespass:ِ And Moses said:ِ \`\`Our Lord! You have given
Pharaoh and his chief splendour and wealth in this life so that they
mislead people from your way! Our Lord! Then destroy their wealth and
harden their hearts, that they won't believe unless they are afflicted
with painful punishment.''

Through the glory and glitter of their wealth and luxurious houses they
had puffed up with pride and vanity, so much so that they mislead
themselves and the others from the way of truth. Moses in his prayer
asked God to destroy their possessions in such a way that instead of
being the object of desire and pleasure for them, they become the object
of disgust and detestation.

Moses and his brother, also asked their Lord, to harden the hearts of
Pharaoh and his chiefs. They prayed their hearts which was

[ 118 ]

supposed to be the seat of affection and Mercy and the seat of joy and
hope to become a seat for sorrow and regret and a seat of grief and
despair; and this is exactly the fruit of unbelief when it serves to
harden the heart of man. The owners of such a hardened heart will
believe not until they taste a painful punishment to wake them up!

وَجَاوَزْنَا بِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ الْبَحْرَ فَأَتْبَعَهُمْ فِرْعَوْنُ
وَجُنُودُهُ بَغْياً وَعَدْواً حَتَّى إِذَا أَدْرَكَهُ الْغَرَقُ قَالَ
آمَنْتُ أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ الَّذِي آمَنَتْ بِهِ بَنُوا
إِسْرَائِيلَ وَأَنَا مِنْ الْمُسْلِمِينَ(( 90 ))

90- AND WE PASSED THE ISRAELITES OVER THE SEA. THEN PHARAOH AND HIS
HOSTS PURSUED THEM WITH INSOLENCE AND ENMITY, UNTIL WHEN DROWNING
OVERTOOK HIM. HE SAID; I BELIEVE THAT THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT HE IN WHOM
THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL BELIEVE, AND I AM OF THOSE WHO HAVE SUBMITTED.
(TO ALLAH, AND ARE MUSLIMS)

أَالاْنَ وَقَدْ عَصَيْتَ قَبْلُ وَكُنْتَ مِنْ الْمُفْسِدِينَ(( 91 ))

91- NOW!? AND YOU HAVE REBELLED BEFORE AND WERE OF THE CORRUPTORS.

فَالْيَوْمَ نُنَجِّيكَ بِبَدَنِكَ لِتَكُونَ لِمَنْ خَلْفَكَ آيَةً
وَإِنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنْ النَّاسِ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا لَغَافِلُونَ(( 92 ))

92- SO, TO-DAY WE SHALL SAVE YOUR (DEAD) BODY (FROM THE SEA), SO AS TO
BE A SIGN FOR THOSE WHO COME AFTER YOU, THOUGH, A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE
HEEDLESS TO OUR SIGNS.

[ 119 ]

وَلَقَدْ بَوَّأْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ مُبَوَّأَ صِدْق وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ
مِنْ الطَّيِّبَاتِ فَمَا اخْتَلَفُوا حَتَّى جَاءَهُمْ الْعِلْمُ إِنَّ
رَبَّكَ يَقْضِي بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ(( 93 ))

93- AND WE SETTLED THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL IN A RIGHT SETTLEMENT, AND
GAVE THEM SUSTENANCE OF CLEAN THINGS. THEY DIFFERED NOT UNTIL KNOWLEDGE
CAME TO THEM.

VERILY YOUR LORD WILL JUDGE BETWEEN THEM IN THE RESURRECTION DAY
CONCERNING THEIR DIFFERENCES.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FINAL STAGE OF THE COMBAT (VERSE NO. 90 - 93)**

Here the final stage of the combat with Pharaoh and his hosts is
described in brief, but clear and subtle:ِ \`\`We passed the children of
Israel over the sea, when pharaoh and his hosts pursued them with
insolence and enmity, until drowning over took him.'' How was the pass
over, and what sort of a miracle saved these, and drowned those; is to
be explained in detail in S 2b:63, if God speeds us. However, pharaoh
found himself like a leaf of straw floating upon the sea water with
God's wrath all round him! He therefore, cried loudly:ِ \`\`I believe
that there is no god except He in whom the children of Israel have
believed, and I have submitted.'' This was, infact, a death bed
repentance, forced by terror, and would not be accepted. The repentance
of those who continue with evil deeds until death faces them, is not a
real repentance and therefore Allah will not accept it. The answer to
him when declaring faith, was therefore:ِ \`\`Now!? And you have
rebelled before and were a corruptor! So, to-day we

[ 120 ]

shall deliever your dead body to the land to make it a sign of our
justice for those who come after you; that they may take lesson of your
fate, although a lot of people pay no heed to our signs!'' If pharaoh's
body was not thrown up, out of the water by the sea waves, the laymen
would compose fairy tales, and many fictions about him, and introducing
him as a god or deify him, for not believing that he was really drowned!
So, as per order of God, the waves threw up his fat and big body, and
according to Egyption custom he was embalmed and mummified with
preservatives for burial. At present a couple of mummified bodies of the
Egyptian Pharaohs are preserved and exhibited in the British and
Egyption museums; but we are not sure enough if the pharaoh who was
contemporary to Moses is among them or not.

Pharaoh and his hosts were thus vanquished, and their land and
possessions fell in the hands of the Hebrews, who lived there in Egypt
for a period before the OXODUS.

فَإِنْ كُنْتَ فِي شَكّ مِّمَّا أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ فَسْئَلِ الَّذِينَ
يَقْرَءُونَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَقَدْ جَاءَكَ الْحَقُّ مِنْ
رَّبِّكَ فَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنْ المُمْتَرِينَ(( 94 ))

94- THEN IF ARE IN DOUBT REGARDING WHAT WE HAVE SENT DOWN TO YOU, (LIKE
THE ABOVE STORY OF PHARAOH AND HIS HOSTS) ASK THOSE WHO WERE READING THE
BOOK BEFORE YOU.

VERILY THE TRUTH HAS COME TO YOU FROM YOUR LORD. SO BE NOT OF THE
DOUBTERS.

وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنْ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِآيَاتِ اللهِ فَتَكُونَ مِنْ
الْخَاسِرِينَ(( 95 ))

95- AND DO NOT BE OF THOSE WHO BELIED THE SIGNS OF ALLAH, FOR YOU SHALL
BE OF THE LOSERS.

[ 121 ]

إِنَّ الَّذِينَ حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِمْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ((
96 ))

96- THOSE AGAINST WHOM THE WORD OF YOUR LORD HAS PROVED TRUE WILL NOT
BELIEVE.


وَلَوْ جَاءَتْهُمْ كُلُّ آيَة حَتَّى يَرَوْا الْعَذَابَ الاَْلِيمَ(( 97
))

97- EVEN IF ALL THE SIGNS COME TO THEM (THEY WILL NOT BELIEVE) UNTIL
THEY SEE A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT.

**THE COMMENTARY
DON'T GIVE WAY TO DOUBTS (VERSE NO. 94 - 97)**

These verses ask Muslims to refer to the Scriptures, if they are in
doubt about that which has been inspired to their prophet Mohammad,
regarding Moses and the fate of pharaoh, and other historical incidents.
Some may ask here; was the prophet himself in any doubt about what he
narrated of ancient stories? The answer is definitely, \`\`none at
all''. He always proved in his acts and deeds, and it is confirmed by
Qura"n too, that he was unique in the belief that,whatever he said was
truth and from God. We read in the Holy Qura"nِS 53:3ِ4, that he said
nothing of his own desire, and that whatever he said was an inspiration,
inspired to him. He was indeed sure of that. therefore this
commandment:ِ \`\`REFER TO THE SCRIPTURES IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT'' is
addressed in the form, to Mohammad (AS), but in substance, it is
addressed to the Muslims.

Then the following verse (NO.96) implies that there were, and still
there are, some contumacious and stubborn people against whom the word
of Allah has proved true that, they will never believe until they taste
a painful punishment that they deserve! So no one should expect such a
one to give up resistance and opposition to the truth, inspite of

[ 122 ]

the hardened heart and the metamorphosed nature that they have earned:ِ
Even if all the signs come to them they will not believe until they
taste a painful punishment. This pronounced change in nature, or better
to say against the nature of man, is effected by their own evil deeds in
a long period of their life, which they earned with their own hands and
in their Free-Will.

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE PASSOVER IN THE BIBLE**

In the above verse (NO.94) Muslims are commanded that if they are in
doubt regarding what Allah has sent to them, like the PASSOVER and other
incidents of ancient, refer to the Scriptures that has been revealed
before the Holy Qura"n. We therefore have quoted here for our dear
readers, a passage of the old Testament which refers to the PASSOVER in
the Book of EXODUSِ14 as follows.

**CROSSING THE RED SEA**

Then the Lord said to Moses:ِ \`\`Tell the Israelites to turn back and
camp in front of PI HAHIROTH, between Migdol and Red sea near
BAALZEPHON. The king, (PHARAOH) will think that the Israelites are
wandering about in the country and are closed in by the desert. I will
make them stubborn, and he will pursue you, and my victory over the king
and his army will bring me honour. Then the Egyptians will know that I
am the Lord.'' The Israelites did as they were told.

When the king of Egypt was told the people had escaped, he and his
officials changed their minds and said:ِ \`\`We have let the Israelites
escape, and we have lost them as our slaves!'' He set out with all his
chariots, including the six hundred finest, commanded by their officers.
The Egyption army, with all the horses, chariots, and drivers, pursued
them and caught up with them where they were camped by the Red Sea.

[ 123 ]

10ِWhen the Israelites saw the king and army marching against them,
they were terrified and cried out to the Lord for help. They said to
Moses:ِ \`\`Weren't there any graves in Egypt!? Did you have to bring us
out here in the desert to die? We told you to leave us alone and let us
go on being slaves of the Egyptians.'' Moses answered:ِ \`\`Don't be
afraid. Stand your ground and you will see what the Lord will do to save
you to-day.'' The Lord said to Moses:ِ \`\`Why are you crying for help?
Tell the people to move forward. Lift up your stick and hold it out over
the sea. The water will divide, and the Israelites will be able to walk
through the sea on dry ground.'' 21ِMoses held out his hand over the
sea, and the Lord drove the sea back with a strong east wind. It blew
all night and turned the sea into dry land. The water was divided and
the Israelites went through the sea on dry ground with walls of water on
both sides. The Egyptians pursued them and went after them into the sea
with all their horses, chariots, and drivers.

26ِThe Lord said to Moses:ِ \`\`Hold out your hand over the sea, and
the water will come back over the Egyptions and their chariots and
drivers.'' So Moses held out his hand over the sea and at day break the
water returned to its normal level. The Egyptian tried to escape from
the water, but the Lord threw them into the sea. 28ِThe water returned
and covered the chariots, the drivers, and all the Egyptian army that
had followed the Israelites into the sea: no one of them was left. But
the Israelites walked through the sea on dry ground, with walls of water
on both side. 30ِOn that day the Lord saved the people of Israel from
the Egyptians, and the Israelites saw them lying dead on the seashore.
When the Israelites saw Egyptians, they feared the Lord; and they had
faith in the Lord and in his servant Moses. EXODUSِ14

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

[ 124 ]

فَلَوْلاَ كَانَتْ قَرْيَةٌ آمَنَتْ فَنَفَعَهَا إِيمَانُهَا إِلاَّ
قَوْمَ يُونُسَ لَمَّا آمَنُوا كَشَفْنَا عَنْهُمْ عَذَابَ الْخِزْىِ فِي
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَتَّعْنَاهُمْ إِلَى حِين(( 98 ))

98- WHY WAS THERE NOT A CITY THAT BELIEVED SO THAT THEIR FAITH SHOULD
HAVE PROFITED THEM, EXCEPT THE PEOPLE OF JONAH. WHEN THEY BELIEVED WE
REMOVED FROM THEM THE DEBASING TORMENT IN THIS WORLD'S LIFE, AND LET
THEM ENJOY THEMSELVES FOR THE TIME BEING.

**THE COMMENTARY
ONLY ONE GROUP BELIEVED IN TIME! (VERSE NO. 98)**

The verse implies that no group of ancient people, who were warned by
their prophets showed positive reaction to warning in time and before it
was too late, except the people of JONAH. They repented collectively and
believed all together and at once, and their sincere faith entitled them
to God's Mercy and forgiveness:ِ \`\`Why was there not a city that
believed so that their faith should have profited them, except the
people of Jonah.'' When Jonah who was sent to the people of Nineveh, was
rejected by the people there; he abandoned to despair, and cursed his
people by the advice of a fanatic monk. Contrary to that, there was
another learned Monk in Nineveh who advised Jonah to be patient and
strive with constancy and perseverance. He said:ِ\`\`O, Jonah! Through
your prayer ask our Lord to forgive these people and have Mercy on them
perhaps they might be guided.''

However JONAH cursed his people and left them. He ran away and sailed
by a ship fully laden, and met with furious waves. The superstitious
sailors wanted to know who was responsible for their

[ 125 ]

illِluck. So, to know that, they cast lots, and the Lot fell on Jonah,
and he was thrown into the sea, and soon after he was swallowed by a
whale or a huge fish. There in that awful darknesses he repented and
glorified Allah. If not so he would certainly have remaind inside the
fish till the Day of Resurrection. But Allah forgave him and cast him
out in the seaِshore sick and exhausted. After him, his people were
admonished by the said learned monk. He encouraged them to fear God and
repent. Meanwhile the signs and symptoms of God's punishment was
appearing to them more or less. So they repented and went out to pray
for God's forgiveness. Their prayer was answered and God forgave them:ِ
\`\`When they believed We removed from them the debasing torment in this
world's life and let them enjoy themselves for the time being.'' Soon
after their repentance, their prophet too, joined them and all of them
escaped an inevitable punishment through repentance and turning in time
to their Gracious God.

The incident shows that, how effective an aware and compassionate
leader can be among his people. Here two monks or priests are put on the
carpet. One of them is a unidirectional fanatic man who is crusty and
governed by too great enthusiasm on religious subjects. He urges the
Apostle Jonah to curse his people and insist not upon their guidance.
The second one is a learned compassionate priest with good insight and
deep understanding, who encourages the Apostle Jonah to be patient and
strive with constancy and perseverance. Comparing these two sorts of
religious leader, one can judge which kind of a leader should he follow.
The story of JONAH is told in S 37:139ِ148 in more detail. There is also
a book named JONAH in the old Testament. So we shall give further
comments about this wonderful apostle of God when we reach chapter 37 of
Qura"nِa more appropriate place for this purpose.

\*\*\*\*\*

[ 126 ]

**NINEVEH**

The people to whom apostle JONAH was sent were the inhabitants of
Nineveh. It was an ancient Assyrian city on the east bank of the TIGRIS,
opposite to the modern City of Mosul in Iraq.

NINEVEH began as a NEOLITHIC settlement more than 5000 years ago. Its
earliest settlers with primitive stone tools and crude pottery were
culturally related to the contemporary people of northern Mosopotamia
whose racial identity is uncertain. It was king Sennacherib (705ِ681
B.C.) who expanded the city and made it the capital, and it is from his
records that we have our best picture of the city. King Sennachrib
doubled the size of the city and beautified it. He built some 8 miles of
walls around the town, 45ft. thick and 75 feet high, made chiefly of
limestone and protected with many towers. A water moat extended more
than 100 ft in front of the wall. An outer double wall with the moat in
between offered further protections. Fifteen gates, each with its own
name led into the city. An elaborate canal and aqueduct brought fresh
water from the hills.

A large part of the city was occupied by official building, temples,
and great governmental armour. Another feature of the city was a park
with strange flora and fauna, gathered from distant parts of the world
by the ruler. ASHURBANIPAL, the last great ruler of Assyria (668ِ630
B.C.) built himself a palace in NINEVEH. The fall of Nineveh and of the
Assyria Empire occured in the summer of 612 B.C. through the united
efforts of the Medes and Babylonians under the leadership of their
respective kings; CYAXARES and NABOPOLASSAR.

Modern archeological investigation of the site consisting of two
mounds, called KUYUNJIC and NABI UNUS began in the middle of 19th
century with Layard's and Rassam's work. In 1854, Rassam uncovered the
remains of an immense library, estimated at 22000 uniform tablets. The
varied contents of these tablets from the library of ASHURBANIPAL, now
in British Museum, give a brilliant introduction to the complex culture
and history of ancient Babylonia and Assyria.

**BY:ِ ENCYCLOPEDIA INTERNATIONAL
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

[ 127 ]

وَلَوْ شَاءَ رَبُّكَ لاَمَنَ مَنْ فِي الاَْرْضِ كُلُّهُمْ جَمِيعاً
أَفَأَنْتَ تُكْرِهُ النَّاسَ حَتَّى يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ(( 99 ))

99- AND IF YOUR LORD HAD WILLED, WHOEVER IS IN THE EARTH WOULD HAVE
BELIEVEDِALL OF THEMِALL TOGETHER. BUT WOULD YOU THEN FORCE PEOPLE
(AGAINST THEIR WILL) TO BECOME BELIEVERS!?

وَمَا كَانَ لِنَفْس أَنْ تُؤْمِنَ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِ اللهِ وَيَجْعَلُ
الرِّجْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ(( 100 ))

100- NO SOUL CAN BELIEVE EXCEPT BY THE PERMISSION OF ALLAH. AND HE LAYS
FILTH UPON THOSE WHO DON'T USE THEIR FACULTY OF UNDERSTANDING.

**THE COMMENTARY

FORCED FAITH IS NO FAITH (VERSE NO. 99 - 100)**

We have already read in the previous verses that forced faith is no
faith, and any compulsory belief is void of value:ِ \`\`And if your Lord
had willed, every one on the earth would have believed.'' This is an
integral part of Man's Free-Will, that some of them become faithful, and
some others faithless:ِ \`\`Do you want to enforce people to have
faith!?''

This limited amount of free will that God has granted to man, is
connected with God's universal law that governs the universe. If it was
not so, he would have created all mankind alike and with faith. But due
to his Free-Will, man has to strive and explore, and bring himself into
harmony with God's universal laws that govern the universe. Therefore,
faith becomes a moral achievement, and is not a compulsory matter.

[ 128 ]

Inspite of the above verses, and many others, which are in this scale;
it is not only unjust, but a deadly sin too, if any body accuses Islam
of being, \`\`THE RELIGION OF SWORD'', to have been imposed on others by
force. When Mohammad (AS) began his sacred mission and Divine Doctrine,
THE SWORD was in the hands of Persian kings, and Roman Emperors. Muslims
through their faith, piety, and virtue, took the sword out of their
hands, and the promise of God to them was fulfilled who had said in
Qura"n:ِ \`\`It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the
religion of truth, so as to prevail it over all religions; even though
the polytheists dislike it.''

We Muslims believe that neither FreeِWill nor Fatalism can be the
absolute governor of our affairs, but something in between. This is
because Man's Free-Will is limited and all important attainments depend
on Man's struggle and endeavour, as well as God's Will and Grace which
is not without account and considerations. The world is not in a state
of confusion and anarchy that one may do whatever he wants without
question and reckoning. There is a law, an order, and recorded account,
for every movement, and also an appropriate result and reaction for
every action.

قُلِ انْظُرُوا مَاذَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضِ وَمَا تُغْنِي
الاْيَاتُ وَالنُّذُرُ عَنْ قَوْم لاَّ يُؤْمِنُونَ(( 101 ))

101- SAY:ِBEHOLD WHAT IS IT, THAT IS IN THE HEAVENS AND EARTH. AND
NEITHER SIGNS NOR WARNERS WILL ENRICH (FREE FROM WANT) A PEOPLE WHO
BELIEVE NOT.

فَهَلْ يَنْتَظِرُونَ إِلاَّ مِثْلَ أَيَّامِ الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ قُلْ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِّنْ الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ((
102 ))

102- SO, DO THEY EXPECT (ANYTHING TO HAPPEN) EXCEPT THE

[ 129 ]

LIKE OF THE DAYS OF THOSE WHO HAVE GONE BEFORE THEM?

SAY:ِ THEN WAIT AND WATCH. I TOO, WILL WAIT WITH YOU.

ثُمَّ نُنَجِّي رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كَذَلِكَ حَقّاً عَلَيْنَا
نُنْجِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 103 ))

103- THEN WE SHALL SAVE OUR MESSENGERS AND THOSE WHO BELIEVED.

THUS IT IS AN OBLIGATION UPON US TO SAVE BELIEVERS.

**THE COMMENTARY
TRAINING AND ADVICE (VERSE NO. 101 - 103)**

In the aforementioned verses it was shown that forced faith is no
faith, and Man should believe whatever he believes through his
Free-Will. Now we may learn from the above verses that how can we obtain
faith by studying God's signs which are abundant in the heavens and
earth:ِ \`\`Behold what is it, that exists in the heavens and in the
earth.'' This verse, wants we to observe and study the heavens and the
earth, and the things that exist therein. So let us have a glanceِa
quick lookِupon the starry sky which lays above us or beneath us!

We cast a look, Lo! We may see billions of heavenly bodies wandering
about, and as if in search of a precious thing that they have lost it!
They are wanderers that follow an amazing order. With our naked eye or
with the aid of our optical telescope we see countless heavenly
bodiesِbut we only see those bodies that shineِsuch as the

[ 130 ]

stars that are suns like our sun, and shine by their own light.

The average person looking at the sky can see some four thousand stars
at one time; but the astronomer with his powerful telescope can see
countless stars, and also star groups that are not visible to the naked
eye. The star with which we are most familiar is our sun in the center
of our solar system, and which provides light and heat that are
essential for life upon the earth. Our sun is only an average star in
size and brightness compared to other huge stars that we can not see
them even with our telescopes.

Our earth travels through the universe in company with nine other
planets. They all move in elliptical orbits around the sun. All the
planets except URANUSِNEPTUNE and PLUTO, are at certain times visible to
the naked eye. Our earth has a moon orbiting around it while JUPITER has
12 known moons, and SATURN has nine, URANUS five, Neptund and Mars, each
have two. At various times of the year, our earth in its journey around
the sun, passes through large crowds of meteoric particles, and
thousands of, \`\`SHOOTING STARS'' stab the blackness of the night with
their quick sudden trials of light. Our Merciful, Allِknowing Lord
through his infinite knowledge and power protects us from the deadly
hazards of shooting stars.

\`\`And We have made the sky (OVERHEAD) a protected roof and they pay
no heed to its signs.'' QURA"NِS 21:32 This verse indirectly alludes to
METEORITES which encounter the earth's atmosphere, where they are heated
to incandescence by friction and air resistance. Most of them are soon
consumed, leaving momentary luminous trails or shooting stars in the
sky. It has been estimated that 90 millions meteor trails are bright
enough to be seen

[ 131 ]

during any 24 hour period over all the earth. These meteors are
regarded as debris of disintegrating comets. Some of the meteors have
survived its flight through the air and has fallen to ground. These
great masses of material are called METEORITES. The largestِknown stony
meteorite, weighing more than a ton, fell on Feb.18,1948 in Furnas
county Nebraska. When a meteorites falls on the ground it makes great
craters and dangerously disturbs the air, creating extraordinary
powerful winds. If one such meteorite fall upon a crowded town like
London or Tehran, its bad consequences is no less than an atomic
bomb:ِ

and we have made the sky (over your head) a protected roof and they pay
no heed to its signs. Yet out, and beyond our miniature universe of suns
and planets; lies the MILKY WAYِ a majestically beautiful path way of
light girdling the heaven. Although it appears to be cloudy, it is
actually composed of thousand of suns like our sun. All the individual
stars in our night sky also belongs to the Milky way system.

All the stars like our sun, appear to rise in the east and set in the
west, but all the bodies are not actually moving that way. This is an
optical illusion caused by the rotation of our earth which rotates from
West to East. The verse also implies that all God's signs in His
creation, or in spoken words which comes through inspiration to the
apostles, will not result in faith if the people themselves do not want
to believe, and intend not to understand. Signs, warnings, and teachings
will not be useful enough when there is no ground for acceptance of
faith in a heart.

Then the verses end in a warning that if you follow the unbelievers who
lived before you, then you should not expect anything to happen except
the like of the fate of those who have gone before you. They all
perished and our Messenger and those who followed them were savedِKnow
that dry and wet do not burn together, and it is an obligation upon us
to save the believers.

[ 132 ]

قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ فِي شَكّ مِّنْ دِينِي فَلاَ
أَعْبُدُ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ وَلَكِنْ أَعْبُدُ اللهَ
الَّذِي يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ وَأُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 104
))

104- SAY:ِ \`\`O, PEOPLE! IF YOU ARE IN DOUBT CONCERNING MY RELIGION;
THEN I WORSHIP NOT THOSE WHOM YOU WORSHIP APART FROM ALLAH. BUT I DO
WORSHIP ALLAH. HE WHO TAKES YOUR SOUL, (CAUSE YOU TO DIE) AND I AM
COMMANDED TO BE OF THE BELIEVERS.''

وَأَنْ أَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفاً وَلاَ تَكُونَنَّ مِنْ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ(( 105 ))

105- AND SET YOUR FACE TO THE RELIGION PURELY (FAR FROM ANY COMPEER)
AND DO NOT BE OF THE POLYTHEISTS.

وَلاَ تَدْعُ مِنْ دُونِ اللهِ مَا لاَ يَنْفَعُكَ وَلاَ يَضُرُّكَ فَإِنْ
فَعَلْتَ فَإِنَّكَ إِذاً مِّنْ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 106 ))

106- AND DO NOT PRAY TO (ANYONE) OTHER THAN ALLAH, WHICH WILL NEITHER
PROFIT, NOR HURT YOU. IF YOU DO THAT, THEN YOU WILL BECOME OF THE
OPPRESSORS.

وَإِنْ يَمْسَسْكَ اللهُ بِضُرّ فَلاَ كَاشِفَ لَهُ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَإِنْ
يُرِدْكَ بِخَيْر فَلاَ رَادَّ لِفَضْلِهِ يُصِيبُ بِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ
عِبَادِهِ وَهُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ(( 107 ))

107- AND IF ALLAH TOUCHES YOU WITH A LOSS, THERE IS NO ONE TO REMOVE
IT, EXCEPT HIMSELF. AND IF HE INTENDS SOMETHING GOOD FOR YOU, NO ONE CAN
REPEL HIS GRACE. HE WILL REACH IT TO ANY OF HIS SERVANTS WHOM HE WILL,
AND HE IS ALLِFORGIVING THE COMPASSIONATE.


[ 133 ]


