Decisiveness Against the Polytheists (verse No. 104 - 107)
==========================================================

These last verses of the chapter of YUNUS, once again put the stress
upon Monotheism and worshipping the only one and true God. The tone of
the verses imply that the polytheists expected our prophet to show of
himself some flexibility and suppleness, against his ardent faith in
Monotheism; giving a little way to idolatries. But Mohammad who had no
least amount of doubt in truthfulness of his religion, declared his
faith clearly to all the pagans, that, he will never worship anything or
anyone other than Allah, such as the idols or the deified persons or
personified fetishes and gods:ِ

\`\`O, People! If you are in doubt concerning my religion; then know
that I worship not those whom you worship apart from Allahِbut I worship
Allah the only true one God, and one true God, who causes you to die.''
The Lord God Whom Mohammad worshipped, is Allah the Everِliving,
Allِknowing, in whose hand lays the life and death of all the living
creatures. And that he got his warrant for the worship directly from God
Himself through inspiration:ِ \`\`I am commanded to be of the
believers.''

This phrase BEING OF THE BELIEVERS also imply that the religion that
Mohammad has brought, is not a religion of monks and hermits who
renounce the world and its people to live in seclusion for prayer and
worship. He was commanded to be of the believers and with the believers,
and therefore his religion which is called Islam lays great stress upon
social duties. Then the next verse, (NO.105) gives a clear logical
reason for such a worship of Allah, namely:ِ \`\`And do not pray to
anyone for help other than Allah, who will neither profit nor hurt his
worshippers.'' In other word; he is not able to do anything good or bad,
in favour or against. The ending of the verse alludes to the fact that,
there is no power

[ 134 ]

that can intercept Allah's favour or prohibition:ِ \`\`If Allah touches
you with a loss there is no one to remove it, except Himself, and if He
intends something good for you, no one can repel that.''

قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَّبِّكُمْ
فَمَنِ اهْتَدَى فَإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدِي لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا
يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا وَمَا أَنَا عَلَيْكُمْ بِوَكِيل(( 108 ))

108- SAY:ِO, PEOPLE! THE TRUTH HAS ALREADY COME TO YOU FROM YOUR LORD.
SO, HE WHO IS GUIDED, IS GUIDED FOR HIMSELF. (FOR HIS OWN GOOD) AND HE
WHO STRAYED, HE STRAYS AGAINST HIMSELF, AND I AM NOT A GUARDIAN OVER
YOU.

وَاتَّبِعْ مَا يُوحَى إِلَيْكَ وَاصْبِرْ حَتَّى يَحْكُمَ اللهُ وَهُوَ
خَيْرُ الْحَاكِمِينَ(( 109 ))

109- AND FOLLOW WHAT IS INSPIRED TO YOU, AND BE PATIENT UNTIL ALLAH
ISSUES HIS DECREE; AND HE IS THE BEST OF THE JUDGES.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE LAST WORD (VERSE NO. 108 - 109)**

The two verses consist of an advice for all the people, and an
instruction for the religious leaders, who is the prophet in this case:ِ
\`\`Tell all the people that truth has been sent to you from your
Lord.'' The Law which consist of instructions, admonitions, warnings,
and commandment, is all truth. The Holy QURA"N with its amazings
contents, is nothing but truth. Any one who is guided by the truth, he
has been guided to his own benefit, and for his own good; and anyone

[ 135 ]

who goes astray, and is misled by the devils of any kind, has strayed
against himself. The prophet is no one's guardian. His duty is only to
convey the Message of Allah to His servant. A man of God can not force
anyone against his free will if they don't want to be guided. Therefore
the prophet has been ordered to follow that which has been inspired to
him:ِ \`\`Follow that which has been inspired to you and be patient
until Allah issues His decree.'' When inspite of all the efforts of the
Messenger of God, people do not accept the Message, what else can be
done except being patient, without giving up, or falling to despair; and
carrying out the duties obliged by inspiration, until Allah Who is the
best of just judges may issue His decree?

**THE END OF SUREH JONAH (10)**

[ 136 ]

**سوره هود
HOOD**

بِسْمِ اللّهِ الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ IN THE NAME OF ALLAH THE MERCIFUL
THE COMPASSIONATE

الر كِتَابٌ أُحْكِمَتْ آيَاتُهُ ثُمَّ فُصِّلَتْ مِنْ لَّدُنْ حَكِيم
خَبِير(( 1 ))

1- A.L.R. (THIS IS A) BOOK WHOSE VERSES ARE MADE FIRM (BY WISDOM) AND
FURTHER EXPLAINED; FROM THE (LORD GOD WHO IS) WISE, ALLِAWARE.

أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُوا إِلاَّ اللهَ إِنَّنِي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ
وَبَشِيرٌ(( 2 ))

2- THAT YOU WORSHIP NONE EXCEPT ALLAH. VERILY I AM A WARNER AND BEARER
OF GLADِTIDING TO YOU FROM HIM.

وَأَنِ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ يُمَتِّعْكُمْ
مَتَاعاً حَسَناً إِلَى أَجَل مُسَمّىً وَيُؤْتِ كُلَّ ذِي فَضْل فَضْلَهُ
وَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَابَ يَوْم كَبِير(( 3
))

3- AND THAT YOU ASK FORGIVENESS OF YOUR LORD, THEN REPENT TO HIM; HE
WILL GIVE YOU FAIR ENJOYMENT TILL AN APPOINTED TERM (IN THE PRESENT
LIFE). AND TO BESTOW HIS GRACE ON EVERY VIRTUOUS (ACCORDING TO THEIR
MERITS). BUT IF YOU TURN AWAY I FEAR FOR YOU THE TORMENT OF A GREAT
DAY.

[ 137 ]

إِلَى اللهِ مَرْجِعُكُمْ وَهُوَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْء قَدِيرٌ(( 4 ))

4- TO ALLAH IS YOUR RETURN AND HE HAS POWER OVER ALL THINGS.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE FOUR IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES IN THE MESSAGE OF THE PROPHETS. (VERSE
NO. 1 - 4)**

The chapter begins with the importance of the Holy Qura"n, whose verses
are made firm and statute by knowledge and wisdom. The Book includes all
the basic principles, and it further explains them in detail. The Book
is of surety sent down to our prophet through inspiration from Allah Who
is Allِwisdom and Allِaware. The Message given to all the apostles, as
well as our prophet Mohammad (AS), includes four important principles,
namely:ِ

1ِ Worship none except Allah the only one true God.

2ِ Allah has sent His Messenger Mohammad to all mankind as a warner to
warn against evil, and also as a bearer of good news, for the believers
who do righteous deeds.

3ِ The prophet calls Man to seek God's forgiveness and repent to Him.

4ِ The fourth basic principle of the Message is that, after cleansing
his soul through repentance, Man should turn to his Lord and adorn
himself with the attributes of Allah by doing righteous deeds.

Then the argument applies to the results that can be obtained by
adhering to the above principles and making a life programme out of
them:ِ

[ 138 ]

If you follow the principles, Allah will give you in return, the
enjoyment of all the good thing that are obtainable in the life of this
world during its limited period; and He will also bestow His Grace upon
the followers according to the merits, so as to attain the high
spiritual rewards of the life to come:ِ \`\`But if you turn away, I fear
for you the punishment of a great day.'' The said verses imply that the
aim of Islam, our religion, is to improve and flourish the material life
of man before it applies to the next world's life. Such an aim has been
clearly explained in Qura"n, and many a time in detail. As an instance
of this; we read in theِS71:11, that NUH the arch prophet of God, says
to his people:ِ

\`\`O, My People! Seek the forgiveness of your Lord and turn to Him,
Then He will loose the sky upon you in its blessings (such as its rain),
and will strengthen you with wealth and sons and will bestow on you
gardens and will appoint rivers for you.'' The bounties promised here
are essential to the continuance of life and fundamentally affect man's
happiness and prosperity.

أَلاَ إِنَّهُمْ يَثْنُونَ صُدُورَهُمْ لِيَسْتَخْفُوا مِنْهُ أَلاَ حِينَ
يَسْتَغْشُونَ ثِيَابَهُمْ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ
إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ(( 5 ))

5- BEHOLD! THEY FOLD THEIR BREASTS (TO BRING THEIR HEADS NEAR FOR
WHISPER) TO HIDE (THEIR WORDS) FROM HIM. BEHOLD! WHEN THEY WRAP
THEMSELVES IN THEIR GARMENTS (NOT TO BE RECOGNIZED) HE KNOWS WHAT DO
THEY CONCEAL AND WHAT DO THEY REVEAL; THAT HE KNOWS THE SUBSTANCE OF THE
BREASTS. (i.e.HE KNOWS THE IN MOST OF THEIR THOUGHTS)

[ 139 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
OCCASION OF THE REVELATION (VERSE NO. 5)**

AKHNASِIBNِSHARIF the hypocrite, had a sweet and expressive tongue, and
in the presence of the prophet he expressed his love and obedience, but
in his absence he was the worst of the enemies. There also were a group
of the idolaters who, when confronted with the prophet in their way,
bowed down their heads and folded their breast, wrapping themselves in
their garments and passed swiftly not to be recognized, and that the
prophet might not see them! They wanted to hide the containts of their
hearts and their inmost thought and intention, but they failed because
Allah knows all the tricks of Man. They wanted to conceal their hatred
and enmity of their hearts by showing a good appearance, playing a
double role, but could not do so, because Allah is the Allِknowing,
Allِaware.

**BEGINNING OF PART 12
OF THE HOLY QURA"N**

وَمَا مِنْ دَابَّة فِي الاَْرْضِ إِلاَّ عَلَى اللهِ رِزْقُهَا
وَيَعْلَمُ مُسْتَقَرَّهَا وَمُسْتَوْدَعَهَا كُلٌّ فِي كِتَاب مُبِين(( 6
))

6- AND THERE IS NOT ANY MOVING CREATURE IN THE EARTH, WHOSE SUSTENANCE
IS NOT PROVIDED BY ALLAH; AND HE KNOWS ITS RESTING PLACE AND SHIFTING
PLACE. ALL ARE (RECORDED) IN A PERSPICUOUS BOOK.

[ 140 ]

**THE COMMENTARY
WE ARE ALL HIS GUESTS (VERSE NO. 6)**

The aforementioned verse pointed to the fact that God knows the inmost
of our thought and whatever we conceal, or whatever we reveal. The above
verse gives reason to prove the said attributes, that all things and all
matters are actually before God's allِembracing knowledge, which is some
sort of a record beyond time and space:ِ \`\`There is not any moving
creature in the earth whose sustenance is not provided by Allah; and He
knows their resting place and shifting points.''

Sustenance here is not limited to food and drink. It consists of any
means of support, and nourishments, and supplying with all the
necessaries of life, be it physical or spiritual; such as knowledge,
wisdom, and guidance. The verse implies that not only Allah provides for
those creatures that are settled in a certain place or home, but He also
knows that, where are they in any moment, and sends them their
nourishments there. In other word; God's care and knowledge encompasses
everything and every creature throughout his life in any time and space.
With Allah is the keys of the unseen, and hidden treasures of nature
that no one else knows them! Even a leaf will not fall down without His
permission. That is to say:ِ \`\`nothing can happen in the creation,
except by Allah's word and will, and with His allِembracing
knowledge!''

There are living creatures at the bottom of the oceans, thousands of
meters deep. The main root, and the base of all sorts of food depends
upon the plants and vegetation, for the growth of which sun's light is
essential. But how can sun's ray reach the far depths, and bottom of the
oceans to give the necessary energy to the plants to grow!? Allah has
amazingly solved all the problems of creation in the simplest possible
way. We now know through scientific researches that the sun light helps
some microscopic plants to grow on top of the sea

[ 141 ]

water, and when such plants are developed like a ripe fruit, they sink
down to the depths to feed and sustain the sea creatures. The ways in
which the Allِknowing Creator sustains His creatures are indeed
wonderful and astonishing! He feeds the foetus in the mother's womb to
which no one can have access! He feeds the tiny insects who live in the
depths of the soils that no one knows how do they live, and as the above
verse implies, God knows all their addresses and their resting homes and
shifting points! In this verse Qura"n has used the Arabic word, \`\`DA",
BBEH'' which means any moving creatures. But we physically know that no
movement can occur without the waste of energy; or better to say,
without the change of energy to, hold on with the conservative law. Even
the plants themselves are in need of energy to facilitate their growth,
and who else except God can create the necessary energy for any kind of
movement that may exist?

**IS MAN'S SUSTENANCE PREDESTINED?**

The answer to this question is not positive, and it is a little complex
too! Some weak minded people say that the sustenance for every creature
and particularly for Man, is a matter foreordained by Divine Decree and
eternal purpose. They say that we need not to work and bother ourselves
to obtain our sustenance, because it is something destined, and divided
by God; and our share will come to us in any how, according to God's
decree! Such a wrong idea creates good opportunities for the exploiters
and the profiteers to rob people and deprive them from their resources
and available means of prosperities.

They say so against many clear verses and Islamic traditions that
encourage Muslims to work and strive and to be hardy and active. As an
instance we have the famous verse NO.39 of the SURA 53 in Qura"n, which
has turned to a proverb or a slogan, saying:ِ \`\`Man can have nothing
except that for which he strives, and soon shall he see the result of
his striving.''

[ 142 ]

This verse clearly implies that man must work hard and strive, or he
will gain nothing moral or material. This sort of false and wrong
assertions is just like saying:ِ \`\`Every one has a term and a certain
life time destined for him, and he will not die until his time is over,
but they don't say what of them if they commit suicide!? It is true that
the creator in His universal plan, has designed Man so that he can live
a long life time of about a century. But this term is on condition, that
man observe the rules and regulations of nature and creation. If he
intentionally destroys his lungs through smoking, and ruins his stomach
by intoxicants, and makes his soul sick by evil deeds, who can keep him
alive for long?''

Even all the prophets have strived and have worked hard, and all of
them had an occupation for their livelihood and life's support. Some
have been shepherds. Others were farmers. Among them was tailor and
weaver of chainِmail. We also have had a prophet carpenter, and none of
them said; we will sit hand upon hand and wait for God to provide us
with sustenance, and send down our daily bread through a basket from the
heavens. True that the bases and roots of all sustenances come to us
from God our Merciful Creator, just like sun's energy that comes at our
door. But if we do not make use of it in farming and other purposes, we
shall have no food to eat.

There is a saying in NAHJOLBALA"GHEH narrated from Hazrat Imam Ali, who
said to his son:ِ \`\`There are two kinds of sustenances for Man. One of
the two kind will search and seek him, but the second kind is that which
Man has to search and seek.''

وَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالاَْرْضَ فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّام
وَكَانَ عَرْشُهُ عَلَى الْمَاءِ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلا
وَلَئِنْ قُلْتَ إِنَّكُمْ مَبْعُوثُونَ مِنْ بَعْدِ الْمَوْتِ
لَيَقُولَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ هَذَا إِلاَّ سِحْرٌ مُبِينٌ(( 7
))

7- AND HE IS WHO CREATED THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH

[ 143 ]

IN SIX DAYS, (6 PERIODS) WHILE HIS THRONE (OF POWER) WAS UPON THE
WATERِTHAT HE MAY TRY YOU (TO MAKE KNOWN) WHICH ONE OF YOU HAS A BETTER
CONDUCT. AND IF YOU SAID; \`\`YOU WILL BE RAISED UP AFTER DEATH,'' THE
UNBELIEVERS WILL SAY; \`\`THIS IS NOTHING BUT AN OBVIOUS SORCERY.''

**THE COMMENTARY
THE AIM OF CREATION (VERSE NO. 7)**

Three fundamental points are discussed here:ِ

1ِ The creation which was done in six periods of time, long or short,
and particularly its beginning in which God's throne of authority and
power was laid upon the water, which is the building block of life. The
Arabic word, \`\`ARSH'' means roof, throne, elevated seat of a king
which is the symbol of his power, and also it means the whole universe,
and all the being things.

The Arabic word, MA"A means water, and also it refers to any kind of
liquid, and melted material. Elsewhere in the Qura"n, (S 21:30) it is
also cited that the heavens and the earth were one single unit of
creation all joined together, then Allah separated them and clove them
asunder, and made out of water all the living things therein. All these
points allude to the fact that life has been evolved from the water.

2ِ The second point will give us some information about the aim and
object of creation, the eventual fruit of which is, \`\`Man'' the
creature who can think and decide and work with Free-Will.

The whole creation, be it an atom or a galaxy, is not without an

[ 144 ]

aim or purpose. Nothing is created for nothing, and there is an object
for the creation of every creature, on the part of the creator. In
general, we may say the creation is a medium through which spiritual
life is to develop and make out man's life which is a period of
probation and trial:ِ \`\`That He may try you to make known which one of
you has a better conduct.'' 3ِ The third point mentioned in the verse
is, the promised Resurrection which is firmly connected with the
origination. This is because the final goal of creation is evolution, to
reach an end in which an everlasting developed spiritual and physical
super life, is attained in a most developed world:ِ \`\`But if you tell
the unbelievers that, you will be raised up after death, they will say;
this is nothing but sorcery.''

Sorcery and sorcerer's talk is baseless, or based upon falsehood and
pretence. Therefore those who believe not in the life to come, will
think that such a saying is baseless like the sorcerer's word, and this
of course will prove their absolute ignorance of the whole matter.

وَلَئِنْ أَخَّرْنَا عَنْهُمُ الْعَذَابَ إِلَى أُمَّة مَعْدُودَة
لَيَقُولُنَّ مَا يَحْبِسُهُ أَلاَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِيهِمْ لَيْسَ مَصْرُوفاً
عَنْهُمْ وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ(( 8 ))

8- AND IF WE DELAY THE PUNISHMENT FROM THEM FOR THE TIME BEING (UP TO
AN APPOINTED TIME) THEY WILL SAY:

\`\`WHAT KEEPS IT BACK?''

BEHOLD! THE DAY WHEN IT WILL COME TO THEM, THERE IS NOTHING TO TURN IT
AWAY FROM THEM, AND WHAT THEY USED TO MOCK AT, WILL ENCOMPASS THEM.

وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَا الاِْنسَانَ مِنَّا رَحْمَةً ثُمَّ نَزَعْنَاهَا
مِنْهُ إِنَّهُ لَيَئُوسٌ كَفُورٌ(( 9 ))

[ 145 ]

9- AND IF WE LET MAN TO TASTE A MERCY FROM US, THEN WITHDRAW IT FROM
HIM, HE ABANDONS TO DESPAIR, AND (FALLS TO) BLASPHEMY.

وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ نَعْمَاءَ بَعْدَ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ
ذَهَبَ السَّيِّئَاتُ عَنِّي إِنَّهُ لَفَرِحٌ فَخُورٌ(( 10 ))

10- BUT IF WE GIVE HIM A TASTE OF BOUNTIES AFTER ADVERSITY THAT HAS
TOUCHED HIM, HE WILL SAY:ِ \`\`DIFFICULTIES HAVE LEFT ME! (AND THEY WILL
RETURN NO MORE) AND HE FALLS INTO JOY AND PRIDE.''

إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ كَبِيرٌ(( 11 ))

11- EXCEPT THOSE WHO WERE PATIENT AND DID RIGHTEOUS DEEDS. FOR THEM IS
FORGIVENESS AND A GREAT REWARD.

**THE COMMENTARY
BELIEVERS HAVE HIGH CAPACITY AND ENDURANCE. (VERSE NO. 8 - 11)**

Here in these verses some weak points of man are alluded to, which can
lead him to the worst of the situations, corrupting his soul. They mock
at the truth, and make fun of important matters that are serious and
vital. When they hear the divine threats, and warnings of the prophets,
they ridicule it for a little delay that has held their punishment
back:ِ \`\`And if we delay the punishment from them for the time being
they will say what keeps it back?'' In other word, they say; if really
there is such a thing as punishment, what has delayed it and who hinders
it? In fact they mock at the threat, and in answer to their mockery God
says:ِ

\`\`The day when it will come to them there is nothing to turn it away
from them; and their mockeries will encompass them.''

[ 146 ]

Their second weak point is their low capacity for misfortune and
happiness. When they are afflicted with a loss, they soon abandon to
despair and fall to blasphemy. But when they are in affluence and
opulence, they feel so sure that pride and vanity overcome them, and
they take it as matter of course, or due to their merits, skills, and
intellects! On the other hand the believers are always patient, be they
in ill-fortune or good-fortune. In either cases they continue with their
fair conducts and are thankful to God and expect to receive His Mercy
and Grace again.

We ought to realize that all the bounties are granted to Man through
God's Mercy and Grace and not through his merits and quality of
deserving. If not so; only a few have the necessary merits, and may
deserve God's Grace or Mercy, which appears in the form of various
bounties. The believers who have the power of continuing under pain and
hardship without being overcome, are promised to have a two-fold results
of their patience:ِ Their sins are forgiven, and they will also have
great rewards for their deeds.

فَلَعَلَّكَ تَارِكُ بَعْضَ مَا يُوحَى إِلَيْكَ وَضَائِقُ بِهِ صَدْرُكَ
أَنْ يَقُولُوا لَوْلاَ أُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ كَنزٌ أَوْ جَاءَ مَعَهُ مَلَكٌ
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ نَذِيرٌ وَاللهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْء وَكِيلٌ(( 12 ))

12- THEN IT MAY BE THAT YOU LEAVE ASIDE (FOR THE TIME BEING) SOME OF
WHAT IS INSPIRED TO YOU, AND YOUR BREAST (HEART) GETS STRAITENED THAT
THEY SAY:ِ \`\`WHY HAS A TREASURE NOT BEEN SENT DOWN TO HIM, OR AN ANGEL
COME NOT WITH HIM?''


[ 147 ]

أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُوا بِعَشْرِ سُوَر مِثْلِهِ
مُفْتَرَيَات وَادْعُوا مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِّن دُونِ اللهِ إِنْ كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ(( 13 ))

13- OR DO THEY SAY:ِ \`\`HE HAS FORGED IT!?''

SAY:ِ \`\`BRING YOU THEN TEN SURAS, FORGERIES, THE LIKE OF IT; AND CALL
(TO HELP) WHOEVER YOU CAN APART FROM ALLAH IF YOU ARE TRUTHFULS.''
فَإِلَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَكُمْ فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا أُنزِلَ بِعِلْمِ
اللهِ وَأَنْ لاَّ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُّسْلِمُونَ(( 14
)) 14- BUT IF THEY ANSWERED NOT YOUR CALL, THEN KNOW YOU THAT IT HAS
BEEN SENT DOWN WITH ALLAH'S KNOWLEDGE, AND THAT THERE IS NO GOD EXCEPT
HE. WILL YOU THEN SUBMIT?


