The Tempest Begins (verse No. 40 - 43)
======================================

The faithless continued with his blasphemy and inequitous conducts, and
the faithful with his belief and righteous deeds until God's decree was
issued, and the oven of God's wrath boiled over, and a fearful tempest
began! Then the sky rained cats and dogs, and all the springs on the
earth gushed forth, and Lo! A mad Flood covered the whole globe, and
overwhelmed everything and every one! It seemed as if the ovens which
are usually the places of fire, had turned to flowings springs of water,
in order to catch and drown all the enemies of truth! Noah and his
followers got the hint from a certain oven which boiled up, and swiftly
prepared themselves for a fearful voyage. They soon took refuge in the
Ark of Allah, knowing well that there would be no refuge other than
that, from the wrath of God.

As per order that was inspired to him; Noah embarked all the
believersِwho were not manyِhis own family, except his wife, and KANAAN
his sonِand from all species of the animals, a male and a female, and
that was all. The vessel raised up, and upper, and upset, by the boiling
and roaring water; and at once found herself amid the furious waves
that

[ 167 ]

towered like mountains. Everything seemed to be fearful, and no hope
flickered from anywhere except from the direction of God! The
unbelieving son of Noah whose name was KANAAN, standing apart had no
confidence in Allah, and relied upon the material things like the
mountains! He refused to obey his father in joining them in the Ark. He
even could not believe that the handmade Ark of his father could
withstand the Flood. In answer to his father he said:ِ \`\`I will go to
that mountain's peak which will protect me from the water.'' He could
not believe that all the peaks and depths are in the charge of Allah and
under His control:ِ \`\`My son! Embark with us, and be not with the
unbelievers. And he replied:ِ I shall soon seek refuge in the mountains
which will protect me from water.'' And the father who saw the fruit of
his life is being lost, said with pity and sorrow:ِ \`\`Papa! No one can
protect you to-day from the wrath of God, except His own Mercy.'' But a
huge wave came forth and interrupted the argument and made a barrier
between them, and the rude son went with the waves which were not his
friend!

**WAS THE FLOOD UNIVERSAL?**

Many of the verses imply that the Flood was not regional, and had
covered the whole globe, destroying all the living creatures. To this
effect all the races of mankind now living on earth take their origin
from either one of Noah's three sons, namely HAAMM-SAAMM and YAAFTH. The
above verses too, denote that Noah embarked one couple of each animal
species which may imply that the Flood could have killed all the living
creatures; and yet Allah knows better whether the Flood was a regional
or a universal, because the same reason can be used to prove both
cases.

[ 168 ]

وَقِيلَ يَا أَرْضُ ابْلَعِي مَاءَكِ وَيَا سَمَاءُ أَقْلِعِي وَغِيضَ
الْمَاءُ وَقُضِىَ الاَْمْرُ وَاسْتَوَتْ عَلَى الْجُودِىِّ وَقِيلَ
بُعْداً لِلْقَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ(( 44 ))

44- AND IT WAS SAID:ِ \`\`O, EARTH! SWALLOW YOUR WATER. AND O, SKY!
WITHHOLD (YOUR RAIN).'' AND THE WATER WENT DOWN, AND THE MATTER WAS
JUDGED (ALLAH'S WILL WAS DONE) AND THE ARK WAS SETTLED ON JUDI; AND IT
WAS SAID:ِ \`\`AWAY WITH THE OPPRESSING PEOPLE.''

**THE COMMENTARY
THE END OF AN ADVENTURE (VERSE NO. 44)**

Some Islamic traditions imply that the Ark wandered on that wavy ocean,
for six months when finally the end of the punishment was announced.
Then the sky ceased raining and the earth swallowed the water and the
Ark sat upon JUDI. The above verse is one of the most beautiful and
expressive passages in the Arabic language and literature. It has a
wonderful moving force and fluency through which large scenery is
explained in few words, that none of them can be replaced with a synonym
without ruining the beauty and changing the whole meaning!

**WHERE IS JUDI?**

There is not a widely accepted place, as Judi, upon which the Ark must
have settled. Some of the commentators say that it is a mountain near
Musel in the northern region of Iraq. Some others have taken it as a
common name given to any place which is hard and high. A group of the
commentators speak of BOHTAN in a district at the frontier of Modern
Turkish and Iraq, in which JABAL JUDI= THE MOUNTAIN OF JUDI is situated,
and Allah knows best where JUDI or the seat of the Ark had been.

[ 169 ]

وَنَادَى نُوحٌ رَبَّهُ فَقَالَ رَبِّ إِنَّ ابْنِي مِنْ أَهْلِي وَإِنَّ
وَعْدَكَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنْتَ أَحْكَمُ الْحَاكِمِينَ(( 45 ))

45- AND NOAH CALLED UNTO HIS LORD AND SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY LORD! MY SON IS
OF MY FAMILY AND YOUR PROMISE IS TRUE, AND YOU ARE THE HIGHEST OF ALL
JUDGES.''

قَالَ يَا نُوحُ إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَهْلِكَ إِنَّهُ عَمَلٌ غَيْرُ
صَالِح فَلاَ تَسْأَلْنِي مَا لَيْسَ لَكَ بِهِ عِلْمٌ إِنِّي أَعِظُكَ
أَنْ تَكُونَ مِنْ الْجَاهِلِينَ(( 46 ))

46- HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, NOAH! HE IS NOT OF YOUR FAMILY. HIS DEED IS NOT
RIGHTEOUS. SO, REQUEST NOT OF ME THAT WHICH YOU HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE OF. I
WARN YOU NOT TO BE OF THE IGNORANTS.''

قَالَ رَبِّ إِنِّي أَعُوذُ بِكَ أَنْ أَسْأَلَكَ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ
عِلْمٌ وَإِلاَّ تَغْفِرْ لِي وَتَرْحَمْنِي أَكُنْ مِّنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ((
47 ))

47- HE SAID:ِ \`\`MY LORD! I SEEK REFUGE IN YOU FROM REQUESTING THAT
WHICH I HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE OF IT. AND IF YOU FORGIVE ME NOT, AND HAVE NOT
MERCY ON ME I SHALL BE OF THE LOSERS.''

**THE COMMENTARY

THE PAINFUL INCIDENT OF NOAH'S SON (VERSE NO. 45 - 47)**

KANAAN, the son of Noah disobeyed his father and took no admonition
from the warnings. He adhered to his evil friends and left

[ 170 ]

his father's teachings behind. True that he was connected to the
prophet through a blood relation, but he had made firm spiritual and
moral ties with disbelievers and evil-doers and so he lost all the
privileges of being the son of a prophet. He had plunged in sin, and so
deep that his father failed to intercede with God on his behalf! It is
narrated that Kanaan played a double role in his acts, like all the
hypocrites. He apparently belonged to the prophetic house and the
believers, but privately he befriended the unbelievers and evil doers.
So Noah was not sure enough that his son was with the faithless mischief
makers of the town. Had he known that, he would have driven him away.

On the other hand, Noah was a kind-hearted man with all the emotions
and sentiments of a Man father such as, fear, love, anger, joy, with
such feelings under his control. When he saw his son was drowned, he was
naturally grieved like any other loving father, and questioned his Lord
in his tender prayer. But when it was inspired to him that his son was a
wrong doing unbeliever, he knew that there could be no compromise with
evil, and therefore he repented and begged God to pardon him.

قِيلَ يَا نُوحُ اهْبِطْ بِسَلاَم مِنَّا وَبَرَكَات عَلَيْكَ وَعَلَى
أُمَم مِمَّنْ مَّعَكَ وَأُمَمٌ سَنُمَتِّعُهُمْ ثُمَّ يَمَسُّهُمْ مِنَّا
عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ(( 48 ))

48- IT WAS SAID:ِ \`\`O, NOAH! COME DOWN (FROM THE ARK) WITH PEACE FROM
US, AND BLESSINGS UPON YOU AND UPON THOSE WHO ARE WITH YOU. AND NATIONS
THAT WE LET THEM ENJOY THEMSELVES, THEN A PAINFUL PUNISHMENT FROM US
WILL TOUCH THEM.''

تِلْكَ مِنْ أَنْبَاءِ الْغَيْبِ نُوحِيهَا إِلَيْكَ مَا كُنتَ
تَعْلَمُهَا أَنْتَ وَلاَ قَوْمُكَ مِنْ قَبْلِ هَذَا فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ
الْعاقِبَةَ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ(( 49 ))

[ 171 ]

49- THESE ARE THE NEWS FROM THE UNSEEN THAT WE INSPIRE TO YOU. YOU WERE
NOT TO KNOW IT, NEITHER YOUR PEOPLE, BEFORE THIS. THEN BE PATIENT THAT
THE (GOOD) END IS FOR THOSE WHO ARE PIOUS.

**THE COMMENTARY
NOAH DEBARKED IN PEACE (VERSE NO. 48 - 49)**

These are the last verses about the event of Noah in this chapter of
Qura"n. Noah disembarked safely and in peace, but the land was not the
former landِAll the building were destructiond and all the orchards and
farm lands ruined and no more creature was seen moving! Noah and his
disciples trembled and a fear and anxiety of famine and starvation
seized them, but Allah promised to bestow on them His Grace and
Blessings:ِ \`\`O, Noah! Come down from the Ark with peace from us, and
our Blessings upon you and upon those who are with you.'' The ending of
the above verse (NO.48) implies that the sad story of Noah's people was
not the first one of its kind nor the last of all:ِ \`\`And there will
come nations again that We let them enjoy themselves and have pleasures
and fruition, and then a painful punishment from us will touch them for
their evil conducts which comes out of their faithlessness.''

Again and again nations, and races will come to existence, and take no
lesson of the past experiences of man. They will waste their respite and
unique opportunities in material enjoyments and secular pleasures and
plunge in sin and oppression, and then the wrath of God seizes their
throats and the history is repeated and renewed.

The good end always belongs to those who adhere to piety and grasp the
chain of God, and in return recieve God's Grace and Mercy.

[ 172 ]

Thus, Noah debarked with the promise of God's peace and blessings.
Through God's peace, real spiritual calmness and true comfort of mind is
obtained, and by His Blessing, all means of spiritual happiness and
physical welfare is provided for the blessed. The said Grace and
Blessing of God was not only given to Noah and those who followed him.
It rather waits for all the righteous people who have faith, and seek
the guiding light of God. Of course, we ought to know that the Grace of
God is not a family or racial privilege, but rather something that the
godly strives and works hard to earn it.

\*\*\*\*\*

**THE FLOOD**

The story of Noah in a much lower class of literature, has also been
narrated in the BIBLE, (O.T. GENESIS) with nothing more of details. In
the narration no mention is made of Kanaan or other sons of Noah to have
been drowned in the Flood. But there is a ridiculous and abused tale
forged about Noah and Canaan when they disembarked, which is by no means
a becoming conduct for a prophet, and it rather is a real aspersion and
abuse. For our dear reader to compare the Qura"nic narration with that
of the BIBLE, we beg to bring the following to their kind notice:ِ

**EXTRACTION FROM GENESIS 7 ِ 9**

7: 11ِWhen Noah was six hundred years old, all the outlets of the vast
body of water beneath the earth burst open. All the flood-gates of the
sky were opened, and rain fell on the earth for forty days. 13ِOn the
same day Noah and his wife went into the boat with their three sons,
SHEM, HAM, and JAPHET, and their wives. 14ِWith them went every kind of
animals, domestic and wild, large and small, and every kind of bird. A
male and a female from each kind of living being went into the boat with
Noah as God had commanded.

[ 173 ]

Then the Lord shut the door (OF THE BOAT) behind Noah. 17ِThe Flood
continued for forty days and the water became deep enough for the boat
to float. 6: 13ِ When Noah was 601 years old the water was gone. So Noah
removed the covering of the boat, looked round and saw that the ground
was getting dry. 15ِ God said to Noah:ِ\`\`Go out of the boat with your
wife your sons, and their wives. Take all the birds and animals out with
you, so that they may reproduce and spread over all the earth.''

9: 20ِ Noah who was a farmer was the first man to plant a vineyard.

21ِ After he drank some of the wine, he became drunk, took off his
cloths, and lay naked in his tent. When Ham, Canaan's father saw that
his father was naked he went out and told his two brothers. Then Shem
and Japhet took a robe and held it behind them on their shoulders. They
walked backward in the tent and covered their father, keeping their
faces turned away so as not to see him naked. 24ِ When Noah was sober
again and learnt what his youngest son had done to him he said:ِ \`\`A
CURSE ON CANAAN!'' he will be the slave to his brothers. Canaan will be
the slave of Shem!

I wish I could have the answers of the priests, either Christians or
Jews for the following questions on account of the above mentioned
tale:ِ 1ِ Were Noah and his rescued folk more in need of planting wheat
and barley, or wine and vineyards?

2ِ What was HAM going to prove when he informed his two brothers, of
their father being blind drunk fallen naked!? Why did he not cover his
father, and where was his mother then?

3ِ When HAM the father of Canaan did that sin of tale-bearing! Why did
Noah cursed Canaan his innocent grandson instead of his own guilty son,
if there was any guilt?

**TRANSLATOR'S NOTE)**

[ 174 ]

وَإِلَى عَاد أَخَاهُمْ هُوداً قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللهَ مَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَه غَيْرُهُ إِنْ أَنْتُمْ إِلاَّ مُفْتَرُونَ(( 50 ))

50- AND TO A"D THEIR BROTHER HOOD SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY PEOPLE! WORSHIP
ALLAH. YOU HAVE NO GOD OTHER THAN HIM. YOU ARE ONLY FORGERS.''

يَا قَوْمِ لاَ أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْراً إِنْ أَجْرِي إِلاَّ عَلَى
الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي أَفَلاَ تَعْقِلُونَ(( 51 ))

51- O, MY PEOPLE! I ASK NO REWARD OF YOU FOR IT, THAT MY REWARD IS ONLY
ON HIM WHO CREATED ME; DON'T YOU THEN UNDERSTAND.

وَيَا قَوْمِ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ يُرْسِلْ
السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَاراً وَيَزِدْكُمْ قُوَّةً إِلَى قُوَّتِكُمْ
وَلاَ تَتَوَلَّوْا مُجْرِمِينَ(( 52 ))

52- AND O, MY PEOPLE! ASK FORGIVENESS OF YOUR LORD, THEN REPENT TO HIM;
HE WILL TURN ON YOU THE SKY MUCH RAINING, AND WILL ADD POWER TO YOUR
POWER. AND DO NOT YOU TURN AWAY AS SINNERS.


**THE COMMENTARY
THE BRAVE IDOLِBREAKERS (VERSE NO. 50 - 52)**

This SURA of QURA"N, includes the message of five great prophets, and
their troubles and sufferings, and results of their strive and
endeavour. All of them had one object and the same, and that was to free
man from his various fetters and chains, and gather them together under
the light of Monotheism guiding them how to tread the path of
development and evolution:ِ

[ 175 ]

\`\`And to A"D,their brother HOOD said:ِ O, my people! Worship Allah.
You have no other God than HIM.'' Hood is called their brother here
because he belonged to the same race and society and tribe, and he
behaved towards them more like a brother than a citizen or other
relatives. Hood's message for his people was the same as that of all the
other apostlesِto worship Allah, and associate no one and nothing with
him. For further information about the place wherein the people of Hood
lived, please refer to the TRANSLATOR'S NOTE on volume 2ِpage 437 of
this book. There are a few points here that deserve more
consideration:ِ

1ِThe principle of the message of all the apostles was MONOTHEISM which
is belief in one God as the creator and governor of the universe. In the
strict sense, Islam, Judaism, and Christianity are probably the only
monothestic religions of the world. Monotheism is the source of unity,
cooperation, and all sort of mutual assistance in the societies. On
contrary, Polytheism is the cause of all disunions and conflicts and
differences which result to self-centering, selfishness, and
monopolism.

2ِThe truthful leaders do not demand any wage or reward from their
followers for their teaching and leadership. They do not have material
needs of people and are connected to them spiritually. If not so, they
would be fettered by their necessities, which is said to be the mother
of invention and forgeries. Of course those who work full-time for
Muslim Societies, must be provided some how in a correct way, and there
is the Islamic Public Purse for such purposes.

3ِQura"n proves a clear cut relation between spiritual and physical
phenomenons. As an instance; repentance and seeking God's forgiveness,
will result in fruitfulness of the land, and abundance of rain, and
increase in personal power! If we go through the matter a little deeper,
we soon come to the conclusion that a society which is plunged in sin,
betrayal, theft, oppression, and laziness will never prosper. When a
community loses

[ 176 ]

the spirit of cooperation, learning, good morality, and mutual
assistance; will give way to all sorts of misfortune and bad luck, and
eventually will disintegrate, and break up and destory its identity.

قَالُواْ يَا هُودُ مَا جِئْتَنَا بِبَيِّنَة وَمَا نَحْنُ بِتَارِكِي
آلِهَتِنَا عَنْ قَوْلِكَ وَمَا نَحْنُ لَكَ بِمُؤْمِنِينَ(( 53 ))

53- THEY SAID:ِ \`\`O, HOOD! YOU HAVE NOT COME TO US WITH EVIDENCE, AND
WE ARE NOT TO LEAVE OUR GODS FOR WHAT YOU SAY, AND WE DO NOT BELIEVE
YOU.''

إِنْ نَقُولُ إِلاَّ اعْتَرَاكَ بَعْضُ آلِهَتِنَا بِسُوء قَالَ إِنِّي
أُشْهِدُ اللهَ وَاشْهَدُوا أَنِّي بَرِىءٌ مِمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ(( 54 ))

54- WE SAY NOTHING EXCEPT THAT SOME OF OUR GODS HAVE AFFLICTED YOU WITH
SOME EVIL. (SUCH AS MADNESS) HE SAID:ِ \`\`I CALL ALLAH TO WITNESS, AND
YOU WITNESS TOO, THAT I AM QUIT OF WHAT YOU ASSOCIATE....''

مِنْ دُونِهِ فَكِيدُونِي جَمِيعاً ثُمَّ لاَ تُنْظِرُونِي(( 55 ))

55- ....APART FROM HIM.

THEN SCHEME AGAINST ME YOU ALL, AND GIVE ME NO RESPITE. (DO YOUR WORST
AGAINST ME)

إِنِّي تَوَكَّلْتُ عَلَى اللهِ رَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ مَّا مِنْ دَابَّة
إِلاَّ هُوَ آخِذٌ بِنَاصِيَتِهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَى صِرَاط مُسْتَقِيم((
56 ))

56- I HAVE PUT MY TRUST IN ALLAH, MY LORD AND YOUR LORD. THERE IS NO
MOVING CREATURE UNLESS HE HOLDS

[ 177 ]

IT BY ITS FORELOCK. (HE HAS CONTROL OVER IT) VERILY MY LORD IS ON A
STRAIGHT PATH.

فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَقَدْ أَبْلَغْتُكُمْ مَّا أُرْسِلْتُ بِهِ إِلَيْكُمْ
وَيَسْتَخْلِفُ رَبِّي قَوْماً غَيْرَكُمْ وَلاَ تَضُرُّونَهُ شَيْئاً
إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْء حَفِيظٌ(( 57 ))

57- THEN IF YOU TURN AWAY, I HAVE CONVEYED TO YOU THAT WITH WHICH I WAS
SENT TO YOU.

AND MY LORD WILL REPLACE YOU WITH A PEOPLE OTHER THAN YOU, AND YOU CAN
DO HIM NO HARM, THAT MY LORD IS THE GUARDIAN OVER EVERYTHING.

**THE COMMENTARY
THE STRONG LOGIC OF HOOD (VERSE NO. 53 - 57)**

The obstinate people of Hood did not want to be convinced, and
therefore instead of considering the evidences, and pondering over the
signs that the Messenger of God manifested, they denied everything and
said:ِ \`\`O, Hood! You have not come to us with evidence, and we are
not going to leave aside our gods for the sake of your sayings, and we
will never believe you.'' They insisted upon their idolatry and put
stress upon their false gods saying:ِ \`\`We don't want to call you
strictly a liar, but of surety you are a feeble minded, because our gods
have touched you with some evil which has turned you mentally weak!''
Hood's call to A"d was to leave aside the idols who had made with their
own hands for gods, and worship Allah the only true one God who is the
Creator of the universe.

This sort of a call wants no evidence and reasoning, because it is

[ 178 ]

self-explanatory. What sort of reason were they seeking to convince
them that an idol can do nothing for man? What did they mean by evidence
and clear sign? Did they want a wonderful miracle, such as raising up
the sun from the west, in order to prove to them that an stone idol, or
a metal image, is not the God who has created them, and cannot either
harm or profit them? Which of the two parties was feeble-mindedِHood or
A"d? To this effect Hood did not care the least for A"d and its power
and plot, and whatever they could do, and so he said:ِ \`\`Then plot
against me all of youِyou and your gods, and give me no respite at all.
I have put all my trust on my Lord.''

But you ought to know that in the universal plan of God, there is not
enough room for those creatures who obtain no merits, and He will
replace them with some other who deserve it. He who has permanent watch
and care over the whole universe has also the FORELOCK of every moving
creature in His hand, and controls all the movements. My Lord is on a
straight path. In other word; any path other than that of creation which
is established by the creator, is no path, or a crooked one. It is only
the direct path of God which passes through justice and righteousness,
and may lead man to the Paradise of prosperity.

GRASP OF THE FORELOCK is an Arabic idiom with reference to horse's
forelock. He who grasps it will have complete power and control over the
horse. (A. YUSUF ALI)

وَلَمَّا جَاءَ أَمْرُنَا نَجَّيْنَا هُوداً وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ
بِرَحْمَة مِنَّا وَنَجَّيْنَاهُمْ مِّنْ عَذَاب غَلِيظ(( 58 ))

58- AND WHEN OUR DECREE WAS ISSUED, WE SAVED HOOD AND THOSE WHO
BELIEVED WITH HIM BY A MERCY FROM US, AND WE SAVED THEM FROM A DENSE
TORMENT.

[ 179 ]

وَتِلْكَ عَادٌ جَحَدُوا بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَعَصَوْا رُسُلَهُ
وَاتَّبَعُوا أَمْرَ كُلِّ جَبَّار عَنِيد(( 59 ))

59- AND THAT WAS (THE FATE OF) طD WHO DENIED THE SIGNS OF THEIR LORD,
AND DISOBEYED HIS MESSENGERS AND FOLLOWED THE ORDER OF ANY INSOLENT
TYRANT.

وَأُتْبِعُوا فِي هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا لَعْنَةً وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَلاَ
إِنَّ عَاداً كَفَرُوا رَبَّهُمْ أَلاَ بُعْداً لِعَاد قَوْمِ هُود(( 60
))

60- AND THEY WERE FOLLOWED BY A CURSE IN THIS WORLD, AND ON THE DAY OF
RESURRECTION.

BEHOLD! THAT طD DISBELIEVED IN THEIR LORD! SO, AWAY WITH طD THE PEOPLE
OF HOOD. (FROM GOD MERCY)

**THE COMMENTARY
AN EVERLASTING CURSE UPON THE OPPRESSORS. (VERSE NO. 58 - 60)**

God's general plan is such that when an inevitable disaster comes, He
saves his faithful servants by His special Grace and Mercy. A"d
disobeyed their apostles, and rejected their Message and followed every
rebel against God's law and religion. The sins for which the people of
A"d were punished are classified here in three category as
undermentioned:ِ

1ِThey denied the signs of their Lord and obstinately rejected all the
reasons and evidences that were presented to them.

2ِThey disobeyed their apostles and rebelled against God.

3ِThey ignored God's commandment and followed the orders of the
insolent tyrants.

[ 180 ]

Therefore they met with the consequences of their deeds and the fruit
of their evil conduct, which was being followed by a curse in this world
and also in the Resurrection Day.

وَإِلَى ثَمُودَ أَخَاهُمْ صَالِحاً قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللهَ مَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَه غَيْرُهُ هُوَ أَنشَأَكُمْ مِنْ الاَْرْضِ
وَاسْتَعْمَرَكُمْ فِيهَا فَاسْتَغْفِرُوهُ ثُمَّ تُوبُوا إِلَيْهِ إِنَّ
رَبِّي قَرِيبٌ مُجِيبٌ(( 61 ))

61- AND TO THAMOOD (WE SENT) THEIR BROTHER SALIH. HE SAID:ِ \`\`O, MY
PEOPLE! WORSHIP ALLAH. YOU HAVE NO GOD OTHER THAN HE. HE MADE YOU FROM
THE EARTH, AND ALLOCATED IT TO YOU TO FLOURISH IT. SO ASK FORGIVENESS OF
HIM, AND TURN TO HIM, THAT MY LORD IS NEAR, ANSWERING (YOUR
PRAYERS).''


