Woman and Material Civilization
===============================

To study the history of nations and societies throughout its ages,
shows the sufferings of the woman and how has she exploited and
persecuted.????????

No ideology or belief has saved the woman from persecution and
sufferings like Divine principles represented in its perfect and
prettiest form i.e. the immortal Islamic message. Before talking about
the value, rights and the notable position of the woman in Islam, it is
necessary to mention some statistics about the persecution and
sufferings of the woman in the material civilization headed by America
and Europe that declare the rights of the woman.

The figures and statistics underline that the woman is persecuted and
enslaved in these cultures. French News Agency: "1.3 billion human
beings lead a life of abject poverty in the world. 70% of them are
women. There are about 2.3 billion illiterate women in the world.

"One-third of the women in Norway, America, Holland and Newsland are
subject to sexual exploitation "Every eight seconds one woman is
mistreated. Every six minutes one woman is violated."

The News Agency added: "Half a million women die during pregnancy and
its symptoms. 40% of them are young girls. "The wages of 828 million
women ranging from 30-40% less than those of men. 10% of bank
considerations include them." In another report announced by American
Federal Police says: "According to a study made by American Ministry of
Justice, 310 thousand women are raped every year."

According to the report of French News Agency from Washington, there
are about half a million sexual assaults against women every year."

According to the latest figures issued by F.B.A. the police announced
only the existence of 140 thousand attempts of violation in America.

The Iranian Newspaper, Ittila'at, No.20401, quoted a report from Rome
as follows: "The wave of violence has increased among the Italian
families. The instances of murdering fathers by sons and of sons by
fathers have increased more than they had been before."

The Italian Newspaper, Larpoblika, wrote lately from the annual report
of the Euro Union for Statistics, in the first ten months of the year
1994, 192 incidents of family violence were recorded in Italy; 129 of
them ended to murders. According to this report, this kind of violence
led to 112 murders in 1993.

It is worth mentioning, 40.1% of these family murders occurred in the
north of Italy; 43.8% occurred in the south of Italy; 16.1% occurred in
the middle of Italy.

Most family murders in 1994 occurred in the Province of Lombardy, in
the north of Italy. Jumhuri Islami Newspaper, No.4485, Autumn of 1994,
mentioned the following report:

"Epidemiology Magazine, affiliated to the World Health Organization
(WHO), No.11, Summer of 1993, published the latest world figures
concerning AIDS in various areas of the world. "WHO has recorded that
the number of AIDS cases was 718,894 in June, 1993. "(371086) cases were
in America; 247,577 cases were in Africa; 92,482 cases were in Europe;
4,188 cases were in Australia; 3,561 cases were in Asia.

"The number of cases per countries is as follows: 289320 cases were in
the U.S.A.; 38,719 cases were in Tanzania; 36,481 cases were in Brazil;
31,185 cases were in Kenya; 34,611 cases were in Uganda; 26,955 cases in
Britain; 24,226 cases in France; 21,008 cases in Zaire; 18,347 cases in
Spain; 16,860 cases in Italy; 14,655 cases in Congo. Besides there are
other cases in other countries.

"We see that the U.S.A. not only occupies the first position in Aids
cases but also it is extremely differing from the counties that follow.
Besides, if we take into consideration the percentage of the figures, we
will find that those infected by AIDS in the U.S.A. constitute 40% of
the infected in 150 countries in the world. Nevertheless, the population
of the U.S.A. constitutes only 5% of the population."

The Iranian Newspaper, Ittila\`at, No. 20482, May 21, 1995, conveying
its correspondent in Madrid, reported: "In the year 1960, 82% of the
children lived under the care of their fathers. Nowadays, 60% of them
live without fathers. Divorce and the stubbornness of mothers forced
fathers to abandon their houses. After mentioning the above-mentioned
figures, David Blink Horn, an American writer, said in his book
\`America without Father': \`To have good fathers needs exemplary
(righteous) women. This is the reason why fathers abandon their
houses'

"In a report from America, the reporter of the Spanish Newspaper,
Al-Payis, said: \`Being partial toward the woman in American society led
to the damage of the fathers there. It has prevented children from the
care of their fathers. So, it has become a difficult dream to secure
fathers in America."

Concerning the conditions of the children in Britain, the Newspaper,
Ittila\`at, No. 20407, January 1995, reported the following account from
IRNA News Agency, London:

"In a report, the United Nations strongly criticized the conditions of
the children in Britain and the laws and regulations of taking care of
the children in that country.

"According to this report, prepared by the Children's Rights Committee
affiliated to the United Nations Organization, the laws ruling in
Britain concerning the health, eduacation and social insurance of
children pay no attention to the interests of the children there.

"The specialists in the Children's Rights Committee think that the laws
concerning the children in Britain only concentrate for punishing and
imprisoning the deviated children and teenagers. "Among the criticisms
in the report is that the number of poor children has increased, the
average of divorce has increased, the authorities have decreased their
relives to poor families, and the number of children and teenagers, who
loiter and beg in streets, has increased.

"The writers of the report expressed their worry about the
mistreatment, sexual and physical exploitation from which children
suffer.

"According to what the sources of the United Nations mentioned, the
reports of this organization on the conditions of the children in
Sweden, Norway, and Denmark have criticisms similar to those in the
report about Britain."

An Iranian Newspaper, Jumhuri Islami, No.4485, mentioned the following:
"According to IRNA News Agency from Bonn, the report of Germany
Statistics Office mentioned in the year 1993 that the number of mothers
who brought up their children by themselves increased each year. The
report added that there were 455 thousand mothers in the eastern states
of Germany (21% of all mothers in these states) who brought up their
children by themselves.

"Besides there were 915 thousnad mothers out of 7 million mother (12%
of mothers) in the western states of German brought up their children by
themselves.

"Thus, there were one million 370 thousand mothers out of 9 million 260
thousand in Germany who brought up their children by themselves.

"According to this report, 46% of these mothers in the eastern states
and 30% of them in the western states did not marry officially, and 43%
of these women divorced their husbands. As the children in Germany are
under the care of mothers, therefore, they should take the
responsibility of bringing them up.

There are over 9.26 million mothers in Germany. They have children
under 18 years old. 5.4 million of them work outside their houses full
time or part time in addition to their responsibilities in their houses
and the tasks of bringing up their children. It is worth mentioning, the
average of divorce has doubled since 1968. It has increased from 65
thousand cases in 1968 to 135 thousand cases in present years. Every
year 390 thousand contracts of marriage are recorded in Germany.
However, 33% of them end with divorce. This ratio reaches 50% in the
large cities such as Hamborg.

Ittila\`at Newspaper, No.20503, reported the following from the United
Nations-IRNA:

"The American's contribution to the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), in comparasion with its national income, is less than that of
the industrial counties in the world."

The officials of UNICEF announced that and added: "Though America
occupies the second position after Japan through paying 9.7 billion
dollars as an aid to UNICEF, this sum of money is only 0.15% of its
national income. Holland and the Scandinavian countries occupy the first
position in this respect, for their aid is 0.8% of their national
incomes.

"The officials of UNICEF expressed their concern with the low
contributions from rich countries to the under developed countries.
Then, they added: \`This happens at the time when the importance of
supporting the growth and health of children and of improving the
conditions of the work of mothers exetremely increases.'

"According to this account, 13 million children die in the world every
year of pneumonia, diarrhea, and measles. "Besides 200 million children
in the world suffer from the lack of vitamin C which leads to
blindness."

Ittila\`at Newspaper, No.20370, 15 December 1994, in another report
adds. In the report it has been mentioned: "Tehran-IRNA: There are a
half million children who loiter in America. Orphanages will be built
for them. However, the American society regards this as a shame against
it.

"Susan Fildiz, the analyst of the Washington Times Newspaper, wrote:
"Many fatherless children live under the care of foster families. They
are subjected not only to hitting, abuse and mistreatment, but also,
they are killed." "Fildiz said: "The quality of the treatment of society
towards its children is an important sign for the real identity of that
society."

"She added: \`The number of the children who loiter in America
increases day by day to the extent that the police sometimes find
new-born babies in garbage cans. In such cases, financial aid is not
enough for mothers. Rather, it is necessary to find special centers to
meet the basic needs of these children.'"


**The Woman in Islam**

Why is the attack against Islamic attitude towards Woman????????

Studying this matter (woman's rights in Islam) is among the important
civilizational and inellectual matters and affairs at the present time.
The opponents of Islam, their followers, and those who have no knowledge
of Islamic thought, precepts and concepts still continue their
oppressive attack against Islamic thought and law, claim that the woman
is oppressed in Islam.

Studying and analyzing the elements of this intellectual battle between
Islam, materialism and secularism, we can conclude that the axle of the
battle moves around a basic matter. The matter is that the secular
thought tries to spread sexual dissoluteness and corruption.

According to this theory, the woman will become a tool for enjoyment
and instinctive satisfaction which destroys the family, society, and the
woman. While, Islam honors the woman and raises her from this low level.
It also grants her rights and position to allow her to share with man in
building life and expressing her humanity according to human bases which
we will mention briefly in this study.

Before discussing this matter, it is important for us to mention the
basic reasons of this battle (of the rights of the woman) and accusing
Islam of depriving woman of her rights.

Muslim writers and thinkers, the propagators of Islam, the religious
scholars, the foundations of the Islamic message and culture, and
especially as it concerns the children of the Moslem communities in the
non-Islamic countries and especially in America and Europe should
explain this important matter through researches, studies, conferences,
seminars in all various political, psychological, social, family, and
civilizational fields.

We can summarize the reasons which lie beyond the attack against the
Islamic thought as follows:

1. The confusion between the backward customs and social Islamic
theory:

Muslim writers, thinkers, and propagators should clarify such
confusion, for the opponents of Islam, those who are deceived by corrupt
material thought, and those who confuse concepts have no ability to
distinguish Islamic concepts from the social customs existed in backward
Islamic societies. Such customs are contrary to the essence, principles
and methods of Islam that regulate society, sexual relationships and the
foundations of the relationship between man and woman.

So, the opponents of Islam attribute such backward customs to Islam to
distort it, intentionally or out of ignorance. It is necessary for us to
differentiate between the present society of Muslims and the Islamic
society based on Islamic principles.

This social backwardness in the society of Muslims is part of the
general backwardness in the fields of science, knowledge, development,
industry, health, etc.

Some sociologists derive a distorted picture concerning the social
position of the woman from the rural of Muslim countries such as Egypt,
Iraq, Morroco and the desert areas of Peninsula. Thus, they diagnose the
problem of the woman through the backward rural or desert view that
oppresses the woman. Then, they give a distorted picture about the
Muslim society, for its members are Muslims. They forget that such
concepts and practices have no relation with Islam. We firmly believe
that such concepts and practices oppose Islamic values and teachings.
Meanwhile, Islam has devoted part of its thought, laws, and values to
change these conditions.

**2. Ignorance of Islam:**

Among the problems which Islamic thought faces in our present time is
that the people, in Europe, America, and other non-Islamic countries,
are ignorant of Islam and have no correct knowledge of the simplest
principles of Islam. In other words, they have a distorted picture of
Islam. They think that Islam is based on fable, terrorism, bloodshed,
and tribalism. They do not know that such ideas have been created by the
enemies of Islam, such as orientalists, Zionists, and church
foundations.

Thus, Western man knows nothing about Islam except distorted pictures.
If Western man understands the essence of Islam, surely he will embrace
it through rationale.

To understand this problem more clearly, let us return to the speech
addressed by German President, Roman Hotsogh, on the occasion of
honoring Mrs. Ana Mary Shmil, a German orientalist, who received a peace
prize from the German Book Association in 10/1/1995. Some people opposed
giving a peace prize to Mrs. Shmil, for she supports the Islamic
thought, treats it justly, and summons people to understand Islam and to
change the distorted picture which the European ministers made about
Islam and Muslims.

In response to those who opposed giving a peace prize to Mrs. Shmil,
the German president said: "There is a phenomenon that seems clear in
our relations and dealings with Islam in our present time. We do not
accuse falsely of the German public opinion when we say that many of us
think that Islam is the religion of inhumane penal law, non-tolerance,
oppression against woman, and aggressive roots. However, this is
narrow-mindedness which we must change. In turn, we must remember the
wave of enlightenment that maintained great parts of the western
inheritance six or seven centuries ago, and that it found itself before
a style of western thought. Without doubt, it was radical and
non-tolerant."11

In another part of his speech, the German president indicated that the
Europeans showed enmity toward Islam, for they had no knowledge of it.
Thus, in his speech, he asked them: "Isn't it possible that we do not
understand Islam because it depends on deep popular faith, while we are
in a secular society?

"Have we the right to classify the pious Muslims with the radical
terrorists because we have no sound feeling towards the mockery at the
religious feelings of others or because we are unable to express this
sound feeling?"12

Then, the German president admitted that he had no knowledge of Islam
until he read the books of Mrs. Shmil. In this regared, he said: "I did
not know the numerous Islamic trends in the history of Islam except
through the books of Ana Mary Shmil. Perhaps, other than I witnessed the
same experience. Indeed we are in need of understanding each other."13

Then, the German president summoned (people) to understand Islam to
adopt another attitude towards it. Thus, he said: "I confess that there
is no other option before us except that we must increase our knowledge
of the Islamic world. That is if we want to achieve human rights and
freedom."14

Then he added: "Indeed, the real reason for longing for understanding
Islam and its rich civilization arises from our belonging to a
civilization differing from it. Mrs. Shmil has moved this longing in my
soul. I hope that others than me do the same."15 "Mrs. Shmil has paved
the way for us to meet Islam."16

The battle of granting a peace prize to the orientalist Shmil in
Germany in 1995, the agreement of the learned political public opinion
in Germany, which is among the most important countries in modern
history, and the victory of the front of Shmil, which means the victory
of the trend that summons (people) to understand true Islam and to adopt
an attitude towards it, among this advanced class of thinkers and
politicians, among the foremost being is the German president, whose
important speech we have read, all these denote that Muslim writers,
thinkers, artists, and scholars think men should shoulder their
responsibility towards Islam.

Besides, religious foundations and clergy men should shoulder their
responsibility towards it. They should spread the true Islam that moves
intellect, heart, and conscience. They should follow the method of the
Qur'an when they summon people to believe in Allah, the Glorified: "And
call you unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and kindly exhortation
and dispute with them in the manner which is the best;..." Holy Qur'an
(Nahil 16:125)

That civilizational battle, which took place in Germany and ended for
those who summoned people to understand Islam, shows us that Islam is
great and that man is ready to understand it, regardless of his faith.
This battle is clearly shown in the Qur'an: "Go you unto Pharaoh, verily
he has transgressed (the bounds). Then speak you both unto him a gentle
word, happly he may get admonished or fear (Our punishment)." Holy
Qur'an (Taha 20: 43-44)

From this we understand that the Qur'an summons the propagators of
Islam to hold true faith and communicate it to those who have intense
enmity towards Islam. Meanwhile, it summons them to leave despair and to
open a door to hold intellectual talks. That is because the conditions
of talks differ from time to time. In other words, the talks may be
rejected today but are accepted tomorrow. What is rejected through one
way is accepted through another way.

**3. Lust and Sexual Deviation:**

Perhaps, among the most prominent motives of those who demand the
freedom of woman or sexual dessolateness is the motive of lust or sexual
deviation. The Holy Qur'an talks about these motives and their danger
and denotes their destructive effects. Allah, the Most High, says:

"But followed after them a succession who neglected prayers and they
followed lust, so they shall soon meet perdition,." Holy Qur'an (Maryam,
19:59)

He said: "(It has been) made to seem attractively fair unto men, the
love of the lust for women and sons and the hoarded treasures of gold
and silver..." Holy Qur'an (Aali-Imran 3: 13)

He said: "...but desire those who follow their own lusts that you
should deviate a great deviation." Holy Qur'an (Nisa'4: 27)

In these verses, the Holy Qur'an explains the danger of lust and that
it represents \`ghay', which means (the ignorance that arises from a
corrupt belief) and \`mayl', which means (turning away from
righteousness and moderation), which has been mentioned in another
verse:

"Those who hinder (others) from the path of Allah and seek to make it
crooked; and they in the hereafter, they are the disbelievers." Holy
Qur'an (Hud 11:19) There is a practical proof in the reports and figures
which we have mentioned about sexual deviation. The Qur'an has explained
it to people and warned them against it.

**4. Inherited Malice and Fear of Islam:**

Among the motives of the campaign against Islam and distorting its
attitude towards woman is the inherited malice against Islam and
distorting its principles and high values. This malice began from the
day when the Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) made public his mission. Then it
increased during the Crusades and after them. Through blind imitation,
Europe has inherited spite and hatred towards Islam.

It has spared no effort to distort the plain principles of Islam and to
mislead public opinion, because Islam is a civilizational mission that
will destroy their interests, end their oppression and domination over
the world in general and the Muslim world in private. The fears of
Europe of Islam have increased since the beginning of Islamic awareness
and the appearance of Islam as a plan which the Islamic movements have
adopted, and which a live experience has embodied through establishing
Islamic states, such as the Islamic Republic in Iran.

The super powers have gathered their hirelings everywhere to resist
Islamic awareness and to destroy the Islamic plan and its propagators
and the holders of its banner.


