Woman and Family Economy
========================

Among the basic problems of human society are: the problem of money,
individual and collective income, and the balance between income and
spending. This includes the economy of family and its financial balance
between expenses and consumption. So, wasting food, drink, ornament,
clothes, house, luxuries, and services are among the most dangerous
problems that face man.

Extravagance destroys the economy of family, nation, and state. Most
times this extravagance does not match the income of family. To organize
the economic balance of society, Islam summons people to be moderate in
spending. It forbids extravagance and miserliness. She takes great
responsibility in organizing family spending and identifying its
nature.

Islamic Law has legislated general rules for organizing spending. It
has also limited the basic system for family spending and balance. We
will mention some verses from the Qur'an that decribes the servants of
the Most Merciful (Allah) and regards them as ideal examples to others
in spending. In this connection, Allah, the Most High, says: "And those
who when they spend, are neither extravagant nor niggardly but are
stationed between the two (extremes)." Holy Qur'an (Furqan 25:67)

"and eat and drink you and commit you not excesses." Holy Qur'an (A'raf
7:31)

"And give to the near of kin his due and to the needy and the wayfarer,
and squander not (your earnings) wastefully. Verily the squanderers are
brethren of the satan; and Satan to his Lord is ever an ingrate." Holy
Qur'an (Isra' 17: 26-27)

"And cause you not to shackle your hand unto your neck, nor stretch it
forth to the maximum (limits of) stretching forth, lest you should
(therefore) sit down blamed, destitute." Holy Qur'an (Isra' 17:29)

"Lodge them, wherever you lodge according to your means, and you harm
them not to straiten (life for) them, and if they be pregnant, spend you
on them until they lay down their burden; and if they suckle (to your
issues) for you, you give them their recompense; and deal you unto one
another in fairness; and if you find between you difficulties, then
shall suckle some other woman for him. Let him with abundance spend of
his abundance and he on whom is straitened his subsistence, let him
spend of what Allah has given him; (for) Allah lays not on any soul a
burden save to the extent to which He has given it; Allah will soon
bring about ease after difficulty." Holy Qur'an (Talaq 65:6-7)

In this manner the general bases of family budget spending and expenses
are limited within the frames of moral moderation, education, and
guidance- they are the social and the family frame.

The role of woman is prominent in managing the affairs of the house and
family economy. That is when she is careful with the budget of her
family and moderate in spending on luxuries.

The wife is able to save part of the income of the family and to free
her husband from debts. That is when she is moderate in spending on
herself and her family.

Extravagance does not only affect the family but also affects the
general economic situation of society and state. For the ability to buy
in the market becomes high because of high spending and consumption. So,
the value of money becomes low and the prices of commodities and
services increase. Accordingly, the deprivation of the poor (of buying)
increases, the family faces debts and social problems, currency faces
inflation. As a result of the disorderly economic situation of society ,
moral, security, and political problems come into existence.

To educate woman to be moderate in spending special lectures on family
economy in schools take part in building economic awareness and save it
especially from the problem of over expending and the deprivation of
poor classes. With this woman participates in building society through
directing and organizing family economy, and through being moderate in
spending according to the method of the Qur'an and its wise summons.
Therefore, woman should carry out her responsibility towards her husband
and her house according to the previous Prophetic tradition.


**Work and Islamic Law**

Islamic law summons people to work. It urges them to work using many
practical attitudes, concepts, and texts. Among them are the following
words of Allah, the Exalted:

"He it is Who made for you the earth subservient, traverse you then its
board sides, and eat you of His provision; and unto Him (alone) is the
return." Holy Qur'an (Mulk 67:15)

"And when the prayer is ended then disperse you in the earth and seek
you of the grace of Allah." Holy Qur'an (Jumu'a 62:10)

"And seek, by means of what Allah has given you, the abode in the
hereafter, and forget not your share in this world." Holy Qur'an (Qasas
28:77)

Islamic Law not only summons people to work and production but also it
denotes that they are different in abilities and merits. It also denotes
that people should be perfect through exchanging interests with each
other. In this respect Allah, the Most High, said: "...and We did raise
some of them above the others in rank, so that some of them may take the
others in subjection." Holy Qur'an (Zukhruf 43:32)

The Qur'an urges people to work, production, and exchanging interests.
The Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) regdarded work and production as jihad and
worship. In this connection he (s.a.w.) said: "He who works for his own
family is like the mujahid in the way of Allah."24

"Worship is seven parts; the best of them is seeking the lawful."25

Jurists devoted great efforts to their studies and analyses of work and
production. They concluded that precepts of Islamic law and its attitude
towards service and productive work is valid. They divided work legally
into five parts. They are as follows: 1. Obligatory work: Islamic law
has regarded as obligatory the work aiming at meeting need, satisfying
the soul, and maintaining the family. Moreover, it has made it
obligatory on the debtor to work to pay his debt.

2. Islamic law has regarded the work aiming at generously spending
one's family as most desirable. 3. Islamic law has regarded as unlawful
the work in forbidden things, such as making wine, narcotics,
prostitution, and dancing etc... It has also forbidden work that leads
to unlawful deeds, even if it is lawful in itself. 4. Islamic law has
regarded some work as abominable for itself or for other than it. 5.
Excluding the above-mentioned points, Islamic law has confirmed that
work is lawful. With this work, collecting money and increasing wealth
is lawful as long as it follows the precepts of Islamic law.

To study and analyze the concepts of the verses and the traditions, we
will not find in them anything what prevents woman from working. Rather,
they permit woman to work as they permit man, though some texts address
and urge man to work.

**The Work of a Wife**

Islamic law has limited precepts concerning the work of a wife as
follows:

1. The wife has the right to stipulate in her marriage contract that
her husband should not prevent her from working.

2. The husband must agree to let his wife work through mutual
understanding. That is when she wants to work without a previous
stipulation. Sometimes the husband disagrees to let his wife work. This
does not mean that Islamic law prevents her from working. However, that
depends on the relationship between the husband and his wife.

3. If a woman had worked before the marriage contract, a work contract
is valid, even though work opposes her husband's right.

4. When the wife works without permission from her husband, the
correctness of permission depends on the approval of the husband in what
contradicts the rights of husband. The contract is valid in what does
not contradict his right. 5. The precept which woman makes to hire
herself to service includes all work contracts she makes.

When we study the precepts of Islamic law, we will not find any text
that prevents woman from working in the first title. Rather, those who
prevent woman from working outdoors produce evidence of that. Some
people say that when woman works in mixed foundations, she will be
corrupted, and will commit unlawful acts. This means that woman's work
is unlawful because of the mixed work that leads her to commit unlawful
acts.

It is necessary to mention here that all work that leads to unlawful
things is forbidden for both man and woman. Therefore, it is obligatory
to prevent mixed work and to employ the person needed for the regardless
of whether the person is a man or woman.

From interpreting this holy verse: "and We did raise some of them above
the others in rank, so that some of them may take the others in
subjection", it is clear that abilities, merits, and readiness for work
differ from one person to another, regardless of the person being a man
or woman, and that exchanging interests and satisfying service and
material needs can be achieved by all the members of society. Every
individual, regardless of his gender, offers his effort and ability to
satisfy the needs of society. Meanwhile the individual satisfies his
needs through the process of the service and material exchange in
society.

Therefore, the farmer offers agricultural products, the engineer and
the technician make the instruments, the doctor offers medical
treatments, the teacher teaches, the merchant secures commodities in the
market, the soldier defends his country, the night watchman struggles
against theives, etc.

When we study and analyze all Islamic concepts and precepts, we will
find that Islam does not prevent woman from working or from getting
knowledge. The woman has the right to practice any work she wants, such
as agriculture, industry, medicine, engineering, administration,
political jobs( ), driving cars and planes, teaching and education,
etc.

Man and woman have the right to practice all lawful work. Both man and
woman are equal before the precepts of Islamic law. The difference
between man and woman lies in some duties that concern both of them or
in some powers which have been built on scientific bases that take into
consideration the psychological and biological structure of both man and
woman to organize and manage social life.

Accordingly, work is permitted in Islamic law. Rather it is sometimes
obligatory. No work is forbidden in Islam except those which Islamic law
has forbidden, or that leads to unlawful deeds. Some people regard it
forbidden for woman to work. Such people must produce evidence in
support of their claim. For there is no religious proof for that.

The religious scholars have analyzed religious obligatories and divided
them into collective and individual. Through studying the collective
duty, we can conclude that Islam has made it incumbent on both man and
woman to secure social services such as medicine, engineering, teaching,
agriculture, trade, transport, security, etc. Sometimes collective duty
becomes individual duty, regardless of whether the individual is a man
or woman.

From this we understand that the division and carrying out of
functional work in society stand on two bases: individual and
collective. In both cases, Islam does not make any difference between
man and woman. Rather, Islam makes it incumbent on woman to learn jobs
that concern women such as medicine and teaching.


**Woman and Political Work**

Woman's rights are among the basic matters that face intellectual and
civilizational discussion in the 20th century. Among these rights are
woman's participation in political life and work.

We find it strange that those who support woman's rights accuse Islam
and Islamic beliefs of depriving woman of participating in political
life and work. They support their claims with the political and social
situations which they witness in Muslim countries. They do not
differentiate between Islam, as regime, law and principles, and those of
Muslims who do not represent Islam through their social and political
actions. What they see in the society of Muslims is different from
Islam. The picture of woman in that society of Muslims, the way of
treating her, and her value in society opposes Islam, have resulted from
views and concepts that have arisen from social practices, habits, and
customs that do not represent Islam, especially as it concerns the
attitude towards woman in political, social, cultural, and scientific
fields, and her relationship with man.

In Islamic thought, policy means taking care of the affairs of the
community in all of its vital fields, and leading its movement in the
way of Islam. So, policy is a general social responsibility. All Muslims
are responsible for it. In the terms of a religious scholar, that
responsibility is an individual obligation. In it the command and
address is directed to all Muslims, regardless of whether they are men
or women, but some exceptions exist.

In this connection, Allah, the Exalted, says:

"...that: \`Establish you the religion and be you not divided
therein'." Holy Qur'an (Shura 42:13)

"Allah has promised unto those of you who believe and do good deeds
that He will certainly appoint them successors in the earth before
them." Holy Qur'an (Nur 24:55)

"Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those vested with authority from
among you." Holy Qur'an (Nisa'4:59)

In all these verse, the address is directed to all Muslims, men and
women. So, establishing religion with its thought and with all its
religious, social and political regulations, is the responsibility of
all Muslims. The address of obedience to the Muslim ruler, which has
been mentioned in the verse that talks about obedience, is directed to
all Muslims, and the promise of succession is directed to all those who
believe (in Allah) and do good deeds.

In the Sura of al-Mumtahana, v.12, Allah, the Exalted, says: "O (Our)
Prophet (Muhammad!) when come unto you believer women pledging that they
will associate not aught with Allah, and they will steal not, and they
will commit not adultery and kill not their children, and they will
utter not slander, nor utter any falsehood which they had forged
themselves between their hands and their feet and will not disobey you
in what is fair, then accept you their pledge, and ask forgiveness for
them from Allah; verily Allah is Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful." This
verse is a practical practice and Qur'anic proof, which the Prophet
(s.a.w.)

carried out during his political and propagative life, for accepting
the pledge of allegiance of woman to Muslim ruler. In fact, her pledge
of allegiance to him is obligatory. In this verse, the pledge of
allegiance is the pledge of obedience to the Muslim ruler to conform to
legal precepts and laws and to acknowledge his authority. This pledge of
allegiance represents the most prominent meanings of the political
rights in human society.

Perhaps, the clearest proof for the political role of woman and her
rights in Islam is that which has been mentioned in the verses that
enjoin (people) to do good and prevent (them) from doing evil, and the
verses of authority that includes both men and woman. The jurist and
great Muslim thinker, and martyr, Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr (may his grave
be sanctified)?????????has produced this verse as evidence that every
believing man and woman is qualified for political authority. Both men
and woman are equal in that. This is mentioned in the text of his
words:

"The community practices its role in succession within the legislative
frame of the following two Qur'anic verse: "...and (conduct) their
affairs with counsel among themselves," "...and the believer men and the
believer women, they are guardians to one another; they enjoin good and
forbid evil."

The first text gives the community the power to practice its affairs
through a consultative committee, unless there is a special text
opposing this text.26 The second text talks about authority, and about
that believers rule each other. By authority \`wilaya', He (Allah) means
ruling His affairs. For the context enjoining (people) to do good and
preventing (them) from doing evil' branches from it (authority). The
text is obvious in that authority includes equally both believing men
and women. Putting into effect the principle of consultation and the
view of majority during differences results from that."27

Muslim women entered the field of policy at the lifetime of Allah's
Apostle (s.a.w.), as the verse of pledge of allegiance has mentioned.
Muslim women entered the political field and took part in political
life. Muslim women also entered and showed their opinions on the matter
of the Imamate, policy, and caliphate after the death of Allah's Apostle
(s.a.w.). The best example of that was the attitude of Fatima The Chaste
(a.s.), daughter of the most honorable Apostle, Muhammad (s.a.w.), and
wife of Imam Ali b.

Abi Talib (a.s.). That was when she entered the field of policy after
the death of her father (s.a.w.). She stood by Ali during her political
movements and attitudes. So a group of the emigrants and the Ansar
joined her. Accordingly, a political ideological party was formed. The
party opposed and refused the pledge of allegiance (to Abu Bakr) that
took place under the shelter (saqifa), and then it summoned the people
to Pledge allegiance to Imam Ali (a.s.). Moreover Fatima (a.s.)
communicated with the Ansar in their houses and summoned them to pledge
allegiance to Ali (a.s.) and to oppose Saqifa.

This has been mentioned in some historical books:

"Ali, may Allah honor him, went out at night carrying Fatima, daughter
of Allah's Apostle (s.a.w.), on a riding animal, (and made her pass)
through the assemblies of the Ansar to ask them to support (Ali).
However, the Ansar said: \`O Daughter of Allah's Apostle (s.a.w.), our
pledge of allegiance to this man( )husband and your cousin had come to
us before Abu Bakr, we would not have turned away from him.'"28

The books of history have also mentioned opposing attitudes took place
between Fatima, the Chaste (a.s.) and the caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar b.
Khattab.

When we consider carefully the two verses (the verse ????????of
consultation and the verse of authority of believers), which martyr
al-Sadr has explained, we will find that they are the wide intellectual
foundation of political rights, in fact they are the wide intellectual
foundation of all the members of the community, men and women.

In this respect, there is another verse. The verse urges both men and
woman to oppose tyrannical rulers, to establish the Islamic state, to
guide political public opinion, etc. The verse contains these words of
Him, the Exalted: "And that there should be among you a group who call
(mankind) unto virtue and enjoin what is good and forbid wrong; and
these are they who shall be successful."

In this verse the Qur'an makes it obligatory that there should be a
group from Muslims to enjoin (people) to do good and to forbid doing
evil. This group includes both men and women. The clear proof for that
is these words of Him, the Exalted: "And the believer men and the
believer women, they are guardians to one another; they enjoin good and
forbid evil."

It is clear, in Islamic thought, that the political field is so wide
that it includes enjoining good and forbidding evil and includes the
summons to establish the Islamic regime, facing oppressive rulers and
regimes. It also includes participating in managing authority, planning
the policy of the community, political education, consultation, pledge
of allegiance -such as electing the ruler and the representatives of the
community, and taking part in consultative assemblies that practice
enjoining good, and forbidding political means, etc.

From studying political and social situations and conditions, according
to which we should act, we can conclude that this group which the Qur'an
ordered to be founded: "And that there should be among you a group...",
cannot practice its role as the Qur'an wants except when it is an
organized group to practice its role according to developed means and
methods which should suit the conditions of the historical period of its
Muslims. This means that woman can take part in political groups and
activities, various reformative and intellectual foundations and
associations.

From these Qur'anic bases, we understand that political life is open to
woman, as it is open man, on both levels- individual and collective
obligations- or to permit participation in all fields of political
life.

A practical example of women's political life in Islam is their true
participation in political life In the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
constitution here has given woman the right to elect and participate in
the parliament (the Consultative Assembly) and political organizations,
activities, and jobs, just as woman took part in the Islamic revolution
against the Shah's regime. She participated in strikes, demonstrations,
distributing leaflets, and delivering speeches. She shared with man all
his political struggle. Accordingly, she has obtained all her political
rights under the Islamic regime.

**Epilogue**

Only Islam has given woman rights and dignity. In this connection the
Qur'an says:

"And indeed We have honored the children of Adam, and We carry them in
the land and on the sea and We provided them with sustenance of good
things, and We have exalted them over most of those whom We have
created, by (high) degree of exaltation." Holy Qur'an (Bani Israel
17:70)

""and for the women shall be similar rights (over men) in fairness,."
Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 228) The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:

"It is the manner of the prophets to love women."

Therefore, woman should demand her rights as the Qur'an gives her. The
Qur'an wants her to be mother, daughter, and wife. It wants her to be a
person who has the right of support and love in society. It wants her to
practice her biological, psychological, and intellectual abilities in
the place of good, purification, and righteousness. For woman has tasted
the bitterness of life in the chastic world of material civilization.
And praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.

**Endnotes**

1. In Majjma\` Bayyan, Tubrisi explained this verse, saying: "They
exploit each other. So, they make use of the work of each other. With
that the straightness of the world is organized."

2. Turaihi, Tafsir Gharib Qur'an Karim. Tabataba'i, Tafsir al-Mizan.

3. Ibid.

4. Mu\`jam Wasit.

5. Ibid.

6. Bukhari, Sahih, Kitab al-Adab, Chapter 27.

7. Dr. Anwar Sultan, Mabadi' Qanuniya Amma, p.16.

8. Hur Amili, Wasa'il Shi\`a, Kitab Salat, Abwab Ahkam Libas, Chapter
13.

9. Ibid.

10. Bukhari, Sahih, vol.7, p.55.

11. Dr. Nadim Ata al-Yas, Sayaqhar al-Ma' Summa al-Hajar, p.42.

12. Ibid, p. 46.

13. Ibid, p.50.

14. Ibid.

15. Ibid.

16. Ibid, p.51.

17. Is\`af Raghibin. Shiblanji, Nur Absar, p.96.

18. Muslim, Sahih, (Dar Ihya Turath Arabi) vol.15, p.201.

19. Tirmidhi, Sunan. Ahmad b. Hanbal, Musnad, vol.4, p.5. Nisa'i,
Khasa'is, p.25.

20. Tabari, Thakh'ir Uqba, p.36.

21. Bukhari, Sahih, vol.3, p.196.

22. Kulaini, Furu\` mina al-Kafi (3rd Edition), vol.5, p.320.

23. Ibid.

24. Kulaini, Kafi, Kitab Ma\`isha, vol.5, p.67.

25. Harrani, Tuhaf Uqul an Aal Rasul, Mawa\`idh Nabi (s.a.w.).

26. An example of that is the text which has been reported on the
authority of the Prophet (s.a.w.) concerning the Imamate of the
Ahlul-Bait (a.s.) in the farewell Pilgrimage, and the like. Also see
Ahmed, Musnad, vol.1, p.118. Ibn Maja, Sunan, vol.1, p.43. Hakim,
Mustadrak, vol.3, p.109.

27. Martyr, Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Sadr, Islam Yaqud Hayat, p.171.

28. Ibn Qutayba Daynwari, Imama wa Siyasa, vol.1, p.19.


