Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet’s Household [*ahl
al-bayt*] (may peace be upon them all) and their followers’ preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of an
all-encompassing school [*maktab*], which embraces the different
branches of Islamic knowledge. This school has been able to train many
talented personalities by quenching them with this gushing fountain.
This school has presented scholars to the Muslim *ummah* who, by
following the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*), have occupied the station
of clarifying doubts and skepticisms brought forth by various creeds and
intellectual currents both inside and outside Muslim society. Throughout
the past centuries, they have presented the firmest answers and
solutions to these doubts.

Anchored in the responsibilities it is shouldering, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has embarked upon defending the sanctity of
*risalah* [messengership] and its authentic beliefs—truths which have
always been opposed by the chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects,
religions and trends. In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself
as a follower of the upright pupils of the school of the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*)—those who have always been ready to refute those accusations and
calumnies and have tried to be always in the frontline of this struggle
on the basis of the expediencies of time and space.

The experiences in this field, which have been preserved in the books of
scholars belonging to the school of the Ahl al-Bayt (*‘a*), are unique
in their own right. It is because these experiences have been based upon
knowledge [*‘ilm*] and the preeminence of the intellect and reasoning,
and at the same time, they are completely devoid of blind prejudice,
whim and caprice. These experiences address experts, scholars and
thinkers in a manner that is acceptable to a healthy mind and the pure
human natural disposition [*fitrah*].

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has endeavored to enter a new phase of these
worthy experiences within the framework of research and translating the
works of contemporary Shi’ah writers or those who, through divine
guidance, have embraced this noble school.

The Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of the
valuable works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shi’ah
personalities so that those who are thirsty for the truth could quench
their thirst from this refreshing fountain by listening and embracing
this truth, which the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*) has offered as a
gift to the entire world.

It is hoped that our dear readers would not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly of their valuable opinions, suggestions and
constructive criticisms in this arena.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist us
in propagating the pure Muhammadan (*S*) Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this trivial effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth, Hadrat al-Mahdi
(may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to Ayatollah
Shaykh Ibrahim Amini for writing the book, and to Mr. Ali Reza’i for
translating it, as well as to all our honorable colleagues in
accomplishing this task especially the dear ones in the Translation
Office for undertaking this responsibility.

***Cultural Affairs Department***

**The Ahl al-Bayt (*****‘a*****) World Assembly**


