Lesson 8: God is Just
=====================

Earlier we read that the Creator should possess all the great qualities
and should be free from all shortcomings and defects. One of the great
qualities of God is *justness.* Because anyone who exercises tyranny and
oppression is either ignorant of its evil nature or deems himself needy
and does so to meet his needs. For instance, someone who seizes other
peoples’ properties by force is either ignorant of the viciousness of
this act or he tries to fulfill his needs or eliminate his lack of
wealth that he regards as a defect.

But with regard to the Creator of the world who is absolutely needless
and the source of all virtues and is acquainted with the true nature of
everything through His boundless knowledge, it is quite absurd to be
tyrannical and oppressive. In some prayers we read,

“O God! Anyone who exercises oppression is weak and impotent, and he
does so to make up for his weakness. But Your Holy and Lofty Being is
free from such defects.”[^1]

Note
----

The reason why the Shi’ahs regard justness as the second primary
principles of their religion is that some Sunni sects do not consider
justness necessary for God. That is, they argue that if God, the
Exalted, hurl His obedient and devout servants into hell, this would not
be oppression and injustice. Even if it was deemed to be unfair, when
done by God, it would not be regarded as evil. They have also raised
some points on *free will and predestination* that presuppose injustice
in God.

As opposed to these groups, the Shi’ahs and some other Sunni sects have
proved the quality of justness in God with irrefutable reasons and have
contended that without doubt, oppression and injustice are derogatory
and evil and if they were committed by God, they would continue to be
so, and we all know that God will never commit any evil.

Therefore, *justness* occupies the second place in the primary
principles of the Shi’ahs to distinguish them from these groups of Sunni
sects. Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) has observed,

“God, the Exalted, won’t punish the innocent due to the sins committed
by others and He won’t torment children due to the transgressions and
sins perpetrated by their parents. God, the Exalted, can forgive sins
and it is beneath God to exercise tyranny and oppression.”[^2]

[^1]: Misbah al-Mujtahid, p. 188.

[^2]: Al-Tawhid by al-Saduq, p. 407.


