Lesson 9: The Prophetic Mission
===============================

The third primary principle is the faith in the prophetic mission of the
prophets who were sent by God to guide and lead mankind and as some
sources suggest the number of these prophets amounts to 124,000. The
last prophet after whom no other prophet has come or will ever come is
Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (may God bless him and his household) who
introduced Islam.

The Necessity of the Appointments Of Prophets
---------------------------------------------

It is evident that the All-wise Creator did not create this vast
universe in vain and also it is obvious that the goal behind creation is
not profitability because as we noted previously God is free from any
defect and need and so He did not create the world to fulfill His needs
and complement Himself. Consequently, the objective behind creation must
have to do with the creatures. And the only objective that one could
imagine for this world is the evolution and perfection of the creatures,
especially the all-out evolution of mankind. Now, this question arises
that how and by what means this all-out evolution could be accomplished?

It is manifest that the evolution and progress of mankind is not
practicable without a divine plan and instructor. Because earthly
leaders due to their limited knowledge and perceptions could not direct
mankind accurately, and since they are not free from error and mistake
and their judgments are erroneous, they are not qualified to assume
leadership unless they follow heavenly leaders.

But the divine leaders, thanks to their connection with the Unseen and
their freedom from error and mistakes can direct mankind toward genuine
prosperity without lapsing into error in their leadership.

Given what was said earlier, one realizes that mankind’s plan must have
been developed by the Creator who is aware of all their needs and also
knows that what is harmful and beneficial for them. And these divine
plans are delivered by those who are qualified for the prophetic mission
and are in touch with the Unseen.

Man is Social
-------------

Every one believes that man is social, that is, he cannot keep on living
on his own but has to live with other people. And this co-existence
builds up the society. Undoubtedly, this way of life will lead to
differences and enmities. If there were no accurate and fair law to
manage the society, the society would not advance on the path of
progress and prosperity.

Therefore, the vital significance of a solid, accurate, and fair law to
guard the rights of the society and individuals is evident. Now the
question is who should draw up this law? Who is the best law-maker? And
what are his qualifications?

The first qualification is that the law-maker should be aware of the
mental, physical, emotional and instinctive traits of those to whom the
law would be applied and such perfect awareness is not possible for
anyone except God, because He is the creator and only He is truly aware
of the internal as well as the external dimensions of mankind and their
mental and physical peculiarities. Only God is cognizant of the various
incidents happening in man’s life and the developments occurring in the
society and therefore, only He is able to draw up a perfect plan for
man’s life and keep him from annihilation.

God, the Exalted, has presented this plan through outstanding and
eminent men picked from among people, who are free from error, so that
man may achieve his all-out evolution by seeking guidance from this
plan.

Another function performed by the prophets is that they are the first to
apply the divine law, that is, besides delivering the law, they teach
men to practice the law. They are the visible embodiments of that law so
that others choose the divine law as the plan for their lives by
modeling them. Therefore, the faithful people believe that God has sent
prophets to direct men toward the path of evolution and felicity in
every era.

Someone asked Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) “Why prophets are appointed?”

The revered Imam replied, “having proven with irrefutable arguments the
existence of an All-wise Creator who has brought us form non-being to
being and having established that God is not material and is superior to
every other creature, and none can see or observe Him, so that he might
talk to Him about the state of affairs, and put his questions to Him,
therefore, it is inevitable that He must have messengers and prophets
who guide people toward felicity and explain what is harmful for them
and in every era, there must be a guide among people so that earth is
not bereft of God’s proof.”[^1]

[^1]: ‘Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 168.


