Lesson 10: Prophets Must Be Infallible
======================================

We learned that prophets have been sent to lead and direct mankind.
Undoubtedly, if the leader is tainted by wrongdoing and evil, he won’t
be able to direct people to chastity and purity. Therefore, prophets
must be free from wrongdoing and mistakes, so that people may
confidently follow them to prosperity.

In other words, if someone urges people to be truthful and trustworthy
but himself is a liar or at times lapses into dishonesty and treachery,
his words will never deeply sway people. Similarly, if divine prophets
had not been free from error and mistakes, and people had anticipated
that they would make mistakes in carrying out their mission, they would
never have wholeheartedly believed his words. Consequently, a complete
compliance would not have occurred and their objectives would not have
been achieved.

Indeed, God won’t choose anyone who is not free from idolatry and
wrongdoing to deliver His message. Rather, He would pick those who are
free from any impurity whatsoever and would maintain this infallibility
in the future to assume this lofty position.[^1]

Prophets Must Perform Miracles
------------------------------

Anyone with a healthy nature, won’t accept any claim without any reason,
and if someone buys a claim without compelling reasons, this reveals his
lack of common sense. Therefore, it is inevitable that prophets should
present some evidence to prove the authenticity of their prophetic
mission as well as the fact that they are sent by God.

One of the emblems that establish the prophets’ connection with the
Unseen is *miracles. Miracle* signifies something that could not be
performed by others except the prophets. For example, reviving the dead
or curing incurable diseases. With regard to this, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
has said, “Any prophet should present some proof of his honesty.”[^2]
And one of the most manifest proofs is *miracles* through which people
can establish the authenticity of anyone who claims to be a prophet.

[^1]: This has been deduced from a narration from Imam al-Ridha cited in
‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Ridha, vol. 2, Qum, p.125.

[^2]: ‘Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 168. It is likely that the word ‘alam be
read as ‘ilm.


