Lesson 11: The Last Prophet
===========================

As we said the last prophet is Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah. He was appointed
as prophet at the age of forty. As attested by history, throughout his
life he never ever worshipped idols or abandoned his faith in God. Prior
to his appointment, he occasionally went to a certain location in Hara
Mountain (Hara cave) during certain seasons to serve and worship the
Only God.

He was appointed by God to lead people with the divine plans and rules
at a time when the contemporary society was gripped by chaos, bloodshed,
conflicts, and superstitions and when myths prevailed in the minds.

He proclaimed his invitation and to prove his authenticity he presented
innumerous signs and miracles. Among his miracles, one was very lively,
eloquent and enduring which in terms of its testimony to his prophetic
mission has preserved its validity. This living evidence and immortal
miracle is the Great Qur’an which still shines like a brilliant sun and
lights up the hearts of its followers. Qur’an still clearly states, *“My
carrier is not an ordinary person and I am not produced by his thought,
rather, the person who brought me is a distinguished individual who*
*has been in touch with the Unseen and God has sent him to guide
mankind.”*

The prophet of Islam has observed, “O folks! I have been appointed by
God and this Qur’an is a living testimony to my prophetic mission. If
you doubt me, get together and with the help of one another present one
verse like one of this Qur’an. If you succeed and could equal me, then
you’re entitled to decline my invitation but if you fail —which you will
ever do— then realize that I am a mediator between God and mankind and
am God’s prophet and messenger to lead you toward perfection and
felicity.”

At that time, all the eloquent orators and celebrated poets who were
reputed to be peerless masters of eloquence failed to introduce a verse
like one of Qur’an’s and they acknowledged their failure and defeat.
Since then, the enemies of Islam have utilized every means available
against Islam but they have failed to counteract the Holy Qur’an and
present one verse like that of Qur’an’s.

The Qur’an, the Immortal Miracle
--------------------------------

Qur’an is a miracle not only by virtue of its eloquence, spiritual
appeal, and beauty of composition but also due to many other aspects.
Now we briefly allude to some of them.

1. All historians unanimously agree that the noble Prophet of Islam was
illiterate and prior to his appointment at forty, had not been educated.
Given this, the Muslim Prophet has recounted the accounts of a large
number of the preceding prophets. Of course, the narration of other
prophets’ accounts per se is not a miracle. But these narratives have
been incorporated by the Jewish and Christian Scriptures (the Old and
New Testaments).

Therefore, we can compare this section of Qur’an (the narratives of the
previous prophets) with its counterpart in the Old and New Testaments
and thus establish the heavenly nature of *the Holy Qur’an.* Because
having studied the current Old and New Testaments[^1], we realize that
their writers have presented the history of these prophets, who were
prominent men and devout instructors and their accounts must be
instructive, in the form of superstitious myths and have so distorted
facts that in these books prophets have been depicted as inferior to
ordinary men. But when we return to Qur’an, the accounts of these
virtuous prophets have been presented in a way that they bear an
educational and moral point for everyone.

By the same token, one cannot claim that the prophet of Islam has
borrowed the contents of the Holy Qur’an from the Scriptures of the Jews
and Christians to present them in the form of the Holy Qur’an.

When the Holy Qur’an recounts the story of a prophet, it also refers to
a number of moral facts and points and relates their accounts without
any distortion or superfluous superstitions. If the prophet’s source for
Qur’an were not from Revelation, then undoubtedly, in recounting these
stories, he would suffer from the same superstitious distortion that
befell the writers of the Scriptures of the Jews and Christians and Arab
storytellers and consequently the narratives of the prophets would be
marred by superstitions and untruths.

You can ascertain this by comparing the accounts of Adam, Eve, Abraham
and Jesus in Qur’an and the Bible. This cursory comparison will
demonstrate that the Prophet of Islam has come up with these facts
through divine revelation. These stories have been so blatantly
distorted in the Old and New Testaments that pen is ashamed of ascribing
such stories to the divine instructors whereas the same accounts have
turned up in Qur’an with the best of themes bearing a series of moral
and educational facts.

2. Another way of establishing the miraculous nature of the Holy Qur’an
is through the rules that are included within it. These rules are so
precise, robust and calculated that the passage of time and
transformation of societies have never been able to undermine them.
Qur’an has presented a special economic system for the human society
which is capable of meeting peoples’ demands in every period. If we only
comply with one of the economic principles of Islam, that is, *the ban
on usury* then many of the class divisions would disappear.

An illiterate person would never be able to present partially correct
economic system, let alone an accurate economic system, which won’t be
discredited with the advent of new economic systems but its principles
are endorsed by contemporary economists and which will also direct its
followers (if they observe it) to elevation and dignity.

Qur’an has distributed wealth in a way that if its commands were abided
by, poverty and famine would vanish. Qur’an has introduced solid
criminal laws to maintain peace and welfare. The military rules and
warfare principles and tactics of Islam are so progressive that they
have taken into consideration the rights and sacred things of the enemy.
Finally, the Islamic law is so extensive and exhaustive that it covers
the entire human life from his birth to his death and has a definite
verdict for even the slightest things.

Is it likely that an illiterate person could have presented such plans
and enduring rules without aid form the Unseen and without any
connection with God, especially in the light of the atmosphere of the
time which was prevailed by ignorance and savagery?

The superiority of Islam and the miraculous nature of the Holy Qur’an
are not confined to these but there are many more signs to prove that
the carrier of Qur’an is a divine teacher and leader and his plan is
heavenly. Imam ar-Ridha has observed, “My grandfather, Imam as-Sadiq
(‘a) was asked why does not the Holy Qur’an lose its appeal and
originality despite its widespread progress and over-familiarity but
conversely grows more lively day by day?

Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) replied, “it is so because Qur’an is not exclusively
pertinent to a certain time or certain people and consequently it is new
and fresh all the time.”[^2]

Indeed, if we adopt the Holy Qur’an as our plan for life, then our
perfection and prosperity will be guaranteed. And like the early Muslims
who achieved dignity and splendor swiftly due to their compliance with
Qur’an, we also could restore the lost grandeur of Islam. But, sadly,
Muslims have abandoned Qur’an, and therefore the Muslim world is as it
is.

[^1]: Note: the present Jewish and Christian Scriptures are not those
that were introduced by the prophets Moses and Jesus (peace be upon
them) and the authentic scriptures are lost.

[^2]: ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Ridha, vol. 2, Qum, p. 87.


