Lesson 13: Imam’s Traits
========================

Imam and the leader of the Muslims who is to succeed the great Prophet
assuming the management of the mundane and religious affairs of people
must have certain distinctions.

1. He must be free from errors and mistakes to be able to lead the
society toward prosperity because an impure person won’t be able to
clean up peoples’ contamination.

2. Imam must be in touch with the Unseen and enjoy boundless divine
knowledge to be able to explain the Islamic facts, concepts and edicts
to Muslims, because if he were to speculate or merely possess ordinary
human learning like other people, then his remarks would not be
compelling and people won’t appreciate the truth of the Islamic
teachings.

3. Imam must be appointed by the great Prophet or his predecessor on
behalf of God, because none except God and His Prophet could determine
the infallibility of others and people are also unable to be certain
about anyone’s future.

Therefore, it is not appropriate to hand over the appointment of Imams
to people because, although people might regard someone as innocent and
pure, in actuality, he may be the contrary or people might confirm
someone’s integrity in the light of present circumstances but he may
lapse into error and impurity in the future.

It is only and merely God who is aware of the present and future and
within as well as the without and knows who to choose to lead the
society and assume the management after the great Prophet. The great
Qur’an says,

***“God knows better to whom He should turn over the religious and
mundane leadership of the people.”***[^1]

Who has been appointed as the successor of the Prophet?
-------------------------------------------------------

At the command of God, the Prophet of Islam has introduced all of his
successors and has explicitly named them, one by one, and has
recurrently reminded people of ‘Ali’s right to succession.

An examination of history and books will reveal that the Prophet over
the twenty-three years of his prophetic mission has raised the subject
of the succession of Imam ‘Ali on any propitious occasion. Here, we will
only refer to two cases, the first took place at the onset of the
prophetic mission and the second occurred during the last year of his
life.

The Prophetic Mission And The Leadership Of Imams Are Continuous
----------------------------------------------------------------

Approximately three years after the appointment of the great Prophet,
this verse was revealed,

***“Admonish your close relatives with the threat of divine torment (and
invite them to worship God).”***[^2]

In the exegesis of this verse, the commentators have pointed out that,
on the day when the great Prophet was called on by God to invite his
close relatives, he asked ‘Ali who was barely fifteen years old to
prepare food, then he invited the progeny of ‘Abd al-Muttalib who
numbered about forty to announce his mission to them. On that day, Abu
Lahab the Prophet’s uncle disrupted the reception with irrelevant
remarks.

The great Prophet held another session and after the meal was served
announced his invitation and said, “I have been appointed by God and
herald the best of this world and the hereafter for you and God has
called on me to invite you to His dominion…”

Then, at the same reception the great Prophet observed, “Who among you
is ready to stand by me, to be my brother and successor?”

‘Ali rose and voiced his readiness. The great Prophet told him to sit
down and repeated his invitation three times. No one answered him except
‘Ali, every time he announced his invitation, then he turned to those
who were present and said, “This youth, ‘Ali, is my brother and
successor among you, obey him and listen to his remarks.”

This incident, about its authenticity there is no doubt neither in the
accounts of the Sunni nor Shi’ah, clearly demonstrates that the
prophetic mission and the leadership of Imams are not distinct and on
the day when the divine Prophet was introduced to people, it is on the
same day that his successor should be named and it should be known
basically that the foundations of these two positions are the same and
they are connected to one another like the links of a chain and the
leadership of Imams is the continuation of the prophetic mission and the
successor of the Prophet pursues the same goals as the Prophet but the
distinction between them is that the Prophet is the founder of the
religion but Imam is its explicator.[^3]

The Hadith of Ghadir
--------------------

In the last year of his life, the great Prophet who was returning from
the Hajj pilgrimage stopped at a place called *Ghadir* where pilgrims
parted from one another. There he mounted a high mound so that he could
be seen by everyone whose number amounted to nearly one hundred thousand
and at the command of God announced the succession of Imam ‘Ali to that
crowd. He held ‘Ali’s hand and raised it so that everyone could observe,
and then said, “O folks! Just as I am your leader and decision-maker and
have control over your life and property, ‘Ali is also your leader and
commander.”

Thus, again it was made clear to everyone that ‘Ali is the immediate
successor of the great Prophet and on the same day people offered
congratulations to ‘Ali and even ‘Umar told ‘Ali, “Great, you’re my and
every Muslim’s leader.”[^4]

Indeed, the Prophet of Islam announced Imam ‘Ali’s right to succession
again and again so that everyone should know who is the ruler of Muslims
after the demise of that revered figure.

Hadith al-Thaqalayn
-------------------

Besides these, in the final days of his life, the great Prophet told
people, “O folks! I leave you with two priceless things, that is,
*Qur’an and my household,* so long as you seek these two and follow my
legacy, you won’t go astray.”[^5]

The Hadith of Jabir
-------------------

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah Ansari recounts that when the verse, *“Obey God and
the Prophet and those who are in authority among you!”* was revealed I
told the divine Prophet, *“O the Messenger of God! We know God and His
Prophet and it is important that we know those who are in authority with
whom this verse obliges us to comply, could you explain the meaning of
the phrase?”*

The great Prophet said, “they are my successors and the Imams after me
and they begin with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and then respectively, Hasan ibn
‘Ali, Husayn ibn ‘Ali, ‘Ali ibn Husayn, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali who is known
as *Baqir* in the Bible and you will spend your old age in his
leadership and remember me to him when you see him. After Muhammad ibn
‘Ali, the rest are as follows respectively, Ja’far ibn Muhammad, Musa
ibn Ja’far, ‘Ali ibn Musa, Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, Hasan
ibn ‘Ali, and after him his son who is my namesake and who will dominate
the whole world and who will be hidden from the sight of people and
whose absence will be protracted that only those who remain steadfast
and firm will persist in their belief in his leadership.”[^6]

Of course, the accounts pertaining to the successors of the great
Prophet are innumerable and we raised these just to exemplify some.
Therefore, undoubtedly, the twelve Imams of the Shi’ah have been
determined by the great Prophet on behalf of God and furthermore, every
Imam has explicitly introduced his successor to remove any
misunderstanding and doubt on the part of people.

In addition to this, as we noted earlier, Imam must be infallible and
connected with the Unseen and after the great Prophet except these
twelve figures, innocence has not been verified in any one and no one
has been able to present teachings and insights similar to those
delivered by these twelve figures. To establish this it suffices to
examine *Nahj al-Balaghah* by ‘Ali and the remarks recorded from other
Imams.[^7]

[^1]: Surah al-An‘am 6:124.

[^2]: Surah al-Shu‘ara’ 26:214.

[^3]: It has been drawn and abridged from Majma‘al-Bayan, vol. 7,
Islamiyah, p. 206 and al-Mizan, vol. 15, p. 263 onward and some other
books.

[^4]: The tale of Ghadir has been cited in every Shi‘ah and Sunni book
and for more information look at the translation of the first volume of
al-Ghadir.

[^5]: There is no doubt about the issuance of this hadith by the great
Prophet (peace be upon him and his household) neither on the part of
Shi‘ahs nor Sunnis, for more information consult the translation of
Hadith al-Thaqalayn by Shaykh Qawam al-Din Wishnawi published in Qum and
Tehran.

[^6]: Kifayah al-Athar, first print, p. 7.

[^7]: Note: You will read the abridged account of the fourteen
infallible figures which is in effect complementary to the discussion of
the prophetic mission and the leadership of Imams after the lesson about
the Resurrection.


