Lesson 14: The Resurrection
===========================

The fifth principle of the primary principles of religion is the faith
in *the Resurrection.*

The Resurrection signifies revival to bear the consequences. This
principle, that is, the faith in the Judgment Day is one of the oldest
beliefs of humanity its traces could be detected in nations with an old
history.

Among the well-established religions of the world, the question of an
immortal life in the hereafter constitutes one of the principal
doctrines and any faith on whose agenda there is no place for the faith
in the resurrection could not be called a divine faith.

The records of this faith among all nations of the world could establish
its inherent quality because it is improbable that such a faith with so
long a history and such a widespread purview could have flourished in
the hearts of people unless its were inherent. At times, everyone will
feel that his life won’t dissolve by death and death is not the final
destination of his evolution and he has not been created for a
transitory life replete with vicissitudes and disillusionments but
rather this dark night will culminate in a bright daybreak and death is
not but a doorway to an eternal life.

Therefore, it should be said that the faith in the Resurrection is
inherent and does not need any reasoning at all, but despite that, for
the sake of clarification, here we elaborate on two arguments for the
necessity of *the* *Resurrection.*

The Relationship Between The Divine Justice And Wisdom And The Resurrection
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The world inhabited by mankind is founded upon justice and fairness. Its
Creator is also just and fair and has commanded His servants to base
their worldly lives upon justice and refrain from oppression and He has
sent infallible prophets to guide and assist them in discriminating
between good and evil.

But with respect to the divine commands and the edicts of the prophets
people are divided in two categories:

1. One group is submissive and obedient and never deviates from the
straight path of religion and morality and tries to abstain from
corruption, indecency, and wrongdoing, or at least they are determined
to purify themselves.

2. Another group is so steeped in debauchery and oppression and they
behave as though no prophet had ever been sent to guide them and the
straight path has not been revealed to them. In their lives, the only
objectives they pursue are domination, gratification of lustful desires,
deception, duplicity, and oppression and to achieve their goals; they
won’t spare any brutality or ruthlessness. For instance, we read in
history that a certain ruler, whose name evokes fear and terror, says,
“I enjoy hurling the worshippers in the fire and listening to their
whining and growling, because the moaning and whining of innocent people
in the flames and under torture is the most melodious music.” He was a
human being.

As opposed to this, we come across another person who says, “I swear by
God that if they granted me the dominion of the whole world to oppress a
feeble ant, I will never do that.” We all have known and continue to
know some who do nothing but wickedness and indecency as well as those
who have dedicated their welfare to that of fellow-Muslims.

Is it consistent with God’s justness that these two groups be treated
equally? Does the Just God to whom every conduct of His servants is
manifest and who is aware of the within and without of everyone treat
these two groups equally?

The common sense dictates that these two groups are different and each
should face the consequences of their actions. Those who have retained
their faith in God and have done deeds of righteousness should receive
their rewards and those who were non-believers and were contaminated by
oppression and wrongdoing should face the consequences of their
viciousness. Indeed, God’s justice dictates that there must be a
distinction between the faithful and the virtuous and the unfaithful and
the evil. There is no doubt that this distinction does not occur
completely in this world because as we could see many infidels and
oppressors enjoy a luxurious life and become prosperous by exploiting
others.

As opposed to this we come across some virtuous people who dedicate
their lives to serving and helping others and obediently perform their
individual and social obligations but are afflicted by vicissitudes,
indigence, torture or captivity and eventually die under these
circumstances.

Therefore, due to God’s wisdom and justice, there must be a hereafter
where the virtuous reap the reward of their good deeds and the vicious
suffer the consequences of their evil deeds.

And this hereafter refers to the Resurrection which is stressed in every
divine religion especially Islam, in which it is presented as one of the
primary principles of the faith.


