Foreword
========

Our actions and our conduct are the results of our beliefs. A faithful
person, believing in God and the Day of Resurrection, leads a completely
different life from that of a non-believer. A set of moral and human
virtues constitute the foundations of the believer’s life, because he
considers death as the opening to another world and believes that death
is not tantamount to dissolution of his life and therefore in the hope
of reward or out of fear of the Judgment Day, avoids wrongdoing and evil
deeds, volunteers for useful activities, whereas a non-believer’s
situation is at the opposite end of the pole.

Therefore, those who seek felicity and prosperity for their society
should promote faith among individuals because an individual’s felicity
is not separate from that of the society.

About twenty years ago, a group of Iranian expatriates asked the
honorable jurisprudent Ayatullah Subhani to compile a brief and concise
article about the primary principles of the Islamic beliefs to
familiarize themselves and their acquaintances with them.

He composed an article which was subsequently sent and welcomed by them
and later on it was translated and published in other languages. After a
while, a number of friends noted that if a compelling but simple book on
the primary principles of the religion was published, it would prove
useful to religious gatherings and high schools.

To achieve this objective, the honorable master called on me to compile
a book by supplementing that article. In obedience to his request, all
the sections of that article were rewritten elaborately and extensively,
and the book was published. From then onward, tens of thousands of
copies of the book have been published by *Dar al-Fikr* publications and
have been utilized across the country.

Recently, having decided to reprint the book, the publications has made
slight corrections that is hoped to render it more useful.

**Reza Ostadi**,  
**Qum Seminary.**


