Lesson 20: The Third Imam And The Fifth Infallible Figure, Imam Husayn
======================================================================

He was born on Sha’ban 3, 04. At the command of God, the great Prophet
named him Husayn and foretold his martyrdom in the cause of religion on
the day of his birth and said, “A group of infidels and tyrants from
Bani Umayyah would kill him. May God keep my intercession from them.”

Husayn (‘a) spent forty six years with his grandfather, parents, and
brother and attained the position of leadership at the age of forty
seven after the demise of Imam Hasan. He suffered under the deceptive
and oppressive rule of Mu’awiyah but so long as Mu’awiyah was living, he
could not do anything because just as Imam Hasan, for the sake of Islam,
agreed to peace with Mu’awiyah on a number of conditions and thought it
advantageous to Islam and Muslims to renounce war with him, Imam Husayn
(‘a) also thought it expedient to refrain from confrontation during the
remaining ten years of his rule.

But following the death of Mu’awiyah, Yazid mounted the throne and
announced his rule and to strengthen his position, demanded allegiance
from all senior figures including Imam Husayn (‘a) but Imam (‘a) from
the very beginning said, “When persons like the dissolute, gambling and
drunken Yazid, who do not even superficially observe and respect Islam,
intend to assume the leadership of the Islamic community, that time
would mark the death and annihilation of Islam because these people
intend to eradicate Islam with its own power.”[^1] And on these grounds,
he refused to pledge allegiance and did not recognize the rule of Yazid
and at the command of God, the Exalted, and for the sake of Islam, he
decided not to acknowledge Yazid’s rule and rise up against him even at
the risk of his life.

Thus, upon the invitation of the inhabitants of Kufah, he set out toward
Iraq in the year 60. From the start of this journey through his
martyrdom, he announced to his companions and other Muslims that his
uprising was aimed at the promotion of decency and prohibition of
indecency and revolt against the oppressor and refusal to acknowledge a
tyrannical regime, and eventually the protection of the Holy Qur’an,
Islam and the prophetic tradition. With the same steadfast resolve,
finally, he and his children and some of the youths of Bani Hashim and
some of the most prominent figures of the time, were killed in Karbala
and his household went into custody but he made it clear to his
contemporaries and the following generations that sacrifice and
selflessness are essential in the great cause of truth and he
established his reputation like a shining sun in the history of Islam.

A Lesson From The School of Imam Husayn
---------------------------------------

Since his martyrdom, his followers and devotees have constantly
commemorated his memory and have held mourning services and thus and by
visiting his holy shrine they have renewed allegiance to the memory of
Karbala.

Our infallible leaders underlined the preservation of the memory of
Karbala and repeatedly held commemoration and mourning ceremonies
themselves and talked a lot about the benefits of mourning for Imam
Husayn.

Abu ‘Ammareh has said, “One day I was with Imam as-Sadiq (‘a). He asked
me to recite some elegies about Imam Husayn and as I started reading,
Imam burst out crying and he kept on weeping so loudly that his cries
were audible outside the house, when I finished, he talked about the
advantages and greatness of reciting elegies and mourning for Imam
Husayn (‘a).” [^2]

Indeed, mourning and crying for Imam Husayn and recalling the history of
Karbala is a great virtue and is invaluable but we should bear in mind
that the mourning services and the narration of the incidents of Karbala
are intended to derive lessons of selfless sacrifice and devoutness in
the cause of religion, and the dignity and honor and protection of the
Holy Qur’an and its holy edicts and not lamentation and mourning for
their own sake, because the objective behind these mourning ceremonies
and rites is to immortalize the goals of Imam Husayn (‘a).

Excerpts From Imam Husayn’s Supplications
-----------------------------------------

“O God! I grant Your unity and count Your blessings although I know that
I won’t be able to enumerate them because Your gifts are countless.”

“I have consistently, from my birthday, enjoyed Your blessings and from
the start of my life, You have protected me from poverty and destitution
and suffering and misery and have provided the means of my welfare.”

“O the best person to whom we can express our demands, and the kindest
from whom to seek forgiveness.”

“O the one who is aware of the closing eyes and the secret peeping, O
the one to whom the hidden secrets of the hearts are not unknown. O the
kindest, bestow your good regards upon Muhammad and his household. O
God! I can’t accomplish but what merits my meanness and we demand what
merits Your generosity.”

These were the prayers that Imam said at the plains of ‘Arafah on the
day of ‘Arafah and wept and taught greatness and knowledge of God to
mankind.[^3]

[^1]: Lahuf, p. 20.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 282.

[^3]: Iqbal by ibn Tawus, p. 339.


