Lesson 21: The fourth Imam and the sixth infallible figure, Imam Al-Sajjad
==========================================================================

His name is ‘Ali, the son of Imam Husayn and his most well-known
epithets are Sajjad and Zayn al-’Abidin. He was born on Jumadi al-Awwal
5 or 15, 36 or 38 and attained the position of leadership after the
martyrdom of his father, Imam Husayn in the year 61.

His leadership coincided with the zenith of the Umawi rule and the
enemies of the prophetic household (‘a) and during this period,
momentous events and bloody revolts took place which entailed
difficulties for Imam. Occasionally, his life and at times his dignity
and honor were jeopardized but with foresight, patience, fortitude,
self-sacrifice and self-esteem he managed to overcome all the obstacles
and preserved his life and honor along with those of many others.

He was not only devout and devoted but also a thoughtful and adept
leader who did his best to guard the interests of Islam and Muslims at
critical moments.

One of his most outstanding services to the Islamic world and Islamic
teachings is the collection of the prayers of that Imam which is known
as *The Complete Sahifah-ye Sajjadiyyah.* This book and its prayers
incorporate a series of rational, moral, philosophical and social facts
and teachings and have been preserved in the form of supplications
toward the absolutely needless. And it is impossible that anyone save an
infallible Imam who has inherited the knowledge of the prophets could
provide humanity with such facts and truths.

He was poisoned to martyrdom by the agents of the Umawi regime on
Muharram 25, 97 at the age of fifty seven or fifty nine and was buried
in Medina.

Some Remarks by Imam al-Sajjad
------------------------------

“The dearest of you, before God, is the most righteous and the most
respected of you, before God, is the most pious and god-fearing.”

“O men! You will eventually die and will be revived to stand trial
before divine justice, so have an answer ready.”[^1] That is, until the
opportunity is available and you’re alive get ready for the hereafter
and endeavor to earn the divine pleasure.

“If all men were perished and I were deserted, I would not be terrified
so long as I am with the Holy Qur’an.” (I will approach the Holy Qur’an
and derive benefits from it).[^2]

[^1]: Tohaf al-‘Uqul, p. 280.

[^2]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol.3, p. 582.


