Lesson 24: The Seventh Imam and the Ninth Infallible Figure, Imam al-Kazim
==========================================================================

He was called Musa and was well-known as Kazim. His father was Imam
as-Sadiq and his mother was Hamidah who was very knowledgeable and Imam
as-Sadiq used to ask women to consult her regarding religious edicts and
teachings. He was born on Safar 7, 128, and attained the position of
leadership at 21.

He spent some time in prison because Harun, the ‘Abbasi ruler, deemed
his presence among people dangerous and was jealous of his popularity
among them and put him into jail on different pretexts. At prison, he
spent his time saying prayers and worshipping God. At one of the
prisons, the ‘Abbasi ruler sent an attractive woman as a servant to Imam
and his aim was to get Imam infatuated with that woman and thus exploit
this against him outside.

After a few days, the ‘Abbasi ruler sent someone to inspect the prison
and see about the Imam and the woman. He walked into the prison and saw
that at one corner, Imam was engaged in prayers and at the other corner
was sitting the woman praying.

The woman was taken to the ruler and was asked how come she had changed
so dramatically. She replied, “Imam Kazim’s routine and his devotion and
devoutness influenced and changed me.” (But I could not exert any
influence upon him whatsoever).[^1]

Indeed, men of God and their conduct and lifestyle attracted people
toward them and they reformed and rectified the environment, and they
were never swayed and corrupted by other people and the environment.

He was poisoned to death by the ‘Abbasi ruler’s agents and passed away
in the corner of the prison of Baqdad on the 25th of Rajab of 183 and
was buried at Quraysh cemetery which was later known as Kazimayn.
Currently, his shrine is visited by all Muslims especially shi’ahs.

Some Remarks by the Imam
------------------------

Anyone whose yesterday and today are equal, that is, after twenty four
hours, he has not gained anything in spirituality and humanity and has
not advanced on the path of piety and faith, this person is like someone
who has invested but has not obtained any value in return.

And anyone who is worse than yesterday, that is, instead of spiritual
progress, has deteriorated and is inclined toward wrongdoing and
impiety; such a person will be far from God’s grace.

[^1]: Manaqib by Ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. 3, Najaf, p. 415.


