Lesson 1: Imitation Is Not Accurate In Appreciating The Primary Principles
==========================================================================

The primary principles of the religion are a series of beliefs (unity,
justice, the prophetic mission, the leadership of Imams, and the
Resurrection) which constitute the foundations of the faith. Since there
have been various beliefs that have prevailed in the human communities,
or in other words, each group has propagated its own peculiar set of
beliefs, therefore it is incumbent upon everyone to identify the primary
principles of their faith through reasoning, so they could withstand the
toxic propaganda of their prejudiced opponents and not be diverted every
day.

Of course when it is said that everyone should learn the primary
principles of his faith through reasoning it does not mean that each
person should engage in a prolonged study of religion and should
extensively study philosophical and argumentative books but he should do
so to the extent that he could know the foundations of his faith with
solid but simple reasons. It is helpful to recall the story of an old
woman busy spinning, who was asked,

“What reasons do you have to establish the existence of God?”

She stopped working immediately and as the wheel came to a standstill,
said,

“While such a little wheel needs a person to spin it, how could one say
that the immense world with all the awe-inspiring heavenly bodies that
revolve, have spun on their own or without an operator?”

Imitation In The Secondary Principles Of The Religion
-----------------------------------------------------

Having learned the foundations of his faith through reflection and sound
reasoning, one can imitate a qualified jurisprudent who is an expert in
deducing divine edicts from its sources in the secondary principles such
as questions about prayers, fasting, Hajj pilgrimage, and transactions
and so on and so forth. Here imitation signifies consulting the experts.
Just as in our lives, when we don’t know anything well, we seek experts
in those areas, for instance, when we fall ill, we see a doctor or when
we want to build a house, we seek an architect, similarly, in the
secondary principles and beliefs and divine commands, if the person is
not an expert, that is, a jurisprudent, he should consult a qualified
jurisprudent and follow his opinions and insights.


