Lesson 30: The Rule Of Jurists During The Occultation
=====================================================

With a cursory examination of the Holy Qur’anic verses and the
narrations of the infallible figures, one can prove the necessity and
indispensability of a government at all times in the Islamic and Shi’ah
school.

Islam has invited people toward gathering and contact with one another
and the unity of stance and solidarity and has warned them against
discord, division, seclusion and being a burden upon the society.

The Qur’an says, ***“Indeed, the believers are brothers to one
another”***[^1]**.**

***“Everyone should clutch the divine rope and don’t be
dispersed”***[^2]

It has been quoted from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Anyone who distances
himself from the Muslim community even as far as a stone’s throw, he has
removed the string of Islam from his neck”[^3]

Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 127 reads, “Always stay with the massive
congregations and the mass of people because the hand of God is with the
congregation and avoid division. Truly, the man who strikes out on his
own will be the prey of Satan.”

From the aforementioned verses and similar ones, it is clearly
demonstrated that Islam wants Muslims to coexist with unity and harmony
and it is clear that to realize this goal, government and leadership of
Imams is indispensable because they manage and organize the society and
preserve the unity and solidarity of people and accurately run the
social affairs.

It has been quoted from Imam Ridha (‘a), “Indeed, the leadership of
Imams is the guardian of the religion and the system of Muslims, and the
interests and the dignity of the believers. It is a growing root and a
fruitful and shady branch. The integrity of the daily prayers, *Zakat*,
fasting, the *Hajj* pilgrimage, struggle, (*Jihad*), the collection of
taxes and alms and the endorsement and implementation of the verdicts
and rules and the safeguarding of borders and boundaries of Muslims are
entrusted to Imams and are carried out by him”[^4]

An excerpt of Nahj al-Balaghah reads, “The position of the leader of the
affairs is like the position of the string of the rosary to its beads
that keeps them together. So when the string is broken its beads are
scattered everywhere and they can’t be collected again. “

It has been narrated from the Messenger of God (S), “Obey the one to
whom God has entrusted the state of affairs because he organizes the
Islamic rules.”

Therefore, it is manifest that Islam possesses a government and
leadership. Now, this question arises, are the points and objectives
that have been raised in aforementioned verses and narrations and
similar ones, confined to the time of the Prophet and the infallible
Imams and God, the Exalted, is content with the suspension of His rules
and commands during the absence of the Imam of the Age and then God does
not desire the interests and the dignity of believers and the safeguard
of borders and the removal of the threats of the foes?

I can definitely say that it is not confined to that period and all
these objectives continue during the absence therefore, the formation of
the government during the absence like when the Prophet or the
infallible Imams were present is essential and necessary.

From the examination of verses and narrations, having drawn the
conclusion that even during the absence of the Imam of the Age, there
should be a government, we turn to this question that who should be
placed at the top of this government and assume the leadership of
Muslims?

With a little contemplation and carefulness, we will learn that the
leader of Muslims should possess the following characteristics:

1. He must be wise.

2. He must be a professing Muslim and a faithful Shi’ah.

3. He must be just.

4. He must be competent enough to manage the affairs of the society and
Muslims.

5. He should not suffer from vices such as ambition, greed, cupidity,
compromise and negligence in affairs.

6. He must be a jurisprudent, familiar with the Holy Qur’an, narrations,
and Islamic teachings and jurisprudence.

Since the leader of Muslims must certainly possess these qualifications,
the eligible jurisprudent for the leadership during the absence of an
infallible Imam has been introduced and appointed in the narrations of
the infallible figures.

And thank God, that in our time, the late grand Ayatullah Imam Khomeini,
who was one of the manifest embodiments of a qualified jurisprudent
could demolish the monarchy and eliminate tyranny and oppression and
exploitation with awe-inspiring diligence and perseverance and the help
and the extensive efforts of the seminaries and the devout and faithful
people and formed a government that was desired by the saints (Awliya’)
and assumed the leadership and brought Muslims and Shi’ahs the credit to
enjoy an Islamic state which is based on the leadership and sovereignty
of a qualified jurisprudent.

At the conclusion of this lesson, it is necessary to bear in mind that
obedience to the sovereignty of the jurisprudent and the leader of
Muslims is like compliance with the Imam of the Age (‘a) obligatory and
as it has been narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a), “Anyone who rejects the
edict of a sovereign jurisprudent is like he has rejected an infallible
Imam and the rejection of an infallible Imam constitutes infidelity and
apostasy.[^5]”

[^1]: al-Hujarat, 49:10.

[^2]: Al ‘Imran, 3:103.

[^3]: ‘Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 403.

[^4]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 200.

[^5]: ‘Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 67.


