Lesson 4: Order In The Faculty Of Thought
=========================================

Again we return to the question of the creation of man. A person by
himself is an immense world. Each part of his body attests to the
boundless wisdom and capability of its Creator. And as the human
knowledge is expanded and more secrets of the creation are disclosed,
the existence of a powerful and wise Creator gets more obvious.

As we can see, a light from the Unseen is placed in everyone’s nature,
which guides him toward virtues, and felicity. This shining light is the
faculty of *thought*.

Every new invention is the fruit of this power of “thought.” All the
books, libraries, and scientific majors have emerged due to the
tremendous power of “thought.” And this is the power of thought and
reflection that guides us toward felicity and prosperity, when we are
faced with dilemmas. Who has endowed human beings with such a useful and
wonderful power?

Could it be supposed that anyone but a wise Creator has bestowed such a
great asset upon human beings? In the human body, a delicate, small, and
precise system which weighs very little and has a delicate substance is
placed. This system is called “brain,” or the nervous center one of
whose miraculous wonders is that it works completely on its own.

Human made calculators operate according to directions. They work as
they are directed. But this automatic machine (brain or the nervous
center) is just the opposite of these machines. Not only no direction is
necessary, but it issues commands to the body and directs it.

The body itself is a machine that transforms substance into energy, but
it is utterly different from human-made machines with similar function.
Because such machines could only change special things into energy but
the human body draws its raw materials from nature and transforms them
into a variety of energies. Human body is endowed with automatic and
advanced labs and drug companies in the form of “glands” each one of
which is in charge of producing a certain substance, which performs a
special duty of the different vital functions of the body.

Does not the existence of such orderly and exact machine testify to the
creation of man by a wise and capable Creator?

The life of Ants
----------------

Let’s abandon man to take a look at the life of ant, this mysterious
insect whose whole life teaches us the knowledge of God and His unity.

These tiny insects have founded their lives upon distribution of
efforts, and close cooperation and perform tasks through understanding
and contribution to one another. All of us have observed this close
cooperation when they build a house or carry a burden.

This insect knows instinctively and through its God-given intelligence,
without going to college or majoring in agriculture, that in order to
prevent the decay of seeds, they should be divided in two and actually
does this. If it notices that the seed is damp, it will take out the wet
seed to expose it to sunlight and dry it. Furthermore, it constructs its
house at a high altitude to keep it from being immersed in water.

Could it be said that it performs such amazing things without guidance
from a higher authority? Who is the instructor of this little insect?
From where it has learned such important lessons, and has founded its
life upon them, that human could not have acquired unless they studied
or learned through experience?[^1]

Remarks by Imam as-Sadiq (‘a)
-----------------------------

Abu Shakir Deisan, who was one of the materialists, called on the
revered Imam, “Prove the existence of God for me!” he said.

As he posed this question, a boy was playing with an egg nearby. The
revered Imam took the egg from the boy and turned to Abu Shakir and
said,

“Do you see this egg? It has a fortress which is strong and firm. Inside
this fortress, and beneath its walls, rests a thin layer and there are
melted gold and silver inside it (the yellow and white fluids of the
egg). But these two parts are never mixed [could it be said that these
two parts with this special quality could have come into being on their
own?].

“Abu Shakir, no one knows whether the chicken that is hatched from this
egg, will be male or female. And when the chicken emerges from the egg,
it has beautiful colors. (For example, consider the colorful feathers of
the peacock. What power has so beautifully painted the chicken?). Is
painting a chicken or a peacock less important that painting a picture?
Could it be ever said that these paintings have painters but these
natural colorings have arisen by themselves?

Then, he said to Abu Shakir, “Don’t you agree that this egg and the
chicken that is going to emerge from it with its attributes must have a
thoughtful and wise Creator?”

Abu Shakir thought for a while as if he had been asleep and were
suddenly awakened, and then he said, “Yes, I testify that the universe
has a creator called “Allah” who possesses all the great qualities and
testify that Muhammad is God’s servant and His prophet and you are the
Prophet’s successor and God’s proof on earth, obedience to whom is
obligatory.”[^2]

Yes, any creature of this world, any atom or cell from the animate cells
of creatures, testify to the existence of its Maker and Creator.

[^1]: Abridged from Tawhid Mufadhdhal, Najaf, p.111.

[^2]: From Al-Ihtijaj by Tabarsi, Najaf, vol. 2, p. 71 and the same
book, pp.181, 1350.


