Lesson 6: God Is One And Has No Partner
=======================================

The unity of God could be established in manifold manners but in this
lesson we will present two of them.

The First Argument
------------------

The solidarity and coordination of the universe by itself is a strong
evidence of God’s unity. Imagine that there is a five-hundred-page book
before you which you have not yet read. As yet you don’t know whether it
is the work of the mind and pen of one author or each section of the
book has been written by one separate writer.

To establish this, you will have to read the entire book. If you realize
that the spirit of the contents, the style of the arguments and
organization of the sentences are unified and harmonious, you will
definitely conclude that the whole book is written by one writer,
because if it were co-authored by two or more authors, you would have
come up with a difference. No matter how subtle, hidden, and
insignificant that difference is, so that it won’t be discovered by
laymen, it won’t evade the scrutiny of experts who will figure out that
the book is not the work of one person.

Given this introduction, we begin studying the universe which has been
called “God’s book” by some scientists. We will consult the experts of
every science pertinent to the world to see whether all the pages of
this magnificent book of creation are unified and harmonious or not. If
it so, it will be the strongest testimony to the unity of its Creator.

In fact, when we pose this question to the scientists of these
disciplines, they reaffirm the unified order that is prevalent
throughout the world and they contend that this world is founded upon a
unified plan and its rules are so encompassing, comprehensive and
harmonious that an experiment with a single creature would reveal a
general rule that is valid everywhere. All scientists, including
biologists, physicists, and astronomers attest to the existence of this
harmony and coordination.

Could harmony and similarity be more obvious than this that the solar
system and other gigantic systems are subject to the same rule to which
the tiny atom is subject. As we all know, the revolution of the big
planets around their orbits results from two forces, viz. “gravity” and
“centrifuge.” Atoms, hundreds of millions of which don’t take up more
than a millimeter, also have these two forces of “gravity” and
“centrifuge.” As a result of these forces, “electrons” revolve around
“protons.”

If you look at the world of plants, animals and humans, you will come
across the same harmony. The general rule of reproduction among plant,
animals and humans is so similar to one another that it has led some to
conclude that “All species, in principle, spring from one specimen.”
Could not you figure out that excerpts from different speeches extracted
from a number of recordings have been delivered by one person? You could
establish the fact that by means of investigating the coherence,
cohesion, the similarity of style and structures.

The world is like a book composed of many pages, whose every page and
line has been examined and studied by thousands of scientists. All
unanimously concur that the entire length of the book is subject to
series of general rules. For instance, the rule of causality is valid
everywhere or the rule of gravity could be applied to the entire world
of substance. All atoms have a center and the rule of light is the same
everywhere.

Does not the harmony and coordination observed in the book of creation
attest to the unity of its Creator? Do not you think it likely that if
the world had two or more creators, it would result in diversity and
discordance in the management and maintenance of the world?

Hisham, one of the youngest and most outstanding disciples of Imam
as-Sadiq (‘a) asked him, “What is the reason for the unity of God?”

The revered Imam summarized the above-mentioned argument in a concise
sentence, “The continuity and coordination of the world (that are
inextricably linked to one another) and the integrity and perfection of
the creatures testify to the unity of the Creator.”[^1]

The Second Reason for the Unity of God
--------------------------------------

The second reason for the unity of God is the fact that all the prophets
sent to guide people who proved their authenticity with miracles and
innumerable signs, encouraged people to worship the Only God and
practice monotheism without any exception. It goes without saying that
if there were more than one god, the prophets would not invite people to
practice monotheism but would direct people to the gods by whom they
were appointed. And it is quite baseless to argue that there might be
gods who have not sent any prophets to guide their creatures. How is it
probable that God could have been so indifferent to his most superior
creature (man) and neglect to send any leader or guide to lead him
toward prosperity.

The Commander of the Faithful in a letter to Imam Hasan (‘a) has raised
the same point. “O dear son! Know that if there were any god except the
Only God, it must have sent prophets. And the fact that all the prophets
invite us to worship the Only God, strongly testifies to the fact that
there is no god except the Only God. Besides, if God had any partner,
the traces of his divine dominion and rule would be evident, when no
such vestige could be traced, we are reassured that God has no
partner.”[^2]

[^1]: Al-Tawhid by al-Saduq, p.250.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 3, Egypt, p. 49.


