The Rays of Hope
================

In the previous discussions, we became acquainted with some of the
*hadith*s concerning the global state of affairs prior to the advent of
the Imam of the Age (*‘a*). Although these *hadith*s mention confusions
and problems to such an extent that they might discourage people, there
are other *hadith*s that point out bright aspects and rays of hope for
the Shi‘ah, the faithful and the committed people.

Some of these *hadith*s concern the believers of whom the earth will
never be empty and who will be also present during these pressing
circumstances all over the world prior to the advent of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*).

A number of *hadith*s point out the role of the *‘ulama’* and Islamic
scholars during the period of occultation, and present them as catalysts
of change in the society in every epoch as well as the protectors of
religion. Some statements of the Infallibles (*‘a*) mention the special
role of the city of Qum prior to the advent of the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*) while a number of *hadith*s also indicate the active role of
Iranians before and after the advent of the Imam (*‘atfs*).

The True Believers
------------------

Sometimes, we come across some *hadith*s in answer to those who imagine
that a time will come when society will be devoid of the presence of
faithful human beings. The Imam (*‘a*) has dismissed this notion,
mentioning the existence of believers in every epoch.

Zayd az-Zurrad said: I told Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*): “I am afraid that we
would not be among the faithful.” He (*‘a*) asked: “Why do you think
so?” I answered: “It is because there is none among us who prefers his
brother over the dirham and dinar. On the contrary, I observe that we
prefer the dirham and dinar over our brothers in faith which the
*wilayah* (guardianship) of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) have
brought us together. Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “It is not as you say;
you are the people of faith though your faith will not be perfected
until the time when the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘atfs*) rises up.
At that time, God will perfect your wisdom and you will become perfect
believers.

I swear to God in Whose hand is my life! There are people throughout the
world in whose sight the entire world would not be equal to the wing of
a gnat.”[^1]

The Role of the Shi‘ah ‘Ulama’ and Scholars
-------------------------------------------

Every time the veils of darkness and ignorance cast their shadows on
human society, it was the *‘ulama’* and religious scholars who used to
perform their obligation very well of wiping away ignorance and
foolishness from thinking and eliminating corruption and decadence from
the people. It can be understood from the *hadith*s that the *‘ulama’*
will also adequately play this role at the end of time.

Imam al-Hadi (*‘a*) said: “If there would be no *‘ulama’* during the
period of occultation (*ghaybah*) of the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny
(*‘a*) who would guide and draw the people toward him, defend the
religion through divine proofs, and save the weak Shi‘ah from the guiles
of Satan and his legions as well as from the mischief of the Nasibis
(the enemies of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)), no one would be left clinging
to the religion of God and everyone will become apostates (*murtaddin*).

Yet, they will assume the responsibility of leading the hearts of the
weak Shi‘ah to the utmost decree and keep on it just as the captain of
the ship controls the rudder and control of the ship. Therefore, they
are the people of the highest station in the sight of God.”[^2]

Regarding the revival of religion in every century the Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “Verily, Allah, the Exalted, will send for this *ummah*
a person who will revive (*yujaddid*) the religion at the beginning of
every century.”[^3]

These two *hadith*s and others similar to them explicitly point out the
role of the *‘ulama’* during the period of the occultation in thwarting
the plots of the mischief-mongers as well as in reviving the spirit of
religion.

Of course, proving this point during our time does not necessitate much
proof and evidence, for the role of Hadrat Imam Khomeini (*r*) in
exterminating the nefarious designs of the enemies, which had threatened
the foundations of religion in the contemporary world, is proverbial to
all.

Undoubtedly, the dignity that Islam has acquired in this age is through
the blessings of the Islamic Revolution of Iran and its Founder, Hadrat
Imam Khomeini (*r*).

The Role of the City of Qum at the End of Time
----------------------------------------------

At the time when human society will move toward degeneration and
decadence, a ray of hope will be made manifest and there will be a group
of people who will serve as the standard-bearers of light in the heart
of all this darkness. The city of Qum at the end of time will assume
this pivotal role.

There are many *hadith*s that express words of appreciation for this
holy city and its upright people whose existence has emanated from the
pure fountain of the school of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and who have
shouldered the mission of conveying the divine message.

The Infallible Imams (*‘a*) have made various statements regarding Qum
and its role in the cultural movement during the period of occultation
(*ghaybah*) of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*). We shall mention some of
them below.

Qum as the Sanctuary of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
--------------------------------------------

It can be deduced from some *hadith*s that Qum and its inhabitants are
the keys and models of Shi‘ism and *wilayah* (guardianship).

Thus, they will label as “Qummi” anyone they would like to introduce as
a lover and enthusiast of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

A group of people came to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) and said to him: “We are
among the people of Rey.”[^4] He (*‘a*) said: “Hail to our brothers from
among the people of Qum!” They repeated several times: “We have come
from Rey.” And he (*‘a*) also repeated his statement. Then, he (*‘a*)
said: “God has a sanctuary which is in Mecca. There is also a sanctuary
for the Messenger of Allah and it is in Medina. Kufah is the sanctuary
of the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) while our (*Ahl al-Bayt*’s)
sanctuary is the city of Qum and a daughter from my progeny with the
name of Fatimah will soon be buried there. Anyone who would sincerely
pay homage (*ziyarah*) to her, paradise would be incumbent upon him.”

The narrator said: “Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) made this statement at the time
when Imam Musa al-Kazim[^5] (*‘a*) was not yet born.”[^6]

Safwan narrated: One day I was with Abu’l-Hasan—Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*)—and
he (*‘a*) talked about the people of Qum and their love and enthusiasm
for Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*). The Seventh Imam (*‘a*) said:

“May God have mercy on them and be pleased with them.” Then he (*‘a*)
continued: “Heaven has eight doors one of which is for the people of
Qum. From among the cities and countries, they are among our excellent
and chosen Shi‘ah. God has blended our *wilayah* (guardianship) and
friendship with their disposition and essence.”[^7]

It can be inferred from these *hadith*s that the Infallible Imams (*‘a*)
have regarded the city of Qum as a base of the lovers of the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). Perhaps, the door of
heaven apportioned for the city of Qum is the door for the strugglers
(*bab al-mujahidin*) or the door of the excellent ones (*bab al-akhyar*)
especially when in the *hadith*s the inhabitants of Qum have also been
described as excellent Shi‘ah.

The City of Qum as a Proof for Others
-------------------------------------

In every epoch, God chooses some persons as proofs for others, and since
they are treading the path of God, they struggle in exalting the word of
Allah (*kalimatullah*).[^8] God will assist them and keep the mischief
of enemies away from them. During the period of occultation (*ghaybah*)
of the Imam of the Age (*‘atfs*), Qum and its people would be the proofs
for other people.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Difficulties and problems will be kept away
from Qum and its people and a time will come when Qum and its people
would be the proofs for all people. This will be so during the period of
occultation (*ghaybah*) of our Qa’im till his advent, and if it were not
so, the earth would swallow its inhabitants.

Verily, the angels will keep difficulties away from Qum and its people,
and no tyrant will ever target Qum; otherwise, God will break his back
and afflict him with pain, calamity or enmity. God will let tyrants
forget the name of Qum and its people just as they have forgotten
God.”[^9]

The Center for the Diffusion of Islamic Culture
-----------------------------------------------

Another point worthy of note in the *hadith*s is that the city of Qum
during the period of occultation (*ghaybah*) will serve as a center for
the conveyance of the message of Islam to the downtrodden of the world,
and its *‘ulama’* and religious scholars will be a proof for the people
of the world.

In this regard, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The city of Kufah will soon
be void of believers, and knowledge and learning will depart from there
and like a snake coiled up in a corner, it will be restricted to and
emerge from a city named “Qum”, which will become the center of
knowledge and virtue as well as the repository of learning and
perfection so much so that no (intellectually) downtrodden
person—including the secluded women—would ever be left on the surface of
the earth without being aware of religion. And that time will be near
the time of the advent of our Qa’im.

“God will appoint Qum and its people as his (al-Mahdi’s) vicegerents and
if it were not so, the earth will swallow its inhabitants and no proof
will remain on earth. Therefore, from the city of Qum knowledge and
learning will spread to the east and west, and the proof for the people
of the world will be completed such that no person will be left unaware
of religion and knowledge.

At that time, Hadrat Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will appear and through him divine
wrath will descend upon the infidels. It is because God will not take
vengeance from His servants unless the proofs were completed on
them.”[^10]

It is reported in another *hadith*: “Had it not been for the people of
Qum, religion would have vanished.”[^11]

The Confirmation of the Way of Thinking in Qum
----------------------------------------------

It can be understood from some *hadith*s that the Infallible Imams
(*‘a*) had approved of the method of the *‘ulama’* of Qum.

In this regard, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “There is an angel above Qum,
who is spreading his two wings over it, and no tyrant will ever target
Qum; otherwise, God would melt him like salt in water.”

Then, he (*‘a*) pointed to ‘Isa ibn ‘Abdullah Qummi and said: “God’s
benediction be upon Qum! The Lord of the universe will fill their land
with rain and send His blessings upon them while transforming their sins
into good deeds. They are the people of bowing (*ruku‘*), prostration
(*sujud*), standing (*qiyam*), and sitting (*qu‘ud*) in prayer just as
they are jurists, scholars and people of comprehension (*ahl-e dark*).
They are the people of insight, revelation and perspicacity in the
worship of the excellent servants of God.”[^12]

Similarly, in reply to a person who said, “I want to ask something from
you, which has not been asked by anyone before me and will never be
asked by anyone after me,” the same Imam (*‘a*) said: “Perhaps, you want
to ask about *hashr* and *nashr*.”

He said: “By the One Who appointed Muhammad as the giver of glad tidings
and as the warner, yes.”

He (*‘a*) said: “The *hashr* of all people is toward the Bayt
al-Muqaddas (in Jerusalem) except that of a mausoleum in a mountainous
land to be called “Qum” and divine teachings will be part of their
features.”

While half-standing, the man asked: “O son of the Messenger of Allah!
Does it pertain to the people of Qum?”

The Imam (*‘a*) replied: “Yes, it pertains to them and anyone who shares
their conviction and words.”[^13]

The Companions of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
---------------------------------------

The point worthy of note is that the *hadith*s talk about the people of
Qum, the companions of the Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and those who will rise up to
claim the right of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

‘Affan al-Basri said: Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said to me: “Do you know why
Qum is named “Qum”?” I replied: “God, His Messenger and you know
better.” He said: “It is named Qum as such because its inhabitants will
rally behind the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘atfs*) and rise up along
with him (*‘atfs*). Along this line, they will show their perseverance
and assist him (*‘atfs*).”[^14]

In another *hadith*, the Sadiq (Truthful) of Muhammad’s Progeny (Imam
Ja‘far as-Sadiq) (*‘a*) said in this regard: “The soil of Qum is holy
and its inhabitants are from us and we from them. No tyrant will have
any bad intention toward it; otherwise, his punishment would quickly
follow (in the hereafter).

Of course, this will be the case as long as they do not betray their
brothers, for if they did so, God will let the mischievous tyrants
dominate them. The people of Qum, however, are the companions of our
Qa’im and campaigners for our truthfulness.”

Then, the Imam raised his head toward the sky and prayed, thus: “O God!
Protect them from any sedition (*fitnah*) and save them from any type of
perdition.”[^15]

Iran as the Country of the Imam of the Time (‘atfs)
---------------------------------------------------

A *hadith* about the city of Qum, which elucidates the role of the
Iranians before and after the advent of the Promised Mahdi (*‘a*), was
quoted. A closer examination, however, of the statements of the
Infallibles (*‘a*) will show that they (*‘a*) have paid particular
attention to Iran and its people, and on various occasions, they have
made mention of their role in supporting religion and preparing the
ground for the advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*).

At this point, it will suffice to cite some *hadith*s, extolling the
Iranians and those paving the ground for the advent.

Commendation for the Iranians
-----------------------------

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas said: The Persians were mentioned in the presence
of the Prophet (S). He (S) said: “The people of Persia—the Iranians—are
a group from us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*.”[^16]

When the *Mawali* or the *A‘ajam*[^17] were mentioned in the presence of
the Prophet (S), the Holy Messenger (S) said: “I swear to God that I
have more trust in them than you.”[^18]  
 ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas said: “At the time when they would hoist the black
banners toward you, you have to give honor to the Persians because your
government is with them.”[^19]

One day Ash‘ath said to ‘Ali (*‘a*) in protest: “O Commander of the
Faithful! Why have these *A‘ajam* who have come around you overtaken
us?” He (*‘a*) got angry and said in reply: “Who will excuse me in
facing you useless corpulent people each of whom is like a donkey
wallowing in his bed, and on account of fame and pride, is turning away
from the community? Are you commanding me to cast them away? I will
never cast them away to become one of the ignorant.[^20] By God Who
split the seed and created the creatures! They will stand up to fight
against you in order to return you to the fold of religion just as you
drew the sword in bringing Islam to them.”[^21]

Those Who are Paving the Ground for the Advent of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The main part of the *hadith*s regarding the events prior to the advent
and the companions of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*) is related to Iran and the
Iranians, whom have been referred to in various terms such as Persians,
*‘ajam/a‘ajam*, the people of Khurasan, the people of Qum, the people of
Taleqan, the people of Rey, etc.

By studying the collection of these *hadith*s, we will arrive at the
conclusion that prior to the advent of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*), a
religious system and defender of the Infallible Imams (*‘a*) will be
established in Iran, which would be acceptable to the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*), and that the people of Iran will have a key role in his
(*‘atfs*) uprising, which we will deal with in the section on the
uprising. It would suffice here to mention some *hadith*s:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “A people from the east will stage an
uprising and pave the ground for the uprising of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘a*).”[^22]

He (S) also said: “The black banners will come from (the people of) the
east whose hearts are like pieces of iron (in firmness). Then, anyone
who becomes informed of their movement will go to them and pay
allegiance to them even to the extent of traveling over ice if it is
necessary.”[^23]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see a community (*qawm*)
that will stage an uprising in the east and demand rights but rights
will not be given to them. They will seek again but again it will not be
granted to them. In such a state of affairs, swords will be unsheathed
and put on the shoulder.

At that time, the enemy will accept their demands, but they will not
accept it. They will stage an uprising and will not give the right to
anyone except to its owner of the affair (rightful owner).

Their killed ones are martyrs. If I knew them, I would have prepared
myself for the owner of this affair.”[^24]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The companions of Hadrat Qa’im (*‘atfs*) are
three-hundred and thirteen, and they are from the progeny of *‘ajam*
(non-Arabs).”[^25]

Although *‘ajam* is said to be the non-Arabs, the Iranians are certainly
included and keeping the other *hadith*s in view, there will be the
presence of a large number of Iranians among the special forces of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*).

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Soon after you, there will be a
community (*qawm*) at whose feet the world will be gathered—they will
traverse the world—and the doors of the world will be opened for them,
the men and women of Persia will serve them. The earth will be rolled
under their steps in such a manner that anyone of them could cover the
distance from east to west within an hour. They will sell neither
themselves to the world nor its inhabitants. The world is also not their
delight and portion.”[^26]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Blessed is Taleqan! It is
because God has treasures there which are neither gold nor silver.
Instead, they are men of faith who have really recognized God and they
will be the companions of the Mahdi (Guided One) of Muhammad’s Progeny
(*‘atfs*) at the end of time.”[^27]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said regarding Khurasan: “There are
treasures in Khurasan but they are not gold and silver. Instead, they
are men whom God and His Messenger love.”[^28]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 351.

[^2]: Tafsir Imam al-‘Askari, p. 344; Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 260; Muniyyah
al-Murid, p. 35; Mahajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 1, p. 32; Hilyah al-Abrar,
vol. 2, p. 455; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 6; Al-‘Awalim, vol. 3, p.
295.

[^3]: عن النّبىّ(ص): إِنَّ الله تعالى يبعث لِهذه الأُمَّة على رَأس كلّ
ماﺌﺔ سنة من يجدد لها دينها.

[^4]: Rey or Shahr-e Rey (City of Rey): the old Tehran and located at
the southern part of today’s Tehran. (Trans.)

[^5]: Imam Musa al-Kazim, son of Imam Ja‘far as-Sadiq: seventh of the
Twelve Imams, and father of Hadrat Fatimah al-Ma‘sumah who was buried in
Qum. He was born in Medina in 744 CE and died in prison in Baghdad in
799 CE. (Trans.)

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, p. 217.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 216.

[^8]: “Word” in the Qur’an has been used for various meanings, among
them: the promise of truth; monotheism; Islamic call. (Trans.)

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, p. 213.

[^10]: Ibid.; Safinah al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 445.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, p. 217.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 218.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 218.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Dhikr Isbahan, p. 11.

[^17]: In linguistics, mawali and mawla have various technical
implications. In volume one of Al-Ghadir, ‘Allamah Amini has reported
twenty-two (22) terms, which in technical terms, in the Qur’an and in
the hadith, have five (5) sets of meanings: wala’ ‘ataq, wala’ islam,
wala’ halaf, wala’ qabilah and wala’ in contrast to the Arabs, and what
is meant is the non-Arabs. This meaning is mostly meant by the scholars
of ‘ilm ar-rijal (science of the chain of hadith transmission and
transmitters). See At-Taqrib wa’t-Taysir, vol. 2, p. 333. The secret
behind this is that they equate this word with the Iranians probably on
the basis that the use of the word to mean them prevails (ghalabeh-ye
wajudi) or its usage (isti‘mali) referring to them is so much that some
have claimed that this is what it really means. In addition, in the
writings of past and contemporary scholars, it has been interpreted as
such and in imitating them, we have interpreted it accordingly though we
do not insist on it. By “Persia” (Fars) they used to mean those lands in
contrast to the Roman Empire that included today’s Iran and some parts
of other lands that were once parts of Iran at that time.

[^18]: Dhikr Isbahan, p. 12. See Al-Jami‘ as-Sahih, vol. 5, p. 382.

[^19]: Ramuz al-Ahadith, p. 33.

[^20]: In view of the fact that the market of Kufah was mostly populated
by Persians speaking the Persian language (as can be understood from
Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 13, p. 250, hadith 4), it becomes very clear
that the mawali against whom Ash‘ath was protesting and whom the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) was defending were precisely the
Iranians.

[^21]: Al-Gharat, vol. 24, p. 498; Safinah al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 693; Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 20, p. 284.

[^22]: Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, p. 1368; Al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat,
vol. 1, p. 200; Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 318; Kashf al-Ghammah,
vol. 3, p. 268; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 599; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
51, p. 87.

[^23]: ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 129; Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 490; Yanabi‘
al-Mawaddah, p. 491; Kashf al-Ghammah, vol. 3, p. 263; Ithbat al-Hudah,
vol. 3, p. 596; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 84.

[^24]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 373; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 243; Ibn
Majah, Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, p. 1366; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p.
464.

[^25]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 315; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 2, p. 547; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 369.

[^26]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 449.

[^27]: Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 106; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 150; Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 591; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 491; Kashf
al-Ghumah, vol. 3, p. 286.

[^28]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 591.


