The Soldiers of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
=====================================

The forces of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be composed of various
nationalities and at the time of uprising they will be called through
unique means. The individuals who have been designated before as
commanders will assume the responsibility of guiding the soldiers and
planning war operations.

The soldiers to be accepted in the army of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) under
special circumstances have peculiar characteristics of their own. Some
will be present in the primary staff and some will join the army. A
group has been called the security guard corps.

In this chapter, we will take a look at the *hadith*s related to this
topic.

Commanders of the Army
----------------------

In the *hadith*s we can read the names of the individuals who have been
associated with particular military operations and the command of a
number of soldiers. In this section, we shall mention the names and
functions of some of them:

### 1. Hadrat ‘Isa (Jesus Christ) (‘a)

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said in a sermon (*khutbah*):
“…Then the Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will appoint Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) as his
representative in the offensive operations against ad-Dajjal (the
Anti-Christ). ‘Isa (*‘a*) will set out to capture and suppress
ad-Dajjal.

Ad-Dajjal who will then be controlling the entire world, destroying
agriculture and human generation, will call the people toward him and
anyone who accepts him will be treated with favor and anyone who refuses
to accept him would be killed. He will travel throughout the world, with
the exception of Mecca, Medina and Bayt al-Muqaddas (Jerusalem), and all
the illegitimate children from both the east and the west of the globe
will rally around him.

“Ad-Dajjal will set out toward the Hijaz and ‘Isa (*‘a*) will intercept
him at the passage of Harsha. ‘Isa (*‘a*) will direct a horrible shout
at him and strike him a decisive blow. Ad-Dajjal will melt in a blazing
fire like lead melting in fire.”[^1]

The penetration of the blow that will lead to the melting of ad-Dajjal
is perhaps due to the use of the ultramodern weapons at that time, or it
could be due to one of the miracles of Hadrat ‘Isa.

Concerning the salient features of Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*), it is thus
stated: “He has such magnificence that once the enemy sees him he will
remember death as if ‘Isa was demanding his life.”[^2]

### 2. Shu‘ayb ibn Salih

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The Sufyani and the bearers
of the black banners will confront each other while among the latter
there will be a young man from the Bani Hashim in the palm of whose left
hand would be a black mole. He would be in front of his soldiers and
would be from the tribe of Bani Tamim. His name is Shu‘ayb ibn
Salih.”[^3]

Hasan al-Basri said: “In the land of Rey a person named Shu‘ayb ibn
Salih will appear having broad shoulders, a dark complexion, and
beardless. There will be an army of four thousand men under his command
whose garments will be white and their banners will be black. They will
constitute the vanguard of the Mahdi’s army.”[^4]

‘Ammar ibn Yasir said: “Shu‘ayb ibn Salih is the standard-bearer of
Hadrat al-Mahdi.”[^5]

Shablanji said: “The commander of the advance forces of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) will be a man from the tribe of Bani Tamim with a slight beard
and who will be called, Shu‘ayb ibn Salih.”[^6]

Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah said: “An army will set out from Khurasan that
will wear black belts and white shirts. One of the army’s vanguards will
be the commander called Shu‘ayb ibn Salih or Salih ibn Shu‘ayb who is
from the tribe of Bani Tamim. They will defeat the soldiers of the
Sufyani and drive them away; they will arrive in Bayt al-Muqaddas and
pave the ground for the government of Hadrat al-Mahdi.”[^7]

### 3. Isma‘il the Son of Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) and ‘Abdullah ibn Sharik

Abu Khadijah said that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “I asked God to keep
(my son) Isma‘il alive after me but He did not grant it, but granted him
another station. He will be the first person to reappear along with his
ten companions. ‘Abdullah ibn Sharik will be his standard-bearer and one
of his ten companions.”[^8]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see ‘Abdullah ibn Sharik
al-‘Amiri who has put a black turban on his head with the two sides of
his turban placed between his shoulders. With an army of four thousand
men as vanguards of our Qa’im, they will climb the mountain slope and
always utter *takbir*.”[^9]

### 4. ‘Aqil and Harith

Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*) will let the army
advance until they will arrive in Iraq in such a manner that soldiers
will be moving to his front and at the rear. The commander of the
advance forces will be a man named ‘Aqil while the commander of the rear
soldiers will be a man named Harith.”[^10]

### 5. Jubayr ibn Khabur

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) quoted the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) as
saying: “While their weapons have already been drawn from the scabbards,
this person—Jubayr—along with four thousand men in Jabal al-Ahwaz will
wait for the advent of the Qa’im from among us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*. Then,
this person along with and beside the Imam will engage in combat against
the enemy.”[^11]

### 6. ‘Umar ibn Mufaddal

Imam as-Sadiq said to Mufaddal: “You, along with forty four other
persons, will be with Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*). You will be on the
right side of the Imam (*‘a*) enjoining (good) and forbidding (evil),
and the people at that time, compared to the people of today, will
believe in you more sincerely.”[^12]

### 7. The Companions of the Cave (ashab al-kahf)

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The Companions of the Cave
(*ashab al-kahf*) will come to assist the Mahdi (*‘atfs*).”[^13]

The Nationality of the Soldiers
-------------------------------

The forces of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be composed of various
nationalities. In the *hadith*s there are various views in this regard.
Sometimes, the soldiers of the Imam (*‘atfs*) have been described as
*a‘jam*—interpreted as non-Arabs.

Some *hadith*s cite the names of the cities and countries from which
soldiers will hasten to assist the Imam (*‘atfs*). At other times, they
have mentioned particular communities (*aqwam*) such as the repentant
from among the Children of Israel, the faithful among the Christians,
and upright people to be revived in the future, who will assist the Imam
(*‘a*).  
 In this chapter, we will mention some *hadith*s in this regard.

### 1. Iranians

It can be understood from the *hadith*s that a considerable number of
the special soldiers in the army of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) would be Iranians
and they have been mentioned in various ways such as the people of Rey,
the people of Khurasan, the treasures of Taleqan, the Qummis, the people
of Persia, etc.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The forces with black banners that will rise
up from Khurasan will come to Kufah, and when Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
appears in Mecca, they will pay allegiance to him.”[^14]  
 Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) also said: “The supporters of Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘a*) will be three hundred and thirteen persons who will be from the
children of the *a‘jam* (non-Arabs).”[^15]

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar said that the Prophet (S) said: “God will give your
(Muslims’) power to the *a‘jam*; they are like lions that will never
desert the battlefield. They will kill you (Arabs) and plunder your
properties.”[^16]

Hudhayfah also narrated a *hadith* with the same content from the
Prophet (S).[^17] Of course, the implication of the *hadith* is
debatable and problematic. Based on the *hadith*s, a time will come when
the Iranians will unsheathe their swords against the Arabs to spread
Islam and make them return to Islam, and they will slay those who oppose
them. The condition of the Arabs at that time will be very deplorable
with difficult and unpleasant days awaiting them.

Although *a‘jam* is said to be the non-Arabs, the Iranians are
definitely included. On the basis of other *hadith*s, both in preparing
the ground for operations to be conducted prior to the advent (*zuhur*)
and at the time of the uprising of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), the
Iranians will have a pivotal role and they will constitute a large
number of combatants.

In a sermon delivered by ‘Ali (*‘a*) regarding the supporters of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and their nationalities, the names of some Iranian
cities have been mentioned.

Asbagh ibn Nabatah said that the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)
delivered a sermon in which he mentioned Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and
his supporters who will accompany him in the uprising, saying: “One is
from Ahwaz; one from Shushtar; three are from Shiraz whose names are
Hafs, Ya‘qub and ‘Ali; four are from Isfahan whose names are Musa, ‘Ali,
‘Abdullah, and Ghalfan; one from Burujerd named Qadim; one is from
Nahavand named ‘Abdur-Razzaq; three are from Hamedan[^18] whose names
are Ja‘far, Ishaq and Musa; ten are from Qum whose names are that of the
*Ahl al-Bayt* of the Messenger of Allah (and in another *hadith*
eighteen have been mentioned); one from Shirvan’; and one is from
Khurasan named Darid.

There are also five whose names are that of the Companions of the Cave;
one from Amul; one from Gorgan; one from Damghan; one from Sarakhs; one
from Saveh; twenty four from Taleqan; two from Qazvin; one from Fars;
one from Abhar; one from Ardebil; three from Maragheh; one from Khuy;
one from Salmas; three from Abadan; and one from Kazerun.”

Then, the Commander of the Faithful said: “The Noble Prophet (S)
mentioned to me three hundred and thirteen persons of the supporters of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) equal to the number of the supporters in (the Battle
of) Badr, and he said: ‘God will bring them from both the east and the
west to the precinct of the *Ka‘bah*’ faster than the blink of an
eye.”[^19]

As you can observe, among the three hundred and thirteen persons
constituting the special corps of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)—who will
accompany him at the beginning of the uprising—seventy two will come
from the present cities of Iran. If we also take into account what has
been narrated in *Dala’il al-Imamah*[^20] of Tabari and the names of
cities that were in Iran at that time, the number of Iranians will
become more than this.

In this *hadith* the name of a city is sometimes mentioned twice,
sometimes the names of some cities in a country, and at other times the
name of the very country has been mentioned.

In case the *hadith* has been correctly recorded, it perhaps bespeaks of
the divisions and the names used at that time, thus geographical
divisions in the present age cannot serve as the criteria to interpret
and understand this *hadith*; for, the names of cities change over time;
sometimes, the name of one city is used for a country at the present
time or vice versa.

The other point is that by collating the names of cities (mentioned in
the

*  
*

hadith

  
in question) with the present geographical map of the world, it can be
concluded perhaps that the supporters of the Imam are scattered
throughout the world and it is possible that the word “

*  
*

afranjah

  
” mentioned in the

*  
*

hadith

  
refers to the western hemisphere. If this collation and statement were
correct, the

*  
*

hadith

  
will become meaningful with the dictum,

**  
**

“

**  
**
قلبت

**  
**

**  
**
خليت

**  
**

**  
**
لو

**  
**
”

**  
**
.

  
It is because at no time will the earth be devoid of good men;
otherwise, it will come to an end.

In other *hadith*s, some cities have been especially mentioned. Here, we
will suffice to mention some *hadith*s concerning the cities of Qum,
Khurasan and Taleqan:

#### a. Qum

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The soil of Qum is holy… Aren’t they the
supporters of our Qa’im and callers toward our right?”[^21]

‘Affan al-Basiri said that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said to him: “Do you
know why Qum is named “Qum”?” I replied: “God, His Messenger and you
know better.” He said: “It is called Qum because its inhabitants will
rally behind the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘atfs*) and rise up along
with him (*‘atfs*). Along this line, they will show their perseverance
and assist him (*‘atfs*).”[^22]

#### b. Khurasan

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “…There are treasures in Khurasan but they are not gold and
silver. Instead, they are men who will gather together on their belief
in God and His Messenger.”[^23] Perhaps, it means that what they have in
common is the correct belief in God and His Messenger, or it may mean
that God will gather them one day in Mecca.

#### c. Taleqan

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Blessed is Taleqan! It is
because God has treasures there which are neither gold nor silver.
Instead, they are men of faith who have really recognized God and they
will be the companions of the Mahdi (Guided One) of Muhammad’s Progeny
(*‘atfs*) at the end of time.”[^24]

### 2. Arabs

The *hadith*s related to the participation of Arabs in the uprising of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*) can be classified into two. Some indicate their
lack of participation in the revolution of al-Mahdi while a number of
other *hadith*s mention some cities in Arab countries in which there are
those who will rise up to support the Imam.

Assuming that they are authentic, the *hadith*s that talk about the lack
of participation of the Arabs can be justified. For, it might be
possible that there will be no Arabs among the soldiers who will
accompany the Imam at the beginning of the uprising. Shaykh Hurr ‘Amili
in the book, *Ithbat al-Hudah*, has interpreted it this way.

Concerning the Arab cities mentioned in the *hadith*s, perhaps non-Arab
soldiers residing there will hasten to aid the Imam, and not those who
are Arab in origin. It may also mean that it refers to Arab governments
and states. Let us look at this category of *hadith*s:

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Keep aloof from the Arabs for they will have
a gloomy and dangerous future; isn’t it that no one from among them will
accompany Hadrat al-Mahdi in his uprising?”[^25] Shaykh Hurr ‘Amili
said: “Perhaps this statement of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) refers to the
beginning of the Mahdi’s uprising, or it alludes to their minimal
participation…”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Great and noble personalities from the
land of Sham will join al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) as well as those from the
various tribes and lands adjacent to Sham; they are the ones whose
hearts are said to be like pieces of iron. They are worshippers at night
and lions during the day.”[^26]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Three hundred and thirteen persons, the same
number as that of the supporters (Muslim soldiers) in the Battle of
Badr, will pay allegiance to Hadrat al-Mahdi in between the *rukn* and
*maqam* (in the *Ka‘bah*). From among them, great figures from among the
people of Egypt, good men from Sham, and good men from among the people
of Iraq can be seen and the Imam will rule to the extent that God would
wish.”[^27]  
 Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) also said concerning the city of Kufah: “When
Hadrat al-Qa’im appears and proceeds to Kufah, God will choose from
behind Kufah (Najaf al-Ashraf) seventy thousand truthful and upright
people. They will be among the supporters and companions of the
Imam.”[^28]

### 3. The Followers of Various Religions

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar reported that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “During the
advent of the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘a*), some people will come
from behind the *Ka‘bah* such as the twenty seven persons from the
community (*qawm*) of Musa (Moses)—those who rightfully give judgment;
the seven persons from the Companions of the Cave; Yusha‘ the executor
of Musa’s will (*wasi*) (Joshua); the believer from the family of
Pharaoh; Salman al-Farsi; Abu Dujanah al-Ansari;[^29] and Malik
al-Ashtar.”[^30]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The souls of the believers can see the
Progeny of Muhammad (*‘a*) in the mountains of Radawi, partake of their
food, drink their beverages, participate in their assemblies, and talk
with them until such time that the Qa’im from among us, the *Ahl
al-Bayt*, rises up. At that time, God will incite them; they will accept
the call of the Imam in large groups and accompany him. During that
time, those who possess false beliefs will fall into doubt and
skepticism, and the groups, parties, and claimants to fellowships and
partisanships will disintegrate while those who are near to God
(*muqarrabin*) (and the believers) will attain salvation.”[^31]

Ibn Jarih reported: “I have heard that when the twelve tribes of the
Children of Israel killed their prophets and turned infidels, one tribe
regretted doing such an act and was disgusted with it; they asked God to
separate them from the rest of the tribes. God opened a tunnel
underground in which they travelled for the period of one year and a
half until they came out behind the land of China, and up to now they
are still there. They are Muslims and they face our *Qiblah*.”[^32]

Some say that on the night of the ascension (*mi‘raj*), Jibra’il brought
the Noble Prophet (S) to them, and the Prophet (S) read for them ten
Meccan chapters (*suwar*) of the Qur’an. They were convinced and
acknowledged his prophetic mission. The Prophet (S) ordered them to stay
there, abandon work on Saturday (which is the Sabbath day for the Jews),
establish prayer, and give the poor-rate (*zakat*). They accepted it and
performed these duties.[^33] And the other obligations had not been made
incumbent upon them.

Ibn ‘Abbas said: “In the exegesis of the blessed verse (*ayah*):

**  
**
﴿

**  
**

**  
**
وَقُلْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِ لِبَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ اسْكُنُواْ الأَرْضَ فَإِذَا
جَاء وَعْدُ الآخِرَةِ جِئْنَا بِكُمْ لَفِيفًا ﴾

*“After him We said to the Children of Israel, ‘Take up residence in the
land, and when the occasion of the other (promise) comes, We shall
gather you in mixed company,”*[^34]

It is said that the “promise in the end” (*wa‘dah al-akhirah*) refers to
the advent of Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) who, along with the Children of Israel,
will rise up. Our companions, however, have narrated that they will rise
with the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘a*).”[^35]

On the exegesis of the noble verse, *“Among the people of Moses is a
nation who guide (the people) by the truth and do justice
thereby,”*[^36] the late Majlisi said: “There is a difference of
opinions as to who constitute this *ummah*.”

Others such as Ibn ‘Abbas say: “They are a community that lives beyond
China. Their land has been largely separated from China by a desert full
of sand. They will never make any changes in the law of God.”[^37]

In describing them, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “They do not regard
property as exclusive to them unless their brethren in faith are treated
as partners to it. They also rest at night and are awake in the day, and
are engaged in agriculture. But none of us (people) could go to their
land and none of them will come to us (people), and they are on the
right path.”[^38]

Concerning the noble verse,

**  
**
﴿

**  
**
وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّا نَصَارَى أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَهُمْ
فَنَسُواْ حَظًّا مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُواْ بِهِ

**  
**
﴾

*“Also from those who say, ‘We are Christians,’ We took their pledge;
but they forgot a part of what they were reminded,”*[^39]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The Christians will be reminded of this path
and rule, and a group from them will accompany Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*).”[^40]

### 4. Jabalqa and Jabarsa

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “God has a city called Jabalqa in the eastern
hemisphere having twelve gates of gold. The distance of one gate to
another is one *farsang* (6 kilometers). There is a tower in each of the
gates that can accommodate an army of twelve thousand men.

Their equipment, weapons and swords have been ready and they are waiting
for the advent of Hadrat al-Qa’im. God has also a city called Jabarsa in
the western hemisphere (with the same features), and I am the proof of
Allah for them.”[^41]

There are numerous other *hadith*s about the other cities and lands in
the world whose inhabitants never commit sins against God. For further
information, refer to volume 54 of the book, *Bihar al-Anwar*.

It can be understood from the *hadith*s as a whole that Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) has armies and bases on standby, which at the time of his
advent, will participate in combat. From some other *hadith*s, however,
it can be understood that they have passed away a long time ago and in
order to assist the Imam, God will revive them and let them return to
the world.[^42]

Imam a

s

-

S

adiq (

*  
*

‘a

  
) said: “Najm ibn A‘yun is among those who will engage in

*  
*

jihad

  
after their

*  
*

raj‘ah

  
(return to life).”

[^43]  

He also said regarding

H

amran and Maysar: “It is as if I can see

H

amran ibn A‘in and Maysar ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz holding swords and delivering
sermons to the people

(“

**  
**

الناس

**  
**

**  
**
يخبطان

**  
**
”)

  
between

Saf

a

[^44]  

and Marwah

[^45]  

(in Mecca).”

[^46]

In

*  
*

Mu‘jam ar-Rij

*  
*
a

*  
*
l al-Had

*  
*
i

*  
*
th

  
, the late

A

yatull

a

h al-

‘

U

z

m

a

Sayyid Ab

u

’l-Q

a

sim al-Kh

u

’

i interprets

**  
**

“

**  
**
الناس

**  
**

**  
**
يخبطان

**  
**
”

  
as “striking the people with the sword”.

Similarly, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) looked at Dawud Raqi[^47] and said:
“Anyone who wants to see a man from among the supporters of Hadrat
al-Qa’im should look at this man (i.e., this man is among the supporters
of al-Mahdi who will return to life again).”[^48]

The Number of Soldiers
----------------------

Regarding the number of the soldiers and supporters of the Imam of the
Time (*‘atfs*), there are various *hadith*s available. Some *hadith*s
say that their number is three hundred and thirteen while others say ten
thousand and more. It is necessary here to highlight two points:

1. The three hundred and thirteen persons—as mentioned in the
*hadith*s—are the special forces that will be in the company of the Imam
at the beginning of the uprising. They will be the administrators of the
global government of the Imam of the Time (*‘a*). As the late Arbeli has
stated in *Kashf an-Ni‘mah*: “From this *hadith* (regarding ten thousand
persons), it can be deduced that the number of supporters of the Imam
cannot be limited to three hundred and thirteen, for it is only the
number of supporters who will be in the company of the Imam at the
beginning of the uprising.”

2. The number, four thousand, ten thousand, etc. which has been
mentioned in some *hadith*s, is not the total number of the military
forces of the Mahdi (*‘a*). Instead—as can also be deduced from the
*hadith*s—each of these figures indicates the number of forces who will
participate in the uprising at a particular juncture of the Imam’s
advent or in a particular battle in a certain part of the world.
Perhaps, there are other issues we do not know, which will be clarified
with the advent of the Imam (*‘atfs*).

### 1. Special Forces

Yunus ibn Zibyan said: “I was in the company of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
when he mentioned the name of one of the supporters of Hadrat al-Qa’im
and said: “They are three hundred and thirteen persons and each of them
sees himself as being among the three hundred persons.”[^49]

As the Imam (*‘a*) said that “Each of them sees himself as being among
the three hundred,” there are two probabilities that can be entertained
in this regard:

(1) that the physical strength of each of them would be equivalent to
that of three hundred persons just as the strength of one of the
believers at that time would be equivalent to that of forty men; and

(2) that each of them would have three hundred forces and sees himself
among three hundred forces under his command.

Therefore, they will probably be commanders of approximately three
hundred soldiers. It is equally probable that it only means what it
literally says. That is, each of them regards himself part of that
number as some have said.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin (*‘a*) said: “Those who will disappear from their
locations in order to assist Imam al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) are three hundred
and thirteen—equal to that of Badr—who will gather together in Mecca in
the morning of the following day.”[^50]

Imam al-Jawad (*‘a*) said that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The
Imam of the Time (*‘a*) will appear in the land of Tuhamah (Mecca). He
has treasures that are not gold and silver, but powerful horses and
illustrious men who are equal in number to that of the Companions in
Badr. They are three hundred and thirteen from different parts of the
world who will come to rally around him.

There is a sealed book in his possession in which the number of his
supporters has been written along with their names, cities, races,
characteristics, and epithets. They will all be under the command of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*).”[^51]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The people will gather around him like
birds until they reach three hundred and fourteen persons—some of whom
will be women, and the Imam will prevail over any tyrant and son of a
tyrant, and justice will be as the people would wish. I wish the dead
among them were among the living and benefit from justice!”[^52]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will appear with
three hundred and thirteen persons—equal to the number of Companions in
Badr—without any prior notice and arrangement. This is when they would
have been scattered like an autumn cloud. They are lions in the day and
worshippers at the night.”[^53]

Iban ibn Taghlub said that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Three hundred and
thirteen persons will soon come to your mosque (Mecca). The people of
Mecca know that these persons are not related to their fathers and
forefathers (and are not among the people of Mecca). Each of them has a
sword on which a word is inscribed from which thousands of words
(problems) can be unravelled and solved.”[^54]

In some *hadith*s, the names of some of them have been mentioned of
which it shall suffice to quote two *hadith*s:

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said to Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar, one of his companions:
“You and forty four other men are among the supporters and companions of
Hadrat al-Qa’im.”[^55]

Perhaps, what is meant by “forty four” is the number from among the
companions of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*).

The Imam also said: “During the advent of the Qa’im from Muhammad’s
Progeny (*‘a*), twenty seven persons will come out from behind the
*Ka‘bah* and twenty five persons from the community (*qawm*) of Musa
(Moses); those who were judges that were always on the path of truth and
justice; the seven persons from the Companions of the Cave; Yusha‘ the
executor of Musa’s will (*wasi*) (Joshua); the believer from the family
of Pharaoh; Salman al-Farsi; Abu Dujanah al-Ansari;[^56] and Malik
al-Ashtar will return to the world.”[^57] In some *hadith*s Miqdad ibn
Aswad has also been mentioned.

Based on the *hadith*s, the angels who move things from place to place
will transfer the good among the dead to holy places such as the House
of God (*Ka‘bah*).[^58] Therefore, these persons are perhaps those whose
bodies will be transferred near the *Ka‘bah* and their *raj‘ah* or
return to life will take place right there. Based on other reports, this
place is behind the city of Kufah, i.e. Najaf al-Ashraf, which again
will render the meaning of the *hadith* correct; for their bodies will
be transferred there, i.e. Najaf al-Ashraf.

It is worthy of note that these individuals have experience in struggle
in the political and military arenas against the *taghuti*s[^59] of
their time, particularly Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dujanah, Malik al-Ashtar,
and Miqdad ibn al-Aswad who had participated in the wars during the
early period of Islam and had demonstrated their own acts of bravery.
Some of them have also experience in leadership and command.

### 2. The Army of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)

Abu Basir said: “A man from among the inhabitants of Kufah asked Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*): ‘How many persons will be with Hadrat al-Qa’im in his
uprising? People are saying that the companions of Imam are equal in
number to the soldiers (of Islam) in (the Battle of) Badr, i.e. three
hundred and thirteen persons.’ The Imam (*‘a*) said: ‘Hadrat al-Mahdi
will not appear unless he is with a strong and powerful army and a
powerful army will not have less than ten thousand combatants’.”[^60]

The Imam (*‘a*) also said: “When God grants Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*)
the permission to stage the uprising, three hundred and thirteen persons
will pay allegiance to him. The Imam will stay in Mecca until the number
of his companions will reach ten thousand persons. Then, he will set out
toward Medina.”[^61]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The Mahdi will appear with
an army of at least twelve thousand persons and a maximum number of
fifteen thousand persons. Fear and intimidation (of the enemies) with
respect to his military forces will go ahead of his soldiers. No enemy
will confront them without being defeated. He and his soldiers will not
reproach anybody in the way of Allah. The slogan of his soldiers is
this: ‘Let them die! Let them die!’”[^62]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) will not
appear unless their assembly and number would be completed.” The
narrator asked: “How much is their number?” The Imam (*‘a*) replied:
“Ten thousand persons.”[^63]

Shaykh Hurr ‘Amili said: “It is stated in the *hadith* that the total
number of the army of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) is one hundred
thousand persons.”[^64]

### 3. Security Guard Corps

Ka‘b said: “A man from Bani Hashim will reside in Bayt al-Muqaddas. The
number of his security forces is twelve thousand.” In another *hadith*
he said: “The number of his guards is thirty six thousand persons, and
twelve thousand will be stationed at the beginning of every highway
leading toward Bayt al-Muqaddas.”[^65]

Of course, the word *haras* in the *hadith* also means “aid” and “help”
but this meaning in the context of *hadith* is not appropriate because
it possibly means the *supporters* and *friends* of the Imam (*‘atfs*).

Mustering the Soldiers
----------------------

As stated earlier, the soldiers of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will gather
around him from the different corners of the world. The *hadith*s
indicate various means by which the soldiers become aware of the
uprising and how they gather in Mecca. Some who are asleep in their beds
at night will find themselves in the presence of the Imam (*‘a*) in the
morning. Others will travel by traversing long distances within very
short periods of time and come into the presence of the Imam (*‘a*).
After being informed of the uprising, a certain group will join the Imam
(*‘a*) by riding on the clouds.

Let us look at a certain *hadith* in this regard:

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When the permission (of God) for the
appearance and uprising is to be granted to Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*),
he will recite “God” in His Hebrew name. At that time his supporters
will be ready; they will number three hundred and thirteen persons who
will be scattered like the autumn clouds and they will also be the
standard-bearers (and commanders). While resting at night, some of them
will disappear and in the morning they will find themselves in Mecca.
Others will be seen riding on clouds in the daytime. They will be
recognized by their names, their fathers, their families, and their
reputations.”[^66]

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar said: “I asked: ‘May I be your ransom! Which group
has a higher station in terms of faith?’ The Imam (*‘a*) said: ‘They are
those who will move on top of the clouds, those who will disappear about
whose station this blessed verse (*ayah*) has been revealed:

**  
**
﴿

**  
**
أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُواْ يَأْتِ بِكُمُ اللّهُ جَمِيعًا

**  
**

**  
**
﴾

*“Wherever you may be, Allah will bring you all together”*.’”[^67]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “A community (*qawm*) will emerge after
you that will gather the world under their feet, and the world will be
spread out for them, while the men and women of Persia will serve them.
The earth will be traversed under their steps in less than the blink of
an eye in such a manner that anyone of them could cover the distance
from east to west in an instant. They are not of this world and the
world has also no benefit and portion for them.”[^68]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The Shi‘ah and supporters of Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
will go toward him from different parts of the world; the earth will be
gathered under their feet and by traversing the world they will reach
the Imam (*‘a*) and pay allegiance to him.”[^69]

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Ajlan said: “I was in the company of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
when he was talking about the uprising of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*). I
asked him: ‘How can we be informed of the advent of the Mahdi?’ He
answered: ‘While getting up in the morning you will see a letter under
your pillow in which it would be written: ‘Following the Mahdi is an
excellent and good deed’.’”[^70]

Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*) said: “By Allah! If our Qa’im stages the uprising,
God will gather the Shi‘ah from all cities (and countries) to be around
him.”[^71]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) also said: “While the young Shi‘ah will be sleeping
on rooftops, suddenly and without prior notice, they will be brought in
multitudes in one night beside him (*‘atfs*). Then in the morning
everybody will be gathered around him (*‘atfs*).”[^72]

Things Necessary in Recruiting and Training the Soldiers
--------------------------------------------------------

In this regard, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The
supporters of the Mahdi (*‘atfs*) who number three hundred and thirteen
will go to him and they will find him who had been hidden, and they will
ask: ‘Are you the Promised Mahdi?’

He will answer: ‘Yes, O my supporters!’ Then he will again hide himself
from them and go to Medina. Because they will become aware of this, his
supporters will leave for Medina and when they arrive at the city of
Medina, the Imam (*‘a*), still being hidden will return to the city of
Mecca and in order to join him, his supporters will go to Mecca. Once
again, the Imam (*‘a*) will go to the city of Medina and his supporters
will go to Medina (for the second time), again he will go to Mecca, and
this routine will be repeated three times.

“The Imam (*‘a*) will test his supporters in such a manner in order to
be aware of their degree of adherence to him. Thereafter, he will appear
between Safa and Marwah and while addressing his supporters he will say:
‘I will not pursue any activity unless you pay allegiance to me under
certain conditions, adhere to it and not violate it in any way. I am
also obliged with respect to eight things.’ In reply to him, the Imam’s
(*‘a*) supporters will say in unison: ‘We do render our total submission
to you, follow you, and accept whatever conditions you set. Kindly tell
us what those conditions are.’

“The Imam (*‘atfs*) will go to Mount Safa in Mecca and his supporters
will also follow him. Addressing them there, he will say: ‘I will make a
covenant with you under these conditions:

(1) You shall not desert the battlefield;

(2) you shall not steal;

(3) you shall not perform any illegitimate act;

(4) you shall not commit unlawful acts;

(5) you shall not do any evil and obnoxious act;

(6) you shall not unjustly strike anyone;

(7) you shall not amass gold and silver;

(8) you shall not hoard wheat and barley;

(9) you shall not destroy any mosque;

(10) you shall not bear witness to falsehood;

(11) you shall not despise and belittle any believer;

(12) you shall not consume anything earned from usury;

(13) you shall endure adversities and difficulties;

(14) you shall not curse any theist and monotheist;

(15) you shall not drink wine;

(16) you shall not wear brocade;

(17) you shall not wear silk clothing;

(18) you shall not pursue an escapee;

(19) you shall not shed blood unlawfully;

(20) you shall not nourish the hypocrite and infidel;

(21) you shall not wear fur garments;

(22) you shall make the soil as your pillow (perhaps it means that “you
shall be humble and meek”);

(23) you shall shun unworthy acts; and

(24) you shall enjoin what is good and forbid what is wrong.

“‘If you abide with and act upon these conditions, it is incumbent upon
me to choose no one but you as my assistants; I have to wear nothing but
what you wear; I have nothing to eat but what you eat; I have nothing to
ride but what you ride; I should be with you wherever you go; I have to
go wherever you set out for; I have to be satisfied and pleased with a
small force and fill the earth with justice and equity just as it has
been full of injustice and oppression; and I have to worship God as He
is worthy to be worshipped. I will remain committed to what I have said
while you also have to remain committed to your pledges.’

“The companions said: ‘We are satisfied and we promise to be committed
to what you have said.’ Then, the Imam (*‘a*) will shake the hands of
each of his supporters (as a sign of allegiance)’.”[^73]

Of course, it must be noted that the Imam (*‘atfs*) will set these
conditions and impose this test on his special forces because they will
serve as administrators in his global government and they are ones who,
having good deeds, will play crucial roles in spreading justice in the
world.

Meanwhile, it must be borne in mind that the chain of transmission of
this *hadith* is dubious as it is from the *Khutbah al-Bayan*, which
some scholars regard as “weak” (*da‘if*) notwithstanding the fact that
some prominent figures have come to its defense and reinforcement.[^74]

Peculiarities of the Soldiers
-----------------------------

Many peculiarities and salient characteristics of the companions and
supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘a*) have been stated in the *hadith*s and we
will mention some of them below:

### 1. Worship and Devotion

In describing the supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
said: “They keep regular vigils and spend the night standing in worship
of God. During their prayers, their silent supplications are like the
buzz of honeybees. They mount their horses during the daytime in line
with the performance of their duties. They are worshippers at night and
lions during the day. On account of fear of God, they are in a
particular state. God will extend succor to the rightful Imam through
them.”[^75]

The Imam (*‘a*) also said: “It is as if I can see the Qa’im of
Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘a*) and his supporters behind the city of Kufah.
As if birds are spreading their wings over their heads. They are running
out of travel provisions and their garments are worn out and patched.
There are marks of prostration on their foreheads.

Yes, they are lions in the day and worshippers in the night. Their
hearts are like pieces of iron, firm and formidable. Each of them has
the strength equal to that of forty men. They will not be killed by
anyone but by hypocrites and infidels. God has thus described them in
the Qur’an:

**  
**
﴿

**  
**
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَاتٍ لِّلْمُتَوَسِّ

**  
**
مِينَ ﴾

*“There are indeed signs in that for the percipient.”*[^76]”[^77]

### 2. Love for the Imam and Obedience to Him

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The Master of the Affair (*sahib al-amr*)
(*‘atfs*) will be in occultation in some of these valleys (*Dhi*
*Tawa*). Two nights prior to his advent, his closest attendant will go
to meet some of the Imam’s supporters, asking them: ‘How many of you are
here?’ They will answer: ‘Forty persons.’ He will ask: ‘What will happen
to you if you see your leader?’ They will reply: ‘By God! If he lives in
a mountain, we will be with him and live the same way’.”[^78]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The supporters of the Imam (*‘atfs*) will
place their hands on the saddle of his horse and by doing so, they will
be asking for blessings. They will form a ring around him and in battles
they will offer their bodies and souls for him. They will accept and do
whatever he would ask from them.”[^79]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also stated the following in describing the
supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘a*): “He has men whose hearts will seem to be
as if they were from pieces of iron... They are more obedient to the
Imam than a slave girl would be in relation to her master and owner, and
they are subservient to his command.”[^80]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “God will gather warriors for Hadrat
al-Mahdi from the different corners of the world whose number would be
equal to that of the (Muslim) combatants in (the Battle of) Badr. They
are very diligent and determined in their obedience to him.”[^81]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see Hadrat al-Qa’im and
his supporters stationed in Najaf (Kufah) and (they are so steady and
unflinching there) that it is as if birds are sitting on their
heads.”[^82]

The warriors are standing with such discipline, lack of motion and total
submission to him that it is as if birds are sitting over their heads,
for if they would show the least movement, the birds will fly away.

### 3. Strong and Young Soldiers

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The supporters of al-Mahdi
are all young. There are no old and aged among them but a few who are
like antimony for the eye and salt for the food. Of course, the least
amount of a thing needed in food is salt.”[^83]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “What Prophet Lut (Lot) (*‘a*) meant in his
statement addressed to his enemies when he said, ‘I wish I had a potent
force against you or I can take refuge in a formidable column,’ was a
force similar to the potent force of the Promised Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and
his supporters each of whom has the strength equal to that of forty men.
They have hearts firmer than steel and when they traverse mountains, the
rocks tremble. They do not sheathe their swords unless when God wants
and is pleased with it.”[^84]

In this regard, Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im stages the
uprising, God will keep away sluggishness and weakness from our Shi‘ah
and make their hearts as firm and resolute as steel; He will grant each
of them the strength of forty men and they will become rulers and
leading figures on earth.”[^85]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “In the government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) our
Shi‘ah will be the rulers and leading figures on earth and each of them
will have the strength of forty men.”[^86]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “There is fear of the enemy in the hearts of
our Shi‘ah (today), but when our government is established and Imam
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) appears, each of our Shi‘ah will be more fearless
than a lion and sharper than a spear. They will crush our enemies
underfoot and slay them with their hands.”[^87]

‘Abdul-Malik ibn A‘yun said: “As I got up to say goodbye to Imam
al-Baqir (*‘a*), I leaned on my hands and said: ‘I wish I could perceive
the advent of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) in my youth (at the moment when
I am physically sound).’

The Imam (*‘a*) said: ‘Are you not satisfied that your enemies are
killing one another while you are safe in your own houses? If the Imam
(*‘a*) appears, each of you will be given the strength of forty men and
your hearts will be like steel so much so that if you struck the
mountains with such hearts, the mountains will rend asunder and be
pulled up. And you will become the leaders and trustees on earth’.”[^88]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “At the time of our affair (the government of
Hadrat al-Mahdi), God will remove fear from the hearts of our Shi‘ah and
place it on the hearts of our enemies. At that moment, each of our
Shi‘ah would be sharper than a spear and braver than a lion. A single
Shi‘ah will hit his enemy with a spear, strike him with a sword, and
crush him underfoot.”[^89]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “The supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
are men whose hearts are as firm and formidable as iron. Doubt and
skepticism about the Essence of God are never entertained in those
hearts. They are firmer than stone. If they were given the mission to
shuffle the mountains and interchange them, they would quickly do it,
and if the mission of destroying a city is given to them, they would be
able to destroy it (with such speed and decisiveness that it would be)
as if they were eagles sitting on horses.”[^90]

### 4. Beloved Soldiers

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see the supporters of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) dominating heaven and earth and there is nothing in
the world that would not be under their rule and sovereignty. Fierce
animals and predatory birds also seek their pleasure. They will be so
beloved that everywhere on earth will brag and boast to the other,
saying: ‘Today, one of the supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) dropped in
and passed by here’.”[^91]

### 5. Lovers of Martyrdom

Regarding the characteristics of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*), Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “They have an intense fear of God and they aspire
for martyrdom. Their aspiration is to be slain in the way of Allah.
Their slogan is ‘O avengers of Husayn (*‘a*)!’ As they move, the fear
and dread of them in the hearts of their enemies move with the distance
of one month’s travel.”[^92]

[^1]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 167.

[^2]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 161.

[^3]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 86; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 127; Kanz al-‘Ummal,
vol. 14, p. 588.

[^4]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 53; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 130; Ash-Shi‘ah
wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 210.

[^5]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 53; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 211.

[^6]: Nur al-Absar, p. 138; Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 211.

[^7]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 84; Ibn al-Munadi, p. 47; Darmi, Sunan, p.
98; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 126; Ibn Tawus, Fitan, p. 49.

[^8]: Al-Ayqaz min al-Haj‘ah, p. 266. See Kashi, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifah
ar-Rijal, p. 217; Ibn Dawud, Ar-Rijal, p. 206.

[^9]: Al-Ayqaz min al-Haj‘ah, p. 266. See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p.
67; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 561.

[^10]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 158.

[^11]: Khara’ij, vol. 1, p. 185; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 41, p. 296;
Mustadrakat ‘Ilm Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 2, p. 118. Notwithstanding an
extensive study of both Sunni and Shi‘ah books which I have conducted
regarding Jubayr ibn Khabur, I have found nothing except the following
point: Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) said: “Jubayr ibn Khabur was a treasurer of
Mu‘awiyah. His old mother was living in Kufah. One day Jubayr said to
Mu‘awiyah: “I missed my mother. Kindly permit me to see her so that I
could fulfill some of those rights I owe to her.” Mu‘awiyah said: “What
is your business in the city of Kufah? There is a sorcerer there named
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib and I am not sure that he would not deceive you.”
Jubayr said: “I have no business with ‘Ali. I want to go there in order
to see my mother and give to her some of her rights.” After being
granted permission, Jubayr set out for the journey. When he arrived in
the city of Kufah—since the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) after the
Battle of Siffin had assigned guards to be posted around the city who
used to control the traffic to and from the city—he was arrested by the
guards and brought to the city center. ‘Ali said to him: “You are among
the Godly treasurers. Mu‘awiyah said to you that I am a sorcerer.”
Jubayr said: “By God! He has said exactly that.” The Imam (‘a) said:
“You have an asset along with you a portion of which you have buried in
the ‘Ayn at-Tamar district.” Jubayr also admitted it. Afterward, the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) ordered Imam al-Hasan (‘a) to entertain
him. The following day, ‘Ali (‘a) said to his followers: “This person in
Jabal al-Ahwaz…” (The complete sentence is in the text of the book.)

[^12]: Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 248; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 573.

[^13]: Husayni, Al-Hidayah, p. 31; Irshad al-Qulub, p. 286; Hilyah
al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 601. The other persons are Dawud Raqi and Najm ibn
A‘yun, Hamran ibn A‘in, and Maysar ibn ‘Abdul-‘Aziz whose revival and
presence at the time of Imam al-Qa’im (‘atfs) have been mentioned in
some hadiths, which we shall discuss later.

[^14]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 85; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 129; Al-Hawi
Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p. 69.

[^15]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 315; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 547; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 369.

[^16]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 366.

[^17]: ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p. 385; Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir,
vol. 7, p. 268; Hilyah al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 24; Firdaws al-Akhbar,
vol. 5, p. 445.

[^18]: Probably it refers to the Arab tribe of Hamdan.

[^19]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 146.

[^20]: Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 316.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, p. 218.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 216.

[^23]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 147; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, p. 310; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 304.

[^24]: Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 106; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 150; Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 591; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 491; Kashf
al-Ghammah, vol. 3, p. 268.

[^25]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 284; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 517;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 333.

[^26]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 142; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 304.

[^27]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah (new edition), p. 477; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 334; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 518.

[^28]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 43; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, vol. 2, p. 435;
Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 456.

[^29]: His name is Sammak ibn Kharshah Ansari. The late Mamqani said
concerning him: “I regard him as Hasan al-Hal…” See Tanqih al-Maqal,
vol. 2, p. 68.

[^30]: Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 266; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p.
55.

[^31]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 131; Al-Iqaz, p. 290; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
27, p. 308.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 316. Qiblah: the direction where the
Muslims face in times of prayer and other acts, which is the Ka‘bah in
Mecca. (Trans.)

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 316.

[^34]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:104.

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 316.

[^36]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:159.

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 316.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:14.

[^40]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 352; At-Tahdhib, vol. 7, p. 405; Wasa’il
ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 14, p. 56; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 601; Tafsir
Burhan, vol. 1, p. 454; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 422.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 334; vol. 26, p. 47.

[^42]: The Shi‘ah believe that in this very world and after the advent
of Hadrat al-Mahdi (‘atfs), the Infallible Imams and a group of the
believers as well as a group of the infidels will be revived and return
again to the world. There are tens of hadiths in this regard. My father,
the late Ayatullah Shaykh Muhammad Rida Tabasi Najafi (r) has discussed
it in detail in the second volume of the book, Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah
(Najaf, 1385 AH). Recently, this book has been translated into Persian
by Hujjat al-Islam Shaykh Mir Shavalad and published as Setareh-ye
Derakhshan (Brilliant Star). Fifteen years ago, by making use of the
writings and words of my late father, I have also published a relevant
lecture note.

[^43]: Al-Ayqaz min al-Haj‘ah, p. 269.

[^44]: Safa: a hill in Mecca which is an extension of Abu Qubays
Mountain to the east of the Masjid al-Haram. Traversing the distance
between this place and Marwah (another place in Mecca) is another
devotional hajj rite and is termed sa‘i (literally: effort, trial,
attempt). (Trans.)

[^45]: Marwah: a hill located between the east and the southeast of
Mecca, north of Safa. (Trans.)

[^46]: Kashi, Rijal, p. 402; Al-Khulasah, p. 98; Qahba’i, Rijal, vol. 2,
p. 289; Al-Ayqaz min al-Haj‘ah, p. 284; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 4;
Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 6, p. 259.

[^47]: Regarding the reliability of Dawud Raqi, the ‘ulama’ of rijal
have extensive discussions. Some have considered this hadith as “weak”
(da‘if) while others treated it reliable (mu’aththaq). Another hadith
has been reported from Imam as-Sadiq (‘a) as he has said: “The station
and position of Dawud to me is that of Miqdad to the Prophet (S).”
Tanqih al-Maqal, vol. 2, p. 414.

[^48]: Al-Ayqaz min al-Haj‘ah, p. 264.

[^49]: Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 320; Al-Muhajjah, p. 46.

[^50]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 654; ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p.
56; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 139; vol. 4, p. 94; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 323.

[^51]: ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, vol. 1, p. 59; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
310.

[^52]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 315.

[^53]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 64; Al-Fatawa al-Hadithiyyah, p. 31.

[^54]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 671; Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 311; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 286.

[^55]: Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 248; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 573.

[^56]: His name is Samak ibn Khurshah Ansari. The late Mamqani said
concerning him: “I regard him as Hasan al-Hal…” See Tanqih al-Maqal,
vol. 2, p. 68.

[^57]: Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, p. 266; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 55.

[^58]: Durar al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p. 258.

[^59]: The term taghut applies to any idol, object, or individual that
prevents men from doing what is good, and leads them astray. The term
has been used eight times in the Qur’an. Prior to Islam, taghut had been
the name of the one of the idols of the Quraysh tribe. This name is used
also to mean Satan. Moreover, the term is used to indicate one who
rebels against lofty values, or who surpasses all bounds in his
despotism and tyranny and claims the prerogatives of divinity for
himself whether explicitly or implicitly. (Trans.)

[^60]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 654; ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 1, p.
134; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 4, p. 98; vol. 1, p. 340; Al-‘Adad
al-Qawiyyah, p. 65; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 548.

[^61]: Al-Mustajad, p. 511.

[^62]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 65.

[^63]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 307; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 545.

[^64]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 578; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp.
307, 367; Bisharah al-Islam, p. 190.

[^65]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 106; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 143.

[^66]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 672; ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 1, p.
67; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 315; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 368; Al-Kafi,
vol. 8, p. 313; Al-Muhajjah, p. 19.

[^67]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:148.

[^68]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 2, p. 449.

[^69]: Rawdah Al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 263; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 65; Muttaqi
Hindi, Burhan, p. 145.

[^70]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 324; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 582;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13 (Persian translation), p. 916.

[^71]: Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 231; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 524;
Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 140; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 291.

[^72]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 316; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 198;
Bisharah al-Islam, p. 198.

[^73]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 157; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 96.

[^74]: In a footnote pertaining to the Khutbah al-Bayan in the first
volume of As-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, my late father has thus written: “We
have quoted this sermon (khutbah) from the book Dawhah al-Anwar of
Shaykh Muhammad Yazdi but it is not only confined to this book. In fact,
it has also been quoted in other books as Aqa Buzurg Tehrani mentions
the titles of the following books in volume 7 of his Adh-Dhari‘ah: a.
Qadi Sa‘id Qummi, Sharh-e Hadith Ghamamah, 1103 AH; b. Muhaqqiq Qummi,
Jami‘ ash-Shitab, p. 772; c. A manuscript in Imam ar-Rida (‘a) Library
dated 729 AH; d. A manuscript inscribed by ‘Ali ibn Jamaluddin dated 923
AH; e. Khulasah at-Tarjuman; and f. Ma‘alim at-Tanzil. This sermon has
some expressions that are repugnant to the essence of monotheism
(tawhid), but in all the manuscripts these lines are not included and as
such, there is no doubt that they are among the forgeries of the
Ghullahs (a certain group that attributes divinities to the infallible
Imams (‘a)). But the expressions such as انا مورق الاشجار و مثمر الثمار
and the like are also numerous in other hadiths. The same is true with
this phrase, بنا أثمرت الاشجار و أينعت الثمار و جرت الأنهار و بنا ينزل
الغيث و تنبت عشب الأرض. In Ziyarah al-Mutlaqah, it is thus stated: و بكم
تنبت الأرض أشجارها و بكم تخرج الأشجار و أثمارها... And in Ziyarah
ar-Rajabiyyah, it is also stated: أنا سائلكم و آملكم فيما إليكم التفويض
و عليكم التعويض فبكم يجبر المهيض و يشفى المريض و... Therefore, every
expression or phrase that was apparently contradictory to the apparent
meaning of the Qur’an and couldn’t be justified as authentic has nothing
to do whatsoever with the Infallibles (‘a). The presence of some
expressions in the sermon that are forgeries should not necessarily
render the whole noble sermon as unauthentic.

[^75]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 308.

[^76]: Surah al-Hijr 15:75.

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 386.

[^78]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 56; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
52, p. 341.

[^79]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 308.

[^80]: Loc. cit.

[^81]: Ibid., p. 310.

[^82]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 585.

[^83]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 284; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 315; Ibn
Tawus, Malahim, p. 145; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 592; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 334; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 517.

[^84]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 673; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 317,
327.

[^85]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 673; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 317,
327, 372; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 424; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 346.

[^86]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Ikhtisas, p. 24; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
372.

[^87]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Ikhtisas, p. 24; Basa’ir ad-Darajat, vol. 1, p.
124; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, pp. 448, 489; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 557;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 318, 372.

[^88]: Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 282; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 335.

[^89]: Khara’ij, vol. 2, p. 840; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 336. See
Hilyah al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 184; Kashf al-Ghumah, p. 345; Yanabi‘
al-Mawaddah, p. 448. Similar hadith has also been reported from Imam
al-Baqir (‘a) as recorded in Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 24; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 2, p. 189.

[^90]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 308.

[^91]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 673; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 493;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 327.

[^92]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 11, p. 114.


