The Wars of Imam al-Mahdi (‘afs)
================================

Since the objective behind the uprising of Hadrat al-Mahdi is the
establishment of divine government throughout the world and the
elimination of tyranny and tyrants, it is natural that the Imam will
face many difficulties and obstacles in realizing this objective.

By conducting military operations, he has to remove those hurdles along
the way and overrun one country after another so as to prevail in the
east and west of the world and establish the government of divine
justice on earth. In this chapter we shall draw your attention to the
*hadith*s related to this.

The Reward for the Strugglers (mujahidin) and Martyrs (shuhada’)
----------------------------------------------------------------

Since the objective behind the wars at the time of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘a*) is the annihilation of corruption and tyranny for the formation
of worldwide Islamic government, participation in the war on the side of
Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) also has multiple rewards so much so that if a
combatant eliminates one person from the enemy, his reward would be that
of twenty or twenty five martyrs (*shuhada’*). If he attained martyrdom,
he will have the reward of two martyrs. Similarly, the disabled and
wounded veterans will have special value in the government of the Imam
of the Time in addition to their spiritual station. The families of
martyrs will have also special value.

While addressing the Shi‘ah, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “If you would be
as we have enjoined and you would not go against our commands—if in such
a condition one of you would die prior to the advent of our Qa’im—he
will be a martyr, and if he perceive the Imam and attained martyrdom on
his side, he will have the reward of two martyrs, and if he slew one of
our enemies, he would have the reward of twenty martyrs.”[^1]

In this *hadith*, the value of eliminating an enemy is regarded as much
higher than attaining martyrdom because killing the enemy brings about
the pleasure of God, relief of the servants of God and honor for Islam
whereas in earning the grace of martyrdom, the martyr merely attains
perfection. Therefore, combatants in the warfront have to think more
about the enemy than about attaining martyrdom.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Martyrdom on the side of the Imam of the
Time (*‘atfs*) has the reward of two martyrs.”[^2]

It is thus stated in *Al-Kafi*: “If a soldier of the Imam kills one of
our enemies, he shall have the reward of twenty martyrs and anyone who
attains martyrdom on the side of our Qa’im, the reward of twenty five
martyrs shall be his.”[^3]

Regarding the way the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) would behave with the
martyrs and their families, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said:
“(After the operations, Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*)) will proceed to Kufah
and stay there… And there will be no martyr whose debts will not be paid
by the Imam, and he will give stipends and remuneration to his
family.”[^4]

This *hadith* bespeaks of the Imam’s attention to be paid to the
families of martyrs.

War Armaments
-------------

The type of weapons that Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*) will use in the
conflicts would be fundamentally different from that of other weapons at
that time. The word “*sayf*” (sword) mentioned in the *hadith*s might
allude to a particular weapon and not refer to a particular sword. This
is because the weapon of the Imam is one which when used will make the
walls of cities crumble to pieces and make a pulverized city turn into
mere smoke. By only a single blow, the enemy will melt like salt or
heated lead.

Based on a *hadith*, the weapons of the Imam’s soldiers are made of iron
but they are such that if they fell on a mountain, the latter will be
divided into two.

Perhaps, the enemy will also use incendiary weapons because the Imam
(*‘a*) will wear an anti-heat garment. It is the same garment from
heaven that Jibra’il (Archangel Gabriel) (*‘a*) brought to Ibrahim
(Prophet Abraham) (*‘a*) for him not to die in the fire of Namrud
(Nimrod) and thus be saved. That garment will be at the disposal of
Hadrat Baqiyyatullah (*‘atfs*), and if it were not the case—that is, if
advanced weapons and industry were not at the disposal of the
enemy—maybe there would be no need for the Imam to wear such a garment.
It is also possible that it hints that there is a miraculous aspect to
it.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im stages the uprising, the
swords of combat will descend—on each of which the name and father’s
name of each of the combatants will be written.”[^5]

Regarding a group of supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*) said: “The supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘a*) have swords made of
iron, but this is different from common iron. If one of them would
strike a mountain with his sword, the mountain will be divided into two.
With such soldiers and equipment, Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will wage
war on India, Daylam, Kurdistan,[^6] Rome,[^7] the Berbers, Fars, and
between Jabarsa and Jabalqa.”[^8]

The means of defense possessed by the forces of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
be such that the weapons of the enemy will be rendered useless (and
harmless) against them. In this regard, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “If
the supporters of al-Mahdi (*‘a*) encountered an army stretching from
east to west, they would be able to crush them in a moment, and the
weapons of the enemy would never have any effect upon them.”[^9]

The Imam’s Conquest of the World for the Liberation of Mankind
--------------------------------------------------------------

There are two sets of *hadith*s concerning the military operations of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and the conquest of cities and countries. Some
*hadith*s have made mention of the conquest of the east and west, the
south and the *Qiblah*, and finally the entire world while others
indicate the conquest of particular portions of the world.

There is no doubt that the Imam (*‘atfs*) will dominate and rule over
the entire world. But the reason why some cities have been mentioned is
probably on account of the importance they will have at that time.

This importance might be due to the fact that they will be centers of
power in those days and will have control over some parts of the world.
It is also possible that those lands would be vast in which the bulk of
the world’s population are concentrated, or that they are the center of
the hopes and aspirations of particular sects and religions so much so
that if such a city fell, all the followers of a certain belief system
would surrender. It could also be because of their military and
strategic importance such that their fall would result in the failure of
enemy operations and pave the way for the offensive operations of the
forces of the Imam (*‘a*).

The selection of Mecca as the point of origin of the uprising and then
the selection of Iraq, the city of Kufah in particular, as the
military-political capital of the government, the march toward Sham
(Syria) and the conquest of Bayt al-Muqaddas emphasize this point. This
is because today, the political, religious and military importance of
these three places is proverbial to all.

The first set of *hadith*s concern the Imam’s dominance over the entire
world, some of which are as follows:

Hadrat ar-Rida (*‘a*) reported from his forefathers that the Messenger
of Allah said: “When they took me on the ascension (*mi‘raj*)… I asked:
‘O God! Will they (Imams) be my successors after me?’

The voice replied: ‘O Muhammad! Yes, they are My friends, chosen ones,
and proofs after you for My servants, and they will be the successors
and best servants (of God) after you. By My Honor and Glory! Through
them I will let My religion and creed prevail among mankind, and exalt
My word (*kalimah*) through them. Through the last of them, I will purge
the world of the existence of rebellious people and sinners, and I will
grant him sovereignty over the east and west.”[^10]

On the exegesis of the noble Qur’anic verse (*ayah*),

**  
**
﴿

**  
**

**  
**
الَّذِينَ إِن مَّكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتَوُا
الزَّكَاةَ ﴾

*“Those who, if We granted them power in the land, maintain the prayer,
give the zakat,”*[^11]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “This verse is related to the Progeny of
Muhammad (*‘a*) and the Last Imam. God will grant Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) and his supporters control and influence over the east and
west of the world.”[^12]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Mahdi is from my progeny and
through him God will conquer the east and west.”[^13]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said: “At the time of the advent of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), God will let religion return to its original
state, and he will attain glorious victories for Him and through Him. At
that time, no one will remain on earth except the Muslims who recite the
formula of faith, “*La ilaha illallah*” (There is no god worthy to be
worshipped but Allah).”[^14]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Qa’im is from us and his rule will
extend from the east to the west.”[^15]

The same Imam also said: “At the time of the uprising of Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*), God will make Islam prevail over all other religions.”[^16]

The Prophet is reported to have said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
dispatch his soldiers to the entire world.”[^17]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “If only one day is left in the life of
this world... God will send al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and through him the
religion will regain its grandeur and through him and for Him, glorious
victories will be attained. At that time, no one will remain on earth
except the Muslims who recite the formula of faith, “*La ilaha
illallah*” (There is no god worthy to be worshipped but Allah).”[^18]

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari quotes the Messenger of Allah (S) as
saying: “Dhu’l-Qarnayn was a meritorious servant that God appointed as a
proof for His other servants. He invited his community (*qawm*) toward
God and enjoined piety, but they struck a blow on his head and he hid
from them for so long that they imagined him to be dead. After sometime,
he returned to his community, but they struck him another blow on the
other side of his head.

“There is a person from among you who will behave according to the
*Sunnah*. God, the Honorable and Glorious, gave Dhu’l-Qarnayn authority
on earth, put everything at his disposal, and made him reach the east
and west of the globe. God, the Exalted, will make his character and
manner be adopted by the Hidden Imam (*imam al-gha’ib*) who is from my
progeny, and make him reach the eastern and western lands.

No pond and house whether on the top of a mountain or in the desert that
was visited by Dhu’l-Qarnayn will remain unvisited by him (Imam
al-Mahdi). God will manifest the treasures and minerals of the earth for
him, help him by striking fear in the heart of the enemy, and fill the
earth with justice and equity as it would have been full of injustice
and oppression prior to the uprising.”[^19]

Another set of *hadith*s points to the conquest of certain cities. It
would suffice to quote a few *hadith*s in this respect:

Concerning the march of al-Mahdi (*‘a*) toward Sham (Syria), the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “At the order of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*), transportation of the armies will be organized. After this
order, four hundred ships will be constructed and berthed along the
shore of Acre.[^20] Rome (or Constantinople) with one hundred
crosses—along with each cross being ten thousand forces—will emerge and
overrun Tarsus.[^21]

The Imam along with his soldiers will arrive there and kill so many of
them that the water of the Euphrates will change its color and due to
their corpses, the shore will emit a fetid smell. (On hearing this
news,) those remaining in Rome (or Constantinople) will flee to
Antioch[^22].”[^23]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When Hadrat al-Qa’im stages the uprising… he
will dispatch soldiers to the city of Constantinople. When they reach
the gulf, they will write a sentence on their feet and pass over the
water.”[^24]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “If only one day is left in the world,
God will surely send a man from my progeny who is my namesake and whose
forehead is radiant. He will conquer Constantinople and Jabal Daylam
(Mountain of Daylam).”[^25]

Hudhayfah said: “Constantinople, Daylam and Tabaristan will not be
conquered except by a man from Bani Hashim.”[^26]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) stages the
uprising, he will conquer Constantinople, Sin (China),[^27] and the
mountains of Daylam, and he will rule for seven years.”[^28]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
and his supporters will advance until they enter Constantinople. They
will go to the place where the king resides and they will take out three
types of treasure: jewelry, gold and silver. Then, the Imam will divide
the assets and booty among his armies.”[^29]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*) will prepare three
banners for (operations in) three regions. He will dispatch a banner to
Constantinople[^30] and God will open it for him (i.e., he will conquer
it); he will send another banner to China and it will also be opened for
him, and he will send the third banner for the mountains of Daylam,[^31]
which will be overrun by his forces.”[^32]

Hudhayfah said: “Balanjar[^33] and the mountains of Daylam will not be
conquered except by a man from the Progeny of Muhammad (*‘a*).”[^34]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “…Then, with a thousand ships
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will leave the city of Qati‘ for the holy city
of Quds, and from Acre, Tyre, Gaza, and ‘Asqalan[^35] he will enter the
Land of Palestine. He will take out its wealth and booty. Thereafter,
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will enter Quds ash-Sharif where he will
dismount and stay until the coming out of ad-Dajjal (the
Anti-Christ).”[^36]

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali said: “I heard Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) saying: ‘At
the time of the advent of the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny (*‘a*), he
will have a sword with him, which he will unsheathe, and through him God
will conquer the lands of Rome,[^37] China, Turkistan,[^38] Daylam,
Sind, Hind,[^39] Kabul, Sham, and Khazar.”[^40]

Ibn Hajar writes: “…The first banner that Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
prepare for war would be dispatched to the Turks.”[^41]

Perhaps, what is meant by the sword mentioned in the *hadith* reported
by ath-Thumali (*as-sayf al-mukhtarit*) alludes to a particular weapon
at the disposal of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). It is because in order to
conquer all these lands, which requires extraordinary offensive
capability, an appropriate weapon, superior to all weapons would be
necessary especially if we would say that the Imam will perform various
activities through natural and common ways.

Regarding the conquest of Hind, Ka‘b said: “The ruler in Bayt
al-Muqaddas will dispatch an army to Hind and conquer it. Then that army
will enter the territory of Hind and it will send the treasures there to
the ruler of Bayt al-Muqaddas. He will also embellish it (Hind) and the
kings of Hind will be brought to him as captives. The eastern and
western lands will be opened for them and the forces will be present in
Hind till the emergence of ad-Dajjal.”[^42]

Hudhayfah reported that the Prophet (S) said: “Tahir ibn Asma’ fought
with the Children of Israel and took them in captivity, setting Bayt
al-Muqaddas on fire while taking the amount of one thousand and seven
(or nine) hundred ships of gold and jewelry from there to the city of
Rome. Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will definitely take them out from that
city and return them to Bayt al-Muqaddas.”[^43]

Although the uprising of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will commence in
Mecca, he will conquer the land of Hijaz[^44] after the advent. In this
regard, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
appear in Mecca and God will conquer the land of Hijaz and the Imam will
set free anyone from the Bani Hashim who is in prison.”[^45]

Concerning the conquest of Khurasan, the Commander of the Faithful
(*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will continue in his advance
until he conquers Khurasan[^46] and then he will again return to the
city of Medina.”[^47]

Regarding the conquest of Armenia[^48] at the hand of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*), the same Imam (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
continue in his advance till he arrives in Armenia. When the people of
that land see him, they will send one of their erudite priests to
negotiate with him (*‘atfs*).

The priest will ask the Imam (*‘atfs*): ‘Are you the Mahdi?’ The Imam
will reply: ‘Yes, I am; the one whose name has been mentioned in the
Evangel (Gospel) and the glad tidings of my advent at the end of time
has been given.’ He will pose some questions and the Imam will answer
(each of them satisfactorily).

“The Christian priest will embrace Islam but the people in Armenia will
be defiant and disobey. Thereafter, the soldiers of the Imam will enter
the city and exterminate five hundred thousand men from the Christian
forces. By His infinite power, God will suspend their city between
heaven and earth so much so that the king and those around him who will
be stationed outside the city will see the city being suspended there.

“Out of fear, the king of Armenia will flee and will also order those
around him to seek refuge in a certain sanctuary. Along the way, a lion
will pass close to them and being terrified, they will throw away and
abandon the weapons and possessions at their disposal. The soldiers of
the Imam who will be pursuing them will take the properties and divide
them among themselves such that each one of them will receive one
hundred thousand dinars.”[^49]

Another part of the Imam’s (*‘atfs*) global conquest will be in the
cities of Zanj. Hadrat Amir (Imam Ali) (*‘a*) said in this regard:
“Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will continue in his advance until he arrives
at the city of Zanj al-Kubra. There are one thousand markets in the city
and in each of the markets, there are one thousand shops. The Imam will
conquer that city.[^50] After its conquest, the Imam will go to a city
called Qati‘, which is an island on the sea.”[^51]

Regarding the dispatching of al-Mahdi’s (*‘atfs*) soldiers throughout
the world, Hadrat al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see Hadrat
al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) dispatching his armies throughout the globe.”[^52]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*a’tfs*) will send his
armies throughout the world to solicit the pledge of allegiance
(*bay‘ah*), and annihilate tyranny and tyrants. The conquered cities
will be stabilized for him, and through his blessed hand, God will
conquer Constantinople.”[^53]

Suppression of Revolts
----------------------

After the advent of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and the conquest of
various cities and countries, some cities and tribes will mount
resistance to the Imam (*‘atfs*), which will be suppressed by his
forces. A deviant group will not accept the view of the Imam on some
issues and launch an insurrection against him, which will be also
defeated by his forces. Let us look at some *hadith*s pertaining to
this:

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “There are thirteen cities and clans whose
people will wage war against Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) and the Imam, in
turn, will confront them. They are the people of Mecca, Medina, Sham
(Syria), Basrah, and Rey; the Bani ‘Umayyah, Damansiyan, Kurds, and
Arabs such as the Bani Ḍabbah,[^54] Ghani,[^55] Bahilah,[^56] and
Azd.”[^57]

Concerning the opposition of a group to the words of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*),
Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) would
elaborate on some of the laws and talk about some parts of the *Sunnah*,
in opposing the Imam, a group will go out of the mosque as a gesture of
protest. The Imam will order his followers to pursue them.

The army of the Imam will catch them up in the Tamarin district; they
will capture them and bring them to him. The Imam (*‘atfs*) will give
the order for all of them to be beheaded. This will be the last revolt
and movement to emerge against the Imam.”[^58]

Regarding the revolt in Ramaylah and its suppression, Ibn Abi Ya‘fur
said: “I came to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) while a group of his followers was
in his company. The Imam said to me: ‘Have you read the Qur’an?’ I
replied: ‘Yes, but only a normal reading.’ He said: ‘My point was that
very (normal) reading.’ I said: ‘What is meant by this question?’ He
said: ‘Hadrat Musa (*‘a*) said something to his community (*qawm*) but
they could not endure it, and they rose up against him in Egypt. Musa
also fought against them and killed them.

“Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) also said something to his community but they could
not tolerate it also, and they also rose up against him in the city of
Takrit. ‘Isa (*‘a*) also confronted them and eliminated them. This is
the meaning of the words of God when He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَآَمَنَت طَّائِفَةٌ مِّن بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ وَكَفَرَت طَّائِفَةٌ
فَأَيَّدْنَا الَّذِينَ آَمَنُوا عَلَى عَدُوِّهِمْ فَأَصْبَحُوا
ظَاهِرِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“So a group of the Children of Israel believed, and a group
disbelieved. Then We strengthened the faithful against their enemies,
and they became the dominant ones.”*[^59]

“At the time of his advent, Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*) will also deliver a
speech to you, which you will not be able to accept. Therefore, you will
rise up against him in the city of Ramaylah and wage war against him.
The Imam will also confront you and will kill you, and this revolt will
be the last uprising against him.”[^60]

The End of War
--------------

By the establishment of the divine system or global government of the
Imam of the Age (*‘atfs*) and the downfall of the satanic powers, the
flames of war will be extinguished and there will be no more powers that
would be able to confront the army of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). As such, there
will be no demand for military equipment in the markets and as a result
they will become cheap remain unsold.

‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “…And war will also come to an end.”[^61]

Ka‘b said: “The days will not end unless a man from Quraysh will descend
in Bayt al-Muqaddas… And war will also cease to exist.”[^62]

In a sermon regarding the Dajjal and how he will be killed, the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Thereafter, the price of a horse will
become a few dirhams.”[^63]

Ibn Mas‘ud said: “Among the signs of the Day of Resurrection is that
women and horses will become expensive. Afterward, they will become
cheap and until the Day of Resurrection their respective prices will not
be exorbitant.”[^64]

Perhaps, what is meant by the expensiveness of women prior to the advent
of the Imam of the Time (*‘a*) alludes to the fact that as a result of
worsening economic conditions, maintaining and keeping a woman and
having a family will become very problematic. Similarly, as a result of
the proliferation of wars and the need for horses, procuring a horse
(and war equipment) will become difficult and expensive.

However, with the end of war after the uprising of Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*), weapons will become cheap, and as a result of improved
economic conditions, the difficulties of life and marriage will be
removed and as such women will become cheap to maintain.

Zamakhshari narrates: “One of the signs of the uprising of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) is that they will use swords instead of scythes.”[^65]

Since there will be no more war at that time, people will therefore
utilize instruments and industries intended for use in war for
agricultural activities.

In this regard, the Noble Prophet of Islam (*‘a*) said: “…The price of
cows will soar while the price of horses will become
insignificant.”[^66]

Perhaps, this *hadith* may also be interpreted in this manner: this is
because cows are used in agriculture and their meat and milk can be
consumed. Horses however are largely used as means of transportation in
war.

[^1]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Amali, vol. 1, p. 236; Bisharah al-Mustafa, p.
113; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 529; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 123,
317.

[^2]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 490. See Shaykh at-Tusi, Amali, vol.
1, p. 236; Burqi, Mahasin, p. 173; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 356.

[^3]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 222.

[^4]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 261; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
52, p. 224.

[^5]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 244; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 369; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 542.

[^6]: Kurdha (Kurds) in the original text; that is, with the Kurds.
(Trans.)

[^7]: Rumyan (Romans) in the original text; that is, with the Romans.
(Trans.)

[^8]: Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 141; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 523;
Tabsirah al-Wali, p. 97; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 27, pp. 41; vol. 54, p.
334.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 366; ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, vol. 1, p. 262;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 346.

[^11]: Surah al-Hajj 22:41.

[^12]: Tafsir Burhan, vol. 2, p. 96; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 425; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 1.

[^13]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 259; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 487;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 378; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 218.

[^14]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 222; Fara’id Fawa’id al-Fikr, p. 9.

[^15]: Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 331; Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 284; As‘af
ar-Raghibin, p. 140.

[^16]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 423.

[^17]: Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 23.

[^18]: ‘Uyun Akhbar ar-Rida, p. 65; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 346;
Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 218.

[^19]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 394; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 323,
336; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 218. See Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p.
95; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, pp. 250, 262; Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad,
p. 362; A‘lam al-Wara, p. 430.

[^20]: Acre (also called Akko): a city in Occupied Palestine, near
Haifa, located on the Bay of Haifa, an arm of the Mediterranean Sea, is
one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. (Trans.)

[^21]: Tarsus (city) (ancient Cydnus): a city in southern Turkey, on the
Tarsus River, near Adana and also near the Mediterranean Sea. (Trans.)

[^22]: Antioch or Antakya (in Turkey): a city in southern Turkey, the
capital of Hatay Province, on the Orontes River, near the Mediterranean
Sea. The fact that Antioch is mentioned in the hadith as the place of
refuge of the people in Rum (Rome) seems to indicate that the name
“Rome” refers to Constantinople (capital of Byzantine or the Eastern
Roman Empire). It is because it seems illogical to flee from a far place
(Rome in Italy) to a place (Antioch in Turkey), which is near the spot
of a perceived danger. This is corroborated by the fact that the same
word, Rum (“Rome”) mentioned in the Qur’an (Surah ar-Rum) refers
historically to the Byzantine or Eastern Roman Empire. (Trans.)

[^23]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 116; ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 189.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 365.

[^25]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 83; Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 137; Ihqaq
al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 229; vol. 19, p. 660.

[^26]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, Musannif, vol. 13, p. 18.

[^27]: Sin (China) is said to refer to East Asia which includes the
former Soviet Union, India, Nepal, Burma (Myanmar), Vietnam, Japan, the
China Sea, and the Korean Peninsula. See Al-Munjid.

[^28]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 339; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 352;
Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 400.

[^29]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 162.

[^30]: Constantinople: a city in Turkey built in the 7th century BCE and
has been the capital of the Eastern Roman empire for sometime. See
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 4, p. 347; A‘lam al-Munjid, p. 28.

[^31]: Daylam: a place in the mountainous part of Gilan which is located
in the north of Qazvin. See Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 1, p. 99; A‘lam
al-Munjid, p. 227; Burhan-e Qati‘, vol. 1, p. 570.

[^32]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 585; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 388.
See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 54, p. 332, hadith nos. 1, 6, 11, 14, 17-19,
34-36, 46.

[^33]: Balanjar refers to Khazar (former Soviet Union). See Mu‘jam
al-Buldan, vol. 1, p. 99; I‘lam al-Munjid, p. 214.

[^34]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 123 as quoted from Ibn al-Munadi, Malahim.

[^35]: ‘Asqalan: a city in Sham which is a dependency of Palestine and
along the seashore. It is located between the cities of Gaza and Bayt
al-Jabrayn. See Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 3, p. 673.

[^36]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 201.

[^37]: Rome is presently the capital of Italy. At that time, it was the
political capital of kings who used to rule there under the official
title of Cesar and dominate a considerable portion of the world such
that its sphere of influence encompassed the Mediterranean Sea, North
Africa, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, and all these
territories were regarded as Rome (Roman Empire).

[^38]: Turkistan is located in the continent of Asia and divided between
China and the ex-Soviet Union including Uighur China, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Tashkand, Tajikistan, Qaranjir, and Kazakhstan. See I‘lam
al-Munjid.

[^39]: Hind: the triangle-shaped subcontinent in South Asia including
India, Pakistan, Bhutan, and Nepal. See Burhan-e Qati‘, vol. 1, p. 703;
I‘lam al-Munjid, p. 542.

[^40]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 108; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 348.

[^41]: Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 26.

[^42]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, pp. 97, 319; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 81; Hanafi,
Burhan, p. 88.

[^43]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, 201; Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 114; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol.
13, p. 229.

[^44]: Hijaz stretches from the north to the Gulf of ‘Aqabah, from the
west to the Red Sea, from the east to Najd, and from the south to ‘Asir.
See I‘lam al-Munjid, p. 229. As reported by Hamuyini, from the depth of
San‘a in Yemen to Sham is called Hijaz in which Tabuk and Palestine are
also included. See Mu‘jam al-Buldan.

[^45]: Ibn Hummad, Fitan, p. 95; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 141; Ibn
Tawus, Malahim, p. 64; Al-Mukhtasar, p. 23.

[^46]: Khorasan at that time included a portion of Iran, Afghanistan and
the ex-Soviet Union. See I‘lam al-Munjid, p. 267.

[^47]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 158.

[^48]: Armenia is in Asia Minor and bordering the mountains of Ararat
and the Caucasus, as well as Iran, Turkey, and the Euphrates River. It
once had an independent government and after the downfall of the
Byzantine Empire this land was divided among Iran, Russia and the
Ottoman Empire. See I‘lam al-Munjid, p. 25.

[^49]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 162.

[^50]: Ibid., p. 164.

[^51]: Ibid. See ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 200; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 229.

[^52]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 341; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
337.

[^53]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 64; Al-Fatawa al-Hadithiyyah, p. 31.

[^54]: Ḍabbah is the name of a village in Hijaz located on the way to
Sham along the seashore. Adjacent to it is the village of Hadrat Ya‘qub
(‘a) called Bada. Bani Ḍabbah is a tribe that stood up in support of the
enemies of ‘Ali (‘a) in the Battle of Jamal, and most of the famous
poets and epic versifiers there belonged to the tribes of Ḍabbah and
Azd. In that battle they surrounded the camel of ‘A’ishah and supported
her. See Sam‘ani, Insab, vol. 4, p. 12; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, vol. 9, p. 320; vol. 1, p. 253.

[^55]: Ghani is a tribe that lives in Har in the Arabian Peninsula
between Musil and Sham, and it is associated with a certain person named
Ghani ibn Ya‘sur. See Sam‘ani, Insab, vol. 4, p. 315.

[^56]: Bahilah is a tribe associated with a certain person named Bahilah
ibn A‘sar. The Arabs at that time used to avoid establishing
relationships with this tribe because no noble and honorable men could
be found in it. Members of the Bahilah tribe were despicable people.
Before leaving for the Battle of Siffin Hadrat ‘Ali (‘a) said to them:
“I swear to God that I am angry with you in the same manner that you are
angry with me. So, you come and claim your right, and migrate from Kufah
to Daylam. See Sam‘ani, Insab, vol. 1, p. 275; Waq‘ah Siffin, p. 116;
An-Nafyi wa’t-Taghrib, p. 349; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
vol. 3, p. 272; Al-Gharat, vol. 2, p. 21.

[^57]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 299; Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 336; Hilyah
al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 632; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 363; vol. 48, p.
84.

[^58]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 61; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 2,
p. 83; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 345.

[^59]: Surah as-Saff 61:14.

[^60]: Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 336; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 375; vol.
47, p. 84; vol. 14, p. 279.

[^61]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 162; Al-Mu‘jam as-Saghir, p. 150; Ihqaq
al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 204.

[^62]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, p. 166. See ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p.
401.

[^63]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 152.

[^64]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 9, p. 342 and similar topic has also
been reported by Kharijah ibn as-Salt in ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 331.

[^65]: Al-Fa’iq, vol. 1, p. 354.

[^66]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 159; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 82.


