The Government of Truth
=======================

Administering a territory as wide as the world itself is a difficult
task, which is only possible for a divinely guided leader and
functionaries committed to this divine system and the sovereignty of
Islam. Indeed, in order to administer lands and territories Imam
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will appoint ministers who will have had a record of
struggle both in experience and action, and who will have shown their
firmness and decisiveness.

Governors with strong personalities, who think of nothing but the
welfare of the Islamic state and the pleasure of God, will take charge
of state affairs. Obviously, a country whose officials possess these
qualities will prevail over any difficulty. The destructions wrought by
the previous governments will successfully turn into progress and
conditions will be so transformed that the living will wish that the
dead would live once again.

It must be noted that Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will take charge of
affairs at the time when the world will have inherited a plethora of
confusions and disorders, and there will be millions of invalids as well
as physically and mentally sick individuals. An atmosphere of
delapidation will cast its shadow upon the world and insecurity will
become prevalent everywhere. Cities will be in total ruin on account of
wars and conflicts, and the decline of farming due to pollution of the
ecosystem will lead to the scarcity of food.

On the other hand, the people of the world would have witnessed that
many governments, parties and organizations had claimed that if they
were given the chance to take charge of things, they could serve the
world and its inhabitants, ensuring peace, security and improvement in
economic conditions. In action, however, each of them would have been
worse than the other, introducing nothing but corruption, killing and
ruin.

Leninism collapsed while Maoism was disfavored by its own leaders, and
Western democracy, on the other hand, is nothing more than a
people-deceiving slogan.

The time will finally come when justice and equity would be implemented
by the able hand of the man of God on the earth full of tyranny.[^1] He
will be so serious and decisive in actualizing the slogan that “He will
fill the world with justice and equity”—that its effect would be felt
everywhere.

Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will administer the government and nurture the
people in such a manner that the word “tyranny” will no longer hold a
place in one’s mind, and according to the *hadith*s no person will
oppress another anymore; even animals will also cease harming and
oppressing others to the extent that the sheep and the wolf will mingle
with each other.

Umm Salmah reported that the Prophet (S) said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
institute justice in society to the extent that the living will wish
that their dead would live again in order to partake in reaping the
fruits of justice.”[^2]

Commenting on the noble verse (*ayah*),

**  
**
﴿

**  
**
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُحْيِي الأرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا

**  
**
﴾

*“Know that Allah revives the earth after its death,”*[^3]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “God will revive the earth through Hadrat
al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*). He will behave justly on earth and with the spread
of justice the earth will be revived after its death from rampant
tyranny.”[^4]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) also said: “By God! Certainly, the justice of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will penetrate their houses and rooms just as heat
and cold penetrate therein.”[^5]

It can be inferred from this *hadith* that notwithstanding the desire of
certain groups of people and even their opposition, justice will
encompass the entire world without any exception.

On the exegesis of the noble Qur’anic verse (*ayah*),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذِينَ إِن مَّكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Those who, if We granted them power in the land, maintain the prayer,
give the zakat,”*[^6]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “This verse has been revealed concerning the
station of al-Mahdi and his supporters. Through them God will manifest
His religion and make it so dominant that no trace of tyranny and
innovation (*bid‘ah*) could be seen.”[^7]

In this regard, Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*) said: “During the advent of Hadrat
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), he will establish the scale of justice in society
and from then on, no one will oppress anyone anymore.”[^8]  
 The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) also said: “The Imam (*‘atfs*)
will behave justly with peasants and the people.”[^9]

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari said: “A person came to Imam al-Baqir
(*‘a*) and asked: ‘Take this five hundred dirham *zakat* on my
properties!’ The Imam (*‘a*) said: ‘Keep it and give it to your
neighbors yourself, and the indigent and needy Muslims.’ Then, he said:
‘During the uprising of the Qa’im from among us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*, he
will distribute property evenly and he will behave justly with them
(people). Thus, anyone who follows him will actually be following God
and anyone who disobeys him will actually be disobeying God. In view of
this, he will be called the Mahdi (the Guided One) as he has guidance
with respect to hidden affairs and issues.”[^10]

Justice at the time of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be so pervasive that even
religious priorities will be observed. By utilizing the facilities
intended for them, those who want to perform their religious obligations
will have priority over those who are at the threshold of doing optional
acts of worship. For example, during the time of Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*) when Islam and the divine government are established in the
entire world, it would be natural for religious rites to be held in a
splendorous and indescribable manner.

Due to the spread of the Islamic government, there will be no more
obstacles obstructing the performance of the Abrahamic *Hajj*, which is
one of the religious rites. In performing the *Hajj* the people will be
like a torrential flood rushing toward the *Ka‘bah*. As a result, the
area surrounding the *Ka‘bah* will be overcrowded and it would not be
able to accommodate all the pilgrims.

The Imam (*‘atfs*) will issue an order for priority to be given to those
who are performing the obligatory *Hajj*. In the words of Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*), that will be the first manifestation of justice of the Promised
Mahdi (*‘atfs*).

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The first thing to be manifested of the
justice of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*) is that he will announce that those
who are performing the optional *Hajj* or rituals, kissing the *Hajar
al-Aswad*,[^11] and doing optional *tawaf*[^12] would have to offer the
same opportunities to those who would be performing the obligatory
*Hajj*.”[^13]

Government over Hearts
----------------------

Naturally, the government, which in a short period of time would prevail
over adversities, eliminate confusion and disorder, and sow the seeds of
hope in the hearts of mankind by removing despair from them, will enjoy
popular support.

The system, which could extinguish the fires of war and restore order
and security in society to the extent that even animals would benefit
from it, will be the government over hearts. The aspiration of mankind
is to live under such a government. As such, in the *hadith*s the
people’s adherence to the Imam and their attachment to his government
have been mentioned in glowing terms.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I give you glad tidings of al-Mahdi, a
man from the Quraysh with whose caliphate and rule the inhabitants of
the heavens and the earth will be pleased.”[^14]  
 The Prophet (S) also said: “A man from my *ummah* will rise up whom the
people of the earth and heavens will love.”[^15]

Sabah said: “During the time of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) young people
will wish to be old enough while old people will wish that they were
still small and young.”[^16]

Maybe the old would wish that they were still small and young because
they would like to spend more time under his government while the youth
would wish to be old enough because they want to be responsible enough
to play a role in the implementation of the programs of the divine
government of Hadrat Wali al-‘Asr (*‘atfs*), and thus, acquire spiritual
reward in the hereafter.

The government of the Imam (*‘atfs*) will have such an impact that even
the dead will benefit from it.

In this regard, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “A man from my progeny will
come, as a result of whose advent and government, no dead person would
remain in the grave without having received relief and blessings there,
and they will visit and give the glad tidings of his uprising to one
another.”[^17]

In *Kamil az-Ziyarat*,[^18] “*al-farahah*” has been interpreted as
“rejoicing” and “delight” and the use of the word “*mayyit*” (dead) in
the *hadith* deserves close attention because it can be concluded that
this relief and comfort is universal and not confined to a particular
group of souls. If we put this *hadith* beside those that state, “The
souls of the infidels will be in the worse state of enchainment and
captivity,” its meaning will be made clear; for, it is said that with
the advent of the Imam, the order for their release from chastisement
will be given, or the state of “the absence of relief and mercy in the
treatment by the chastising angels” will be changed for a certain
period, however short will it be, as a token of respect for the
establishment of the divine government on earth. Within that short
period, the chastising angels will desist from punishing the souls of
the infidels and hypocrites.

The Capital of the Government
-----------------------------

Abu Basir reports: “Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: ‘O Abu Muhammad! It is as
if I can see the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny along with his family
descending upon the Sahlah Mosque.’ I asked: ‘Is the Sahlah Mosque his
residence?’

He replied: ‘Yes; right there in the residence of Prophet Idris (Enoch)
(*‘a*), and no prophet has been appointed without having performed
prayer there. Anyone who stays there is like one who had been in the
camp of the Messenger of Allah (S). There is no faithful man or woman
whose heart is not favorably disposed toward that mosque. Every day and
night, angels of the Divine seek refuge in that mosque to worship God. O
Abu Muhammad! If I were only near you, I would perform my prayers only
in that mosque.’

“‘During the uprising of our Qa’im, God will take revenge on behalf of
His Messenger and all of us upon the enemies’.”[^19]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) mentioned Sahlah Mosque and said: “That is the
house of our Sahib (Hadrat al-Mahdi); there will be a time when he will
stay there with his family.”[^20]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will rise up; he will go
to Kufah and reside there.”[^21]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “When our Qa’im rises up and goes to
Kufah, there will be no believer who would not take residence there with
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) or visit that city.”[^22]  
 In this regard, Hadrat Amir (Imam ‘Ali) (*‘a*) said: “A time will come
when al-Mahdi’s (*‘atfs*) place for prayers will be here (Kufah
Mosque).”[^23]

Abubakr Hadrami said: “I asked Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) or Imam as-Sadiq
(*‘a*): ‘Which land is more sacred after the House of God (in Mecca) and
the Mosque of the Prophet (in Medina)?’ He replied: ‘O Abubakr! The land
of Kufah is a sacred place, where the Sahlah Mosque is found, a mosque
where all the prophets have prayed; from there divine justice will be
established, and the Qa’im of God and those who rise up after him will
be from there. There is the place of the prophets and their righteous
successors’.”[^24]

Muhammad ibn Fadil said: “The Day of Resurrection will not come to pass
unless all the believers gather in Kufah.”[^25]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will rule
for nine or ten years and the most fortunate people with respect to him
are the people of Kufah.”[^26]  
 It can be deduced from this set of *hadith*s that the city of Kufah
would be the epicenter of activities and the political capital of the
Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*).

The Officials of Imam al-Mahdi’s (‘atfs) Government
---------------------------------------------------

It would be only natural for the administrative workers and officials in
the government which Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will lead to be the leading
figures and best of the *ummah*. As such, we can observe in the
*hadith*s that the government of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be
comprised of prophets and their successors, the most pious and righteous
people of that time as well as of times past, and the towering
personalities among the companions of the Prophet (S).

Some of them are Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*), the seven Companions of the Cave
(*ashab al-kahf*), Yusha‘ (Joshuah), the executor of will (*wasiyy*) of
Musa (*‘a*), the believer in the family of Pharaoh, Salman al-Farsi, Abu
ad-Dujanah al-Ansari, Malik al-Ashtar an-Nakha‘i, and the tribe of
Hamdan.

Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) has been mentioned in the *hadith*s under various
titles such as minister, successor, commander, and government official.

‘Isa (*‘a*) will say to Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*): “Verily, I have been
sent as a minister and not as chief (*amir*) or ruler.”[^27]

“Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) will be a minister of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) as
well as his doorkeeper and successor.”[^28]

“…Then ‘Isa will come down and he will be responsible in collecting the
properties of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*). The Companions of the Cave will
also be behind him.”[^29]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When Hadrat al-Qa’im of the Progeny of
Muhammad (*‘a*) rises up, he will revive eighteen persons behind the
*Ka‘bah*; they include the five persons from the community (*qawm*) of
Musa (*‘a*) who will judge correctly and behave justly; the seven
Companions of the Cave; Yusha‘ the *wasiyy* of Musa; the believer in the
family of Pharaoh; Salman al-Farsi; Abu Dujanah al-Ansari; and Malik
al-Ashtar.”[^30]

In a *hadith* their number has been mentioned as twenty seven,
mentioning fourteen persons from the community of Musa,[^31] while
another *hadith* mentions the name of Miqdad.[^32]

Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “…There will be soldiers in front of Hadrat
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and his minister will be from among the tribe of
Hamdan[^33].”[^34]

In this regard, it is also stated: “Men of God will accompany the Mahdi
(*‘atfs*)—men who will respond to his call and support him. They will be
his ministers and statesmen who will shoulder the heavy responsibilities
of the government.”[^35]

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas said: “The Companions of the Cave will be
supporters of the Mahdi.”[^36]  
 Halabi said: “All the Companions of the Cave are of the Arab race and
they speak in no language other than Arabic. They will be among the
ministers of the Mahdi.”[^37]

From the aforementioned *hadith*s and statements, we can conclude that
the heavy burden of governing and administering the vast Islamic
territories cannot be shouldered by just anybody; instead, individuals,
who have been tested on many occasions and have proven their merit in
various trials, must accept this responsibility.

Therefore, we can see that the head of the ministers in the government
of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is Hadrat ‘Isa (*‘a*) who is one of the leading
prophets (*ulu’l-‘azm*). Similarly, among the outstanding officials of
his government will be Salman al-Farsi, Miqdad, Abu Dujanah, and Malik
al-Ashtar, who had shown their merit in handling affairs during both the
time of the Prophet (S) and that of the Commander of the Faithful
(*‘a*), as well as the tribe of Hamdan. All of them have embellished the
pages of the early history of Islam and during the rule of ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (*‘a*).

The Period of Rule
------------------

Regarding the period of rule of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), there are various
*hadith*s existing in both Sunni and Shi‘ah sources. Some *hadith*s
limit the period of Imam al-Mahdi’s (*‘atfs*) rule to seven years.
Others mention eight, nine, ten, or twenty years while there are even
*hadith*s that say one thousand years. What is certain is that the
government of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will not be less than seven
years, and this period has been emphasized in some *hadith*s reported
from the Imams (*‘a*).

Perhaps it can be said that the period of rule would be seven years, but
the length of a year at that time will be different from ours, as
indicated in some *hadith*s such as the following:

“His rule will be seven years and each year is equivalent to ten of your
years. Therefore, the years of his rule will be equivalent to your
seventy years.”[^38]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will rule for seven
years; every year in that time will be equal to ten years of
yours.”[^39]

The Holy Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is from us…
and for seven years he will take charge of affairs.”[^40]

The Prophet (S) also said: “He will rule for seven years over this
*ummah*.”[^41]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said elsewhere: “The tenure of rule of
al-Mahdi (S) will be seven years at the shortest or it will last for
eight or nine years at the longest.”[^42] It has also been reported:
“Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will rule in this world for nine years.”[^43]

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari asked Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*): “How many
years will the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) live?” The Imam (*‘a*)
replied: “From the day of the uprising till his demise will be nineteen
years long.”[^44]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will rule
for twenty years. He will take out the treasures from the ground; he
will conquer the lands of polytheism.”[^45]

He (S) also said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is from my progeny and he will
rule for twenty years.”[^46]  
 It has also been reported: “The Imam (*‘atfs*) will rule for ten
years.”[^47]

In answer to the question on how many years the Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
rule, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “He will rule over the people for thirty
or forty years.”[^48]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be from my
progeny and his age will be equal to that of Ibrahim Khalil ar-Rahman
(Prophet Abraham) (*‘a*). He will appear at the age of eighty years and
rule for forty years.”[^49]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “The tenure of Hadrat al-Qa’im’s
(*‘atfs*) rule will be nineteen years and some months.”[^50]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will rule for
three hundred and nine years just as the Companions of the Cave stayed
in the cave for the same period.”[^51]

The late Majlisi said: “The *hadith*s regarding the Imam’s (*‘atfs*)
period of rule must be explained under the following probabilities: Some
*hadith*s refer to the entire period of rule while some others point to
the period of stabilization and establishment. Some are based on the
years and days that we are acquainted with while others are based on the
years and days in the time of the Imam (*‘atfs*) which are long. God
knows best the truth of the matter.”[^52]

After mentioning the *hadith*s, the late Ayatullah Tabasi, my honorable
father, gives preference to the *hadith* that propounds seven years, but
he says: “It means that by the power of God, every year at that time
will be equal to ten of our years.”[^53]

[^1]: “Earth full of tyranny”: “earth that died due to tyranny” in the
original. (Trans.)

[^2]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 315; Al-Idha‘ah, p. 119; Ihqaq
al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 294.

[^3]: Surah al-Hadid 57:17.

[^4]: Kamaluddin, p. 668; Al-Mahajjah, p. 429; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol.
5, p. 242; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 429; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 54.

[^5]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 159; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 544; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 362.

[^6]: Surah al-Hajj 22:41.

[^7]: Tafsir Qummi, vol. 2, p. 87; Al-Muhajjah, p. 143; Ihqaq al-Haqq,
vol. 13, p. 341.

[^8]: Kamaluddin, p. 372; Kifayah al-Athar, p. 270; I‘lam al-Wara, p.
408; Kashf al-Ghammah, vol. 3, p. 314; Fara’id as-Samtayn, vol. 2, p.
336; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 448; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 321;
Ghayah al-Maram, p. 696; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 364.

[^9]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 496.

[^10]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 39; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 186.

[^11]: Hajar al-Aswad: a black stone located in the eastern corner of
the Ka‘bah, 1.5 meters above the ground, placed in the wall. Hajj
pilgrims try to touch this stone during the circumambulation for
blessings and luck as part of the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (S).
(Trans.)

[^12]: Tawaf: the ritual of circumambulating the Ka‘bah seven times, as
a part of the Hajj rituals. (Trans.)

[^13]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 427; Man la Yahduhu’l-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 525;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 374.

[^14]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 431; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 524.

[^15]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 4, p. 496; Is‘af ar-Raghibin, p. 124;
Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 19, p. 663; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 216.

[^16]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 99; Al-Hawi Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p. 78;
Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 21; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 86; Ibn Tawus,
Malahim, p. 70.

[^17]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 653; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 328;
Wafi, vol. 2, p. 112.

[^18]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, p. 30.

[^19]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 495; Kamil az-Ziyarat, p. 30; Rawandi, Qisas
al-Anbiya’, p. 80; At-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p. 31; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3,
p. 583; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 524; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp.
317, 376; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 3, p. 414.

[^20]: Al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 495; Al-Irshad, p. 362; At-Tahdhib, vol. 3,
p. 252; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 282; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p.
532; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 331; Maladh al-Akhyar, vol. 5, p. 475.

[^21]: Rawandi, Qisas al-Anbiya’, p. 80; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
225.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 385; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 275
with a slight difference.

[^23]: Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 337; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p.
452.

[^24]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, p. 30; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 3, p. 416.

[^25]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 273; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 330.

[^26]: Fadl al-Kufah, p. 25; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 609; Hilyah
al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 719; A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 51.

[^27]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 83; Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 160.

[^28]: Ghayah al-Maram, p. 697; Hilyah al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 620.

[^29]: Ibid.

[^30]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 32; Dala’il al-Imamah, p.
274; Majma‘ al-Bayan, vol. 2, p. 489; Al-Irshad, p. 365; Kashf
al-Ghumah, vol. 3, p. 256; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 266; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 550; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 346.

[^31]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 573.

[^32]: Miqdad is a companion of the Prophet (S) and Imam ‘Ali (‘a).
Regarding his dignified station, it is enough to say that based on one
hadith, “For the sake of seven persons—one of whom is Miqdad—God gives
you provisions and sustenance, helps you, and sends you rain.” On the
issue of caliphate (khilafah) and Imamate (imamah), he insisted on the
rightfulness of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) and exerted much
effort in this regard. Regarding him, the Prophet (S) said: “God ordered
me to love four persons: ‘Ali (‘a), Miqdad, Abu Dharr, and Salman.” In
another hadith, it is stated: “Heaven is eager to meet Miqdad.” See
Mu‘jam Rijal al-Hadith, vol. 8, p. 314. He migrated twice and
participated in various battles. During the Battle of Badr, he said to
the Prophet (S): “We will not say to you what the Children of Israel
said to Hadrat Musa (‘a). We shall say instead that we are beside you
and fight against the enemy at your side.” During the rule of Imam ‘Ali
(‘a), Miqdad was among the Shurtah al-Khamis. Miqdad passed away at the
age of seventy in a land called Jarf, three miles away from Medina. The
people there ritually washed his corpse and brought it to Baqi‘ where
they buried him. See Tanqih al-Maqal, vol. 2, p. 245; Asad al-Ghabah,
vol. 4, p. 409.

[^33]: Hamdan is a large tribe in Yemen. After the Battle of Tabuk, they
sent a delegation to the Prophet (S) and in return, in 9 AH the Prophet
(S) sent the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) to Yemen to invite them to
Islam. After reading the message of the Prophet (S), all of them
embraced Islam. Imam ‘Ali (‘a) wrote a letter to the Prophet (S) about
the news of the tribe of Hamdan’s acceptance of Islam in which he sent
salutations to Hamdan three times. Upon the receipt of the letter, the
Prophet (S) performed prostration of gratitude (sujud shukr) as a token
of gratitude for the received news. See Kamil Ibn Athir, vol. 1, pp. 26,
29-30. In praise of them, Imam ‘Ali (‘a) has thus recited: “The Hamdanis
are the possessors of the religion and of good manners. They are adorned
by their religion, their bravery, and their wrath against enemies at the
time of confrontation. If I were the doorkeeper of heaven, I would tell
the Hamdanis: ‘Enter therein in tranquility!’” See ‘Aqd al-Farid, vol.
4, p. 339; Waq‘ah Siffin, p. 274. When Imam ‘Ali (‘a) mobilized people
to wage war against Mu‘awiyah, someone protested against him. And since
it was probable for him to create disorder while the army was being
organized, those witnessing the event put an end to his life by striking
him with punches and kicks, and the Imam (‘a) paid his blood money. See
Ibid., pp. 94-95. In reply to the threat of Mu‘awiyah, Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
praised the might and bravery of the tribe of Hamdan, saying: “When I
found death as a “red death” (honorable death), then I mobilized the
tribe of Hamdan and they also mobilized the tribe of Himyar. See Waqi‘ah
Siffin, p. 43. The tribe of Hamdan was one of the three tribes having
the largest number of combatants in the army of Hadrat ‘Ali (‘a). See
Ibid., p. 290. In one of the encounters in Siffin, members of this
tribe, being on the right flank, had shown their unique firmness
especially eight hundred from among their youth who remained steadfast
till their last breath. One hundred and eighty of them were martyred and
wounded; eleven among those who attained martyrdom were commanders. As
the banner in the hands of one of them would fall on the ground, another
would pick it up, and in the encounter with their opponents the Azud and
Bujaylah killed three thousand of them. In one of the nights during the
Battle of Siffin, when Mu‘awiyah along with his four thousand men
intended to launch a night assault on the army of Imam ‘Ali (‘a), the
tribe of Hamdan was informed of it, and they were on guard, ready for
battle till morning. See Ibid., pp. 252, 329-330. One day, Mu‘awiyah
along with his army engaged in a battle with this tribe but having
suffered considerable losses he also left the battlefield and fled.
Mu‘awiyah dispatched the tribe of ‘Ak to fight them. The Hamdanis
attacked them in such a manner that Mu‘awiyah found no other alternative
but to give the order for their withdrawal. Imam ‘Ali (‘a) asked the
Hamdanis to subdue the soldiers from the land of Hamas. The Hamdanis
stormed and defeated them after an epic engagement with them thus
forcing them to withdraw near the station and camp of Mu‘awiyah. The
members of the tribe of Hamdan were always obedient to Imam ‘Ali (‘a).
When there was a difference on opinion within the camp of the Imam on
the tying of copies of the Qur’an on lances, the commander of this tribe
said to the Imam: “We do not have any protest and we will execute any
order you will give.” See Ibid., pp. 434, 436-437, 520.

[^34]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 97.

[^35]: Nur al-Absar, p. 187; Wafi, vol. 2, p. 114; as quoted from
Futuhat al-Makkiyyah.

[^36]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 4, p. 215; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p.
150; Al-‘Atr al-Wardi, p. 70.

[^37]: Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1, p. 22; Muntakhab al-Athar, p. 485.

[^38]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 363; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p.
283; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 264; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p.
251; Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 302; Al-Ayqaz, p. 249; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 291; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 4, p. 101.

[^39]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, pp. 224, 238; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 624.

[^40]: Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 302; Ibn Batriq, ‘Umdah, p. 435; Dala’il
al-Imamah, p. 258; Hanafi, Burhan, p. 99; Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p.
314; Fara’id as-Simtayn, vol. 2, p. 330; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, pp. 20, 236;
Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 50; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 557; Kanz al-‘Ummal,
vol. 14, p. 264; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 3, p. 262; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah,
p. 431; Ghayah al-Maram, p. 698; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 82.

[^41]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 20; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 82.

[^42]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 140; Kashf al-Astar, vol. 4, p. 112;
Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 314.

[^43]: Ibn Tawus, Tara’if, p. 177.

[^44]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 326; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p.
331; Ikhtisas, p. 257; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 298.

[^45]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 4, p. 221; Al-‘Ilal al-Mutanahiyyah, vol.
2, p. 858; Dala’il al-Imamah, vol. 233; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 593;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 91. See Tabrani, Mu‘jam, vol. 8, p. 120;
Asad al-Ghabah, vol. 4, p. 353; Fara’id as-Samtayn, vol. 2, p. 314;
Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 318; Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 4, p. 383.

[^46]: Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 3, p. 271; Ibn Batriq, ‘Umdah, p. 439;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 1; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 142; Firdaws
al-Akhbar, vol. 4, p. 6; Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 233; ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p.
239; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 432.

[^47]: Nur al-Absar, p. 170; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 225. See
Fadl al-Kufah, p. 25; A‘yan ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 51; Yanabi‘
al-Mawaddah, p. 492.

[^48]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 104; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 591.

[^49]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 574

[^50]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 331; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 298; vol.
53, p. 3.

[^51]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 283; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 390;
Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 584.

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 280.

[^53]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 225.


