The Growth of Knowledge and the Diffusion of Islamic Culture
============================================================

A government whose leader is a person like al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) for whom
the doors of knowledge have been opened—doors of knowledge which have
opened thirteen times compared to that of the prophets and the *awliya’*
(saints)—will naturally make tremendous progress in knowledge and will
bring about remarkable transformations in the world of culture, science
and technology.

In other words, the understanding of the science and knowledge that the
Imam of the Age (*‘atfs*) will bring about for the people cannot be
compared with the progress that mankind has so far attained. The people
in turn will also show much more enthusiasm in the acquisition of
knowledge to the extent that even very young women will become so
well-versed in the Book of God and religious principles that they could
easily deduce the decrees of God from the Holy Qur’an.

In the fields of technology and industry, there will also be astounding
advancements. Although the *hadith*s have not mentioned the details of
this advancement, the number of *hadith*s that have indicated something
in this regard give an example of the impressive transformation in this
context.

For example, there are *hadith*s that state: A person in the east would
be able to see his brother in the west; during his speech, the Imam
would be seen by the people all over the world; the supporters of the
Imam will talk to one another across vast distances and one could hear
the voice of the other; walking sticks and shoelaces will talk to
people; house utensils will give reports to man; man will ride on the
clouds in traveling, flying from one direction to another. And there are
still more similar *hadith*s.

Although some of them perhaps refer to miracles, one can realize the
abovementioned transformation by paying close attention to all the
pertinent *hadith*s.

The *hadith*s show the world during the period of the Imam of the Age
(*‘atfs*) as a civilized world at the apex of power and scientific
advancement. In general, the state of technology at that time will be
far more advanced than that of the present day just as today’s
technology is astoundingly different from that of past centuries.

The most fundamental distinction between the advancement at the time of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) with that of the present is that in our time
the advancement of science and technology has been leading to the
degeneration of the culture and morality of human society and the more
human beings make advancements in science the farther they move from
humanity and the more they head toward corruption, retrogression and
annihilation.

During the period of al-Mahdi (*‘a*), however, the situation will be
different. While mankind will be attaining the highest growth in science
and technology, to the same extent it will also be achieving the
loftiest moral goals and human perfection.

With the implementation of divine programs in the government of Imam
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), mankind will be so cultivated in personality that it
would seem as if they were different from those human beings who had
lived in the past. Just yesterday, they used to shed the blood of the
nearest kith and kin for the sake of a single dirham or dinar, but now
during the government of the Imam (*‘atfs*), money and wealth will
become so insignificant and trivial for them that for them asking for
such will be regarded as a sign of meanness and vileness of nature.

If just yesterday jealousy, rancor and enmity had been prevalent among
them, during the government of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) hearts will be as
close together as if they were one soul in different bodies. The hearts
of people who were irresolute, sluggish and weak will become stronger
and firmer than iron.

Yes, the government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will lead to the growth and
perfection of the intellect and morality, and that time will be the day
when talents will be perfected. What used to happen just yesterday was
the result of narrow-mindedness, but in the divine system of al-Mahdi
(*‘a*) humanity will reach the pinnacle of maturity and such qualities
as morality, thinking and will will reach their heights.

This promise is the very great promise that will be realized in the
government of justice of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). It is a gift that no
government at no point in time has been able to present to human
society.

Progress in Science and Technology
----------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Knowledge and learning are twenty seven
letters, and everything that the prophets have brought is only two
letters; so, now, the people are unaware (of these letters) except
(*juz’an*) these two. When our Qa’im rises up, he will bring out the
other twenty five letters, spreading and extending them among the
people. He will also attach the two letters and a total of twenty seven
letters will be distributed among the people.”[^1]

As reported by Rawandi in *Khara’ij*, the word “*juz’an*” is the
substitute of “*sirfan*” (merely).

It can be deduced from this *hadith* that although mankind progresses in
terms of knowledge and learning, in the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) it will suddenly attain growth and expansion thirteen times
more. When we think about it we will realize how stupendous and stunning
this progress of knowledge during the period of the Imam (*‘atfs*) will
be.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “There is much awareness of the Book of God,
the Honorable and Glorious, and the *Sunnah* of the Noble Prophet (S) in
the heart of our Mahdi such that a plant will grow with the best
quality. Anyone of you who remains alive during his advent and visits
him, at the moment of meeting him should say: ‘May peace be upon you, O
progeny of mercy and prophethood and the repository of knowledge and the
station of messengership!’”[^2]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “This affair (the global governance of
Islam) will be at the hand of him whose age (at the age of Imamate) is
the youngest among us and his memory is the most pleasing among us. God
will bestow knowledge and learning on him and will never leave him to
himself.”[^3]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said elsewhere: “The Imam who possesses the
Qur’an, knowledge and weapon is from us.”[^4]

This *hadith* gives the secret behind the progress and perfection of
humanity; the leader who can lead society toward felicity and perfection
is he who possesses three things:

(1) the divine law that guides mankind toward perfection,

(2) knowledge that will be utilized for the comfort of human life, and

(3) power and a weapon that will remove the corrupt and hindrances in
the way of human perfection.

Hadrat Wali al-‘Asr (*‘atfs*) is equipped with these things; therefore,
he will rule over the world and apart from leading mankind toward
progress in science and technology, he will also draw them toward moral
and human perfection.

At this juncture, we shall mention some *hadith*s that illustrate the
progress and advancement in science and technology during the period of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*):

Regarding the means of communication during the period of the Imam of
the Age (*‘atfs*), Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “During the period of
Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) the believer in the east would be able to see
his brother in the west. Similarly, the believer in the west would be
able to see his brother in the east.”[^5]

This *hadith* can be better understood by taking into account the
invention of video telephones. It is not clear, however, if this means
of communication will be introduced in the entire world so that the
people could use it conveniently. It is also possible that a more
advanced system will replace it, or there is another means which is
beyond all these mentioned things.

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said in another *hadith*: “When our Qa’im
rises up, God will enhance the audio-visual power of our Shi‘ah in such
a manner that the Imam will talk to his Shi‘ah from a distance of one
*barid* (24 kilometers) while they would be able to hear his voice and
see him; this will happen while the Imam remains where he is.”[^6]

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar asked Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*): “In which site and place
will Hadrat al-Mahdi appear?”

The Imam (*‘a*) replied: “During his advent there would be no witness
that could see the Imam when others could not see him (that is, during
his advent everybody would be able to see him), and if anyone would
claim other than this fact, you have to deny him.”[^7]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*) wearing the armor of the Prophet (S)… And no inhabitant of any
land could remain without having seen him in a manner that it would seem
as if he was in their own country.”[^8]

It can be understood from this *hadith* that during the time of Hadrat
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), people would be able to see him by means other than
what exists today, for it has thus been stated in the *hadith* that “The
people would be able to see him in a manner that it would seem as if he
was among them in their own country.”

There are two probabilities in this regard: (1) a system of broadcasting
three dimensional images will be spread all over the world at that time,
and (2) a more advanced system which will replace the existing one will
be utilized in seeing him, or the *hadith* points to a miracle to be
preformed by the Imam (*‘atfs*).

Regarding the means of transportation at that time, the Messenger of
Allah (S) said: “After you, communities (*aqwam*) shall come, under
whose feet the earth can be traversed and for whom the doors of the
world will be opened… The earth can be traversed in less than the blink
of an eye so much so that if any of them wants to traverse the world
from east to west in an hour, they would be able to do this.”[^9]

Many *hadith*s have been narrated concerning the advance of information
technology during the advent of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) as well
as in his government. It would be sufficient to mention two of them:

The Noble Messenger (S) said: “By Him in Whose hand is my soul! The Day
of Resurrection shall not come to pass unless one’s shoe, walking stick
or staff would report to him what his family had done after going out of
his home.”[^10]

Concerning the types of information during the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*), Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “He acquired the name “Mahdi” (the
guided one) because he will be guided regarding hidden affairs so much
so that he would dispatch men to execute a person whom the people do not
know was a criminal.

The degree of the Imam’s awareness of the people would be such that if a
person would speak inside his house he would be afraid lest the walls of
his house gave report and bore witness.”[^11]

This *hadith* probably indicates the amazing advancement of the system
of information during the period of the Imam of the Time. Of course, any
government that will rule over the entire world will need a complex
system and structure of information. Similarly, it is also possible that
it refers to the apparent purport of the *hadith*, i.e. the wall itself
would give a report.

The Diffusion of Islamic Culture
--------------------------------

In the government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) people will enter the fold of
Islam in an unprecedented manner, and the period of the strangulation
and suppression of religious people and the banning of Islamic symbols
will come to an end.

The call of Islam will reverberate everywhere manifesting the impact of
religion. In the words of some *hadith*s, Islam will penetrate every
house, slum and tent just as heat and cold would penetrate therein. As
the effect of heat and cold is inevitable, not subject to our choice and
will, in the same manner, Islam at that time will penetrate all places,
cities, villages, fields, and deserts notwithstanding the inner
opposition of some. It will influence and transform them.

In such a state of affairs, people’s reception and acceptance of the
manifestations of religion and principles will naturally be
unparalleled. The people’s reception of Qur’anic education,
congregational prayers and Friday prayers will be eye-catching, and the
present mosques and those to be built in the future would not be able to
meet their needs.

That which has been stated in a *hadith* that in one mosque
congregational prayers will be performed twelve times is itself a vivid
proof of the degree of the people’s acceptance of religious
manifestations. Taking into account the fact that during the advent of
Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) the population of the world will decrease
because of a series of killing and wars, this point is noteworthy.

Under such circumstances, the role of offices or ministries in charge of
religious and cultural affairs will be very wide. The mosques will be
built in proportion to population size. In some places, it will even be
necessary to build mosques having five hundred doors. It is also stated
in a *hadith* that the smallest mosque at that time will be the Kufah
Mosque, which at the present is one of the largest mosques in the world.

Now we shall present a number of *hadith*s on Imam al-Mahdi’s
government, the expansion of teaching in Qur’anic and Islamic sciences,
the mushrooming of mosques, the enhancement of spirituality, and the
elevation of morality.

### 1. Teaching of the Qur’an and Islamic Studies

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see my
Shi‘ah gathering in the Kufah Mosque and by erecting tents they are
teaching the people in the same manner that the Qur’an had been
revealed.”[^12]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “It is as if I can see the Shi‘ah of ‘Ali
(*‘a*) having copies of the Qur’an in their hands and teaching the
people.”[^13]

Asbagh ibn Nabatah said: “I heard ‘Ali (*‘a*) saying, ‘It is as if I can
see the *‘ajam* (non-Arab people) spreading their tents in the Kufah
Mosque and teaching Qur’an to the people just as it had been
revealed’.”[^14]

This *hadith* clarifies the identity of the teachers of the Qur’an as
*‘ajam* and according to linguists[^15] the word *‘ajam* here refers to
the Persians and Iranians.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “During the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*)
wisdom and understanding will be given to you such that a woman in her
house will pass judgment based on the Book of Allah and the *Sunnah* of
the Prophet (S).”[^16]

### 2. The Building of Mosques

Habbah ‘Arani said: “The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) proceeded
toward the land of Hirah[^17] and said: ‘…Certainly, in the city of
Hirah a mosque having five hundred doors will be built and in which
twelve just prayer leaders will conduct congregational prayers.’

I asked: ‘O Commander of the Faithful! As you have described, can the
Kufah Mosque accommodate the people then?’ He answered: ‘Four mosques
will be built there, and the (present) Kufah Mosque will be the smallest
among them. This mosque (in Hirah with five hundred doors) and two other
mosques at the two ends of the city of Kufah will be built,’ and then
the Imam (*‘a*) pointed to the direction of Basriyin and Gharbiyin
rivers.”[^18]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will continue
his movement… until such time that so many mosques will be built in
Constantinople and its surroundings.”[^19]

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar said: “Hadrat as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: ‘When Hadrat
al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) rises up, he will build a mosque with one thousand
doors outside the city of Kufah (*Zahr al-Kufah*).”[^20]

Maybe what is meant by *Zahr al-Kufah* mentioned in the *hadith* is the
holy city of Najaf since some scholars have described Najaf as *Zahr
al-Kufah.*

The Enhancement of Spirituality and Morality
--------------------------------------------

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “The people during the time
of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be preoccupied with worship and religion,
performing the prayers in congregation.”[^21]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The houses in Kufah will be connected to the
river of Karbala’ and Hirah so much so that a person who wants to join
the Friday congregational prayer will ride on a fast animal and yet
cannot reach the prayers on time.”[^22]

Perhaps it alludes to the increase in population and crowdedness, which
will hinder his timely participation and presence in the Friday
congregational prayers. That all the prayer attendees will gather in one
place and that the Friday congregational prayers will not be performed
more than once is perhaps due to the unification of these three cities;
for, from the viewpoint of religious law, the performance of more than
one Friday congregational prayer is not permissible.

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar reports that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When our
Qa’im rises up, one might be ignorant, cowardly and jealous before
daybreak, and by the daytime he will be the wisest among the people, the
bravest among them, and the most compassionate. Then the Imam’s victory
will be near at hand.”[^23]

Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up… The rancor of the
servants (of God) in relation to one another will be removed from their
hearts.”[^24]

The Holy Prophet of Islam (S) also said in this regard: “…At that time
spite and enmity will be removed from the hearts.”[^25]

Regarding the extinction of moral corruption and deviation, Imam Hasan
al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) said: “At the end of time, God will send a man through
whom none of the corrupt and deviant will remain without being
reformed.”[^26]

One of the features of the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is that
greed and covetousness will be wiped away and the spirit of freedom from
want will be instilled in men.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “At the time when Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) rises up, God will put contentment and freedom from want into
the hearts of His servants so much so that the Imam will announce that
anybody who was in need of wealth and property to come forward but
nobody will take the first step forward.”[^27]

What is interesting to note is that in the *hadith* the word *‘ibad*
(servants) has been used. It implies that this spiritual transformation
will not be confined to a particular group. In fact, this inner change
will happen to all human beings.

The Prophet also (S) said: “I give you the glad tidings of the Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) who shall be sent to the people while commotion and discord
are prevalent among them. Then, he will fill the earth with justice and
equity just as it had been full of tyranny and oppression; the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth will be pleased with him.

“God will make the hearts of the *ummah* of Muhammad (S) overflowing
with freedom from want so much so that a caller will announce, ‘Anybody
who is in need of wealth and property should step forward (so as to
satisfy his need),’ but nobody would come forward except one person.
Then, Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will say to him: ‘Go to the treasurer
and tell him that Mahdi has ordered him to give you wealth and
property.’

The treasurer will say: ‘You collect the money with your two hands,’ and
he will do so but while still there he will regret what he had done and
say to himself: ‘What happened for me to become the most covetous of the
*ummah* of the Prophet (S)?! Did the One who made them contented and
free from want fail to make me free from want?’ Then he will return to
give back the money. But the treasurer will not accept it, saying: ‘We
do not take back anything we have given!’”[^28]

In the *hadith* the phrase, “محمّد أمّة قُلوب يملأ” has been used, which
needs close attention; for, riches and freedom from want is not the
point. Instead, it is magnanimity and inner freedom from want. It is
possible for a man to be poor but has inner freedom from want.

In this

*  
*

hadith

  
the phrase

“

**  
**

قُلوب

**  
**

**  
**
يملأ

  
”

has been used, which implies that their hearts are full of the sense of
freedom from want and apart from that, their financial status is also
good.

There are some *hadith*s regarding the people’s intellectual growth,
moral perfection and strength of faith during the period of Hadrat
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). It will suffice to mention some of them:

Imam al-Baqir (

*  
*

‘a

  
) said: “When our Qa’im rises up, he will put his hand on the heads of
the servants of God and their intellects will be gathered (i.e., he will
give them concentration and intellectual growth by the will of God) and
he will perfect their morality.”

[^29]  

*  
*

Bi

*  
*
h

*  
*
ar al-Anwar

  
mentions the phrase,

“

**  
**

أحلامهم

  
”

which means, “their wishes”.

[^30]

Since he will fully implement Islamic commands, the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*) will bring about the intellectual growth of the people and
materialize the objective of the Noble Prophet (S) when he said: “I was
sent to perfect the morality of mankind.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Hadrat Fatimah (*‘a*), God will send
a man from the progeny of these two (Hasan and Husayn) who will conquer
the strongholds of misguidance and subdue the locked and blackened
hearts.”[^31]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said that the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*)
said: “A man from my progeny will appear… And he will put his hand on
the heads of the servants of God. Then, no believer will remain unless
his heart would become more formidable than big pieces of iron and
anvil, and he would acquire the strength of forty men.”[^32]

The people during the time of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will believe in
the deceitfulness of the world, knowing all the adversities and sins
therein. In terms of faith and piety they will reach such a sublime
state where the world can no longer beguile them.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The earth will bring out its best
substances such as gold and silver. Then the murderer will come forward
and say, ‘On account of them I committed murder,’ and he who severs his
relationship with his kith and kin will say, ‘These were the reasons for
the severance of relationships.’ The stealer will say: ‘It was because
of them my hand was amputated.’  
 Then, all of them will release the gold and they will not take anything
from them.”[^33]

Zayd az-Zurrad reports: “I said to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*): ‘We are afraid
that we would not be among the believers.’ He asked: ‘Why?’ I replied:
‘Because among us, we cannot find anyone who prefers his
brother-in-faith to his dinar and dirham, and we can see that dirham and
dinar for us are preferable to a brother-in-faith with whom we have been
united by the *wilayah* (guardianship) of, and love for, the Commander
of the Faithful (*‘a*).’

“The Imam (*‘a*) said: ‘That is not the case; you are believers, but
your faith will not be perfected unless our Qa’im rises up. At that
time, God will instill brotherhood and fortitude in you and then you
will become perfect believers.”[^34]

[^1]: Khara’ij, vol. 2, p. 841; Mukhtasar Basa’ir ad-Darajat, p. 117;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 326.

[^2]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 653; Al-‘Adad al-Qawiyyah, p. 65; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 491; Hilyah al-Abrar, vol. 3, p. 639; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 36; vol. 52, p. 317.

[^3]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 42.

[^4]: Mathalib an-Nawasib, vol. 1, p. 222.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 391; Haqq al-Yaqin, vol. 1, p. 229;
Bisharah al-Islam, p. 341.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 240; Khara’ij, vol. 2, p. 840; Mukhtasar
al-Basa’ir, p. 117; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p. 262; Muntakhab
al-Anwar al-Mudi’ah, p. 200; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 336.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 6.

[^8]: Kamil az-Ziyarat, p. 119; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 309; Kamaluddin,
vol. 2, p. 671; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 325; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol.
3, p. 493; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 387; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol.
10, p. 245; Jami‘ Ahadith ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 12, p. 370.

[^9]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 2, p. 449; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 351.

[^10]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 89; Firdaws
al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 98; Jami‘ al-Usul, vol. 11, p. 81.

[^11]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 319; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 365.

[^12]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 318; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 364.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Al-Irshad, p. 365; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 3, p. 265; Nur
ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 27; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 265.

[^15]: Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, vol. 6, p. 111.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 352.

[^17]: Hirah was a city 6 kilometers away from Kufah where Lakhmid kings
who were protégés of Iran ruled during the Sassanid period. In 602 CE
Khosroe Pervez overthrew this dynasty and determined the ruler there.
After the Muslims’ conquest of it, Hirah declined due to the rise of
Kufah, and prior to the tenth century CE/fourth century AH, it was
totally ruined. See Farhang-e Farsi-ye Mu‘in, vol. 5, p. 470.

[^18]: At-Tahdhib, vol. 3, p. 253; Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 427; Man la
Yahduhuh al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 525; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 9, p. 412;
Mir’atu’l-‘Uqul, vol. 18, p. 58; Maladh al-Akhyar, vol. 5, p. 478; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 375.

[^19]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 312.

[^20]: Al-Irshad, p. 362; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 295; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 537; Wafi, vol. 2, p. 112; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52,
pp. 330, 337.

[^21]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 159.

[^22]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 295; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 537;
Wafi, vol. 2, p. 112; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 330, 337.

[^23]: Wafi, vol. 2, p. 113, as quoted from Futuhat al-Makkiyyah.

[^24]: Khisal, vol. 2, p. 254, hadith 1051.

[^25]: ‘Abdur-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p. 402; Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p.
162; Ibn Hammad, Malahim, p. 152.

[^26]: Manan ar-Rahman, vol. 2, p. 42; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 524,
as reported from the Commander of the Faithful (‘a).

[^27]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 71; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 186;
Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 27.

[^28]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, pp. 37, 52; Jami‘
Ahadith ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 34; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 146.

[^29]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 25; Khara’ij, vol. 2, p. 840; Kamaluddin,
vol. 2, p. 675.

[^30]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 336.

[^31]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 152; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol .13, p.116; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, pp. 448, 495.

[^32]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 653; Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 243; Kamil
az-Ziyarat, p. 119.

[^33]: Muslim, Sahih Muslim, vol. 2, p. 701; Tirmidhi, Sahih Tirmidhi,
vol. 34, p. 493; Abu Ya‘la, Musnad, vol. 11, p. 32; Jami‘ al-Usul, vol.
11, p. 38.

[^34]: Al-Usul as-Sittah ‘Ashar, p. 6; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 350.


