Security
========

While prior to the advent of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) states of
insecurity will prevail over the world, one of the most fundamental
tasks the Imam will undertake will be the restoration of security in
society. With the implementation of appropriate and accurate programs in
his government, within a short period of time security will be restored
in society in all aspects, and the people will live in a safe
environment experiencing security that mankind has not experienced so
far.

Highways will become so safe that young women will travel from one place
to another without an accompanying close relative, being safe from any
molestation and bad intentions.

The people will live in total judicial security to the extent that no
one ever has the least apprehension that his right would be trampled
upon. Programs and laws will be made and implemented in such a way that
the people will see themselves in total financial and social security.
Stealing will be eliminated from society and financial security will
prevail to the extent that if someone puts his hand in another’s pocket,
there will be no probability of stealing involved, and he will honestly
justify his action.

Insecurity will be eliminated from society, and security will prevail in
such a manner that it will encompass even animals and living creatures;
the sheep and wolf will live together while children will play with
scorpions and biting creatures without being harmed.

Public Security
---------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said in this regard: “When Isa ibn Maryam
(Jesus the son of Mary) (*‘a*) comes down on earth from heaven and kills
ad-Dajjal… The shepherds will tell their sheep: ‘Go to so-and-so place
for grazing and return at so-and-so time!’ A flock of sheep will go
between two plantations, but they will never encroach on any of the
plants or break any branch with their feet.”[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “…He will fill the earth with justice
to such an extent that the people will return to their natural pure
disposition (*fitrah*). No blood will unjustly be shed and no sleeping
person will be woken up (unjustly).”[^2]

Regarding the prevalence of security during the time of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*), ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas said: “At that time, even the wolf will
not harm the sheep; the lion will not devour the cow; the snake will not
bite man; the mouse will neither gnaw leather bags nor take away
anything from them.”[^3]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up, the
sky will send down its rain while the beasts of prey will reconcile with
the other quadrupeds and harm human beings no more so much so that a
woman from Iraq will go to Sham without worrying about a fierce animal
or being afraid of it.”[^4]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “The army of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
crush the army of the A‘war ad-Dajjal, cleansing the earth of its
existence. Afterward, al-Mahdi will attain the leadership of the east
and west, extending from Jabalqa to Jabarsa, including every country,
and his government and rule will be stabilized.”[^5]

Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will behave justly with the people to such an
extent that sheep will graze beside wolves while children will play with
scorpions without being harmed by them. The wicked will be exterminated
while the good will remain.

It has been stated in a *hadith*: “The Day of Resurrection will not come
to pass unless Hadrat ‘Isa comes down… And wolves will be among flocks
of sheep like shepherd dogs while lions will be among a herd of camels
as if they were young small camels.”[^6]

Hudhayfah reports that he heard the Prophet of God (S) saying: “During
the advent of Hadrat al-Qa’im… Birds will lay eggs in their own nests
and so will the fishes in the sea.”[^7]

Perhaps, it means that they will feel a sence of security, and with
nothing to worry about, they will lay eggs in their nests and habitats.

Abu Amamah Bahili narrates: “One day the Messenger of Allah (S)
delivered a sermon to us and at the end he (S) said: “The leader of the
people at that time will be a righteous man… In that time, sheep and
cows will not be attacked and animosities will be removed from hearts.
Bridles will be removed from the mouths of animals. Children will put
their hands in the mouths of fierce animals but the latter will not harm
them. Young animals will be put in front of lions and other beasts of
prey and yet they will not be harmed. Lions will be among a herd of
camels like shepherd dogs while the wolves will be in the midst of
shepherd dogs.”[^8]

This *hadith* perhaps alludes to the absolute security and emergence of
the sense of confidence with one another.

The Prophet (S) also said: “When ‘Isa ibn Maryam comes down and kills
ad-Dajjal, snakes and scorpions will not be hiding and will harm no
one.”[^9]

These *hadith*s clearly illustrate the degree of security from harm of
person and property during the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). The
shepherd will send his herd in the fields and not worry about its being
stolen by man and attacked by beasts of prey. Man will travel or live
among harmful animals and be safe from their harm; it would be as if the
law on respecting the rights of others had been accepted among the
fierce animals and insects, and they all submitted and abided by it.
Maybe some degrees of that security could be due to the fact that during
the period of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) divine favors will be abundant,
and since all animals will also benefit from them and experience
security, they, in turn, will not harm anyone.

Public security in the period of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) will be
so pervasive that even if one was sleeping, he would be certain that
nobody would wake and disturb him.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said in this regard: “The *ummah* of al-Mahdi
will seek refuge in him just as honeybees seek refuge in their queen. He
will fill the earth with justice and equity just as it had been filled
with tyranny and oppression to the extent that the people will return to
their primordial nature (*fitrah*). A sleeping person will not be awoken
while no one’s blood would ever be shed (unjustly).”[^10]

The Security of Highways
------------------------

There are numerous *hadith*s concerning the security of highways during
the rule of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). It will be appropriate to mention
some of them:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The rule of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be
such that two women will keep on moving and traveling at night and yet
they will not be afraid of injustice or oppression (against them).”[^11]

The Prophet (S) also said: “Surely, God will draw this affair to a close
(His religion) in such manner that a person on horseback would travel at
night from San‘a to Hadramawt (both in Yemen) and not be afraid of any
one except God.”[^12]

Perhaps, these two places had been cited due to their formidable deserts
because of which they have been sometimes referred to as *Mafazah* and
mentioned to wish one success and safety in traversing the desert.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “By God! The supporters of al-Mahdi will
fight to the extent for God to be worshipped as the Only One Creator and
for Him not to be associated with any partner, and to the point where a
weak old woman would set off from one point of the world to another and
nobody will offend her.”[^13]

A person asked Hadrat as-Sadiq (*‘a*): “Why should we wish for the
advent of Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘a*)? Do we have a sublime station during
the period of his occultation (*ghaybah*)? The Imam (*‘a*) replied:
“Glory be to Allah! Don’t you like justice to be spread in the world,
security be established along the highways, and the oppressed be dealt
with justly by passing a just verdict and be assisted?”[^14]

One of the companions of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “One day, Abu
Hanifah came to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*). The Imam (*‘a*) asked him: ‘Which
place does this Qur’anic verse refer to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ سِيرُوا فِيهَا لَيَالِيَ وَأَيَّامًا آمِنِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Travel through them in safely, night and day”*[^15]?”

Abu Hanifah said: “I think it is between Mecca and Medina.”

The Imam (*‘a*) turned toward his companions and said: “Don’t you know
that people on this route are being attacked, their properties
plundered, having no security, and are being killed?”

His companions replied: “Yes, it is so,” and Abu Hanifah kept silent.  
 The Imam (*‘a*) asked him again: “Which place in the world is referred
to in this verse when God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَنْ دَخَلَهُ كَانَ آمِنًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And whoever enters shall be secure.”*[^16]?”

Abu Hanifah said: “It is the *Ka‘bah*.”

The Imam (*‘a*) said: “Don’t you know that Hajjaj ibn Yusuf
ath-Thaqafi[^17] attacked the *Ka‘bah* with catapults in order to
suppress Ibn Zubayr and killed him. Was he then in a secure place?”  
 Abu Hanifah kept silent and did not say anything.

As he left the assembly, Abubakr Hadrami asked the Imam (*‘a*): “May I
be your ransom! What are the answers to these two questions?”

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “O Abubakr! The first verse refers to the
assistance given to the Qa’im from among us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*. Also,
when God said, “Whoever enters it is safe,” it means that anyone, who
pays allegiance to the Imam and enters into allegiance with him and thus
becomes one of his supporters and companions, is safe.”

‘Ali ibn ‘Uqbah narrated from his father: “When Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*) appears, he will issue judgments justly and tyranny will be
removed during his government, and on account of his presence roads and
highways will become safe.”[^18]

Qatadah said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is the best of men… During his
time, the earth will become so safe that a woman along with five other
women, without any male companion, will set out for *Hajj* and not be
afraid of anything.”[^19]

‘Adi ibn Hatam said: “Surely, a day will come when a weak woman from
Hirah (near Najaf) will perform pilgrimage in the House of God alone and
she will not be afraid of anyone except God.”[^20]

Judicial Security
-----------------

One of the topics mentioned about the state of affairs after the advent
of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is the punishment of individuals who make the
world unsafe, leave behind millions of killed, wounded and infirm, and
bring about material and non-material confusion. These are criminals who
would drag the world down to a deplorable state.

After the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), they will definitely be
pursued, detained, and tried in court. Implementation of the divine
legal punishments (*hudud*) can be regarded as an important obligation
especially at the advent of the Infallible Imam. Through Hadrat
Baqiyyatullah (*‘atfs*) the legal punishments will be implemented on
earth according to the Book of God and free of any influence of
materialistic desires.

During that time, supervision of this key post will be entrusted to
individuals who, apart from having total mastery of Islamic and
jurisprudential principles, do not have the slightest fault and
shortcoming in terms of the personal records. In the *hadith*s, their
mastery of judicial works as well as their personal record and merits
have been pointed out. Here are some examples:

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When the Qa’im of the Progeny of Muhammad
rises up, he will bring out seventeen persons from behind the *Ka‘bah*.
They are the five persons from the community (*qawm*) of Musa (Prophet
Moses) who judge rightfully… the seven Companions of the Cave (*ashab
al-kahf*), Yusha‘ (Joshua) the *wasiyy* (executor of will) of Musa, the
believer from the family of Pharaoh, Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dujanah, and
Malik al-Ashtar.”[^21]

Abu Basir asked Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*): “With the exception of this group
(three hundred and thirteen persons) are there any other people behind
the *Ka‘bah*?” The Imam (*‘a*) answered: “Yes, there are believers, but
this will be the group of jurists, experts, learned men, and judges upon
whose breasts and backs of the head, the Imam (*‘a*) will put his hand
and rub. Afterward, no judgment will be difficult for them.”[^22]

It is thus stated in *Bihar al-Anwar*: “They will be the assistants of
al-Mahdi and rulers on the earth.”[^23]

The Sadiq (Truthful) of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) said: “When Hadrat
al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) rises up, he will designate a ruler for every country
and say to him: ‘The program of your activity is in your hand. If in the
performance of a duty a problem arises for which you do not know the
ruling, look at the palm of your hand and act according to what you find
therein.”[^24]

It is possible that finding the judicial ruling on a problem from the
palm of the hand alludes to the speed of communication with the central
government and obtaining the pertinent information on solving them. It
may also point to the amazing talent of the officials in performing
their tasks that with just a single glance they could pronounce a
ruling. Perhaps the *hadith* is talking about a miracle, which the human
mind could not comprehend, by which problems could be easily solved.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “After the advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) no
one’s right could be usurped by another without it being regained by the
Imam and returned to its rightful owner.”[^25]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When the Qa’im of the Progeny of Muhammad
(S) rises up, he will judge and issue rulings based on the method of
judgment of Prophet Dawud (David) and he will not be dependent on
witnesses and evidence. God will inspire him (the divine laws) and he
will behave according to his (inspired) knowledge and make judgments
based upon it.”[^26]

Ja‘far ibn Sayyar Shami said: “The magnitude of the restoration of lost
rights (during the time of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)) will be to such an extent
that if the right of a certain person is between the teeth of another,
the Imam will regain it and restore it to its owner.”[^27]

Of course, such actions with respect to the rights of people will be
done by the courts which are convened during the rule of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) and the judges therein will be such figures as Salman, Malik
al-Ashtar, the great men among the community of Musa, and others, and
the top judicial post will be assumed by the Imam himself. It would be
natural that there will be no more concern for the trampling of rights
as the statement, “If the right of a certain person is between the teeth
of another, the Imam will regain it and restore it to its owner,”
bespeaks of this reality.

[^1]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 97.

[^2]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 99; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 78; Ibn Tawus,
Malahim, p. 70. See ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 156; Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 19;
Safarini, Lawa’ih, vol. 2, p. 12; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 274;
Khara’ij, vol. 3, p. 1149; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 514; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 290.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 61; Bayhaqi, Sunan Bayhaqi, vol. 9, p.
180.

[^4]: Shaykh as-Saduq, Al-Khisal, section 400, p. 255; Al-Imamah
wa’t-Tabsirah, p. 131; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 494; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 316.

[^5]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 422; Al-Mahajjah, p. 425; Ihqaq al-Haqq,
vol. 13, p. 341.

[^6]: ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p. 401. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 2, pp. 437-438; Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 162.

[^7]: Ikhtisas, p. 208; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 304.

[^8]: Tayalisi, Musnad, vol. 10, p. 335; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 152.

[^9]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 97.

[^10]: Al-Hawi Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p. 77; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 70 and
p. 63 with a slight variation; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 154.

[^11]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 8, p. 179.

[^12]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 4, p. 72; Jami‘ al-Usul, vol. 7, p. 286;
Bayhaqi, Sunan Bayhaqi, vol. 9, p. 180.

[^13]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 62; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p.
283; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 1, p. 369; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 345;
Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 423; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 380.

[^14]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Ikhtisas, p. 20; ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol.
1, p. 64; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 149; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 144;
Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 557; In Bihar al-Anwar, “المظلوم ينصر” has
been stated instead of “المظلوم ينصف”. See Al-Fa’iq, vol. 4, p. 100.

[^15]: Surah Saba’ 34:18.

[^16]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:97.

[^17]: Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ath-Thaqafi (d. 714 C.E.) was a lieutenant
appointed by the ‘Umayyad caliph, ‘Abd al-Malik (r. 685-705 C.E.). In
order to suppress dissent in Mecca, he ordered the bombardment of the
sacred mosque. He is famous for his bloody persecution of the Shi‘ah,
particularly for having killed Sa‘id ibn Zubayr (d. 713 C.E.), who was
one of the early exegetes of the Qur’an. It is reported that Hajjaj was
tormented by the image of this martyr in his dying moments. (Trans.)

[^18]: ‘Ilal ash-Shara’i‘, vol. 1, p. 83; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p.
332; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 3, p. 212; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 314.

[^19]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 98; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 69; ‘Iqd
ad-Durar, p. 151; Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 21.

[^20]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 491.

[^21]: Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 55, as quoted from ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir
‘Ayyashi, and according to Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, p. 266. Imam al-Mahdi will
bring out twenty seven persons from behind the Ka‘bah.

[^22]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 202; Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 307 with a
slight variation.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 365. See Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 249.

[^24]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 319; Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 249; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 573; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 365; vol. 53, p.
91.

[^25]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 64; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
52, p. 224.

[^26]: Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, p. 266; Basa’ir ad-Darajat, vol. 5, p. 259.

[^27]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 98; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 36; Ibn Tawus,
Malahim, p. 68; Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 52.


