The Economy
===========

If a government is supported up by God and implements the divine laws
and rules in the society, by its grace, the people will also be
transformed and direct their steps toward piety and goodness. As a
result, the favors of God will be showered on His servants from all
directions.  
 We read in the Holy Qur’an:

**  
**
﴿

**  
**

**  
**
وَلَوْ أَنَّ أَهْلَ الْقُرَى آمَنُواْ وَاتَّقَواْ لَفَتَحْنَا عَلَيْهِم
بَرَكَاتٍ مِّنَ السَّمَاء وَالأَرْضِ ﴾

*“If the people of the towns had been faithful and God-wary, We would
have opened to them blessings from the heaven and the earth.”*[^1]

In the government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) in which the people will direct
their steps toward submission to God and obedience to the Proof of
Allah, there will be no more reason for the sky and earth to withhold
their blessings from the servants of God.

As such, seasonal rains will pour; rivers will become full of flowing
water; the soil will become fertile; agriculture will bloom; gardens
will become green and full of fruits; desert climates in places such as
Mecca and Medina which had never become verdant will at once turn into
palm-groves; and animal husbandry will flourish.

The society’s economy will boom; poverty and indigence will be wiped
out; there will be progress everywhere, and commerce will flourish
considerably.

There are many *hadith*s transmitted concerning the economic boom at the
time of the Imam of the Age (*‘atfs*). It shall suffice for us to quote
some of them here:

Economic Boom and Social Welfare
--------------------------------

What can be deduced from the *hadith*s in this context is that as a
result of the improvement in economic conditions, poverty and indigence
will be uprooted from human society, and a needy person will be endowed
with so many assets and wealth that he would be incapable of carrying
them. The condition of the society will be such that those who are
liable to pay *zakat* will find difficulty in finding recipients
entitled to it.

### 1. Distribution of Properties and the Endowment of Possessions

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When the Qa’im of the *Ahl al-Bayt* rises
up, he will distribute the public treasury to the people evenly and he
will behave justly with them.

Riches on the ground (such as *zakat* and *khums*) as well as
underground wealth (like treasures and minerals) will be gathered
through him. Then, the Imam will address the people, thus: “Come and
take those things for the sake of which you used to sever relationships,
shed blood and commit sins. He will give wealth such that no one before
him had ever done.”[^2]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “At the end of time, a caliph will
appear who will bestow properties without reckoning.”[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said: “At the time of despair and the
emergence of seditions, a person with the name of Mahdi will appear
whose generosity to the people will be wholesome.”[^4]

The munificence of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be like that of a father,
without reservation. Therefore, his generosity will be pleasant. His
munificence would be contrary to the munificence of others which leads
to the servitude of the recipients, trampling upon their religion, and
their humiliation.

The Prophet (S) also said: “A person from Quraysh will appear… and he
will distribute wealth among the people and act based on the *Sunnah* of
their Prophet.”[^5]

In another *hadith*, he (S) said: “The Mahdi will take out treasures
from under the ground, distribute wealth among the people, and restore
the splendor of Islam.”[^6]

The Prophet (S) also said: “During the last period of my *ummah*, there
will be a caliph who will give handfuls of possessions to the people
without counting them.”[^7]

‘Abdullah ibn Sinan reports: “My father said to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*): ‘I
have at my disposal some tributary lands which I have cultivated.’ The
Imam (*‘a*) remained silent for a while and then said: ‘If our Qa’im
rises up, your share from the land will be more than that’.”[^8]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When the Qa’im of the *Ahl al-Bayt* rises
up, he will distribute the public treasury among the people evenly and
he will behave justly with them.”[^9]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The name of the last Imam will be
similar to mine. He will appear and fill the world with justice. When
wealth would have been stored up, a person will ask for property from
him. The Imam (*‘atfs*) will say: ‘Take it yourself from these
possessions.”[^10]

### 2. The Uprooting of Poverty from Society

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “When Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) rises
up… Properties and *zakat*s will be brought in the alleys, but one could
hardly be found who would be willing to receive them.”[^11]

He (S) also said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be from my *ummah* and
during his rule property and wealth will be stockpiled.”[^12]

This *hadith* alludes to the elimination of society’s needs to the
extent that wealth will exceed consumption. In other words, the
government of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) apart from having no budget
deficit will have surplus income.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up… The earth will
bring out its treasures and expose them in such a manner that the people
could see them on the ground with their own eyes. The payers of *zakat*
will look for someone needy to whom they could give their *zakat* but
they would not be able to find anyone. Owing to the grace and
munificence of God, the people will become needless of others.”[^13]

‘Ali ibn ‘Uqbah narrated: “During that time, no one would be able to
find a place where they can give charity and spend money in the way of
goodness because the believers will be free from want everywhere.”[^14]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The people will go to al-Mahdi paying their
taxes. God will endow our Shi‘ah with a comfortable and easy life and
they will live while being free from want. And if the grace and felicity
of God had not encompassed them, they would have risen up with such
freedom from want.”[^15]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘a*) will give gifts to
the people twice a year. He will give salaries twice a month and he will
treat the people equally in such a manner that nobody who is in need of
*zakat* could be found in society. The payers of *zakat* will bring the
share of the poor to them but the poor will not accept them. Having no
alternative, they will place the revenue in specially bags and bring
them where the Shi‘ah are located but they will say, ‘We are not in need
of your dirhams’.”[^16]

From the abovementioned *hadith*s two points can be learned. Firstly,
the people during the rule of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will have
intellectual maturity such that, even without any force and pressure
exerted on them, they will perform their obligations in every respect.
One of these obligations is the payment of taxes on their income to the
Islamic state.

If all the Muslims would pay the *khums* on their income and *zakat* on
their assets to the Islamic government, their aggregate will be huge and
the government would become able to undertake any measure of reform and
public service.

Secondly, although Hadrat al-Mahdi’s (*‘atfs*) grants to the people at
that time will be countless and the people will have incomes through
various means that would render them free from need, what is worthy of
attention is the sublime nature and spirit of contentment they will
have.

For, there are many rich people who have hungry natures and greedy
spirits while there are many people who, in spite of their being poor,
have lofty natures and spirits of contentment. The people during the
period of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) will possess the spirit of
contentment and this is the very spiritual transformation that will
occur at that time.

### 3. Attending to the Affairs of the Deprived and the Downtrodden

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “…At that time, al-Mahdi (S) will
appear and he is from the progeny of this person (‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
(*‘a*)). Through his hand, God will eliminate liars, remove difficult
circumstances, and take away the rope of slavery and servitude from your
necks.”[^17]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “When the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*) appears, no Muslim slave will remain without being bought by
the Imam and freed in the way of God, and no debtor will remain without
his debt being paid by the Imam.”[^18]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) appears, he will go
to the city of Medina and free everyone from the Bani Hashim who was
imprisoned there.”[^19] Then, Ibn Artah said: “He will go to Kufah and
set free the prisoners from the Bani Hashim there.”

Tawus al-Yamani said: “The salient feature of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) is that
he would be strict in relation to his rulers and officials and would be
generous in giving wealth. In relation to the helpless, weak and
indigent, he will be kind and magnanimous.”[^20]

Abu Ru’bah said: “The Mahdi will give presents to the weak with his own
hands.”[^21]

This probably means that in distributing gifts and presents, the Imam
(*‘a*) will pay particular attention to the deprived and weak, giving
them more property. In addition to the right that every Muslim has with
respect to his share in the public treasury, he will give to the poor as
much as he deems appropriate.

Prosperity and Development
--------------------------

We will realize the magnificence and importance of the prosperity and
development during the rule of the Imam of the Time (*‘a*) when we try
to take into account the magnitude of the destruction prior to his
advent. Yes, the world that had suffered from ruinous war, that had
fallen prey to the carnal desires of the power-mongers, that had been
burnt in the fire of war for long periods, and had left behind death and
destruction, will be more in need of prosperity and development. The
government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will undertake the repairing of those
destructions and make the entire world prosperous and developed.

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will dispatch his companions
to different lands. He will send companions who had paid allegiance to
him from the beginning of the uprising off to the cities, enjoining
justice and benevolence. Each of them will become the ruler of a
territory on the earth. Afterward, all cities of the world will flourish
through justice and benevolence.”[^22]

In this regard, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “During the rule of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) no ruined place will remain on the surface of the earth
without it being rehabilitated and developed.”[^23]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “After entering Kufah… Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) will assign a group to dig a river from behind the shrine of
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) (outside the city of Karbala’) toward the Ghariyin
for the water to flow toward the city of Najaf, and they will build
bridges across this river.”[^24]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up… The houses of Kufah
will be connected to the river of Karbala and Hirah.”[^25]

This *hadith* indicates the expansion of the city of Kufah, which will
spread in the direction of Hirah, which is at present approximately
sixty kilometers away from Kufah and to Karbala’, in another direction,
which also is the same distance from Kufah.

Habah ‘Arani said: “The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) went to Hirah.
There, pointing toward Kufah, he said: ‘Certainly, the houses of the
city of Kufah will be connected to the city of Hirah and it will be so
developed that every *dhara‘*[^26] (approximately one meter) of land in
these two cities will be sold and purchased at great expense for many
dinars.”[^27]

Perhaps, the future expansion of Kufah and the expensiveness of its
property will be due to its being the capital of the Islamic government
in the future and based on *hadith*s, the faithful will go there.

In the same vein, roads and highways will expand during the period of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and special rules will be observed in this
context. In this connection, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said:

“When Hadrat al-Qa’im rises up, he will go to Kufah… Then, no corniced
mosque (having a porch or crenation or overlooking other houses) will
remain on the surface of the earth without being destroyed by him and
restoring it to a form lacking their previous features, and he will
expand the main roads.”[^28]

Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up, he will inform
those who own means of transportation (animal or otherwise) to travel
along the middle of the highways and roads just as he will order
pedestrians to walk on the sidewalks of the street. Thus, anyone riding
who traveled along the edge of the street and harmed somebody will be
obliged by the Imam (*‘a*) to pay blood-money. Similarly, any pedestrian
who walked in the middle of the street and was harmed by somebody would
have no right to receive blood money.”[^29]

We can understand from this *hadith* that the cities will be so
developed, main roads so expanded and means of transportation so
multiplied that a law will be imposed not only for the means of the
transportation but also for pedestrians.

Yes, a government that will use science and technology, expand the main
roads, and construct expressways will also impose a law for driving with
strong executive guarantees.

Agriculture
-----------

One of the sectors that will experience considerable transformation
during the rule of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) is the agricultural
sector (farming and animal husbandry). After the people had tasted the
pain of scant rain, long draughts, lack of foodstuffs, the destruction
of sown fields, and a lack of news about domesticated animals and animal
husbandry, when in order to procure a loaf of bread one sometimes had to
sacrifice the most valuable things he possessed, i.e. chastity and
dignity, a tremendous transformation in agriculture will occur and
foodstuffs will become abundant in society.

Prior to the advent of the Imam (*‘a*) if there was any rain, the earth
was not receptive to it and when the earth was receptive, the rain did
not come or would sometimes fall at the wrong time and agricultural
products would be destroyed. During the time of the Imam (*‘a*), the
rain would change.

Initially, rain which had not so far been experienced by the people
throughout their lives would fall. Thereafter, divine grace will descend
opportunely upon the people, and as a result, the blessings of God for
them will become abundant to such an extent that it would seem as if
they had received ten years of produce in one day. It has been stated in
*hadith*s that for every *man* (three kilograms) of wheat one could
harvest a hundred *man* of produce.

Some *hadith*s mention the fall of twenty four rains after the advent of
Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). Thereafter, accordingly, great blessings will
envelop the people, encompassing flora and fauna as well. Plains,
mountains and deserts, and perennially barren fields will become
verdant; the divine blessings will be so bountiful that the people would
wish for a new life for the dead.

### 1. The Abundance of Rain

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The sky will shower upon them abundant
rain.”[^30]

In another *hadith* he (S) said: “God will send down for him blessings
from the sky.”[^31]

He (S) also said elsewhere: “He (*‘atfs*) will fill the earth with
justice and equity while the sky will send down rain, and as a result,
the soil will produce its crops permanently and my *ummah* during the
rule of the Imam (*‘atfs*) will enjoy blessings the like of which has
not been seen before.”[^32]

In this connection, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Because
of our existence, God, the Exalted, began His creation and will also end
it because of our existence. He extinguishes whatever He wills through
us and creates anything He wills through us. Owing to our existence, He
removes difficult circumstances, and sends down the rain for our sake.
So, let (the world’s) deception not deviate you from the way of God.
From the day God closes the doors of the sky, even a drop of rain will
not fall, and if our Qa’im rises up, the sky will send down its rain of
mercy.”[^33]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When the time for the advent of Hadrat
al-Qa’im comes, in Jumadi ath-Thani and ten days in the month of Rajab,
a rain will fall the like of which the people have not seen.”[^34]

Sa‘id ibn Jubayr said: “The year when Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) rises
up, it will rain twenty four times whose effects and blessings will be
made manifest.”[^35]

Concerning the abundance of water during the period of Hadrat al-Qa’im
(*‘atfs*), the Noble Messenger of Islam (S) said: “During his
(al-Mahdi’s) rule, water will be abundant and the water (level) of
rivers will rise.”[^36]

He (S) also said in another *hadith*: “…Rivers will overflow with water,
springs will gush forth and spill over, and the earth will produce crops
manifold times.”[^37]

### 2. The Surplus of Agricultural Produce

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “How happy would life be after al-Masih
(Christ) (*‘a*) kills ad-Dajjal because the sky will be granted
permission to let rain fall and the earth to produce crops. If a seed
was to be thrown on Mount Safa (which is rocky and barren), it would
surely grow. At that time rancor and jealousy will fade away such that
if a person passes by a lion, he will not be harmed, and if he treds
upon a snake, he will not be bitten.”[^38]

The Prophet (S) also said: “My *ummah* during the period of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) will acquire blessings the like of which has never been seen,
and no believer or infidel has ever attained such a blessing. The sky
will send down rains in succession while the earth will not keep
anything from the plants but send it out (i.e., it will let the plants
grow).”[^39]

Regarding the preparedness of the earth in the time of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*), the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The earth is like silver,
which becomes calm after its ebullition. It will be ready for
cultivation and the flourishing of plants. It was the same during the
time of Hadrat Adam (*‘a*).”[^40]

Concerning the blessings of the produce and their good quality, the
Prophet (S) said:  
 “…A pomegranate will satisfy many persons[^41] while a bunch of grapes
will be consumed by many (and satiate them).”[^42]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will conquer the east
and the west… He will remove evils and disturbances and replace them
with wholesome and good things so much so that a wheat and barley farmer
can get from every *man* (a unit of measurement equivalent to three
kilograms) of wheat, a hundred *man* of produce just as God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فِي كُلِّ سُنْبُلَةٍ مِائَةُ حَبَّةٍ وَاللَّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَنْ
يَشَاءُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In every ear (grow) a hundred grains. Allah enhances severalfold
whomever He wishes.”*[^43]”[^44]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “The Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will enjoin his
officials to observe justice among the people in the cities… A farmer at
the time will sow a *mudd*[^45] (of grain) and reap seven hundred
*mudd*s of crops as God, the Exalted, said and God will also increase it
manifold.”[^46]

With regard to the fruition of trees, he (*‘a*) said: “At the time of
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) trees will bear fruits (plentifully) and blessings
will abound.”[^47]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said elsewhere: “When our Qa’im
rises up, the sky will send down its rain while the earth will let its
plants sprout such that if a woman travels on foot from Iraq to Sham,
she will tread on nothing but grasses and shrubs.”[^48]

Maybe the Imam (*‘a*) mentions this region as an example. It must be
noted that the present geographical condition of this region is such
that on this route nothing can be found except the cacti of the desert.
Perhaps, mentioning this region is meant to indicate that during the
time of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) all barren lands will become verdant.

In relation to this, the Prophet of God (S) said: “When Hadrat al-Mahdi
appears to my *ummah*, the earth will bring forth its crops, fruits and
flowers will grow while the sky will send down its rain.”[^49]

On the interpretation of the noble Qur’anic verse:

**  
**

﴾

**  
**

**  
**
مُدْهَامَّتَانِ

**  
**

**  
**
﴿

**  
**

*  
*
“Dark green,”

[^50]  
Imam a

s

-

S

adiq (

*  
*

‘a

  
) said: “Date palms will connect Mecca and Medina.”

[^51]

The same Imam (*‘a*) also said: “…By God! After the appearance of
ad-Dajjal, there will be (flourishing) agriculture and trees will be
planted (plentifully).”[^52]

As narrated by Shaykh at-Tusi in *At-Tahdhib*, “We will do farming and
plant trees.”[^53]

### 3. The Flourishing of Animal Husbandry

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “During the last period of the life of
my *ummah*, Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will appear… and sheep and (other)
domesticated animals will become abundant.”[^54]

The Prophet (S) also said: “At that time, there will be herds of animals
and they will continue to live.”[^55]

A point worthy of note in the statement of the Prophet (S) above is that
prior to that period, it seems that on account of the scarcity of water
and forage as well as the spread of diseases, domesticated animals could
hardly survive.

He (S) said elsewhere: “After the killing of ad-Dajjal, God will bestow
blessings on the herds of animals so much so that a young camel (which
is at the age of preparation for pregnancy) would be able to satisfy a
number of people; a calf would be the enough food for an entire tribe;
and a goat would be enough to feed a certain number of people.”[^56]

Commerce
--------

The growth and expansion of commerce in a society is a sign of its
economic development and prosperity. The closing of markets and
commercial stagnation are signs of a society’s poverty. Since the people
during the rule of the Imam of the Age (*‘atfs*) will experience good
economic conditions, commerce will flourish and markets will be active.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said in this regard: “Among the signs of
*Qiyamah* (advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)) are the following: Assets and
wealth will flow like a flood among the people; knowledge and learning
will become manifest; and commerce will expand and flourish.”[^57]

‘Abdullah ibn Salam said: “After the elimination of ad-Dajjal, the
people will live for forty years; date palms will be planted; and
markets will be established.”[^58]

[^1]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:96.

[^2]: ‘Ilal ash-Shara’i‘, p. 161; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 237; ‘Iqd
ad-Durar, p. 39; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 390; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol.
3, p. 497.

[^3]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 98; Ibn Abi Shaybah, Musannif, vol. 15, p.
196; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 5; Ibn Bitriq,
‘Umdah, p. 424.

[^4]: Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 124; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 248; Ash-Shi‘ah
wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 207.

[^5]: Abu Dawud, Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 4, p. 108.

[^6]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 69.

[^7]: ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p. 372; Ibn Batriq, ‘Umdah, p.
424; As-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, p. 164; Baghawi, Masabih as-Sunnah, vol. 2,
p. 139; Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 122; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 69.

[^8]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 285; At-Tahdhib, vol. 7, p. 149.

[^9]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 237; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 29.

[^10]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 70; Bihar al-Anwar, p. 379. See Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 21; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 55.

[^11]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 166; Al-Mustajad, p. 58. In the hadith it is
thus stated: “They will place property in the local houses”. Al-hawa’
(الحواء) in this context refers to adjacent houses situated in the same
locality.

[^12]: Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 558; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1,
p. 214.

[^13]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 363; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
337.

[^14]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 344; Al-Mustajad, p. 509; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 339. See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol.
2, pp. 53, 272, 313; vol. 3, p. 5; Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 314;
Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 496.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 345.

[^16]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 238; Hilyah al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 642; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 390. See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 352; Ibn Abi
Shaybah, Musannif, vol. 3, p. 111; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal,
vol. 4, p. 306; Bukhari, Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 135; Muslim, Sahih
Muslim, vol. 2, p. 70.

[^17]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 114; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 502;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 75.

[^18]: ‘Ayyashi, Tafsir ‘Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 64; Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
52, p. 224.

[^19]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 83; Al-Hawi Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p. 67;
Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 118.

[^20]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 167.

[^21]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 68; Aqd ad-Durar, p. 227.

[^22]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 168.

[^23]: Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 331; Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 284; As‘af
ar-Raghibin, p. 152; Wafi, vol. 2, p. 112; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 2, p.
212; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 342.

[^24]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 362; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p.
280; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 263; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p.
262; A‘lam al-Wara, p. 430; Al-Mustajad, p. 580; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.
3, p. 253; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 331; vol. 97, p. 385.

[^25]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 295; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp.
330, 337; vol. 97, p. 385. It is thus stated in Shaykh al-Mufid’s
Al-Irshad, “The houses of the residents of Kufah will be connected to
the river of Karbala’” (كربلاء بنهر الكوفة أهل بيوت اتصلت). See Rawdah
al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 264; A‘lam al-Wara, p. 434; Khara’ij, vol. 3, p.
1176; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p. 251; Al-Mahajjah, p. 184.

[^26]: Every dhara‘ is equivalent to a range between 50 and 70
centimeters. See Al-Munjid.

[^27]: At-Tahdhib, vol. 3, p. 253; Maladh Al-Akhyar, vol. 5, p. 478;
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 374.

[^28]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 365; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
339.

[^29]: At-Tahdhib, vol. 10, p. 314; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 19, p. 181;
Maladh al-Akhyar, vol. 16, p. 685; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 455.

[^30]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 317; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p.
139.

[^31]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 169; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 71, 141.

[^32]: Al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah, vol. 4, p. 242; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p.
139; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 524; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 19, p. 655.
See Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 2, p. 262; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 345; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 19, p. 169, 663.

[^33]: Minan ar-Rahman, vol. 2, p. 42.

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 337; Wafi, vol. 2, p. 113.

[^35]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 169.

[^36]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 84.

[^37]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Ikhtisas, p. 208; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
304.

[^38]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 24.

[^39]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 141. See Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 115;
Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 504.

[^40]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 152; Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2,
p. 1359; Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 162; ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11,
p. 399, with variation.

[^41]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 152; Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 4, p. 255,
with difference; ‘Abd ar-Razzaq, Musannif, vol. 11, p. 401.

[^42]: Ibid.

[^43]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:261.

[^44]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 167.

[^45]: Mudd: a unit of measurement which is equivalent to 18 liters in
Iraq. See Farhang-e Faarsi-ye ‘Amid, p. 935.

[^46]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 159; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 97; Al-Qawl
al-Mukhtasar, p. 20.

[^47]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 125; Al-Hawi Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p. 61;
Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 117.

[^48]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, p. 115; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 316, 345.

[^49]: Al-Manaqib wa’l-Mathalib, p. 44; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 19, p. 677.
See Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 2, p. 1356; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol.
4, p. 492; Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 244.

[^50]: Surah ar-Rahman 55:64.

[^51]: Tafsir Qummi, vol. 2, p. 346; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 49.

[^52]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 260; Man La Yahduruh al-Faqih, vol. 3, p.
158; Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 13, p. 193; At-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p. 384.

[^53]: At-Tahdhib, vol. 6, p. 384.

[^54]: Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 558; ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 144; Muttaqi
Hindi, Burhan, p. 84; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 3, p. 260; Ihqaq al-Haqq,
vol. 13, p. 215; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 81; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah,
vol. 1, p. 214.

[^55]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 8, p. 77; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 215;
vol. 19, p. 681.

[^56]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 148.

[^57]: Ibn Qutaybah, ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p. 12.

[^58]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, Musannif, vol. 15, p. 142; Ad-Durr al-Manthur,
vol. 5, p. 354; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 193.


