Health and Medical Services
===========================

One of society’s problems prior to the advent of the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*) will be the deterioration of health conditions and the
inefficiency of treatment measures, which as a result, will lead to the
spread of contagious diseases and sudden death throughout the world.

The spread of ailments such as leprosy, plague, paralysis, blindness,
heart failure, and hundreds of others will be so threatening to the
lives of people that it would seem as if everyone was waiting for
certain death without any hope for a longer life. When they go to bed at
night, there would be no hope for them to wake up and survive the
following day, and if they were going outside, there would be no hope
for their return.

These heartrending and painful circumstances will arise as effects of
environmental pollution and as a consequence of the use of chemical,
nuclear and biological weapons. The increase in the number of the dead
as well as their not being buried and their decay will be factors for
the outbreak of those diseases, or as a result of other psychological
and emotional diseases that will occur out of hopelessness and the loss
of loved ones. The causes of all these things might however be due to
other factors of which we are unaware.

The government of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) in such a state of affairs
will be the light of hope in the hearts of the calamity-smitten and
afflicted people of that time for the elimination of such conditions and
the restoration of health to human society. This is exactly what the
government of the Imam of the Time (*‘a*) will do.

We shall mention here some *hadith*s regarding the condition of health
and medical treatment prior to the Imam’s advent. Then, we shall examine
some *hadith*s about the efforts of Hadrat Hujjah (*‘atfs*) in
safeguarding society’s health and medical services:

The Spread of Diseases and Sudden Deaths
----------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Among the signs of the approach of the
Day of Resurrection is that a man will die without pain or
ailments.”[^1]

In another *hadith*, he (S) said: “During the approach of *Qiyamah*,
there will be excessive and successive *sa‘iqah*s (thunder and lightning
that would ignite fires and cause burning) so much so that when a person
is in the company of his relatives or a group, he will ask, ‘Yesterday,
who among you was struck by lightning and was burned?’ It will be
answered: “So and so…”[^2]

*Sa‘iqah* means unconsciousness or the loss of intellect from hearing a
frightening sound. It also means catching fire or burning. Therefore, a
person who is afflicted with *sa‘iqah* either loses his intellect, or is
burned from the effect of its fire[^3] and turned into ashes.

Of course, it is possible for *sa‘iqah* to be the result of the
explosion of advanced weapons at that time which will burn and have a
frightening sound such that anyone near them will turn into ashes. The
effect they will have on human beings will not be anything but diseases;
these three ailments and calamities can only be caused by destructive
weapons.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said in another *hadith*: “During the
approach of *Qiyamah* and Resurrection, there will be innumerable deaths
and afterward will be years of many earthquakes.”[^4]  
 In this regard, the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Prior to
the advent of al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*), two types of death will become
rampant, i.e. the “red death” and the “white death”, which is actually
the spread of epidemics.”[^5]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Among the signs of *Qiyamah* and
Resurrection is the spread of paralysis and sudden death.”[^6]

Imam al-Kazim (*‘a*) quoted the Prophet (S) as saying: “The occurrence
of sudden death, leprosy and hemorrhoids would be among the signs of the
approach of *Qiyamah* and Resurrection.”[^7]

It has been stated in *Bayan al-A’immah*, thus: “Among the signs of the
approach of al-Mahdi’s advent is the spread of cholera and plague
throughout the world especially in Baghdad and its neighboring cities as
a result of which many people will die.”[^8]

Health
------

Astounding quantum leaps in science, medical science in particular,
would be achieved during the rule of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) and it will be
utilized for the improvement of health in society. Other factors
contributing to the improvement of health in society would be
extinguishing the flames of war; peace of mind; the preservation of
mental health with the reformation of mankind; and the blossoming of
agriculture and animal husbandry providing proper nourishment for
people.

Thus, the state of public health during the period of the Imam of the
Age (*‘atfs*) will attain its highest and ideal level. It will be such
that the physical condition of the people will change and their
lifespans will become so much longer that sometimes a person would see
his children, grandchildren and great grandchildren before departing
from this world.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The day after Isa (*‘a*) comes down
from heaven and kills ad-Dajjal, the sun will rise in the west (and not
in the east) and for forty years you will live prosperously and
comfortably during which no one will die or get sick.”[^9]

Maybe what is meant by this statement is that death and sickness, which
would have been widespread prior to the Imam’s advent, will become
insignificant and trivial during the period of the Imam. The literal
meaning might also be true, i.e. during that particular period, there
will be no death and sickness owing to the blessed presence of Hadrat
Baqiyyatullah al-A‘zam (*‘atfs*).

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “During the rule of al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*)… lifespans will be long.”[^10]

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar said: “Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: ‘When our Qa’im
rises up… the people under the aegis of his rule will have long
lifespans to the extent that for every person a thousand children will
be born’.”[^11]

In this regard, Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up,
God, the Honorable and Glorious, will keep our Shi‘ah away from ailments
and calamities, and make their hearts like solid iron and the strength
of each of them to be equal to that of forty men. They will be rulers on
the earth and its leading figures.”[^12]

Concerning the healthy condition of the environment during the rule of
the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*), Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “When our
Qa’im rises up… septic tanks and drainpipes along roads will be
removed.”[^13]

Maintaining health in cities and in the social environment is one of the
responsibilities of a government. As such, every factor that might
threaten the healthy condition of the environment must be prevented.

Dumping of domestic waste on the streets and constructing cess pits
outside the house—as is the case in some deprived cities and
villages—are detrimental to the healthy condition of the environment.
So, we can see that one of the jobs to be undertaken by Hadrat al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*) is to prevent any violation of health regulations.

Medical Services
----------------

Since health conditions will reach their ideal levels during the period
of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), diseases will decrease; only a few
individuals will be afflicted with sickness. Medical science will also
reach its height and diverse sicknesses will be cured within a very
short period of time. In addition to that, with the help of God, the
Imam (*‘atfs*) himself will cure the incurable. In fact, it can be said
that no ailment would be found during the rule of the Imam (*‘atfs*).

Regarding the government of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*)
said: “No blind, paralytic or sick people will remain on the surface of
the earth without being cured by God.”[^14]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “…Then, our Qa’im who would
then be in the state of occultation, will appear with Jibra’il before
him and the Book of God behind him. He will cure those who would be
suffering from vitiligo and leprosy.”[^15]

It can be inferred from this *hadith* that Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
himself will play a key role in curing incurable diseases.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “When our Qa’im rises up, God will keep the
believers away from diseases and restore them to health.”[^16]

In this regard, Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “Anyone who happens to see
the Qa’im from among us, the *Ahl al-Bayt*, will be cured if he had an
ailment, and if he suffered from weakness, he will become strong and
energetic.”[^17]

It has thus been stated in Shaykh as-Saduq’s *Khisal*: “During the time
of Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), diseases will be cured and they (the
faithful) will become like pieces of iron.”[^18]

[^1]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 4, p. 298.

[^2]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 3, p. 64; Firdaws
al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 434.

[^3]: See Farhang-e Farsi-ye ‘Amid, vol. 2, p. 688.

[^4]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 7, p. 59.

[^5]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 359; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 277;
Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 267; I‘lam al-Wara, p. 427; Khara’ij, vol.
3, p. 1152; Sirat al-Mustaqim, p. 249; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 211;
Ilzam an-Nasib, vol. 2, p. 147.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 313; Ibn Athir, Nihayah, vol. 1, p.
187.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 269, as quoted from Al-Imamah
wa’t-Tabsirah; Ilzam an-Nasib, vol. 2, p. 125.

[^8]: Bayan al-A’immah, vol. 1, p. 102.

[^9]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 97.

[^10]: ‘Iqd ad-Durar, p. 159; Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar, p. 20.

[^11]: Shaykh al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 363; Al-Mustajad, p. 509; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 337; Wafi, vol. 2, p. 113.

[^12]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 317; Shaykh as-Saduq, Khisal, vol. 2, p.
541; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 295; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p.
261; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 317.

[^13]: Man La Yahduruh al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 234; Shaykh al-Mufid,
Al-Irshad, p. 365; Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 283; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin,
vol. 2, p. 264; I‘lam al-Wara, p. 432; Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 302;
Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 452; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 333.

[^14]: Khara’ij, vol. 2, p. 489; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 62.

[^15]: Dawhah al-Anwar, p. 133; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 171.

[^16]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 317; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 364; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 493.

[^17]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 317; Shaykh as-Saduq, Khisal, vol. 2, p.
541; Rawdah al-Wa‘izin, vol. 2, p. 295; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p.
261; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 335, as quoted from Khara’ij.

[^18]: Shaykh as-Saduq, Khisal, p. 507.


