Conclusion
==========

The Martyrdom or Passing Away of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
------------------------------------------------------

Different *hadith*s exist regarding the martyrdom or passing away of
Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), but because Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) has
said, “Each one of us Imams will either be poisoned or martyred,” the
*hadith*s that indicate the Imam’s martyrdom can have preponderance over
others that say otherwise.

Here, it will suffice to examine only a few pertinent *hadith*s.

Concerning the noble Qur’anic verse, *“Then We gave you back the turn
(to prevail) over them,”*[^1] Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “It means the
revival of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) and seventy of his companions during
the period of the Imam of the Time wearing golden helmets. The return
(*raj‘ah*) and revival of Hadrat al-Husayn (*‘a*) will be announced by
them to the people so that the believers would not entertain doubt and
skepticism.

This will occur while Hadrat al-Hujjah (*‘atfs*) will be among the
people. When knowledge and faith in him will be well-embedded in their
hearts, the demise of Hadrat Hujjah will come. Then, Hadrat Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) will take charge of his *ghusl* (ritual bath for the
dead), his shrouding (*kafn*), embalmment (*hunut*), and burial. A
non-*wasiyy* (executor of will) will never prepare the burial of a
*wasiyy*.”[^2]

Zuhri said: “Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will live for fourteen years and
then he will meet the Lord by natural death.”[^3]

Artah said: “It has been narrated to me that Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)
will live for forty years. Then, he will die a natural death on his
bed.”[^4]

Ka‘b al-Ahbar[^5] said: “The victor (*mansur*) of this *ummah* is
al-Mahdi, and the inhabitants of the earth and the birds in the sky send
salutations to him.

“It is he who will be tested in the war with Rome and other great
battles. This test will take twenty years. Along with two thousand of
his standard-bearing commanders he will attain martyrdom. Afterward,
there will be no tragedy more painful than the martyrdom of Hadrat
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) after the tragedy of the demise of the Messenger of
Allah (S).”[^6]

Of course, in my opinion, the statements of Zuhri, Artah and Ka‘b are
unreliable unless the opposite is proved.

The Manner of the Martrdom of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
---------------------------------------------------

Regarding the manner of the martyrdom of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), it has
been stated in *Ilzam an-Nasib*, thus: “When his seventieth year comes
to an end and his death is about to take place, a woman named Sa‘idah
from the tribe of Bani Tamim will martyr him. The salient feature of
that woman is that she would have a beard like a man.

“When the Imam is passing by, she will throw a stone from a rooftop upon
him and he will attain martyrdom. After he passes away, Imam al-Husayn
(*‘a*) will perform the rites of his *ghusl*, *kafn* and burial.”[^7]

Of course, with the exception of this book, I have not found this
subject written anywhere else, i.e. the manner of martyrdom of the Imam.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Husayn (*‘a*), along with his companions who
were martyred with him, will come[^8] and seventy prophets will
accompany them just as Hadrat Musa was accompanied by seventy dispatched
persons. Then, Hadrat al-Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will turn over his ring to him.
Imam al-Husayn will perform Hadrat al-Qa’im’s *ghusl*, *kafn*, *hunut*,
and burial.”

*May peace be upon him on the day he was born, the day he will appear,*

*the day he will die, and the day he will be raised up to life again!*

[^1]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:6.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 206; Ta’wil al-Ayat az-Zahirah, vol. 1, p.
278; vol. 2, p. 762; Mukhtasar al-Basa’ir, p. 48; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 2,
p. 401; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 13; vol. 51, p. 56.

[^3]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 104; Al-Bada’ wa’t-Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 184;
Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 163.

[^4]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 99; ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 147; Muttaqi Hindi,
Burhan, p. 157.

[^5]: It is to be noted that according to the scholars of ‘ilm ar-rijal
(science concerned with the study of hadith chain of transmitters), Ka‘b
al-Ahbar is a known liar. The Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet (‘a)
did not accept his hadiths. See, for example, Muhammad Jawad Chirri, The
Shi‘ites Under Attack (Detroit: The Islamic Center of America, 1986),
“Did Muslims other than Shi‘ites Borrow Religious Teachings from Jews?”,
pp. 62-75, available online at:
http://www.al-islam.org/the-shiites-under-attack-muhammad-jawad-chirri .
(Trans.)

[^6]: Iqd ad-Durar, p. 149.

[^7]: Ilzam an-Nasib, p. 190; Tarikh-e Ma Ba‘da’z-Zuhur, p. 881.

[^8]: For information on the return (raj‘ah) of Imam al-Husayn (‘a), see
the book, Setareh-ye Derakhshan (Bright Star), by my father, the late
Ayatullah Tabasi.


