Addendum
========

The following are questions posed by one of the translators of this book
and the answers of the author to them:

Question 1
----------

Please explain *hashr* and *nashr*.[^1]

**Answer:** Perhaps the *hadith* means that during the commencement of
the Day of Reckoning, all human beings and other creatures will head
toward Bayt al-Muqaddas (in Jerusalem) except those who were buried in
Qum. In fact, those who would be admitted to paradise will enter it
directly from Qum, for, as mentioned in *hadith*s, one of the doors of
heaven will be opened in Qum.

Since “it is the day of the transformation of the world into another
form,” on the Day of Resurrection this world and all its contents will
change and nothing will remain of them. Perhaps, this is improbable.

It is also possible that this *hadith* refers to the *raj‘ah* or the
purgatory world (*‘alam al-barzakh*) in which the souls of all believers
would assemble in Bayt al-Muqaddas except for those who were buried in
Qum which would be a purgatorial heaven for them.

Question 2
----------

What would be the status of *jizyah* during the time of Imam al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*)?[^2]

**Answer:** Of course, the *hadith*s quoted in that part of the book are
related to the noble verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ...حَتَّى يُعْطُواْ الْجِزْيَةَ عَن يَدٍ وَهُمْ صَاغِرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“…until they pay the tribute out of hand, degraded,”*[^3]

and this is an indisputable part of Islamic law affirmed by all Muslims
of the world.

At any rate, perhaps it can be said as an explanation that one of the
reasons for abandoning their own religions and inclining to Islam would
be as stated in the *hadith*s. On one hand, they would see that if they
embraced Islam, they would enjoy all the privileges of being Muslim.

In addition to being exempted from paying the *jizyah*, they would also
have a share in the public treasury. On the other hand, if they remained
in their religions, they would suffer both a guilty conscience (for not
accepting the truth after knowing it) and a financial burden (in paying
*jizyah*). So, they would choose the first option and become Muslims.

Or, maybe there are other points and aspects of the *hadiths* which are
beyond our understanding.

Question 3
----------

Why is making a profit off a believer unlawful and usurious, or
discouraged and reprehensible (*makruh*)?[^4]

**Answer:** The unlawfulness and usuriousness of making a profit off a
believer or its being discouraged and reprehensible (*makruh*) is
related to the time of the establishment of the government of truth and
the Islamic state of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*).

Perhaps, at that time, such laws and regulations would be related to the
conditions of the people and the market. It is also possible that it
alludes to the psychological makeup of the people at that time which
would naturally express itself in their commercial transactions with
each other. As a manifestation of this psychological makeup, the people
would tend to avoid burdening others and gaining huge profits.

Of course, any of these conjectures might be true provided that the
*hadith*s in question are indeed authentic.

Question 4
----------

Why will *qatayi‘* (private estates) cease to exist during the time of
Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*)?[^5]

**Answer:** In view of the fact that *qatayi‘* here refers to the vast
tracks of land registered under the name of a king or his agents,
perhaps the *hadith* means that during his just government, Imam
al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will declare these land titles null and void,
confiscate these tracks of land in favor of the public treasury and turn
them over to their original owners who are the masses or the popular
government.

Question 5
----------

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Woe unto him who destroyed
you (Kufah Mosque)! Woe unto him who facilitated the way to your
destruction! Woe unto him who built you with mud and baked clay, and
changed the direction of Nuh’s (Noah) (*‘a*) *qiblah*!”[^6]

Was this expression a warning because of the reprehensibility of the
material used in the reconstruction (mud and baked clay), or because of
the action itself of destroying and reconstructing the mosque?

**Answer:** Of course, it was because of the action itself of destroying
and reconstructing the mosque. As recorded in history, it had been made
up of woven reeds but during the rule of Mughayrah ibn Shu‘bah, a
notorious and staunch enemy of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), in Iraq, it was
rebuilt with mud and baked clay. Then, during the time of Ziyad ibn
Abih, he destroyed and rebuilt the mosque with baked clay and acquired
its foundations from Ahwaz.[^7]

During the reign of Hajjaj ibn Yusuf in Iraq he totally destroyed it
which was partly damaged at that time and rebuilt it. After that some of
its walls were destroyed and rebuilt during the time of Yusuf ibn ‘Umar
ath-Thaqafi, a bloodthirsty, cruel and tyrannical governor appointed by
the Umayyad caliph Hisham ibn ‘Abd al-Malik.[^8]

Actually, the aforementioned *hadith* was a prediction by the Commander
of the Faithful (*‘a*) about the emergence of tyrant rulers such as
Ziyad, Hajjaj, Yusuf ibn ‘Umar, and others.

Question 6
----------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Husayn (*‘a*), along with his companions who
were martyred with him, will come and seventy prophets will accompany
them just as Hadrat Musa was accompanied by seventy dispatched
persons.”[^9] Who would be these seventy prophets?

**Answer:** These seventy prophets will accompany Hadrat Musa (*‘a*) in
visiting the House of Allah while performing *Hajj*,[^10] or they could
be the seventy persons from among the community (*qawm*) of Hadrat Musa
(*‘a*) who demanded to see Allah and hear His voice at an appointed
tryst (*miqat*), but when the manifestation of the divine glory came
upon them, they fell down dead and were raised up to life again[^11] and
while reaching the station of prophethood they would accompany Hadrat
Musa (*‘a*) during the time of Imam al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). It could also
mean something else which is beyond our knowledge and understanding.

[^1]: See p. 52.

[^2]: See p. 136.

[^3]: Surah at-Tawbah (or, Bara‘ah) 9:29.

[^4]: See p. 151.

[^5]: See p. 152.

[^6]: See p. 152.

[^7]: Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 4, p. 493.

[^8]: Sayr I‘lam an-Nabala, vol. 5, p. 442.

[^9]: See p. 211.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, no. 11.

[^11]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:55-56; Surah an-Nisa’ 4:153; Surah al-A‘raf
7:155.


