Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلىٰ سَيِّدِنَا وَ نَبِيِّنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلىٰ أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be upon our Master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his
pure progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all their enemies.**

The region of Shush[^1] had been then newly liberated from the clutches
of the infidel Ba‘athist forces and the people were gradually returning
to the town. At that time, I had the honor to be in the presence of a
group of the dear combatants. Given that opportunity, I delivered a
series of lectures at the central mosque of that historical city on the
topic of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*)[^2] based on the book *Bihar
al-Anwar* compiled by ‘Allamah Majlisi.

At that moment, my attention was drawn to the point that concerning the
Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*), notwithstanding the diverse discussions
being raised such as the secret behind longevity, the philosophy of
occultation (*ghaybah*), factors leading to the advent and the like, no
sufficient research and worthy investigation had been made on the manner
of his uprising, system of government and method of rule. As such, I
decided to conduct a research on this subject; perhaps, I could offer
answers to the questions that everybody, more or less, would pose.

One of the questions that occupy the mind of many people is this: How
will the Imam (*‘atfs*) eliminate the various political systems—having
different views and capabilities—and establish a unified global system?

How will his administrative system and program operate in which there
will be no oppression and tyranny, corruption, and starvation in the
world?

This idea prompted me to conduct intensive research and study for four
years, and the result of such an endeavor is the book, which is hereby
presented to you, dear reader.

In the first part of this book, the state of affairs in the world prior
to the advent of the Imam (*‘atfs*)—which is replete with war and
killing, destruction and famine, death and disease, tyranny and
oppression, and insecurity and aggression—is examined. It is concluded
that the people at that time will be in despair with respect to the
various doctrines, schools and governments each of which will claim to
be the proponent of human rights, happiness and salvation; they will
lose hope as to the improvement of the undesirable conditions in the
world, and will expect a reformer to come to give them salvation.

The second part of the book deals with the manner of the global uprising
and revolution of Hadrat[^3] Mahdi (*‘atfs*); a movement that will start
by his declaration at the vicinity of the *Ka‘bah* in Mecca.

His true followers and companions throughout the world will join him.
The central command headquarters will be formed; the army organized;
commanders appointed; and extensive operations conducted.

Imam Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will appear and engage in uprooting tyranny and
oppression in society. This society is not confined to the land of
Hijaz,[^4] the Middle East and Asia; instead, it is global in scope.  
 Reformation of such a society full of injustice and corruption is
indeed not an easy job, and the claimant reformer—the true
claimant—would claim a great miracle and this miracle will be shown by
him.

The third part of the book touches on the government of the Last Imam
(*‘a*). In a bid to rule the world freed from tyranny and corruption as
well as to realize the sovereignty of Islam, he will establish a
powerful and efficient government through the assistance of his capable
companions at his time and the great personalities from among the pious
predecessors such as Hadrat ‘Isa (Jesus the Messiah) (*‘a*), Salman
al-Farsi, Malik al-Ashtar, Salih (*‘a*), etc. Albeit, their roles in
overthrowing tyrannical governments cannot be dismissed, their main
roles will be in the reconstruction and reformation of the world under
the aegis of the universal government of Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*).

In this preface, what is worth-mentioning, though briefly, is that the
present book is made possible by utilizing tens of books—both Sunni and
Shi‘ah—and studying hundreds of *hadith*s in a detailed and
well-documented manner.

It is hoped that this book, which is an overview—though an inadequate
one—of the Islamic society after the advent of the justice-spreader of
Muhammad’s (S)[^5] Progeny, would be accepted by the Imam of the Time
(*‘atfs*), be beneficial to all Muslims who are truly awaiting him
throughout the world, and make them ready in paving the ground for his
advent.

I beseech God, the Exalted, for the eminent religious authority Imam
Khomeini (*r*)[^6] who showed us a manifestation of the government of
Mahdi (*‘atfs*) in Iran, to join the company of the prophets and the
Imams (*‘a*); for the success of those serving the *Ahl al-Bayt*[^7]
(*‘a*) and the country of the *Ahl al-Bayt*, and succor in safeguarding
this prototype of the ideal community of Islam. At this juncture, it is
necessary to mention some points:

1. I do not claim to have presented a new subject in this book as the
*hadith*s mentioned therein have been compiled by the *‘ulama’* in the
past; they have also made conclusions on some cases. The peculiarity of
this book, however, lies in trying to present the subjects in a new and
simple fashion understandable to laymen and free from technical terms
and religious controversies.

2. The interpretations made on quoted *hadith*s and in places where
there are no references indicated are those of the author. As such,
through more meticulousness and further research and collation of the
*hadith*s, other subjects can possibly be presented.

3. I also do not claim that all the *hadith*s quoted in this book are
authentic (*sahih*) and flawless. It has been tried, instead, to quote
those that have been regarded by the scholars of *hadith*
(*muhaddithin*) and authors as reliable. Similarly, in some cases, no
discussion about the chain of transmitters (*sanad*) of the *hadith*s
has been undertaken as I have not been in a position to posit or negate
them. In many cases, meanwhile, through a brief *tawatur*[^8] we will
find the issuance of authority of the *hadith* especially those that are
traceable from the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

4. The *hadith*s in this book have been compiled prior to the writing
and compilation of the book, *Mu‘jam Ahadith al-Imam al-Mahdi* (*‘atfs*)
(An Anthology of Traditions on Imam Mahdi).[^9] Therefore, those who are
interested to conduct further research on this matter are advised to
refer to that book which, thanks to God, I was able to compile, write
and publish.

5. In so many *hadith*s the words “*as-sa‘ah*” (the time) and
“*al-qiyamah*” (the uprising) have been interpreted as the advent
(*zuhur*) of Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*). Thus, the *hadith*s that indicate
the conditions or signs of the “time” and the “uprising” have been
presented in this book as the signs of the “advent”.

6. Some topics of this book require further research notwithstanding the
fact that I have tried to explain them. It is hoped that through the
help of God, we could publish subsequent editions of this book with
further research.

In the end, as the saying goes, “He who does not extend gratitude to the
people does not extend gratitude to the Creator,” I have to express my
thanks and appreciation to my brothers and friends especially to my two
esteemed brothers, Hujjat al-Islam Muhammad Jawad and Hujjat al-Islam
Muhammad Ja‘far Tabasi for their guidance, and to Hujjat al-Islam ‘Ali
Rafi‘i and Hujjat al-Islam Sayyid Muhammad Husayni Shahrudi for
rewriting and arranging the topics of this book.

**Najmuddin** **Tabasi**  
***Qum,*** ***1373 AHS***

[^1]: Also known as Susa, Shush is an ancient town located in the
Iranian western province of Khuzestan and famous for being the site of
the Tomb of Daniel. It was once occupied by the Iraqi forces during the
8-year Iraqi imposed war on Iran (1980-88). (Trans.)

[^2]: The abbreviation, “‘atfs” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘ajjalallahu ta‘ala farajah ash-sharif (may Allah, the Exalted, expedite
his glorious advent), which is invoked after mentioning the name of Imam
al-Mahdi (‘atfs).

[^3]: Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. (Trans.)

[^4]: Hijaz: the region in Western Arabia that includes Ta’if, Mecca and
Medina.

[^5]: The abbreviation, “s”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam (may God’s salutation and peace be
upon him and his progeny), which is used after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). (Trans.)

[^6]: The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
rahmatullah ‘alayhi, rahmatullah ‘alayha, or rahmatullah ‘alayhim (may
peace be upon him/her/them), which is used after the names of pious
people. (Trans.)

[^7]: Ahl al-Bayt: according to authentic hadiths recorded in both the
Sunni and Shi‘ah sources, the term Ahl al-Bayt, and interchangeably
Itrah and Al, is a blessed Qur’anic appellation that belongs exclusively
to the Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn (‘a). The members of
this Family of five, with the Prophet Muhammad (S) at its head, were the
ones alive at the time the Qur’anic verses regarding their virtue were
being revealed to the Prophet (S). However, nine other Imams from the
descendants of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) are also in this chosen Family, the
final one being Imam al-Mahdi (‘a). For further information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/faq. (Trans.)

[^8]: By tawatur is meant the multiplicity of the sources of a certain
report that leads to certitude in the listener that the report is indeed
true. A mutawatir hadith is one which has been reported by so many
different chains of transmission that such a number of narrators in
every generation would normally not be able to agree on fabricating a
tradition without the fact of its fabrication becoming known. (Trans.)

[^9]: With the cooperation of some seminary scholars, I wrote the said
book in five volumes and was published by the Islamic Sciences
Foundation of Qum in 1411 AH. In the near future, we will review it, God
willing.


