The Religious Condition of the People
=====================================

In this chapter, we will examine the religious condition of the people
prior to the advent of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*). It can be
understood from the *hadith*s that during those days, Islam and the
Qur’an will remain in name only while the Muslims will be Muslims only
superficially. The mosques will no longer be centers for guiding and
admonishing the people. The jurists (*fuqaha*) at that time will be the
worst jurists on the face of the earth while religion will be bartered
for a trivial price and paltry sum.

Islam and the Muslims
---------------------

Islam means submission to the will and orders of God. Islam is the most
superior and the best religion which ensures the felicity of mankind in
this world and in the hereafter. However, that which is valuable is the
implementation of the precepts of Islam and the Qur’an. At the end of
time, everything will be the contrary. In other words, nothing will be
left of Islam but its name.

The Qur’an will be present in society, but nothing of it will remain
except the script written on its pages. The Muslims will be Muslims only
in name and no semblance of Islam will be found in them. The Noble
Prophet of Islam (S) said: “A period will come to pass for my *ummah* in
which nothing will be left of Islam but its name, and there will be no
trace of the Qur’an but its form and outline. The Muslims will be called
Muslims in name but of all the people they will be the most alien to
Islam.”[^1]  
 Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “A time will soon come to pass when the
people will not recognize God and will not know the meaning of
monotheism at such a time the Dajjal (the Anti-Christ) will appear.”[^2]

The Mosques
-----------

The mosque is the place for the worship of God, religious preaching, and
guiding and enlightening the people. During the early period of Islam,
even important administrative work would be carried out in the mosques.
*Jihad* would be planned there, and man would realize spiritual
ascension (*mi‘raj*) from the mosque.

But during the end of time, mosques will lose their importance, and
instead of being centers for religious teaching, propagation and
enlightenment, only their number and splendor will increase, even when
they will be cut off from the believers. The Prophet of God (S) said:
“During that time the mosques will be beautiful and flourishing but they
will be devoid of guidance and enlightenment.”[^3]

The Jurists (fuqaha)
--------------------

The scholars and the *‘ulama’* of Islam are the protectors of God’s
religion on earth, and the guidance and enlightenment of the people lies
upon their shoulders. By enduring great difficulties, they deduce
religious matters from the fundamental sources of the religion and
present them to the people. At the end of time, however, the situation
will change, and the *‘ulama’* of those days will be the worst
*‘ulama’*.

In this regard, the Messenger of God (S) said: “The jurists (*fuqaha*)
of those days will be the worst jurists under heaven. Sedition and chaos
will start from them and will also return to them.”[^4] Perhaps, it
alludes to court-affiliated scholars who justify the crimes of tyrant
kings and self-centered rulers, giving them an Islamic twist.

It also includes those who are ready to compromise with every offender
and criminal such as Wahhabi[^5] preachers on the payroll of kings who
regard it as unlawful to struggle against America and Israel, and those
who did not speak out against the crimes of Israel and justified the
crimes of the Wahhabis in killing pilgrims to the House of God by citing
Qur’anic verses and *hadith*s.[^6] Yes, it must be said that they are
the worst *fuqaha* from whom seditions have started and to whom they
will also return.

The Desertion of Religion
-------------------------

Another sign of the end of time is the people’s desertion of religion.
One day, Imam Husayn (*‘a*) came to the Commander of the Faithful (Imam
‘Ali) (*‘a*) while a group of people were sitting around him. ‘Ali
(*‘a*) said to them: “Husayn is your chief. The Messenger of Allah has
called him *sayyid* (master) and chief.

From among his progeny a man will rise up who resembles me in appearance
and character. He will fill the world with justice and equity just as it
had been full of injustice and oppression.” It was asked: “When will
this uprising occur?” He said: “Alas! It will be at the time when you
would abandon religion in the same manner that a wife would take off her
clothes for her husband.”[^7]

The Selling of Religion
-----------------------

If a person’s life is in danger, he becomes obliged to sacrifice his
property in order to save his life. If his religion is in danger,
however, he must sacrifice his life in order to save his religion. At
the end of time, however, religion will be sold for a miserable price,
and those who were believers in the morning will become infidels by the
afternoon.

In this regard, the Messenger of God (S) has said: “Woe to the Arabs for
the evil that is approaching them. Seditions, like nighttime, are dark
and gloomy. A man would be a believer in the morning and an infidel at
sunset. A group will sell their religion for a trivial profit and a
miserable amount. Anyone at that time who will cling steadfastly to his
religion would be like one who will take an ember from the fire or
squeeze a thorn in his hands.”[^8]

[^1]: Thawab al-A‘mal, p. 301; Jami‘ al-Akhbar, p. 129; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 190.

[^2]: Tafsir Furat, p. 44.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 190.

[^4]: Thawab al-A‘mal, p. 301; Jami‘ al-Akhbar, p. 129; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 190.

[^5]: Wahhabi: follower of Muhammad ibn ‘Abdul-Wahhab, the founder of
the Wahhabi sect. For information on Wahhabism, see Ayatullah Ja‘far
Subhani, Wahhabism (Tehran: Naba’ Organization, 1996);
http://www.al-islam.org/wahhabism-ayatullah-jafar-subhani . (Trans.)

[^6]: It refers to the Sa‘udi massacre, in the 1987 Hajj, of hundreds of
mostly Iranian pilgrims in Mecca at the order of America under the
pretext that “The Iranians wanted to take out the Black Stone of the
Ka‘bah and bring it to Qum!” as parroted by the Wahhabi ‘ulama’
throughout the Muslim world. (Trans.)

[^7]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 144.

[^8]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 390.


