Morality before the Advent of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
===================================================

The weakening of the foundations of the family, of kinship and
friendship; the coldness of human feelings and heartlessness are among
the salient characteristics of the end of time.

The Coldness of Human Feelings
------------------------------

The Noble Messenger of Islam (S) thus described the state of affairs of
those days from the emotional perspective: “In those days the elders
will not have mercy upon subordinates and the young, while the powerful
will not have pity on the weak. At that time, God will give permission
to him (al-Mahdi) to rise up and reappear.”[^1]

He also said: “The Day of Resurrection (*yawm al-qiyamah*) shall not
take place unless the time would come when a man (out of intense
poverty) would look toward his kith and kin, and swear that they are his
relatives to receive help from them, but they will give nothing to him.
One will seek help from his neighbor and appeal to the right of
neighborliness, but his neighbor will not render him any
assistance.”[^2]

The Prophet (S) also said elsewhere: “Among the signs of the Day of
Resurrection is bad treatment between neighbors and severance of the
bonds of kinship.”[^3]

Since in some *hadith*s the word “*as-sa‘ah*” (the time) has been
interpreted as the advent of Imam Mahdi (*‘atfs*),[^4] I interpreted the
*hadith*s on the “signs of the time” (*asharat as-sa‘ah*) as the “signs
of the advent”.

Moral Corruption
----------------

It is possible for any kind of deviation and corruption to be tolerated
somehow except sexual promiscuity, which is very unpleasant and
intolerable for dignified and noble people. Among the vilest and most
hazardous deviations with which the society prior to the advent of the
Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) will be afflicted would be family insecurity
and moral turpitude.

At that time, corruption and moral laxity will spread remarkably. The
animalistic acts of pseudo-humans will no longer be seen as indecent and
obscene due to the extent of the corruption, and these acts will
gradually appear as natural and normal. Corruption will be so widespread
that it would be hard to find anyone who could or would want to prevent
it.

The celebration of 2,500 years of the Iranian monarchy in 1971 during
the rule of Muhammad Rida Pahlavi in which extremely obscene scenes of
animalistic life had been presented under the guise of “Shiraz Arts”
earned the condemnation of the Islamic society of Iran. During the time
prior to the advent of Imam Mahdi (*‘a*), however, there will be no such
protests and the only gesture of protest will be this: “Why were such
indecent acts undertaken in the middle of the crossroads?” This is the
highest form of forbidding evil that will be undertaken and such a
person will be the most pious of his time.

Now, let us look at the *hadith*s in order to comprehend the profundity
of the tragedy of the loss of Islamic values and the spread of
corruption at that time. The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The Day of
Resurrection will not commence unless a woman would be openly taken away
from her guardian in broad daylight and be molested in public in the
middle of the road and no one would condemn and prevent this. The best
among the people is he who will say: ‘I wish you would have gone a bit
away from the middle of the road and done your work!’”[^5]

He (S) also said: “I swear to the One in Whose hand is the life of
Muhammad (S) that this *ummah* will not vanish until such a time when
man would ambush a woman like a wild lion and molest her. The best among
the people is he who will say: ‘I wish you would have hidden her behind
this wall and did not do such a thing in public’.”[^6]

Elsewhere, he (S) said: “Those men, being like animals, will fight one
another in the middle of the road, and then one of them will publicly
molest the other one’s mother, sister and daughter in the middle of the
road. Thereafter, he will let others molest them, and they, one after
the other, will do this lewd act. But no one will condemn this lewd act
or change it. The best among them would be he who will say: ‘It would
have been better if you would have been far from the highway and away
from the public eye’.”[^7]

The Spread of Immodest Acts
---------------------------

Muhammad ibn Muslim said: “I asked Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*): ‘O son of the
Messenger of Allah! When will the Qa’im from among you appear?’” The
Imam said: “It will be at the time when men would resemble women and
women would act like men; at the time when men would suffice themselves
with men (i.e. they would do sodomy), and so would women with other
women (i.e. they would engage in lesbianism).”[^8]

Another *hadith* with the same content has been reported from Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*).[^9] Abu Hurayrah also reported from the Prophet (S),
thus: “The Day of Resurrection shall not come to pass until such time
when men would vie with one another in committing indecent acts; the
same would be the case with women.”[^10]

Other *hadith* with the same content has also been reported.[^11]

The Desire for Less Children
----------------------------

The Prophet of Islam (S) said: “The Day of Resurrection shall not come
to pass until such time when someone who has five children would wish
for four while one who had four children will say: “I wish I had three!”
The one having three children would wish for two, one with two children
would wish for one child, and the one with a single child would thus
say: “I wish I had no child!”[^12]

He (S) said in another *hadith*: “A time will come when a man would
begrudge having a smaller number of children just as you are now
begrudging more children and properties; so much so that one of you will
pass by the grave of his brother and wish to be in his place (that he
was also dead)—just as animals will wish for a place in the meadow—and
he will say: “How I wish I were in his stead!” And this statement is not
on account of eagerness to meet the Lord and because of the good deeds
he has done before; instead, it is due to the calamities and adversities
that will befall him.”[^13]

He (S) also said elsewhere: “The Day of Resurrection shall not come to
pass unless offspring would decrease in number.”[^14] In this *hadith*
the phrase, “*al-walad ghayzan*” means abortion and contraception, but
the word “*ghayzan*” in another *hadith* means worry, agony, suffering,
and resentment.

In other words, by practicing abortion and contraception at that time,
the people will prevent increase in the number of children. It can also
mean that having a child would make one sad, anxious and furious.
Perhaps, it would be due to extreme economic problems, the spread of
diseases among children, the lack of facilities, and the propaganda and
encouragement to have fewer children, or other factors.

The Increase in the Number of Families without Guardians
--------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “One of the signs of the Day of
Resurrection is the decrease in the number of men and the increase in
the number of women to such an extent that there will be one guardian
for every fifty women.”[^15]

Perhaps, this condition will result from the deaths of men in the
successive and protracted wars that will occur.

He (S) also said: “The Day of Resurrection shall not come to pass until
such a time when thirty women will be in pursuit of one man, and each of
them would request him to marry her.”[^16]

He (S) also said in another *hadith*: “Allah will separate His Friends
and chosen ones from the rest so as to make this earth devoid of the
hypocrites and misguided as well as their children. A time shall come
when fifty women will face a single man. One will say: “O servant of
God! Take me.” The other one will say: “Give me refuge.”[^17]

Anas narrated: The Prophet (S) said: “The Day of Resurrection shall not
come to pass until such a time when (on account of the death of men and
the plentitude of women) a woman would find a pair of shoes along the
way and (out of remorse and disappointment) she would say: “This pair of
shoes belonged to a man!” At that time, there will be one guardian for
every fifty women.”[^18]

Anas said: Wouldn’t you like me to narrate a *hadith* I heard from the
Prophet (S)? The Prophet (S) said: “Men will die while women will
remain.”[^19]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 380; vol. 36, p. 335.

[^2]: Shajari, Amali, vol. 2, p. 271.

[^3]: Akhbar Isbahan, vol. 1, p. 274; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol.4, p. 5;
Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 50; Jam‘ al-Jawami‘, vol. 1, p. 845; Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 240.

[^4]: See Tafsir Qummi, vol. 2, p. 340; Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 465;
Tafsir Safi, vol. 5, p. 99; Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 175; Ithbat
al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 553; Kashf al-Ghumah, vol. 3, p. 280; Shafi‘i,
Al-Bayan, p. 528; As-Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, p. 162. For information on the
terms, yawm az-zuhur, yawm al-karrah and yawm al-qiyamah, see Tafsir
al-Mizan, vol. 2, p. 108.

[^5]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, p. 333; Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 495.

[^6]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 9, p. 119; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p.
91; Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7, p. 217.

[^7]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 101.

[^8]: Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 331.

[^9]: Mukhtasar Ithbat ar-Raj‘ah, p. 216; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p.
570; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 12, p. 335.

[^10]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 226; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p.
249.

[^11]: (a) Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 39; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 257;
Bisharah al-Islam, p. 133. (b) Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 38; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 257. (c) Bisharah al-Islam, p. 76; Ilzam an-Nasib, p. 121.
(d) Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 38; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 457. (e)
Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 38. (f) Bisharah al-Islam, pp. 36, 76, 133. (g)
Bisharah al-Islam, p. 23; Ilzam an-Nasib, p. 181.

[^12]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 227.

[^13]: Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 10, p. 12.

[^14]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 151; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol.
5, p. 221; Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 10, p. 281; Bihar al-Anwar, 34, p.
241.

[^15]: Tayalisi, Musnad, vol. 8, p. 266; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol.
3, p. 120; Tirmidhi, Sunan, vol. 4, p. 491; Abu Ya‘li, Musnad, vol. 5,
p. 283; Hilyah al-Awliya’, vol. 6, p. 280; Dala’il an-Nubuwwah, vol. 6,
p. 543; Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, p. 50.

[^16]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 509.

[^17]: Mufid, Amali, p. 44; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 250.

[^18]: ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 232; Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 225.

[^19]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 377.


