Security before the Advent of Imam al-Mahdi (‘atfs)
===================================================

Chaos and Insecurity
--------------------

Because of the aggression of the big powers, the security of small
governments and weak nations will decline, and freedom and security will
be rendered meaningless. The powers dominant in the world will make life
so difficult for weak nations and will intensify violating the rights of
nations so much that they will not even allow people to breathe!

The Noble Prophet (S) described that period in this manner: “The
*ummah*s (the followers of other creeds and schools) will take hostile
action against you just like the hungry rushing to a food container.”
Someone said: “Will we be attacked because we will be a minority at that
time?”

The Prophet said: “Your number at that time will be many but you will
become just like paper tigers. God will remove your majesty and grandeur
from the hearts of your enemies and sluggishness will dominate your
hearts.” Someone asked: “O Messenger of Allah! What is the cause of this
sluggishness and weakness?” He (S) said: “Love of the world and
abhorrence of death.”[^1]

These two undesirable traits mentioned by the Noble Messenger are enough
to prevent a nation from attaining freedom and defending its values, and
make them used to an ignominious life under any circumstance even to the
extent of losing their religion and the principles of their school
(*maktab*).

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “The advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
be at the time when the world would be in chaos and full of turmoil and
disorder with one group rising up against another; neither would the
elder be merciful toward the young nor would the powerful have pity on
the weak. In such a time God will grant him permission to rise up
(*qiyam*).”[^2]

Insecurity of the Highways
--------------------------

The extent of the chaos, insecurity and cruelty will also include the
highways. At that time, God will raise up al-Mahdi and he will capture
the strongholds of misguidance from the hands of the powerful. The
Promised Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will not only take control of formidable
citadels, but he will also conquer hearts blinded to the recognition of
the truth and spirituality, and prepare them to accept these truths.

In addressing his beloved daughter, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I
swear to God Who has chosen me in truth! Verily, the Mahdi of this
*ummah* is from the progeny of al-Hasan and al-Husayn (*‘a*). At the
time when anarchy and confusion would envelop the whole world; when
seditions would arise (one after the other); when highways and roads
would become insecure and groups attack each other; when neither would
the old have mercy on the young nor the young respect the old; at that
moment God would let a person from the progeny of these two (Imams Hasan
and Husayn (*‘a*)) rise up to capture (and destroy) the strongholds of
misguidance and conquer hearts that have been covered by the veil of
ignorance and unawareness (and have been deprived of recognizing the
truths).

He will rise up at the end of time—just as I rose up at the beginning of
time—and fill the world with justice and equity just as it had been full
of injustice and oppression.”[^3]

Horrendous Crimes
-----------------

The crimes of oppressors and leaders throughout history have been very
dreadful and horrible. The pages of history are replete with oppression,
injustices and crimes perpetrated by tyrannical and bloodthirsty rulers
such as Genghis Khan, Hitler and Attila[^4] against weaker nations.

Yet, the crimes that will be committed in the world prior to the advent
of Imam Mahdi (*‘atfs*) are among the most horrifying crimes that can
ever be imagined. The execution of very young boys on the gallows; the
burning of children and dipping them into molten liquids; cutting human
beings into pieces by iron saws, axes, and mills are among the painful
actions that governments which regard themselves as champions of human
rights will perpetrate. It is the occurrence of such barbarities that
will manifest the importance of the government of Hadrat Mahdi
(*‘atfs*)—based on the description of the *hadith*s—as the sanctuary of
the deprived.

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) described the painful events of that period in this
manner: “Verily, the Sufyani will commission a group to gather the
children in a certain place. Then, he will heat the oil to be used in
burning them. The children will say: ‘If our fathers were opposing you,
what is our sin in that we have to be burnt?’ He will select two
children with the names of Hasan and Husayn and will hang them on the
gallows. Thereafter, he will proceed toward Kufah and behave the same
way toward the children there, hanging two children with these same
names at the door of Kufah Mosque.

From there he will go out and commit crimes again. While having a spear
in his hand, he will pick up a pregnant woman and turn her over to one
of his supporters and order him to molest her in the middle of the road.
After the molestation, he will rend asunder her stomach and take out the
fetus, and nobody would be able to change such a horrible
condition.”[^5]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “…God has completed His mercy by means of the
son of the Prophet’s daughter (*‘a*); the same person who has the
perfection of Musa (Moses), the reverence of ‘Isa (Jesus) and the
patience and fortitude of Ayyub (Job). My fellows! During the period
(prior to) his advent there shall be despised and abject people and
their heads, just like the heads of the Turks and the people of Daylam,
will be given as gifts (to despotic rulers).

They would be killed and burnt as well as terrorized, scared and
intimidated. The earth would be colored with their blood while the cry
and lamentation of their women would be multiplied. They are my true
friends. Through them he will quell every sedition. He will eliminate
commotions (and insecurities), and he will remove the chains and bonds
of bondage from them. May the benediction of God be upon them as they
are the guided ones!”[^6]

Ibn ‘Abbas said: “Sufyani and Fulani will go out and fight each other in
such a manner that he (Sufyani) will rend asunder the stomachs of women
and put children in large pots and burn them.”[^7]  
 Artat said: “Sufyani will kill whoever would oppose him. By means of
saws, he will cut his opponents into two and get rid of them in burning
pots. These tyrannies will last six months.”[^8]

Wishing for Death by Those who are Alive
----------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “I swear to Him in Whose hand is my
life! The world shall not end unless the time would come when on passing
by the graveyard, a person will throw himself onto the grave and say: ‘I
wish I were in the place of the owner of this grave!’ This is while his
problem is not debt but the sufferings and pressures of the day as well
as tyranny and oppression.”[^9]

By using the word “man” (*rajul*) in the *hadith*, two points can be
deduced. One is that the sufferings and predicaments of that period and
as such, the wish for death are not confined to a particular sect,
nation or group, but everyone will undergo suffering and pain on account
of the deplorable circumstances. The other point is that the word “man”
indicates the extent of the pressure and difficulty of that period. This
is because men usually can endure problems and inequities more than
women, and the fact that men would not be able to tolerate and endure
the problems and adversities of that period only shows that these
predicaments would be very immense and backbreaking.

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali narrated: Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “O Abu
Hamzah! Hadrat Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will not rise up unless at the time when
fear and dread would intensify, calamities and seditions would prevail
(over society) and affliction and misfortune would befall the people. In
addition to this, diseases would reach epidemic proportions; an intense
and fatal dispute would occur among the Arabs; intense discord among the
people would become rampant; religious and sectarian strife would be
triggered; and the condition of the people would change to such an
extent that every wisher—when he sees the brutality of the people and
their violation of the rights of each other—will wish for death every
day and every night.”[^10]

Hudhayfah, the Companion of the Prophet, narrated from the Prophet (S):
“Verily, a time shall come upon you when man will wish for his death
although he would not be under the pressure of poverty and
indigence.”[^11]

Ibn ‘Umar said: “Verily, a time will come upon the people when the
believer, on account of the magnitude of afflictions and calamities on
earth, would wish for his family and himself to ride on a boat and spend
their lives on the sea.”[^12]

The Captivity of the Muslims
----------------------------

Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman said: While mentioning the problems that the
Muslims will face, the Prophet (S) said: “On account of the pressures to
be exerted on them, they will sell free people, and men and women will
be ushered into slavery. Polytheists will hire Muslims as mercenaries
and sell them in the cities, and no one will be offended by this state
of affairs—neither the good nor the bad and the debauchee.

“O Hudhayfah! The suffering of that period will continue in such a
manner that they will lose hope, and they will find comfort and relief
in bad ideas. At that point, God will send a man from among the purified
ones of my progeny and the good ones of my descendants who is just,
blessed and pure without even an iota of connivance (with bad elements)
and indulgence (in the bad things). Through his assistance, God will
endear the religion, Qur’an, Islam, and its people and humiliate
polytheism.

He will always fear God and never be arrogant about his relationship (to
me). He will neither put a stone over another stone nor whip anyone
unless it is just and for the execution of punishment. Through him, God
will annihilate innovations and seditions, open the door of truth, close
the doors of falsehood, and let the Muslim captives—from whatever region
they come—return to their respective motherlands.”[^13]

Sinking into the Ground
-----------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Surely, a time shall come to pass on
this *ummah* when the day would reach the night and they would ask one
another, ‘Last night, who was swallowed by the earth?’ They would also
ask one another, ‘Who is still alive from among the tribe of so-and-so?’
Or, ‘Is there anybody who is still alive from so-and-so clan?’”[^14]

Perhaps, these words allude to the wars and killings at the end of time
in which with the use of advanced weapons of mass destruction, every day
more people will be killed and perhaps because of the mounting degree of
sins, the earth will swallow its inhabitants.

The Increase of Sudden Death
----------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) said: “Among the signs of the Day of Resurrection
is paralyzing diseases and sudden death.”[^15] He (S) also said: “The
Day of Resurrection shall not come to pass unless the “white death”
occurs.” He was asked: “O Messenger of Allah! What is “white death”?” He
(S) answered: “Sudden death”.[^16]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Before the advent of the
Qa’im (*‘atfs*), there will be the ‘red death’ and ‘white death’… The
‘white death’ is plague.”[^17]

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The Qa’im (*‘atfs*) will not rise
up until there comes a time when intense fear becomes dominant and prior
to it there would be contagious diseases of epidemic proportions.”[^18]

Hopelessness of the People of the World to Attain Deliverance
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “O ‘Ali! The advent of the Mahdi will
be at the time when cities will be changed, and the servants of God
become weakened and hopeless about the advent of the Mahdi. At that
time, Mahdi the Qa’im from my progeny will appear.”[^19]

Abu Hamzah ath-Thumali said: Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “The uprising
and advent of the Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will be at a time when there will be
hopelessness and disappointment in the people concerning his advent and
the improvement in deeds.”[^20]

In this regard, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “Verily, someone from my
household will come as my successor, and his successorship will be after
a period full of hardship and affliction—a period in which calamity and
suffering will become intense and hopes shattered.”[^21]

The Absence of Judges and Refuge
--------------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) said: “The calamity and affliction on this *ummah*
will be such that a man would not be able to find a sanctuary where he
could seek refuge from oppression.”[^22]

He also said: “At the end of time intense affliction from their
governments will befall my *ummah* in such a manner that a believer
would not find a sanctuary where to seek refuge from tyranny.”[^23]

In another *hadith*, he said: “Glad tidings to you of the Mahdi from the
progeny of Fatimah! He will appear in the west and fill the world with
justice.” It was asked: “O Messenger of Allah! When will it (his
appearance) be?” He (S) said: “It will be at the time when judges would
receive bribes while the people become debauchees.” It was asked: “What
will be the characteristics of the Mahdi?” He (S) said: “He will be
separated from his family and relatives; he will be away from his
homeland and live far from home.”[^24]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “You will not see him while waiting for him
except at the time when you become like a dead she-goat under the
clutches of a fierce animal for which it makes no difference how she was
brought. At that time there would be neither a place away from
aggression where you could go nor a sanctuary where you could seek
refuge.”[^25]

Wars, Killings and Seditions
----------------------------

It can be deduced from the *hadith*s that prior to the uprising of
Hadrat al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*) wars and killings will engulf everywhere. Some
*hadith*s talk about seditions. A number of *hadith*s report protracted
wars while other *hadith*s make mention of the killing of human beings
through wars and diseases such as epidemics.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said: “After me you will experience four
seditions. In the first sedition, blood will be regarded lawful to be
shed while killing will increase in number. In the second sedition,
blood and property will be regarded as lawful (to be shed, or plundered)
while killing and pillage will increase in number.

In the third sedition, the blood, property and honor of the people will
be regarded as lawful (to be shed, plundered, or trampled on) and apart
from killing and pillage, the honor and chastity of human beings will
not be safe. In the fourth sedition—which will be so intense, that it
will affect everyone[^26] and like the state of a turbulent and agitated
ship in the middle of the sea—no one will find refuge from it. The
sedition will spread from Sham,[^27] encompass Iraq, and envelop the
entire Peninsula (Hijaz). The afflictions of the people will be so
intense that no one would be able to complain, and wherever the state of
chaos subsides, it will be blazing in another.”[^28]

In another *hadith*, he (S) said: “After me there will be seditions from
which there will be no way of relief and in which there will be wars,
displacement and homelessness. After this, there will be seditions more
intense than the previous ones. Sedition will not yet subside when
another one will emerge so much so that no house of the Arabs shall
remain that will not catch this fire (of sedition), and no Muslim will
be spared from this sedition. At that time a man from my family will
appear.”[^29]

He (S) also said: “After me sedition will soon emerge to the extent that
if there will be calm in one direction, it (sedition) will spread in two
other directions until such time that a harbinger from heaven will
shout: ‘This is Hadrat Mahdi, your chief and commander!’”[^30]

These *hadith*s have made mention of a sedition that will emerge prior
to the advent of Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*). Other *hadith*s, however, talk
about destructive wars, which we will cite below.

‘Ammar ibn Yasir said: “The message and invitation of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(household) of your Prophet at the end of time is this: Avoid any kind
of dispute until such time that you would see leaders from the *Ahl
al-Bayt*; it will be the time when the Turks would oppose the Byzantines
and wars would increase in number on the earth.”[^31]

A number of *hadith*s talk about killings and murders that will take
place prior to the advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*). Some of these *hadith*s
mention only the killings while some others also specify the extent of
the killings.

In this regard, Imam ar-Rida[^32] (*‘a*) said: “Before the advent of the
Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) successive and relentless killings will take
place.”[^33]

Abu Hurayrah said: “There will be killing in Medina which will break up
the Ahjar az-Zayt[^34] district and compared to it the tragedy of
Hurrah[^35] would be just like a whip. It will be at that time—after the
killing—that two *farsang*s[^36] away from Medina, allegiance would be
paid to Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*).”[^37]

Abu Qabil said: “A person from Bani Hashim[^38] will take the helm of
government and will only kill the Bani ‘Umayyah[^39] in such a manner
that only a few of them will be left. Then, a person from the Bani
‘Umayyah will emerge and kill two persons in lieu of one person (killed
from his side) so much so that none will be left except women.”[^40]

The Messenger of Allah (S) thus said: “I swear to God in Whose hand is
my life! The world will not end unless the time would come when neither
the killer would know for what reason he is killing, nor would the
reason behind the killing of the killed be clear, and chaos will spread
everywhere. At that time, both the killer and killed will go to
hell.”[^41]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Before the advent of the
Qa’im (*‘atfs*), the world will face two types of death: the “red death”
and the “white death”. The red death is through the sword (weapon) while
the white death is through plague.”[^42]

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) said: “There are two stages of occultation
(*ghaybah*) for the Qa’im of Muhammad’s Progeny, the second of which is
longer than the first. At that time, death and killing will engulf the
people.”[^43] Jabir said: I asked Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*): “At what time
will this affair (uprising of the Mahdi (*‘atfs*)) happen?” In reply,
the Imam (*‘a*) said: “O Jabir! How could this affair happen when the
number of the slain between Hirah[^44] and Kufah has not yet
increased?”[^45]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Before the advent of the Qa’im (*‘atfs*),
two types of death will surface: the “red death” and the “white death”.
The number of people to be killed will be such that in every group of
seven, five will die.”[^46]

The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said: “Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will
not appear unless one-third of the people are killed; another one-third
die; and the remaining one-third survive.”[^47]

They asked the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*): “Is there any sign and
symbol for the advent of Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*)?” He (*‘a*) said: “Yes,
horrible killing, sudden death and epidemics.”[^48]

And as reported in *Irshad al-Qulub*: “sudden and mass killings (*qatl
adh-dhari‘*).”[^49]

And as reported in *Madinah al-Mu‘ajiz*: “vile and despicable killings
(*qatl ar-radi‘*).”[^50]

And as reported in *Hilyah al-Abrar*: “deplorable killings (*qatl
al-fadi‘*).”[^51]

The meaning of the *hadith* is this:  
 “Yes, there are signs for the advent of Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*) such as
mass, deplorable and despicable killings; sudden and successive deaths;
and epidemics.”

Muhammad ibn Muslim said: Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “The Imam of the
Time will not appear unless two-thirds of the people in the world would
die.” It was asked: “If two-thirds of the people would be killed, how
many will remain?” He answered: “Are you not satisfied (and would you
not like) to be among the remaining one-third?”[^52]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) has said: “The affair (advent of Imam al-Mahdi
(*‘atfs*)) shall not be realized until nine-tenth (9/10) of the people
are eliminated.”[^53]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “…At that time none of the people will remain
except one-third (1/3) of them.”[^54]

The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) said: “Out of ten thousand people nine
thousand and nine hundred will be killed and none will remain alive
except very few.”[^55]

Ibn Sirin said: “Hadrat Mahdi (*‘atfs*) will not appear unless out of
nine persons, seven would be killed.”[^56]

From the foregoing set of *hadith*s, the following points can be
deduced:

1. Before the advent of al-Mahdi (*‘atfs*), killings will take place and
large numbers of the people will be killed, and those who will be left
would be less than those who would be killed.

2. A number of those who will be killed will be killed in wars and
another number will be killed by contagious diseases. Most probably,
these contagious diseases will be engendered by those killed in war.
Similarly, it is probable that this group of people would die through
chemical and biological weapons that generate diseases.

3. The small number that will be left would be the Shi‘ah and followers
of the Imam of the Time (*‘atfs*) because they are the ones who will pay
allegiance to the Mahdi (*‘atfs*). This fact can also be inferred from
the statement of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) when he said: “Are you not
satisfied (and would you not like) to be among the remaining one-third?”

[^1]: Tayalisi, Musnad, p. 133; Abu Dawud, Sunan, vol. 4, p. 111;
Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 2, p. 101.

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 52, p. 154.

[^3]: ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 152; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 154, 266;
Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 116; Al-Arba‘un Hadithan, (Abu Na‘im)
Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqba, p. 135; Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 426.

[^4]: It refers to Attila, called the Scourge of God (circa 406-53 CE)
and king of the Huns (circa 433-53 CE), who is called Etzel by the
Germans and Ethele by the Hungarians. (Trans.)

[^5]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, p. 94; Ash-Shi‘ah wa’r-Raj‘ah, vol. 1, p. 155.

[^6]: Kamaluddin, vol. 1, p. 311; Ibn Shahr Ashub, Manaqib, vol. 2, p.
297; A‘lam al-Wara, p. 371; Ithbat al-Wasiyyah, p. 226.

[^7]: Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 83; Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 51.

[^8]: Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 520; Al-Hawi Li’l-Fatawa, vol. 2, p.
65; Muntakhab Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 31 (Marginalia of Musnad Ahmad
ibn Hanbal); Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 293.

[^9]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 636; Muslim, Sahih Muslim,
vol. 4, p. 2231; Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 9, p. 410; Masabih as-Sunnah,
vol. 2, p. 139; ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 236.

[^10]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 235; Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 274; I‘lam al-Wara,
p. 428; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 348; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p.
540; Hilyah al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 626; Bisharah al-Islam, p. 82.

[^11]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, Musannif, vol. 15, p. 91; Malik, Muwatta’, vol.
1, p. 241; Muslim, Sahih Muslim, vol. 8, p. 182; Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
Musnad, vol. 2, p. 236; Bukhari, Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 9, p. 73;
Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 221.

[^12]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, p. 334.

[^13]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 132.

[^14]: Al-Matalib al-‘Aliyah, vol. 4, p. 348.

[^15]: Shajari, Amali, vol. 2, p. 277.

[^16]: Al-Fa’iq, vol. 1, p. 141.

[^17]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 277; Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 267; I‘lam al-Wara,
p. 427; Khara’ij, vol. 30, p. 1152; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, p. 65; Al-Fusul
al-Muhimmah, p. 301; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p. 249; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 211.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 348.

[^19]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 440; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 125.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 348.

[^21]: Ibn al-Munadi, Malahim, p. 64; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, vol. 1, p. 276; Al-Mustarshid, p. 75; Shaykh al-Mufid,
Irshad, p. 128; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 592; Ghayah al-Maram, p.
208; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 32, p. 9; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 314;
Muntakhab Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 35.

[^22]: Shafi‘i, Bayan, p. 108.

[^23]: ‘Iqd ad-Darar, p. 43.

[^24]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 19, p. 679.

[^25]: Al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 213; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 246.

[^26]: “Affect everyone”: kar va kur (deaf and blind) in the original
Persian text. (Trans.)

[^27]: Sham: up until four centuries ago, it included Syria of today,
Lebanon and parts of Jordan and the Occupied Palestine. (Trans.)

[^28]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 21; Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 371.

[^29]: ‘Aqd ad-Durar, p. 50.

[^30]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 295; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2,
p. 371.

[^31]: Tusi, Ghaybah (new edition), p. 441; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
212.

[^32]: Imam Rida: ‘Ali ibn Musa, eighth of the Twelve Imams, born in 148
AH/765 CE and died in 203 AH/817 CE in Tus (Mashhad). He was poisoned
by the ‘Abbasid caliph Ma’mun, who had superficially appointed him as
his successor at first, but then grew fearful of the wide following he
commanded. His shrine in Mashhad is one of the principal centers of
pilgrimage and religious learning in Iran. See Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi,
The Life of Imam ‘Ali bin Musa al-Rida, trans. Jasim al-Rasheed (Qum:
Ansariyan Publications, 2001); Muhammad Jawad Fadlallah, Imam al-Rida: A
Historical and Biographical Research, trans. Yasin T. al-Jibouri,
http://www.al-islam.org/imam-ar-ridha-an-historical-and-biographical-res...
; Muhammad Mahdi Shamsuddin, “Al-Imam ar-Rida (‘a) and the Heir
Apparency,” At-Tawhid Journal,
http://www.al-islam.org/al-tawhid/heir.htm. (Trans.)

[^33]: Qurb al-Asnad, p. 170; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 271.

[^34]: Ahjar az-Zayt: a place in the city of Medina which was the venue
of Salah al-Istisqa (special prayer in asking for rain) during the time
of the Holy Prophet (S). See Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 1, p. 109.

[^35]: After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) and the people’s
uprising in Medina against Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah, at the order of Yazid
the inhabitants of Medina were massacred and this event saw more than
ten thousand people killed and this place is called Hurrah Waqim. See
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 2, p. 249.

[^36]: Farsang (parasang): a unit of length equal to 6 kilometers.
(Trans.)

[^37]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 58.

[^38]: Bani Hashim: the Meccan clan to which the Prophet and his
descendants belonged. See Ja‘far Subhani, The Message, chap. 4,
“Ancestors of the Prophet,”
http://www.al-islam.org/the-message-ayatullah-jafar-subhani (Trans.)

[^39]: Bani Umaayyad is the name of dynasty of Muslim caliphs who gained
control of the administration of Islamic territories in 40 AH (662 CE)
after the first four caliphs and held sway until 132 AH (750 CE). The
founder of this dynasty was Mu‘awiyah, son of Abu Sufyan, by whom
hereditary monarchy as well as aristocracy were revived in stark
contrast and opposition to basic Islamic articles of faith. History is
replete with innumerable instances of cruelty and oppression perpetrated
in the world of Islam during the Umayyad rule, including murder,
banishment and imprisonment of the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (the
Family of the Prophet) as epitomized by the martyrdom of Imam Husayn and
his votaries in Karbala’ by the forces of Yazid, son of Mu‘awiyah.
(Trans.)

[^40]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 59.

[^41]: Firdaws al-Akhbar, vol. 5, p. 91.

[^42]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 277; Shaykh Mufid, Irshad, p. 359; Shaykh
at-Tusi, Ghaybah, p. 267; Sirat al-Mustaqim, vol. 2, p. 249; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 211.

[^43]: Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 173; Dala’il al-Imamah, p. 293; Taqrib
al-Ma‘arif, p. 187; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 156.

[^44]: Hirah: a city three miles (6.6 kilometers) away from Kufah in
Iraq. See Mu‘jam al-Buldan, vol. 2, p. 328.

[^45]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah (new edition), p. 446; Ithbat al-Hudah,
vol. 3, p. 728; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 209.

[^46]: Kamaluddin, vol. 2, p. 665; Al-‘Adad al-Qawiyyah, p. 66; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 207.

[^47]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, vol. 58; Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 13, p. 29.

[^48]: Husayni, Hidayah, p. 31.

[^49]: Irshad al-Qulub, p. 286.

[^50]: Madinah al-Mu‘ajiz, p. 133.

[^51]: Hilyah al-Abrar, p. 601.

[^52]: Shaykh at-Tusi, Ghaybah (new edition), p. 339; Kamaluddin, vol.
2, p. 655; Ithbat al-Hudah, vol. 3, p. 510; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
207; Ilzam an-Nasib, vol. 2, p. 136; Ibn Hammad, Fitan, p. 91; Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 587; Muttaqi Hindi, Burhan, p. 111.

[^53]: Ilzam an-Nasib, vol. 2, pp. 136, 187; ‘Aqd ad-Darar, pp. 54, 59,
63-65, 237; Nu‘mani, Ghaybah, p. 274; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 242.

[^54]: Husayni, Hidayah, p. 31; Irshad al-Qulub, p. 286.

[^55]: Majma‘ az-Zawa’id, vol. 5, p. 188.

[^56]: Ibn Tawus, Malahim, p. 78.


