Dhikr at-Tasbih
===============

“Subhan Allah” {glory be to Allah}
----------------------------------

While in *ruku‘* and *sujud*, the person praying glorifies God.  
 When the verse, *“So celebrate the Name of your Lord, the
All-supreme,”*[^1] was revealed, the Prophet (S) thus said: “Apply this
command to your *ruku‘* and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَ رَبِّيَ ٱلْعَظيمِ وَ بِحَمدهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Subhana rabbiya’l-‘azim wa bihamdih.*  
 “Glory be to my Lord, the Great, and praise belongs to Him.”

And when the verse, “*You are laboring toward your Lord, the Most
Exalted,*”[^2] was revealed, he (S) said: “Apply this command to your
*sujud* and say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَ رَبِّيَ ٱلاَعْلىٰ وَ بِحَمدهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Subhana rabbiya’l-a‘la* *wa bihamdih.*  
 “Glory be to my Lord, the Exalted, and praise belongs to Him.”[^3]

The station of tasbih
---------------------

Glorifying {*tasbih*} and exalting {*tanziyyah*} God are the root of all
authentic Islamic beliefs and thoughts:

*Tawhid* means regarding God as free from any taint of polytheism:
*“Clear is Allah of any partners that they may ascribe {to Him}!”*[^4]

Justice {*‘adl*} means considering God as free from any form of
injustice: *“They said, ‘Immaculate is our Lord! We have indeed been
wrongdoers!’”*[^5]

Prophethood {*nubuwwah*} and Imamate {*imamah*} mean treating God as
immune from the lack of the purpose, the program and the means
delivering the people from the sea of desire and inclination:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ مَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ إِذْ قَالُوا مَا أَنزَلَ
اللَّهُ عَلى بَشرٍ مِّن شيْ‏ءٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They did not regard Allah with the regard due to Him when they said,
‘Allah has not sent down anything to any human’.”***[^6]

The Return {*ma‘ad*} means knowing God not to have made creation in vain
and knowing that the end of the world is not annihilation:

***“O Lord, You have not created this in vain! Immaculate are
You!”***[^7]

***“Did you suppose that We created you aimlessly, and*** ***that you
will not be brought back to Us?”***[^8]

Yes, God is guiltless of this futile and vain act.

Glorification of God is not only the fountainhead of Islamic beliefs but
also the source of enormous spiritual and moral excellences:

*Subhan Allah* is the source of satisfaction {*rida*}. If we regard Him
as free from any defect, it means that we are satisfied with His decrees
and submit to the wisdom behind His will.

*Subhan Allah* is the fountainhead of *tawakkul* {reliance on God}. It
is only logical that we have to trust and rely on the One who is free
from any need and immune from any weakness and inability: *“Immaculate
is He! He is the All-sufficient.”*[^9]

*Subhan Allah* is the source of love for God. The Essence that is clear
from any defect and shortcoming is loved by man.

*Subhan Allah* is the preliminary part of praise and eulogy to
God—praise and eulogy for the Essence that is free from filth and
unpleasantness. Thus, in the *Tasbihat al-Arba‘ah*,[^10] “*subhan
Allah*” comes first before “*al-hamdulillah*”.

*Subhan Allah* is the key to salvation from all superstitions and
man-made creeds: *“Clear is Allah, the Lord of the Throne, of what they
allege {concerning Him}.”*[^11]

Perhaps, it is for these reasons that the command for *tasbih*
{glorification of Allah} has been mentioned more frequently compared to
other *adhkar* {forms of remembrance to God}. The command for *tasbih*
has been repeated 16 times; for *istighfar* {asking forgiveness from
Allah} eight times; for the remembrance of Allah {*dhikr*} five times;
and for *takbir* {to say, “*Allahu* *akbar*”} twice. Besides, the
command for *tasbih* is meant for all times and conditions so that man
should always remember God and regard Him as free from any form of
defect and shortcoming:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ
غُرُوبِهَا وَمِنْ آنَاءِ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْ وَأَطْرَافَ النَّهَارِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And celebrate the praise of your Lord before the rising of the sun
and before the sunset, and glorify Him in watches of the night and at
the day’s ends.”***[^12]

You also glorify God at the moment of victory and joyfulness: ***“When
Allah’s help comes with victory… then celebrate the praise of your
Lord.”***[^13]

In addition, glorify God in the depths of vicissitudes and adversity for
the *tasbih* is the source of deliverance: ***“And had he (Jonah) not
been one of those who celebrate Allah’s glory, he would have surely
remained in its belly till the day they will be resurrected.”***[^14]

Yes, on account of man’s many limitations, he can never comprehend God.
So, it is better for him to admit his own weakness and say, “As You are
beyond the scope of the intellect and imagination, You are guiltless of
and above what others ascribe to You”: ***“Immaculate is He, and greatly
exalted above what they say!”***[^15]

Only the sincere servants of God, through divine guidance and succor,
can describe God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ ٭إِلا عِبَادَ اللَّهِ
الْمُخْلَصِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Clear is Allah of whatever they allege {about Him},—{all} except
Allah’s exclusive servants.”***[^16]

The reward for tasbih
---------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (S) said that
when a servant of God utters, “*Subhan Allah*,” whatever is under the
Divine Throne glorifies God along with him and 10 times the reward shall
be given to him. When he recites, “*Al-hamdulillah*,” God shall grant
him the blessings of the world till he meets Allah and enters into the
blessings of the hereafter.[^17]

Practical tasbih
----------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “One of the most difficult and important
things that God has made necessary for creation is “abundant
remembrance” {*dhikr al-kathir*}.” He (*‘a*) then said: “What it means
is not the recital of “*Subhan Allahi wa’l-hamdulillahi wa la ilaha
illallahu Allahu akbar*” {Glory be to Allah; praise be to Allah; there
is no god but Allah; Allah is greater} although it is also part of them.
What it means is ‘to remember Allah as to what is lawful {*halal*} and
what is unlawful {*haram*}’.”[^18]

That is, to remember God when acting; if a certain task means obedience
to Him, it has to be undertaken; if it earns His displeasure, it has to
be abandoned.

Repetition of tasbih
--------------------

Someone came to the house of Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*). He saw the Imam
(*‘a*) in a state of *ruku‘*glorifying God and repeating the *tasbih* 60
times. While in the state of *sujud*, the Imam repeated the *tasbih* 500
times.[^19]

The repetition of *tasbih* is discussed not only in prayer but in the
*Hajj* rites as well. At the time of looking at the Black Stone {*hajar
al-aswad*}, during the *sa‘i* between Safa and Marwah, and in other
cases, the repetition of *tasbih* has been recommended.

For instance, in the prayer, apart from the *dhikr* in *ruku‘* and
*sujud*, *Tasbihat al-Arba‘ah* can also be repeated in the third and
fourth *rak‘ah*s. Based on both Sunni and Shi‘ah traditions, what is
meant by the *baqiyat as-salihat* {“lasting righteous deeds”}[^20] in
verse 46 of *Surah al-Kahf* is this *Tasbihat al-Arba‘ah*.[^21] As
stated by Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*), the *dhikr* of Hadrat Ibrahim (*‘a*) at
the time of constructing the *Ka‘bah* was “*Subhan Allahi
wa’l-hamdulillahi wa la ilaha illallahu Allahu akbar*”.[^22]

Remembrance of God {dhikr Allah} in Islamic culture
---------------------------------------------------

Let us take a brief look at the remembrance of God {*dhikr Allah*} in
Islamic culture:

When surprised and amazed, our faithful ancestors would say: “*Masha’
Allah*” {what Allah has willed!} or “*subhan Allah*” {glory be to
Allah!}; when entering the house: “*Ya Allah*” {O Allah!}; when
separating from each other: “*Khoda* *hafiz*” {may God protect (you)!};
when standing: “*Ya ‘Ali!*” {O ‘Ali!}; to remove fatigue while working:
“*Khoda quwwat*” {may God give you power!}; in reply to the inquiry
after one’s health: “*Al-hamdulillah*” {All praise belongs to Allah};
when offering food: “*Bismillah*” {In the Name of Allah!}; and at the
end of a meal, they would recite appropriate prayers and thanks to God.

Grandmothers would start their storytelling: “*Yeki bud; yeki nabud*”
{There was once nobody except Him}.

It is clear that to live in such an atmosphere and to be reared in such
an environment would encourage the remembrance of God to flow in the
heart and His Name to flow from the tongue at any time and in any place.

The tasbih of other creatures
-----------------------------

All of creation—the seven heavens and the earth and whatever there is
between them—glorifies God.[^23] The animals such as the birds,
inanimate objects such as the mountains,[^24] thunder and storm[^25] do
so and that too is out of consciousness and instinct!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُ وَتَسْبِيحَهُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Each knows his prayer and glorification.”***[^26]

The *tasbih* of the angels is so pervasive that the Prophet (S) said:
“There is not a single layer of the heavens except that therein is an
angel in the state of prayer and *tasbih*.”[^27]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “Whenever Hadrat Dawud (*‘a*) would read the
*Zabur*, there was no mountain, stone and bird that did not recit it
with him.”[^28]

In the traditions, we are admonished not to strike a blow on the face of
four-footed animals for they are glorifying God.[^29]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گر تو را از غيب چشمى باز شد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
با تو ذرّات جهان همراز شد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نطق آب و نطق خاك و نطق گل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هست محسوس حواس اهل دل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جمله ذرّات عالم در نهان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
با تو مى گويند روزان و شبان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما سميعيم و بصيريم و هوشيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
با شما نامحرمان ما خاموشيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you could see the unseen, to you would be revealed the secret behind
every particle of the world.*  
*The voice of water, soil and mud can be heard by the gnostics.*  
*All the particles of the world say secretly to you during the day and
night:*  
*“We are hearing, discerning and vigilant. We are silent with you the
strangers.”*

A group of chirping sparrows passed by in front of Imam as-Sajjad
(*‘a*). The Imam (*‘a*) turned to those who were near him and said:
“Every morning the birds glorify Allah and pray for power for the
day.”[^30]

Some people have said that what is meant by the *tasbih* and *sujud* of
other creatures is allegorical and not literal. Just as a beautiful
painting and a collection of poems respectively testify to the enormous
talent of the painter and the inborn disposition of the poet, the
mysterious constitution of other creatures bears witness to the
knowledge, power, wisdom, and precision of God, declaring Him immune
from any sort of defect and shortcoming. This is the very meaning of the
*tasbih* of other creatures.

This view is put forward when, in the first place, we have no proof and
evidence substantiating this notion. Secondly, we have to resort to
allegorical interpretation {*ta’wil*} and analysis when the apparent
meaning of a word poses an impossibility such as the verse, ***“The hand
of Allah is above their hands,”***[^31] in which it is impossible for
God to have a hand and so we say that what is meant by “the hand of
Allah” is divine power. However, in case where we cannot comprehend the
meaning, we have no right to resort to allegorical interpretation.

How could we resort to allegorical interpretation when the Qur’an itself
says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ إِن مِّن شىْ‏ءٍ إِلا يُسبِّحُ بحَمْدِهِ وَ لَكِن لا تَفْقَهُونَ
تَسبِيحَهُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is not a thing but celebrates His praise, but you do not
understand their glorification”*****?**[^32]

How could we resort to allegorical interpretation when the Qur’an
declares,

***“And you have not been given of the knowledge except a few {of
you}”***[^33]?

We read many times in the Qur’an that the Prophet (S) who has access to
eternal knowledge, said: ***“I do not know.”***[^34] So what if we also
say, “We do not know” and “We do not understand”?

What is interesting is that God has explicitly declared to us our
ignorance and lack of knowledge: **“*****But you do not understand their
glorification.*****”**[^35] But the proud man is not ready to say: “I do
not understand the secret of creation among which is the *tasbih* of
other creatures.

Does not the Qur’an categorically disclose that the hoopoe was aware of
the sun-worshipping practice of the people of Sheba and reported the
same to Hadrat Sulayman (*‘a*), saying: “The ruler of Sheba is a woman
who is sitting on a large throne and her people are worshipping the
sun.[^36]

The hoopoe’s knowledge of the peculiarities of the environment and the
name of the land, and its ability to distinguish woman from man, ruler
from subject, polytheism from monotheism, and the like are all signs of
the intelligence of other creatures.

Does not the Qur’an say that one of the ants said to the others,

***“Enter your dwellings, lest Solomon and his hosts should trample on
you while they are unaware”?***[^37]

In these verses, understanding the movement of human beings, their names
(Solomon), their occupation (military), their inattention to where they
step, and the ant’s concern for the other ants are among the issues that
makes us aware of the capacity and power of discernment of other
creatures.  
 Now, if we accept the existence of instinct as we have to accept the
text of the Qur’an, then there is no more need to justify and analyze
the *tasbih* of other creatures.

[^1]: Surah al-Waqi‘ah 56:74.

[^2]: Surah al-A‘la 87:1.

[^3]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 19, p. 160.

[^4]: Surah at-Tur 52:43.

[^5]: Surah al-Qalam 68:29.

[^6]: Surah al-An‘am 6:91.

[^7]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:191.

[^8]: Surah al-Mu’minun 23:115.

[^9]: Surah Yunus 10:68.

[^10]: Tasbihat al-Arba‘ah: literally, the four tasbihs; it refers to
the recital of “Subhan Allahi wa’l-hamdulillahi wa la ilaha illallahu
Allahu akbar” {Glory be to Allah; praise be to Allah; there is no god
but Allah; Allah is greater}. {Trans.}

[^11]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:22.

[^12]: Surah Ta Ha 20:130.

[^13]: Surah an-Nasr 110:1, 3.

[^14]: Surah as-Saffat 37:143-144.

[^15]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:43.

[^16]: Surah as-Saffat 37:159-160.

[^17]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 7, p. 187.

[^18]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 80.

[^19]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p. 107.

[^20]: Surah al-Kahf 18:46: “Wealth and children are an adornment of the
life of the world, but lasting righteous deeds are better with your Lord
in reward and better in hope.”

[^21]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, p. 540.

[^22]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1207.

[^23]: Surah al-Jum‘ah 62:1: “Whatever there is in the heavens glorifies
Allah and whatever there is in the earth, the Sovereign, the All-holy,
the All-mighty, the All-wise.”

[^24]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:79: “And We disposed the mountains and the
birds to glorify {Him} with David, and We have been the doer {of such
things}.”

[^25]: Surah ar-Ra‘d 13:13: “The Thunder celebrates His praise.”

[^26]: Surah an-Nur 24:41.

[^27]: Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol. 8, p. 5581.

[^28]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 444.

[^29]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 168.

[^30]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, p. 206.

[^31]: Surah al-Fath 48:10.

[^32]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:44.

[^33]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:85.

[^34]: This sentence was repeated four times in the Qur’an among which
is in Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:109.

[^35]: Surah al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:44.

[^36]: Surah an-Naml 27:22-27.

[^37]: Surah an-Naml 27:18.


