Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلىٰ سَيِّدِنَا وَ نَبِيِّنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلىٰ أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be upon our Master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his
pure progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all their enemies.**

I was glad to be present at the holy shrine of Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*) and
to have started writing this booklet, the drafts of which I had prepared
earlier, prior to the beginning of the (Iranian) New Year 1374 AHS
(which commenced on March 21, 1995).

In line with the efforts made after the {victory of the} Islamic
Revolution in establishing the performance of Islamic prayer {*salah*}
in schools, universities, military garrisons, and other public places, I
also decided—after writing the books, *Partu-ye az Asrar-e Namaz*
{Radiance of the Secrets of Prayer}, *Hamrah ba Namaz* {In the Company
of Prayer} and *Yeksad va Chahardah Nokteh Darbareh-ye Namaz* {One
Hundred and Fourteen Points about Prayer}—to write about a commentary on
the recitals {*adhkar*} in prayer such as the *takbir* {recital of
*Allahu akbar* at the beginning of the prayer} and the recital of *Surah
al-Fatihah* and another *surah*, bowing down {*ruku‘*}, prostration
{*sujud*}, *tashahhud* and *salam* so that we could understand better
what we are uttering to God in this regard, and have a conscious and
gnostic involvement in the act of worship.

Before embarking on the subject proper, let us first take a cursory
glance at “Worship {*‘ibadah*} and Servitude {*‘ubudiyyah*}” which is
the soul of prayer as well as all other devotional duties so as to
better internalize its sublime station in our lives.

**Muhsin Qara’ati**


