Intention {niyyah}
==================

The first essential element {*rukn*} of prayer is the intention
{*niyyah*}.

Intention means that we have to know what we are doing, what we are
reciting, and for whom and for what a certain movement is made.

The value of every deed lies in the intention and motive behind it; not
merely in the deed itself. Thus, the quality of the actions of a person
who stops on a red traffic light in order to maintain order and respect
for the law is different from that of a person who carries out the same
actions but out of fear of the traffic officer or of the fine that he
might receive for violating traffic regulations. In all forms of
worship, especially in prayer, intention occupies a special importance.

In principle, what makes an action a form of worship is the divine
intention behind it. If such an intention is not present, even if the
outward appearance of a deed is good and proper, it would not have the
value of worship.  
 In this regard, the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّما الاَعْمالُ بِالنِّيات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, the action is (judged) by the intention (behind it).”[^1]

Yes, the criterion for an action to be judged materialistic or spiritual
lies in the intention and motives behind it.

Sincere Intention
-----------------

Sincere intention means that man acts for the sake of God only and in
the depth of his being, God and His pleasure are his aims, without
expecting reward, gratitude or admiration from others.[^2]

The loaves of bread that the *Ahl al-Bayt* of the Messenger of Allah (S)
gave to the orphans, captives and poor on successive nights at the time
of breaking fast {*iftar*} did not have much material value, but since
they were given sincerely, on this account God revealed a *surah*.[^3]

And concerning it, ‘Attar an-Nayshaburi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گذشته زين جهان، وصف سنانش
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گذشته زآن جهان، وصف سِه نانش
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No one in this world can describe his sword. No one in the hereafter
can describe his three loaves of bread.*

We read in history that a certain person was slain in the battlefield
and everybody said: “He is a martyr {*shahid*}.” But the Prophet (S)
said: “He was killed in the way of a donkey {*qatil al-himar*}!” The
people were astonished, but the Prophet (S) said: “His aim in going to
the battlefield was not God; rather, when he saw that the enemy was
riding a good donkey, he said to himself: ‘I will kill him and take his
donkey as war booty {*ghanimah*}.’ But he did not succeed and that
infidel killed him instead. So, he was killed in the way of a donkey
{*qatil al-himar*}!”[^4]

Making one’s intention sincere is indeed a difficult and taxing work.
Sometimes, wicked thoughts penetrate the soul of man to such an extent
that he himself is unaware of it. As such, it is narrated in the
tradition that ostentation {*riya’*} in matters of worship and
polytheism {*shirk*} are more subtle and silent than the movement of a
black ant on a black rock during a dark night.[^5]

So many individuals imagine that their intention is nearness {*qurb*} to
Allah, but during the ups and downs of their lives, it becomes obvious
that their motive is not a hundred percent pure and sincere.  
 In the words of ‘Allamah Shahid Mutahhari, intention means
self-awareness, and thus, the value of worship lies on gnosis and
awareness. We read in a tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِيَّةُ الْمُؤْمِنِ خَيْرٌ مِنْ عَمَلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The intention of the believer is more valuable than his action.”[^6]

Just like the comparison between body and soul, the soul is better than
the body and the humanity of man is related to his soul. In comparing
intention and action, intention is better than the act itself because it
is the spirit of the action.

Intention is so valuable that even if a person is unable to perform a
good deed, God will reward him for he had the intention to do so.[^7]

The motive for seeking nearness {qurb} to Allah
-----------------------------------------------

The motive for nearness {*qurb*} means seeking proximity to the Divine
Station. When it is said, “So-and-so is near or close to a certain
national official,” what is meant is not spatial, bodily and physical
nearness, for if it were such, the office attendants are the closest or
nearest to him. Rather, what is meant by this nearness is spiritual,
emotional in status and nearness in intimacy.

Doing deeds seeking the pleasure of God does not mean that God would be
influenced by our deeds and change His attitude or position toward us,
and as such, He becomes the subject of events and change. Instead,
“nearness to Allah” means exaltation of the spirit through the ladder of
existence whose consequence is the acquisition of influence in the
creation. That is, proximity to the Fountainhead of Creation and finding
Him in one’s heart.

Just as there are differences in the levels of existence among inanimate
objects, plants, animals, and human beings, there are also differences
on the level of human beings with respect to proximity to the
Fountainhead of Creation. Man could attain such nearness to God and be
the nearest to Him so that he becomes the vicegerent of Allah on the
earth.

Worship which is motivated by nearness {*qurb*} will make man more
luminous and perfect and have more existential capacity {*zarfiyyat-e
wujudi*}. All forms of worship, recommended prayers in particular, have
significant roles in this affair, just as we read in a *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَزالُ الْعَبْد يَتَقَرَّبُ اِلىَّ بِالنَّوافِل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, man can always get nearer to God through recommended
prayers.[^8]

Obligatory prayer is possibly done on account of fear of hell and the
divine wrath, but the optional prayer is a sign of love and the secret
of love to the Worshipped Being {*ma‘bud*}.

The degrees of proximity {qurb}
-------------------------------

The term “*darajat*” {degrees} has been mentioned frequently in the
Qur’an and it has appeared with diverse interpretations—a fact which
elicits subtle points. For some, the Qur’an states: *“For them, there
are degrees.”*[^9] For others, however, it says: *“They (themselves) are
degrees.”*[^10] It is like the case of great figures who even if they
sit at the lower section of an assembly, that section can become “high”;
they are themselves makers of degree and rank, and are not subject to
degree and station.

This spiritual ranking is not exclusive to human beings; for, there is
also hierarchy among the angels. The Qur’an thus says regarding Jibra’il
(Archangel Gabriel) (*‘a*): *“One who is heard and trustworthy as
well.”*[^11]

In any case, the degrees of human beings in obedience to God are not
similar:

1. Sometimes man obeys {*muti‘*}, but not out of pleasure.

2. At some other times, he obeys {*muti‘*} as well as loves {*muhibb*};
that is, he obeys God based on love and affection.

3. There are also times when he attains perfect gnosis {*ma‘rifah*} far
higher than obedience {*ita‘ah*} and love {*muhabbah*} and whatever he
sees is only God. Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مارَأَيْتُ شَيْئاً إِلاّ و رَأَيْتُ الله قَبْلَه و بَعْدَه و مَعَه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I do not see anything except God, before it, after it and with
it.”[^12]

We have to love God for the sake of God
---------------------------------------

It is said that in order to test the loyalty of his courtiers, Sultan
Mahmud Ghaznawi set out with a caravan and placed an unlocked container
of jewelry on a camel. Along the way, they reached a valley. He roused
the camel and thus the container turned upside down and the jewels fell
into the valley.

The Sultan said: “Whatever jewels one may get belongs to him.” Those who
were around him left him, and they engaged themselves in amassing gold
and silver. Meanwhile, it was observed that Ayyaz had abandoned the
jewels and pursued the Sultan. The Sultan asked him: “Why did you not
amass jewels?” In reply, Ayyaz said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منم در قفاى تو مى تاختم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زخدمت نعمت نپرداختم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For me, I prefer to cling to you and thus I did not serve the grace
{ni‘mah}.*  
 Then, from this event Mawlawi concludes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
گر از دوست چشمت به احسان اوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تو در بند خويشى نه در بند دوست
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خلاف طريقت بود كاولياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تمنّا كنند از خدا جز خدا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you are hoping for the Friend’s grace, you love yourself not the
Friend.*  
*It is contrary to the spiritual path {tariqah} of the awliya’ to
beseech God something other than God.*

The Qur’an has strongly condemned those who call on God only for their
own sakes and remember Him only in times of problems and at other times
forget or even deny Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذا رَكِبُوا فِي الْفُلْكِ دَعَوُا اللّهَ مُخْلِصينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ فَلَمّا نَجّاهُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ إِذا هُمْ يُشْرِكُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they board the ship, they invoke Allah putting exclusive faith
in Him, but when He delivers them to land, behold, they ascribe partners
{to Him}, being ungrateful for what We have given them!”***[^13]

At any rate, working for one’s self is egotism; for the sake of the
people is idol-worship; and working for the sake of God and His
creatures is dualism; and making one’s work and that of the creatures
for the sake of God is worship of God.  
 We thus read in the litanies {*munajat*}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلٰهى ما عَبَدتُكَ خَوْفاً مِنْ نارِك وَ لا طَمَعاً في جَنَّتِك بَلْ
وَجَدْتُك أهْلاً لِلْعِبادَة فَعَبْدتُك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! My worship is not out of fear of hell or desire for Your
paradise. Rather, it is because I found You worthy of being worshipped
and thus I worshipped You.”[^14]

Yes, only traders work to earn profits and only slaves work out of fear,
but free and noble men worship Him to express their gratitude for the
divine graces, just as has been narrated in the words of the Infallibles
{*ma‘sumin*}[^15] (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ قَوماً عَبْدوا اللهَ رَغْبَةً فَتِلْك عِبادَةُ التُّجارِ وَ
اِنَّ قَوماً عَبْدوا اللهَ رَهْبَةً فَتِلك عِبادَةُ الْعَبيدِ وَ اِنَّ
قَوماً اللهَ عَبْدوا شُكْراً فَتِلكَ عِبادَةُ الاَحْرارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed there is a group that worships Allah for gain; that is the
worship of the trader. There is a group that worships Allah out of fear;
that is the worship of the slave. And there is a group that worships
Allah out of gratitude; that is the worship of the free.”[^16]  
 In the language of Hafiz,[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
در ضمير ما نمى گنجد بغير از دوست كس
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هر دو عالم را به دشمن دِه كه ما را دوست بس
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no one in our hearts (minds) but the Friend. Give the two
worlds to the enemy as the Friend suffices for us.*

In materialistic love, the person loves his object of love for himself,
but in spiritual love the person dedicates himself to the Beloved. In
the Supplication of Kumayl {*du‘a’ kumayl*},[^18] ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاجْعَلْ قَلْبِي بِحُبِّكَ مُتَيِّماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Lord! Make my heart enthralled by Your love!”

Attainment of the state of proximity {qurb}
-------------------------------------------

Attainment of the divine proximity {*qurb-e ilahi*} and motive for
nearness {*qurbah*} is achieved in two ways:

One is to recognize the grandeur and station of God and the other is to
recognize the meanness and abjectness of other than Him.

The Qur’an always mentions the divine favors and graces to the servants
(of God) so as to make man enamored by the love for God. Stating His
Attributes, His creatures, His material and spiritual assistance and the
many favors, great and small—all in all are meant to enhance our love
for God.

On the other hand, there are many verses which indicate the weakness and
meanness of other than God, saying: Anyone and anything other than God
have neither honor nor power. Even if they combine together to create a
fly, they would not be able to do so. Except Him who could answer the
call of helpless and the indigent? How could it be proper to discuss
others in association with God and regard them as equal to and partners
of God?

A Recollection
--------------

One of the *maraji‘ at-taqlid*[^19] of the Shi‘ah world was Ayatullah
al-‘Uzma Burujerdi. During days of mourning, he used to hold mourning
ceremonies in his residence. In one of these assemblies, he was not
feeling well. So, he was resting in his private room while listening to
the speeches of the orators.

One of those present in the mourning assembly said: “Extend *salawah*
(invocation of blessings to the Prophet and his progeny (*‘a*)) for the
sake of the health and safety of the Imam of the Time and Aqa
Burujerdi!”

Suddenly, they found out that he was knocking the door with his staff.
His near relatives came and asked: “Is there anything we can do for
you?” This great *marja‘ at-taqlid* said: “Why did you mention my name
along with the name of the Imam of the Time (*‘a*)? I do not have the
worth for you to mention my name along with the name of the Imam and
invoke blessings {*salawah*} on us both.”[^20]

This religious authority who was a deputy {*na’ib*} of the Imam of the
Time (*‘a*) was not willing to let his name be mentioned along with the
name of an infallible Imam, but many of us, on account of incorrect
understanding and impoliteness, place the names of weak and thoroughly
needy creatures along with the name of God, the Omnipotent, Absolute and
Exalted, as if we regard them as equals.

Quality or quantity?
--------------------

Islam has paid much attention to the manner of performing a task and the
underlying motive and purpose behind it. The Qur’an praises the *better
acts* and not the *amount of acts accomplished*, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That He may test you {to see} which of you is best in
conduct.”***[^21]

While in a state of *ruku‘* {bowing down}, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) gave his
ring to a beggar, and on account of this, a verse {*ayah*} of the Qur’an
was revealed. Some people imagine that the reason behind the revelation
of a verse because of a ring was that the ring was precious and thus
they have said: “The value of the ring was equal to the tax and revenue
of all of Shamat.”[^22]

This is while a ring with such a price could never be consistent with
the simplicity {*zuhd*} of ‘Ali (*‘a*). It was equally incompatible with
his sense of justice for him to have such a ring on his hand while some
people were in a state of poverty and indigence. But the truth of the
matter is that it was on account of the quality of the deed and not its
quantity, and on account of the sincerity and intention for nearness
{*qurbah*} and not the weight and magnitude of the ring’s value that the
following verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ
الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ
رَاكِعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your guardian is only Allah, His Apostle, and the faithful who
maintain the prayer and give the zakat while bowing down.”***[^23]

A Recollection
--------------

Bahlul saw a group of people constructing a mosque and claiming that
they were doing so for the sake of God. He inscribed on a stone: “The
builder of this stone is Bahlul,” and placed it at the door of the
mosque one night. The following day, when the workers saw the inscribed
stone, they reported it to Harun ar-Rashid. So, he summoned Bahlul and
asked him: “Why have you assumed ownership of a mosque I am
constructing?”

Bahlul replied: “If you are really constructing the mosque for the sake
of God, then let my name be inscribed therein (as the owner). Anyway,
God knows who the real builder is. Besides, He will not commit any
mistakes in giving the reward. If it is really for the sake of God,
whether my name or your name is inscribed there does not matter.

In doing so, Bahlul let him understand that he had no intention for
nearness {*qurbah*} (to Allah), but rather for desire and fame. For this
reason, the Qur’an likens the deeds of the infidels {*kuffar*} to a
mirage which seems to be water but it is not:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَعْمَالُهُمْ كَسَرَابٍ بِقِيعَةٍ يَحْسَبُهُ
الظَّمْآنُ مَاءً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the faithless, their works are like a mirage in a plain,
which the thirsty man supposes to be water.”***[^24]

In principle, Islam regards an act as righteous if its four constitutive
elements are good: the components of the action, the motive, means, and
method.

The motive for nearness {*qurbah*} is necessary not only at the
beginning of an act; rather, the intention for divine proximity should
remain throughout the course of the action otherwise the act in its
entirety becomes void.

If the motor of an airplane malfunctions for only a minute, the airplane
will definitely come crashing down. Polytheism {*shirk*} or ostentation
{*riya’*} in the intention {*niyyah*}, though for only a moment, will
extinguish the entire act and render it useless.

Another recollection
--------------------

On a certain flight, the passengers of an airplane preparing for
take-off were asked to disembark from the aircraft and the flight was
delayed for many hours. I asked about the reason behind the delay.
Someone said: “A cockroach had been seen in the aircraft!” I exclaimed:
“All this delay is because of a cockroach?!”

It was said in reply: “Yes, because there have been many cases when a
cockroach would gnaw through a wire and the control system of the
aircraft would malfunction and this could lead to a mishap.”

Many good deeds are supposed to lead to man’s ascension toward God, but
because of a spiritual vice, not only do they not lead to his ascension;
instead, they would lead to his fall.

The intention gives value to the deed
-------------------------------------

Let us assume that out of oppression and aggression, someone killed
another and it became known later that the victim had been a criminal
who was supposed to have been executed. In this case, what the killer
had done was beneficial, however the people will not praise the murderer
because his intention was killing an innocent person and not executing a
corruptor on the earth {*mufsid fi’l-ard*}.

Thus, the usefulness of a work is not enough for it to be regarded as a
righteous act. In fact, it is necessary for it to be accompanied by a
pure intention as well.

In all instances, the Qur’an lays stress on the intention for nearness
{*qurbah*} (to Allah) whether in the case of *khums*, *zakah* and other
financial matters, or in the case of war and *jihad* against the enemy.
The fact that the Qur’an emphasizes such phrases as *“In the way of
Allah,”*[^25] *“For* the sake of Allah,”[^26] and *“Seeking the pleasure
of Allah*[^27] is an indication of the importance of the intention for
nearness {*qurbah*} to Allah.

If those who are performing beneficial acts on behalf of the people by
constructing schools, hospitals, roads, and dormitories have no divine
intention, they have committed an injustice to themselves because they
themselves will not benefit from those deeds although others will get
much benefit from them.

That the Qur’an always mentions righteous deeds along with faith,
saying:

***“Those who have faith and do righteous deeds,”***[^28]

or

***“Whoever acts righteously, {whether} male or female, should he (or
she) be faithful”***[^29]

is because of the fact that the goodness of an act alone is not enough;
rather, the goodness of the doer is also required.

Two historical accounts
-----------------------

1. Bilal al-Habashi, who was the caller to prayer {*mu‘adhdhin*} of the
Holy Prophet (S), would pronounce “sh” {*shin*} as “s” {*sin*} in the
recital of the sentence, “*Ashhadu an la ilaha illa’llah*” as he had a
defect in pronunciation. The people criticized it, but the Prophet (S)
said: “The *sin* of Bilal is *shin* for God.”[^30]

Although outwardly his work was defective, since he had the motive for
nearness {*qurbah*} and good intentions, he received the reward.

2. ‘Abd Allah ibn Maktum was one of the sincere Companions of the
Prophet (S) and a blind man. One day, this great Companion entered into
an assembly where the Prophet (S) and some people were busy talking. As
he could not see the other people in the assembly, he talked loudly.
Being annoyed, one of those who were present in the assembly frowned at
him.

In spite of the fact that frowning and smiling do not make any
difference to a blind person as he cannot see, the Qur’an revealed a
whole *surah* on account of that very frowning, and reproached the
person who frowned in ten successive verses {*ayat*}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ عَبَسَ وَتَوَلَّى ٭ أَنْ جَاءَهُ الأعْمَى ٭ وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ
لَعَلَّهُ يَزَّكَّى ٭ أَوْ يَذَّكَّرُ فَتَنْفَعَهُ الذِّكْرَى ٭ أَمَّا
مَنِ اسْتَغْنَى ٭ فَأَنْتَ لَهُ تَصَدَّى ٭ وَمَا عَلَيْكَ أَلا
يَزَّكَّى ٭ وَأَمَّا مَنْ جَاءَكَ يَسْعَى ٭ وَهُوَ يَخْشَى ٭ فَأَنْتَ
عَنْهُ تَلَهَّى ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He frowned and turned away when the blind man approached him. And
how do you know, maybe he would purify himself, or take admonition, and
the admonition would benefit him! But as for someone who is
self-complacent, you attend to him, though you are not liable if he***
***does not purify himself. But he who comes hurrying to you, while he
fears {Allah}, you are neglectful of him.”***[^31]

So, the criterion of a deed is not its usefulness or harmfulness with
which we would evaluate it and say: “If an action gives benefit to
others, it is a righteous deed and if it renders harm then it is an
impious act.” Instead, we have to assess the relationship of the action
with the person himself—what were his motives in doing it? Or, how is
the action per se if it renders neither benefit nor harm to others?

Yes, in the school {*maktab*} of the prophets (*‘a*), morality
{*akhlaq*} has essential {*dhati*} value and not merely accidental
{*‘aradi*} value. It is not like the morality of a person which is meant
to attract customers, maximize the volume of production and gather
people around him.

In the episode of the *‘abasa* {he who frowned}, the criticism is
anchored on this: Why did you frown at the blind man? Although the blind
man cannot see you, frowning at a believer is in itself an abhorrent
act.

In any case, the motive for nearness {*qurbah*} means that all actions
must be done according to divine criteria and should not have dire
political and social impact upon others.

The motive for nearness {*qurbah*} means that an act must be done for
the sake of God regardless of its resultant joy or pain. In describing
the true believer, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يُجاهِدُونَ في سَبيلِ اللّهِ وَ لا يَخافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لائِمٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(They) wage jihad in the way of Allah, not fearing the blame of any
blamer.”***[^32]

The motive for nearness {*qurbah*} means that one must say the truth and
not be concerned about anything or anybody except Him, just as the
Qur’an thus describes the divine propagators:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الَّذينَ يُبَلِّغُونَ رِسالاتِ اللّهِ وَ يَخْشَوْنَهُ وَ لا
يَخْشَوْنَ أَحَدًا إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَ كَفى‏ بِاللّهِ حَسيبًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Such as deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and fear no one
except Allah, and Allah suffices as reckoner.”***[^33]

A recollection
--------------

One day, I was engrossed in doing supplication {*du‘a’*} and paying
homage {*ziyarah*} in the holy shrine of Imam ar-Rida (*‘a*). One of the
pilgrims {*za’irin*} sat beside me and as he recognized me from my TV
program every Friday night, he gave me a sum of money, saying: “Aqa
Qara’ati! Give this money to the poor.” I said: “Like you, I have also
come here for *ziyarah* and (here) in Mashhad I do not know of any poor
people. You give it to the poor yourself.”

After sometime, he pleaded with me again and I also repeated my
argument, and then I resumed supplication.

He repeated his plea for the third time. I was annoyed and said: “Today,
with twenty tumans[^34] you disturbed my concentration three times.
Please do not disturb me. You yourself have to give this money to the
poor.” He said: “Aqa Qara’ati! This is not twenty tumans; it is one
thousand tumans.”

I was thinking that he wanted to give twenty tumans to the poor. I
reflected for some time and my anger faded away. I said to him: “There
is an institution here for helping the orphans.” He said: “It is up to
you. You spend it as you deem it appropriate.” He gave the money to me
and left.

I put down the book of supplication and started reflecting. If it is for
the sake of God, what is the difference between twenty tumans and one
thousand tumans? I realized that this scene was a test for me, reminding
me that the motive for nearness {*qurbah*} had not yet become alive in
me.

One of the signs of sincerity is that the volume of work, the
individuals involved, the places, types of work, and situations make no
difference for the person. His only concern is to seek the pleasure of
God regardless of whether he benefits from it or not, or the people
would know or not, support it or not.

Of course, humanitarianism and doing something for the people is nobler
than egotism, but in the absence of a divine motive, it has no divine
value.

In the words of Shahid Mutahhari, the motive for nearness {*qurbah*} is
an essential condition {*shart-e dhati*} and not a contractual and
delegated condition; it is a creational {*takwini*} condition and not a
ceremonial {*tashrifati*} one.[^35]

If we say: The condition for reaching Mecca is traversing the way to the
city, this is a natural and essential condition, and not a contractual
one. Similarly, the condition to attain the station of nearness to Allah
is to have the motive for nearness {*qurbah*} and this is an essential
condition.

The effects and blessings of a pure intention
---------------------------------------------

Through a cursory glance at the verses of the Qur’an and the Prophetic
traditions, we shall find out many effects and blessings of having a
pure intention, some of which we shall mention concisely below:

1. Anyone who has a good intention shall have abundant provisions.[^36]
Perhaps this *hadith* means that because of his good intention, his
behavior and treatment of people is somehow pleasant and naturally, more
people will be attracted to his business and thus he will earn more
income.

2. A good intention increases man’s success and opportunity, makes his
life pure and desirable, and wins him more friends.[^37]

Divine favors for individuals depend on their having a good intention.
The purer and more sincere their intention is, the more divine favors
they will obtain.

3. It endows long life to man.

It is narrated in the traditions: If a person who just performed *Hajj*
pilgrimage would intend and decide when he is returning home to go to
*Hajj* again the following year, God will prolong his life on account of
that good intention.[^38]

4. A good intention compensates for one’s past (sins). ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:
If a sinner having a good intention repents, God will return to him
whatever is taken from him as a remuneration (for his sins), and set
right whatever problem he might have in his work.[^39]

5. God will give the reward of a good deed to a person for intending to
do a good act even if he actually fails to do so. By having a sincere
intention, the unfulfilled works of a person shall be counted, as it has
been narrated in the traditions: If a faithful person would say, ‘If God
had given amenities to me, I would have done this and that’, and if this
wish is sincere, God will grant him the reward of those deeds.[^40]

Even if he sincerely wishes for martyrdom and prays to God for his
martyrdom, God will grant him the station of a martyr though he departs
from this world on his bed.[^41] It is enough of a favor that God will
give reward for a decision to do a good deed, but regarding an intention
to commit a sin, He will not set a punishment for it unless it is
actually done.[^42]

6. A pure intention can make the most materialistic affairs of life a
means for man’s nearness {*qurb*} to Allah. In the same manner, the most
spiritual states such as prostration {*sujud*} and weeping, if they are
motivated by ostentation {*riya’*}, will turn into a means of drifting
away from God.

We read in the traditions: Just as the body having a soul is firm,
religion with a sincere intention is firm.[^43] Having a pure heart and
good intention are among the divine assets and treasures, and the better
the intention the more the value this treasure will have.[^44] Having a
serious intention, decision and will power will multiply the physical
ability of man.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “On the Day of Resurrection, God will group
the people according to the intentions they have.”[^45]

For one whose aim is the performance of a duty, it is not important for
him the type of work and its outcome. As the Qur’an says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ مَنْ يُقاتِلْ في سَبيلِ اللّهِ فَيُقْتَلْ أَوْ يَغْلِبْ فَسَوْفَ
نُؤْتيهِ أَجْرًا عَظيمًا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever fights in the way of Allah, and then is slain or
conquers, soon We shall give him a great reward.”***[^46]

What is important is to struggle in the way of God, but as to whether
its outcome is defeat or victory has no effect on the divine reward. In
another place, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ مَنْ يَخْرُجْ مِنْ بَيْتِهِ مُهاجِرًا إِلَى اللّهِ وَ رَسُولِهِ
ثُمَّ يُدْرِكْهُ الْمَوْتُ فَقَدْ وَقَعَ أَجْرُهُ عَلَى اللّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever leaves his home migrating toward Allah and His Apostle,
and is then overtaken by death, his reward shall certainly fall on
Allah.”***[^47]

It can also be readily inferred from this verse that if a person leaves
his home for the sake of God, even though he does not reach his
destination, he would be rewarded. What is important is the intention
behind the act and not the act itself. What is important is to take a
step along the way and not reaching the destination.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Abu Dharr: “Decide to do a good deed
though you might not succeed in doing so; for, it is this decision that
will take you out from the circle of the neglectful.”[^48]

We read in another *hadith*: “Any deed which is accompanied by a divine
intention is great even if that work is simple and trivial.”[^49]

On the contrary, the most important deeds, if they are not based on
correct intentions, have no value. The Prophet (S) said: “Most of the
martyrs of my *ummah* will depart from this world while lying on their
beds while there are many who will be killed on the battlefield but God
is aware of their intentions.”[^50]

During the Tabuk expedition, the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) said:
“Indeed, those who are in Medina but wish to participate with us in the
battlefield shall share in the spiritual reward on account of that
intention.”[^51]

Also, in another tradition we read: Anyone who goes to his bed with the
intention of waking up to say the night supererogatory prayers, if he
remains in his bed and is not able to wake up, God will treat his sleep
as charity and his breathing as glorification (of God) {*tasbih*} and
give him the reward of saying the night supererogatory prayers.[^52]

It is not without reason that we have been admonished to have sacred
aims even in eating and sleeping.[^53] And if you love a person for the
sake of God and imagine him as a good person, even if he is actually a
dweller of hell, you are excused.[^54]

The pre-eminence of intention {niyyah} over action {‘amal}
----------------------------------------------------------

The pre-eminence the intention behind an action possesses over the
action itself is that in the performance of action, sometimes
ostentation {*riya’*} and showing off are at work, but in the
intention—since it is an inner matter and has no outward
appearance—there is no place for ostentation, showing off and the like.
The other advantage of intention over action is that it is always
possible in all places and requires no particular conditions, but
performance of an action requires many prerequisites and contingencies.

In the traditions, there is a category known as “*man bala‘*”
traditions. This group of traditions states: If somebody hears a
tradition which states that such an act has a reward and he performs it,
God will grant him that reward even if that tradition is not correct. It
is because one who has done so did it with a good intention.

The degrees of intention
------------------------

1. Sometimes, fear of divine wrath or desire for divine favor prompts
man to perform an act. As the Qur’an says in this regard, ***“And
supplicate Him with fear and hope.**”*[^55]

And in another place, the Qur’an states: ***“And they would supplicate
Us with eagerness and awe.”***[^56]

2. A higher degree of intention is that man performs an act on account
of gratitude for His favors whether he earns reward or punishment from
God. As Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ لَمْ يَتَوَعِّدَ اللهُ عَلىٰ مَعْصِيَتِهِ لَكانَ يَجِبُ اَلاّ
يُعْصىٰ شُكْراً لِنِعْمَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Even if Allah had not warned of the chastisement of those disobedient
to Him, it was obligatory by way of gratefulness for His favors that He
should not be disobeyed.”[^57]

3. An even higher degree of intention is that without desiring paradise
and being afraid of hell, man worships God as he regards Him as the only
Being worthy of worship and adoration.

4. The highest degree of intention is that the love for God drives man
to perform an act. In this regard, ‘Ali (*‘a*) considers his love for
death and meeting Allah as more intense than the fondness of an infant
for the breast of its mother.[^58] And Hadrat al-Qasim, son of Imam
Hasan al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) says in Karbala’: “For me, death in the way of
God is sweeter than honey.”

The role of intention on the penal issues
-----------------------------------------

On the question of punishment, Islam also takes motive and intention
into account.

Concerning murder, the penalty for a person who kills another
intentionally is distinct from the penalty for one who kills another
unintentionally. Each of these two cases has its own particular
ruling.[^59]

With regard to swearing an oath, the Qur’an also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لا يُؤاخِذُكُمُ اللّهُ بِاللَّغْوِ في أَيْمانِكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah shall not take you to task for what is unconsidered in your
oaths.”***[^60]

Therefore, if someone gives an oath but he has no serious intention and
motive, his oath has no value.

Gnosis {ma‘rifah} as the preliminary step toward the intention for nearness {qurbah}
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The best way of acquiring the motive for nearness {*qurbah*} to Allah
and a pure intention is gnosis {*ma‘rifah*} and cognition.

• If we only knew, acquiring the endearment of people is in the hands of
God.[^61]

• If we only knew, honor and power are only through His hands.[^62]

• If we only knew, benefit and harm to us are not in the hands of
others.[^63]

• If we only knew, work for the sake of God has sometimes double, ten
times, or seventy times its reward. So, we should not work for the sake
of other than Him.

• If we only knew, the elevation of social status does not mean glory
because black smoke also goes up!

• If we only knew, the attention and opinion of the people to us have no
value because if an elephant would pass by the street, everybody will
also look at it!

• If we only knew, we would pay attention to the perils and ignominies
of our ostentations!

• If we only knew, there will be a day for us when one’s call will not
reach the other and only those who have sound hearts shall attain
deliverance.[^64]

• And if we only knew what values we shall lose by having corrupt
intentions, we would prepare ourselves for the sincere performance of
work based on the motive of nearness {*qurbah*} to Allah.

The effects of corrupt intentions
---------------------------------

Concluding the discussion on intention, we shall also cite the adverse
effects of having corrupt intentions, just as we earlier stated the
blessings of a sound intention.

1. Non-acceptance of supplication {*du‘a’*}. Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) says:
“A bad intention causes the non-acceptance of supplications.”[^65]

Having an ungodly intention not only removes the divine color and
devotional nature of actions; it also entails perils.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “If somebody borrows a certain amount of
money without the intention of returning it, it is equivalent to
stealing.”[^66] Similarly, if in marriage the person has no intention of
giving the dower {*mahriyyah*} to his wife, in the sight of God he is
committing adultery {*zina*}.[^67]

2. Deprivation of sustenance {*rizq*}. Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “So
many believers have the intention of committing sin and God deprives
them of sustenance {*rizq*}.”

An actual example of this *hadith* is the story of a garden which has
been narrated in the Qur’an:

In *Surah al-Qalam*, verses 16-30, there has been narrated the story of
a people who owned a garden and who intended to harvest its yields in
the dark so that the poor would remain unaware of their action and they
would not have to give any of the fruits to them.

As the dawn came they went to the garden. They saw that the garden had
been burned and turned into ashes. Initially, they imagined that they
had lost the way, but the wisest among them said: “Did I not remind you
not to have such an intention? You had the intention of depriving the
poor. Now, God deprived you of it as well.”

From this Qur’anic account, it can be understood that sometimes God
gives a sort of penalty on account of our motive and intention.[^68] Of
course, this is not a general rule.

3. It causes wretchedness and misfortune. Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) says: “A
corrupt intention is a sign of wretchedness.”[^69]

4. The blessing of life and daily living is taken away. In another
place, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِنْدَ فَسادَ النِّيِّة تَرْتَفعُ الْبَرَكَة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, God will take away the blessing from the person whose intention
is not sound and he will not be able to make good use of divine
favors.[^70]

It is narrated that it was said to someone: “On account of your good
work, you have three acceptable supplications.” He was glad and said: “O
God! Make my wife the most beautiful woman in the world.” His wife
became very beautiful but his life became bitter because he realized
that everyone was staring at his wife. He therefore made his second
supplication: “O God! Make my wife the ugliest woman in the world.”

His supplication was granted but his life became intolerable with such
an ugliness. So, he made his third and last acceptable supplication,
saying: “O God! Let my wife return to her original condition.” His
supplication was heard and his wife returned to her original state. He
made his three accepted supplication but he earned no benefit at all.
This is the meaning of taking away blessings from a person and as such,
he cannot make good use of the facilities at his disposal.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 210.

[^2]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:9: “We feed you only for the sake
of Allah. We do not want any reward from you nor any thanks.”

[^3]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76.

[^4]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 8, p. 104.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 93.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 210.

[^7]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 8, p. 104.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, p. 155.

[^9]: Surah al-Anfal 8:4.

[^10]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:163.

[^11]: Surah at-Takwir 81:21.

[^12]: Tamashagah-e Raz, p. 114.

[^13]: Surah al-‘Ankabut 29:65.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 186.

[^15]: Ma‘sumin: those possessing the quality of ‘ismah; i.e., the
Prophet, Fatimah, and the Twelve Imams (‘a). See A Brief History of the
Fourteen Infallibles, 3rd ed. (Tehran: WOFIS, 2001).
http://www.al-islam.org/brief-history-of-fourteen-infallibles {Trans.}

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 41, p. 14.

[^17]: Khwajah Shams ad-Din Muhammad Hafiz Shirazi (ca. 1325-1391) was
the fourteenth century Persian lyric bard and panegyrist, and commonly
considered as the preeminent master of the ghazal form. {Trans.}

[^18]: Du‘a Kumayl {Supplication of Kumayl}: The supplication taught by
Imam ‘Ali (‘a) to one of his loyal companions and staunch supporters of
Islam, Kumayl ibn Ziyad. Usually offered on every night preceding Friday
{Laylat’ul-Jum‘ah} individually or in congregation after Isha’ prayers,
this supplication envisages divine teachings and solid foundations of
religion in order to enable everyone to follow the right path for
becoming a worthy Muslim. The Arabic text, English translation and
commentary of this famous supplication are available online at
http://www.al-islam.org/kumayl. {Trans.}

[^19]: Maraji‘ at-Taqlid (sing. Marja‘ at-Taqlid): literally means
“Sources of Imitation”. Maraji‘ are the ‘ulama’ who have reached the
position of Marja‘iyyah {Religious Reference Authority} because they
have possessed such characteristics as justice, piety, superior
knowledge, awareness and being oblivious to worldly possessions. The
average people refer to them to find answers to their religious
problems, and to follow their religious decrees. {Trans.}

[^20]: As narrated by Ayatullah Safi.

[^21]: Surah Hud 11:7; Surah al-Mulk 67:2.

[^22]: Sham or Shamat: up until five centuries ago, included Syria of
today, Lebanon and parts of Jordan and Palestine. {Trans.}

[^23]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:55.

[^24]: Surah an-Nur 24:39.

[^25]: For example, Surah al-Baqarah 2:190.

[^26]: For instance, Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:9.

[^27]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:207 and others.

[^28]: For example, Surah at-Tin 95:6; Surah al-‘Asr 103:3, and many
others. {Trans.}

[^29]: Surah an-Nahl 16:97.

[^30]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, hadith 4696.

[^31]: Surah al-‘Abasa 80:1-10.

[^32]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:54.

[^33]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:39.

[^34]: Tuman: every tuman is equivalent to ten Iranian rials. {Trans.}

[^35]: See Murtada Mutahhari, Wala-ha va Wilayat-ha, pp. 290-293. For
this book’s English translation, see Murtada Mutahhari, Master and
Mastership (Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications, n.d.), chap. 7,
“Wala of Control,” available online at
http://www.al-islam.org/mastership. {Trans.}

[^36]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 39.

[^37]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^38]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 8, p. 107.

[^39]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 178: “By Allah, no people are deprived
of the pleasures of life after enjoying them, except as a result of sins
committed by them, because certainly Allah is not unjust to His
creatures. Even then, when calamities descend upon people and pleasures
depart from them, they turn towards Allah with the true intention and
the feeling in their hearts, He will return everything that vanished
from them and cure all their ills.”

[^40]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 40.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 201.

[^42]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 40.

[^43]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 312.

[^44]: Ghurar al-Hikam.

[^45]: Qassar al-Jamal.

[^46]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:74.

[^47]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:100.

[^48]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 39.

[^49]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 87.

[^50]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’ vol. 8, p. 103.

[^51]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’ vol. 8, p. 104.

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 206.

[^53]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 35.

[^54]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’ vol. 4, p. 374.

[^55]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:56.

[^56]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:90.

[^57]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Saying 290.

[^58]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 5.

[^59]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:92-93: “Anyone who kills a believer by mistake
should set free a believing slave, and pay blood-money to his (the
victim’s) family, unless they remit it in charity… Should anyone kill a
believer intentionally, his requital shall be hell, to remain in it
{forever}; Allah shall be wrathful at him and curse him and He shall
prepare for him a great punishment.”

[^60]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:225.

[^61]: Surah Ibrahim 14:37: “Our Lord! …So make the hearts of a part of
the people fond of them (Abraham’s descendants), and provide them with
fruits, that they may give thanks.”

[^62]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:165.

[^63]: Munajat ash-Sha‘baniyyah.

[^64]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:88-89: “The day (Day of Resurrection) when
neither wealth nor children will avail, except him who comes to Allah
with a sound heart.”

[^65]: Surah al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 375.

[^66]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 12, p. 86.

[^67]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 15, p. 22.

[^68]: Someone thus narrated to me: “I met one of the disabled war
veterans (during the 1980-88 Iraqi imposed war against Iran), who was
sitting in a wheelchair. I approached and kissed him. As he smelled my
perfume, he asked me to give him my perfume. I said: ‘I will buy one for
you and I will keep this one.’ At any rate, I did not give it to him and
we parted ways. An hour later, I went to the toilet and the bottle of
perfume fell into the toilet bowl. All of a sudden, I realized that this
was a penalty for my stinginess and right there, I wept for my
(miserable) state.” Yes, we will suppose to have so much regret and
remorse on the Day of Resurrection since we have done nothing for God.

[^69]: Ghurar al-Hikam, hadith 1610.

[^70]: Ghurar al-Hikam, hadith 1615.


