Surah al-Ikhlas
===============

The importance of Surah al-Ikhlas
---------------------------------

In the prayer, after *Surah al-Fatihah*, one of the *surah*s of the
Qur’an must be recited. The person praying might choose any *surah*; of
course, with the exception of the four *surah*s in which prostration is
obligatory.

Among the *surah*s recited in prayer, *Surah al-Ikhlas* (or *at-Tawhid*)
is preferable and in the traditions it is thus enjoined: “You have to
read this *surah* in at least one of the *rak‘ah*s of prayer everyday so
as to be among those who are praying.”[^1]

In terms of importance, this *surah* is equal to one third of the
Qur’an, nay one third of the *Tawrah*, *Injil*[^2] and *Zabur*.[^3] If
this *surah* is also recited after the prayer as a prayer supplement,
God shall give the person the goodness of this world and the hereafter.

This *surah* is short, yet its content is very sublime. As Imam
as-Sajjad (*‘a*) said, “Since He knew that meticulous and insightful
individuals shall emerge in the future, God revealed this *surah* as
well as the initial verses of *Surah al-Hadid*.

Recital of this *surah* is enjoined not only in prayer. In fact,
frequent recitation of it removes the evil of tyrants and ensures one’s
house from mishaps and perils.

Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh, one of the companions and commanders of the army of the
Messenger of Allah (S), was buried in the cemetery of Baqi‘ in Medina.
The Prophet (S) participated in the burial rites for him barefooted and
saying: “Ninety thousand angels have come to participate in the burial
of Sa‘d.” The Prophet (S) asked Jibra’il (Archangel Gabriel) (*‘a*):
“What is the reason behind your coming down as well as that of all these
angels for the burial of Sa‘d ibn Mu‘adh?” Jibra’il (*‘a*) replied: “In
whatever state—standing, sitting, riding, or walking—he used to recite
the *surah*, *“Say, ‘He is Allah, the One’.”*

Concerning the circumstances surrounding the revelation of this *surah*,
we read that the Jews, Christians and the idol-worshippers asked the
Prophet (S) about God: “Describe your God to us.” In reply to them, the
Prophet (S) recited this *surah*. This *surah* serves as the “identity
card” of God.

“Qul huwa’llahu ahad”
---------------------

*Tawhid* {monotheism} is the most fundamental principle of all heavenly
religions and the prophets (*‘a*) have come to eliminate the effects of
polytheism, disbelief and idol-worship and to invite mankind toward God.

*Tawhid* is the spirit and kernel of the teachings of the prophets
(*‘a*). Not only beliefs but also laws and morality revolve around the
axis of *tawhid*.

*Tawhid* is the frontier between faith {*iman*} and disbelief {*kufr*},
and entering the fortress of faith without acknowledgment of *tawhid* is
not possible: “Say, ‘*La ilaha illa’llah* {There is no god but Allah}’
to attain success”[^4] and “*La ilaha illa’llah* is My fortress; so,
whoever enters My fortress is safe from My wrath.”[^5]

This *surah* consists of the purest monotheist beliefs; hence, this
*surah* is called *Surah al-Ikhlas* {Chapter: Purity}. This *surah*
refutes the Christian belief in the Trinity, the polytheism of the Jews
as well as the belief of the Arabs during the pre-Islamic period of
ignorance who regarded the angels as the daughters of God.

*Tawhid* means the purification of mind and action from any form of
polytheism and associating partners with God; neither theoretical
polytheism nor practical ostentation. Instead, both the motive and the
action itself must be only for the sake of God.

That is, He is One and has no substitute; He has neither similitude nor
equal; He has neither limbs nor parts.

That is, He is the Worshipped Being {*ma‘bud*} who is unique in
everything. Thus, His Essence is beyond the comprehension and
understanding of man.

The reason behind His Oneness is that if there were also another “God”,
this “God” would also have been supposed to send prophets to mankind to
recognize and obey “Him”!

The reason behind His Oneness is that at the time of danger, all human
beings focus only on the One Being and their hearts testify to the fact
that only One Being gives hopes to man amid all difficulties.

The reason behind His Oneness is the harmony between the heaven and the
earth, the universe and man, and the precise and orderly relations among
all creatures. If you would ask three painters to draw a single rooster,
for example, asking one of them to draw its head, the second one to draw
its body, and the third one to draw its tail or feet, there would be no
harmony among the three drawings when you place them together; one might
be big while the other one might be small; one may have a dark color
while the other one may have a light color.

Yes, the harmony existing between the sun, moon, earth, water, wind,
soil, mountain, desert, sea, and others, on one hand, and the needs of
man, on the other, signifies that there is only One Creator.

The human being inhales oxygen and exhales carbon dioxide. On the
contrary, a plant absorbs carbon dioxide and releases oxygen. In this
way, the needs of man and other livings creatures are met, and this
harmony is the secret behind the life of men and plants.

The needs of an infant are met through the love and affection of its
parents, and the weariness of the day is removed through sleep at night.
The water of the eye (tears) has been created salty and the water of the
mouth (saliva) fresh. In this way, the salty water cleanses the eyes
while the fresh water prepares the food for the processes of chewing and
digestion.

Instead of dying, the infant is taught to suck and even before it is
born, its milk has been made available in the breasts of the mother. The
food of some birds is located along the teeth of whales in the sea. And
everyday, animals are satisfactorily provided with food.

During the Battle of Jamal, a Bedouin Arab asked Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*)
about the meaning of *tawhid*. The soldiers complained to him, saying
that it was not the time for such questions. Nevertheless, the Imam
(*‘a*) explained to him the meaning and interpretation of *tawhid*, and
then said: “It is for this very meaning (of *tawhid*) that we are now
fighting.”[^6]

Yes, the struggle of the followers of truth throughout history has been
for the sake of hoisting the banner of *tawhid*.

“Allahu’s-samad” {Allah is the All-embracing}
---------------------------------------------

“*Samad*” means impenetrable, indestructible and unchangeable.

He is *samad*. So, He is not material or corporeal because all corporeal
things experience change and destruction with the passage of time. Thus,
He has no body that can be seen by the eyes or such an attractive force
that, though unseen, has corporeality.

He is *samad*, the Impenetrable Force whose will pervades and penetrates
all things.

He is *samad*, the Indestructible, the Honorable from whom all honors
come and whatever honor and power anyone has emanates from Him. He is
not in need of anybody or anything but everything is in need of Him.

He is *samad*, the Absolute Perfect Being, nay the Absolute All-perfect
Being who possesses all excellences at the apex of their perfection. In
order to attain perfection, all beings are in need of His grace, but He
is and will not be in need of any being. His Command is above all other
commands and His Will is above all other wills. He is in need of neither
sleep nor assistance and partners in doing His work.

He is *samad*, and in a nutshell, He is the Needless God who is always
needed by all.

“Lam yalid wa lam yulad” {He neither begat nor was begotten}
------------------------------------------------------------

He is the Creator of all beings and is not the one who gave birth to
them. His work is not reproduction such as “reproducing Himself”. It is
instead bringing something into being from non-being or nothing.

In the case of the mother who gives birth to a child, the infant belongs
to her genus and is like her, i.e. a human. But with respect to God, it
is impossible for an equal and similar being to be begotten by Him or
for Him to have been begotten: ***“Nothing is like Him.”***[^7]

This sentence is against the belief of the Christians who believe in
‘Isa (*‘a*) as the son of God, and treat him like God. In the same vein,
this verse negates the belief of the polytheists who imagined that the
angels were the daughters of God by saying: “God has never begotten a
child, whether a girl or a boy!”

Nothing is to be begotten unless that the one who begot is preeminent
and superior to the begotten one, not to mention the fact that the one
who begot existed prior to the begotten one!

His existence is not like the sprouting of the fruit from the flower;
the tree from the seed; the water from the cloud; the fire from the
wood. It is not like the emergence of words from the mouth; or the
script from the pen. It is not like the emission of scent from the
flower, or taste from food. It is not like the flashing of an idea from
the mind, or intuition from the heart.

It is not like the appearance of heat from fire or cold from snow. He
exists but is similar to nothing and no one. He is neither in anything
nor is anything in Him. His relationship with things is not like that of
a parent to his child. It is rather the relationship of the Creator
{*khaliq*} with the creature {*makhluq*}.

“Wa lam yakun lahu kufuwan ahad” {Nor has He any equal}
-------------------------------------------------------

He has no equal in being, perfection and action. He is One and no one is
similar to Him. He is the One and Only and He has neither spouse nor
offspring! He has no equal to be His assistant and partner.

How could man dare to regard His creature as His partner and commit this
grievous inequity against Him?

**“*****Polytheism is indeed a great injustice.”***[^8]

O praying one! Do not consider others as His partners and associates in
the favors that He bestows upon you, nor attribute to other than Him the
things you do. Why do you think of attracting the attention of those who
are like you—weak and needy? Try to win the favor of God instead who has
no equal, weakness and need.

At the end of the *surah*, we shall take a cursory glance at its sublime
content:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَد ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, He is One in Essence as well as in Attributes. So, He is also
One in worthiness to be the Worshipped Being {*ma‘bud*}.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, He is free from want and all things are in need of Him, and He
is Alone in being free from want.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَمْ يَلِدْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, He does not reproduce an equal for Him to have a peer and a
match.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ لَمْ يُولَدْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, He is the First and the Last. He is not created to have emerged
from something.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ لَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كفُواً أَحَدُ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, He has neither equal nor spouse; neither peer nor partner.

This *surah* negates all layers of polytheism, superstitions, delusions,
and deviant beliefs from the Sacred Essence of God, while presenting to
us pure and pristine *tawhid*.

According to the traditions, the verses of this *surah* are the
interpretation of each other.[^9] They describe God in a step-by-step
process:

**First step:** Say, “He is my God. He is beyond the comprehension of
the human mind and intellect, and He is hidden and absent from any
vision.”

At this stage, all the attention is focused on the Essence of God and
not on His Attributes. The Essence alone is enough for His being the
Beloved {*mahbub*} and the Worshipped Being {*ma‘bud*}. Hadrat ‘Ali
(*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كَمالُ الاِخْلاصِ نَفْىُ الصِّفاتِ عَنْه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

That is, perfect sincerity is that you worship Him without taking into
account His Attributes.[^10] That is, you worship God for the sake of
Himself and not on account of the favors that have been given to you.

**Second step:** “He is Allah, the Worshipped Being who possesses all
perfection.”  
 In this stage, the Essence and Attributes are considered together.
“*Allah*” is the Essence that possesses all the good Attributes, and
thus He is worthy of worship and devotion. As the Qur’an states,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ للَّهِ الأَسمَاءُ الحُْسنى فَادْعُوهُ بهَا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To Allah belong the Best Names, so supplicate Him by them.”***[^11]

Knowing God through the Attributes is the second step in which “*Allah*”
is the comprehensive word for all those Attributes.

Considering God by way of the Attributes is a means that is manifested
in the supplications, especially in the *Du‘a’ Jawshar Kabir* where we
address God through a thousand Attributes.

**Third step:** “He is One and Unique in Oneness.”  
 In this stage, *tawhid* is discussed—*tawhid* in Essence and
Attributes. His Essence is One and His Attributes are Unique and
Unparalleled. The existence of His Essence and His Attributes are one
and the same; not that His Attributes are a separate existence added to
His Essence.

He is One who has no second or third. The numerical “one” {*wahid*} is
different from oneness as a qualitative concept {*ahad*}. The Qur’an
says: “God is *ahad* and not *wahid*.”  
 He is “One” (ontologically) and not “one” (numerically) which may have
a second or a third of its kind.

**Fourth step:** “God is free from want.”  
 In this stage, the freedom from want which is the pivot of the Divine
Essence and Attributes is an important description of God. In addition,
it is not just in the form of a predicate, stating: “*Allahu* *samad*”.
It is rather in the form of a fixed description of “*Allah*” and because
of this, the word “*Allah*” is hereby repeated: “*Allahu* *samad*”.

He is One but not in need. Other than Him are many, but all the needs
and attention of all those who are needy are geared toward that
Independent One!

**Fifth step:**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ ٭ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

This stage, according to the traditions, is the interpretation of
**“الصَّمَد”.** He is not in need of begetting a child. Neither is He in
need of a father and a mother to beget Him, nor of a spouse, associate
and partner to assist Him in His work.

If He were ever born, then He would not be the First, and if He ever
gave birth, then He would not be eternal because He would be prone to
diminish and dwindle. If He ever had an equal and a peer, then He would
not be unrivalled. He is free and exempt from all these things.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يُشرِكُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Clear is Allah of any partners that they may ascribe {to
Him}!”***[^12]

[^1]: The traditions regarding the merits and importance of this surah
have been recorded in Tafsir Burhan. In this volume, we shall only quote
some of these traditions.

[^2]: Injil: the scripture revealed to Prophet ‘Isa (Jesus) (‘a) in its
original form. {Trans.}

[^3]: Zabur: the scripture revealed to Prophet Dawud (David) (‘a) in its
original form. {Trans.}

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 202.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 3, p. 13.

[^6]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 709.

[^7]: Surah ash-Shura 42:11.

[^8]: Surah Luqman 31:13.

[^9]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 714.

[^10]: Najh al-Balaghah, “Khutbah at-Tawhid”.

[^11]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:180.

[^12]: Surah at-Tur 52:43.


