Bowing Down {ruku‘} and Prostration {sujud}
===========================================

Bowing down {ruku‘}
-------------------

Bowing down {*ruku‘*} is an essential pillar of prayer. Performing it in
an excessive or inadequate manner, whether intentional or unintentional,
renders the prayer invalid.

The word “*rak‘ah*” {circle} which is used in counting the cycles of
prayer is derived from the word “*ruku‘*”.

The tribe of Thaqif requested that the Prophet (S) excuse them from
performing *ruku‘* and prostration {*sujud*} in prayer, saying: “Bending
down for us is a shame.” This verse was revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ إِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ ارْكَعُوا لا يَرْكَعُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When they are told, ‘Bow down,’ they do not bow down!**”*[^1]

Others bow and show reverence in front of human beings like themselves,
but you have to bow down and show reverence solely to your Creator.

When the verse, *“So celebrate the Name of your Lord, the
All-supreme,”*[^2] was revealed, the Prophet (S) ordered: “Show
reverence to God while you are in *ruku‘* and recite this *dhikr*
{remembrance or glorification}:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحانَ رَبِّيَ ٱلْعَظيمِ وَ بِحَمدهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Subhana rabbiya’l-‘azim wa bihamdih.*  
 “Glory be to my Lord, the Great, and praise belongs to Him.”[^3]

We read in the traditions: “*Ruku‘* is the sign of courtesy {*adab*}
while the *sujud* is the symbol of nearness {*qurb*} to God. Once you do
not perform the gesture of courtesy properly, you cannot be ready for
the stage of nearness.”[^4]

*Ruku‘* is the means of repentance {*tawbah*}, penitence and asking
forgiveness in the presence of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَاستَغْفَرَ رَبَّهُ وَ خَرَّ رَاكِعاً وَ أَنَاب ﴾‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whereat he (David) pleaded with his Lord for forgiveness, and fell
down bowing and repented.”***[^5]

The effects of ruku‘
--------------------

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) says: “Anyone who perfectly performs his *ruku‘*
perfectly will be safe from the horror of the grave.”[^6]

The more we bow down in humility to God, the more we shall have the
power to confront the Satan and satanic ones. Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says:
“Long *ruku‘* and *sujud* makes Iblis angry, saying, ‘Woe to me! With
such quality of servitude, the people will no longer obey me.”[^7]

God says to the angels: “See my servants, how they express reverence to
Me and they kneel down in front of Me. I shall also exalt them and give
them honor and glory.”[^8]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “A long *ruku‘* and *sujud* have effects on
the longevity of life.”[^9]

The etiquette of performing ruku‘
---------------------------------

We read in the traditions that during *ruku‘* the blessed back of the
Messenger of Allah (S) would be so bent and so straight that if a drop
of water was poured on his back, it would remain in the center of his
back and not fall to either side.”[^10]

It is thus enjoined: “During *ruku‘* stretch your neck as if to say: ‘I
have accepted the faith even if I am beheaded in His way.”[^11]

Among the other etiquettes of performing *ruku‘* is that men have to
position their elbows outwardly like the wings of a bird and not to
attach them to their flanks. We have to place the palms of our hands on
our knees and spread our fingers. The feet must be aligned, neither one
of them should be placed forward nor backward. Between the feet there
must be the distance of about one hand span.

During *ruku‘* one must look between the feet and after the recital of
the *dhikr* for *ruku‘*, while still in the position of *ruku‘* one must
invoke blessings {*salawah*} upon Muhammad and his progeny (*‘a*). Of
course, repetition of the *dhikr* for *ruku‘* at least thrice has been
recommended and is preferred.[^12]

The ruku‘ of the saints of God
------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) would make his *ruku‘* so
long that his legs would perspire.”[^13]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) himself thus says in the first sermon of *Nahj
al-Balaghah*: “God has angels who are always in the state of *ruku‘* and
will never rise up {*qiyam*}.”

Of course, tiredness and hunger are not applicable to the angels. So,
those who are gnostics and lovers of God and who perform such long
*ruku‘* persuade the angels to praise God. This is the state of the
saints of God. Yet, what about us? The Prophet (S) was once sitting in
the mosque when a certain man entered and stood in prayer, but his
*ruku‘* and *sujud* were defective and done very quickly. The Prophet
(S) said: “He is like a crow that would peck and go. If he departs from
this world with such a state of prayer, he will not have died under my
religion.”[^14]

The history of sujud
--------------------

After creating Adam (Adam) (*‘a*), God ordered the angels to prostrate
before him. All of them prostrated except Iblis.[^15] On account of this
defiance, God expelled him from His Presence.

The Qur’an mentions this episode repeatedly and we know that repetitions
in the Qur’an are not without wisdom. It is as if it wants to say: “O
man before whom all the angels prostrated! Why do you not prostrate
before God, the Creator? O man! Iblis was expelled for refusing to
prostrate before you. Once you refuse to prostrate before God, what can
you expect?

“Iblis did not prostrate before you. He was saying: ‘I am superior to
man.’ Can you afford to say: ‘I am superior to God’? You—who were once
non-existent and once you came into the world, weakness and impotence
enveloped your entire being, and in the end you shall also humbly depart
from this world—how could you dare to be proud in front of the Creator
of the universe?

At any rate, the first commandment of God after the creation of man was
the command of prostration.

The importance of sujud
-----------------------

• *Sujud* is the best position of man in the presence of God.

• Sujud is the best way to attain nearness to God: ***“But prostrate and
draw near {to Allah}!”***[^16]

• A sign of the loyal Companions of the Prophet (S) was that the effect
of prostration could be seen on their foreheads: ***“Their mark is
{visible} on their faces, from the effect of prostration.”***[^17]

• *Sujud* makes man harmonious and concordant with all of creation. This
is because all creatures in heaven and on earth—from the stars to the
plants—prostrate and are humble before God: ***“To Allah prostrates
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth**,”*[^18] and
***“And the herb and the tree prostrate {to Allah}.”***[^19]

• *Sujud* means harmony with the angels of God. Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:
“There is no layer of the heavens without having therein a group of
angels in the state of *sujud*.”[^20]

• *Sujud* is the highest degree of obedience and servitude because man
places on the earth the loftiest part of his body, i.e. his forehead,
and expresses humility and impotence in the presence of the Omnipotent
Authority.

• *Sujud* is the most sublime station for the noblest men and women of
the world. God commanded His Prophet (S) to prostrate, and that was not
only during daytime but also during the night: ***“And worship Him for a
watch of the night and glorify Him the night long.”***[^21] And in
addressing Hadrat Maryam (Saint Mary)—that pure and devoted woman—He
says: ***“O Mary, be obedient to your Lord, and prostrate.”***[^22]

• *Sujud* comes after the *ruku‘*. It is a more perfect and higher stage
than *ruku‘*, and brings the person praying to the peak of humility. As
such, *ruku‘* and *sujud* are usually mentioned together in the Qur’an.
For example, ***“O*** ***you who have faith! Bow down and prostrate
yourselves,”***[^23] and ***“You see them bowing and prostrating {in
worship}.”***[^24]

• *Sujud* is the symbol of faith in the divine signs: ***“Only those
believe in Our signs who, when they are reminded of them, fall down in
prostration.”***[^25]

• Nightly prostration is one of the signs of the righteous servants of
God: ***“The servants of the All-beneficent are… those who spend the
night with their Lord, prostrating and standing {in worship}.”***[^26]

• *Sujud* is the adornment of prayer. So, perform it properly. Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “Whenever you perform prayer, perform the *ruku‘*
and *sujud* well as God will give seventy times the reward or even
more.”[^27]

• *Sujud* is the source of pride of God to the angels, and thus, it
entails His favor such that in every *sujud*, one of man’s sins is
forgiven and a great reward is recorded for him.[^28] Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*)
said: “If man only knew what mercy envelopes him at the time of *sujud*,
he would never raise up his head from that state.”[^29]

• *Sujud* extinguishes the spirit of egoism and pride, and delivers man
from vanity.[^30]

• The Prophet (S) used to say: “On the Day of Resurrection, I will
identify my *ummah* by the mark of prostration that they have on their
foreheads.”[^31] That portion of the earth on which prostration was made
will testify to the devotion of man on the Day of Resurrection[^32] and
even in the world, a radiant point connect it to the heavens.[^33]

• As in the case of *ruku‘*, long prostrations result in the permanence
of favors and longevity.[^34]

• *Sujud* is so important that God commands a great Prophet (S) such as
Ibrahim (Abraham) (*‘a*), to cleanse Masjid al-Haram for those who
perform the circumambulation {*tawaf*} of the *Ka‘bah*, *ruku‘* and
*sujud*.[^35]

The wisdom behind sujud
-----------------------

The Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (*‘a*) was asked concerning the
wisdom behind *sujud*. The Imam (*‘a*) said: “The first *sujud* means
that I was dust in the beginning, and as I raise my head from *sujud*,
it means that I came to the world from the dust. The second *sujud*
means that I will again return to the soil, and as I raise my head from
*sujud*, it means that on the Day of Resurrection I will rise up from
the grave and be summoned.”[^36]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “Since *sujud* is for God, it must therefore
not be done on anything that is eaten or worn which draws the attention
of materialists. *Sujud* must remind man of God, not the stomach,
clothing and material things.”[^37]

We read in the *hadith* that the reason behind the prostration for
forgetfulness {*sujud sahwi*} for unintentional excess and deficiencies
(in the number of any essential pillar of the prayer) or misplaced
utterance, standing and sitting is that Iblis distracted your attention
and created disorder in your prayer.

Therefore, after prayer you perform two prostrations so as to rub his
nose in the ground and to inform him that every time he creates
disorder, you will again perform prostration before God.[^38]

Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) said: “The external appearance {*zahir*} of the
*sujud* is the placing of the forehead on the ground with sincerity and
humility, but its esoteric essence {*batin*} is the detachment of the
heart from all perishable things, attachment of the heart to the eternal
abode, and relief from pride, fanaticism and all worldly
attachments.[^39]

The etiquette of performing sujud
---------------------------------

We shall point out some of the rules of etiquette of performing *sujud*
as recorded in the traditions:[^40]  
 After *ruku‘* in preparation for the performance of *sujud*, the hands
must be placed first on the ground before the knees.

During the *sujud* the hands must be placed parallel to the ears. For
men, the elbows must not be placed on the ground and must remain open on
both sides like wings. Not only the forehead but also the nose must be
placed on the ground. In between the two prostrations, the person
praying must place his left foot under the right foot in such a manner
that the weight of his body is on the left side because the left is the
symbol of falsehood while the right is the symbol of truth.

During *sujud* the person praying, apart from the obligatory recital,
has to send *salawah*, supplicate and weep out of fear of God. While
rising from *sujud*, he has to recite *takbir* and during the recital of
*takbir*, he has to raise both his hands.

The soil of Karbala’
--------------------

Although *sujud* on any ground, nay on any clean stone and wood, is
permissible and correct, the soil {*turbah*} of Imam al-Husayn has great
merits. It is said that Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) would not prostrate on
anything but the soil of Karbala’.

*Sujud* on the soil of Karbala’ tears away seven types of veils
{*hijab*s} (that separate man from the Source of Light). It uplifts the
prayer and makes it accepted. It also brings the person praying out of
the abyss of material things, and acquaints him with *jihad*, blood and
martyrdom.

*Sujud* on the soil of al-Husayn (*‘a*) means prayer accompanied by
divine guardianship {*wilayah*}.

*Sujud* on the soil of al-Husayn (*‘a*) means prayer accompanied by
martyrdom.

*Sujud* on the soil of al-Husayn (*‘a*) means commemorating the memory
of the martyrs of Karbala’ who offered their blood for the sake of
prayer and in the way of prayer.

*Sujud* on the soil of al-Husayn (*‘a*) means that every day is ‘Ashura’
and everyplace is Karbala’.

*Sujud* on the soil of al-Husayn (*‘a*) means that in the struggle
against falsehood, one should offer his head and soul, but not subject
himself to humiliation.

Yes, the shrine of al-Husayn (*‘a*) is one of the gardens of heaven and
one of its gate.

Supplication under the dome of al-Husayn (*‘a*) is accepted and prayer
in that place is beloved and accepted.

If the beads of a rosary {*tasbih*} made from the soil of Karbala’ are
rotated in the hands, there shall be the reward of reciting “*subhan
Allah*” {glory be to Allah} for the owner even if he is silent. If he
does *dhikr* {the remembrance of God} and uses the rosary, there shall
be 70 times the reward for each *dhikr*.

The importance of Karbala’ as mentioned in the traditions is not
concealed so as for it to encompass so far as four miles away from the
shrine of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*).[^41]

Prostration of thanks {sujud shukr}
-----------------------------------

Prostration is not exclusive to prayer. In fact, it is also discussed in
other areas and it is even obligatory sometimes such as after the
recital of one of the verses for which prostration is obligatory.  
 One of the ways of expressing gratitude is the prostration of thanks
{*sujud shukr*} which is highly recommended.

*Sujud shukr* means giving thanks for the incessant divine blessings
which have been showered upon us and our family.

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “Whenever you remember a blessing, place your
forehead on the ground as a token of thanks and if you see that the
people are looking at you, as a respect for that favor, bend a little
bit.”[^42]

The Holy Prophet (S) was seen dismounting a camel. He performed
prostration five times and said: “Jibra’il came down to me and gave me
five types of insight, and for every insight I made *sajdah*.”[^43]

Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) sometimes would faint while performing *sujud
shukr*[^44] and it has been narrated from the Imam of the Time (*‘a*)
that the most necessary of the recommended acts {*sunnah*} is *sujud
shukr*.[^45]

During the *sujud shukr* any *dhikr* or supplication is permissible, but
the recital of “*shukran lillah*” {thanks to Allah} and
“*al-hamdulillah*” {all praise belongs to Allah}, and remembrance of the
great blessing of the guardianship {*wilayah*} of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) are recommended.[^46] God said: “The reward of the person who
performs *sujud shukr* is that I also give thanks to him.”[^47]

Although there is a specific time and place for *sujud shukr*, the best
time nevertheless is after every prayer as a supplement to the prayer.

The blessings of sujud shukr
----------------------------

Many blessings and benefits of *sujud shukr* have been mentioned in the
traditions. We shall briefly state some of them below:

If there is deficiency in prayer which is not removed through the
recommended and optional prayers, *sujud shukr* will compensate for it.
It entails the pleasure of God and removes the distance between man and
God. Supplication during the *sujud shukr* is recommended and has the
reward of ten *salawat*s and the removal of ten major sins.

Concerning the station and status of *sujud shukr*, it is enough to say
that God would be proud of it and express this pride to the angels.[^48]

The prostrations of the saints of God
-------------------------------------

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says: “The reason behind Ibrahim’s (*‘a*)
attainment of the station of Friend of Allah {*khalilullahi*} was his
many prostrations on the ground.[^49]

On the night when Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) was supposed to sleep on the bed of
the Holy Prophet (S) in order to protect him from the swords of his
enemies, he asked the Messenger of Allah (S): “If I do so, will your
life be safe from danger?” When the Prophet (S) gave an affirmative
reply, Hadrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) smiled and performed *sujud shukr* as a
gesture of gratitude for this opportunity.[^50]

When the head of Abu Jahl, leader of the polytheists, was brought to the
Prophet (S), he performed *sujud shukr*.[^51]

Imam as-Sajjad (*‘a*) would perform *sujud shukr* as an expression of
thanks. Whenever a calamity was taken away from him or he initiated the
reconciliation between two Muslims, he would make *sujud shukr*. His
*sujud* was so long that he would perspire profusely.[^52]

Some points
-----------

1. The place of prostration is so important in that we thus read in the
traditions: “After prayer, touch the place of prostration with your hand
and apply it to your face and body in order to remain safe from
diseases, plagues and unpleasant things.”[^53]

2. Try not to forget *sujud shukr* after the *maghrib* {dusk} prayer as
the supplication after it is accepted.[^54]

Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) said: “Anyone who performs prostration between the
*adhan* and *iqamah* and thus says while in prostration, “I do prostrate
before You humbly, submissively and meekly,” God will place love for him
in the hearts of the believers and fear of him in the hearts of the
hypocrites {*munafiqin*}.[^55]

3. Prostration is solely for God and it is not permissible to prostrate
before anyone including the Prophet of Allah (S),[^56] let alone in
front of the graves of the Imams (*‘a*) and their descendants
{*imamzadeh*s}, in front of which some people do prostrate as an
expression of respect.

When a group of Muslims migrated to Abyssinia, the infidels of Mecca
dispatched a delegation to King Negus in order for him not to
accommodate the Muslims in his country and thus expel them. In
accordance with the customs at that time, the representative of the
Quraysh prostrated before the Negus (king of Abyssinia). On the
contrary, the Muslim representative, Ja‘far, the brother of Hadrat ‘Ali
(*‘a*), did not prostrate, saying: “We do not prostrate to anybody
except God.”[^57]

The prostration of Hadrat Ya‘qub (Jacob) (*‘a*) and his sons to Hadrat
Yusuf (Joseph) (*‘a*) was also not for Yusuf but for God as a token of
gratitude for the blessing of reunion with Yusuf: ***“And they fell down
prostrate before him**.”*[^58]

[^1]: Surah al-Mursalat 77:48. See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 100.

[^2]: Surah al-Waqi‘ah 56:74.

[^3]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 2, p. 922.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 108.

[^5]: Surah Sad 38:24.

[^6]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 928.

[^7]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 928.

[^8]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 203.

[^9]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 928.

[^10]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 942.

[^11]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 942.

[^12]: All these etiquettes are recorded in Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4,
pp. 920-943.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 110.

[^14]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 922.

[^15]: Of course, sujud is solely for God and man was merely assumed the
qiblah of the angels.

[^16]: Surah al-‘Alaq 96:19.

[^17]: Surah al-Fath 48:29.

[^18]: Surah an-Nahl 16:49.

[^19]: Surah ar-Rahman 55:6.

[^20]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 91.

[^21]: Surah al-Insan 76:26.

[^22]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:43.

[^23]: Surah al-Hajj 22:77.

[^24]: Surah al-Fath 48:29.

[^25]: Surah as-Sajdah 32:15.

[^26]: Surah al-Furqan 25:63-64.

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 139.

[^28]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 466.

[^29]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 482.

[^30]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 453.

[^31]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 4, p. 189.

[^32]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 189.

[^33]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 4, p. 485.

[^34]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 928.

[^35]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:125: “We charged Abraham and Ishmael {with its
upkeep, saying}, ‘Purify My House for those who go around it, for those
who make it a retreat and for those who bow and prostrate.”

[^36]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 139.

[^37]: Al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 282.

[^38]: Al-Wafi, vol. 8, p. 992.

[^39]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 4, p. 484.

[^40]: These traditions have been recorded in Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol.
4, pp. 950-980.

[^41]: The subjects of this discussion have been recorded in the
traditions of the book, Kamil az-Ziyarat, Section 89 onward.

[^42]: Al-Wafi, vol. 8, p. 825.

[^43]: Muhajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 1, p. 346.

[^44]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 459.

[^45]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 453.

[^46]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 469.

[^47]: Al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 334.

[^48]: Al-Faqih, vol. 1, p. 331.

[^49]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 163.

[^50]: Al-Wafi, vol. 8, p. 882.

[^51]: Jami‘ al-Ahadith, vol. 5, p. 475.

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 137.

[^53]: Safinah al-Bahar.

[^54]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 1058.

[^55]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 633.

[^56]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 4, p. 986.

[^57]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p. 461.

[^58]: Surah Yusuf 12:100.


