Introduction
============

In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Beneficent Intend they to
put out the light of Allah with their mouths. But Allah will perfect His
light, though averse may be the disbelievers. Quran, 61:8.

There has always existed a tough tug of war between the devilish forces
of darkness and ignorance on the one hand, tending to disrupt harmony on
the earth, and the forces of peace and order flowing from the sources of
light and knowledge on the other. We do not have to go very far to seek
out the reason. Man, according to his constitution, is very loath to
submit to the discipline of controlled behaviour unless rightly guided
by enlightened personalities through precepts and personal examples or
forced by some external agonies. The libidinal urges within the human
psyche, necessary for human survival when allowed to play within the
limits, labor mostly towards extreme limits causing friction within the
same human breast by the interplay of mutually contradictory emotions on
the one hand and disorderly social conduct on the other due to the
competitive rivalries of different individuals and groups yearning to
secure the same material goods. The Western philosopher Spinoza has very
tersely summed up the situation of humans in his memorable words: Human
beings are like hedgehogs gathered together for warmth. They would
shiver to death if they tried the aloofness of Robinson Crusoe, but they
would puncture each other's skins if they came too

close together. Each individual's wants of shelter, food, etc., must be
satisfied as an essential part of fulfilling his purpose in life, which
may be defined for want of a better terminology as co-partnership in
humanity's orderly progress to live blissfully in the world as well as
in the Hereafter. Man alone is the stumbling block in the way of this
achievement because of his denial to be guided by the enlightened
personages the prophets and those in their wake and because of his mad
rush towards satisfying his desires, which however, as has been said,
cannot be satisfied regardless of the efforts made for satisfaction. If
society is to be saved from their barbaric conflicts and consequent
degeneration to the beastly life of the jungle, checks and limits have
to be devised and imposed on the hellish play of the desires. The
question arises as to who shall impose the checks?

Different answers have been given to this question, but the one answer
that has repeatedly worked to man's everlasting benefit is the one that
has been expounded from all angles by the truly enlightened Imam Ja'far
as-Sadiq (a.s).

The discreet reader will find in the pages that follow a veritable mine
of information covering almost all aspects of human knowledge. He shall
find that most of the information for which the West gets credit was
transmitted thereto from the fountainhead of our great thinkers, among
whom the most eminent is Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) whose teachings are
recorded in many collections of apostolic narrations, particularly in
Bihar al-Anwar a vast Encyclopedia of learning in no less than
twenty-seven volumes.**[1]** Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) lectured in Medina to
thousands of scholars who flocked to this center of learning from all
parts of the known world. They carried away to the far-flung provinces
of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** One hundred and ten volumes in the new editions.

Muslim Empire the light of original thought and research. It was the
torch lit ablaze by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) in Medina that set his devout
scholars on the path of inquiry and research. It was by this nucleus
that the four corners of the known world received their awakening to the
resplendent vistas of the various branches of knowledge. It should be
remembered that all this was being achieved not because of any
encouragement from the state but rather against the teeth of opposition
characteristic of despotic regimes.

A very important aspect of this dissemination of learning, which runs as
a soul-stirring strain throughout the system of education that was
inaugurated by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s), is the insistence and emphasis on
the Ideology of Islam and its fundamental tenet Tawheed (oneness of
God). Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) himself, infused as he was with the
crystalline purity of the Ideology, infused that same galvanizing spirit
into his following. They, in turn, became the torchbearers of the light
of learning in distant lands, notably the Southern gateway of Europe
Andalusia.

They were the people who wrote one of the brightest chapters in the
intellectual history of Medieval Europe. They were the main bearers of
the torch of the culture, science and philosophy which made possible the
Renaissance of learning in Western Europe. Cordova, Seville, Granada,
and Toledo, to name only a few of the centers of Muslim Spain, opened
their gates to the teeming alumni who were seeking admission to the
universities (See Philip K. Hittis History of the Arabs PP. 557-605 for
Muslim contribution in the cause of intellectual upsurge). It is on this
account that Stanley Lane Poole in his History of the Moors in Spain
mourns the fall of the Muslim Empire of Spain in these words: The fall
of Granada happened within forty years of the conquest of
Constantinople; but the gain to Islam in the East made no amends for the
loss to Europe in the West. The Turks were incapable of founding a

second Cordova. Dozi, by no means a friend of Islam, is nevertheless
compelled to pay a glowing tribute to the administrative, cultural, and,
in particular, intellectual caliber of the Muslims.

Such was the influence exerted by these votaries of the Medinite School
of learning that despite the secularization of the state by the rulers,
their zeal was transmitted to the coming generations through the various
centers that sprang up. Even Christian monarchs solicited their
cooperation in their day-to-day administration. Thus, the Sicilian King
Rogers administrations, both civil and military, were mainly staffed by
Muslim intellectuals, who gave the court an oriental complexion. Philip
K. Hitti attributes the prosperity enjoyed by his realm to the
intellectual caliber of the Muslim staff. They not only administered his
Kingdom efficiently but also manipulated his susceptibilities as to
imbue him with a Muslim view of Christianity. The chief gem of his court
was Al-Idrisi geographer and cartographer at Palermo.

It will thus be obvious to even a superficial observer that the torch
lit ablaze by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) at Medina was the powerful
lighthouse that illuminated the intellectual firmament of not only his
own age but also the ages that followed. His own powers of observation
are marvelous to the extreme as will be seen from a perusal of his works
on the varied branches of learning, which, of course, always converge to
the central theme of Tawheed.

To cite only a few instances of his intuitive grasp of the nature of
things, we may observe his ultra-modern, scientific description of the
development of the human embryo through its various stages till its
flowering into maturity, with special emphasis at each descriptive pause
to focus the mind on the specific merit of ingenuity evinced therein.
The embryo in the world is adjusted, though it is confined within three
distinct

kinds of coverings the outer wall, the womb and the placenta. This is
the time when the embryo can neither manage his nutrition nor ward off
any harm from itself. The menstrual flow is diverted to serve him
nutrients, just as water carries nutrients to the plants, so this
process goes on till such time as his constitution is perfected, his
skin over his body becomes tough enough to withstand the atmosphere, and
his eyes gain the capacity to withstand light. When all this is
accomplished, its mother feels labor pangs, which shake her severely,
culminating in the birth of the infant. With the birth of the infant,
the menstrual flow ... is diverted to its mother's breasts. Its taste is
altered, so is its color ... it becomes a nutriment of the first order
... till such time as his body remains delicate, his organs and bowels
soft and weak. As he begins to move about and requires tougher nutriment
to build up a stronger constitution, his molars appear to masticate food
to facilitate digestion. He carries on with such nutriment till puberty
... Who then created man from nothingness and Who becomes the architect
of his worth? Who is ever-vigilant to supply his needs from time to
time? ... If abiogenesis (spontaneous creation without specific design)
can be admitted under such conditions of regularity, then purposeful
generation and definitely-balanced order in creation will have to be
admitted to proceed from error and disorder.

These remarks of Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) are repeated by modern scientists
in almost the same tenor. Let us quote the tenor of argument of some
eminent present-day scientists who find their scientific theories
inadequate explanations of natural phenomena without postulating the
existence of the Supreme Designer. The discreet reader will bear in mind
that the Imam (a.s) was born in the first century of hijrah, and as such
it will be seen that he has anticipated these scientists by more than
thirteen hundred years. The editor of Pears Cyclopedia has the pregnant
remarks, This hypothesis (biogenesis) was upset by

the philosopher Spallanzani (1729-99, who follows Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) by
some eleven centuries). Pasteur, the great French Chemist (1822-95, yet
another century later), founder of the Sciences of Bacteriology and
immunology, gave a final death blow to this hypothesis of spontaneous
generation.

J. C. Monsma in his remarkable anthology entitled The Evidence of God in
An Expanding Universe has collected some forty essays from the pens of
the most eminent scientists of the day in this regard, all of whom echo
the tenor of arguments marshaled by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s). It is not
possible to quote all relevant passages from this magnificent array,
which will recompense the study of it munificently. (The book has been
rendered into Urdu as an authorized translation, by Prof. Abdul Hamid
Siddiqi, M.A. and published by the Shish Mahal Kitab Ghar, 42 The Mall,
Lahore). A few quotations from the book, however, are quite in order.

Dr. Irving William Knobloch says, As knowledge advances, science ceases
to frown on religion ... The theory which states dogmatically that all
higher forms of life have evolved to their present state by chance
mutations, recombination, polyploidy or hybridization, requires an act
of faith for adherence to it, an act of unreasoned acceptance ... The
wonders of the universe have converted many neutral scientists to the
belief that some One unknown and perhaps unknowable has been responsible
for the vastness and order, knowledge whereof is distilled in every
statement that has escaped the lips of the Imam (a.s) while explaining
the mysteries of this grand panorama of life on the earth. This strain
runs as an unbroken galvanic current throughout the entire work and it
is the one purpose of the descriptive observations to instill the spirit
of inquiry and knowledge from this particular angle, to wit, the belief
in the transcendent origin of the mysterious universe as the handiwork
of the Supreme Sovereign Designer. Unless mankind is weaned from its
puerile suicidal disbelief to the

maturity of a full realization of reality as propounded by the inspired
geniuses of all ages, life on the earth will continue to be hellishly
torturous. This theme was nicely re-echoed by the dean of the University
of Hiedelberg in Germany at the reopening of the university after the
war in 1945, when he stated, We have seen in a shocking way what science
is without a religious man in command. Medicine without God can destroy
life and find cruel practice for concentration camps. Law without God
teaches that right is what is of use and pronounces fearful judgments.
Philosophy without God teaches erroneous ideas of man and invents most
brutal weapons to destroy life instead of saving it.

I believe in God because to me His Divine existence is the only logical
explanation for things as they are. Thus does Dr. Knobloch conclude his
essay.

Dr. Walter Lundverg, Ph.D., who also has contributed an essay to the
said collection compiled by J. C. Monsma, gives expression to his views
thus: A denial of the existence of God is sometimes an arbitrarily
established policy of influential social groups or organizations, or of
the state. Fear of social consequences or even physical consequences,
where despotism is the state creed, discourages any active espousal by
the individual of the revelation of God found in nature ... the
scientific method is founded on orderliness and predictability in
natural phenomena. It is precisely the orderliness and predictability
that constitute revelation of God in nature. Order and predictability in
the framework of non-existence of God, that is, absence of rationality,
is a meaningless contradiction ... Man is but at the beginning of
knowledge ... the basic units of matter and energy are incomprehensibly
minute. His own life span is but an infinitesimal fraction of a second
in the timelessness of the on-going universe. He conceives dimly of the
possibility of new forms and dimensions of energy, space and time and of
other such concepts as yet

wholly unknown ... Because man's understanding of God as revealed in
natural phenomena is as yet very limited, it is in the nature of man
that his belief in God should also have a spiritual basis, a basis in
faith. Belief in God on the basis of faith is important to personal
happiness in the lives of many men. But for the scientist who believes
in God, there is an added satisfaction that comes with each new
scientific discovery, for each discovery gives added meaning and
significance to his concept of God.

Yet another eminent scientist Donald Henry Porter in his essay, The
Answers to the Unanswered Questions, states his proposition in the
following words: Science is composed in the main of unproved laws or
principles. This lack of proof does not prohibit one from using these
laws as they might apply to various situations. It is not reasonable to
expect proofs in the realms of the supernatural when proofs in the
natural are lacking ... Whatever process of nature is considered or
whatever question of origins is studied, as a scientist I derive
satisfaction only by placing God in the leading role. God is the central
figure in every picture. He alone is the answer to the unanswered
questions. The whole tenor of Imam as-Sadiq's instructive exposition of
nature is expressed in the words, the universe stands before us with the
leaves of its compendious volumes open for any man with a discerning
mind to study and glorify the Supreme Architect. He identifies organ
after organ of the human body, points out its physiological build and
functions, and logically leads his listeners to the stupendous ingenuity
that has gone into its constitution. O Mufadhdhal! Do you not see that
everything big or small is patterned on a flawless plan? ... Both hands
are meant for handling business, feet are designed for locomotion, both
eyes are for seeing, the mouth is for taking in food, the stomach is for
digesting it, the liver is for extracting its nutrition for distribution
to the various parts of the body in the

form of blood, bile, lymph, etc. ... On arrival in the stomach, the food
is processed into chyme. A fine network of capillaries forms the liver,
which is fed by the nutriment processed by the stomach. ... The liver
then takes up the extracts of the nutriment and by an incomprehensible
ingenuity changes it into blood, which is supplied to the body by way of
the heart and pumped through blood vessels in the manner of irrigation
channels. ... All waste products and toxic matters are then carried off
to the organs designed to eliminate them, for example, the bladder, the
intestines and the sweat glands. ... Glory then to Him who has organized
all organs into coordinating units. The descriptions of the constitution
and functions of the human body precede space, but always at a
difference with the way of the secular physiologist.

Imam as-Sadiqs observations comprehend the whole of creation as
witnesses to the Majesty of the Almighty Allah. The animal kingdom
comprising of various species of carnivorous and herbivorous animals,
the bird-life, beasts of the jungle and the domestic pets and draught
cattle, water life, and the insignificant insects all receive due
attention, but only as specimens of consulate ingenuity and design,
witnesses to the workmanship of the Almighty Designer.

The natural phenomena of the change of seasons, the alternation of day
and night, the winds and rains, the waxing and waning of the moon, the
movements of the stars, and so on, are all dealt with but with emphasis
on the same proposition, as expressed in the following statement:

If for a whole or a part of a year the situation changes to the
contrary, you can well imagine the plight of the human race. In fact
what chance would they have to survive at all? Does man not observe such
magnificent planning, wherein his own schemes would go away? They
function automatically without interruption, nor do they even lag behind
the time regulated

for the management of the world's organization and maintenance.

The vegetable kingdom has its due share of notice. The grain, the fruit,
the leaves, etc., are all marshaled as glorious witnesses to the eternal
skill of the Almighty Allah. A few sentences expressive of the general
tenor of Imam as-Sadiq's way of elucidating natural facts will not be
out of place. Imam (a.s) says:

You will see intertwined in the texture of the leaf something comparable
to the root system extending all along its length and breadth. Some of
them are fine capillaries joined with thicker ones, all very stout and
fine. If they were to be prepared by hand, man would not have been able
to do the job of a single plant in a year's time. ... In a few days of
the spring season, such abundance of foliage comes into being that the
mountains and lowland regions of the earth become filled with it,
without a word being spoken or a movement being made, just as the result
of a fiat permeating all things a single inviolable dispensation. ...
The spring season clothes the trees with leaves and you get all kinds of
fruit, just as you arrange different kinds of delicacies before you
which are cooked in turn. ... Who has planned all this? Surely He Who is
the Omniscient Ordainer. And what purpose is served thereby? Surely that
man may enjoy the fruits and flowers. How strange it is that instead of
gratitude for such precious boons, man is inclined to deny the Donor
altogether!

And what will the students of Botany think of the observations made by
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) in regard to the female and male organs of
reproduction among plants?

There are female trees among them for whose fertilization male plants
are generated, which fertilize without planned horticulture. The males,
like those in animals, fertilize the females, but are themselves
sterile.

We have not made a mention here of the beauty of the original which
borders on poetry, though in translation and retranslation much of its
beauty of style gets spoiled. Just consider passages such as the
following:

The joy that is afforded by the scenic beauty and freshness of
vegetation is incomparably superior to the pleasures and merriment of
the whole world. (The green verdure of plants fascinates the eyes,
delights the heart, and refreshes the mind). A hundred or so grains
spring from a single seed. A single grain from a single seed would have
been a (logical) plan. Why then such multiplication? Surely to amplify
the production, so that the same may serve as food to last till the
following crop besides making provision as seed for the farmers.

This brief review of the subjects dealt with in the pages that follow,
will convince the discerning reader of the incomparable worth of the
matter, particularly the angle of vision pervading the whole text. The
educationists of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan would do well to
imbibe this spirit that should permeate all learning at all stages of
instruction. Here is a work that deals with almost all sciences in a
most rational way. The information imparted, then, will have an Islamic
bias and redound to the production of scholarship of the true Muslim
caliber. The ever-increasing wave of criminality and indiscipline in the
land can be solved only if the specific outlook aimed at by Imam
as-Sadiq (a.s) in his discourses is nurtured sedulously. Our
socioeconomic problems cry out loudly for a profound chance in our
outlook. Not only we in Pakistan, but the far-sighted among other
nations are also troubled with similar misgivings. They too are ardently
advocating fundamental changes in individual and national outlooks, from
the narrow parochial views to the broad basis of human and universal
principles.

Let us, in passing, notice the trends in Western patterns of

thought in this regard. Dr. Pitram A. Sorokim, chairman of the
department of sociology at Harvard University, in his very commendable
book The Crisis of Our Age the Social and Cultural Outlook quite
profoundly analyzes man's chief problems in life. He states the crisis
thus tersely:

Ever expanding misery spreads its gloomy shadow over larger and larger
areas. The fortune, happiness and comfort of untold millions have
disappeared. Peace, security and safety have vanished. Prosperity and
well-being have become in many countries a memory; freedom a mere myth.
Western culture is covered by a blackout. A great tornado sweeps over
the whole of mankind. ... It is a crisis involving almost the whole way
of life, thought and conduct of Western society. More precisely, it
consists in the disintegration of a fundamental form of Western culture
and society dominant for the last four centuries.

He goes on to dilate upon the vile offshoots of the Western outlook as
follows:

Scientific theories based upon the truth of senses tend to become
progressively materialistic, mechanistic and quantitative even in their
interpretation of man, culture and mental phenomena. The social and
psychological sciences begin to imitate the natural sciences attempting
to treat man in the same way as physics and chemistry treat inorganic
phenomena. In the field of social sciences all mental and cultural
phenomena come to be treated behavioristically, physiologically,
reflexologically, endocrinologically and psychoanalytically.

It was this materialistic banefulness that was trying to force its way
into the Muslim society, which the great Imam (a.s) fought to
discountenance. It was due to these efforts that a great deal of the
Islamic principles was salvaged from the political turmoils that
agitated the body-politic. The weapons they

used, to wit, propagations of the eternal values of the Quran by their
discourses and practical conduct, served to maintain the picture of the
fundamental tenets of truth and justice. Dr. Sorokim is stressing a
similar need for a reorientation of outlook when he says:

There must be a change of the whole mentality and attitudes in the
direction of the norms prescribed in the sermon on the Mount fundamental
transformation of our system of values and the profoundest modification
of our conduct towards other men, cultural values and the world at
large.... If neither religion nor ethical nor juridical values control
our conduct, what then remains but moral chaos and anarchy? (The Crisis
of Our Age, 1951 Ed. Pp. 319, 158, 112).

This English translation of the book is presented to the discerning
public to serve as a beacon of light with the hope that the grace of
understanding may be vouchsafed to us and that we may choose, before it
is too late, the right road, the road that leads not to death but to the
further realization of man's unique creative mission on this planet, to
quote the parting words of the book mentioned above.

The translator feels himself highly honored for the opportunity afforded
to him to be associated with this truly great work following from the
truly great encyclopedic personality Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s).

Muhammad Ibrahim  
 Narowal  
 12-10-66
