The First Meeting
=================

Al-Mufadhdhal said, I left him so happy and delighted. That night felt
so long while I waited for that which he had promised me. In the
morning, I went to him. After being permitted, I went in and stood
before him. He asked me to have a seat, and I did. Then he went up to a
room to where he would often retire in solitude. I got up too. He asked
me to follow him. He entered the room, and I entered after him. He sat
down, and I sat before him. He said, O Mufadhdhal! I feel as if you have
had a lengthy night because of your anxiety for what I had promised you.
I affirmed his remark respectfully. He said, O Mufadhdhal! Allah has
existed before there was any thing and He will exist with no end. Praise
be to Him for what He has inspired to us and thanks be to Him for what
He has granted to us. He has singled us out with the best of knowledge
and the highest of honors and has preferred us to all of His creatures
by giving us from His knowledge and has made us guardians over them by
His authority. I said, O my master, would you permit me to write what
you say? He said, O Mufadhdhal, yes.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said, O Mufadhdhal! The waverers failed to grasp the
causes and meanings of the creation and their minds were unable to see
the right and wisdom in what Allah has created of different kinds of His
creatures in the sea and on the land, in the plains and on the
mountains. Because of the deficiency of their knowledge, they
disbelieved and because of the weakness of their sights, they denied and
resisted until  

they denied the creation of things and claimed that things had come to
existence by accident and chance with no will, ordinance or wisdom from
a maker or manager.  Allah is far above what they attribute to Him. May
they perish! How misguided they are! In their misguided blindness and
bewilderment they are like blind persons groping right and left in a
well‑furnished, well‑built house with fine carpets, luscious articles of
food, drink, various kinds of clothing and other necessities of
essential use all adequately supplied in proper quantity and placed with
perfect decorum and ingenious design. In their blindness they fail to
see the building and its furnishings, they move about aimlessly from one
room to another, advancing and retreating. If by chance anyone of them
finds anything in its place to supply a need, therefore and not knowing
the purpose for which it is set there and unaware of the underlying
ingenuity, he might begin to reprimand the architect of the building in
his offensive rage, whereas, as a matter of fact, the fault is due to
his own inability to see. This analogy holds good in the case of the
sect who deny the creative factor and the argument in favour of the
divine management. Failing to appreciate the merit of their provision,
the perfection of creation and the beauty of design, they start
wandering in the wide world, bewildered by their inability to grasp with
their brains the underlying causes and principles. It so happens
sometimes that some one among them is aware of a thing but due to his
ignorance of its reality, purpose and need begins at once to find fault
with it, saying, it is untenably wrong. The followers of Mani, (a man
who founded a Zoroastrian sect in the time of King Shapur, the son of
Urdsher who believed in the prophethood of Jesus but denied that of
Moses and who believed in the duality of divinity as the creators of all
good and evil in the universe one light as the creator of all good
things, the other darkness as that of beasts and harmful creatures) who,
as the heretical bigots of devilry

, have begun openly to propound their heresies. Besides these, some
misguided persons have also gone astray from the divine favours, by
merely declaring as untenable or impossible certain facts.

It behoves the person, whom Allah has endowed with the gnosis of Reality
and whom He has guided to His Faith and who has been granted insight, to
ponder over the beauty of the design underlying the creation and who is
gifted with the expression of the merits of such things on the basis of
cogent reasoning and fine distinction, it behoves such a person to
glorify the Almighty Allah consummately as his Lord, for such celestial
favour, and to pray to Him for the increase in gnosis and a
steadfastness therein with lofty power of expression thereof. Allah
says, ***If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you more, and if
you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe.* [1]**

The Universe And Its Parts
--------------------------

O Mufadhdhal! The structure of the universe is the foremost evidence of
the existence of the Almighty Allah how the parts thereof have been set
together and ordered as they are. If you think about the world deeply,
you will find it like a house furnished with all what its inhabitants
need. The sky is like a canopy. The earth is spread like a carpet, while
the stars set in stratum upon stratum appear as lamps alight in their
places. The gems are treasured as if the house has lots of collections.
Besides, every thing is readily available to meet all the needs. Man is
like the owner of that house and authorized with everything therein. And
there exist the different plant species available to meet mans needs;
some as fodder for the animals, others as drugs for human beings, some
merely for ornament,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quran, 14:7.

some to supply fragrance to man for his recreation, some as drugs for
animals, some as nutriment for man, some for birds only, and others for
the quadrupeds alone and so on. Different species of animals have been
allotted functions for particular exigencies and interests.

There is a manifest proof in this beautiful composition, cohesion,
combination and admixture, that this world is the work of a Creator, Who
has produced it on a balanced plan, impregnated it with ingenuities and
established order therein; all bearing proper connection and furnishing
proof of the unique Creator, Who has combined them in such elegance as
to compound them into a unity ... glory be to Him and Exalted is He.
There is no god but Him. He is far above what the infidels attribute to
Him.

The creation of man
-------------------

O Mufadhdhal! We now start talking about the creation of man so that you
may learn a lesson from it. The first step in the creation of man refers
to the state when the embryo in the womb is adjusted, though it is
confined within three distinct kinds of coverings and three kinds of
darkness firstly that of the outer wall, secondly of the womb and
thirdly of the placenta. This is a time when the embryo can neither
manage its nutrition nor ward off any harm from itself. The menstrual
flow is diverted to serve it nutrients, just as water carries nutrients
to the plants, so this process goes on till such time as its
constitution is perfected, its skin over the body becomes tough enough
to withstand the atmosphere so that it does not receive any harm from
the air, and its eyes gain the capacity to withstand light. When all
this is accomplished, its mother feels labour pangs, which severely
shake her to uneasiness culminating in the birth of the infant. With the
birth of the infant the menstrual flow, which served for nutrition in
the womb, is diverted to the mother's breasts. Its taste is altered,

so is its colour altered and it becomes a nutriment of quite a different
kind, which exactly suits the temperament of the infant who is in need
of it, compared with the flow of blood. Simultaneously with his birth,
he starts moving and licking his lips with his tongue to indicate his
desire for milk. He finds his mothers pair of breasts as luscious
reservoirs hanging to provide nutrition for him. He gets his nutrition
from milk in this way till such time as his body remains delicate, his
organs and bowels soft and weak.

Need of Teeth and Growth of Beard
---------------------------------

As he begins to move about and needs harder food to build up a stronger
body, his molars appear to masticate food materials to facilitate
digestion. He carries on with such nutriment till Puberty. The male
grows hair on the face as a sign of manliness, to gain honour as man,
thus over‑stepping the stage of adolescence and likeness to females. A
female keeps her face clean lovely and hairless, to preserve her
freshness and comeliness, as an attraction for the males in the service
of the survival of the race.

O Mufadhdhal! Can you imagine that the manner in which man, through
these different stages, is led and perfected, can take place without a
Designer and a Creator? Do you think that if the menstrual flow had not
been diverted to him while an embryo in the womb, would he not have been
dried up just like the plants deprived of water, and had he not been
motivated by labour pangs after he had been matured for birth, would he
not have been buried in the womb just as living infants used to be
buried in the earth, and had he not been supplied with the suitable kind
of milk, would he not have starved to death, or if he had not been fed
with nutriment suited to his temperament and capable of perfecting his
body, and if his teeth had not appeared at the proper time, would it not
have been difficult for him to feed, masticate and digest his food, and
if he had not

passed through the milk‑infancy, would not his body have suffered in
strength and been incapacitated for any kind of work and would be a
permanent charge on his mother to keep her busy with only his nurture
and upbringing without leaving her time to look after other than
himself?

Had not his face grown hair at the proper time, would he not have stayed
in the form of adolescents and the figure of females, without any
dignity or prestige like the eunuchs who have a repulsive look in the
absence of the beard?

Absurdity of Atheism
--------------------

If abiogenesis (spontaneous creation without specific design) can be
admitted under such conditions of regularity, then purposeful generation
and definitely balanced creation can be the result of error and
perplexity, since these two are opposed to abiogenesis. Such a statement
is highly absurd that order and rectitude should come about without a
creator and disorder and impropriety of design and fate should
presuppose a Creator. He is an ignoramus who says this because anything
produced without design will never be exact and proportioned, while
disorder and contrariness cannot coexist with orderly design. Allah is
far above what the heretics say.

Reasonable infant
-----------------

And in case an infant had been born with mature intellect, it would have
been bewildered in this world that would seem so strange to him, in an
unrecognisable environment abounding with animals and birds of varied
forms all around which would be the focus of his vision every moment and
day after day.

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the case of a man migrating to another country
from the prison of one country. If he has a perfect intellect, you will
see him perplexed and astounded. He can neither soon learn there the
language, nor acquire the etiquette and decorum of the place. On the
other hand, one

who is taken as prisoner to a strange land in his early days when his
intellect is immature, he shall soon learn the language, etiquette and
manners of the place. Similarly, if a child had been born with mature
intellect, he would have been astounded on opening his eyes and seeing
such varied assortment, different kinds of forms, and distinctive
imagery of unity and disunity. For a long time he would not be able to
understand as to whence he had come and where he has arrived and whether
all that he was seeing was in a state of dream or waking.

Then if he had been born with mature intellect, he would have felt
disgusted and degraded on finding himself being carried about in the
lap, being fed with milk, being wrapped in bandages (after the manner of
the Arabs and being laid in the cradle; all these proceedings being
necessary for infants because of their soft and delicate bodies).

There    would not have been, if they had been born with a mature
intellect, that sweetness, nor that consideration for the infants in the
minds of the adults which springs generally from fondling the untutored
children because of their artlessness creating a particular attraction
for them. As such, he is born in this world without an understanding for
anything, quite unaware of the world and what lies therein.

He views all these things with his underdeveloped brain and inadequate
understanding, and so does not feel perplexed.

His intellect and understanding by degrees, slowly, from time to time,
little by little develop, so as to introduce him gradually to the things
around and to accustom his brain accordingly so as to habituate him
thereto without further need for curiosity and wonderment, thus enabling
him to seek his sustenance serenely without understanding and planning,
to bend his efforts thereto and to learn the lessons of obedience, error
and disobedience. And behold!

There are other aspects of the matter. If the infant had been born
mature in intellect with an understanding of his functions, there would
have been little occasion for the sweetness felt in the nurture of the
offspring, and the exigency, under which the parents find a whole time
preoccupation with the affairs of their young ones, would not have
arisen. Love and affection, felt for children, would not subsist between
the parents and their offspring. Because of their mature intellect, the
children would not have needed parental care. A separation would have
taken place just after birth of the infant from its parents. He would
not know his father and mother, and therefore, he would not refrain from
getting married to his mother or sister or any mahram **[1]** woman whom
he did not know. Besides, it would be too ugly and shameful that if he
was born with full mind and understanding, he would see from his mother,
when being born, that which he should not see.

O Mufadhdhal! Dont you see that every thing big or small has been
created on a flawless plan without fault or error?

Advantage of crying
-------------------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the advantage of crying to children. There is a
fluid in the child's brain which if not drained off may cause trouble or
illness, even the loss of an eye. The discharge of the fluid from its
brain leaves it healthy and the eyes brighter. The child is benefited by
weeping, while its parents, in their ignorance, try to prevent his
weeping by catering to his wishes, not knowing the benefits thereof.
There are similar other advantages, which these atheists fail to grasp.
If they could have grasped them, they would not have denied the
existence of such benefits therein. The gnostics understand

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mahram woman is a woman with whom it is not permissible to get
married, such as ones mother, sister, daughter, auntetc.

what is unintelligible to such deniers. It so happens oftentimes that
the creatures know not the wisdom thereof, though it is within the
knowledge of the Creator.

The saliva dripping from the mouths of children may cause serious
derangements if not allowed to flow. This can be seen in the case of
those with an excess of saliva, who sink down to the level of idiots,
imbeciles, and fools and succumb to other diseases like paralysis
general and facial. Almighty Allah has ordained that fluid should be
discharged by way of the mouth in early age to keep him healthy in later
age. Allah has granted this boon, of the profundity whereof they are
ignorant. They are allowed this respite to acquire knowledge of the
wisdom underlying therein, so as to become gnostic. Had these people
appreciated all these boons, they would not have stayed in sin so long.
So all praise and Glory is due to Him. How grand is His Beneficence. His
blessings are for all whether deserving or not. He is far exalted above
what these misguided persons say.

Genitals
--------

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the male and female organs of copulation.
The male organ is capable of stimulation and expansion so as to spawn
the uterus with sperm, that being its function, being itself incapable
of developing the foetus and as such required to transfer the sperm to
the uterus of the female a deep receptacle fit to efficiently preserve
the two seminal fluids, to develop the foetus by expanding
proportionately with the increase in its size, to prevent any pressure
on it, to preserve it till it is strengthened and toughened. Is it not
designed by a Deep Seeing Designer? Have all these works of ingenuity or
these elegant proportions come about by themselves? Allah the Almighty
is far exalted above the heresy of the polytheists.

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the various organs of the body, the
functions each one is required to perform and the

perfection of design that underlies each. Both hands are meant to handle
business, both feet are meant for locomotion, the eyes are to see with,
the mouth is to take in food, the stomach is to digest it, the liver is
for clearing, the orifices of the body are meant to eliminate waste
products, and the private parts for reproduction and you shall find that
every organ is exactly fitted to perform its specific functions and is
constituted with perfect design.

Mufadhdhal said, Sir! Some people believe that all this is the outcome
of the function of nature; each organ coming into existence as and when
required by nature.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said, Just ask them whether the nature which
functions in such a well‑planned and well‑ordered fashion does it have
knowledge and power to do such things?

If they admit that it possesses knowledge and power, then what obstructs
them from believing in the Creator? What we say is that all things are
created by One Who is the Master of Knowledge and Power. They say that
there is no Creator and yet admit that nature has done this with
ingenuity and plan. As such nature is the cause of their creation, while
they deny the Creator. If they say that nature produces such things
without knowledge and power not knowing what it is doing nor having the
power to do it in connection with the type of design and ingenuity that
subsists in all phenomena, it is something inconceivable that something
may be performed without corresponding power to do it and without a
knowledge thereof. As such it is obvious that the action emanates from
an Omniscient Creator, Who has laid down as only a method among His
creation through His omniscience, which these people call nature. In
other words Allah the Almighty has ordained a method to produce
everything according to its definite cause and principle. As for
instance, a seed needs water to sprout, no rain no corn; a child is born
by the union of

man and woman; without this procedure of union and insemination no child
can be born; water evaporates to cause a cloud, the cloud is moved about
by air to give rain; there can be no rain without such a process. These
atheists took these causes and nature as the real Creator, denying the
existence of the Creator above all these. This is manifest error, seeing
that water is lifeless and unless it is enlivened by the Life‑Giver how
can it produce corn? And how can the sperm which is without
intelligence, develop into an infant unless energized by the Omnipotent
to create a head out of one part, hands and feet from other parts, bones
from yet another part and heart and liver from another? Other forms of
creation can be considered accordingly.

Digestion
---------

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the nutrition supplied to the body, and the
ingenious plan underlying it. Just note that on arrival in the stomach,
the food is processed into chyme and the extract is transferred to the
liver by fine capillaries forming a network in that organ. The stomach
is constituted as a rectifier to transfer materials to the liver in
rectified form, to prevent injury to that delicate structure.

The liver then takes up the extract of the nutriment taken in, and by an
inscrutable ingenuity changes it into blood to be pumped by the heart to
all parts of the body by means of blood‑vessels as the manner of
irrigation channels seen in gardens and fields supplying water to any
place requiring irrigation. All waste products and toxic matters are
carried off to organs designed to eliminate them. The bile matter goes
to the gallbladder, some matter goes to the spleen, and the moisture to
the bladder.

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the ingenuity that has gone into the
building up of the body! How nicely are these organs co-ordinated! How
the vessels, the intestines, the bladder, etc.,

are organised to collect the waste products of the body so as to prevent
them from being scattered all over the body and causing diseases and
decrepitude.

Glory, then, is to Him Who has created these organs according to a
remarkable plan and a redoubtable design. All praise is due to Him, Who
is worthy of it.

Development of man
------------------

Al-Mufadhdhal said, Please Sir, explain to me the gradual development of
the body stage by stage till its perfection.

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) said, The first stage of this development (of man)
is the embryo in the womb that is invisible to the eye and inaccessible
to the hand. His development proceeds apace, till he is perfected in
body with all organs and parts complete in every detail; the heart, the
liver, the intestines and all working parts, the bones, muscles, fat,
the brain tendons, blood‑vessels, the cartilages all fully developed. He
enters this world and you see how he develops on together with all his
organs in proportion, preserving at the same time all his features
without any addition or diminution. The body progresses on while
retaining its well‑knit form, till his maturation, whether his life span
is lengthened or shortened.

Is not this profound planning and ingenuity elegantly designed by the
Omniscient Designer?

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the excellence and merit of man's creation
over the animals. He has been created to stand erect and sit squarely,
to be able to hold things in his hands, to acquire them with his organs
and to treat things with his organs. If man had been hunched like
animals, he could not have performed the tasks he does now.

Just consider O Mufadhdhal, the senses specifically superior to those of
animals in point of constitution and efficiency so as to endow him
special merit thereby.

The eyes are set in the head as if a lamp is set on a lamp‑post to
enable man to see everything. They are not set in the lower parts like
the feet and the hands to be safeguarded against injuries or accidents
during work or movement, which would have ailed them and impaired their
efficiency. Had they been set in the middle part of the body like the
belly, the back or the breast etc., it would have been difficult to
revolve them or to see things by sudden turning. The head is the
cynosure; the best place for these senses in suitability compared with
any other organ.

The senses are made five in number to respond to all kinds of stimuli
and to leave no stimulus undetected.

The eyes are so constituted as to distinguish between Colours. The
colours would have been meaningless without such ocular proficiency,
since these colours exist as a means whereby things may be distinguished
from one another or the eyes may get recreation therefore.

The ears are set in the head to detect sounds, which would have been
meaningless without such auricular proficiency. Similar is the case with
other senses without proficiency of the sense of taste, all tasteful
foods would have been dull, without the sense of touch, the sensations
of heat, cold, softness, hardness would as well have been nonexistent
and without the sense of smell, all scents would have been inert.

And vice versa; if there were no colours, the eyes would be ineffective.
Without sound the ears may as well be non‑existent. So just consider how
it has been ordained that there is a definite correspondence between the
sense organ and the sensation‑stimulus interacting mutually. We cannot
hear with our eyes, nor distinguish colours with our ears, nor smell
except with our nose, and so on.

Then there are media interpolated between the sense organ and the
sensation‑stimulus, without which the link cannot be

established. As for example       in the absence of light to reflect
colour, the eyes fail to recognise colour, and without air to set up
sound waves, the ear would not be able to detect any sound.

O Mufadhdhal, can it be, then, hidden from one who has been endowed with
sound reason and who utilises his intellect correctly, after all the
details I have given about the interconnection between the sense‑organs,
the sensation‑stimulus and the media linking them to complete the
process, that all this has been planned and executed by the Omniscient,
Almighty Allah?

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the case of a person who has lost his
eyesight and the loss he suffers in his day‑to‑day work. He cannot
perceive his foothold, nor can he see ahead, nor can he recognise
colours, nor appreciate a pleasing or an ugly thing. He will not be able
to know a hollow ground, nor know an enemy with a drawn sword, nor can
he undertake any of the handicrafts like writing, business or
goldsmithery. Without his brain, he would be like a stone at rest.

Similar is the case of a man deficient in hearing. He suffers loss on
many counts. He has no relish for conversational talk, nor a sense for
pleasant or unpleasant sounds. People have difficulty in conversing with
him and they get annoyed with him. He does not hear anything of peoples
news or talks until he becomes absent though he is present and dead
though he is alive.

The person devoid of intelligence is worse than cattle, for even the
cattle recognise many a phenomena unintelligible to him. Dont you
perceive that these organs, systems, intellect and everything else
required for his adjustment and without which he is at a serious
disadvantage in point of the perfection of his build are duly provided?
Have all these been produced without balance and knowledge? Certainly
not! They are necessarily the outcome of definite design and planning of
the Almighty

Designer.

Mufadhdhal said, Sir! How is it that some people lack some of these
organs and systems and undergo the losses that you have described?

Imam as-Sadiq (s) said, It is for the admonition of the person lacking
them and of other people as well that the monarch admonishes his
subjects in such a way and such admonition is hardly resented, rather it
is appreciated as a stratagem and is eulogised.

The people who are thus afflicted will be recompensed after death,
provided they are grateful to Allah and they turn to Him, so
munificently that all the troubles undergone by them due to the lack of
such organs will appear trivial in comparison, so much so that if after
death they are allowed the choice to return to those troubles they would
welcome the opportunity to earn higher recompense.

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the ingenuity and balanced design underlying
the production of the organs and systems in pairs or as single units.
Just consider the head which is created a single unit and it is but just
appropriate not to have been created in more than one unit. A second
head would have been only an additional weight; quite unnecessary,
seeing that one head comprises all the senses needed for man. Two heads
would have meant two parts of men. So if he used only one for talk, the
other would have been redundant. To have used both simultaneously for
the same talk would have been meaningless, inasmuch as no further
purpose is served thereby.

A person would have been much handicapped in the business he had to
transact, if he had been created with one instead of a pair of hands.
Don't you see that a carpenter or a mason is unable to carry on his
profession if one of his hands gets paralysed? And in case he tries to
do his work with a single

hand, he cannot perform it as dextbeingerously and efficiently as with
the help of both hands.

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider a man's voice and conversation and the
constitution of the organs concerned therewith. The larynx, which
produces the sound, is like a tube while the tongue, the lips and the
teeth mould the sound into letters and words.

Dont you see that a person who loses his teeth cannot reproduce the
sound of the letter s? He who gets his lips cut cannot pronounce f,
while a thick tongue cannot give the sound of r. A bagpipe resembles it
a great deal. The larynx is comparable to the pipe, and the bag into
which air is blown corresponds to the lungs containing air. The muscles
controlling the lungs to produce sounds resemble the fingers pressing
the air of the bag into the pipe. The lips and teeth, which mould the
sounds into letters and words, correspond to the fingers on the orifices
of the pipe giving rise to music and song. The larynx here has been
regarded as an analogue to the bagpipe by way of explanation, whereas in
reality the bagpipe is the instrument constructed on the pattern of the
natural organ, the larynx.

O Mufadhdhal! The organs of speech here portrayed suffice for a correct
reproduction of the letters. There are, however, other functions
allotted to these. The larynx, for instance, is so fashioned as to admit
fresh air into the lungs to supply the blood and heart, which if it
fails even for a moment causes death.

The tongue is forged as to distinguish between the varied tastes of
foods one from the other the sweet from the sour, the purely sour from
the sweetish sour, the salty from the sweet. The tongue also helps to
feel the pleasantness of water and food. The teeth masticate the food to
make it soft enough for easy digestion. They also hinder the lips from
being sucked

into the mouth. A person who has lost his, teeth is seen to have loosely
moving lips. The lips help to suck in water, so as to allow only
calculated quantity of water to enter the stomach as required, not
gurgling down of its own accord and producing suffocation in the throat
or leading to some sort of internal inflammation by virtue of its
forceful flow. Moreover, the two lips serve as a door to keep the mouth
shut at will.

O Mufadhdhal! We have explained to you the multifarious functions
performed by them and the benefits accruing from them, just as the same
tool may serve different purposes; for instance, the axe may be used by
a carpenter and may also be used for digging the earth and for other
purposes.

If you look at the brain, you will find it wrapped up in membranes one
upon the other to protect it from injuries and movement. The skull
protects it as a helmet against being shattered to pieces by a knock or
percussion on the head. The skull is covered with hair like a fleecy
covering, safeguarding it against hot and cold. Who, then, except Allah
the Almighty endowed the brain with such security and protection, and
who made it the fountain of sense perception and who made the
arrangements for its extraordinary protection in comparison with all
other parts of the body because of its important status to the body?

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the eyelid how it is fashioned as a screen
for the eye with the eyelashes like tile strings for raising and
lowering the screen. Just notice how the eyeball is set in a cavity
shaded by the screen and hair.

O Mufadhdhal, who has concealed the heart within the breast and covered
it with a screen which you may call the membrane? Who has arranged for
its protection by means of the ribs, the muscles and flesh interwoven in
such a way as to prevent anything getting to it to cause an abrasion?
Who has shaped two holes in the throat; one for the production of the

sound situated in proximity with the lungs and the other called the
gullet leading to the stomach for the entry of the food, and who has
placed a flap, the epiglottis, over the hole leading to the larynx, to
prevent food from entering the lungs, which would cause death if not
thus managed? Who has caused the lungs to fan air to the heart
indefatigably without rest to remove the toxins that would destroy it
otherwise?

Who has shaped the sphincters controlling the outlets of urine and
stool, like the strings of a purse to be opened or shut at will and not
to drip all the while automatically causing a persistent nuisance in
life? Similarly there are matters which a computer may compute, but
others which men have no knowledge of are beyond computation. Who has
given such resilience to the muscles of the stomach that it has been
commissioned to digest coarse foods? And who has made the liver soft and
tender to accept nutriment in purified and rectified form and function
more finely than the stomach? Can all these tasks be completed by any
one except the Omnipotent Almighty? Can you imagine that all this can be
performed by inert nature? Certainly not! All this is the planning of
the Almighty, Omniscient Designer, Who has the fullest knowledge and has
perfect omnipotence in advance of creation. He is Allah, the All
Knowing, Almighty.

O Mufadhdhal! Consider why the tender marrow is kept protected inside
bone tubes just for the sake of protecting it from going to waste under
the influence of the suns heat which might melt it, or that of cold
which might solidify it, which would blast life.

And why is this circulation of blood confined to within the blood
vessels, except that it should function inside the body and not flow
out? Why are these nails fixed on fingers, except that they afford
protection against damage and help in better efficiency, for without
them the presence of flesh alone would

not have enabled man to pick up things with a pinch, to use a pen for
writing or to thread a needle?

Why is the inside of the ear made spiralled as a prison‑house, except
that the sounds may be carded to the membrane for detection without
damage thereto by the violence of air impact?

Why flesh is woven over mans thighs and buttocks, except that he may not
be inconvenienced by the hardness of the floor in sitting, as is the
case of a person of thin, emaciated constitution unless something
intervenes between him and the floor to tone down in hardness like a
cushion or a sofa?

Who has created the human race as man and woman? Surely He Who ordained
the race to flourish by the method of the union of the two sexes or at
least to maintain its numerical strength, through the differentiation of
the two sexes. And who made him the progenitor of a generation? Surely
He Who implanted hope in him.

Who gave him the organs for action? Surely He Who made him a worker. And
who made him a worker? Surely He Who created him needy. Man would not
have worked if he had no need to fulfil. If he did not need to satisfy
his hunger, why should he have laboured, why should he have taken to
business and industry? Had he no need to safeguard his body against heat
and cold, why should he have learnt sewing, needle‑manufacturing,
spinning, weaving, cotton growing, etc. And in the absence of all this,
of what use would have been the organs of action and the fingers? And
who created him needy? Surely He Who created for him the factors of
neediness. And who created for him the factors of neediness? Surely He
Who took upon Himself the responsibility of supplying the needs. Who
endowed him with intellect? Surely He Who made reward and chastisement
as essential for him. He would not need intellect if he were not
responsible for reward and punishment.

 The Almighty Creator endowed him with intellect to distinguish between
good and evil, having decided upon reward and punishment as essential
for him to get the reward for goodness and chastisement for evil. The
animals, which are not subject to reward or punishment, have no sense of
good and evil, nor do they know the distinction between the forbidden
and the lawful, the condemned and the approved types of action. They
recognise however, the factors needed by them for the survival of their
species or individuality.

Who has endowed him with strategy and percipience? Surely He Who has
gifted him with energy. And who has gifted man with energy? Surely He
Who ordained justification of conduct on him.

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider what I have explained to you. Can there be
such orderliness and method in the absence of planning? Certainly not!
Allah the Almighty is far exalted above what those people say.

O Mufadhdhal! Now I describe the heart to you. Know that it has holes
directed towards the holes that are in the lung to refresh the heart and
if these holes are different from each other, refreshments will not
reach the heart and then man will perish. Is it possible for a sane,
reasonable one to claim that such a thing is done in ignorance? Does he
not find evidence in himself to prevent him from such a claim?

Suppose you found one shutter of a door having a latch fixed to it, can
you imagine it to have been fixed without any purpose? Surely you will
conclude that it is there to be joined to the other shutter for a
definite advantage. Similarly you will find a male creature as one
individual of a pair created for a female individual so they can unite
to preserve the race.

May Allah destroy those who claim to be philosophers but are so purblind
in their approach to such wonders of creation and constitution that they
deny in the creation of the universe the

design of the Almighty Designer and the will of the Master Planner.

If the genital of man were relaxed, how would it reach the bottom of the
womans womb in order to empty the sperm? And if it were hard and erect
for always, then how would man turn about in the bed or walk among
people with something erect before him? Then, besides it would be ugly,
it would provoke sexual lust in men and women all the time. Therefore,
Allah the Almighty has made it invisible to the sights most of the time
and made it no burden on men. Allah has made it to be erect at the time
of need to preserve the human race.

O Mufadhdhal! See with receptive eyes the great boon of Allah, the
Almighty, in the relief of trouble after taking in food and drink. Is it
not an elegance of plan in the construction of a house that the lavatory
should be in a secluded part thereof? In the same way, Allah the
Almighty has made the orifice for the excreta of man in a secret place.
It is not in the open nor has it prominence, but it is so situated as to
be perfectly hidden by the junction of the thighs and the buttocks with
their fleshly matter. When a man needs to answer the call of nature and
assumes the requisite posture of sitting, the orifice allows the excreta
to escape. Exalted be Allah Whose signs and blessings can never be
counted!

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the teeth set in the mouth of man. Some are
sharp, which incise and sunder the food. Others are flat, which chew and
pulverize. Since both types, are required so man is supplied with them
accordingly.

Just consider and appreciate the ingenuity underlying why it is proper
to have the hair cut and the nails clipped. They grow and increase and
need to be clipped. As such they are devoid of sensation in order to not
cause pain to man. In case the clipping causes pain, they would either
be left to grow inordinately and become burdensome or pain would come
out

of clipping.

Al-Mufadhdhal said, Sir! Why were they not designed so as to not thrive
to an extent that their clipping would be necessary?

Imam as-Sadiq (A.S) said, There are, indeed, numberless boons of Allah
the Almighty to his creatures that are unknown to them and which if they
knew them, they would be grateful for. Know that the troubles and
ailments of the body are relieved through the hair coming out of the
pores. (Vapours and sweat are excluded through these pores.) The fingers
get relief of their ailments through the nails. That is why a weekly
clipping of nails, shaving of head and removing of redundant hair must
be effected, so that the nails and the hair should grow fast and relieve
ailments and troubles. Ailments remain confined in the body otherwise
with consequent pains and diseases.

No hair growth is allowed on parts of the body where they would harm
man. If hair grew inside the eyes, man would be blinded. If hair grew
inside the mouth, man would suffer too much with his food and drink. If
hair grew on the palms of hands, it would cause man some difficulties
with the sense of touching and make it difficult for man to do some
tasks.

There is great ingenuity underlying keeping certain spots of the body
hairless. This is not only with man but also with animals. You see that
their entire bodies are covered with hair, with the exception of
particular parts for the same reasons. So consider this affair of
creation and see how error and harm have been avoided while rectitude
and benefit have been secured.

When the followers of Mani and their likes tried to impugn the belief in
purposeful creation (of the universe), they found fault with the growth
of hair on the pubis and the armpits. They failed to grasp that such
growth was due to the moisture flowing to those parts. The hair grows
there just as grass grows at places where water collects. Don't you see
how these spots

are prepared to collect waste products and hold them?

Yet another strategy underlying this is that it renders one more
discomfort to man, regarding his body, and, as long as he is kept busy
with the cleanliness of his body and the removal of his hair, he is
prevented from perpetrating acts of greed, cruelty, conceit and
impudence for which he may not get the opportunity.

Just consider the saliva in the mouth and see the wisdom underlying it.
It is so composed as to ensure constant flow to keep the throat and the
palate moist, to not allow dryness that may lead to death therein.
Without it, food would not be chewed nor would it flow down.

Some ignorant debaters and half‑witted claimants to philosophy, because
of their deficient understanding and faulty knowledge, have said: It
would have been better if the belly of man had been like a cloak to
enable the physician to open it at will, observe its contents and poke
his hand inside for medical treatment, and not as it is walled in,
mysteriously hidden from the reach of the eyes and the hands. The
internal disorders can now only be gauged by delicate symptoms of the
examination of urine, pulse etc., which are not above error and doubt to
an extent that such error in pulse and urine examination may lead to
death. Would that these ignorant claimants to philosophy and polemics
had known that it would have removed all apprehension of disease and
death. (Any attack of disease would then have been met successfully by a
reopening of the cloak‑like belly, learning the exact cause and its
removal). Man would then have been infatuated with his eternality and
healthfulness, which would have rendered him wilful and conceited. The
open belly would have allowed constant trickling of moisture, thus
spoiling his seat, bed and nice dresses. In short, it disturbs his whole
living under such circumstances.

The stomach, the liver and the heart function properly because of the
vital heat, which would have been disturbed by the influence of the
outside air acting through the belly under treatment, open to the reach
of the eye and the hand. This would cause death.

Don't you see that all hypotheses aside of the real nature of creation
and constitution are far‑fetched and preposterous?

Activities of man
-----------------

Just consider, O Mufadhdhal, the matters of feeding, resting and sex,
which are ordained for man and the expediencies underlying them. Each
one of them is propelled by an urge, which gives rise to a desire and a
consequent excitation. Hunger demands food which supplies life and
energy to the body and its substance. Sleep demands rest for the
recuperation of the body to remove the fatigue. If man were to take food
just for the needs of his body without an urge from within forcing him
to feed, it is possible that he might have given way to indolence
because of lassitude or pressure, his body would have been emaciated
leading to death, just as a man puts off taking medicine which he only
needs to improve his tone. And this may cause death.

Similarly he may put off sleep, which his body and organs need, by being
busy with other things and thereby emaciate his body.

If procreation were the sole aim of sexual union, (with no natural
impulsive insistence), it would not have been improbable on mans part to
slacken with resulting decrease in population and final extinction, for
there are people who have no desire for progeny nor any heed therefore.
Behold, then, that every act concerning man's health and improvement has
been reinforced by an insistent urge embedded in his nature prompting
him thereto.

And know that there are four faculties in man:

1. The affinitive faculty that accepts the food and pushes it into the
stomach.

2. The retentive faculty that retains it for the natural processes to
act thereon.

3. The assimilative faculty that processes it to take out its extract
for distribution to the body.

4. The eliminative faculty that eliminates the waste products after the
assimilative faculty has completed its function.

Just consider the adjustment made in the body among these four
facilities. They have been organised to meet the bodily needs as part of
the Omniscient design. (Any deficiency in any one of these faculties
would disturb the body economy with ultimate death). Without the
affinitive faculty, how would man exert after food which is necessary
for the upkeep and maintenance of his body? Without the retentive
faculty, how could the food be retained in the stomach to be digested?
Without the assimilative faculty, how could the food be processed to get
the extract to supply the body without disturbance? And without the
eliminative faculty how could the waste products, given off by the
stomach, be eliminated regularly?

Don't you see how the Almighty Allah has ordained and appointed the
faculties for the functions conditioning the health of the body by His
Consummate Skill and Supreme Will?

Let us illustrate it by an example. Imagine the body to be a royal
palace, with servants and attendants residing therein. There are
employees engaged in its management. One of them is entrusted with the
task of supplying provisions to the attendants. The second is charged
with the task of treasuring it until it (the food) is treated and
prepared. A third has to process it and distribute it. The fourth sweeps
the waste

products left over.

The monarch of the palace is the Omniscient Creator Almighty, the Lord
of the entire universe. The palace is the body and the dependents are
the organs of the body, while the employees are the four faculties.

O Mufadhdhal, you may, perhaps, consider the explanation given by me
concerning the four faculties and their functions as redundant and
unnecessary. Yet my explanation does not follow the pattern of the books
given by the physicians, nor does the tenor of my talk follow theirs.
Those people have made mention of the four faculties on the ground that
it is needed in the medical art for healing. We mention it from the
viewpoint of its need for invigorating the Faith and reformation of the
recusant minds, hence my comprehensive explanation and exemplification
illustrating the Omniscient design.

Mental powers
-------------

O Mufadhdhal, reflect over the faculties embedded in the human psyche
and the way they are organised namely, deliberation, superstition,
reason, memory, etc. What would be a man's plight if he was deprived of
the faculty of memory, and how much would his lifes affairs be
disturbed, as well as his economic affairs and his business? He would
not remember what other people owed him and what he owed to others, what
bargains he made, what he heard and what he said. He would not remember
who did him good or evil, what profited him and what harmed him.

He would not remember the path traversed by him numberless times
(because of the absence of the faculty of memory). He would not remember
anything even if he continued to learn a science all his life, nor would
determine upon a belief or faith, nor could he profit by experience, nor
could he compare one thing with another by analogy (not remembering his
previous

observation). In fact, he would be outside the pale of humanity
altogether.

O Mufadhdhal! Just see how profitable these faculties are to man.
Deliberate on one and on the place it occupies in our lives (without
this faculty of memory, hundreds of shortcomings would result in mans
affairs, ultimately rendering him tired of life).

Forgetfulness
-------------

Even a greater boon than memory is forgetfulness without which man would
not find solace in any affliction, nor would he get clear of
frustration, nor would he be rid of malice. (It is this forgetfulness
which makes man free from the sting of his past afflictions and
frustrations; he forgets malice and enters into companionship). He would
fail to relish anything of the worlds goods because of persistent
memories of affliction. Nor could he ever entertain any hope of the
sovereigns indifference or the envy of the envious. (The thought of his
sovereigns hauling him up for some transgression ever and anon would
continue to embitter his life; in the same way the idea of the envy of
the envious would continue to pain him and embitter his life).

Dont you see how the contrary facilities of memory and forgetfulness
have been created in man, each ordained with a definite purpose (can
such ingenuities come into being without being planned by the
Omniscient)?

And those people who believe in two opposite creators of all the
universe cannot in any case be expected to regard those two opposite
entities as the creators of these two opposite faculties, for these two
opposite faculties possess the benefits which you see accruing from them
(whereas the creator of evil cannot create but evil and vice according
to them, here both opposing facilities lead to benefit; how then can the
creator of evil create either of them?).

Modesty
-------

O Mufadhdhal! Just consider the quality with which man alone is endowed
and which no other creature shares with him that is modesty. Without it
no one would show hospitality to a guest, nor would anyone implement his
promise, nor would anyones needs be fulfilled, nor would any goodness be
achieved. There are many obligations which are performed merely through
modesty. He who gives up modesty concedes neither the rights of his
parents nor the obligations of consanguinity, neither honours his trust
nor avoids impudence. Dont you see how all these have been endowed in
man so fully as to benefit him and to help him accomplish his affairs?

Speaking and writing
--------------------

O Mufadhdhal, consider the blessing of speech, with which man has been
endowed by Allah the Almighty, which is the medium for the expression of
his inner thoughts and his cordial feelings springing from his
cogitation and with which he also understands the inner feelings of
others. Without this faculty, man would be like quadrupeds: neither able
to convey his own inner thoughts to others, nor able to understand the
words of the speakers. Thence is the case with the art of writing which
is a means for knowing the histories of the bygone people and for
transmitting those of the existing people for the generations to come.
Through this art, achievements of science and literature are preserved
in books for ages. Through this art, the discussions and accounts
between one man and another are preserved. Without this art of writing,
one age would have been completely cut off from another, nor would any
news have been received from those who are away from their native lands.
Sciences too would have been extinct. Information on morality and
etiquette would have been lost, and a serious damage in the affairs of
mankind would have

ensued as well as in the religious teachings and the traditions, which
people need to know and the knowledge whereof would have been impossible
(and yet essential for man).

You may, perhaps, think that this need has been fulfilled by man with
the help of his own design and intelligence. It is not inherent in the
nature of man. The same is the case of speech and language, for this too
is a matter of terminology and resolution, determined by the people
according to their mutual understanding of talk. That is why different
groups have different languages and scripts, for instance, the Arabic,
the Syriac, the Hebrew, the Roman, etc., each of which is different from
the other, each having decided upon its own terminology of language and
words.

For him who makes such a claim (as to what has been the divine share in
this purely human activity), the answer will be that though in both
these matters mans planning and action have played a role, yet the
underlying means therein whereby his planning and action achieve the
goal is a gift from the bounty of Allah the Almighty (for instance, the
intellect or the tongue by means of which he attained the skill to
establish the terminology). Supposing he had not been gifted with the
tongue for speech or the intellect had not been bestowed on him to guide
him to such an activity, he would never have been able to talk and if he
had not been blessed with the palm and the fingers, it would never have
been possible for him to write.

You should learn a lesson from the animals in this behalf, which have
neither the power to speak nor the power to write (being without the
specific intellect or the instruments of writing). As such, it is the
principle laid down by the Almighty Creator for mans fundamental nature
and a special boon, for which whoever is grateful shall get the heavenly
reward, while whoever denies it will be ignored, for Allah the Almighty
is independent of the whole universe. (He does not need

anybodys gratitude).

Knowledge given to man
----------------------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the matters of which knowledge has been
vouchsafed to man and those of which he has not been given the
knowledge. He has been vouchsafed the knowledge of all those matters
that lead to his good in respect to Faith as well as his earthly life.
The Gnosis of Allah, the Almighty Creator, is attainable by means of the
arguments and evidence available in the existence of the creation. So is
the knowledge of matters that are obligatory on man, for instance,
justice towards all human beings, kindness to parents, returning of
trusts to their owners, sympathy towards the downtrodden, etc., the
knowledge and admission of which all nations possess naturally as a
matter of fact, whether in agreement with us or against us. Man has been
given the knowledge of those things which are beneficial to his worldly
life, for example agriculture, horticulture, cattle farming, drawing
water from wells and springs, herbal research for medical purposes,
mining for different kinds of precious stones, diving in the sea,
different kinds of planning for hunting animals and birds, fishing,
industry, trade and business and many other things which need a long
detail, wherein lies the fulfilment of the affairs of mans worldly life,
the betterment of his religious and mundane affairs. Such knowledge is
made available to him as it is in his best interests. Matters whose
knowledge is out of his reach nor does his position demand it are not
made known to him; for example, the knowledge of the unseen, of matters
that are to happen in the future or some of the affairs that have
happened in the past, those pertaining to what lies above the skies,
under the earth, what lies in the oceans and in the vast expanse of the
universe, or within the minds of people, the contents of the uterus,
etc. People who have claimed knowledge thereof, their claims were
stultified by the events

that took place later on and were contrariwise. (The events that
followed were contrary to what they had reported).

So just see O Mufadhdhal, that the knowledge of things given to man is
essential for his worldly and religious affairs. He has been prevented
from knowing unnecessary things to impress him with his worth and his
deficiency (so that it may be known that man is in fact an insignificant
mote possessing a good deal of deficiency and weakness so that pride and
conceit may not overtake him from any side).

Knowledge hidden from man
-------------------------

Oh Mufadhdhal! Just consider why man has not been given the knowledge of
his life span. If he knew the period of his life on the earth to be
short, his whole life would have been embittered, for, knowing this, he
would await the moment of his death. His condition would be like a man
whose assets have all been lost or are very soon to be lost. And he
might feel his poverty and neediness. How afraid he would be at the
expectation of the destruction of his assets and the consequent
indigence! The sorrow and chagrin he would feel at the prospect of death
would be far greater than that at the prospect of the destruction of his
property, for he who loses his property ever entertains the hope that he
might get more in return and that provides solace to his mind. On the
contrary, he who is convinced of the end of his life will be much more
frustrated. In case he has a long life span to live, this confidence in
his survival will give him undue confidence. He might be overwhelmed by
pleasures and debaucheries under the impression that he would offer
penitence in the last days of life, lingering for the present in his
pleasure pursuits. This is a matter which Allah the Almighty does not
want nor likes in his creatures. (He wants man to attend to Him and to
not be absorbed in frivolities and novelties).

Suppose you have a servant who continues to offend you

throughout the year and hopes to be pardoned by doing you good in a day
or a month. Surely you would not like him and this servant will not rank
with a righteous servant who is ever ready to follow your bidding. (He
will necessarily be dearer to you).

You may raise an objection to this by asking whether it does not happen
that a man treads the path of disobedience and then is penitent, and his
penitence is accepted. Our reply to this is that this happens only when
a man is overpowered by his libido to an irresistible extent, but all
the time he is not determined to be disobedient under the impression of
expressing penitence later on while indulging in passions for the
moment. Allah the Almighty does forgive him out of His infinite mercy.
But in the case of one who is determined to be disobedient as long as he
wants, expecting forgiveness at a later stage, he is trying thereby to
deceive Him Who cannot be deceived, thinking of getting the most out of
the pleasures of the moment while expecting to be forgiven because of
his later penitence. There is this aspect of the matter, too, that
persisting in a certain pattern of life of indulgence in pleasures might
not allow him even the occasion for penitence, particularly in the old
age when the physical body has undergone a good deal of weakness
preventing him from working up to his expectations. And he who seeks
pretexts in submitting his penitence, it may not be possible for him in
case of a sudden death and so he may leave the world impenitent. He may
be like a debtor who is competent to pay his debts but keeps delaying
from time to time till death overtakes him, his assets get destroyed and
his debts still stand against him. As such it is in the fitness of
things that the knowledge of mans life span is kept a secret from him so
that he may expect death to come at any moment and, under that suspense,
evade transgression and adopt righteous action.

You may raise another objection by saying that since his life

span is a secret from him and he is ever in suspense about his death, he
commits evil deeds and unlawful acts. Our reply to this is that the
planning is in accordance with the situation prevailing now. If in spite
of all this, a man does not refrain from evil, it is a sign of his
temperamental perversion and his hardheartedness. There is no error in
the planning if a patient after being fully apprised of the benefits of
certain medicines and the demerits of certain malevolent matters does
not avail of this information and disregards the physicians directions;
the physician is not to be blamed but the patient who declined to follow
the physician's directions.

If in spite of the suspense of his death, which he has because of his
ignorance about his life span, he does not desist from transgressions,
he would be steeped in evil and heinous unreasonable sins, like the case
in which he does have full knowledge of his life span and survival. As
such, the suspense about death in any case is better for him than his
confidence in long life. If there are some people who despite their
suspense about death are indolent and do not profit by advice, there are
others who profit by the advice, abstain from sinfulness and act
righteously. They give to the needy and the indigent charity of their
precious possessions. It would not have been justice to deprive this
kind of people from getting the benefit thereof (to prevent such people
from having their share just because others are unable to profit by it;
the state of death is therefore kept secret for people to profit by it).

Dreams
------

Oh Mufadhdhal! Just consider the dreams (one sees in sleep) and the
ingenuity underlying them. There are dreams that come true and dreams
that do not come true and are all mixed up. If all dreams were true, all
men would have been prophets, and if all dreams were untrue, they would
have been useless, rather redundant and meaningless. The dreams are
sometimes

true to benefit a person in his lifes affairs, under their guidance, or
to avoid loss of which he is informed thereby. They are mostly untrue
lest man may come to depend on them.

Everything to serve man
-----------------------

Oh Mufadhdhal! Just consider those things which you see present in the
world, supplied to meet human needs. The earth to build houses, iron for
industry, wood for building boats and other things, stone for
grindstones and other things, copper for utensils, gold and silver for
business transactions, gems for treasure, corns, fruits and meat for
food, fragrant articles for pleasure, medicines to heal the sick,
quadrupeds as beasts of burden, dry wood as fuel, ashes for chemicals,
sand for the benefit of the earth ... and how can one count all these
things which are numberless?!

Oh Mufadhdhal! Do you think that if a man enters a house and sees it
supplied with all human needs, the whole house full of treasures and
every thing placed with a definite purpose, can he imagine that all
those things have been arranged by themselves without anyone to plan
that? Then how can any rational being suggest that this world and all
its contents have come into being by themselves (without the Creator)?

Oh Mufadhdhal! Learn a lesson from the things that have been created to
meet human needs and the great ingenuity underlying them. Corn has been
produced for him but he has been entrusted with the duty of grinding,
kneading and cooking. Wool has been produced for him but he must gin,
spin and weave it. The tree is made for him but he must sow the seed,
irrigate and look after it. The herbs have been created as medicines for
him but he must find them, mix them and compound them. Similarly you
will find all things made by the Creator in this way. The need and the
situation for it have been left to him in his own interest. If the
Almighty Allah had performed all these activities for him and he had
nothing to do

by way of his activity, he would have begun to move on the earth and the
earth would not have been able to bear his burden, such would have been
the extent of his temperamental conceit. This would have led him to
indulge in such activities that would lead to his death and destruction.
Man would not have had a happy life if all his needs had been fulfilled
without effort of hand, nor would he have enjoyed such a thing. (A thing
that man obtains without effort is not valued, nor is it spiritually
relished; if it is gained by effort and labour, the mind feels satisfied
with the result of mans effort).

Oh Mufadhdhal! Dont you see that a guest who stays for a time with all
his needs fulfilled by his host steadily, without any effort on his part
to secure eatables, drink, bedding or seating, gets tired of his
idleness and inactivity? He seeks some engagement. What would have been
his condition if his inactivity were lifelong? This then is ordained for
man to occupy his limbs to transact his business in his own interest,
lest idleness and inactivity cause him ennui. Moreover, he should be
prevented from such undertakings as are outside his capacity, and which
have no advantage for him even if completed.

Bread and water
---------------

Oh Mufadhdhal! Know that a mans basic need is for food and water. See
the planning that has gone therein. Man needs water more than bread,
because he can bear hunger longer than thirst. He needs water for
drinking, for ablution, washing clothes, giving water to quadrupeds, and
irrigating crops. Water, therefore, is provided in abundance without
need of purchase to save man the need of searching for it. Bread must be
obtained with effort and planning to keep man busy with his occupation
and to hinder him from pride and conceit and useless undertakings. Dont
you see that a child in early age is sent to a teacher for instruction
to keep him away from playing

away all his time which may lead him or his kin to trouble? In the same
way, if man were left unoccupied, he would be proud and self-conceited
and would indulge in actions likely to harm him grievously. One, who is
born and nurtured in the lap of luxury under the conditions of opulence
and plenty of his kinsfolk, is likely to fall into such conduct.

People unlike one another
-------------------------

Know why one man does not resemble another as the birds and animals and
other things do. You see a herd of deer and a swarm of partridges each
resembling the other with not much difference among them, whereas men,
as you see, have distinct features and constitutions so much so that no
two men correspond to each other.

The reason is the need each individual has to be recognised personally
by his particular build and physiognomy, as they have to conduct
business amongst themselves that does not concern the animals. Dont you
see that the mutual resemblance among animals and birds does them no
harm? But it is not so in man, for if by chance a pair of twins becomes
alike in shape, people feel a great deal of confusion in dealing with
them. What must be given to one is handed to the other by mistake. One
is held up in place of the other in retribution. It so happens in other
matters as well because of resemblance. Human resemblance can be even
more harmful. Who then has provided such niceties and perfections, which
stagger imagination? Surely, it is He Who has created all these
creatures, Whose grace extends to all things.

Oh Mufadhdhal! Will you believe a person who says that a picture on the
wall has come into being by itself without the aid of an artist?
Certainly not! You will laugh at him. How then can you believe that a
living man with faculties of speech and movement can come into being by
himself? Surely you will mock at that. How then can you deny this
concerning a lifeless

picture on a wall but you do not deny it concerning the living and
speaking man?

Growth of animals
-----------------

Why do the bodies of animals, which always feed, not grow above certain
sizes, rather their bodies stop increasing once they reach their normal
sizes? To what is this due if not to deep percipience and wise planning?

The Almighty Allah has so ordained that each species of living beings
should have a definite limit of growth neither larger nor smaller. They
continue to increase up to that limit and then stop growing, even though
feeding continues. If it were not so ordained, they would continue to
grow till their bodies would grow out of recognisable limits.

Pain
----

Why is it in the case of human beings in particular that movement and
activity cause fatigue in them and they avoid fine industries? It is
just because that his needs like clothing, sleeping and other things
require more exertion. If man does not suffer hardness and pain, how can
he evade evil deeds, prostrate before Allah or have pity for people?

Dont you see that when man is inflicted with pain, he turns to Allah
humbly and submissively, supplicating to his Lord to restore his health
and giving charity open-handedly? If man felt no pain when beaten, how
would the rulers punish the recusants and subject the mutinous and
disobedient? How would children be taught sciences and arts? How would
slaves be made to submit to their masters willingly? Is there no
admonition in all this for Ibn Abul Awja (the said atheist) and his
companions who deny purpose and for the followers of Mani who deny the
ingenuity underlying labour and pain?

If just males or just females had been created in living beings, would
not the species become extinct? It is thus to preserve

their species that both males and females have been brought into being
in the right proportion.

Growth of hair
--------------

Why is it that when men and women reach puberty, men alone grow a beard?
Is it not because of the wise management? This is because man is created
as the lord and woman as housekeeper. The woman is the supervisor of
mans interests and his sweetheart. Man, as such, is bestowed with a
beard to give him prestige and an honourable lordly appearance. The
woman is allowed beauty and freshness instead as attractions for union.
Dont you see the flawless merits that this creation acquires by the
design of the Almighty Allah? Every thing is according to a definite
measure. Nothing is given that is not needed.

Mufadhdhal says, It was now afternoon, my master rose for prayers
telling me to come to him the next day, Allah willing. Overjoyed with
the information received, I returned with a grateful heart for Allah for
the boon bestowed on me. I had a very pleasant night due to the valuable
instructions bestowed on me by my master.
