The Third Meeting
=================

Al-Mufadhdhal said, On the third day, I went early in the morning to my
master Imam as-Sadiq (s). I was permitted to come in and to have a seat.

Imam as-Sadiq (s) said, Praise be to Allah Who has favored us and not
favored (others) over us. He has favored us with His knowledge (has
given us from His knowledge that He has not given others) and supported
us with His patience. Whoever turns away from us will be in Hell and
whoever shades himself with the shadow of our lofty tree will be in
Paradise. O Mufadhdhal! I have explained to you in detail about the
creation of man and the subtle design of Almighty Allah and the lessons
to be learnt from the modifications of circumstances. I have also told
you about the animal kingdom. Now, I will talk about the sky, the sun,
the moon, the stars, the orbits, the day and night, hot and cold, the
wind, the four fundamentals (earth, water, air and fire), the rain,
rocks, mountains, mud, stones, minerals, date-palms, the plant kingdom,
and the signs and lessons therein.

The colour of the sky
---------------------

Look at the colour of the sky and the perfect design in that! This
particular colour is the most appropriate and tonic for the eyesight
compared to all other colours. Physicians ask one whose eyes suffer from
some illness to gaze frequently at greenery, or at some other darker
hue. Some skilful physicians ask one whose sight is weak to gaze in a
green basin full of

water.

See how Allah the Almighty has created the sky with a green colour that
is near dark so as to not harm the eyes that look often at the sky.

That which people have perceived through reason, discernment and
experimentation is found clearly in the creation as an extreme wisdom so
that the people of understanding may take a lesson and the atheists, may
Allah destroy them, may reflect.

O Mufadhdhal, consider the rising and the setting of the sun to make the
day and the night. Without the sunshine, all the affairs of the world
would be futile. People would not be able to earn their livings or
conduct their affairs while the world was dark over them. They would not
be happy in their lives without the pleasure and spirit of light.

Rising and setting of the sun
-----------------------------

The benefits of the sunshine are obvious and do not need to be
expatiated. Consider the benefits of the sunset! If the sun did not set,
people would have no rest or comfort though their need for rest and
comfort is absolutely essential for the calmness of their bodies and the
relaxation of their senses, besides the facilitation of an easy
digestion and the transport of energy to the organs.

And if night did not come, greed would cause people to continue working
to gather more wealth and that would harm their bodies and health. The
perpetual sunshine heats the earth, and all the animals and plants on
it. Allah the Almighty has, therefore, ordained with His wisdom that the
sun should shine for a period and set for a period like a lamp that is
lit for sometime so that a household can carry out their needs and is
then extinguished for sometime so that they can rest and calm down.
Light and darkness are opposite to each other and yet both are made
subservient to the interests of the worlds

betterment and amelioration.

The four seasons
----------------

Then think of the states of the sun that make the four seasons of the
year and the wisdom and advantages therein! In the winter, heat comes
back to the trees and plants, and the materials for fruits are formed.
Air (humidity) is condensed to make clouds and rains. The bodies of
animals grow and become stronger. In the spring, the materials that have
been formed in the winter appear and plants grow and bloom. Animals
become excited and ready for copulation. In the summer, the air becomes
hot and fruits ripen. The waste matters of bodies dissolve and the
surface of the earth becomes dry and ready now for building and for
other works. In the autumn, the air is fresh, diseases disappear, bodies
are healthy, the night is long that it can be fit for some certain works
due to its length, and the weather is nice for other advantages that to
mention will take a lot of time.

Now consider the motion of the sun through the twelve Zodiacs to
complete a year and the wisdom underlying it. This is the period that
comprises the four seasons: winter, spring, summer, and autumn. Grains
and fruits ripen during this annual movement of the sun to meet human
needs. This cycle of development goes on continually. Do you not see
that a year is the period of the movement of the sun from the Aries to
the Aries? With a year and its components time has been measured since
ancient times and throughout all ages. People calculate thereby the
periods of life-spans, loans, contracts and other business matters. It
is with the movement of the sun that a year is completed and a correct
estimate of time established.

See how the sun sheds its light over the world and with what ingenuity
this is! If it shone constantly only at one spot in the sky, its rays
would not reach many other directions. It has, therefore, been so
planned that it rises in the East and moves

on constantly spreading its light from side to side till it reaches the
West so that no place remains without having taken its share of
advantage. If the sun were late for a year or a part of a year, how then
would the state of people be? In fact, how could they survive? Can you
imagine what great, terrible problems people would face that they would
have no way of changing? Therefore, the sun has been ordained to persist
in its motions without a bit of delay for the survival and betterment of
the world. 

The moon
--------

Consider the moon for it has a good sign that the public uses to
identify the months. A year is not calculated according to the motion of
the moon because its motion does not comprehend the changes of seasons
or the times of the growing and ripening crops and fruits. So lunar
months and years are different from solar months and years. A lunar
month varies in that sometimes it comes in the winter and sometimes in
the summer.

Consider why the moon shines at night and the ingenuity underlying it.
In spite of the need of darkness for the rest and tranquillity of
animals and cool air for plants, complete absence of light and total
darkness would not have any merit. There would be no possibility for
work though people may sometimes need to work at night due to the short
time for some works during the day or due to the extreme heat of the
day. Yet, man is able to do many things under the light of the moon. The
moonlight helps people work for their livelihood whenever they are so
disposed. The wayfarers find fascination in their travels. The moon has
been ordained to appear in some nights and disappear in others. The
moonlight is less luminous than the sunlight, lest people (out of greed)
continue working in the same way as they do during the day without
getting rest even unto perishment.

In the different phases of the moon (its appearance as a crescent, its
disappearance, waning and eclipses), there are particular indications
that all these changes have been ordained for the benefit of the
universe by the Almighty Creator, and as lessons to the people of
understanding.

The stars
---------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the stars and their different movements. Some of
them do not budge from the positions appointed for them. Some move
together in groups. Some others move from zone to zone and have their
distinct velocities. Each one of them has two movements: one is general
due to the cosmic motion towards the west and the other is special
concerning itself towards the east. It is like an ant moving on a quern.
The quern moves to the right and the ant to the left. The ant has two
different movements: one from its own accord in a forward direction and
the other inevitably with the quern backward.

Now ask those who claim that the stars have come into existence by
themselves without a creator or any planning what has prevented them all
from being still or whether or not they all move! Carelessness would
imply one movement, so how can it give two different movements with
accurate accounts? There is an evidence in this showing that the stars
and their movements have been created after absolute planning and wisdom
and not by carelessness as the atheists claim.

If someone asks: why are some stars stationary while others are moving?
We say: if all were moving, the evidences of the movements of the moving
ones would be null. Many a secret is known after the movements of the
sun and other stars because of their movements in their respective
orbits.  If all were moving, there would be no certain signs or marks to
know their ways of movements, and besides that, people on the earth
would be unable to find their ways by following the stars and

so the stars would be useless and in vain and one could say that they
had been created by themselves or out of carelessness. In their
different movements and positions there is a clear evidence showing that
they have been created by a Wise Creator and out of utmost wisdom and
planning.

Consider the stars that appear at certain times of the year and
disappear at others like the Pleiades, the Orion, the Sirius, and the
Canopus. If all of them appeared simultaneously, none could stand as a
distinct mark for people to recognise and obtain guidance; rather,
people deduce from the appearance and disappearance of the Orion and the
Taurus. The appearance and disappearance of each at appropriate
occasions was ordained for the benefit of people. The Pleiades and
others have been ordained to appear and disappear at different times for
particular benefits of people. In the same way, the constellation of the
Bear has been ordained to appear all the time for the certain advantage
that it is as a signpost for people to find their ways through the
unknown paths in the land and the sea. As the stars of this
constellation are always apparent, people look at them immediately when
they need to find the path they want. Both these matters, though
opposite, serve mans benefits, in addition to other signs that lead to
knowing the times for many works and activities like planting,
travelling in the land and the sea, and other things like raining,
blowing of the winds and the times of hot and cold. Moreover, people
find their ways with the aid of the stars in their travels through
dreadful deserts and fearful seas in the darkness of night. Besides all
this, the stars, in their comings and goings, risings and settings, have
many lessons for those who have understanding minds.

If the sun, moon and stars were near enough to us for us to see their
very fast movements, would they not dazzle the eyes by their glowing and
radiation just as that which happens sometimes when the lightening
lingers in the sky? If some

people were in a dome having several lamps that were rotating fast
around them, their eyes would be dazzled until they would fall to the
ground.

See how it has been ordained for the stars to move with their high
speeds at huge distances away from us to protect our eyesight against
damage and harms while retaining their tremendous speed so that their
movements are not disturbed. It has been ordained for a little light to
come from the stars in order to not leave the earth completely dark when
there is no moon. People sometimes need to journey at night, and it
would be difficult for them to follow their ways when there is no light
at all to guide them.

Consider the kindness and wisdom ordained in this creation. Darkness is
also needed, but a little light has been made through it for the
benefits of which we have talked.

Think about the universe with its sun, moon, stars and zodiacs, which
revolve perpetually over the world in an accurate account through the
alternation of the day and the night and the four seasons to bring about
numerous benefits to the earth and its people, animals and plants. Is it
not clear to anyone with a discerning mind that this is a creation of a
Wise Creator? If someone says that mere chance has brought this about,
then why does he not say the same thing about a waterwheel rotating to
water a garden with trees and plants? Does he deny saying that this
small waterwheel, which is made of wood and with a simple skill, has not
been made by a maker? If not, then how can he say this about this great
wheel that has been made due to wisdom the like of which human minds
fall far short? If this universe became damaged, like the tools that
people use in their industries, would the human beings have any means of
repairing it?

 

Day and night
-------------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the lengths of the day and night and how they are
adjusted for the benefit of the creation! Neither the day nor the night
exceeds fifteen hours. If the day were a hundred or two hundred hours,
do you not see that the earth with its animals and plants would perish?
The quadrupeds would not stop grazing as long as there was daylight, and
man would not stop working and acting and this would make them all
perish. The plants would dry up and burn under the heat of the day and
the glow of the sun. Similarly, if the night were prolonged (for a
hundred or two hundred hours), all species of living beings would be
prevented from moving about to get their foods until they would die of
hunger. Plants would lose their vital heat, until they would decay and
perish, just as what you see in the plants that are in a place where the
sun shines much.

Hot and cold
------------

Consider the hot and cold and how they alternate in the world
increasing, decreasing and moderating to make the four seasons of the
year and the benefits the creatures get thereby. Moreover, the physical
bodies become improved and renovated thereby. This leads to their health
and longevity; otherwise, the creatures suffer from decadence,
disintegration and emaciation.

Think of how they (hot and cold) replace each other gradually and
slowly. You will notice that one decreases gradually, giving place
gradually to the corresponding increase of the other. If one of them
were to suddenly irrupt the other, it would lead to serious damages and
illnesses, just as when one comes from a hot bath immediately to a cold
place. The Almighty Allah has ordained the gradual change of heat and
cold to protect man from the damages and harms of sudden changes.

If someone claims that this graduality and slowness in the advent of
heat and cold results from the slowness of the sun in its movement, he
may be asked about the reason behind the

movement of the sun and its gradual inclination. If he answers that it
is due to the great distance between the East and the West, he may be
asked why it is so disposed. The question on this line will continue to
be repeated till he is obliged to admit the necessity of omnipotence,
purposefulness and wise planning (against spontaneity).

Without heat, the hard, bitter fruits would not ripen into succulent and
sweet ones. Without cold, plants would not grow their buds and would not
bear their abundant fruits.

Do you not see the benefits of the heat and cold which, with all their
merits, are sources of trouble to the bodies as well. There is a lesson
for those who ponder, and a proof that all this has been ordained by the
Wise Creator for the goodness of the world.

The air 
--------

O Mufadhdhal! Let me inform you of the blessings of the wind. Do you not
see that when it stops blowing and is stagnant, distress comes and is
about to do away with the souls? Healthy persons feel ill, the sick get
worse, fruits get spoiled, legumes get decayed, epidemics spread among
people and animals and plagues in the plants. This proves that the
blowing of the wind has been ordained by the Wise Lord for the good of
the creatures.

I will tell you about another aspect of the air. Sound is produced by
the impact of two bodies and the air takes it to the ears. People talk
day and night on their needs and daily affairs. If speech were to remain
in the air as writing remains on paper, the world would be filled with
it and people would suffer much and be disturbed and troubled, and they
would need to refresh (erase) and replace it with other much more than
their need to refresh their books and writings because that which is
spoken is much more than that which is written. The Almighty Creator
(glory be to Him) has made the air as a

hidden paper that retains the speech just for the required time until
people achieve their need of it, and then it is erased and this hidden
paper gets refreshed again to carry other speeches again and again
forever.

The air has great benefits for everything on the earth. It is the life
of these bodies and their guard from inside through that which is
breathed from outside that keeps the spirit alive. The air drives the
sounds away and carries smells from one place to another. Do you not see
how the air wafts different kinds of scents to your nose?  The same is
said about sounds. This same air is the carrier of heat and cold, which
alternate regularly for the benefit of the world. The blowing wind is
from this air that relieves people when blowing and carries clouds from
one place to another, so that all may receive their benefits, until they
are condensed to rain. The wind pollinates the trees and plants, pushes
ships to move, softens foods, cools water, inflames fire, dries up wet
things and, in general, it enlivens everything on the earth. Without
this blowing air, vegetation would dry up, animals (and living beings)
would die and things would be heated and corrupted.

The earth
---------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the four elements (earth, water, air and fire)
created by Allah the Almighty to adequately fulfil the purpose of their
creation. Among them is this earth and its expanse. If it were not so
vast, how then would it suffice for the human needs of housing,
agriculture, meadows, forests, jungles, precious herbs of medicine and
valuable minerals?

Someone may dispute the existence of empty, desolate deserts and ask
what benefits lie in them? It is said to him that these lands are the
abodes of beasts and their pastures. Besides, they are as a breather for
people if they need to replace their homelands. Many desolate lands have
been changed into palaces and gardens when people moved to live in them.
If the

earth were not so vast, people would find themselves as prisoners in
narrow, walled places and they would not be able to leave their homes
even if pressed by circumstances.

Think of the creation of the earth, in that it is so finely balanced so
as to be a fit habitat for all things; people are able to move about on
the earth and carry out their needs and living affairs, sit on it to get
rest and comfort, sleep on it quietly and tranquilly, and conduct their
businesses easily. If the earth were flickering and upset, it would be
impossible for people to erect buildings or carry out trades and
industries, and they would not live happily with the ground flickering
under them.

Think of the earthquakes that last only for a short while, and yet
people leave their homes and flee in every direction. If someone asks:
why does the earth quake? It is said to him that earthquakes and the
likes are as lessons and warnings for people to refrain from sins and
vices. The calamities afflicting them and their properties have the same
purpose, leading to their advantage and betterment in this life and, if
they are virtuous, a reward and compensation in the hereafter
incomparable to all that is in the earth. It sometimes happens that
there is an immediate reward in this world, if such reward is in the
interests of people generally or individually.

The earth in its nature that Allah has created is cool and dry and so is
the stone, but the stone is relatively harder than the earth. If the
earth were hard like the stone, could it produce any vegetation on which
human and animal life depend? Would plowing and planting be possible?

Do you not see that it is more flexible than the stone? It has been made
pliable and soft to be fit for all mans services.

Water
-----

Allah the Almighty has ordained the earth to be in a gradual slope from
the north to the south (the northern parts of the earth are at higher
levels than the southern parts). Allah has made the earth like this to
allow water to flow on its surface and, after irrigating the lands, to
flow into the sea, just as a roof is made sloping from one side to
another to prevent water from gathering in one place. The earth has been
made so for the same reason. If it were not so, the whole earth would be
swamped with water, and this would trouble people and block their ways
and paths.

If water were not so abundant and flowing through springs, valleys and
rivers, it would fail to suffice the needs of men, animals and plants. A
shortage of water would affect all kinds of beasts, birds and fishes and
all aquatic living creatures as well.

Besides it has other benefits of which you are aware yet ignorant of
their great value and merit. Water is the source of life for all animate
creatures and plants. It may be mixed with different drinks to be
delicious to drinkers. With water, bodies and other things are cleansed
of dirt. Soil is dampened with water to make it fit for different works.
With water, fire is extinguished when it flares up and people face
dangers. Exhausted people refresh themselves by bathing with water; and
there are many other benefits that are known only at the time of need.

If you have any doubts about the benefit of abundant water in the seas,
you should know that it is the abode of many different kinds of fishes
and aquatic creatures. It is a treasure house of pearls, rubies,
ambergris and various other kinds of precious materials that are
extracted from under the seas. At seashores, there are different plants
that provide good perfumes and herbs for drugs. Furthermore, water is a
means of travel and trade between distant countries, such as Iraq and
China. If these long-distance trades had no means except to be carried
on backs, they would become corrupted and remain in their

countries and in their keepers hands because the costs of carrying them
would be much more than their actual prices; therefore, no one would
venture to carry them, and this would lead to the waste of many
necessities people require and would end the living of those who carry
them and live by means of them. 

Likewise, if the air were not so abundant and vast, people and other
creatures would suffocate because of the smoke and vapours that would
congest in it.

Fire
----

If fire were spread like water and air, it would burn the world and all
that it had. Rather, it has been stored in things so as to be obtained
only when needed. It is preserved with fuels and firewood as long as it
is needed. It does not require fuels to burn, for it does not cost much,
nor does it appear everywhere, for it would burn everything. It has been
created in accurate consideration so that people may make use of its
benefits and avoid its harms.

It has another characteristic: it has been assigned only for the benefit
of man. Animals have no need of fire nor do they enjoy it. Man would
suffer much in his living if there were no fire.  

Since Allah the Almighty has ordained it to be so, man has been endowed
with palms and fingers to enable him to light up the fire and make use
of it, while the animals have not been gifted with these abilities.
However, animals have been gifted with patience for the difficult lives
they lead so that they would not be at a loss as man would be when there
was no fire.

I will tell you about one of the benefits of fire in a little thing
whose importance is so great: it is the lamp that people use to satisfy
their needs in the night. Without it, people would spend their lives (at
night) as if they were in graves. How could one read, write, weave or do
many other things in the darkness of

the night without the light of fire? What would be the state of one who
is afflicted with a harm or illness at night when he needs a surgical
treatment or bandage?

The benefits of fire in cooking, warming the body, drying the moist
substances, dissolving hard materials, and many other things cannot be
counted.

The climate 
------------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the clear weather and the rainfall and their
alternating in the world and the goodness they have. If one of them
(clear weather or rainfall) continues, it causes harms to the world. Do
you not see that when rains fall for prolonged times, legumes and
vegetables decay, animals become slack, the air becomes clammy and
causes many diseases and the roads and streets are damaged. When the sky
remains clear for prolonged times, the earth becomes dried up, plants
wither, the waters of springs and rivers decrease which causes harms to
animals and plants, the air becomes dry and other kinds of diseases
occur. When they alternate thus regularly, the climate becomes moderate
and each of them improves the demerits of the other and everything goes
right.

If someone asks: why has it not been ordained that no harm should be in
any of that at all? It ought to be said to him that it is so in order to
make man suffer somehow and feel some pain to encourage him to refrain
from sins. As when mans body suffers from some illness and needs bitter
drugs to recover and restore soundness, man, likewise, when he
transgresses and exceeds the limits, needs what pains him and makes him
suffer so that he may refrain from his faults and turn back to the right
path of goodness and guidance. If a monarch bestows great amounts of
gold and silver on his people, will not his munificence impress their
minds with reverence and admiration and will not his mention be raised
everywhere? Can one rainfall, which falls on a country and brings with
it

goodness and blessings that are more than all of the gold and silver of
all countries, be compared to the gold and silver of that monarch?  

Do you not see what a great blessing this little rain is for people? Yet
people are heedless thereof. It may happen that someones needs or works
are disturbed due to rainfall, and then he becomes angry and
discontented, preferring the trivial benefit to the great one that is
better for his end. It is because of his ignorance of the lofty boons
therein.

Consider the falling of the rain on the earth and the wise ordainment in
it! It has been ordained to pour from high up in order to include all
high places and irrigate them. If the rain were to fall from a certain
side or angle, it would not include the high places and so the lands
there could not be cultivated. Do you not see that the lands that are
irrigated artificially are less than those irrigated by rains? It is so
because the rains cover all the earth, and the vast lands and the feet
of mountains may be cultivated to provide many crops.

By the fall of rains, people are relieved from the trouble of carrying
water from one place to another and from the quarrels happening amongst
them over the sources of water until the strong people of influence
aggressively obsess the source of water and deprive the weak of it.

Then, since rainwater has been ordained to fall onto the earth, it has
been made into drops, showering to penetrate into the earth and irrigate
it. If it poured, it would flow on the surface of the earth and would
not penetrate into it; besides that, it would destroy the plants.
Therefore, rains have been ordained to fall in mild showers to enliven
the earth and make seeds and plants grow.

There are other blessings in rainfall. It tempers the bodies, purifies
the air, removes pollutions and epidemics, and cleans the plants from
mildews and the like besides many other

benefits.

If someone asks: does rain not cause heavy damage in some years when it
falls in intensive quantities or hails which destroy the fruitful plants
and cause much humidity in the air that in turn causes many diseases
against man and plants?

In response, it is said that this damage is sometimes needed to reform
man and make him refrain from sins and vices, and then the benefit he
receives in his religion is more important than the damage he receives
in his properties.

Mountains
---------

O Mufadhdhal! Look at these mountains formed of earth and stone, which
the ignorant consider useless and unnecessary whereas they have many
advantages. From among these advantages is that snow falls on the
heights of mountains and remains there till the time of need. When snow
melts, it makes springs and rivers flow with water and makes different
kinds of trees and herbs grow that do not grow in plains and other
places. Mountains have caves and holes for beasts. Mountains are used as
strong forts against enemies. From mountains, rocks are cut and taken
for buildings and querns. They contain mines of precious stones and
different minerals, besides many other advantages that no one knows save
the Knower, the Wise.

Minerals
--------

O Mufadhdhal! Think of the different kinds of minerals and precious
stones that are extracted from the mines in the mountains such as
plaster, lime, gypsum, arsenic, zinc, mercury, copper, tin, silver,
gold, aquamarine, beryl, and various other kinds of rocks besides tar,
sulphur, petroleum and others that people use to meet their needs. Is it
unclear to anyone with reason that all these treasures have been laid in
the earth for man to take out and with them satisfy his needs?

People, in spite of their greed, have failed to discover all these
treasures. If they could, with all the knowledge they have, do that,
definitely gold and silver would appear and spread everywhere in the
world and then they (gold and silver) would lose their real value before
people and would be of no use in buying, selling or other dealings.
Rulers would not gather wealth, and people would not save any for their
heirs.

Nevertheless, people have been given the knowledge to make brass from
copper, glass from sand, silver from lead and gold from silver and the
like that have no harm.

Just see how they have been given the knowledge of that which has no
harm and have not been given the knowledge of that which would harm them
if they had it.

If someone enters into mines, he arrives at a great valley flowing with
abundant water, the bottom of which no one can reach or cross, and after
it there are near mountains of silver.

Now, think of the wisdom of the Wise Creator in His creation. He has
intended to show His people His omniscience and vast treasures so that
they might know that if Allah had willed to give them as much silver as
there are mountains, he would do so, but there would be no good to them
in that because this precious mineral would lose its real value before
people and then it would not benefit them. Rare things are precious and
dear, but when they are available in abundant quantities and everyone
can attain them, they no longer remain precious or dear because things
are dear due to their rarity.

Plants
------

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the plants and the many advantages they provide.
Fruits are for food, hay is fodder for animals, firewood is fuel, wood
is used for carpentry, and the bark, leaves, roots and gums also have
many other uses.

Think if fruits were to be found accumulated on the ground

and not growing on the branches which bear them, what a disruption would
there be in our living! Nutrition would be available no doubt, but what
about the valuable benefits of wood, firewood and all the other things
mentioned above? This is besides the pleasure one feels when looking at
the beautiful scenes of plants and fruitful trees that are incomparable
with any other scene in the world.

O Mufadhdhal! Think of the revenue that has been placed in plants how
one seed produces a hundred seeds or more or less. One seed should
produce one seed but why has it not been ordained to be so? Seeds and
plants give multiple revenues because farmers need some to sow in their
farms and some others to feed on until their plants will bear fruits
later on. Do you not see that when a ruler wants to build a country, he
gives its people seeds that suffice them for planting and food until
they are able to harvest their coming fruits?

All kinds of trees are so. You find on a tree many branches. If a tree
remains isolated without having branches or shoots, people cannot cut
anything of it, and if it is afflicted with a plague to perish, the
species disappears without leaving a substitute.    

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the grains of pulses such as lentils, peas, beans
and the like! They grow in pods to be protected from plagues and harms
until they gain in strength and hardness, just like the placenta that
protects the foetus. The grains of wheat and other similar grains come
out in hard shells, pointed sharply at their ends like spears to ward
off birds and save the yield for farmers.

If someone asks: dont birds have to eat from these wheat and grains? It
is answered: yes, birds are creatures of Allah and Allah has assigned
them a share from the yields of the earth, but grains have been
protected in this way so that birds will not be able to eat and play
with these grains whenever and

however they like, which might cause terrible harms to these crops. If
these grains were bare and not protected in this way, birds would pounce
upon them and do away with them all. At the same time, birds would
suffer indigestion resulting in death and farmers would lose much.
Grains have been provided with these protective means to be kept safe,
and birds cannot take from them except a little, while most of them
remain for man who is worthier of them because it is he who has drudged
at farms and that which he needs is more than that which birds need.

Consider the wisdom in creating the trees and the different kinds of
plants! Since they always need nutriment like man and animals do and
since they have no mouths like the living beings nor can they move to
get their food, their roots have been made firmly planted into the earth
to enable them to extract their food from the earth and carry it to the
branches, leaves and fruits on them just as mothers suckle their
children.

Do you not see that the poles of tents are tied with ropes from every
side so that they will remain erect and not fall down? Likewise, plants
have roots extended into the earth in every direction to remain erect
and fixed. Otherwise, how could long date palms and great trees
withstand storms?

See how the wisdom of the Creator has preceded the skill of people in
fixing tents! People have taken their skills from the creation because
trees have been created long before tents have been invented. Do you not
see the poles of tents have been taken from the trees? Thus, crafts have
taken their skills from the ingenuities of the creation.

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the creation of the leaves of plants. You will
see lines like veins spread throughout the leaf. Some of them are thick
extending in every side throughout the whole leaf while some others are
thin extending between the thick ones and woven accurately.  If leaves
were made by man, the

leaves of one tree would not be completed in a year and many tools,
actions, dealings, speech and too much work would be required.

In a few days of spring, huge numbers of plants and leaves grow that
fill the mountains, the plains and the lands of the earth. All of that
is made without action or speech but by the Will, which is influential
over everything, and by the obeyed Command.   

Know, nevertheless, the principle underlying these fine capillaries.
They are interwoven in the texture of the whole leaf to irrigate it and
to transport water to every part of it, just as the veins spread in the
body of man to carry nutriment to every part of it.

The thick veins of the leaf have another job. They, with their solidity,
hold together the leaf to prevent it from being torn. These leaves are
similar to the leaves made by man from rags having sticks to hold them
together. The craft of man imitates the creation of Allah although it
does not reach the actuality it imitates.

Consider the pit and its importance! It has been placed inside the fruit
in order to be like a nursery plant when the original plant is damaged
or cannot be planted for any reason. Moreover, the pit, because of its
solidity, keeps the flaccid and soft fruit tenacious; otherwise, a fruit
would break and decay. Some kinds of pits are edible and some others
give oils that are used in foods and other fields.

Think, now, of that which you find on the pits of ripe dates and grapes.
What is the reason behind that and why are they in this shape? Instead
of that, there should be something inedible like that in the nabk, the
cypress and the like. It is so that man may enjoy the delicious tastes
of these fruits.

Consider the other aspects of plants. You will find that they die once
every year. The vital heat is enshrined in their twigs, and

the materials for fruit are generated in them. Then, again, they come to
life and grow to give you delicious kinds of fruits so you serve
different kinds of food. You find the branches of trees receiving you
with their fruits as if they are presenting them to you by hand. You see
flowers greeting you from atop their branches as if they are presenting
to you their breaths. Who has planned all this? Surely it is He, the
Wise Ordainer. And for what is all that? Surely, it is to entertain man
with these fruits and the lights of these flowers. How strange it is
that instead of being grateful to these blessings, man denies the Giver!

Consider the pomegranate and the skill and ingenuity that lie in its
creation! You see inside it what resembles hills of fat accumulated in
its sides and seeds aligned so accurately as if they were arranged by
hands. You see the seeds in groups and each group is wrapped with
screens fabricated uniquely and wonderfully and all these are enveloped
with the outer peel.

The artistic ingenuity therein is that since the seeds alone cannot help
each other in growing, that fat has been made between the seeds to
supply them with food. Do you not see that the roots of the seeds are
stuck into this fat? Then the seeds are wrapped with these screens to
hold them together and to not be confused. After that, the seeds are
fortified with a strong peel to enable them to stand against plagues.
This is a little of the much there is in the description of the
pomegranate. It has more than this, but we do not want to expatiate in
speech; what we have mentioned to you is enough to ponder over.

O Mufadhdhal! Think about how the weak plants carry such heavy fruits
like squash, cucumber and melon and what great wisdom there is behind
such ordinance! When these plants are ordained to bear such heavy
fruits, they are made to sleep on the ground. If they were erect like
other trees and plants, they

would not be able to bear such heavy fruits and they would perish before
their fruits ripened. See how these plants sprawl on the ground in order
to place their heavy fruits on it to carry them instead of on these weak
plants. You see gourd and melon sleeping on the ground and their fruits
scattered around them like a sleeping cat with its kittens around it for
suckling.

See how these kinds of plants grow in the very hot season, and see how
people long for their fruits and receive them gladly! If they were to
grow in the wintertime, people would refrain from them besides that they
would harm mans health.  You may find some cucumbers in the winter, but
people refrain from eating them except the gluttonous who do not refrain
from eating what harms them and diseases their stomachs.

O Mufadhdhal! Consider the date‑palms. Since there are females among
this type of tree that need to be pollinated, male trees have been
ordained to grow planting. A male palm tree is like a male animal that
pollinates the female to bear, but it itself does not bear.

Consider carefully the trunk of the date‑palm. You will find that it is
woven from extended threads with other cross ones like the clothes that
are woven by hands. It is so to be strong and hard enough to bear the
heavy leaves and fruits and to not break before violent storms and to be
firm enough for roofs, bridges and other things.

You also find wood as a textile woven with lengthwise and cross-parts
like the parts of flesh. Nevertheless, it is so hard and tenacious that
it is fit for making different tools and furniture. If it were hard like
stone, it would not be fit to be used in roofing or other things where
wood is used, like in the making of doors, beds, coffins and the like.
One of the great aspects of wood is that it floats in water. All people
know this fact, but not all of them know its great importance. Without
this aspect of wood, how could ships and vessels carry heavy

cargos and relieve people from the burden of carrying heavy goods from
one country to another? It would cost people too much besides that it
would cause many goods needed by people to disappear from the markets or
it would be difficult for people to obtain them.

Consider the herbs of drugs and the characteristics each one has. One
penetrates into the joints to release thick wastes, some others deal
with the humours of the body, some relieve of the wind, some treat
tumours, and the like.

Who then has endowed these plants with these powers, and who has made
people realize these facts in them? Surely it is He Who has created them
for this purpose. How could these facts come to mans mind by chance and
accident, as some atheists say? Well, let us allow that man has learnt
all these facts through his own intellect, reason, contemplation and
experimentation. Then how did the beasts come to realize that, so that
when a beast is afflicted with some illness or injury, it eats certain
herbs and recovers? When some birds suffer from constipation, they get
well by purgation with seawater, and there are too many other examples.

You may doubt the utility of plants in the wild lands and deserts, where
no human life exists, and think them meaningless and useless. Certainly
not! Beasts feed on these plants, and birds feed on their seeds. Their
twigs and wood are used as fuel by people. There are other benefits in
these plants. They have some substances that are used as medicines, some
for tanning hides, some with which to dye clothes, and various other
benefits.

Do you not know that one of the meanest kinds of plants is the papyrus?
Yet it has many benefits. Paper is made from papyrus that rulers and the
public need. Mats that are used by all classes of people are made from
this plant. From papyrus, covers are made to keep different utensils. It
is used as

padding between fragile utensils and in baskets so that they may not
break, besides many other benefits.

You should take a lesson from the different benefits in the little and
big things Allah has created and in those which have values and in those
which do not. The most worthless of all are dungs and excreta, which are
worthless and filthy, and yet they have an important role in
agriculture. They are incomparable in their use for plants. No vegetable
grows well except with dung and other (animal) fertilizers, which people
find dirty and avoid being near.

Know that the worth of a thing is not due to its material value. It has
two different values in two different markets. Perhaps that which is
mean in the commercial market may be precious in the market of
knowledge. Do not belittle a thing just because it is has little value.
If chemists were to realize what there is in dung, they would buy it for
the most expensive prices.

Al-Mufadhdhal said, It was then the time for the noon prayers. My master
Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) got up to prepare for the prayers and asked me to
come to him early the next day. I left so happy because of what he had
taught me, and I praised Allah for the great information I had received
from him. I spent the night extremely delighted.
