The Fourth Meeting
==================

Al-Mufadhdhal said, On the fourth day, I went to my master early in the
morning. I was permitted to come in. He asked me to sit down, and I did.
Imam as-Sadiq (s) said,

From us is praising, glorification, and sanctification to the Oldest
Name, the Greatest Light, the Exalted Knower, the Lord of glory and
honor, the Creator of mankind, the Annihilator of the worlds and ages,
the Keeper of the hidden secret, the forbidden unseen, the concealed
name and the hidden knowledge. His blessings be on the announcer of His
revelation and the executor of His mission, who He has sent as a bringer
of good tidings and a warner, and as a summoner unto Allah by His
permission, and as a lamp that gives light, that he who would perish
might perish by clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear
proof, so on him and his progeny be good blessings and pure greetings
and on him and his progeny be peace, mercy and blessings from the
ancient times until forever, and they are well-qualified for that and
they deserve it.

O Mufadhdhal, I have explained to you the evidences of creation and the
examples of the accurate, planned ordinance in the creation of man,
animals, plants and other things that have clear lessons for him who
takes lessons. Now, I will tell you about the plagues that occurred in
some ages and which some ignorant people took as an excuse to deny the
creation, the Creator and the intended ordinance. I shall tell about the
calamities and misfortunes, death and perishment that atheists and
Manicheans have denied as well as those who have claimed

that things came into existence by chance and accident. I shall refute
them, may Allah destroy them for how they turn away from the truth!

Plagues and misfortunes
-----------------------

Some ignorant people have taken the plagues such as epidemics,
jaundices, hailstorms and attacks of locusts, which occurred from time
to time, as excuses to deny the Creator and the intentional ordinance in
the creation. It is said, in answering such people: if there were no
creator, then why would worse and more horrible events than these
plagues not happen? For example, why wouldnt the sky fall on the ground,
or the ground sink, or the sun not shine at all, or rivers and springs
dry up until no water could ever be found, or the wind stop blowing
until everything would decay and become corrupt, or seawater flow over
the earth? Then, why do these plagues, such as epidemics, locusts and
the like that we have mentioned, not last for such a long time that they
would invade and devastate the entire world? In fact, they take place
for some time and then soon disappear. Do you not see that the world is
protected and saved from the great, terrible events that if even one of
them were to take place for a long time, it might cause the destruction
of the world? Thus, the world is kept safe through these simple plagues
so that people may be disciplined and reform themselves and take
lessons. Then, after not too long, when people feel desperate, these
plagues disappear; therefore, the occurrence of these plagues is as a
warning, and their disappearance is as a mercy to the people. 

The Manicheans say: if the world has a kind, merciful creator, then why
do these calamities and misfortunes take place? They say that the life
of man in this world should be free from any trouble. We say: if it is
so, man, out of ingratitude and haughtiness, will do everything that
fits neither the religion nor this worldly life. Quite often, you find
that many people

who have been nurtured in luxury and ease forget even that they are
human, or they have a Lord, or harm or misfortunes may afflict them, or
they have to be merciful to the weak, help the poor, be kind to the
miserable, and have pity for the weak and distressed. But when
misfortunes afflict them and they taste their bitterness, they awake
from their ignorance and indifference and turn back to that which they
should have been doing.

Those who deny these harmful matters are like children who hate bitter
drugs, become angry when prevented from harmful foods, dislike
disciplines and work, like to be free for amusement and idleness and
like to have anything to eat and drink. They do not know where idleness
takes them. It takes them to a bad upbringing and bad habits. Harmful,
yet delicious foods cause them different illnesses and diseases.
Disciplines bring them reform and goodness, and bitter drugs benefit
them even if they are somewhat troublesome.

If they ask: why has man not been made infallible against sins so that
he would not then need to be afflicted with misfortunes? It is answered:
how would it be if man were not praised and rewarded for the good deeds
he does? If they ask: what harm will it be to man if he is not rewarded
for the good deeds he does as long as he enjoys pleasures and bliss? It
is said to them: make an offer to a sound, reasonable man that he should
sit idly and at ease and receive whatever he wants without any effort or
work, and see whether he accepts this or not. You will find that he is
more delighted with the little he receives out of his own efforts than
the abundance he should receive undeservingly. So is the bliss of the
hereafter. It is earned by man based on his own efforts and merits. The
mercy bestowed on man in this aspect is too great. If he is rewarded for
his deeds in this life and shown the way to get that deservingly through
his own efforts, delight and happiness with what he receives will be
perfected to him. If they ask: is it

not possible that some people rely on the goodness they get even if they
do not deserve it? Then what excuse is there in preventing one who wants
to attain the bliss of the hereafter due to this argument? It is said to
them: if this were permitted to people, they would get the utmost
rabies. They would dare to commit all sins and vices and violate all
forbidden limits. Who would refrain from sins or bear hardship in the
way of virtues, and who would feel safe about himself, his family and
his properties from people if he did not fear the punishment of the
hereafter? The harm of this matter would affect people in this life
before the afterlife, and so justice and wisdom would be invalidated,
and it would give an excuse to criticize the divine ordinance that it is
not true and it puts things in other than their suitable places.   

These persons may talk about the misfortunes that afflict all people,
whether good or bad, or the ones that afflict good people while bad
people remain safe from them. They ask: how is this possible in the wise
ordinance of the Wise Ordainer, and what is the reason behind that? It
is said to them: Allah has made these misfortunes, which afflict both
good and bad people, as a reform for both kinds of people. That which
afflicts good people increases the blessings of their Lord on them and
that makes them thank Allah and be patient, while that which afflicts
bad people makes them stop their evil and refrain from sins and vices.
These misfortunes also contain good for those who are not afflicted with
them. As for the good people, they become delighted with the goodness
and righteousness they are in and become more willing to continue on
their way. But as for the bad people, they realize the mercy and
kindness of their Lord to them and the safety they are in though they do
not deserve it. And this leads them to be kind to people and forgive
those who have done them wrong.

One may say: these misfortunes afflict people through their properties;
so what about those misfortunes that afflict their

bodies and may cause them to perish, such as fire, drowning, flood, and
earthquake? It is said: Allah has made goodness for both kinds of people
in these calamities too. As for the good people, leaving this life
relieves them from its obligations and saves them from its misfortunes;
and, as for the bad people, it clarifies their burdens and sins and
prevents them from committing more sins. In short, Allah the Almighty
with His wisdom and power has ordained all things towards goodness and
advantageousness. Just like when a tree is broken down by the wind, and
a good carpenter makes from it many useful tools, so does the Wise
Ordainer. He turns the misfortunes that afflict people through their
properties and bodies into goodness and benefit. If someone asks: why do
these misfortunes happen to people? It is said to him: it is so lest
people turn to sins because of the long peacefulness they live in, and
then bad people exaggerate in committing sins and good people slacken in
doing good. Both these matters (exaggerating in committing sins and
slackening in doing good) prevail amongst people when they live at ease
and in peace, while these events that afflict them deter them and make
them turn back to their reasons. If they live free from such events,
they will exaggerate in transgression and disobedience just as the
people of ancient ages did, until they deserved perishment through great
floods and the earth was purified from them.

Death and perishment
--------------------

From among what the atheists, who deny planning and ordinance in
creation, criticize is death and extinction. They say that people should
live forever in this life free from any plague and misfortune. It is
necessary to carry the argument to its logical conclusion to see the
consequences to which it leads.

Consider that if all those who had entered this world and those who will
enter it remained and not a single one of them died,

do you not think that this earth would become too narrow for them? They
would not have enough room for their dwellings, farms or the
requirements of their living. People, although death always perishes
them, compete over abodes and farms until wars break out between them
and bloods are shed. Then, how would it be if they were born but did not
die, in spite of their greed and hardheartedness?

If people become certain that they will not die, they will not be
satisfied with anything they receive and no one will give anything to
anyone who asks him. No one will forget or overlook anything that has
happened to him. Yet, they will become wearied with this life and
everything in it, just like one who lives long becomes wearied of his
life and wishes he would die and be free from this world.

If they (the atheists) say: it should have been ordained that plagues
and misfortunes would not afflict people so that they would not wish for
death or yearn for it. We have already described that it would take
people towards transgressions and evils which would make them corrupt in
religion and life. If they (the atheists) say: people should not
reproduce so that dwellings and livings would not become narrow for
them. It should be said to them: then, most creatures would be prevented
from entering this world and enjoying the blessings and gifts of Allah
the Almighty in this life and the afterlife if only one generation, who
would not reproduce, were to enter this world. And if they say: all
people, who had been created and who will be created until the last day
of the world, should be created in that one generation. It should be
said to them: we have already said that dwellings and livelihoods would
not be enough. And if people did not reproduce, the pleasure felt
through kin relationships, their support in misfortunes, and the
pleasure and happiness of having and upbringing children would be
missed. This proves that all the claims and imaginations of the atheists
other than that which has been

ordained by the Wise Creator are wrong and nonsensical.     

Criticizing the divine ordinance
--------------------------------

A criticizer may criticize the divine ordinance from another point of
view and say: is there ordinance in this world while we see that
powerful persons oppress, transgress and rape, the weak are wronged and
humiliated, good people are poor and afflicted with distresses, bad
people are sound and wealthy, sinners and criminals are not punished
immediately? If there is in fact planned ordinance in the world, affairs
should happen according to analogy: good people should be blessed, bad
people should be deprived, powerful people should be unable to wrong the
weak, and sinners should be punished immediately. It is said in
answering this: if it were so, doing good, with which man has been
preferred over other creatures, would disappear. People would not do
good or benevolence expecting to be rewarded and trusting in what Allah
has promised in return. People would be like animals that are led by
whip and fodder. No one would act due to the certainty of being rewarded
or punished until people would emerge from humanity into animality. What
is not seen (the unseen) would not be known and no one would act except
for the present pleasures of the worldly life. Even good people would
act to earn livelihood and wealth in this worldly life only and those
who refrain from oppression and sins would do that just for fear of
immediate punishment until all peoples deeds would be done only for the
present and with no certainty of what is with Allah, and they would not
deserve the reward of the hereafter or the eternal bliss in it;
nevertheless, these things that the criticizer has mentioned wealth and
poverty, good health and affliction are not contrary to his analogy, but
they may happen according to that sometimes. 

You may find many good persons who are granted with wealth for certain
wisdom and lest people think that it is the atheists

who are provided with the means of subsistence while the pious are
underprivileged and thence prefer debauchery to piety. And you find that
many transgressors are punished when their transgressions and harms
increase against people and against themselves, as with Pharaoh when he
was punished with drowning and Nebuchadnezzar was punished with getting
lost and Belbis with killing. Allah may delay the punishment of some
evildoers and postpone the reward of some good doers till the afterlife
for some reasons unknown to people. This does not refute the planned
ordinance. Many rulers in the earth do this without annulling their
ordinances. In fact, their delaying of what they delay and hastening of
what they hasten are considered within their right of statesmanship and
farsightedness. Since all evidences and their analogy necessitate that
things have a wise creator then what prevents this Creator from managing
His creation? According to their analogy, a maker does not neglect his
craft except for one of three reasons: inability, ignorance or evilness;
but all of these are impossible in the creation of Allah the Almighty
for an unable one cannot make such great, wonderful creatures, an
ignorant one does not know what is right and wise, and an evil one does
not try to create and establish such things. If it is so, then
definitely the creator of these creatures manages them, although much of
this management cannot be understood by people. The public does not
understand much of the management of rulers nor do they know its reasons
because they do not know the secrets of the rulers nor what is there in
their minds. If the reason behind a certain management becomes known, it
will be found as right and correct. If you have a doubt regarding some
drug or food, and then it becomes clear to you in two ways or three that
it is cold or hot, will you not judge that it is as you have found and
then remove the doubt from your mind? So what about these ignorants? Why
do they not judge that this world has been created and managed

by a Wise Creator, and deny that it has been created in spite of all the
evidences before them that cannot be counted? If half of the world and
what it contained were somehow ambiguous, whether correct or not, it
would not be a good thinking or courtesy to judge that all the world had
been established out of indifference and by chance because the other
half would have accurate and perfect things that would refute such
hasty, untrue opinions. How is it then that whenever one searches, he
finds the utmost correctness and perfection so that nothing may come to
ones mind unless it is found most right and perfect?     

O Mufadhdhal, know that the name of the universe in Greek is cosmos
which means embellishment. It has been called so by philosophers and
wise people too. They called it so when they saw its perfect order and
organization. They did not call it order or organization but called it
embellishment to show that, besides its exactness and perfection, it was
the utmost in beauty and splendor.  

O Mufadhdhal! I wonder at those people who do not judge medicine to be
faulty though they see doctors commit mistakes, but they judge the world
to be neglected (with no manager) though they do not see anything
neglected in it. I really wonder at the morals of those who claim to be
wise but ignore morals among people and set their tongues free to abuse
the Exalted Creator, glory be to Him! The wonder is at the wretched
(Mani) when he pretends to have the knowledge of secrets while he is
blind to the evidences of wisdom in the creation and claims that the
creation is full of mistakes and the Creator is ignorant!

The oddest of all are the atheists who wanted to perceive by the senses
what could not be perceived by reason, and when they failed, they denied
the existence of the Creator and said: why is He not perceived by
reason? It is said: He is above the position

of reason, as sight when does not see that which is above its position.
When you see a stone rising in the air, you know that someone has thrown
it. This knowledge comes not from the sight but out of reason, because
it is reason that distinguishes and knows that a stone does not rise by
itself. Do you not see how the eyesight stops at a point and does not
exceed it? So does reason. It stops at a point in the cognizance of the
Creator and does not exceed it, but it realizes His existence through
reasoning. It is the same reason by which man realizes that there is a
soul inside him though he does not see or feel it by any of the senses.

Reason and the Creator
----------------------

And according to this too, we say: reason perceives the Creator in a way
that necessitates man to acknowledge His existence, and it does not
perceive Him in a way that necessitates man to know His qualities. If
they ask: how is a weak man charged with knowing the Creator without
knowing His qualities? It is said to them: people have been charged with
what they can do and within their abilities, that is to believe in the
Creator and to follow His orders and prohibitions, and they have not
been charged with knowing His attributes. A king does not ask his
subjects to know whether he is tall or short, white or brown; rather, he
asks them to submit to his rule and follow his orders. Do you not think
that if someone were to come to a king and say present yourself to me so
that I can know you fully; otherwise, I will not follow your orders, he
would expose himself to punishment? In the same way, he who refuses to
believe in the Creator until he knows His essence will receive His
wrath. And if they say: do we not describe Him when we say that He is
the Mighty, the Wise, and the Generous? It is said to them: these are
attributes of acknowledgment and not of description. We know that He is
wise but we do not know the essence of His wisdom, and the same can be
said about His other attributes. We see the heaven but we do not know
its essence, and we look at the sea but we do not know where it

ends. The examples of this cannot be counted, though they fail in
comparison, but they lead the reason to know the Creator. If they ask:
then why do people disagree over Him? It is said: because minds fail to
recognize the extent of His greatness and exceed their capacities in
searching to know Him, and they want to know everything about Him while
they are unable to do that or even the least of it. 

One of these examples is the sun that shines all over the world and yet
no one knows its reality. There are too many sayings about it, and
philosophers have disagreed over how to describe it. Some of them say
that it is a hollow star full of fire with a mouth agitating with
flames. Some others say it is a cloud. Some say it is a glass mass that
concentrates heat and then sends rays. Some say it is a fine, clear mass
of congealed seawater. Others say it is many parts of fires gathered
together. Some others say it is a fifth element separate from the four
elements. Then they have disagreed over its shape. Some of them say it
is like a flat page. Others say it is like a ball. They have also
disagreed on its size. Some say it is as big as the earth. Some others
say it is less, and some say it is much greater than a great island.
People of geometry say it is one hundred and seventy times bigger than
the earth.

The disagreement in the sayings about the sun shows that people cannot
realize its reality. Minds are unable to realize the reality of the sun,
which eyes clearly see and senses easily feel, then how about what is
beyond the senses and hidden from the minds? If they say: why is He
hidden? It is said to them: He is not hidden with a means, as one who
hides from people behind doors and walls. The meaning of our saying He
is hidden is that He is invisible to the eyes and minds because He is
beyond the extent of the faculties of eyes and minds, like the case with
the sun which is a creation created by Him and cannot be realized by
eyes and minds. If they say: why is He so greatly beyond that? This is a
wrong saying because it does not befit One Who is the Creator of
everything except to be different from everything and exalted over
everything. Glory be to Him the Almighty.

If they say: how is it possible that He is different from everything and
exalted over everything? It should be said to them that the truth about
things can be known in four ways: first, to see whether that thing is
existent or not; second, to know what it is in its essence; third, to
know how it is and what its description is; and fourth, to know why and
for what cause it is. There is nothing in this existence that man can
know in the Creator as it is except that he knows that He exists. If we
say: how and what is He? Knowing His essence and all things about Him is
beyond the bounds of possibility. Or we say: for what is He? It is not
valid in the description of the Creator because He, glory be to Him, is
the cause of everything, and nothing is a cause for Him. The knowledge
of man that He (the Creator) is existent does not necessitate that he
know what and how He is, just as his knowledge that the soul is existent
does not necessitate that he know what and how it is. The same can be
said about other spiritual matters. If they say: now you describe Him
due to the shortage of knowledge about Him as if He is unknown. It is
said to them: it is so, on the one hand, if minds want to know His
essence and description; and on the other hand, He is closer than every
close one when His existence is proved by satisfactory evidences. From
one side, He is clear to every one, and from another side, He is so
mysterious that no one can realize Him. So is reason. It is clear
through its evidences whereas it is hidden in its essence.    

The naturalists say that nature does nothing meaningless nor does it
leave anything incomplete and claim that wisdom proves that. It is said
to them: who has given nature this wisdom then, and how does it not
exceed the limits of anything, which is something that minds fail to
learn even after long experiments? If they prove wisdom and power to be
of nature in doing such things, they will acknowledge what they have
denied because these are the attributes of the Creator. But if they deny
this to be of nature, then this is the creation calling out that it is
the Wise Creators.

From the ancient nations, there were some people who denied the divine
will and management in things and claimed that

things came into existence by accident and by chance. They took some
signs which were unlike the usual, such as when one was born with a
finger less or more or when one was born disfigured, as evidence showing
that things were not under will and management but by accidents as they
happened.

Aristotle refuted that by saying: that which comes into being by
accident and chance is something that comes one time due to certain
factors in nature making something unusual and not like the natural
matters that happen in one form continually and successively.     

Oh Mufadhdhal, you see the different species of animals following a
regular pattern and having identical shapes. For instance, a human
infant when born has two hands, two legs with five fingers or toes in
each limb. But sometimes, as for one who is born unlike the usual, it is
because of some reason in the womb or in the substance from which the
infant grows, as it happens in some crafts when a skillful craftsman
wants to be accurate in his craft but some defect in the raw material or
tools affects his production. Such a thing may happen to the children of
animals for the reasons we have mentioned that a child may be born with
less or more or disfigured limbs, but most of them are born sound with
no defect.  

The defects that happen in some things because of some shortage do not
mean that all the things have come by accident with no maker. So are
things in nature. The saying that things have come into existence by
accident and chance is totally wrong and nonsensical.

If they say: why does such a thing happen? It is said to them: to know
that things are not created inevitably by nature nor by something else,
as some people say, but are created with will and management by a Wise
Creator Who has made nature run most of the time in certain routines and
sometimes in variation because of some temporary causes, so it is
concluded that nature is managed by the Creator and it needs His power
to attain its purposes and complete its acts. Blessed be Allah, the Best
of creators.

Oh Mufadhdhal! Take what (the knowledge) I have given you, and keep what
I have presented you, and be to your Lord grateful, and to His blessings
a praiser, and to His guardians an obeyer.

I have explained to you a part from the whole and a little from plenty
of evidences of creation and proofs of the right management and
ordinance. Think of them deeply and take a lesson.

Al-Mufadhdhal said, My master, with your assistance I acknowledge that
and will inform of it Inshallah. He put his hand on my chest and said,
Keep (memorize) it by the will of Allah and do not forget, Inshallah. I
fainted to the ground, and when I regained consciousness, he said to me,
How do you see yourself, Mufadhdhal? I said, By the help and assistance
of my master (Imam as-Sadiq), I am not in need of the book that I have
written and the knowledge is before me as if I am reading it from my
palm. Praise and thanks be to my master as he deserves.

He said, O Mufadhdhal, make your heart attentive and prepare your
attention, mind and tranquility for I shall deliver to you from the
knowledge of the heavens and the earth and what Allah has created in
them and between them of His wonderful creatures, and all kinds of
angels and their ranks and positions up until the farthest lote-tree,
and of the rest of the creation from the jinn and human beings to the
lowest seventh earth and what there is under the soil so that what you
perceive shall be a part of many parts. You may leave if you want with
the mercy and blessings of Allah. You are to us in an honorable place,
and your position in the hearts of the believers is as the position of
water to the thirsty. Do not ask me about what I have promised you until
I myself tell you. 

Al-Mufadhdhal said, I left my master with that which no one had ever
left with.
