Knowledge and sagacity of Ali
=============================

Ali was matchless so far as power of perception is concerned. The
Islamic learning rotates on the pivot of his intellect. He was the
fountain head of knowledge. There is no branch of science in Arabia
which was not founded by him or in the foundation of which he was not
the chief figure. We shall write in detail later about his great skill
in social sciences, because this topic deserves to be discussed
separately. In this chapter I propose to deal only briefly with his
knowledge of jurisprudence, scholasticism and Arabic literature, as well
as his judicial acumen. I shall be brief because many others have
written on this subject and some of them have conducted deep research. I
shall, therefore, narrate briefly those facts which they have dealt with
in detail, and shall narrate those things in detail which they have
dealt with only briefly.

I begin with the Qur'an and the Hadith (tradition) and shall write about
other sciences later so that it may become known as to how far the
following words of the Prophet proved to be true about Ali:

**“I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate”**

Ali was brought up by his cousin. He became his disciple and adopted his
habits and conduct. The Prophet's heritage became implanted in his heart
and brain. He reflected over the Qur'an with the intellect and eye of a
sage and learnt its latent realities. The circumstances provided him
ample time to reflect over the Qur'an. So long as Abu Bakr, Umar and
Uthman remained busy with the caliphate, he kept his attention directed
towards the Qur'an. He mastered its words and meanings. His tongue could
recite it eloquently and his heart was immersed in it.

His knowledge of the traditions of the Prophet was such that none else
could compete with him in the matter. And there is nothing surprising
about it, because he was always associated with the Prophet and
benefited from him more than any other companion or Mujahid did.
Whatever heard by others was heard by him and whatever was heard by him
was not necessarily heard by others.

It is a well-known fact that Ali did not narrate any Hadith from anyone
except from the Prophet. This was so because he was certain that not
even a word of the traditions of the Prophet was hidden from his ears
and heart. He was asked: “How is it that you are superior to all other
companions in the matter of the knowledge of Hadith?” He replied: “It is
so because the Prophet told me whatever I enquired from him, and if I
did not enquire about anything he himself made it known to me”

Ali was superior to all others in the matter of jurisprudence and
Islamic learning just as he acted upon them in a better way than others.
Those who were his contemporaries did not find a greater jurist and a
greater judge than him. Abu Bakr and Umar always approached him for the
solution of difficult problems. These two caliphs benefited much from
his knowledge and wisdom. Other companions of the Prophet also consulted
him for the solution of their problems. None could put forth better
arguments than him with regard to legal problems.

As regards jurisprudence Ali's knowledge was not limited to text and
orders. He was more adept than his contemporaries in other branches of
learning also, as their knowledge is necessary for a jurist (for example
mathematics).

Abu Hanifa is called 'the grand Imam' in the capacity of a jurist. He
was a pupil of Ali, because he learnt jurisprudence from Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq and the chain of his teachers when taken upwards, ended with
Ali. In the same way Malik son of Anas was a pupil of Ali through a few
intermediaries. Malik learnt jurisprudence from Rabiya. He learnt it
from Akrama. He learnt it from Abdullah and Abdullah learnt it from Ali.

Abdullah son of Abbas, who was the preceptor of all others, was asked:
“What is the ratio of your knowledge to that of your cousin i.e. Ali. He
replied: “The ratio is the same as exists between a drop and the ocean”.

The companions have unanimously quoted the Prophet as saying: “The best
judge amongst you is Ali”. Ali excelled all other persons of his time in
matters of law, because he knew the Qur'an and religious rules and
regulations better than all others, and in Islam correct judgments
depend on these two things.

He possessed such intelligence, wisdom and power of thinking that in the
event of dispute he could give the most rational judgment. His
conscience was so strong that he was capable of giving a conscientious
and just decision after examining and understanding various aspects of a
matter.

Umar ibn Khattab has been reported to have said: “O Abul Hasan! May that
problem be not auspicious for the solution of which you are not
available”.

While giving his judgment Ali had regard for the claimants as well as
for the nation and the general public. This double consideration and
regard on his part was inter-dependent. He was the first judge who
proved the rights of the people from philosophical point of view and
said that it is the duty of the rulers to pay due consideration to these
rights. Besides in the case of claimants it is also necessary to observe
justice in the case of all persons in the matter of general
administration. People are under obligation to perform certain acts for
the reformation of the society in which they live.

There is mutual relationship between the human beings, and the public
laws have joined them with one another. It is necessary to respect these
laws for the reformation of the nation and not only for achieving
personal ends.

Ali established public laws and national unity, and treated all the
individuals as one person in the matter of rights and responsibilities.
In his orders and judgments he fully observed this principle which is
being followed strictly by the civilized people of the present times.

One night Ali heard some afflicted person crying for help. He ran
towards him at once and said: “The rescuer has come”. He saw that one
man was holding another man by his collar. When he saw Ali he left his
opponent. Then he said addressing Ali: “I sold a piece of cloth to this
man for nine dirhams and did not also violate any condition of the
bargain. He gave me base coins and when I asked him to give me good ones
instead he abused and slapped me”.

Ali asked the buyer to take back the base coins and give the seller the
good coins. Then he enquired from the other person whether he had any
witness to confirm that the buyer had slapped him. He produced the
requisite evidence. Thereupon Ali asked the buyer to sit down and told
the other man to take revenge. He, however, forgave him.

When Ali saw that the claimant had forsaken his right and forgiven the
other person he did not press him to take revenge. He, however, kept
this point in view in connection with this incident that it was
necessary to take care of the rights of the common people and it was his
duty to punish the oppressors so that the link of justice might remain
firm amongst the people, and the rights of the nation might not be
violated.

He also kept in view the fact that in every community there are many
powerful and cruel persons who usurp the property and rights of the
weak, and the latter cannot take back or demand their rights on account
of weakness or fear, although it is only appropriate that their rights
should not be encroached upon. He, therefore, thought within himself:
“Who is there besides myself who should support them and claim their
rights so that they may lead a peaceful social life and should rest
assured that there is no distinction between the individuals in respect
of social rights, and their rights are safe?”

In the case mentioned above, therefore, Ali let go the person who had
been beaten but caught the aggressor by the hand and slapped him nine
times in the presence of the other person saying: “This is the right of
the ruler”.

Ali was not contented with the outward appearance of anything and was
keen to go deep into all matters. He pondered over the Qur'an and the
religion sagaciously in the same way in which other thinkers ponder over
worldly matters.

No doubt a person possessing celestial power like Ali does not content
himself with the apparent orders of the religion, the carrying out of
prescribed duties and the formalities of worship. Mostly the people look
at the religion and the orders relating to transactions and judgments in
a superficial manner. However, Ali looked at their interior and
realities also. He made these things the subject of his reflection and
research, and proved that religion is based on the principles which are
linked and related with one another. This led to the establishment of
the science of scholasticism and Islamic philosophy. Ali was the first
scholastic ('Arif) and founder of scholas- ticism. (For details see “On
Ilmul Kalam wal Irfan, ISP 82)

The ancient scholastics drank deep from this fountainhead, because they
acquired the elements and principles of scholasticism from him. The
later scholastics also admit him to be their leader, because they also
acquired guidance from him.

Wasil son of 'Ata was the chief and the central figure of Mu'tazila
sect. This was the first sect in Islam which introduced reason into
religion and advocated that the religious precepts should conform with
the principles of logic, and the correctness of religion should be
proved by means of reason.  
 Wasil son of 'Ata was the pupil of Abu Hashim son of Muhammad son of
Hanafiya and his father Muhammad was the pupil of Ali.

The same thing can be said about the Asha'ira, because they were the
pupils of the Mu'tazila, who acquired knowledge from Wasil son of 'Ata,
and he acquired it through some intermediaries from Ali.

The source and basis of Sufism lies in Nahj-al-Balaghah.

Before becoming aware of the Greek philosophy the Muslim Sufis had
acknowledged the sayings of Ali to be the source of their ideas, because
till that time Greek philosophy and Persian philosophy had not yet been
transferred to the. Arabic language.

The Almighty God willed that as in the case of religious knowledge Ali
should be the pillar and centre of Arabian learning. Not even one person
in his time could compete with him in the matter of Arabic literature.

With his perfect knowledge of syntax, eloquent tongue and great power of
thinking he formulated the rules and principles of correct Arabic
language. He confirmed it with logical reasoning and arguments. His
skill in logical reasoning can be realized from the fact that he laid
the foundation of Arabian sciences and paved the way for others to
promote them.

History shows that Ali was the founder of the science of syntax. One day
Abu'l Aswad, who was one of his companions came and saw that Ali's head
was bent down and he was reflecting about something. He said: “O
Commander of the Faithful! What are you thinking about?” Ali replied:
“In your city (i.e. Kufa) I have heard something which was expressed by
the speaker in a wrong manner. I have, therefore, decided to write an
elementary book on the principles of the Arabic language”.

He then handed over a paper ro Abu'l Aswad on which it was written that
the words are of three kinds: noun, verb and preposition.

This incident has also been narrated in another way and it has been said
that Abu'l Aswad complained before Ali that the people usually spoke
incorrect language, because since the time the Arabs had mingled, after
their conquests, with the non-Arabs, incorrect phrases had penetrated
into their conversation.

The Imam reflected a little and then asked Abu'l Aswad to write down
what he was going to dictate. Abu'l Aswad procured a pen and a sheet of
paper and then Ali said: “The Arabic language is composed of noun, verb
and preposition. Noun tells about the things which bear that name, verb
tells about the motion and action of that thing and preposition conveys
a meaning which is neither noun nor verb”. “Things are of three kinds
viz. a patent thing, a latent thing and a thing which is neither patent
nor latent”. (Some scholars of syntax say that by the third kind of
things Ali meant 'demonstrative pronoun').

Then he asked Abu'l Aswad to expand and complete the subject according
to the same 'nahw' (i.e. method or manner). From that day onwards this
branch of learning began to be called 'Nahw' (syntax).

One of the other attributes of Ali was his sharp intelligence and quick
understanding. Often it so happened that whether it was an assembly of
friends or a gathering of enemies he uttered extempore wise words, which
became proverbs and passed from one tongue to another. Difficult
mathematical problems which were enigmas for others were solved by him
in no time. It is said that a woman came in the presence of Ali and
complained that her brother had died leaving behind six hundred dinars,
but out of that money she had been given only one dinar. Ali replied:
“Perhaps the heirs of your brother consist of one widow, two daughters,
mother, twelve brothers and yourself”. And the position turned out to be
the same as was mentioned by the Imam.

One day while Ali was delivering a sermon from the pulpit, one of those
present said: “A man has died and he has left behind his widow, father,
mother and two daughters”. Ali replied at once: “The one-eighth share of
the widow will be changed into one-ninth. As the Imam gave this judgment
while he was occupying the pulpit, the problem began to be called”.
“Obligation of the Pulpit”.

Ali was the philosopher of Islam. Philosophy comes into existence by
means of wisdom and intelligence and strong power of perception and
inference. A philosopher is he who mentions a number of important
matters in a brief narrative and endeavours to live according to his
words.

Ali occupies the highest position not only among the philosophers of
Islam, but also among the unique personalities of the human race.

It is very difficult to find a person like Ali who may infer theoretical
and rational matters with the power of his intellect, and state them in
beautiful and brief sentences in such a way that time may preserve them,
and they may become proverbs. Islamic sciences and learning absorbed the
colour of humanity in their paintings by means of celestial philosophy
and their fountainhead were the two personalities viz. Muhammad and Ali.

The Imam looked philosophically at the secrets of creation, human life
and society and numerous sayings with regard to the Oneness of God,
divine matters, and metaphysics, are available. We have already remarked
above that he was the founder of scholasticism and theology. He was a
preceptor, whose skill and leadership has been admitted by every person,
who came after him with his own view or remark. In Nahj al-Balaghah he
has strung so many pearls of wisdom that, time has made him stand in the
first row of the philosophers of the world. Muhammad in fact referred to
Ali when he said: “The scholars among my followers are like the Prophets
of descendants of Israel”.


