Human rights and Ali
====================

A Difficult Test
----------------

By God! I admit the truth myself before any evidence is given against
me.

Our matter is very difficult. Our words can be understood only by the
honest hearts and the far-sighted intellects. (Imam Ali).

Ali formulated such firm rules and presented such solid views for the
rights of the human beings and the welfare of the human society, that
their roots penetrate into the depths of the earth and their branches
extend upto the heavens. All the social sciences which are prevalent at
present mostly confirm these views and principles. Although these modern
social sciences may be given many names, and may be presented in various
forms, their object is one and one only that the human being should be
protected from oppression and there should be formed a society which
should protect human rights in a better way - a society in which human
dignity should be respected and the freedom of word and action should be
safe to such an extent that none should be hurt.

The conditions and circumstances of time have a great effect on the
creation of social sciences. It is these very conditions and
circumstances which present social sciences in one shape at one time and
in another shape at another time.

When we study history and come across various events we come to know
that there has been a conflict between two different groups of human
beings and two different views and ideas. One group has been keen to be
despotic and to usurp the rights of the common man and to eliminate his
freedom, whereas the other group has been desirous of justice,
democracy, preservation of the rights of the people and their freedom.

During the past all useful movements were started by the oppressed and
the reformers always rose from amongst them so that they might put an
end to oppression and injustice and establish governments on the
foundation of equity and justice which should accord with reason as well
as the conditions and circumstances of the society.

Ali enjoys a very high position in the history of human rights. His
views were linked with the thinking of Islam. The central point of his
views was that despotism should come to an end, and class discrimination
should be eliminated from amongst the people. Whoever has recognized Ali
and heard his remarks and understood his beliefs and views about human
brotherhood knows that he was a sword drawn on the necks of the tyrants.
His entire attention was directed towards the enforcement of the rules
of equity and justice.

His thoughts and manners and his government and polities were all
dedicated to the achievement of this purpose. Whenever any oppressor
encroached upon the rights of the people or treated the weak in a
humiliating manner or ignored their welfare and threw his own burden on
their weak shoulders, Ali gave him a tough fight.

The mental upbringing of the Imam took place with this thinking that
equity and justice should be enforced in such a way that equality should
be established and one class should not enjoy any supremacy over another
class and every person should receive that to which he is entitled. His
voice remained loud continuously for the enforcement of justice, and his
mace always remained active to achieve this end. He elevated man and
always remained ready to protect him. His government was the best
specimen of administration during that period. It was a government which
was just and the protector of human rights, and one, which achieved its
end by all possible means.

The Imam realized it clearly that the society of that time was based on
fraud, deceit and harmful activities, and its reformation was necessary.
He also knew well how that society could be reformed and how much time
it would take to do so. Although he thought of the welfare of the people
in all respects, the things to which he paid his attention most was
their reformation. Nothing could stop him from making efforts in this
behalf. What he desired most was to establish truth and destroy
falsehood and none else could be more capable of making distinction
between truth and falsehood.

Ali assessed things correctly and engaged himself in his task fearlessly
according to his calculations. He never entertained any doubt with
regard to anything related to public welfare. As and when any officer or
governor oppressed the subjects Ali neither sat quiet nor connived at
their actions. He never displayed slackness when he found that some
persons had formed a group against the true government. At times his
plans to achieve his ends were opposed not only to the wishes of his
enemies but to those of his friends as well, but he did not mind this.

All this was done by him so that the right of every person to lead a
peaceful life might be ensured, and the people should not be divided
into two groups, one of whom should be very happy and the other should
be very much grieved.

Ali had clearly understood that it will be very dangerous to divide the
people into two classes and to prefer one of them to the other. This
will retard the intellects, create malice in the spirits, and introduce
oppression and injustice in the judgments and transactions, and all
sorts of mischiefs and corruptions will appear. The result will be that
ambition for life will die and the people will become pessimistic and
will entertain ill-will towards one another. Consequently the society
will be ruined. So long as these two classes exist in a society a
conflict between them is inevitable and it will involve the loss of many
lives.

During the last days of the caliphate of Uthman the dignitaries of the
state and especially the members of the Umayyad family, who were the
kinsmen and relatives of the caliph had made it a practice that they
openly opposed the Islamic rules and regulations. They humiliated the
people, treated them like slaves and made them so much afraid of the
ruler that they could not pick up courage to stand before him and
mention their grievances. They played with their lives in the same
manner in which they played with their property. They did not refrain
from shedding the blood of the people for their personal benefit and
none could dare take revenge. They were not afraid of taking bribes or
looting the property of others.

Their continuous activities, conditions and circumstances showed what
their intentions were. It was clear that they were going to besmear
their hands with the blood of the people, to trample upon their rights
and to change the caliphate into kingship and the Islamic democracy into
despotism and dictatorship of an individual. The position of the members
of this party, between the very just conduct of Ali and their personal
avarice, was that of gamblers.

On the one hand Ali was determined to enforce equity and justice with
all his might, and on the other hand these persons were keen to have the
reins of government in their own hands and to possess as much wealth and
property as possible. Between these two conditions they acted like
gamblers, hoping to seize an opportunity to bring about a revolution and
consequently to appropriate all benefits themselves, entertaining the
worst passions and desires in their minds.

There is no doubt about the fact that the responsibility assumed by Ali
was very difficult and onerous. Various reasons and intricate
circumstances had made Ali face many difficulties which could not be
overcome easily. The world of that time was topsy turvy, the conditions
were revolutionary and the events were frightening and the
responsibilities of Ali were so great and burdensome that the caliphate
and the religion of Islam depended on them. By solving these problems
and overcoming these difficulties Ali performed a task which made his
qualities known to the world. The world came to know how mindful he was
of public rights, how determined he was to promote individual and
collective virtues, and with what patience and perseverance he achieved
his objects.

Ali's difficulties were just like the difficulties experienced by the
Prophet when he made known to Quraysh that he had been appointed to the
Prophetic mission and they had turned against him. On the one side there
was truth and justice and equity and equality, and on the other side
there was treachery, profiteering and egotism. The Prophet wanted to
introduce truth, justice, equity and equality whereas the Quraysh were
bent upon practising treachery, profiteering and egotism.

Ali had also to face a similar difficulty. However, it was viewed to be
a difficulty by others. So far as Ali was concerned even the greatest
difficulty could not make him deviate from his object. If another person
possesses the strength and perseverance which Almighty God had given to
Ali every difficulty will become easy for him as well. What was
intolerable for Ali was that he should sit in seclusion and not enforce
equity and justice - that he should crush the spirit of freedom and not
sow the seeds of virtue.

The Prophet blew a voice in the ears of Abu Sufyan, Abu Lahab, Umm
Jamil, Hind - the liver-eater, and the Quraysh tradesmen, on account of
which the foundations of their plans were demolished, their structure
was broken and their roofs came down on the ground. However, this very
voice was a good tidings and a message of happiness for the Muslims and
the helpless people. He said to Abu Talib: “Dear Uncle! Even if these
people place the sun on my right hand and the moon on my left hand so
that I may abandon the invitation to Islam I shall not do so till
Almighty God makes this religion victorious or I lay down my life”.

One day the elders of Quraysh said to Muhammad: “If you have introduced
this new religion in order to accumulate wealth we shall place so much
wealth at your disposal that you will become the richest person amongst
us. If your object is to acquire high position, we are prepared to
acknowledge you to be our chief. And if you want to become a king we are
ready to accept you as our king”.

He said in reply: “My object in inviting people to Islam is not to
acquire wealth or position, nor am I desirous of becoming your king. I
extend this invitation because God has sent me to you in the capacity of
a Prophet and has revealed the Book to me. He has ordered me to warn you
of His torture and to give you good tidings of Paradise. I have conveyed
God's message to you. If you accept it you will be prosperous in this
world as well as in the Hereafter, and if you reject it I shall remain
patient till God gives His judgment about you and myself”.

What did Ali do? What was his attitude towards the son of Abu Sufyan and
Hind, the liver-eater, and towards the traders, who bought and sold
positions and offices, and towards the soldiery, who blindly sacrificed
their lives for the benefit of others, and towards those, who had sold
their religion and beliefs at the hands of falsehood? Ali also blew a
voice in their ears which demolished the foundations of their designs,
and made their structures and roofs collapse. And this very voice became
the good news of happiness and message of comfort for the righteous and
pious persons. He said: “Your powerful are weak and your weak are
powerful. So long as the stars revolve in the sky I shall not at all
give a judgment opposed to justice. By God I shall do justice so far as
the oppressor and the oppressed persons are concerned. I shall put a
cavessor in the nose of the oppressor and pull him towards truth even if
he may dislike it most. I swear by God that I admit the truth before any
evidence is given against me. I do not care whether I myself am
walking -towards death or death is coming towards me”.

One day some persons said to Ali “We are respectable members of the
community”. He said to them: “An abject person is respectable in my eyes
till I recover his right and the respectable person is weak in my eyes
till I recover the right (of the weak person) from him”.

We shall now examine how far Ali put these words of his into practice
and how he dealt with the people.


