Conditions prior to Ali
=======================

Before we explain what ideas and beliefs Ali held about human
brotherhood and how he respected human rights it appears necessary to
mention what the Prophet did for the welfare of humanity, what rules and
regulations he enacted, and how far he respected human rights. It is
necessary to do so, because Ali's only responsibility was to enforce the
rules promulgated by the Prophet and to accomplish what he had wished.
What Ali did was a complement of the acts of the Prophet and every step
taken by him was linked with the steps taken by the Prophet.

The Prophet of Islam paid full attention to the material and social
conditions of the society. Islam enacted rules and regulations for the
human society in the same manner in which it enacted them for the
individuals.

Islam attaches so much importance to the human brotherhood and society
that it treats every national service to be an act of worship - rather,
national service enjoys precedence over the performance of religious
rites. The Prophet of Islam has said: “Resolving differences and
disputes is better than recommended prayers and fasting”.

The following incident shows clearly how much the Prophet was concerned
about the welfare of the nation and the society:  
 Ibn Abdullah says: We (i.e. the companions) were accompanying the
Prophet in a journey. Some of us were fasting whereas others were not.
It was summer season. We halted at a place. No shade was available to us
except the sheets of cloth which we were carrying. There were many
amongst us who were protecting their faces from sunshine with their
hands. Those of us who were not fasting stood up and pitched the tents
and provided water to the animals. Thereupon the Prophet of Islam said:
“Today those persons who are not fasting have appropriated the entire
spiritual reward to themselves”.

This incident shows that fasting which is an important mandatory article
of worship ceases to be valid during journey so that one may not show
laxity in economic matters for that reason and may not become incapable
of serving the creatures of God.

The Prophet has also said: “When anyone of you sees an indecent thing
being done he should stop it with his hands and if he cannot do so he
should stop it with his tongue. And if he cannot stop it with his tongue
he should condemn it in his heart. And this (i.e. the third alternative)
is the weakest stage of faith”.

'Ordering to do good and restraining from evil' is such an explicit
order in Islam that by its means every sort of good can be done to
others, and all types of evil can be eliminated. There are many
traditions quoted from the Prophet which go to show that whoever renders
any service to the nation is superior to a devout person. This is about
common persons who render service to the nation. In case, however, one,
who renders such service, is also a scholar, he will no doubt be
superior to millions of devout persons in the eyes of the Prophet just
as the moon is superior to millions of stars.

The Prophet of Islam has said: “A scholar is decidedly superior to a
devout person in the same manner in which the moon is superior to the
stars”.

The Prophet has praised wisdom because it is wisdom which endeavours to
find out ways and means for the welfare of the people. One can do good
to the people only by means of wisdom. The Prophet says: “An hour's
reflection is better than a year's worship”. (In some traditions it has
been said that it is better than seventy years' worship).

Islam has paid full attention to the welfare of human society and its
unity and order, as well as to its means of livelihood, and has drawn
the attention of the people to the bounties of the earth and the
blessings of work. ***“Almighty God has created all the gifts of the
earth for you. The earth has been created for the creatures. It is God
who has subjected the earth to you.*** ***Walk on its paths and eat the
provisions made available to you by God”. (67:15)***

Islam has made it obligatory for man to thank others. One can be
thankful to God only when one thanks others, because one who does not
recognise the creatures cannot recognise God.

\`One who has not thanked the people has not thanked God'.

The Prophet has praised useful activities very much. He has not
contented himself with praising such activities but has also treated
worth kissing those hands which are swollen due to excessive work. He
says: “This is the hand which is liked by God and His Prophet”.

The following narration goes to show how great the Prophet considered
the useful tasks and the measures of public welfare:

The companions of the Prophet saw a well-built man and wished that he
might have spent his strength by way of jihad in the path of God.
Thereupon the Prophet said: “If this person has come out to serve his
weak and aged parents it is a task in the path of God. If he has come
out to earn for his children this is also a task in the path of God. If
he has come out to earn for his wife so as to protect her from illegal
things this too is a task in the path of God. And if he has come out to
earn something for himself so that he may not have to beg is also a task
in the path of God”.

The books of Hadith contain many traditions of the Prophet which show
that he appreciated work very much and had great regards for those who
worked hard. He says: “God likes a believer who works and earns. No food
is better than that earned with one's own efforts”.

Hence, when work is such a valuable thing and is even regarded to be
holy it is necessary for us to work with perseverance. When a person
works hard he will benefit himself as well as others. His presence in
the society will be considered to be auspicious and God will also like
him.

The Prophet says: “God likes that when someone of you does a work he
should do it properly”.

We have said above that Islam has subjected the earth to man. He walks
on it and utilises its bounties. The question however, arises as to what
attitude Islam adopted in the matter of distribution of these bounties?

Are all the bounties mean for a particular class to the exclusion of
others? Is only one group of people entitled to benefit from them, and
are others to remain deprived? Or should they be distributed on the
basis of efforts and need? Are these bounties to be collected and stored
by the kings, the aristocrats, the rich and the usurpers, or should they
be divided justly among all persons?

Islam has looked at humanity with the eye of justice and logic and has
enacted rational laws for it. It has neither deprived anyone of his
share nor given him more than his due. Every effort carries a reward and
it is necessary for the society to honour this reward. A good society
does not allow that a hard worker should starve, and an idle person
should benefit from the proceeds of the former's work. Nor does a good
society mean that a worker should not get the reward for his work and an
idle and good-for-nothing person should usurp all the bounties, as
happened in the societies of the earlier time and as Bani Umayyah
endeavoured to do after the advent of Islam viz. that they should
enslave all others and utilize their property and play with their lives
as they liked.

We find that Islam has prohibited extravagance and improper adornment,
especially in a society in which the majority of the people are
indigent. Its reason is that if there is extravagance and improper
adornment on one side there will be poverty and hunger on the other side
and also because none is entitled to usurp the proceeds of the efforts
of others; and life of pleasure in a poor society is possible only when
some persons feed themselves on the proceeds of the efforts of others.
The Prophet has treated the houses of the spendthrift persons to be the
abodes of Satan. He says: “The houses of the devils are cages which have
been covered by the people with silk and brocade”.

The Qur'an says:

***“There were many cities whose residents were drowned in pleasure. We
annihilated them and their houses were ruined. None was left to reside
there except a few..”. (28:58)***

At another place the Qur'an warns the people in a very eloquent manner
and says:

***“When We wish to destroy a city We order its pleasure-loving citizens
to become libertines (i.e. We provide them the means of the life of
luxury and pleasure) so that they may become deserving of annihilation
and then We destroy that city”. (17:16)***

Islam has prohibited living a life of pleasure and extravagance while
one lives amongst the indigent, as it disheartens them, and has
obstructed all paths leading towards it. Tyranny and oppression by the
governors and the officials was one such path. The Prophet prohibited
and declared unlawful hoarding, taking work from the labourers without
paying wages, becoming owner of land without doing anything to develop
it, usurping the property of others, and other similar acts of
oppression. He said about hoarding: “One who hoards is a sinner”.

The Prophet of Islam warned of terrible torture to those who usurp land
and said: “Almighty God will put a chain of the seven layers of land
round the neck of a person who usurps the lands of others”.

He also said: “One who usurps the property of others will meet God on
the Day of Judgment in such circumstances that He will be annoyed with
him”.

Islam has prohibited all kinds of usury. The Qur'an says about usury:

***“O believers! Do not go on consuming compound interest”. (3:130)***

At another place it says:  
***“..Allah has allowed business and disallowed usury..”. (2:275)***

Usurers have been warned of severe torture, because it is a sort of
forced labour and amounts to enslaving others”. [^1]

Justice means that one should get wages equal to one's work. If the
people do not usurp the property of others and do not hoard the
commodities to earn large profit wealth cannot become centred in a few
hands.

If man and his hard work had been given their due importance in the
society, servitude and slavery would not have become current. As opposed
to corrupt societies in which man's worth was assessed keeping in view
his wealth Islam has a much higher criterion for assessing the worth of
man.

The worst sin which can be committed in a society is this that the
government and the profiteers should unite to exploit the weak and
helpless people. The Qur'an says:

***“Do not eat one another's property unlawfully nor give bribes to the
rulers so that you may misappropriate whatever you can out of the
property of others, although you know”. (2:188)***

The Prophet has said: “No food is better than that earned with one's own
hands”.

In Surah al-Zilzal of the Qur'an it has been said:

***“Whoever does something evil equal to an atom will see its result”.
(99:8)***

It has been said: “Every person is pledged to his actions”.

Although Islam has acknowledged wealth as personal property, the Islamic
laws have been formulated in such a way that wealth may not be
concentrated in a few hands and they may not enjoy all its benefits and
humiliate others and subject them to forced labour. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***“..So that wealth may not become a plaything in the hands of your
rich..”. (59:7)***

Thus according to the Qur'an and Hadith the wealth belongs, in the first
instance, to the community, and the members of the community can utilize
it according to their needs and efforts. It is for this reason that
usurpation of other people's property has been disallowed in Islam and
hoarding of surplus property has also been prohibited.

This was the basis of the Prophet's fiscal policy and he set examples in
this behalf by his words and actions, which must be followed. [^2]

Rafa'a bin Zaid was one of the dear companions of the Prophet. In one of
the battles he was killed with an arrow. People came to the Prophet to
condole Rafa'a's death and said: “O Prophet of God! Rafa'a was lucky. He
died a martyr's death. By these words they wanted to console the
Prophet, but he was not consoled and said: “Certainly not. The turban
which he took out of the booty of Khaybar is still a flame like fire”.

Notwithstanding the fact that Rafa'a had been killed while performing
jihad the Prophet treated him to be a sinner because he had taken
something very insignificant out of public property, of his own accord,
although he ought to have waited till the property was divided.

The attitude adopted by Islam towards the usurpers and the profiteers
can be judged from the fact that it has attached great importance to
human life. Only a living person is the spirit of this universe and God
has created all things for him. In the circumstances how can he be
deprived of life and means of livelihood and how can it be possible to
permit some persons to deprive others of the means of livelihood because
of their being stronger than them?

In the eyes of the Prophet of Islam wealth is meant to ensure
comfortable life for all human beings. Just as human beings have equal
rights to utilize sunlight and air in the same way they have equal
rights over the means of life which are the products of sunlight and air
and none is entitled to deprive others of these benefits.

The Prophet has said: “All persons have equal rights over three things
viz. water, vegetation and fire”. To whichever community a person may
belong matters little; for he is entitled to enjoy the fruits of his
labour. Every member of human brotherhood is under obligation to help
others, and all of them must make collective efforts for the reformation
and improvement of their affairs.

It is the duty of human brotherhood to recognize the rights of the
individuals and give them full freedom to earn their livelihood so that
they may work according to their capabilities and enjoy the proceeds of
their labour. It is also necessary for the members of the society to
help others and not to make their own freedom an obstacle in their path.
It is neither permissible for the human brotherhood to oppress the
individuals nor is it permissible for the individuals to harm the
brotherhood.

It is necessary for the individuals to keep in mind the welfare of
others in the same manner in which they take care of their own welfare.
The Prophet has said: “Every one of you is a guardian and every one of
you will be answerable for his wards. None is entitled to harm others”.
The Prophet has explained this point with a very fine example as
narrated below:

Some persons boarded a boat and every one of them occupied his seat. In
the meantime one of them rose from his seat, picked up an axe and began
making a hole at the place which was occupied by him. On others having
asked him what he was going to do he replied that it was his seat and he
was at liberty to do there whatever he liked. Thereupon others held him
by the hands and thus saved him as well as themselves from drowning. If
that man had been left to himself he as well as others would have been
drowned.

It is obligatory for every person to prevent evil in whichever form it
may be committed, and to make efforts to ensure the welfare of the
society. The Prophet has said: “Whoever sees something evil being done
must stop it”.

The Prophet of Islam explained to his followers every now and then that
good morals take birth from practical training and not only from verbal
recommendations and advice. People should be shown kindness practically
and not only verbally. The Prophet did not remain aloof from the people;
he mixed with them freely, heard patiently what they said, and served
them as all great persons do.

Abu Hurayra says: “Once I accompanied the Prophet to the bazaar. He
purchased some things from a shop-keeper and advised him to take only
reasonable profit on the sale of his merchandise, not to hoard things,
not to earn anything by unlawful means, and not to think that he was
entitled to comfortable life whereas others were not”.

Abu Hurayra wanted to carry the things purchased by the Prophet, but he
stopped him from doing so, and said with a smile: “Leave the things.
Their owner has a prior right to carry them”.

The Prophet always mistrusted the kings and did not give them any
position in the society because they are corrupt and also corrupt
others. The Almighty God says:

***“When the kings enter a city they destroy it and humiliate its
respectable persons”. (27:34)***

One of the events which show that the Prophet did not like glorification
is this that on the day on which his son Ibrahim died a solar eclipse
took place. Thereupon the people said that sky was also mourning the
death of the Prophet's son. When the Prophet heard this sentence he
addressed the people with these words: “The sun and the moon are the
signs of God. They are not eclipsed because of the death of any person”.

The Prophet's teachings consisted of this that one should spend one's
life in as simple a manner as possible, and there should be no intricacy
or formality in it. This way of leading life is the basis of Islam. If
Islamic problems are studied carefully it appears that all the problems
have emerged from one source which is very deep and covers all problems.
That source is simplicity untainted with fraud, or deceit or in other
words \`sincerity with life'.

Once the Prophet hit a bedouin unintentionally with a stick. He then
insisted that the bedouin should also hit him in the same manner. He
mounted the pulpit and said: “Whomsoever I may have hit on his back
should take revenge from me and if I have taken the property of anyone
he should compensate himself out of my property”.

The Prophet had never hurt anyone. However, what he said was sincerity
towards life which he manifested in the best manner.

Just as his life was free from hypocrisy and weakness it was also
untainted with pride. He mended his own shoes, and clothes, milked his
goats, helped the members of his family in household matters, carried
bricks along with his companions and tied stones on his belly on account
of hunger.

This was sincerity towards life which is confirmed by all the narrations
quoted above with regard to the Prophet. As regards the rulers they have
to shoulder so many responsibilities that they have to become the
servants of the society and not oppressive and rebellious chiefs or
thieves or dacoits.

The biography of the Prophet shows that once the residents of some place
complained that the governor posted there had taken presents and gifts
from the people. He investigated the matter, and it transpired that the
complaint was true. He was very much annoyed upon this, summoned the
governor and asked him: “Why did you take things to which you were not
entitled?” The governor replied: “O Prophet of God! Those were
presents”.

The Prophet said: “Supposing that you had stayed on at home would the
people have come to give you presents?”  
 He then ordered the governor to deposit the property in question into
the public treasury and also removed him from the office.

Thus the Prophet directed the people not to give bribes and also told
the officer not to indulge in such nefarious activities. As he had been
appointed the ruler of the people he should have been like a father to
them and not like a robber.

When the Prophet was so much annoyed at the governor accepting presents
it can very well be imagined how much he must have been annoyed when
wealth was looted and the rights of the people were encroached upon.

In Islam a ruler is appointed by the selection, and under the authority
of the people [^3] and he rules the people according to their wishes. He
is always anxious about the welfare of the people. Islam has made it
necessary for the rulers to consult their subjects in important matters,
the proper solution whereof is difficult. As the Qur'an says:

***“They perform their tasks with mutual consultation”. (42:38)***

The caliph is not entitled to appropriate the property of the people
without their consent, nor is he competent to make any law, because all
the requisite laws are those which have already been enacted by Islam,
and he is entitled only to safeguard the lives, property and honour of
the citizens. It is not permissible for a ruler to neglect oppressed
persons, and not to protect their rights from the transgression of the
tyrants.

It is also not proper for a ruler to wait for the oppressed person to
come up to him with a complaint. On the contrary it is his duty to go
and help the oppressed person himself, because it is possible that the
oppressed person may not pick up courage to make a complaint or may not
be able to find his way to the ruler. Islam has severely reproached an
oppressed person who silently bears oppression and humiliation and has
said that such a person is cruel to himself. Islam has commended one's
efforts to defend one's life, property and honour.

The Prophet has said: “One who gives up his life opposing oppression and
tyranny is a martyr”.

The Prophet has also said: “If people see a tyrant committing oppression
and do not hold his hand it is likely that all of them may become
subjected to Divine torture”.

Islam has considered all human beings to be the brothers of one another.
It has also campaigned against religious fanaticism. The Qur'an says:

***“There is no compulsion in the matter of faith”. (2:256)***

It has put up the toughest fight against family or tribal bias. The
Prophet has said: “Man is the brother of man, whether he likes it or
not”.

The Qur'an says:  
***“We have bestowed dignity upon human beings, provided them with means
of transport on land and water, given them pure things to eat and given
them superiority over many creatures”. (17:70)***

Whenever the Prophet addressed the people his address was meant for all
human beings whether Arabs or non-Arabs and whether white, yellow or
black. He addressed them as kind and sympathetic, brothers of one
another joined together with the relationship of humanity and
irrespective of their nationality etc. If there was any difference
between them it was on the basis of good deeds and not on account of
colour or race.

The Prophet has said: “O people! Your Lord is One. You have also a
common ancestor Adam. No Arab is superior to a non-Arab and no non-Arab
is superior to an Arab and similarly no red-coloured person is superior
to a white-coloured person and no white-coloured person is superior to a
red-coloured person. And if a person enjoys superiority over others it
is on account of his piety. Those of you who are present should convey
this message to those who are absent”.

[^1]: There is great difference between usury and trade. The traders
procure the provisions from appropriate place at cheaper rates. Every
person cannot do this. The traders take these commodities to suitable
markets for sale. At times they earn some profit and at other times they
sustain loss. That is not the case with the usury. The money-lender does
not make any efforts, is not contented with a small profit and does not
sustain any loss. Hence the difference between the two kinds of
transactions is evident.

[^2]: Those who have studied the Qur'an are aware that Islam neither
supports the condemned capitalism nor the unnatural communist system. It
acknowledges the institution of individual ownership so that every
person may make the best use of his capabilities. As only legal
restrictions are not sufficient for economic reform Islam has also
endeavoured to attain this object by moral training. This is the main
difference between the material systems and Islam. Communism binds our
entire existence with law and a as a result thereof we are reduced to a
machine. Consequently we cannot use our will and determination and they
wear away gradually.

[^3]: This form of government is accepted by all Muslim sects, with the
difference that the Shi'a regard it as justified only during the
occultation of the Imam of the Age. Otherwise the Shi\`a give preference
to those who were appointed or designated by the Prophet and the Imams.
But according to the Sunnis immediately on the death of the Prophet,
this form became the only right form of the government. From the Shi'a
point of view, since the major occultation of Mahdi, the Imam of the Age
in 329 A.H. no particular person has been appointed to be the head and
leader of the Muslim ummah. That is why in the traditions related to
leadership during this period only the general qualities and
characteristics required to be possessed by a leader have been
mentioned. This shows that it is upto the people themselves to choose a
person as their leader, having following qualities and
characteristics: \* Faith in God, His revelations and the teachings of
His Prophet. \* Integrity, adherence to the laws of Islam, and
earnestness about their enforcement. \* Adequate knowledge of Islam,
appropriate to his prominent position. \* Enough competence for holding
such a position and freedom from every defect not in keeping with
Islamic leadership. His standard of living being equal to that of the
low-income people. In this connection there is enough material in the
sermons of Ali and in the epistles he sent to his officials. In a number
of epistles it has been emphasized that an administrative officer should
be free from love of money, ignorance, inefficiency, outrage, timidness,
bribery, and violation of Islamic injunctions and traditions and should
not be guilty of shedding blood. (For further details see: “Philosophy
of Islam” ISP, 1982).


