Freedom and its sources
=======================

The method adopted by Imam Ali in the matter of politics, rulership and
administration of the State was based on the principle of the freedom of
the people. [^1] He had an ardent belief in this freedom which can be
observed in all his actions. Whether he said something, or gave some
orders, or prohibited some actions, whether it was at the time of peace
or war, or made an appointment of a governor, and in whatever manner he
treated the people or his children or worshipped God - his conduct was
based on all such occasions on this freedom.

The question, however, arises as to why the people should be free, why
they should work according to their will and determination. From where
did they get the freedom and what are its limits? According to Ali the
real cause of this freedom is the human society which must proceed on
the path of blessedness and prosperity.

Freedom is the result of the mutual relations, sentiments and
inclinations of the people. It has a close relationship with a few
things which exercise great influence on it.

Reason and experience prove this thing and it has also been confirmed by
Ali that the members of a society are inter-related with one another.
This inter-relationship of theirs is on account of personal interests as
well as national interests. [^2]

It was the policy of Ali to reform these connections and ties, so that
every person might lead his life in a better way. He provided
opportunities to the people to utilize their freedom in the best
possible manners and to discharge by means of this freedom the
responsibilities which it is not possible to discharge without it.

In the first instance Ali made the people realize that to establish
truth and to destroy falsehood is their own responsibility. They should
get hold of their freedom, should not be subservient to the orders of
the upper classes, and should neither betray the society nor be cruel to
themselves. Throughout his life and before attaining to the caliphate,
as well as thereafter, he explained to the people that they must
discharge their duty to establish right and destroy falsehood.

Ali was endeavouring his best to provide means for the welfare of the
people, and at the same time he was so severe in awarding punishment to
the criminals that friends and foes were equal in his eyes in this
matter and he did not observe leniency with anyone.

Ali was confident that his piety was known to all, and they were aware
that he had no equal in the matter of piety, and he took from the world
only as much as was sufficient for his living. The people also knew that
the only purpose of his life was to establish truth and to help the
needy and the oppressed, and that he did these things as a matter of
duty and not to show kindness to others. He did not like to eat honey
because he was afraid that there might be some persons among his
subjects to whom even barley bread might not be available. He never wore
fine dress, because there might be a member of the public who might not
be having even coarse dress to wear. He did not like that the people
should call him the Commander of the Faithful and he should not partake
in their difficulties.

Ali kept himself free from all the pollution in which the rulers of
those days were involved. He did not take advantage of his noble
descent. He never coveted territory, high office or wealth. On no
occasion did he display pride. He remained aloof from all irrational and
worthless things. He never preferred his kinsmen and friends to others.
He never nursed a grudge against his opponents, nor did he take revenge
on anyone. He never did anything about whose goodness and correctness he
was not sure. He did not say or think of anything which he did not like.

He was indifferent to the things which he ate or drank, the dress which
he wore, and the house in which he lived. He utilized these things only
as much as they were absolutely necessary for him. He did not take
anything from the public treasury to meet his personal expenses,
although he could take at least as much as the governors of the
provinces did. Authentic narrations show that often he had to sell his
sword, coat of mail and household articles to feed himself and the
members of his family. However, he gave sufficient salaries to his
governors so that they might not be obliged to take bribes or acquire
money by unlawful means.

Ali kept himself free from all such bonds as might interfere with his
administering justice between friend and foe. He has mentioned his own
condition in this brief sentence. “Whoever forsakes desires remains
free”.

His piety was the piety of magnanimous persons. It was not tainted with
any avarice. He had perfect faith in God and he acted according to his
belief. There was no simulation of hypocrisy in his actions. His good
deeds were not prompted by fear of Hell or desire for Paradise.

As regards the freedom of the common man its first stage is freedom of
action. Imam Ali has given the body of the workers the same rank on
earth as is enjoyed by the hearts of the righteous persons in Paradise
i.e. this world welcomes the workers in the same manner in which
Paradise remains ready to welcome the righteous persons. About the
righteous persons he says: - “Their hearts are in Paradise and their
bodies are busy doing work”. (i.e. they do not attach their hearts with
the worldly things).

He elevated the position of freedom and considered the work of a free
person to be great. He had made it his principle not to compel any
person to do any particular work, because any work which is not done
voluntarily is dishonesty in freedom as well as in work.

He says: - “It is not my intention to compel any person to do a
particular work”. He prescribed award for making people do useful work
and preserving freedom and deprived of reward a person who compelled
others to work. He says: “The canal belongs to one who dug it on his own
accord and not to one who compelled others to dig it” (or one who does
not work on it).

It appears necessary to mention an important point here. The word
freedom as it was used in those days did not carry as vast a meaning as
was attached to it by Ali. Others did not mean by it what Ali meant. In
those days freedom was the opposite of slavery and freeman was the
opposite of slave. Caliph Umar has said: “How did you make the people
your slave when their mothers gave birth to them as freemen?”

When we ponder over these words and take into account the time and the
conditions in which they were uttered by caliph Umar we clearly learn
that by freeman he meant the opposite of slave i.e. one who cannot be
bought or sold. However, during the modern times the words free and
freedom do not carry the same sense in which they were used by caliph
Umar.

We hereby put forth another proof of our view. In the sentence quoted
above caliph Umar has expressed annoyance for the people who had reduced
their subordinates to slavery. He rebuked the powerful persons and told
them not to consider the weak people to be slaves, because their mothers
had given birth to them as free men. Caliph Umar did not tell the slaves
that they were free and should not obey those who claimed to be the
masters of their slaves. In short, caliph Umar in his sentence has
admonished the masters to give freedom to those subservient and weak
persons.

According to Imam Ali the meaning of freedom is different from what is
meant by caliph Umar and carries a much wider sense. In the first
instance we reproduce below a clear remark of his on the subject and
shall later reproduce his other remarks, recommendations and orders in
support of our view.  
 As opposed to the remark of Umar he says: “Do not be the slave of
anyone when God has created you free”.

Caliph Umar had addressed the masters and told them to give freedom to
their subordinates. He had not told the subordinates to decline to obey
their masters. Ali, however, addresses the subordinates themselves and
tells them to have self-reliance and a sense of freedom. He advises them
to realize their right of freedom which is the essence of their being.
He reminds them that God has created them as free beings and whatever
they do or do not do should depend on this natural right of theirs.

By uttering this sentence Ali sowed the seeds of revolution in the
hearts of those subordinates, and prepared them to fight against
anything which might stand in the way of their freedom or involve them
in perplexity.

The readers might think that there is not much difference between the
remarks of caliph Umar and those of Ali, because Umar has addressed some
particular person viz. the masters not to enslave the people whereas Ali
has addressed all the people and told them that they are free. He has
made their freedom dependent on their own intentions and not on the
intentions of their masters so that they may keep them enslaved as long
as they like and make them free as and when they (i.e. the masters)
wish.

However, there is basically a great difference between these two
remarks. Ali's sentence shows the deep insight which he had on the
meaning of freedom. His sentence shows the reality that the
fountain-head of freedom is the being of man himself. He has been born
free and he himself should select his path of action and not that
someone else should take pity on him and set him free.

This sentence of Ali shows that he considered the freedom of man to be
inherent and natural and all the actions of man are the outcome of this
inherent and natural freedom. This freedom is free from all external
influences. This freedom is enjoyed by him internally and not
externally. It is like the light of the sun which cannot be separated
from it. It is not like the light of the moon which declines.

Hence there is a real and basic difference between the sentences uttered
by Caliph Umar and Imam Ali. To one category belong the persons whose
freedom depends on the will of others. This freedom is external and does
not emerge from its own foutain-head. To the other category belong those
free persons whose freedom depends on their nature. This is the real and
true freedom. Such free persons act according to their reason and
interests and do not do what they do not like. However, those whose
independence depends on others are not subordinate to their own views
and thinking.

The type of freedom which Imam Ali desired was the one on which human
relations are based. It is this freedom by means of which the human
beings can walk side by side with one another on the path of prosperity.
It is this freedom which can bring a great civilization into existence.

As the freedom of the kind mentioned above was considered by Imam Ali to
be the real freedom, all his orders were issued keeping this very
freedom in view, and he also determined the human rights on that basis.
We clearly find the observance of this principle in all his orders and
regulations. He treated all the human beings to be equal in the matter
of rights and responsibilities and did not fix any limit in this behalf.
And if he did fix any such limits it was fixed keeping in view the
interests of the public in general.

When we study the character of Imam Ali we clearly see that he did not
violate this freedom in any of his laws, orders, rules and regulations
and kept the public welfare in view in all his actions. He meted out
equal treatment to his friends and foes. We have already mentioned that
he did not compel any person to do any work against his will, nor did he
allow forced labour.

We have also said that he did not compel anyone to take the oath of
allegiance to him. Those who declined to take oath of allegiance to him
were no doubt wrong-doers, but he left them to themselves because he
knew that their not taking the oath of allegiance would make no
difference nor would the public interests suffer on that account. They
refrained from taking the oath for quite a long time, but by doing so
they did harm only to themselves.

He did not take any action against them so long as they did not prove
harmful to the public interest. Addressing Mughira bin Sho'ba he said:
“I permit you to do whatever you like about yourself”.

It may also be mentioned that once Habib ibn Muslim Fehri approached him
and said: “You should abdicate so that the people may select a caliph
through a consultative council”. Thereupon Ali replied: \`What have you
to do with this matter? You should keep quiet. Why do you speak about
something with which you are not concerned at all”.  
 Habib then stood up and said: “By God you will find us at a place which
will not be to your liking”.

The threat latent in Habib's words is quite clear. But what did Ali do?
Did he also threaten him in a similar manner? Did he imprison him so
that he might not be free to oppose him and might not instigate his
tribe to rise against him?

Ali did none of these things. On the contrary he cast a glance at him
and said like a man who fully believes in his own justice and who
respects the freedom of others: “Go and mobilize as many infantry-men
and horsemen as you like. May not God keep me alive till the day when
you should take pity on me”.

Another proof of the full freedom allowed by Ali to the people is that
many persons belonging to the Hijaz and Iraq went away and joined
Mu'awiya, but he did not stop them, nor did he consider it necessary to
keep them under observation. They were free men in his eyes and were
free to adopt any course they liked. If a person chose the right path it
was well and good, but if he decided otherwise the path to Damascus was
open for him and Mu'awiya was awaiting such a person with his treasures.

Hence, when Sahl bin Hanif Ansari, the Governor of Madina informed him
that some persons had gone over to Mu\`awiya he wrote to him in reply:
“I understand that some of the persons belonging to your area are
secretly joining Mu'awiya. You need not worry at all about the number of
people who have left, and the support, which has been lost. It is
sufficient for their going astray and your being relieved of worry and
sorrow that they are running away from truth and guidance towards
ignorance and perversion. They are worldly people who are inclining
towards the world and running to it. They recognized, saw, heard and
learnt justice. They have understood very well that here all are treated
to be equal in the matter of rights and are, therefore, running away
towards the place where discrimination is practised. By God they have
not run away from injustice and have not joined justice and we hope that
God will make easy every difficulty which is involved in this matter,
and will make the stony land level for us”.

Another proof of the fact that Ali believed in the complete freedom of
the people is provided by his treatment of the Kharijites. One group of
the Kharijites was that which had rebelled openly and it was these
people most of whom were put to sword in the Battle of Nahrawan.
However, there were others who held beliefs common with the Kharijites
but they considered it expedient not to rebel, and were mixed up with
the people of Kufa. Imam Ali behaved kindly towards the Kharijites of
the second category and did not permit his companions to contend with
them. He also gave these Kharijites pensions as much as to the Muslims
and had allowed them to go freely wherever they liked.

His way of action was based on perfect freedom i.e. all human beings are
free and may do whatever they like and love or hate whomsoever they
wish. However, none was permitted to harm the people or to create
mischief on the face of earth. If anyone indulged in mischievous
activities he was not spared and was punished for the crime committed by
him.

Once a Kharijite named Khareet bin Rashid came to Ali and said to him:
“By God I shall not obey you and shall not offer prayers with you”. Imam
Ali did not interfere with him and left him free to do whatever he
liked.

After some time Khareet collected a number of men and revolted against
him. Even then Ali did not prevent the persons who deserted him and
joined Khareet, from doing so, although he could stop them from joining
Khareet. However, when those persons took undue advantage of this
freedom and began committing robberies and murders he sent his army and
suppressed them.

The thing which is most surprising is that even at the most delicate
moments of his period Ali paid due respect to human freedom and never
violated it. This he did because he considered freedom to be the most
important thing for humanity.

He did not detract from this freedom even when campaigning against the
***Nakitheen, Qasiteen*** and ***Mariqeen*** who had appropriated large
tracts of land to themselves and were the sworn enemies of Ali.

It was permissible according to every law and religion to fight against
such persons and every person with sound judgment would have treated
such a fight to be a just one.

In the circumstances it was necessary for Ali to mobilize his supports
and march to join battle with the enemy. However, Ali did not compel any
supporter of his to partake in a battle, whether he was his kinsman or
someone else. Although he was the caliph and possessed authority, but he
did not compel his companions to render material or spiritual
assistance, because in whatever manner he might have resorted to
compulsion it would have been opposed to the freedom in which he
believed. [^3]

Imam Ali performed his duty by showing themclearly the true path and
appealing to their intellect and reason. He put forth arguments
regarding his being correct so that whoever liked it might recognize his
right, and support him, and whoever did not like it might oppose him in
spite of knowing the truth.

He prayed for the welfare of those who responded to his call and praised
them. As regards those who did not respond to it he warned them about
their mistake by tendering them advice. Whoever a person was and
wherever he was, was free. Ali did not compel anyone and did not
consider compulsion to be proper.

He never liked that anyone should join him without proper reflection and
faith and knowledge. He did not compel anyone to enlist himself in his
army to fight in the Battles of the Camel, Siffin and Nahrawan for if he
had so desired he would have filled the plains and mountains with
soldiers.

Ali knew very well what freedom is and what its ins and outs are. He
explained it by his words and actions and observed it in his behaviour
towards the people. He kept the principle of freedom in view in
eradicating the evils from the society, in enforcing the religious law,
in mobilizing the forces, in ruling over the people, in making
recommendations and tendering advice, and, in short, in everything.
Every day of his life provided a fresh proof of the fact that man's
right of freedom deserves to be respected provided that it does not mar
the freedom of the public at large and this is the real meaning of
freedom.

[^1]: The author of the book has proved in this chapter that the
political freedom which exists in the advanced nations of today is the
same freedom which prevailed during the period of the caliphate of Imam
Ali. There is no sign of such freedom in the governments which existed
earlier than the caliphate of Ali.

[^2]: In the terminology of the western philosophers, freedom means the
same thing which is meant by the following belief of the Muslims: -
“None is permitted to compel another to do a particular work or to
appropriate his property without his permission”. These philosophers
believe that the cause of every oppression is deprivation of the human
beings of their freedom and the murders, robberies and other crimes are
its consequences. They say that freedom and self-determination are the
inherent properties of man in the same manner in which heat is the
inherent property of fire.

[^3]: Even today the westerners are unaware of the freedom which was
allowed by Imam Ali, as has been explained by the author, although some
social experts like Rousseau have mentioned it in their books and
endeavoured to make people believe in it. Some persons may possibly
think that the penal laws of Islam contradict the claim of the author
and also that the Muslims do not consider it permissible that someone
should apostatize from Islam or use indecent words about God or the
Prophets. Drinking of wine was punished during the caliphate of Ali as
well as other caliphs, purchase and sale of intoxicants was treated to
be a crime and the apostates were executed. Such persons may,
therefore,ask as to where the freedom exists. The reply to what the
author wishes to prove is that all these things (viz. punishment for
apostasy and other crimes) are correct. However, the freedom which is
praiseworthy and which was supported by Ali is not the freedom enjoyed
by a person to appropriate his property and use it as he likes and to
adopt the occupation which he desires. In short Ali believed in
political and social freedom. All Muslims agree that drinking wine and
apostasy are crimes. Now when these acts are crimes from the social
point of view how can freedom to commit them be commendable? Hence if
Imam Ali had given freedom to the people to commit these crimes his act
would have been opposed to the divine commands as well as to the freedom
of the people. If caliph Abu Bakr and Umar had not fought against the
apostates they would have opposed the majority. of the Muslims. Even now
some parties in various countries are declared to be unlawful, because
many people consider the views and beliefs of these parties to be
crimes. Similarly apostasy is a crime according to the Muslims, because
it certainly creates trouble in the society.


