Accountability
==============

As we have already said, freedom in its wide sense was the real basis of
the government of Ali. In his eyes this freedom was as much related with
the mutual relations of the people as with intellect and conscience. Man
who wishes to cover different stages of advancement by means of mutual
co-operation and brotherly relations cannot achieve success in this
behalf unless he is free in his individual and collective capacities.
And it is not possible for him to be free unless his conscience is free
from those defects which destroy the value of man. Similarly that person
cannot also be free whose rights for freedom are admitted by the society
but ignored in practice.

In this matter Ali meted out equal treatment to the individuals and the
society as well as to friends and the foes. He followed this line of
action very firmly. He could not be made to deviate from his object by
any allurement or threat. He knew very well that truth is unpalatable to
many persons. It is for this reason that he says: “Our matter is very
difficult”.

He was also aware that truth is especially hard for the rulers. He
therefore, says: “Truth weighs heavily upon the rulers and every truth
is heavy”.

However, whether truth is heavy on the rulers and the dignitaries or
light, it was immaterial for Ali, because his intellect as well as
conscience obliged him not to deviate from truth in the least, and he
did not attach any importance to things other than intellect and
conscience. Intellect and conscience compelled Ali not to turn away his
face from the people who sought justice and not to leave the ruled at
the mercy of the rulers so that they (the people) might bear the
hardships of need and suffer from hunger which might dry up their
palates and kindle a fire in their bellies. This intellect and
conscience directed Ali not to leave the bounties and blessings at the
disposal of those whose bellies were full, and who ate without hunger
and drank without thirst, and led luxurious lives at the expense of the
common people.

All's fear that the influential persons and the dignitaries would not
tolerate his just ways and methods of government, as expressed by him
before the oath of allegiance was taken to him proved to be true. Hence,
after taking the oath of allegiance, those nobles and dignitaries
demanded from him that they might be given larger shares from the public
treasury as compared with others, but Ali replied: “I am not going to
give anyone anything to which he is not entitled”.

Talha and Zubayr came to him to make a deal and said: “We are prepared
to take the oath of allegiance to you on the condition that we shall be
your partners in running the government”. However, Ali replied to them
in the negative without any hesitation.

On hearing this reply they left him and began mobilizing an army to
fight against him, as will be mentioned in detail later.

Ali knew very well that Talha and Zubayr were very influential and they
had a large number of supporters in Kufa and Basra. However, it was
justice which Ali loved most. He said: “Do you want me to achieve
success by means of oppression? By Allah this will never be. Unjustified
award is extravagance”.

Food is not brought before a person who is satiated. Wealth, small or
large, was not lawful in the eyes of Ali until it was acquired by
lawful, means. It should not have been acquired by hoarding, or by
exploiting the people or by taking undue advantage of one's position as
a ruler.

Ali forgave many crimes of the criminals and overlooked many evil deeds
of the oppressors, but he did not tolerate that the hoarders, should
exploit and oppress the people. According to him oppression was a curse
in whatever shape it might be, but the worst oppression was that
exercised by the powerful on the weak, by the hoarder on the public, and
by the ruler on the ruled. He could not ignore an oppression, which
might give birth to wickedness and crime in the society.

Study \`Nahj al-Balaghah' and you will see how fiery his words are when
he speaks about the exploitation of the people. He mentioned this topic
in every speech of his. His remarks show that he was fully convinced
that exploitation of the wealth of others is a social crime. Whoever
acquires wealth by unlawful means is an oppressor and must be punished
for his offence. In one of his sermons Ali says about the hoarders: “And
he should remember the wealth which he accumulated and did not care as
to where he acquired it from (i.e. did not make any difference between
lawful and unlawful sources) and collected wealth by lawful and unlawful
means. He should rest assured that he will be punished for accumulating
the wealth by illegal means”.

However, as regards accumulation of wealth which is untainted by
usurpation, oppression and hoarding he says: “Whoever dies while earning
by lawful means will die in such a condition that God will be pleased
with him”.

It was for this reason that Ali had decided that he would demolish the
structures which had been erected on the foundation of usurpation and
oppression, abolish the custom of spending the wealth of the public
treasury on one's relatives, and would not permit the influential class
to exploit the common man.

In one of his speeches he declared thus in clear words: “Look here!
Whoever was assigned land by Uthman out of Allah's property should
return it to the public treasury because nothing can annul an old right.
If I come to know that women have been married by spending the money of
the public treasury or that money has been distributed in different
cities, my utmost effort will be to restore that money to its original
position. Justice covers a wide range, and if justice is hard upon a
person injustice will be harder upon him”.

It is possible that there may have been some kings and rulers who may
not have given anything to an undeserving person from the public
treasury and may not have spent public money lavishly on their friends
and relatives. However, we do not come across anyone like Ali, who
compelled those who had become rich by unlawful means during the period
of the former governments to render account of their earning and to
return to the public treasury the wealth which they had earned
unlawfully. This brave action of Ali proves that he had immense
knowledge of the state of affairs and had such a perfect faith in social
justice as was not possessed by anyone else.

If the rule that only that person who works hard and renders service to
the society should be rewarded, is correct, then the question arises as
to what public service Harith son of Hakam had rendered that he should
have been given three hundred thousand dirhams by Uthman from the public
treasury on the day his (Harith's) marriage took place? Was marrying
Uthman's daughter a public service? [^1]

What service had Talha and Zubayr rendered to the Muslims as a
recompense whereof they got such large amounts of dirhams and dinars and
big land grants from Uthman that if they had been distributed among the
hundreds of thousands of the Muslims all of them would have become rich
and would have got more than they might have hoped and desired? [^2]

What preferential rights did Talha and Zubayr possess that they should
have had thousands of slaves and slave-girls? Even if it is admitted
that they embraced Islam at its earliest stage and were the
distinguished companions of the Prophet and had rendered great services
to Islam they had done all this for the sake of God and should have
expected its reward from God in the Hereafter. God never allows the
efforts of the righteous to go in vain. Whatever services they rendered
to Islam were rendered by them to seek the pleasure of God and it is He
who gives the best reward. But what special right had they on the public
treasury on which all the Muslims enjoyed equal rights? What deeds of
public welfare were performed by the relatives of Uthman as a reward for
which he opened the doors of the public treasury for them, entrusted the
administration of the state to them, made them the masters of the lives,
property and honour of the Muslims and allowed them to utilize
everything in whatever manner they liked?

One of these relatives of his was Mu\`awiya, who was notorious for
taking bribes. And there were many other relatives and friends of his
including Hakam son of \`Aas and Abdullah son of Sa'd.

What services had Mu\`awiya rendered to Islam as a reward for which he
was made the governor of Palestine and Hamas, besides Syria, and was
also entrusted the command of four armies? From where did the relatives
of Uthman acquire such immense wealth and how did they erect lofty
palaces in all cities and villages? When these persons did not render
any public service from where did they get capital to finance these
projects? If a person possesses usurped wealth for a long time he does
not become its owner nor does that wealth become his personal property.
Falsehood does not become truth if it persists for a long time.

It was for this reason that Ali had decided to get restored to the
public treasury all those lands and wealth which had been given by
Uthman to undeserving persons by depriving those who deserved them even
though that wealth might have been scattered in different cities or
given to women as their dowry. Justice is a means of prosperity and
comfort for the people and it cannot be limited or confined.

Another point which deserves attention is this that Ali considered the
lands, which had been made personal property by the people on account of
their being Uthman's relatives or favourites, as well as the benefits
drawn from them, to be usurped property. Ali knew very well what sort of
people Uthman's kinsmen were. He was aware that after usurping the lands
they would take forced labour from the common people and accumulate the
produce and would acquire more property with this income. Thus their
capital would increase day after day and whereas others would continue
to become poorer they themselves would grow richer and richer.

Then these big landowners would purchase the holdings of small owners
and consequently only two classes would be left. viz. the capitalists
and the indigent who would have to depend on the former and serve them.
In his testament for Malik Ashtar Ali says: “Beware! Do not give a land
to any of your associates and relatives. He should not expect from you
that you will allow him to occupy a land which is harmful for the
neighbouring people in the matter of irrigation or any other common
matter, so that he may throw the burden thereof on others”.

The fears of the Commander of the Faithful about the land grants proved
to be too true. Those persons took abundant forced labour from the
common people and subjected them to every kind of injustice and
oppression.

Dr. Taha Husayn writes in the first volume of his book entitled
\`Al-fitnatu'l Kubra': “On the one side there were big landowners and
nobles and on the other side there were indigent persons who were the
slaves of these land-owners and nobles. Out of them there emerged a new
class in Islam i.e. those who were the chiefs of the nation according to
the tribal custom prevalent in the Arabian Peninsula and had now become
more distinguished and dignified on account of abundant wealth and a
large number of associates”.

According to Ali all are entitled to share the profit which accrues from
gold and land and only that person, who works harder and is also more
needy, is entitled to a larger share. Whoever denies this reality
commits treachery with his people. In the eyes of Ali the greatest
treachery is the treachery committed with the public. Ali considers that
man who commits treachery with the public to be mean and despicable. He
never relied upon such persons and never associated with them.

Ali endeavoured to safeguard the rights of the people to the utmost
extent. Whenever he took a decision none could make him deviate from it.
He did not care if the people deserted him and joined the enemy. He was
the embodiment of truth and whatever he said was absolute justice.

Ali did not show preferential treatment even to the devoted companions
of the Prophet, who had participated in the battles along with him. He
says: “Beware! There are some persons among you whom the world has made
prosperous. They have acquired lands and dug canals. They ride on strong
horses and possess larger number of slaves and slave-girls. If I
prohibit them tomorrow from doing things in which they are immersed and
restrict them to the rights of which they are well aware they should not
complain that Ali has deprived them of their rights. Remember! Whether
they be the Muhajirs or the Ansar, whoever from amongst them thinks that
he is superior to others is mistaken.

Superiority will be decided upon before God on the Day of Judgment. It
is only God who can reward the people. Remember! Whoever has
acknowledged God and His Prophet, certified our community, joined our
religion and turned to our qiblah is entitled to the rights and
responsibilities of Islam. All of you are the slaves of God and the
wealth, which belongs to God will be divided amongst you equally. None
enjoys preference over another. The righteous and the pious will get
better reward from God”.

This very equal treatment meted out by Ali to common people made the
nobles and distinguished persons among Quraysh leave Ali and join
Mu\`awiya as will be mentioned in detail later.

It was impossible for Ali to prefer those who enjoyed a higher position
to those who were at a comparatively lower level, because according to
him the criterion of virtue and excellence was not that which was
prevalent in his days. He did not prefer a Qurayshite to a non-
Qurayshite or an Arab to a non-Arab, because he considered all men to be
brothers of one another. He could not flatter those chiefs and nobles as
Mu\`awiya did, nor could he attract people towards himself by means of
the wealth of the Muslims.

Malik Ashtar said to the Commander of the Faithful: “O Commander of the
Faithful! We joined the people of Basra and Kufa and performed jihad
against the people of Basra. At that time all were of one view.
Thereafter differences arose. Their intentions became weak and their
number decreased. You are just to all and act according to what is
right. Consequently they got scared on account of your justice. On the
other hand they saw the policies and methods which Mu\`awiya adopts with
regard to the rich and the noble, because there are very few people in
the world who do not aspire for worldly gains. There are many who buy
falsehood at the price of truth and adopt the world. In case, therefore,
you distribute wealth lavishly among the people and give more to the
influential persons you will see how their necks become inclined towards
you and how they sing songs in your praise and become your well-wishers.
May God settle your affairs and disperse and weaken the association and
the deceit of your enemies. God is certainly aware of their deeds”.

Ali said in reply: “You have said that I act according to justice. The
reason for this is that God says:  
***“Whoever does good deeds does them for his own benefit and whoever
does bad deeds suffers on their account. Your Lord does not do injustice
to His slaves”. (41:46)***

If I violate this rule I am afraid that I will have to suffer on this
account.

As regards your saying that some persons have deserted us because truth
is intolerable for them, God knows better that they have not left us
because we have been unjust to them. And it is also not so that after
leaving us they have sought refuge with a just person. There is no
reason for their deserting us except that they have sought the material
world and this world is not lasting. On the Day of Judgment they will be
questioned as to whether they sought the world or acted for the sake of
God.

Now as regards our spending money to attract the people, it is not
lawful for us to give anyone from the public property more than what he
is entitled to. (And I do not bother if the number of my adherents
decreases owing to my being just) God says thus and what He says is
correct:

***“How many a smaller party has overpowered those who are stronger
numerically, with the will of God. And God is with those who are
patient”. (2:249)***

God appointed the Prophet to the prophetic mission when he was all
alone. He had few supporters and then their number increased. He
bestowed honour on his group after they had been humiliated. If God
wishes to give a better turn to our affairs He will solve these
difficulties and make the matters easy for us”.

The gist of his policies and the method of his government is embodied in
the testament which he wrote and gave to Malik Ashtar while appointing
him the governor of Egypt. He said therein: “Beware! Do not appropriate
to yourself the things in which all the people have equal share”.

The public rights are those which vest in all the citizens equally and
those are the rights to which Ali has alluded in his above remarks.

[^1]: Uthman gave three hundred thousand dirhams to Harith son of Hakam
(brother of Marwan) who was his second son-in-law and husband of his
daughter Ayesha (Kitab al-Ansab, Balazari, Vol.5, p.58). Balazari says
at another place: Camels received as zakat were brought before Uthman
and he gave all of them to Harith son of Hakam (Kitab al-Ansab, Vol.5,
p.28). Allama lbn Qutaiba, lbn Abd Rabih and lbn Abi al-Hadid have
narrated that the Prophet had endowed \`Mehzool', a bazaar of Madina,
upon the Muslims but Uthman gave it away to Harith as a land grant
(Ma\`arif, p.84, Aqd al-Farid, p.261, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.
1,p.27). Uthman did favour to Harith in three ways: (1) He gave three
hundred thousand dirhams to Harith although this amount was not Uthman's
personal property but belonged to the public treasury of the Muslims.
(2) He gave Harith all the camels which had been received by way of
zakat. (3) He gave to Harith by way of Jagir all the property which had
been endowed by the Prophet upon the Muslims.

[^2]: On account of the favours done by Uthman to his relatives, friends
and associates they became very rich. As a consequence of the method
adopted by him in the matter of division of wealth, which was opposed to
the Book and the Sunnah as well as to that adopted by his predecessor,
these people acquired big estates, cons tructed magnificent palaces and
accumulated large amounts of wealth. Zubayr son of Awam left behind
eleven houses in Madina, two in Basra, one in Kufa and one in Egypt. He
had four wives. They inherited one-eighth of his property and every one
of them got one million and two hundred thousands. Thus the entire
property left by him amounted to 59 millions and 800 thousands. (Sahih
Bokhari, vol.5 p.21). In Sahih Bokhari only the number has been stated;
it has not been specified whether they were dirhams or dinars, but it
has been stated in Tarikh lbn Kaseer that they were dirhams. Allama lbn
Sa'd writes that Zubayr had estates in Egypt and houses in Alexandria,
Kufa and Madina. He also received income from the suburbs of Madina.
(Tabaqaat Ibn Sa'd, vol.2 p.77, Printed at Leiden) Mas'udi says: “Zubayr
left behind, on his death, one thousand horses, one thousand slaves and
slave-girls and many palaces and lands. (Murooj al-Zahab,vol. 1,p. 34).
Talha son of Obaidullah left behind himself one hundred \`buhars'
(ox-skins) full of gold. Allama Ibn Abd Rabih has quoted Khashni as
having said that Talha left three hundred \`buhars' of gold and silver.
Sibt lbn Jauzi says that he left behind himself gold which could be
loaded on three hundred camels. (Tabaqat lbn Sa'd vol.3. p.158. Murooj
al-Zahab,v. 1. p.444. Aqd al-Farid, v.2. p.275 etc). Allama Balazari has
narrated that during the age of ignorance Hakam son of Aas was a
neighbour of the Prophet and after the advent of Islam he was one of the
deadly enemies and persecutors of the Prophet. When Mecca was conquered
in the eighth year of Migration he came over to Madina. It is doubtful
whether he embraced Islam. He used to follow the Prophet and made
ridiculous signs towards him, mimicked him and made a wry face, and when
the Prophet offered prayers he also stood behind him and made signs with
his fingers. The result was that the shape which he gave to his face
while mimicking the Prophet became permanent and did not change till he
died. He also became insane. One day while the Prophet was staying in
the house of one of his wives, Hakam began peeping. The Prophet
recognized him. He came out of the house and said: “Who will save me
from this accursed trembling person?” Then he added: “This Hakam and his
descendants cannot live where I live.” He, therefore, exiled Hakam and
his family to the side of Taif. When the Prophet breathed his last
Uthman approached Abu Bakr with the request that Hakam might be
permitted to return to Madina. Abu Bakr however, declined to accede to
his request saying that he could not grant asylum to a man who had been
exiled by the Prophet. When Umar became the caliph after Abu Bakr,
Uthman approached him with the same request, but he also gave him the
same reply which had been given by Abu Bakr. However, when Uthman
himself became the Caliph he called back Hakam and the members of his
family to Madina. He told the Muslims that he had recommended to the
Prophet to permit Hakam and the members of his family to return to
Madina and the Prophet had promised that he would grant such a
permission but he breathed his last before this could be done. The
Muslims did not believe what Uthman said and disliked very much his
having allowed Hakam and his descendants to return to Madina. (Kitab
al-Ansab vol.5, p.27) Uthman not only called back Hakam to Madina and
made him his chief adviser, but he also gave away to him the entire
property which had been collected as zakat and alms from the tribe of
Bani Qaza\`a. When Hakam entered Madina he was clad in rags and the
people could see in what miserable condition he was. He had with him a
goat which he was driving. He entered Uthman's court in this condition.
However, when he left that place he was wearing a very valuable fur
cloak and had covered himself with a costly silken sheet. (Tarikh
Yaqoobi, Vol.2, p.41) Allama Balazari says: “Amongst the many acts of
Uthman which annoyed the people one was this that he deputed Hakam son
of Aas to collect zakat from Bani Qaza\`a, which amounted to three
hundred thousand dirhams and when Hakam collected this money and brought
it to Uthman the latter gave away the entire amount to him”. (Tarikh
al-Ansab, Balazari Vol.5, p.28). Allama Yaqoobi says that Uthman married
his daughter to Abdullah son of Khalid son of Aseed and ordered that six
hundred thousand dirhams might be given to him. He wrote to Abdullah son
of \`Aamir that this amount might be paid out of the public treasury of
Basra. (Tarikh Yaqoobi, Vol.2, p.145). Allama lbn Abd Rabih Qartabi,
Allama lbn Qutaiba and Allama lbn Abi al-Hadid have written that Uthman
gave four hundred thousand dirhams to Abdullah (Aqd al-Farid Vol.2, p.
261. Ma\`araf, p.84 and Sharh lbn Abi al-Hadid Vol.1, p.66). One fifth
(khums) of the war booty which was received as a result of the African
war amounted to five hundred gold coins. Uthman gave this amount to
Marwan son of Hakam, who was his cousin and son-in-law, being the
husband of his daughter Umm Ayan. Allama lbn Athir writes: Khums
(one-fifth) was brought from Africa to Madina and Marwan purchased it
for five hundred thousand dinars. Uthman excused him from making payment
of this amount. This was one of those acts of Uthman which were
criticized by the people later. (Tarikh Yaqoobi, Vol.3, p.38). Allama
Balazari and lbn Sa'd have narrated that Uthman endowed upon Marwan the
“Khums” which was received from the war in Egypt, and also bestowed
large sums of money upon his relatives. He explained away these acts by
saying that he had shown kindness to his kinsmen. The people disliked
these actions of Uthman very much and criticized him. (Tabqat Ibn Sa\`d,
V.3, p.24. (Printed at Leiden) and Kitab al-Ansab Balazari, Vol.5,
p.25). Uthman gave one hundred thousand dirhams to Sa\`id son of \`Aas.
Ali, Talha, Zubayr, Sa\`d son of Abi Waqas and Abdur Rahman son of Auf
had a talk with him in this regard. He, however, told them that Sa\`id
was a relative and a kinsman of his and by giving the said amount to him
he had shown kindness to a kinsman. (Kitab al-Ansab, Vol.5, p. 28). He
gave large sum of money out of the public treasury to Walid son of Aqba
son of Abi Mu\`eet who was his brother from his mother's side. Allama
Balazari says: “When Walid was appointed as governor of Kufa Abdullah
son of Mas\`ud was in charge of the public treasury. Walid borrowed a
large sum of money from the treasury. The rulers used to borrow in this
manner and returned it when they received their salaries. After a few
days lbn Mas\`ud demanded the money back. Walid complained to Uthman
against this demand by lbn Mas\`ud. Thereupon Uthman wrote to Ibn
Mas\`ud: “You are only a treasurer. Do not press Walid to return the
money borrowed by him. It is not proper to expostulate with him”. (Kitab
al-Ansab, Vol. 5,p. 1) The day on which Uthman got one hundred thousand
dirhams paid to Marwan from the public treasury he also got two hundred
thousand dirhams paid to Abu Sufyan. (Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Allama Ibn
Abi al-Hadid, Vol.8, p.27). Allama lbn Abi al-Hadid says that Uthman
gave the entire war booty received from different places in Africa,
where battles were fought, to his foster-brother Abdullah bin Abi Sarha
to the exclusion of all other Muslims (Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, V.1,
p.27).


