Helping the needy
=================

There are those common rights which were respected by Ali himself and he
also impressed upon others to respect them. According to him the real
duty of the governors of the provinces and other officials was that they
should protect these rights and should not allow them to be encroached
upon.

If Ali appointed anyone as a ruler or removed him from his office, it
was for this very reason. According to him these rights carried very
wide meanings and were of many kinds. The purport of all of them was,
however, that the needs of every person should be met and no one should
remain hungry, because remaining hungry is the greatest insult to
humanity.

There is no harm in violating the laws which cannot eliminate the
indigence of the people. Just as in the creed of Ali worship must not
estrange man from the society and religion means good behaviour towards
the people, and true religious beliefs are those which promote
righteousness, in the same manner the laws should be such as meet the
needs of the people and ensure elimination of poverty and indigence, so
that man may not be humiliated in his own eyes and become dejected.

It is not a favour but the duty of a ruler and a law-giver to enact laws
which relieve the people of need and indigence, and they are entitled to
demand such laws from him.

Ali safeguarded the rights of the people so meticulously that it is
almost impossible to find any sermon, speech or testament of his in
which he may not have mentioned these rights and may not have drawn the
attention of the governors and the officials to them. Meeting the needs
of the people was undoubtedly the greatest duty of the ruler and the
law-giver and the greatest right of the people in the eyes of Ali.

It was Ali who considered the greatest sin of Kaiser and Kisra to be
this (although the list of their sins is quite long) that they
humiliated their subjects, did not look after their rights, deprived
them of the bounties of the earth and the comforts of life and tried to
make them indigent and despicable. He says: “Think over the agitation
and distress of the people when Kaiser and Kisra were their rulers. They
had expelled them from fertile lands and the water and verdure of Iraq
and transferred them to a place where there was no vegetation and where
there was nothing except violent winds, and had made them extremely poor
and indigent.

Whenever a governor or an official committed breach of trust of public
property (whether the amount involved was small or large) Ali threatened
him with severe punishment. He was deeply grieved as and when he came to
know that a governor or an official had usurped a property or had been
guilty of hoarding, and he reprimanded him in very severe terms. He once
wrote thus to a governor: “I understand that you have usurped the land
belonging to the public treasury and have appropriated what was under
your feet and eaten what was in your hands. You should, therefore, send
me your account”.

The sentence “Send me your account” in the letter of the Commander of
the Faithful deserves attention. This sentence carries very vast
meanings. He was so keen to enforce justice that he could not tolerate
any excuse or slackness in this behalf.

Besides possessing a firm faith Ali was a subtle observer and was fully
aware of the mysteries of human society, and the mutual relations of the
public. He knew which rights had been encroached upon, and which of them
were going to be encroached upon. He fully realized that injustice and
oppression was harmful for the society internally as well as externally
and the oppressors as well as the oppressed were threatened with grave
dangers. He considered pleading for justice and administration of
justice to be necessary even though it might be disliked by the
governors and the officials. He wrote with much annoyance: “Send me your
account”.

He was informed about another governor having misappropriated public
property. He wrote to him immediately as under:

“Fear God and return the property of the people to them. If you do not
do so and then God grants me control over you I shall acquit myself of
my responsibilities in the matter and shall strike you with my sword,
and whoever has been the victim of it has always gone direct to Hell. By
God, even if Hasan and Husayn had done what you have done I would not
have been lenient to them and they would not have been able to make me
accede to any wish of theirs till I had taken back the right (of others)
from them and had effaced the results arising out of injustice”.

The Commander of the Faithful sent a man named Sa\`d to Ziad bin Abih to
bring some money which was lying with him. The Commander of the Faithful
had received information that Ziad was leading a luxurious life and that
he was accumulating wealth himself and did not give anything to the
widows, the orphans and the indigent. When Sa\`d approached Ziad and
demanded the money the latter behaved proudly and rebuked him. Sa\`d
came back and informed Ali about what had happened.

Thereupon Ali wrote a letter to Ziad on these lines: “Sa\`d has informed
me that you have rebuked him without any justification and behaved with
him haughtily and proudly, notwithstanding the fact that the Prophet has
said that greatness belongs to God only and whoever is proud incurs His
wrath. Sa\`d has also informed me that you eat food of various kinds and
perfume yourself every day. What harm will accrue to you if you also
fast for a few days for the sake of God and give away a part of your
wealth as charity in the path of God, and eat many times the food which
you eat once, or let an indigent person eat it.

You, who are rolling in bounties, do not look after your poor
neighbours, the weak and needy widows and the orphans. Do you desire,
inspite of all this, that you should get the reward of the righteous
persons who give alms? Sa\`d has also told me that you speak like the
righteous but act like the evil-doer? If you really do so you have been
cruel to yourself and have wasted your actions. You should repent before
God and reform your ways and should be moderate in your acts. You should
send forward whatever surplus property you possess for the day on which
you will need it, in case you are a true believer. And use perfume on
alternate days and that should not be too much. The Prophet has said:
“Use perfume on alternate days and do not use it excessively. Peace be
on you”.

The Commander of the Faithful sent successive orders to the governors
and warned them severely against misappropriating public property and
taking bribes. He considered such activities to be the worst
relationship between the rulers and the ruled and a great barrier
between title and the entitled person. He was well aware of the harm
which these bad habits were likely to do to the people.

Once he received information that a military officer had taken bribe. He
held his hand and gave it such a violent jerk that it was about to be
dismembered from his body. Then he said to him: “The people earlier than
you were annihilated because they deprived the people of their rights
and they were, therefore, obliged to acquire their rights by offering
bribes. They compelled the people to do invalid things as a result of
which falsehood became prevalent”.

Once a governor was invited to a feast. The governor accepted the
invitation and participated in the party. When the Commander of the
Faithful came to know about this he reprimanded the governor severely
saying: “Entertaining a governor is bribe. Why was this bribe given? If
it was given to establish a right it is the duty of a governor to give
the entitled persons their right without taking bribe, or this bribe was
given to validate something invalid. If that be the case it is not
lawful for a governor to do any such thing even though the entire world
may be offered to him as bribe.

The second thing is: why did the governor participate in a feast to
which the rich were invited but the indigent were ignored and thus
discrimination was made between the slaves of Allah? This discrimination
pained many persons and also grieved Ali. Of course if the society is
prosperous and the people are well-to-do there is no harm in inviting
only some persons to a party to the exclusion of others. However, when
the conditions are such that there are poor as well as rich persons in
the society, does the extension of an invitation to a governor to
participate in a feast not amount to giving him bribe?

Some persons may think that such severity on the part of Ali with regard
to the governors and the officials was not appropriate and they did not
deserve to be censured and reprimanded in this manner. However, if such
persons become aware of the facilities provided by Ali to the officers
which made it absolutely unnecessary for them to take bribes or to
resort to misappropriation of funds they will acknowledge that the
severity expressed by Ali towards the officials was not unjustified.

Another point also deserves attention here and it is that Ali did not
consider it permissible that the officials should take advantage of
their position vis-a-vis the public even to the extent of a feast,
because such an advantage also amounts to theft or bribe. And when Ali
did not permit an officer to accept an invitation to a feast by way of
bribe, how could he tolerate that he should appropriate a whole city to
himself or should take the property of the people from them by way of
bribe?

A far-sighted person who has an eye on the realities is obliged to be
severe and to nip the evil in the bud. Restraint on the officials
commenced in the days of Ali and not during the period of Uthman. Ali
gave such handsome salaries to the governors as were sufficient for
their needs. There could, therefore, be no justification for their
taking bribes.

If Ali was severe with the corrupt officers he was also affable with the
righteous ones. He acknowledged their rights and encouraged them for
their devotion towards their Imam and for their services to the Muslims.

The letter which he wrote to Umar son of Abi Salma, the governor of
Bahrain whereby relieving him of his assignment and asking him to come
over to him to accompany him in the Syrian campaign, deserves to be
studied. He wrote to him: “I have entrusted the governorship of Bahrain
to No\`man son of Ajlan Zarqi and have relieved you of it. However, I
have not done this because you have been considered to be incompetent or
because you have been accused of anything improper.

The fact is that you have run the administration very competently and
faithfully. You should, therefore, come over here and join me. There is
nothing against you. The actual position is this that I have decided to
proceed against the Syrian rebels and wish that you should be with me
because you are one of those persons who can assist me in fighting
against the enemy and erecting the pillar of the faith”.

He always adopted this firm policy with regard to the officers. He
encouraged those who were righteous and was severe to those who did evil
deeds. He neither wavered, nor minced words nor resorted to connivance
or deceit. His real object was the welfare of the Muslims and the
establishment of justice among all, whether they were the rulers or the
ruled.

Those officers who did not misappropriate public funds and did not take
bribe received salaries from the public treasury according to their
needs, and the Commander of the Faithful praised and encouraged them. As
regards the dishonest officers, however, Ali reprimanded and censured
them in the first instance and then dismissed them. In case their crimes
were more serious he also sentenced them to imprisonment.

Besides the governors there were some persons who had usurped the
property of others and had accumulated large amount of wealth by
unlawful means. The Commander of the Faithful subjected them to severe
accountability and did not show them any leniency. He severely opposed
their greed to accumulate wealth and their sensual and luxurious life,
and endeavoured to become a wall between them and their wealth which
they were keen to increase.

He opposed verbally as well as practically the usurpation of the
property of others and severely prohibited hoarding. In the testament
addressed to Malik Ashtar he wrote inter alia: “Keep this also in mind
that many of these persons are habituated to parsimony and stinginess.
They hoard to make profit and weigh lesser and charge more. This thing
is harmful for the public and a defect of the rulers. You should,
therefore, prevent them from hoarding”.  
 Then he says: “If someone is guilty of hoarding after your having
prohibited it you should punish him, but you must ensure that no excess
or oppression is done in your action”.

As regards occupation of estates and land by the people the view held by
Ali was compatible with reason as well as a source of virtue. We have
already discussed this matter in the foregoing pages.

Subjecting others to forced labour and exploiting their earnings is also
a kind of hoarding. Ali did not tolerate this also, and has mentioned it
at various places in Nahj al-Balaghah. While describing the condition of
the people of his time he says: “There are many persons whose endeavours
have been wasted and whose efforts have gone in vain. You people are
living in a time when goodness is receding and wickedness coming nearer
and nearer. Satanic avarice is killing the people. Wherever you cast
your eye you will see indigent persons, who are suffering on account of
poverty, or the rich who are guilty of ingratitude to God, or the stingy
persons who do not pay God's dues and are keen to increase their wealth.
What has happened to your righteous and pious people? Where are those
noble and magnanimous persons, who were pious in earning wealth and pure
in their actions and conduct?”

In fact the Commander of the Faithful had clearly understood this
reality by means of his correct thinking, pure disposition and high
morality that a system which cannot eliminate the indigence of the
people is worthless and a law which cannot do away with class
discrimination is useless and undesirable. All those social laws, which
give birth to a society, in which people are divided into classes, are a
plaything in the hands of those, who call themselves the nobles and the
dignitaries and exploit the rights and property of the common man in a
most shameless manner.

Ali took positive steps to eliminate the poverty of the people. His
actions were based on two principles: Firstly that the entire wealth of
the public treasury and the lands and property and all means of earning
wealth belong to the nation and it is necessary that they should be
distributed among all the citizens according to their needs and
entitlement. Every person should work and benefit from these resources
according to his efforts. None is entitled to appropriate whatever he
likes and to convert the public property into his special property. It
is also in the interest of the individuals that they should co-operate
with the society. They should prove themselves useful for others and
should also benefit from them. The benefits which they will derive from
the society will be thousands of times more than those which they render
to the society.

Ali says: “Whoever withholds his hand from doing harm to his people
apparently withholds only one hand but actually keeps thousands of hands
away from himself”.

The government should adopt this just policy in right earnest because
the people are like a body and it is necessary for the government to
treat every limb of that body according to its needs. It should neither
ignore anyone, nor neglect the right of anyone, nor permit any
discrimination between them. It is in such circumstances that it can
become possible for the government to realize revenue and obtain other
rights of the public treasury from the nation and spend it on the
projects of public welfare.

The second thing on which Ali based his actions was the development of
land, because the life of human beings and their welfare depend on land.
He was of the view that the governors and officers should take much
greater interest in the development of land as compared with the effort
which they make to realize government revenue, because if land is not
developed from where will the revenue come?

A ruler who does not develop land, but wants to realize revenue from the
public, is ignorant and unjust. He desires that the cities should be
destroyed, the people should be ruined and he himself should lose his
dignity and honour. The land is neither developed automatically nor by
means of the ignorance or power of the rulers. Development of land does
not also mean that magnificent palaces should be erected on it to
accommodate rich people. Land is developed with the efforts of the
labourers and the residents of villages. The Commander of the Faithful
had given strict instructions that if the people were distressed and
were not happy with their rulers, revenue should not be realized from
them.

The principles of kindness to the subjects and philanthropy and the
moral values demand that the subjects should pay the revenue voluntarily
and not under duress. It is the duty of governors to make the subjects
prosperous in the first instance and then to think of collecting the
revenue. The Commander of the Faithful has addressed the collectors of
revenue in these words: “........ Don't sell the winter or summer
clothings of the people or the animals used by them, in order to collect
revenue. Don't flog any person or make him stand on his feet for the
sake of money, and don't sell any of their things for this purpose,
because God has ordered us to take that which is surplus”.

He also says: “In the matter of revenue keep in view the interests of
those who pay the revenue, because the affairs of others can be set
right only by means of taxes and the tax-payers”.

These views of the Commander of the Faithful about land and its
development and the conclusion drawn by him that the welfare of
government depends on the welfare of the people are so true and correct
that nothing wrong about them has been found even after the lapse of so
many centuries. All the economic and social theories of the modern times
also confirm these views.

Ali prescribed a general rule for the development of land and the
extraction of wealth from its heart which is admitted by the social
sciences of our time, to be absolutely correct.

During the age of ignorance there was a custom that the powerful persons
forced the slaves, prisoners and subordinates to develop their lands.
They gave these workers paltry wages at their own sweet will but
appropriated the produce of the land themselves without having done any
work.

According to their law man did not carry any value and his labour did
not deserve any reward. The rulers considered the people to be their
slaves and subjected them to forced labour. Their very religion was
based on making people their slaves or in other words on killing and
destroying those helpless and afflicted persons. The people were
ignorant and the rulers, taking undue advantage of their ignorance, made
them their slaves.

The idolatrous priests, who were the religious leaders of those times
had also declared slavery to be lawful and had thus strengthened the
hands of the rulers. These priests had befooled the people in such a way
that they were prepared to make supreme sacrifices for the sake of their
rulers to enable them to increase their wealth and add new lands to
their territories. All this was done either in the name of the homeland
or in the name of the deity, whom they worshipped.

The famous British historian H.G. Wells says: “The idolatrous priests
told the people that the lands which they tilled did not belong to them.
They belonged to the gods whose image they had hung in the temples, and
those gods had given those lands to the rulers. Now it depended upon the
sweet will of the rulers to give the lands to those servants of theirs
whom they liked”.

The peasants also began to entertain the belief that the land which they
ploughed did not belong to them, but were owned by the god (idol) and it
was their duty to surrender a part of the produce of the land to the
representative of the god. Or that the god had given the land to the
ruler and he was entitled to impose thereon any taxes he liked. Or that
the ruler had given the land to the landlord who was their master. If at
times the idol, the ruler or the landlord needed the services of the
peasant it was his duty to leave other work and carry out the orders of
his master. The peasant did not even think that he had any right on the
land which he ploughed. In short the peasant neither possessed any
freedom of will nor enjoyed any right.

The history of Arabia tells us that the persons who assumed the reins of
government after Ali monopolized the lands, their produce, and the
public treasury for their personal benefit. They used to say: “The
entire wealth belongs to God and we are his representatives and
vicegerents on earth. It is our prerogative to give this wealth to
whomsoever we like. Nobody is entitled to criticize us in this regard”.
[^1]

However, Ali knew the position very well. He was very far-sighted and
was well aware that God does not need land or wealth and the land
belongs to those who work on it. Ali also knew that if the peasants are
indigent the land will become waste and it will be difficult to realize
any revenue. Land can be developed only by those people who are its
owners and derive profit from its produce. If the peasants know it for
certain that they will not be able to enjoy the fruits of their labour
and it will reach the treasuries of the extravagant rulers, they will
work half-heartedly and will not make any effort to develop the
land.[^2] Consequently they themselves will be in distress and others
will also be deprived of the fruits of their labour.

In case, however, they know that the more they produce with their hard
work the more they themselves and their children will benefit from it,
and the rulers too will not distribute the revenue among their friends
and relatives, but will spend it on projects of public welfare, they
will work whole-heartedly. As a result of this they will become
prosperous and additional revenue will also accrue to the government
treasury.

In the eyes of the Commander of the Faithful the happiness and goodwill
of the subjects was the only source of the welfare of the people as well
as the good condition of the rulers. He did not believe in coercion and
said: “The best source of satisfaction and heartfelt happiness for a
ruler is that justice should be established and the love of the subjects
for the rulers should become patent. They do not display love so long as
there is ill feeling in their hearts and their devotion cannot be relied
upon so long as they are not prepared to defend their ruler and do not
cease to think that his rule has been burdensome and it will come to an
end after a long time”.

Ali considered farming and all other professions to be respectable. He
prohibited people from remaining idle and considered it essential that a
worker should be paid wages commensurate with his work. He exercised
much strictness in these matters so that the people might realize that
he was not going to pay anything which had not been earned by the person
concerned by means of his work. The incident of his real brother Aqil
son of Abu Talib is well known. He approached Ali to make him some
payment without any work or service, but Ali declined to accede to his
request.

In the eyes of Ali there was no injustice greater than that a worker
should not be paid his wages or that he should be deprived of his right
even to the smallest extent. According to him it was also highly
improper that the work done by persons belonging to the higher class
should be applauded whereas that done by the ordinary persons should be
looked down upon. According to him what mattered was the work and its
real value whether it was done by a big man or an ordinary person.

There were many workers in his time who worked hard but were not
rewarded for their labour. The Commander of the Faithful disliked it
very much. These words of his are a beacon light in the path of social
and moral principles: “Keep eye on the achievement of every person and
do not attribute the achievement of one person to another, and do not
deprive the real person of the reward to which he is entitled on account
of the work done by him. Never treat an ordinary work to be great on
account of high position of the doer, and never treat a great work to be
ordinary on account of the low position of the person who has done it”.

Development of land and payment of full wages, commensurate with the
work done, were the two strong pillars on which Ali intended to erect
the structure of a good and pious society. Some persons belonging to a
particular place came to him and said: “There is a canal in our area
which is now filled with dust. If it is dug again it will be very
beneficial for us”. They then requested him to write to the governor of
the area to make it compulsory for everyone to dig the canal. The
Commander of the Faithful approved the digging of the canal but did not
accede to their request that the people should be compelled to dig it.

He wrote thus to Qarza son of Kaa\`b the governor of the area: “Some
persons belonging to your area came to me and told me that there was a
canal in that region which is now filled with dust. If these people dig
the canal once again it will lead to the development of the area and
they will be able to pay the revenue. This will also lead to the
increase in the income of the Muslims residing in the area. These
persons asked me to write a letter to you desiring you to collect the
people of that place to dig the canal and to make it obligatory upon
them to bear the expenses of the work.

I do not consider it appropriate to compel any person to do a work which
he does not like to do. You should, therefore, call the people and
employ those of them who are willing to do the work. When the canal is
ready only those persons who do digging work will be entitled to use it,
and those who do not participate in the work will have no right on its
water. If those people develop their area and their financial position
improves, it is much better than their remaining weak”.

Ali did not consider it lawful to subject anyone to forced labour,
although a group of persons wished to resort to this practice. The thing
which matters is that one should work. Ali, therefore, said to those
people: “You have been ordered to work (and not to remain idle). As
regards the canal only those persons, who participate in its digging,
will be entitled to benefit from it. Those who do not want to do this
work cannot be compelled to do it. Work should be done willingly and not
under coercion”. This is the principle which Ali followed very strictly.

By formulating this rule about work and the workers centuries ago Ali
surpassed the western thinkers. The western thinkers are putting forth
so vehemently the same thing today which was said by Ali thirteen
hundred years ago. He provided a basis for justice and a better basis
cannot be imagined. [^3] And that basis is that none should be subjected
to forced labour, however beneficial the work may be, because taking
work by force is an insult to humanity. It reduces the value of man and
infringes his inherent freedom. Furthermore, work taken under compulsion
loses its value, because one who is forced to perform a job will not
perform it whole-heartedly.

Ali, however, encouraged the people in another way to do the work by
saying that only those persons who participate in digging the canal
would be entitled to benefit from it. He said: “The owners of the canal
are those persons who participate in digging it and not those who
refrain from doing so”.[^4] This principle enunciated by Ali is the
pillar on which the greatest beliefs and ideas of the western thinkers
are based.

Hence it is necessary for every person to work. None is great or small
except through his work. Whoever works shall be rewarded for it. The
aristocrats and dignitaries are not entitled to usurp the earnings of
others and encroach upon their rights. As said by Ali if God likes any
one He likes an honest worker. If a person earns some wealth by hard
work it naturally belongs to him because he has worked for it.

However, he must also take the interest of the nation into account. The
said property will be treated to be his personal property so long as
public interests are not jeopardized. If public interests demand that a
part of the personal property of the individuals should be taken and
spent for public welfare, this will be done. This wealth is meant for
the benefit of the individuals as well as for the welfare of the society
(it was on this account that revenue was realized from the owners of the
canal for the public treasury) when ownership is circumscribed in this
manner there will neither be excessive wealth with anyone nor will there
be any indigent person in the society.

In every nation there are certain persons (for example young orphans)
who are not able to do any work. Did Ali ignore such persons, as is done
by the western countries, or did he take care of them according to the
rules of justice and morality?

There is no doubt about the fact that the nation has rights on the
individuals and the individuals have rights on the nation. The nation is
like a body which is composed of different limbs. It is necessary for
every limb to help other limbs. Every person is entitled to enjoy the
fruits of his labour. God has given a share of the necessities of life
to everyone. None is, therefore, entitled to appropriate the necessities
of life to the exclusion of others.

However, it is the responsibility of the nation to support those who are
unable to earn, for example small children and old persons. [^5] It
should do justice to the helpless persons in the same manner in which it
does justice to others. It is an exclusive right of theirs, and not an
act of kindness and the governments and its representatives are
responsible to pay this right. Ali Says: “Out of all members of the
society these persons are more deserving of justice. Hence you should
pay the right of every one of them and equip yourself with an excuse to
be presented before God. Take care of the orphans and the old persons
who can neither earn their livelihood nor stand before others to beg”.

Ali has gone ahead of thousands of western thinkers and philosophers in
this matter. He realized the necessity of paying the rights of the
helpless persons and made it a responsibility of the government. He did
not let it depend on the kindness and generosity of the rich so that the
deceitful hypocrites might not get any chance to spread mischief. [^6]

Ali's conscience as well as his intellect were well aware of the reality
that all human beings are entitled to live. This right is one of the
necessities of social life.

Freedom is of no use if sustenance is not available and a good society
cannot come into being without it. He promulgated the law that all human
beings enjoy equal rights. Then in the light of the same law he decided
that the needy persons had preferential rights over the public treasury
as compared with the rich persons even though those rich persons might
have embraced Islam earlier.

It is work which entitles one to wages and it is also work by means of
which one can become the owner of land and property.

In the orders which the Commander of the Faithful sent to the governors
and other officers every now and then he strictly warned them not to
harass the people. He directed them not to press the indigent peasants
for payment of revenue but to render them assistance so that they might
work hard and produce more from the land. Taxes should be realized from
the rich so that the income of the public treasury might increase and
might be used to help the needy.

How great and dignified Ali appears in our eyes when we learn that
fourteen hundred years ago he gave emphatic orders to his governors on
these lines: “Don't sell the winter or summer dresses of the people, or
their cereals, or the animals used by them, to realize revenue. Don't
flog any person or make him stand on his feet for the sake of money.
Don't sell the household effects of any person to get revenue - and pay
more heed to the development of land than to the collection of revenue”.

The Commander of the Faithful has mentioned the reason for the
distressful condition of the indigent persons of his time in a few brief
sentences and has explained their contents in numerous testaments and
precepts. He says: “If an indigent person remains hungry it is because
the rich man has withheld his share”.

This is the greatest reality which is the basis of modern equitable
system. Ali had understood this reality fourteen hundred years ago and
formulated clear rules and regulations, as were suited to his time.

A Lebanese writer who happens to be my friend says that at one time he
was residing in a big city of Europe and the movement to put an end to
poverty was being carried on there. One day he met the Education
Minister of that country and said to him during the course of
conversation: “We Arabs realized centuries ago the class discrimination
and its disadvantages which you are endeavouring to eliminate now”.

The Minister said: “How?” He replied: Fourteen hundred years ago Ali son
of Abu Talib said: “I have not seen excessive wealth with anyone except
that I have seen simultaneously the right of someone being infringed”.

The Minister said: “We are much better than you”. He said: “How?” The
Education Minister said: “Because although an Arab had understood this
reality fourteen hundred years ago you have not so far endeavoured to
eliminate indigence and are still involved in it whereas we are already
endeavouring to get rid of poverty. Hence you are fourteen hundred years
behind us .i.e. if we had heard this sentence of Ali at that time we
would have taken necessary steps in this behalf immediately”.

Before we end this chapter, it will be better to recapitulate what has
been stated above and to invite the readers to compare the views of Ali
on social matters with those of the modern thinkers and to reflect on
them judiciously.

We can mention the social principles and views of Ali in nine sentences.
These principles and views consist of the causes of affluence and
indigence and the class differences of the people or in other words the
best rules and regulations for eliminating poverty and need, and
establishing equality of rights between them.

(1) Prevent hoarding.

(2) No indigent person remained hungry except because a rich man usurped
his share.

(3) I have not seen excessive wealth with anyone except that I have seen
the right of someone being infringed.

(4) You should be more anxious to develop land then to collect revenue.

(5) I do not consider it proper that a person should be compelled to do
a work which he does not like.

(6) The hearts of the pious people are in Paradise and their bodies are
busy doing work in the world.

(7) The canal belongs to him who participated in its digging and not to
him who did not provide physical or financial assistance to dig it.

(8) Keep in view the achievement of a person, and do not attribute the
achievements of one person to another.

(9) Beware! Don't appropriate to yourselves the things in which all have
equal rights.

If these sentences of Ali are studied carefully it becomes known that
the rights of man in the human society can be protected and his freedom
can be ensured only by acting on those principles.

[^1]: The fact is that this policy began to be acted upon during the
time of Uthman himself. During the time of the Prophet and the period of
the caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar everything belonged to the Muslims
and they were treated to have equal rights. However, Uthman's attitude
changed considerably. He considered everything to be the property of God
and considered himself to be the master of the Muslims. He spent public
property as he wished and gave it to whomever he liked. The Commander of
the Faithful has drawn a picture of this period in these words:
“Consequently the third proudly took charge of the caliphate as if it
was a private grazing ground and with bloated stomachs he and members of
his clan (Bani Umayya) started plundering the wealth of the Muslim world
in the same reckless gluttonous manner which characterises a camel when
it devours harvest grass. Uthman deprived the lawful claimants of that
property which belonged to all the Muslims and gave it to his kith and
kin and near and dear ones. On many occasions he uttered words which
reflected the beliefs of the age of ignorance according to which the
lands and its produce and the public treasury belonged to the ruler and
he was entitled to give it to whomsoever he liked. This sentence of his
is found in all history books: “This is God's property. I shall give it
to whomsoever I like and shall not give it to any one whom I do not like
to give. If any person gets annoyed I don't care”. Mu'awiya and other
Umayyad caliphs were the relatives and kinsmen of Uthman. Whatever they
did during their own times was done by them in imitation of Uthman.

[^2]: This goes to show that if the peasants are allowed to share the
produce with the land-owners they will work hard to earn more profit
from the land. However, if their position is that of wage- earners (as
in socialism) they will not strive to increase the produce, knowing that
they will get the same wages whatever the quantity of the produce may
be. Further, the socialist governments are a heavy burden on their
subjects. They interfere with all the affairs of the subjects and the
subjects, too are not faithful to such government, because they do not
have any faith in them.

[^3]: The western philosophers are divided into two groups on this
question. One group considers forced labour to be unjust and unlawful
whereas the other group considers it to be necessary. Socialism holds
the latter view.

[^4]: In the beginning of his letter addressed to the governor the
Commander of the Faithful had told him that he should encourage the
people to dig the canal and bear the expenses of the work. He who could
not personally work, should hire someone to work on his behalf. Being
\`owners of the canal' means that those who participate in its digging
physically or financially own its water and so long as their needs are
not fulfilled others cannot utilize it. They have a right to prevent
others from taking the water or to allow them to take it on payment.
This is the purport of the tradition quoted above viz. “The owners of
the canal are those persons who participate in digging it and not those
who refrain from doing so”.

[^5]: In the Islamic law zakat has been made mandatory for this very
reason. Abdullah bin Sanan has been quoted in Kafi as saying that Imam
Ja\`far Sadiq said: “God has fixed that share of the indigent persons in
the wealth of rich which may suffice them. If He had considered it to be
insufficient He would have ordered that more might be paid”.

[^6]: Meeting the needs of the indigent and helpless person is not the
responsibility of the government only as stated by the author. In
Islamic law the government as well as the individuals have been made
responsible to support the needy. If the collection of zakat and its
distribution among the poor had been the responsibility of the
government only, there would have been greater chances of
maladministration, because the persons nearer to government have
benefited to the exclusion of those who had been at a distance from the
government, and had no chances of approaching the authorities concerned.
It is for this reason that Almighty God has ordered the individuals that
they should pay zakat to their kinsmen, neighbours, and the indigent
persons of their own town of whose indigence they are aware, and should
hand it over to government only when none of their relatives,
neighbours, acquaintances, and residents of their town is entitled to
it.


