War and peace
=============

There are many mutual rights enjoyed by the people. One of them is that
they should strengthen the ties of love and friendship. The ties should
exist between the individuals as well as between the tribes and the
nations, because the citizens of all the countries are brother of one
another. They are the descendants of one father and their origin is one.
They have a common path and their aims and objects are also not
different from one another.

Freedom and affluence, prescribed laws and new efforts are all meant for
mankind. These are however, useless in the presence of warfare and
bloodshed which may destroy human race. All these things are for man.
What is the use of all these (amenities and comforts) when human life is
not safe?

Every statement which invites people to serve the human beings but does
not invite them to peace is false and detestable.

All ideals regarding man and his life are useless unless they promote
human brotherhood. How ridiculous those words, acts and ideals appear
when the canals are converted into streams of blood, the gardens are
destroyed and the palaces fall into ruins! How hopeless these words,
acts and ideals seem to be when a man is hurled into the mouth of war
and the beauty of his life, his hopes and desires, and his very being
are reduced to nothing.

War is the cause of death and destruction, whereas peace is the only
means of escaping destruction. This is the object which leads to many
other aims and objects. It is only during the time of peace that human
beings can utilize all their talents and achieve their common desires by
joint efforts.

The principles and methods of Ali apply to all fields in the same manner
in which the branches which shoot from a common root spread on all sides
He had realized that peace is a high wall surrounding man and life which
protects both of them from every calamity. Addressing the people he
says: “God has not created you in vain”.

As regards Ali's view regarding the purpose for which God has created
man he says: “God has created you respectable on His earth, and safe
among His creation. His bounties have spread the wings of their
kindnesses on your heads and made the streams of comforts flow for your
sake”.

According to Ali love and friendship is the greatest blessing for
mankind. He says: “Almighty God has strengthened the tie of love between
the human beings. It is the love under whose shadow the people walk
about and in whose lap they seek refuge. This love is an invaluable
blessing because it is dearer than whatever price is fixed for it, and
is greater than every great thing”.

Ali says that every person should establish friendship and love with
others so that peace may prevail, because during peace time the
atmosphere of a city remains tranquil and the people do not feel any
fear. One should avoid warfare, because war is oppression and it is
highly indecent and improper to oppress God's creatures. Whether the
result of war is victory or retreat it is harmful in both cases. War is
ruination and destruction for the victor as well as for the vanquished.
War destroys human honour. The victor is considered to be an opponent of
intellect and conscience, an enemy of love, who treats human life to be
valueless, and one who is defeated is humiliated and his life and
property are also destroyed. Ali says: “One who gains victory by evil
means is in fact defeated”. “Nothing is worse than fighting and
bloodshed”.

Ali has considered looting and plundering which were the preliminaries
of war between the tribes during the age of ignorance to be one of the
most horrible acts. According to Ali looting and plundering,
idol-worshipping, and burying the girls alive, were sins of the same
kind and their origin is also one and the same. That origin is that man
is not aware of his own value or that of life and there can be no
greater ignorance than this. He says: “They had reached the abyss of
ignorance. They buried their girls alive, worshipped the idols and
robbed and plundered one another”.

He detested fighting so much that he forbade it even during the most
difficult circumstances and did not permit that one should challenge
another to combat. He says: “Never challenge another person to combat”.

When we study the life and conduct of Ali it becomes abundantly clear
that he condemned many characteristics of the people and considered many
things in the world to be abominable. As regards the characteristics of
the people he first of all condemned inclination towards mischief and
bloodshed. As regards the abominable things there was nothing more
hateful in his eyes than warfare. This sentence of his deserves to be
kept in mind: “This world is the abode of war, plundering and
bloodshed”.

Fighting is as much injurious for truth as it is the source of refuge
for falsehood. It is by means of truth that man is exalted, the society
is strengthened and the world becomes prosperous. Falsehood is the
collection of humiliation and disgrace. It is, therefore, evident that
there can be nothing worse than war. It is the cradle of all
absurdities, because doubt prevails, war and falsehood flourishes, and
the voice of truth is subdued; whereas peace is truth itself, and
whoever violates truth goes astray.

This was the basis of the view and belief held by Ali about war, and
this is not also surprising, because this belief was compatible with his
idea of freedom and the reliance which he had on the common man and the
respect which he had for life as well as for those who were alive. It
was for this reason that at times, in order to put to end to trouble and
to invite his friends to peace he said: “For your enemies this loss is
sufficient that they have gone astray”.

Imam Ali used to ask a sinner and a transgressor to express regret for
his lapse so that fighting might not take place. As regards the
oppressed persons he used to ask him to accept the apology of the
transgressor however big his offence might be. He says: “Accept the
apology of a person who apologizes to you”.

He also says: “Fight against your worldly desires by means of reason. If
you do so the people will continue to love you”. He, therefore,
considered it the best quality for his followers that they should desire
peace, hate war and seek safety for themselves as well as for others. As
to what qualities his followers should possess he says: “When my
followers are angry they do not commit injustice. They are a blessing
for their neighbours and a source of security for their companions”.

However, hatred for war and unusual inclination towards peace did not
mean that Ali should have surrendered before his opponent. Hatred for
war and inclination towards peace does not mean that one should shirk
one's responsibilities and leave the mischief-mongers free to do what
they like, because war is not a detestable thing in itself, but becomes
bad on account of the horrors and destruction which it entails, and
peace is not a good thing in itself, but becomes good, because it
provides security to the people, provides chances for improving the
society, and opens the paths of life before those who are living.

In short, whether it be war or peace, neither of them is intrinsically
good or bad. Their goodness or badness is determined with reference to
other people. If war or peace had any intrinsic value, the revolutionary
efforts made by the oppressed people of the world against the oppressive
kings and rulers and the colonialists would have been evil and sin, and
obedience to those tyrants would have been a blessing, but in fact it is
not so.

The real thing which counts is the welfare of the masses. If they are
living in comfort and their property and honour are safe, peace is
better for them. In case, however, they are leading a miserable life and
their rights are being violated, war is a blessing for them until an
atmosphere of real peace is created, a peace, which is based on human
values and is free from humiliation and helplessness, and subservience
to tyranny and injustice. This was what Ali had in view.

What he disliked was the war of Abu Lahab and Abu Sufyan against
Muhammad and not the war of Muhammad against Abu Lahab and Abu Sufyan.
He disliked the war which was fought by the tyrants against the
righteous, and not the war which was fought by the pious and Godly
persons against the tyrants and the hypocrites.

Ali wished the people not to become Changez Khan, Halaku, Hitler or
Mussolini, but he did not also like them to become like those who were
enslaved by Changez, Halaku, Hitler and Mussolini.

There is nothing wrong with a war which is fought to get back the right
of an oppressed person from the oppressor, or to protect the honour of
the people. In fact it is a social need and something which humanity
demands. The condition precedent to such a war is that before it is
resorted to, all necessary efforts for peace and reconciliation should
be made.

When the followers of Ali became impatient because of his having delayed
permission at Siffin to perform jihad he said to them: “As regards your
asking whether this delay is due to the fact that I abhor death and wish
to escape it, I swear by God that I do not care whether I proceed
towards death or death proceeds towards me. And similarly as regards
your asking whether I am doubtful regarding the lawfulness of jihad
against the people of Syria, I swear by God that I have not delayed the
battle even for a day except with the idea that some persons from
amongst them may possibly come and meet me and be guided through me and
may also see my light with their dazzled eyes. I like this more than to
kill them while they are in a state of ignorance, although they
themselves will in any case be responsible for their sins”.

The second condition for war is that its object should not be only to
gain victory. Furthermore, the victor should not become vindictive. He
should not torture the enemy and should not maltreat the captive and
those who have suffered on account of war. He should not pursue those
who fly away, and should not hurt the old men, the women and the
children. If he who joins battle thinks that he is on the right, and
claims that he is fighting for the sake of justice, and his opponent is
an oppressor, and it is necessary to take revenge from him, he should
content himself with restoring truth to its place. If this object is
achieved after a brief fighting he should withhold his hand from
continued warfare.

In all the battles fought by Ali the basic principle followed by him was
that bloodshed should not be resorted to unless it was absolutely
necessary and there was no alternative other than warfare. He always
endeavoured to advise the enemy and make him submit to reason. He used
to say: “By God I shall certainly do justice to the oppressed and render
advice to the oppressor”.

When advice and efforts for peace and reconciliation failed he resorted
to threats, because his real object was that if possible not even one
drop of blood might be shed. Threatening the people of Nahrawan he says:
“I warn you that you will be killed and will fall on the ground on the
windings of the canal and its even slopes in such a condition that you
will have no sound argument or clear proof to put forth before God as an
excuse.

The position is this that you have become homeless and then the Divine
decree has a firm grip on you. I had already prohibited you from
agreeing to this arbitration but you declined to obey my orders like
opposing violators, so much so that I was obliged to agree to what you
wished. You are a group whose heads are empty of understanding and
intellect. Woe betide you! I have neither involved you in any trouble
nor wished ill of you”.

Now please read this wonderful supplication of Ali and visualize his
sublime morality and the sympathy which he had in his heart for fell
enemies. When the enemy forces in Siffin finally decided to fight and
all efforts for peace and reconciliation failed he prayed to God in
these words:  
 “O God! Lord of the earth, which you have made the abode of man, and
the place of roaming about of the reptiles, the quardrupeds and other
innumerable creatures which can or cannot be seen. O Lord of the strong
mountains which you have made to serve as nails for the earth and means
of livelihood for your creatures! If you grant us victory over the
enemies keep us immune from committing injustice and keep us on the
straight path of truth, and if You make our enemies victorious grant us
martyrdom and save us from the allurement of life”.

The keenness of the Commander of the Faithful for peace and his efforts
for it even a short time before the commencement of the battle is an
undeniable fact which is acknowledged by his friends as well as enemies.
During his entire life he displayed love for peace and hatred for war.
He always tried his best that fighting might be avoided and
reconciliation might take place.

When, at the time of the Battle of the Camel, Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr
got ready to fight against him he arrayed his companions and said to
them: \`Do not shoot an arrow and do not strike a spear or a sword so
that it may be proved that you have discharged your responsibility”.

However, Ali did not start fighting until the enemies had pierced arrows
into the bodies of three of his companions and he had prayed to God
thrice to bear witness to their act. He reached before his enemies
scores of times empty handed and without any arms or coat of mail
although they were fully equipped with arms.

In reply to their harsh words stubbornness, and rough tone he spoke with
extreme kindness and tendered them advice in a friendly manner. Standing
before him were his enemies who looked like a dark night as they were
covered with in coats of mail and shields, but his armour was respect
for mankind; his shield was his faith in his being right and in his mode
of action being correct, and his sword was his compliance with the
commandments of reason and conscience. In fact his kindness to the weak,
his support for truth and his peaceableness were as good as thousands of
shields for him. It was he who said: “If you feel secure from vexation
by someone try to make him your brother”.

Imam Ali was one who disliked enmity and grudge because these two things
give birth to discord and destroy individual morals and national
attributes. He said: “Refrain from enmity and dispute, because these two
things make the heart sick and discord is generated from them”.

Many times he reached before his enemies empty- handed and without any
coat of mail or shield. He did this to make them realize that he hated
warfare and was keen to solve problems in a friendly and brotherly
manner. He said: “Do good to your enemy because this victory is more
agreeable and sweet”.

Another object of his approaching his opponents in this manner was that
he wanted to make it clear that war is something bad and the benefit
which the victor acquires from it is a benefit which is acquired from
evil and has no value. He says: “The goodness of a goodness which is
acquired through evil is futile and the affluence which is the result of
indigence and adversity has no value”.

Ali eliminated this evil (warfare) by all possible means and tried to
improve the conditions of the people without bloodshed and strife. So
much so that when the enemies were bent upon waging war and had no aim
other than shedding his blood as well as his righteous companions, he
advised them and endeavoured his best to obviate fighting. And when
these efforts failed and no alternative was left except to join battle,
he did not initiate fighting. Fighting was started by the enemies and he
only replied to their attacks. And when he took the sword in his hand he
stepped forward and now he was Ali son of Abu Talib. If death did not
proceed towards him he himself proceeded towards death. He crushed the
champions and made brave warriors flee.

Ali desired equity and justice, whereas his enemies craved for injustice
and oppression. He wished that mankind might prosper, whereas they
wanted to create mischief. He wanted the people to enjoy freedom and
comfort, whereas they were keen to keep them in bondage like slaves. He
wished that the slaves of God should be strong and respectable whereas
his enemies wanted to enslave and humiliate them.

The things which must exist in the society and which are also considered
by law of reason to be necessary were in danger. Now in these conditions
remaining a silent spectator amounted to laziness, recklessness, and
infidelity, and to protect them meant courage and bravery.

About fighting against Mu\`awiya he says:-”I have weighed and assessed
this matter very carefully and have concluded that only two paths are
open before me either I should wage war against Mu\`awiya or I become an
apostate”.

Just see how he has drawn a picture of the Battle of the Camel in a
concise and precise manner and has also explained his own position:”
Talha and Zubayr were the first to take oath of allegiance to me. Later
they broke that oath without just cause and took the Mother of the
Faithful Ayesha to Basra. I was also obliged to take the Muhajirs and
the Ansar with me and pursue them. I tried my best that they might take
once again the oath which they had broken but they declined to do so. I
counselled them much and treated them well”.

While Ali was still on his way and had not yet confronted them he sent
his son Hasan and his cousin Abdullah bin Abbas as well as Ammar bin
Yasir and Qais bin Sa'd bin Ubada to have talk with them (i.e. Talha and
Zubayr) hoping that they might respond to the call of reason and
bloodshed might be avoided. They, however, remained intransigent. The
Commander of the Faithful says thus in this regard: “I proceeded along
with the Muhajirs and the Ansar and stopped near Basra. I invited them
to peace and reconciliation, overlooked their lapses and reminded them
of the oath of allegiance which they had taken. They however, remained
adamant and insisted upon fighting.

I sought help from God and was obliged to get ready for defence against
their attacks. The result was that those who were to be killed were
killed and others ran away. Now they requested me for the same peace
which I had desired before the fighting took place, I accepted the peace
proposal and spared them. I appointed Abdullah bin Abbas their governor
and sent Zafar bin Qais to them as the messenger Now you may approach
these two persons to tell you whatever you want to know about us and
them”.

Ali was victorious on account of his unusual bravery and perfect and
deep faith. He was, however, as much grieved over his victory as his
enemies were over their defeat. Tears trickled down from his eyes and he
was extremely sad.

Every father loves his children very much. If a child does not conduct
himself properly his father has to take corrective measures and punish
him although such action also grieves him. Same was the case with Ali.
He treated the Muslims like his children. The Prophet of Islam has said:
“I and Ali are the fathers of this nation”. Ali loved these children
very much. He was obliged to take corrective measures against them on
account of their injustice and error but was very much grieved to
observe their sufferings.

Ali did not dislike anything more than bloodshed. He was always afraid
lest his governors and offices might indulge in unjustified bloodshed.
He, therefore, warned them again and again not to indulge in bloodshed.
He took care from the moral as well as the political and administrative
point of view that blood should not be shed unnecessarily. He forbade it
in both the capacities, because he considered that as a consequence of
such bloodshed the government might topple down and it was also opposed
to the philosophy of government. He did not forgive any officer for a
lapse in this regard.

In a letter addressed to a governor he says: “Do not try to strengthen
your government by shedding blood without just cause because this will
make your government still weaker, rather it will be taken away from you
and will reach the hand of someone else. If you are guilty of
intentional bloodshed God will not consider this crime of yours
pardonable and I, too, will not consider it so”.

Has there been any other ruler in the world, who may have issued
emphatic instructions to his governors to appoint as military commander
a person who is meek and forbearing, hates bloodshed and murder, can
settle matters by mutual discussions, is not guilty of unjustified
bloodshed, is kind and magnanimous, is not harsh in getting work done by
others and is not accustomed to severity and violence?

In the testament written by him for Malik Ashtar while appointing him as
Governor of Egypt Ali says: “Appoint that person as commander of your
army whom you consider to be most sincere and superior to others in the
matter of meekness and forbearance. He should not be short-tempered and
should accept an excuse. He should be kind to the weak and hard upon the
powerful. He should not become hot-tempered due to cruelty and should
not become helpless due to weakness”.

Thus it is evident that Ali was a peace-loving person. He always
recommended peace. He extremely hated war and always prohibited it. He
never stepped towards War unless war itself stepped towards him and even
if he stepped towards it, it was when he had exhausted all efforts to
stop it by means of friendship, love, goodness and kindness. If he was
compelled to fight a battle he tried that the least number of persons
should be killed. And when he secured victory over his enemy he forgave
him.

He was equally grieved in the event of victory and defeat. Whenever his
enemy requested for peace he acceded to his request cheerfully and
wholeheartedly. He used to say: “During peace time the soldiers are in
comfort, the worries of the people are lesser and an atmosphere of
security prevails in the cities.

He sent many orders to the governors and the officers in which he
emphatically recommended to them inter alia that they should follow his
example and should not draw their swords on account of ordinary matters
as was done by the people during the age of ignorance.

Imam Ali says: “Do not put your hands and swords in motion like the
tongue on account of trivial matters”.

“I do not punish anyone merely on account of suspicion”.

“I shall not fight anyone until I invite him to peace and thus discharge
my responsibility in this behalf. If he repents I shall accept his
repentance, but if he declines to do so and is bent upon fighting I
shall seek help from God and shall fight against him”.

We shall mention in detail later how Ali behaved with his cruel enemies.

It is the duty of every person to abide by the promises made by him. By
this means peace is maintained between the individuals and in the
society and the chances of warfare are eliminated. A covenant should be
honoured whether it is concluded between the followers of the same
religion or of different religions, between persons belonging to the
same race or to different races and between friends or enemies. This was
the principle which was followed constantly by Ali.

As stated above fulfilment of promises is a means of peace and peace
ensures maintenance of an atmosphere of security and prosperity and is a
great service to the nation. It is so because covenants and laws are the
means of national unity and solidarity. Fulfilment of promises is a
quality of magnanimous persons and a means of the peace of mind and
achievement of high morals for which the Commander of the Faithful
endeavoured throughout his life.

Being faithful to one's covenants ensures comradeship and love in all
circumstances and is a manifestation of respect for mankind. Both the
parties remain satisfied as a result of this faithfulness, and when both
of them are satisfied each of them can decide with peace of mind as to
how he should conduct his affairs. On the contrary if they are not
satisfied, it will not be possible for them to undertake their work
freely.

During the period of the caliphate of Ali fulfilment of promises was a
rule which it was absolutely necessary for the people to follow.
Everyone was expected either to fulfil his promise or to lay down his
very life. Ali hated violation of promises as much as he detested
falsehood.

In one of his sermons he says: “Fulfilment of promise and truth have
always gone hand in hand and so far as I am aware there is no shield
better than these to protect a man. Whoever understands the reality of
his **“Return”** does not commit treachery. However, our time is such
that many persons have supposed treachery and deceit to mean
intelligence and wisdom, and the ignorant people have treated their ways
and methods to be prudence. May God destroy them! What has happened to
them? When a person, who has seen the ups and downs of life and is aware
of the vicissitudes of time, makes a plan for himself but finds the
divine commandments in his way, he abandons that plan, although he may
be able to execute it. On the other hand one whose path is not
obstructed by religious feelings avails of the opportunity”.

In the testament which he wrote for Malik Ashtar while appointing him as
the Governor of Egypt he says: “If you settle some conditions with your
enemy or conclude a pact with him you should relieve yourself of its
burden by honouring it. You should discharge faithfully the
responsibility undertaken by you and should make yourself a shield for
the protection of your promise. You should not, therefore, abandon what
you undertake to do or dishonour the covenants you make and should not
deceive your enemy”.

Furthermore, he did not content himself only with emphasizing that
deception should not be practised on the enemy but also strictly
prohibited making ambiguous agreements with the enemy which might be
interpreted in different ways, and it may provide a justification for
the violation of the agreement. He also directed that after a covenant
was concluded and authenticated, advantage of some verbal error should
not be taken to violate it.

Whenever Ali formed an opinion or promulgated an order, he, in the first
instance, examined and assessed all its aspects very carefully. As he
firmly believed in the fulfilment of promise even the greatest
impediments and hardships could not make him deviate from this
principle. one of the occasions on which he honoured his promise inspite
of very difficult circumstances was that of Siffin. At the time of the
Battle of Siffin it was decided to refer the dispute to arbitration.

A pact was concluded between the Commander of the Faithful and Mu\`awiya
to the effect that until the two arbitrators gave their award the
hostilities would remain suspended. After fighting was stopped and the
pact was concluded the adherents of the Commander of the Faithful
realized that they had been duped. A man named Muhammad bin Harith then
approached Ali and said: “O Commander of the Faithful! Can we not ignore
the pact and start the war again? I am afraid that this pact will be a
source of great humiliation and disgrace for us” The Commander of the
Faithful replied: “Should we violate the pact after executing it? No.
This is not permissible”. And it was also Ali who said: “Stick firmly to
the responsibilities which you have undertaken. I am responsible for my
words and guarantee their correctness”.

The facts narrated above explain that Ali's efforts for the maintenance
of peace fully accorded with the wishes of the people on account of
their far-reaching consequences. All human beings crave for justice,
equality and freedom and Ali's effort for peace was an expression of
their desire. In fact it was the heartfelt desire of Ali himself which
he also expressed in his orders and commands.

In the matter of his efforts to ensure that man should love man Ali is
on equal footing with the past prophets and benefactors of mankind. What
a great resemblance Ali's efforts for peace have with the kind voice of
Muhammad who has said: “O slaves of God! Become brothers of one
another”.

How much his efforts also resembled the words of the Prophet who, when
asked as to which act is the noblest, replied: “The noblest act is that
one should endeavour for the welfare of the world”.


