Combat oppression
=================

In all general matters Ali led a very consistent and harmonious life.
His high morals, unusual sagacity, his actions relating to the
administration of the state, command of the army and other personal
characteristics and qualities were all similar and inter-connected. He
hated usury, hoarding and oppression very much. He was a fell enemy of
the wealthy and powerful persons who oppressed others, the ignorant
considered themselves to be superior to others, and persisted in their
stubborn views founded on ignorance.

He was extremely keen to help the weak and the indigent, because they
too were human beings and it is highly unjustifiable to treat them to be
mean and humble. He desired the freedom of the creatures of God from the
core of his heart, because God has created them free and it is not at
all proper that they should be subjected to humiliation and abjectness.
Their humiliation and abjectness is the humiliation and abjectness of
humanity, and whoever humiliates humanity deserves to be treated an
enemy.

It can be realized by everyone from what has been stated above how great
a supporter and sympathizer of the helpless and oppressed persons Ali
was, how he fought against the enemies of virtue and goodness, and how
much annoyance he expressed against those who acted against the dictates
of reason and conscience.

However, what has been written by us on the subject does not appear to
be sufficient. It appears necessary to allocate a separate and detailed
chapter to the subject showing how Ali behaved with the tyrants, and
what his views were about injustice and oppression.

There are many kinds of injustice. For example to usurp the property of
a person is injustice of one kind and to hurt his honour and reputation
is injustice of another kind. Sometimes injustice is patent whereas at
other times it is latent. We shall discuss all these kinds of injustice
one by one.

It is not possible to find any sermon or testament of the Commander of
the Faithful, in which he may not have mentioned and condemned injustice
severely. His entire life was spent in waging war against injustice and
oppression and against the oppressors and tyrants. He fought this war
with his hands, tongue and orders and commands as well as with his
sword.

War against injustice and oppression is being fought ever since man
arrived on earth. However, this war has been fought in different ways
and in different conditions. Those who undertook to campaign against the
tyrants and oppressors of their time were hundreds of thousands in
number. These great heroes were a source of pride for humanity whereas
the tyrants stained the pages of history with their misdeeds. Those
heroes came in succession and every one of them inherited this holy war
from another.

They have also been some great souls amongst the human beings whose
entire lives were spent in waging war against injustice and oppression.
The biographies of Abraham, Moses and Jesus consist of war against
oppression, usury and injustice. Muhammad's campaign against the
polytheists was also in continuation of and complementary to the war
waged by Jesus. He started a great revolutionary movement to uproot
injustice and oppression and did not rest till the oppressed were
emancipated and their lives took a turn for the better.

Cruelty becomes the second nature of some persons. They commit
atrocities with perfect ease in the same way in which they perform other
natural acts like eating, drinking, walking and breathing. To this
category belong persons like Nero, Changez Khan, European officers of
the \`Inquisition' during the Middle Ages, and many other kinds and
rulers like Hajjaj bin Yusuf, Ziad bin Abih, Obaidullah bin Ziad, Muslim
bin Aqba etc. And similarly history tells us about innumerable other
persons in whom opposition to injustice was inherent and had become
their second nature.

The reason for the tyrants of the past not being ashamed of the
atrocities committed by them was that they were not pained by their
cruel acts. They did not tyrannize or oppress others with any aim or
object. They did so because it had become their habit.

Once Hajjaj bin Yusuf was having his meals along with some friends of
his. Before him was standing an innocent old man who was trembling with
fear. Hajjaj raised his head and looked at the old man. Then he ordered
one of his servants to behead him. The order was complied with
immediately and the old man was beheaded. Hajjaj continued to eat as if
nothing had happened. He said to his slave loudly: “Bring cold water”.

Nero set the city of Rome on fire. While Rome was burning Nero was busy
in his merry-makings.

The firmness and steadfastness of those who consistently campaigned
against injustice and oppression can also be explained in the same way.
just as the persons mentioned above committed injustice because it was
inherent in their nature, in the same way these benefactors of humanity
fought against injustice and supported the oppressed, because they were
compelled by their nature to do so.

Socrates drank the cup of poison as if it was a medicine because his
drinking it was a display of firmness and steadfastness against
falsehood. Voltaire [^1] waged war against the aristocrats and nobles of
Europe. He was compelled to wage this war by his nature just as a hungry
person is obliged to eat food or a thirsty person is compelled by his
inner urge to get hold of water to quench his thirst. The companions of
Imam Husayn also sacrificed their lives in support of his mission,
although they could see a huge army of Bani Umayyah arrayed against
them.

These people were the benefactors of mankind and the great and
magnanimous souls among human beings, whose head and leader was Ali ibn
Abi Talib. He had come into the world to establish truth and to destroy
falsehood. He rose with this purpose and also accepted the caliphate
with this very object in view. However, the world, with all its expanse
could hardly accept the laws and principles of Ali. The unjust and cruel
persons were large in numbers and possessed much strength. The task
which Ali wished to accomplish was difficult as well as dangerous.

Ali told the people that they should neither be the oppressors nor the
oppressed ones. He wished that none should oppress others and none
should tolerate oppression. However, the people of the time were not
prepared to accept Ali's view and could not lend support to his
intentions. So much so that even the oppressed persons did not side with
him, because they were over awed by the oppressors and were afraid of
their enmity and grudge.

They were so foolish that they took bribes from Ali's enemies and
withdrew their support from him. Eventually only a few God-fearing and
brave persons were left with him, and they did not desert him at any
cost.

However, was it proper that Ali should have shown frailty and weakness
at this juncture when the forces of evil had formed a front against him?
Is it possible for a brave man to lose heart and give up effort because
he is faced with calamities and hardships with men like carnivores
around him, particularly when everybody is afraid of death also?

Should Ali have been disheartened and become sluggish when the enemies
were becoming more and more rebellious, when the men in authority had
lost all sense of wisdom, were selling religion for the sake of the
world, were stupidly running after wealth and rank, had created chaos in
the cities, were persisting in oppression, were full of pride and
conceit, creating innovations and void things before the right things,
praising the wrong and evil doing, and still hoping for a good reward,
had annihilated justice and fair play, and had created rebellion, and
chaos, and their tyranny and violence had no bounds.

Could he become weak and languid when the condition of his companions
was this: “Whoever called them for help never succeeded. Whoever met
them did not acquire peace of mind. Whoever came in the battlefield
accompanied by them sustained loss. They were deaf inspite of having
ears and were dumb although they possessed power of speech. They neither
showed steadfastness in the battlefield like noble and zealous men nor
could one depend upon their sympathy and support at the time of
adversity”.

Of course in such conditions and circumstances one should become weak
and feeble and must sit down languidly - but it is subject to the
condition that he should not be Ali ibn Abi Talib.

The deep love which Ali had in his heart for every human being obliged
him not to show the least leniency to one who did harm to the people
even though he (i.e. Ali) had to lay down his life in the campaign.

One who considers it love and kindness and a sign of gentleness to
remain silent in the face of the oppressors is either a liar or is not
acquainted with human nature, because the position is otherwise. True
love and kindness for mankind means that the oppressors should be dealt
with severely so that they may free the people from bondage. In certain
circumstances kindness and gentleness compel man to resort to extreme
severity.

Man likes beauty as much as he detests ugliness. He hates injustice and
oppression as much as he desires justice. He is as much afraid of the
coldness of non- existence as he is fond of the warmth of existence. A
person cannot strike a sword on the necks of the rebels and the
oppressors unless he considers life to be a blessing. In short one who
does not hate cannot also love.

The best proof of the fact that Ali was as much as harsh upon the
oppressors as he was kind towards others and was prepared to be
extremely severe to eliminate injustice is provided by the event of
Saudah daughter of Ammarah Hamdaniyah.

Saudah says: “I saw the Commander of the Faithful to complain against an
agent who had been appointed by him to collect zakat. When I stood
before him he said with much kindness: “Do you want anything to be
done?” I complained to him against the agent. On hearing what I narrated
he began to weep and said praying to God: “O Lord! I have neither
ordered these agents to oppress the people nor asked them to abandon
your right”. Then he took out a piece of paper from his pocket and wrote
on it as follows: -

“Weigh and measure properly and do not give lesser to the people nor
spread mischief on the earth. When you receive this letter keep the
things in your charge in reserve so that another person may come and
take over the same from you”.

It can well be observed from this incident how kind Ali was to the
oppressed woman, because he began to weep on hearing her tale. And it is
also evident how this kindness was converted into harshness for the
agents. This accords with the principles of extreme kindness for the
oppressed and extreme wrath towards the oppressor.

Ali never refrained from campaigning against refractoriness and
injustice. Whenever he saw a person being oppressed by another he showed
no weakness in relieving him of the oppression. And how could he show
any weakness or hesitation when gentleness and kindness had equipped him
with unusual manliness and steadfastness and had made him very fond of
fighting against falsehood and establishing truth. It was his firm
belief that: “The presence of an Imam through whom the right of a weak
person may be realized from a strong person and that of an oppressed
person from an oppressor is necessary so that the righteous may live in
comfort and feel secure from the mischief of the evil-doers”.

“God has provided protection to the people from being oppressed”. And
when God has provided protection there should be no occasion for
oppression but “God tests the rulers by means of oppression”. Hence if
the rulers are oppressive their rule will come to an end because: “Even
if the oppressor gets respite he cannot escape being captured by God.
God Himself lies in ambush for him and his ambushing will be very
severe. The Day of Judgment will be much severer for the oppressor than
that on which he oppressed another. The oppressed person must not have
suffered so much as the oppressor will suffer on the Day of Judgment''.

The following form part of those orders of Ali which must always be
complied with: “I order you to behave harshly with the oppressor. Hold
the foolish oppressor by the hand, and stop him from committing
injustice”.

No doubt the kindness and affection which Ali had in his mind guaranteed
his steadfastness in the battle between truth and falsehood. Whenever he
reflected about truth and falsehood he said: “O Lord! Our sole endeavour
is that peace and tranquility may prevail in Your cities so that Your
slaves may remain safe”. And when he initiated the campaign he used to
say: “I swear bv God that I shall realize the right of the oppressed
person from the oppressor. I shall put a cavessor in the nose of the
oppressor and pull him to the spring of the truth however much he may
dislike it''. Or said: “It is necessary that the oppressor refrains from
committing injustice, behaves with the people equitably and does not
spread mischief on the earth”.

If the fighting became furious and Ali noticed the disparity between the
numbers of his supporters and the enemy and compared his own condition
with that of his opponents he said: “I have not shown weakness or
sluggishness. I shall continue to fight against falsehood until I
extract truth from its side''.

Ali saw death staring in his eyes but neither his hands were tired of
fighting nor did he entertain the least fear in his heart. He would not
have felt afraid even if the entire population of Arabia had joined
hands and encircled him.

He relied fully on his own justice and equity and firmly believed that
whatever he was doing was in accordance with the canons of equity and
justice. He used to say: “A weak person is strong in my eyes until I get
his right paid to him, and a strong person is weak in my eyes until I
receive the right from him''. He also said: \`\`I swear by God that I am
not worried whether death falls upon me or I fall upon death''.

When he fought against a group of unjust persons and defeated them but
they still offered some resistance he said: “some life is still left in
the oppressors. If God wills we shall uproot them. In case, however,
some of them run away to various cities the matter would be different”.

According to Ali the learned persons are the leaders of the nation and
for this very reason a number of responsibilities devolve upon them.
Their greatest responsibility is that they should oppose the oppressor
and assist the oppressed person. He says: “God has made it mandatory for
the ulema that they should not remain silent spectators of injustice of
the oppressor and the grief and helplessness of the oppressed person.

In order that the oppressors should be eliminated from the society, and
that there should also be none who may assist in the perpetration of
oppression or may tolerate it willingly, Ali has divided the sins of the
people into different categories. There are certain sins which may be
forgiven but injustice and oppression cannot be forgiven in any
circumstances. He says: \`\`And the sin which will not be forgiven is
that one person may oppress another”. He held the view that: “Oppressing
a weak person is the worst type of oppression''.

Thus he endeavoured by all means to eliminate injustice and this
remained his basic policy in the matter of treatment with the people. He
fought against the oppressors with his tongue as well as with his sword
and remained steadfast in his struggle. He continued to fight against
injustice and the unjust till he met martyrdom. If the vicissitudes of
time had not hampered his program and the conditions had not been
unfavourable, he would have brought about a change in a number of
things.

[^1]: Voltaire, a famous French writer and a renowned figure of his time
was born in Paris in 1694 A.D. and died in 1778 A.D. He spent a large
part of life in England, Russia and Switzerland. He severely, criticized
the rulers and religious leaders of his time. It was he who paved the
path for the great French Revolution of 1789 A.D. He is the author of
many valuable books


