U.N. Charter of Human Rights
============================

The rules laid down by Ali regarding human rights appear to be better
and more useful as compared with the declaration made by the U.N. on the
subject.

The readers have now fully grasped the human rights as enunciated by
Ali. It, however, appears necessary to recapitulate them in this chapter
and to study their different aspects keeping their gist in view.

We have endeavoured to understand properly Ali's views and ideas
regarding special and common rights in the light of his various
testaments, letters and orders sent by him to his governors and other
officers and have dealt with them in separate chapters and have tried
our best to explain them as clearly as possible. Hence it should be
quite easy for a reader to get fully acquainted with rules and
regulations set forth by Ali regarding human rights by referring to the
relevant chapters.

In order to present the views and beliefs of Ali in a more prominent
manner and to find out in a better and clearer way with what celestial
power these instructions were issued by him, we propose to mention here
some important contents of the charter of the U.N. and the declaration
of human rights which have been endorsed by the representatives of all
nations. If there is any difference between the rules laid down by Ali
and the U.N. charter it will be possible for the readers to realize it
and also to find out the reason why it is so.

We may say briefly that from the point of view of their purport there is
no difference between the rules laid down by Ali regarding human rights
and the charter of the United Nations. If any minor difference is
observed, apparently it is due to changes which have taken place in the
terminology during the course of time, and is not basic or in principle.

There is no chapter in the charter of the U.N. which is not running
parallel to the rules laid down by Ali. In fact better and more useful
things are found in the instructions given by him.

In my opinion the difference between the two sets of rules is due to the
following four reasons:

Firstly the charter of the United Nations was drafted by thousands of
intellectuals belonging to almost all the countries of the world whereas
the Alavi rules were enunciated by only one person viz. Ali son of Abu
Talib.

Secondly Ali arrived in this world fourteen hundred years ago.

Thirdly those who drafted the U.N. charter or in fact collected the
requisite material for it indulged in too much extravagant talk and
self-praise and boasted that world was indebted to them on this account.
On the contrary Ali showed humility before God and was modest before the
people. He did not seek greatness or superiority. He always prayed to
God and also wished the people that his acts of commissions and
omissions might be overlooked.

The fourth reason for the difference which is more important than the
three enumerated above is that many nations, out of those which
participated in the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights and endorsed it,
violated this declaration and started armed conflicts to nullify and
destroy it, but wherever Ali placed his foot, and whenever he said
anything, or unsheathed his sword, he did so to destroy tyranny and
oppression and leveled the ground to march forward on the path of truth
and justice. So much so that he met his martyrdom in defence of human
rights, although during his lifetime he had already been martyred
thousands of times.

We now give below the contents of the largest chapter of the U.N.
charter which deals with human rights. It has been compiled by a French
writer Barbabech, and translated by Muhammad Mandoor in Arabic and
published by the U.A.R (United Arab Republic).

1. Human beings are equal to one another in the matter of honour and
rights. They have been created with the power of reflection and
competence to distinguish between good and evil. Hence all of them
should behave with one another like brothers.

2. Every human being should enjoy all his rights and the liberties
provided for in this charter. No discrimination should be made between
them on account of difference in race, colour, tongue, faith, political
views, country, social principles, affluence, indigence, pedigree and
family.

3. The rights mentioned in this charter are also available to the
citizens of those countries as well as to the citizens of the countries
whose governments are subordinate to other governments. Hence the
citizens of these regions are equal to the residents of independent
countries.

4. Every person is entitled to possess means of living and to lead his
life in security and peace.

5. Slavery is not permissible for mankind. Slavery and dealing in slaves
is prohibited in all circumstances.

6. It is not permissible to hurt or oppress human beings. It is unlawful
to coerce them unnecessarily. Anything which amounts to aspersion on
another's character or reputation is prohibited.

7. Every person has a right that his legal position should be
acknowledged in whichever country he may be.

8. All human beings are equal before law. Every person is entitled to
seek assistance of law. There is no difference between human beings.
Everyone has a right to oppose the discrimination which infringes the
contents of this charter.

9. Every person has right to lodge a complaint before a regular court
which is established to take decisions about rights and violations of
the law in force.

10. None can be arrested, imprisoned and exiled from his town.

11. It is not permissible that any one should interfere with the
personal or family life or correspondence of another person without
being entitled to do so. None is permitted to attack the honour or
reputation of another, and every person has a right to approach the
law-enforcing authorities in the event of oppression and interference.
[^1]

12. Every person has a right to travel freely in his country and to
settle down wherever he likes. Moreover, every person is entitled to
migrate from any town and also to return to it when he likes.

13. Every person has a right to seek refuge in another country when he
is subjected to tyranny and oppression.

14. Every person has possessive rights in his personal capacity or as a
partner and none can be deprived of the ownership of his property under
coercion.

15. Every person is entitled to reflect freely and the governments are
not entitled to interfere with the religious beliefs and actions of the
people.

16. Every person is entitled to hold an independent opinion and to
express it, and by implication none can hurt him on account of his
opinions. [^2]

17. Every person is entitled to intervene in the activities of the
Department of Public Affairs of the country either directly or through a
freely elected representative. Every person has a right to take part in
public activities on equal conditions, and self-determination of the
people is the origin and basis of the authority of government.

18. Every person is entitled to benefit from the natural
responsibilities of the members of the society which they owe to one
another. The economic, social and educational rights, which are
necessary for a person according to his status, are guaranteed for him
and the entire nation with the co-operation of the governments is
responsible to pay these rights.

19. Every person is entitled to select the profession he likes and to
demand sufficient conditions for it which are compatible with justice.
He is also entitled to be helped to get rid of unemployment. All persons
are entitled, without any exception, to demand appropriate wages for the
work done by them. Every worker has a right to demand wages, which are
sufficient for his and his family's sustenance and with which he may
build his life in accordance with human dignity. If at any time the
usual wages are insufficient to support him he should be compensated by
some collective means. [^3]

20. It is every person's right that he and his family should lead their
lives with means of welfare and security, especially in the matter of
food, dress, lodging, health and social affairs. Furthermore, he/she
should be assisted in the event of unemployment, weakness, old age, and
widowhood, and in all such circumstances as make it impossible for
him/her to earn.

21. Every person has a right to acquire knowledge.

Education should be free and primary education should be compulsory. The
object of education should be the nurture of human personality and
respect for rights and political freedom. It is also necessary that
education should be means of strengthening mutual reconciliation,
forgiveness and friendship between the nations and should assist the
United Nations in its mission of peace.

22. The individuals owe some duties to the society which must be
fulfilled by them, because the personality of the individuals is built
under the auspices of the society.

23. The individuals cannot be prevented from demanding their rights and
enjoying freedom except in matter for which laws have been enacted to
protect and respect the rights and freedom of others, or rules have been
prescribed by society for the protection of good morals, administration
of government and public welfare.  
 These rights and freedom should not in any circum stances interfere
with the aims and objects of the United Nations.

24. The sentences and language of this charter should not be interpreted
in such a way that any government, party or individual may become
entitled to react and nullify practically the freedoms provided for in
this charter.

These are the most important points which are recorded in the charter of
the U.N. regarding the rights and freedom of man. These are the very
rights which are often violated by the signatory governments.

I think that the readers must have realized the sufficiency of these
instructions with the help of the rules enunciated by Imam Ali and must
also have recognized their similarity, with the exception of the
terminology which has changed with the passage of time and the ideas
which have appeared on account of the developments, which have taken
place during the present age. However, the affection and kindness, which
is seen in the rules framed by the Imam, is missing from the charter of
the United Nations.

In the following chapter we shall mention the high morals and virtues of
Ali and how he kept in view the relationship of life which exists
between the living beings and how he respected it in his words and
deeds.

In another chapter we shall review in detail the conditions of the Arab
world during the periods of Bani Umayyah, Bani Abbas and other rulers,
and shall explain how they violated these rules, so that, by a
comparative study of Ali's conduct and theirs, the value of the rules
enunciated by him may become known in a better way.

While giving in detail the rules prescribed by Imam Ali in previous
chapters we have already shown their worth and value, and in these two
chapters we conclude our discussion regarding Ali and human rights, so
that we may turn our attention to other matters.

[^1]: A large part of the contents of this charter is not compatible
with the objects of socialism, because in the socialist countries
complete freedom of the individuals is considered to be opposed to the
interests of the State.

[^2]: The opinions which interfere with law and order, or create
disturbance or are injurious to the independence and integrity of the
State are offences according to law, and the laws of every country take
such offences into account. the co-operation of the governments is
responsible to pay these rights.

[^3]: Freedom of action, strikes, complaints by the workers and other
similar things are not permissible in accordance with the socialistic
ideology, because whatever is connected with action and economy is
controlled by the despotic government and opposition to government is
treated to be a revolt against it.


