Value of life and Ali
=====================

We have learnt that Ali was grieved on account of the privations of the
oppressed. He helped them to acquire their rights and made them
recognize what was due to them. He also shared hardships with the
indigent and the deprived, so that the value of justice might be known
and its standard might be elevated.

We have studied his method of eliminating oppression, and the principles
which he followed in the capacity of a ruler and it has become known
that his principles and laws enjoy a very high position amongst the
principles enunciated by the great sages of the East and the West. We
have already mentioned his contributions to the language, philosophy,
and science and have explained that he was the base and origin of these
branches of knowledge. We have hinted at the extraordinary power which
he possessed to activate the natural inclinations and morality for the
people and the wonderful eloquence with which he described their
qualities and desires. His inherent powers and personal virtues were
intermingled and with their help he planted, on every occasion, a new
tree and provided it with leaves and flowers to perfect the knowledge of
mankind.

He laid a new foundation through his literary and other works on which
Arabic language, jurisprudence, and social sciences, are based, and the
fact is that the theories expounded by others are the offshoots of the
same know- ledge which he has handed down to us.

This voluminous book about the cognition of man cannot be compiled
unless the author describes the nature of human beings, finds out the
effects of the vicissitudes of time on their nature, directs his
intellect and natural inclinations towards their welfare and then takes
a decision according to their individual and collective nature and the
spirit of the time. Imam Ali adopted this method in his sayings and
precepts, which are unmatched after the sayings and precepts of the
Prophet.

In some of his precepts Ali has addressed theoretical logic. In others
he has addressed practical logic. And in many of them he has addressed
both. The precepts referring to theoretical logic mean as to how a fact
should be found out and those which relate to practical logic mean as to
what should be done to acquire prosperity.

As regards the first kind of precepts it may be said that Ali found out
the true nature of facts. With a subtle intellect he observed the good
and evil of the time, arrived at correct conclusions after making
necessary experiments, and made those conclusions known to the people.
[^1]

His precepts are so judicious and exact that it may be said that they
have been deduced by means of geometrical calculations. They have been
stated in such a beautiful manner that from the point of view of their
meanings as well as their interpretation they form the foundation of the
Arabic literature. All the thoughts and opinions of the Imam collected
in Nahj al-Balaghah are of this standard.

In the precepts in which the Commander of the Faithful has addressed
theoretical logic, he has left the people free in the matter of their
reason and views so that they may find out the factual position and act
according to their understanding and comprehension.

Such precepts are not in the form of orders, prohibitions or desires. On
the contrary they are philosophical remarks in which the nature and
habits of the friends and the enemies, the righteous and the wicked, the
wise and the foolish, the generous and the miserly, the oppressor and
the oppressed etc. have been fully explained. He has also explained many
scientific laws with logical reasoning. Some of them will be mentioned
later.

As regards his precepts which relate to practical logic, or both
practical logic and theoretical logic, it may be stated as follows:

Those who think that only the laws, rules, regulations and system of
government are sufficient for the administration of public affairs are
mistaken, because one should take responsibility for the protection and
observance of these principles and laws after due explanation of human
rights. Just as it is necessary that one who enacts these laws should be
wise, experienced and righteous, it is also necessary that one who
implements them should possess these qualities and should obtain the
desired results. This is so because the administration of public affairs
depends very much on the good and bad qualities of those who promulgate
the laws and is also related to the wisdom and attention of the people
for whom those laws have been enacted.

In spite of all this it has to be admitted that the various new rules
and laws which have been formulated are mostly different from one
another. Owing to the differences which exist between the countries it
is not possible to enforce all these laws without force and coercion and
the law-enforcing authorities are permitted to avoid enforcing them to
some extent. The rules and laws of the old governments were mostly
compatible with the habits and morals of those who enforced them. This
was for reasons which are beyond the scope of our present discussion.
[^2]

Let us suppose that it is possible for human beings to enact useful laws
and to compel the people to act according to them However, if the
responsibilities are not carried out according to the dictates of
conscience and faith, they do not carry much value. We believe that any
act which is not performed by man with the confirmation of practical
logic, personal desire, and firm determination, and without coercion,
cannot be treated to be a human act. The greatest and the most precious
human action is that which is prompted by one's conscience.

The rules and laws formulated by a government are not at all sufficient
to improve human relations unless the theoretical and practical wisdom
makes man contented with them. In that event the determination and good
deeds of the people will harmonize with each other and make the
individuals and the groups reach their destination through the path of
civilization, because such persons do not desire anything except good
deeds.

Whatever we have said about the individuals and groups is very well
known to the intellectuals and the philosophers as well as to the past
ulema and research scholars, and we believe that conscience and faith
obliged them to serve.

When we study carefully the history of those who served mankind and
civilization, we come to know that though wisdom alone was their guide
for understanding every matter, yet it was not alone in the history of
their lives. The power of theoretical knowledge is stagnant and dry. By
itself it can do nothing. It must have companions and friends of
different kinds along with their quantities and numbers. This power
shows you the path but not the speed and does not compel you to walk on
the path. The thing which brings you to the stage of action is
enthusiasm and inclination.

Marconi (an Italian scientist who invented wireless) liked it, on
account of his enthusiasm and inclination, not to enjoy the amusements
of the world and to remain in seclusion to serve mankind and
civilization, for otherwise why did he choose seclusion for himself, if
practical wisdom and enthusiasm did not prompt him to serve humanity?
The same thing could be said about some other great men. Thus the
noble-minded servants of mankind did good deeds with great enthusiasm
and devotion.

As the wicked and unlucky persons were devoid of true practical wisdom
and good intentions they could not do any service to humanity in spite
of their theoretical wisdom. To this category belong Adolf Hitler,
Hajjaj bin Yusuf, Changez Khan, Alexander of Macedonia and many great
scientists of our own age who utilized their experiments in respect of
man. All of them possessed power of intellect like the servants of
mankind but in spite of this their performance was nothing but
bloodshed, lack of regard for human life, destruction of the
achievements of human civilization, and death and annihilation of
innumerable innocent men and women. This was due to the fact that their
theoretical wisdom and thoughts were not linked with practical wisdom
and good sentiments. If these two things (viz. practical wisdom and good
sentiments) are not present theoretical wisdom is useless and is in fact
very harmful.

I do not mean to say that the different powers possessed by man viz.
theoretical wisdom, practical wisdom, and inclination, are separate from
one another. In fact these powers assist and influence one another. What
I mean to say is that the theoretical wisdom comprehends the things
themselves, connects causes and effects with each other and provides
unalterable limits and rules which do not change on account of changes
which take place in the morals and the nations, but the practical wisdom
and sentiments are different according to differences in the people.

Theoretical wisdom is present in every person and comprehends a matter
correctly. It is necessary that it should contain inclination and the
practical wisdom should make it proceed on the path of goodness and
prosperity. Failing this the person concerned will spend his wisdom on
making discoveries which will become the cause of destruction of the
human beings as well as of his own bad luck.

This is as true in the case of the law-giver as for those for whom the
law has been enacted. Their conscience and inclination should be
desirous of obeying the laws based on equity and justice and mere
intellectual admission of their goodness is not sufficient. Their hearts
should be free from impurities to ensure the perfection of human
prosperity so that they may make efforts with enthusiasm for the welfare
of the nation. Furthermore, it is necessary that they should possess
moral virtues, because the merits of a man protect the laws and orders
from the evil-doers and the sinners like a fortress.

It was for this reason that Imam Ali awakened good inclinations in the
hearts of the people and delivered sermons to promote good morals. In
his sermons, testaments and conversations he always addressed the
conscience of the people, because he knew that for the administration of
the affairs of the people and their good relations it is necessary that
they should possess good morals. Self-purification ensures human
perfection and also supports justice, and protects its frontiers.
Furthermore, it leads towards the sentiments and desires of the people
which culminate prosperity and happiness.

Ali possessed unusual competence to counsel and refine the people and
his words deeply impressed everyone. He knew their nature and their way
and manners. He compared their good and bad qualities and embodied their
realities in his statements. He explained their different kinds. He
ordered the people to do certain things and forbade them from doing evil
things.

He had a very favourable opinion about the conscience of the people
being able to make distinction between good and evil. This favourable
opinion of Ali about the conscience of human beings resembled a similar
opinion held by other great benefactors of humanity (like Christ) and
Muhammad who had enlightened minds and kind and affectionate hearts, and
whose love for mankind knew no bounds. Every light became insignificant
before that which was kindled in their hearts. Ali has based his
precepts on this very favourable opinion and his addressing human
conscience in his counsels and sermons is also on account of the good
opinion which he held about human nature.

As Ali held a favourable opinion about the people, in spite of all the
hardships which he had to suffer at their hands, he always endeavoured
to inculcate good morals in their hearts. He knew that both goodness and
evil are present in the nature of man. However, it behoves a forbearing
person to turn his heart towards goodness and nourish it. He educated
the people through examples as well as by his good conduct, because this
method of education is more effective.

Imam Ali stressed the people time and again to hold a good opinion about
human conscience. He has said: “If a person holds a good opinion about
you try to prove his opinion to be correct”. He has also said: “If
someone does something do not hold a bad opinion about it so long as it
is possible to draw a good conclusion from it”.

If he has criticized some actions of treacherous and unjust persons it
was because he considered their reformation possible by means of censure
and advice, although it might necessitate a good deal of effort and
time.

A righteous person rewards those who do good deeds, but punishes the
evil-doers because he hopes that by this means it will be possible to
correct them. If Imam Ali had not expected this he would not have
tolerated the unbearable hardships caused by the wicked persons.

Ali said about the world and the worldly people: “The worldly persons
growl at one another like dogs and ferocious animals. Their strong ones
devour the weak and the big ones humiliate the small ones”. He said this
because he had suffered much on account of the usurpation and
disobedience of the corrupt persons, and was very much vexed on account
of the trouble caused by them. By saying these things he fought against
the unjust, the cruel and the tyrants in the same way in which a
physician fights against the germs for the welfare and health of a
patient. He preferred death to life and hoped for the salvation of
mankind.

Ali respected life, because it is a great blessing of God. He considered
living beings to be respectable so that a specimen of the traces of
creation might remain secure in their existence. He had a very
favourable opinion about the conscience and the purity of nature of man
and was very hopeful for the prosperity of mankind. He wished that men
might remain as free as he ought to be.

In the absence of this favourable opinion and hope he would not have
behaved so well with the people and would not have said: “If you hear
something from someone do not hold a bad opinion about it so long as it
is possible to draw a good conclusion from it”. In that event he would
not also have addressed the conscience of the people kindly like the
Prophets, and would not have guided them with a heavy heart, to goodness
with his sermons and admonitions. He wished to protect the morals of the
people with his sermons and precepts, and to rear up human enthusiasm in
them so that they might do good deeds with the assistance of their own
wisdom and intellect.

In every work Imam Ali appointed certain spies from among the people
themselves to keep an eye on them and declared that the limbs of their
body were sitting in ambush for them. As he had faith in their own
assessment he said: “O people! Remember that your own self is sitting in
ambush for you and your limbs are your spies who keep an account of your
deeds and even your breathing”.

On account of his faith in the conscience of man and respect for his
life he told the people of his time that human life cannot be kept in
bondage, and cannot be kept in the cradle of childhood for long. It
should not be kept in imprisonment lest it should become impure and be
consequently annihilated.

In another chapter we shall quote some unique sayings of Ali which will
remain alive so long as righteous persons live on the earth. Those
sayings will last forever. We have selected these sayings from Nahj
al-Balaghah and they relate to the acquisition of excellent morals and
good character and to the purity of man.

[^1]: According to Shiite belief whatever the Imam said was based on
inspiration and celestial power i.e. the spirit of Imamate and it is not
possible to acquire all the knowledge possessed by him by means of
intellect and experience.

[^2]: The author has proved here that it is the duty of the people to
consider law to be a bounty for themselves. They should have faith in it
and should hold themselves responsible to obey it, instead of the
government being wholly responsible to enforce it and the people obeying
it for fear of punishment. The Muslim scholars have explained this point
in their books at length and all the Muslims know that man-made laws are
not sufficient to ensure happiness in this world and salvation in the
world hereafter. As regards the celestial law it is necessary that the
Prophet should enforce it through inspiration and the people should obey
it as an article of faith.


