Conditions prevailing after Ali
===============================

These calamities and social and moral evils began to appear in the Arab
world, and gained strength in the East from the day on which the sinful
hand of Ibn Muljim was stretched towards the specimen of justice and the
embodiment of virtue viz. Ali son of Abu Talib.

It appears necessary to mention briefly the conditions of the Arab
nation after the martyrdom of Imam Ali and to explain what shape the
things assumed during the periods of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas, what
the activities of these rulers, who deviated from the principles laid
down by Ali, were, and how the common man became very cheap and was
transferred like inheritance from one group to another.

The caliphate of Imam Ali was an interval between the period of Uthman
and that of Mu\`awiya and his successors. During this interval truth and
justice enjoyed a very high position. However, during the period
preceding it the rights of the people were violated. The people
belonging to the upper class did not submit to the authority of
government. The result was that injustice and oppression was rampant.
The chiefs of the nation, the officers and the governors had become a
cause of affliction for the people and were devouring their property.
The advisers and associates of Uthman were perfect despots.

It will be better to explain here the condition of the rulers and the
subjects during the periods of Bani Umayyah and Bani Abbas so that the
value of the rules and principles laid down by Ali may be clearly
understood and the readers may realize how sublime his wisdom and
thinking was. His sword nipped selfishness in the bud and his righteous
hand annihilated falsehood.

As soon as Ali was martyred at the hands of the accursed Ibn Muljim,
Mu\`awiya son of Abu Sufyan began planning against the opponents of his
caliphate. He severely punished every person who declined to acknowledge
him as the caliph of God. He had not yet completed his task when he
began levelling the ground for the succession of his son, the notorious
Yazid as caliph. He adopted all possible means which could be useful for
the kingship of his son. He bestowed honours on some persons and
deprived others of position and authority. Out of the numerous plans
which Mu\`awiya contrived for taking the oath of allegiance from the
people for Yazid we make a mention of one which will go to show the
foundation on which the caliphate of Yazid and his successors was
established.

Mu\`awiya arranged a gathering so that the people from different
provinces should collectively take oath of allegiance to his son Yazid
during his own lifetime. When the poeple assembled, Mu\`awiya and Yazid
were also present. At that moment a flatterer named Yazid son of Muqanna
rose and said pointing to Mu\`awiya: “This is the Commander of the
Faithful” Then he pointed to Yazid and said: “If Mu\`awiya passes away
it will be he”. Then he pointed to his sword and said: “If any person
does not agree to this his punishment will be this”. Mu\`awiya said:
“Sit down for you are the chief of the orators”.

The people of the Hijaz did not agree to take oath of allegiance to
Yazid. They could neither be allured by wealth nor were they afraid of
the military power. Mu\`awiya's behaviour with those people is
surprising. Once he threatened them saying: “I swear by God that if any
person utters even one word here against me he will be beheaded before
he utters the second word. You people should, therefore, take care of
your lives and should not seek death”. He posted two observers for each
person belonging to the Hijaz and said to the police-officer: “Whoever
from amongst these persons opens his lips to refute or to affirm, his
head should be chopped off”.

It was in this manner that Yazid son of Mu\`awiya attained to the
caliphate.

Abdullah son of Hanzala said: “We were afraid that if we did not oppose
Yazid stones will rain on our heads from the heavens and all of us would
be annihilated because of the divine wrath. It was for this reason that
we opposed him”.

It was the same Yazid who martyred Imam Husayn in a very tragic manner,
besieged the Ka\`abah and stoned it with the help of the catapult, made
the blood and the property of the people of Madina lawful for his
soldiers, and lived a life of sensuality and pleasure. He used to play
with dogs and monkeys till he died and was succeeded by other members of
the Umayyad family. They distributed the property of the public treasury
among their relatives and associates. The place of justice which was
founded by Ali was destroyed by them and an unjust group assumed the
reins of government. One group of persons became very rich and the other
was reduced to extreme poverty. When thousands were starving, the
Umayyad caliph gave twelve thousand dinars to the singer named Ma\`abad,
because he had amused the caliph with his music. The nobles possessed
innumerable slaves and slave-girls. Seventy thousand of them were set
free by Sulaiman son of Abdul Malik alone. Partiality and bias on
account of race, family or party, was very common during the Umayyad
rule although Islam had destroyed such bias and Imam Ali had not
permitted it.

During that age discrimination was made between the people of Yemen and
Bani Qais. The Arabs claimed superiority over the non-Arabs and
similarly the Qurayshites claimed to be superior to others. Their courts
were full of pleasure-loving persons who got large funds from the public
treasury without doing any public service. History tells that Walid bin
Abdul Malik disallowed the stipends of more than twenty thousand
stipendiaries. These were the ways and manners of all Umayyads except
Umar ibn Abdul Aziz. They gained mastery over various regions by means
of oppression, and performed the task of Mu\`awiya and Yazid.

Abdul Malik bin Marwan used to issue orders according to his own wish
and did not attach any importance to the lives and property of the
people. He ordered the wells and the springs of Bahrain to be filled
with dust so that the residents of that area might become indigent, and
obey the government. He appointed a cruel and bloodthirsty person like
Hajjaj bin Yusuf as Governor of Iraq.

Amin Rayhani says thus about Bani Umayyah: “The Umayyad rulers had
reversed justice which should necessarily be observed by a monarch. This
was a group of mean and incompetent persons. If one of them was a fool
the other was despicable. If one was humble and devoid of honour the
other was a drunkard and an oppressor. At least one cannot overlook the
abominable and wicked practice of theirs that they abused Ali and his
sons from the pulpits”.

Amongst Bani Umayyah there was only one just caliph and he was Umar ibn
Abdul Aziz. He started his rule with doing away with injustice. He
wanted to get the looted property of the public treasury restored to it
and to adopt a sensible policy for his caliphate. However, some people
were not happy with this attitude of his and assassinated him.

Bani Umayyah attained to the caliphate by deceit, and converted it into
kingship by coercion, and established a kingdom in which there was not a
trace of equity and justice. At last the palace of their government
became shaky and fell on their own heads.

After them came Bani Abbas and the impartial persons praised Bani
Umayyah as compared with them.

Amin Rayhani says: “Bani Abbas gained control over the country by means
of bloodshed. There were horrible scenes of massacres and bloodshed in
Syria, Palestine, and Iraq and after which other chiefs also followed
the example of Abu'l Abbas Saffah in killing and bloodshedding.

A man named Ameetar invited people to himself in Syria. The Yemenites
obeyed him but Bani Qais rose against him. Ameetar launched a night
attack on them and burnt their property and houses. Another person named
Ibn Bahees fought against Ameetar, gained control over Damascus and
punished the residents of that city.

During the time of Bani Abbas revolts and disturbances were rampant and
the party spirit was gaining strength. And it was not only the cruel and
blood thirsty rebels who were suffering, but the poor subjects who paid
revenue and were always ready to partake in jihad were also involved in
troubles”.

Thereafter, referring to the big and small principalities of the last
days of Bani Abbas, Amin Rayhani says: “The people who lived in that
dark age were very unlucky. Every ruler vied with another in bloodshed
and warfare and was proud of his atrocities. He told his soldiers: “I
hereby make it lawful for you to do anything you like with this city for
three days”. With these words they permitted the plundering of a city
and shedding of the blood of its residents. Mutanabbi says: “The women
who befriended them were to be made prisoners, their children were to be
killed, the wealth accumulated by them was to be looted and their crops
were to be burnt”.

Fie upon that time, and upon the fear of the people of that time. May
God bless those helpless people and may those rulers and soldiers be
accursed! Does man who is God's best creation get metamorphosed at one
time into a ferocious animal? Do these savages deserve that fifty pages
of history should be allocated to them? No; their acts should be
summarized only in one line; they became fell enemies of one another,
fought, killed, looted and burnt, and were guilty of atrocities or in
other words they considered the lives, property and honour of others to
be lawful for themselves.

These are the remarks of Amin Rayhani about the period of Bani Abbas and
the plundering and bloodshed of the small principalities during the last
days of their caliphate i.e. when the caliphs were only in name and real
authority and gone out of their hands.

Now we shall speak briefly about the period of Bani Abbas. It has been
mentioned earlier, that Bani Umayyah opposing the system of government
which the Commander of the Faithful wished to introduce, and abandoning
the just policy adopted by him, had treated the government to be their
family property. They did not permit anyone to share their authority.
They adopted Fascist policies as if the government and its revenues
belonged to them only and none else had even the smallest share in them.

When Bani Abbas came at the helm of affairs after Bani Umayyah, they
also based their administration on the same ideas.

They also held the view that the king was God's vicegerent on earth and
it was his inherent right to rule. None else was entitled to bring about
any change in this arrangement. It was on account of this very view that
Mansur, the second Abbasid caliph, said while speaking before a public
gathering: “O People! I am the king of the earth appointed by God. I
rule over you with His blessing and help. I am the custodian of God's
property. I utilize the public treasury with His will. Whatever I give
to anyone is given with His permission, because He has made me the lock
of His treasury. If He wants to give you something He will open that
lock and if He does not like to give you anything He will keep it
closed”.

The same policy was followed by other caliphs of the Abbasid family.
Every one of them was the vicegerent of God on earth.

This goes to show very clearly that cruelty was the foundation of the
government of Bani Abbas and their subordinate princes and rulers.
According to them sovereignty was a divine gift. God bestowed this gift
upon those whom He liked and when He willed the welfare of the people He
provided them with a kind, wise and generous ruler.

The result of this way of thinking and this idea and belief was that the
people remained obedient to the Abbasid rulers and patiently bore
whatever befell them considering it to be from God.

Baghdad, the capital of Bani Abbas, was overflowing with wealth, but
this entire wealth was meant only for the caliph and his relatives and
associates. Others, however competent they might be and whatever
services they might have rendered to the nation had no share in the
wealth, and were doomed to poverty and abjectness unless they flattered
the caliph and humiliated themselves before him.

As a consequence of this two classes of people came into being. There
was a vast difference between these two classes. People belonging to one
class rolled in wealth whereas those belonging to the other class,
however skilled and efficient they might be, remained indigent and poor,
and led very miserable lives. The revenues and income of the government
were spent by the caliph, his relatives and courtiers, to lead lives of
pleasure. They spent millions on their associates, flatterers,
slave-girls and eunuchs.

From the point of view of wealth the caliph, the princes, the nobles and
government officers belonged to the highest class. The tradesmen came
next. Although their lives and property, too, were in constant danger on
account of the high-ups, but as regards wealth they enjoyed a position
next to the nobility. The only things which fell to the share of the
common man were, however, abjectness, helplessness, hunger and death. In
Baghdad the lofty palaces of the rich and the dilapidated huts of the
poor stood side by side. It might be said that they presented a scene of
paradise and hell. A poet of that time says about Baghdad:

“This Baghdad is fit for only rich people to live in, and not for the
poor and the indigent.  
 If a rich man like Korah happens to come to Baghdad he too would be
filled with sadness and perplexity.  
 Baghdad is the very paradise which has been promised us, but it has
come prematurely into the hands of those who possess sufficient to eat
and to wear.  
 In Baghdad there are houris and young servants and there is everything
which you may desire. The thing which is not found here is human being”.

A pleasure-loving rich man says: “Have you ever seen a city like Baghdad
in the whole world? This Baghdad is the paradise on earth.  
 In Baghdad the fountain of enjoyment is pure and the tree of pleasure
is green. At other places, however, life is neither pure nor happy.  
 One enjoys longer life in Baghdad. Its food and water is delicious and
dainty. There is no doubt about the fact that the food and water of some
lands is better than that of others”.

It is not objectionable that Baghdad had been a paradise on earth during
the Abbasid period or for that matter during all periods. It is also not
something wrong that the fountain of pleasure in that city had been pure
and the tree of happiness had been green. There is also no harm in the
lives of the residents of that city being long. Nothing out of these
things is wrong, man always seeks to live a life in a paradise, where
there are all means of comforts - fruits and flowers and every good
thing. But all these things can be good only if they have not been
acquired by exploiting the poor and the helpless or by snatching away
from the orphans and the widows. Where did these means of pleasure come
from when there were thousands of indigent persons who did not eat to
their fill even once throughout their lives in that city?

The famous poet Abu'l Atahiya addresses the caliph of his time thus
expressing the sentiments of the people: “Is there anyone who should
convey my frequent counsels to the caliph? I see that the cost of living
of the people is very high and their incomes are very low. Their needs
are innumerable and they are attacked in the morning and in the evening
by calamities and hardships.

The orphans and the widows are sitting empty- handed in their lonely
homes. The men as well as the women are stretching their hands towards
you so that you may do them some favour.

All complain of the hardships of life, and are raising cries in low
tones. They hope for your kindness so that they may get rid of
difficulties and see the face of comfort. Mothers, with children in
their laps, go without meals during night and fast during day time. Who
is there who should fill their empty bellies and dress their naked
bodies? I am informing you about true facts on behalf of your subjects”.

A man came to see the caliph Wathiq Billah. He draws a picture of the
pomp of the caliph and the magnificence and grandeur of his palace in
these words. (It should be remembered that this is about the
magnificence of one palace only):

“One servant entrusted me to another and the second entrusted me to a
third one. Having passed in this manner through the hands of many
servants I arrived in a building, whose courtyard and walls were covered
with painted brocade. Then I arrived in the royal court. Its ground and
walls were also covered with brocade. In the middle of the hall Wathiq
was sitting on his throne. The throne was bedecked with pearls. His
slave-girl Farida was sitting with a guitar in her hand. Wathiq as well
as the slave-girl were wearing costly brocade dresses.

This luxurious life and capitalistic pomp was a contagious disease from
which all including the caliph, his relatives and courtiers as well as
some businessmen were suffering. As regards other indecent acts which
were done in the royal palace it is better not to mention them.

The purchase and sale of slaves and slave-girls for money which was not
permitted either by the Prophet or by Imam Ali [^1] was so much in
progress that in every city there used to be separate bazaar for this
particular trade.

In Baghdad, which was the capital of the Abbasids, Dar-al-Raqiq road is
a well-known place which was used for this purpose. The dealers in
slaves had slaves and slave- girls of every race and colour. Black
coloured slaves were brought from the south to the Abbasid Cities and
sold at two hundred dirhams per head. White coloured slaves and
slave-girls were brought from Samarkand which was a big market for the
slaves of this type. There were many kinds of slave-girls. Some of them
belonged to Kandhar and Sind. They were slim and had black eyes and long
hair, Some of them were those who had been trained in Madina. They were
coquettish and adept musical performers. Those brought up in Mecca were
matchless in their elegance and bewitching looks. Some slave-girls also
came from the western countries.

The middleman Abu Uthman who possessed full information about the
attributes of the slaves and slave-girls of that time says: “A
slave-girl should be born in Barbary and should quit her country at the
age of nine years. She should spend three years in Madina and three
years in Mecca. At the age of sixteen years she should go to Iraq and
learn social manners there. She should be sold when she attains the age
of twenty five years. Such a slave- girl will combine in herself her
inherent charm, the coquetry of Madina, the elegance of Mecca and the
decency and manners of Iraq.  
 Unfortunately Abu Uthman has failed to mention as to how much price
such a slave-girl would have fetched.

Besides the slave-girls who belonged to Barbary there were also
Ethiopian, Turkish, Cypriot, Roman and Armenian slave-girls whose
attributes need not be mentioned here. The slave-girls belonging to each
country had their particular qualities and characteristics which have
been mentioned in detail by the experts of that time.

Not to speak of the poor people in the Abbasid period even the rich did
not feel that their lives and property were secure. The lives of the
people were in the hands of the monarch and they were afraid that they
might lose their property or lives at any moment. Hence, if on the one
hand the generosity of the caliph and his nobles knew no limits there
was also no limit of the exploitation of the people by them. If at one
time the caliph gave thousands of dinars to a person for his having
uttered a beautiful verse, at another time he ordered that a person
might be beheaded immediately and his property might be confiscated.

Attabi has drawn a very realistic picture of the conditions prevailing
in his time. He was asked as to why he did not try to seek some position
in the royal court when he was a man of letters. He replied: “I see that
at one time the caliph gives thousands of dinars to a person without any
justification and without his having deserved it, and at another time he
orders that an innocent man may be thrown on the ground from the roof of
his palace. If I join the royal court I do not know which of these two
fates I shall meet”.

Once the caliph Mehdi summoned Mufazzal Zabi to his court. When the
caliph's messenger approached him he feared that possibly someone had
spoken ill of him before the caliph. He, therefore, wore a shroud under
his clothes and reached the royal court fully prepared for his death. He
saluted the caliph and the latter replied to his salutation. Then he
stood quietly. After sometime he realized that the caliph had no
intention of killing him and, therefore, became calm, Mehdi asked him:
“Which Arab poet has composed the best verse on the subject of taking
pride and glorying?” He also asked him some other questions and Mufazzal
gave appropriate replies. Mehdi was pleased with his replies and
questioned him about his personal affairs. Mufazzal told the caliph that
he was indebted and thereupon the caliph ordered that he might be given
thirty thousand dirhams.

Mamun executed his minister Fazal bin Sahl and then offered the ministry
to Ahmad ibn Abi Khalid, but he declined to accept the post. On having
been asked as to why he rejected the offer Ahmad replied: “My experience
is that whoever has held this office has eventually lost his life”.

The result of affluence was that revelry knew no bounds and had spread
like a contagious disease. In every house there were innumerable
slave-girls who were experts in singing, dancing and coquetry. [^2] When
the rich persons got tired of one means of enjoyment they invented
another. At times when they were overjoyed on hearing a good song and
did not know how to express their pleasure they were beside themselves
and struck and wounded their own heads with anything they could lay
their hands on. Abu'l Faraj Isfahani in his \`Aghani' and many other
historians have narrated numerous such incidents. The reason of their
becoming beside themselves was that they did not know to express their
mirth and joy; hence they invented new devices every day.

On the other side there were innumerable indigent persons, who living in
misery and abjectness, were fed up with their lives. One group was
leading an extremely luxurious life, while the people of the other group
were fed up with their very existence. They despised their life as well
as their society and culture. They had no hope of the condition of the
society being better off. Abu'l Atahiya expresses the feelings of those
people in these words: “The dry bread which you eat sitting in a corner
and the narrow house in which you spend your days; or the corner of a
Masjid in which you can live in seclusion are better than the moments
which are spent under the shade of lofty palaces. This is a counsel from
one who knows the real position fully well. Happy is he who hears my
advice.  
 I swear by my life that this piece of advice is sufficient for him.
Lend your ears to this advice of your well-wisher who is called Abu'l
Atahiya”.

Both the conditions of committing suicide by drowning oneself in joy and
mirth or by abandoning the world are opposed to human nature. The
Almighty God has not created man either for this mode of life or for
that; however, during the Abbasid period these two evils were very
common.

**\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \***

What has been stated above is a glimpse of the conditions of the people
during early days of the Abbasid rule. Later their lives became so
miserable that it is not possible to imagine their abjectness. The rich
became richer and the poor became much poorer. The rich were small in
number but the indigent were innumerable. However, the lives and
property of neither of them were secure.

Only a few persons viz. the monarch and his relatives and associates
felt secure and satisfied. None of the other rich persons enjoyed peace
of mind. They were constantly afraid that the caliph might get annoyed
with them at any time and this might result in confiscation of their
property and loss of their life. This type of cruelty began during the
time of Mutawakkil - the man who constructed hell side by side with
paradise.

The rich had become absolutely shameless. They drank wine and became
devoid of their senses. They arranged feasting and drinking in their
palaces and became riotously festive. They at times tore their clothes
and rolled on the ground. They lost all sense of decency and indulged in
all sorts of evil deeds. While intoxicated some of them thought that
they had made the earth tremble by striking their feet on it. Many such
stories have been narrated by Abu Hayyan Tauhidi in his book entitled
\`Al-Mata\`a wa al-Mawanisah'.

The number of the slave-girls in those times was unprecedented.
Mutawakkil, who insulted the wise and zealous persons as much as
possible, tried his best to drown Imam Husayn's grave in water and
allowed the ruffians in his court to ridicule and insult Imam Ali, had
thousands of slave-girls in his palace. Some Abbasid caliphs had as many
as ten thousand slave-girls. Besides the slave-girls there were
innumerable eunuchs in their palaces. Wealthy persons and those
belonging to the aristocratic class kept eunuchs in their houses for the
protection of their females. During the days of Amin the number of the
eunuchs increased very much. The caliph Muqtadir had as many as eleven
thousand eunuchs. The middle class also possessed many slaves who were
very immodest. The masters took shameful services from their slaves.

The root cause of all these evils was that the nobility and the rich
persons had ignored the principles laid down by the Prophet and Imam
Ali. They did not consider human being equal to one another. The rich
and the persons in high positions considered themselves to be superior
to the ordinary people and led luxurious lives by exploiting the poor.

We would like to talk once again about the habits and morals of the
people during the Abbasid period to throw light on the luxurious and
voluptuous life led by the nobles and the rich, and the indigence and
helplessness to which the poor were subjected. The fact is that in a
society whose members are usually indigent there two things viz.
affluence and indigence are bound to occur. We may notice this fact in
the light of what Imam Ali said: “I have not seen excessive wealth with
anyone except when side by side therewith I have seen a right being
violated”.

Magnificent palaces were constructed and on them enormous amount of
money was spent. Mutawakkil got constructed many palaces, whose beauty
and splendour was beyond description. In one of these palaces a big
swimming pool was constructed for the ladies and the slave-girls. When
the famous poet Behtri saw that palace he was so much impressed by its
grandeur that he thought that it had been constructed by the fiends and
the genii. Describing the palace he says:

“It appears as if the genii subordinate to Prophet Suleiman had
constructed this palace and worked hard on every detail.  
 If Bilquis, the queen of Sheba were to pass through this palace she
would have mistaken it for Suleiman's palace on account of great
resemblance of the two.  
 When you look at this pool at night and see the reflection of the stars
in it you will think that the pool is the sky and the stars are studded
in it. The fish cannot reach the bank of the pool, because there is a
great distance between its beginning and end”.

Yaqut Hamavi writes in Mu\`jam al-Buldan: “None of the other caliphs
built such magnificent buildings in Samarrah as were built by
Mutawakkil. Besides other buildings there were a number of palaces
namely Qasr al-\`Arus which cost thirty million dirhams, Qasr
al-Ja\`fari, Qasr al-Gharib, Qasr al-Shaidan, Qasr al-Burj and Qasr
al-Bustan Aitakhyah which cost ten million dirhams each, and Qasr
al-Maleeh and Qasr al-Subh which cost five million dirhams each”.

After giving a long list of the palaces Yaqut Hamavi says that a sum of
three hundred million dirhams was spent on them.

Praising Mutawakkil's Qasr al-Ja\`fari the poet Ali son of Jehm says:
“There are such masterpieces of art in this palace as must not have been
seen by the Roman and Iranian emperors during their long rule.  
 There are such spacious court-yards in it that the eyes must travel
long to see their rarities and curiosities.  
 And there are such high domes that it might be said that they are
chatting with the stars.

Ibn Mu\`tiz got built a palace, whose roof was constructed with bricks
of gold, and trees were planted around it. Bahtri praises the palace in
these words:

“Its roof was made of gold and was bright and luminous. Its light
prevailed everywhere.  
 The breeze loitered in it and the fruitless trees and fruit trees were
always swinging.  
 They were like delicate maidens who come out for a walk - some of them
having ornaments and others being without them”.

One of the palaces got built by the caliph Mu\`tazid was called Qasr
al-Surayya. It was very spacious and was very finely decorated, so much
so that Ibn Mu\`tiz, who had built this palace himself, considered it to
be the workmanship of the genii.

The historian Khatib Baghdadi has drawn a comprehensive picture of this
palace while describing the meeting of the Roman ambassador with the
caliph. He says:

“Muqtadir had eleven thousand eunuchs and thousands of Sicilian, Roman
and Ethiopian slaves. This was one aspect of the palace. There were also
other innumerable items which contributed to its beauty and elegance.
Muqtadir had ordered that the ambassador should be taken round the
entire palace and should also be shown the store-houses wherein very
valuable articles had been stored in a very beautiful manner. Costly
pearls had been set in cases which were covered with black-painted
silken cloth. The ambassador was brought in a hall wherein stood a tree
made of pure silver which weighed five hundred thousand dirhams. There
were also many birds made of silver which were fixed to the branches of
the tree and as and when the wind blew they began to whistle. The
ambassador was wonder-struck to see all this.

The curtains suspended on the walls of this palace numbered thirty eight
thousand. All these curtains were made of silk and brocade. They were
painted in various ways and contained pictures of animals and boats. The
big curtains were the best specimens of the workmanship of the Armenians
and the Venetians. Some of them were plain and others were painted.

Thereafter the ambassador was taken to the stable. The porch of this
building rested on marble pillars. In the right half of the stable there
were five hundred horses fully equipped with bridles and saddles but
without saddle-covers and in the left half there were also five hundred
horses which were equipped with bridles, saddles and silken
saddle-covers. For every horse there was a servant clad in a costly
uniform.

Then the ambassador was taken to the building wherein tamed wild animals
were kept. They used to come to the visitors and smell them, and also
ate things from their hands.

Then the ambassador was brought to another building wherein he saw four
elephants covered with painted silken sheets. Many servants were posted
there to look after the elephants. When the ambassador saw the elephants
he was struck with terror.

Thereafter the ambassador was taken to a building where one hundred
ferocious animals were kept. Fifty of them were kept in one portion of
the building and fifty in another.

Then he was brought to a place called \`Josaq'. This place was
surrounded by gardens and in the middle of it a pool made of pewter had
been built. A canal which was also made of pewter had been built around
this pool. This pool, which was thirty cubits long and twenty cubits
wide was more beautiful than one made of silver. It contained four boats
in which golden chairs had been placed to sit in.  
 There were four hundred trees in the garden situated around the pool
and each of those trees was five cubits in height. Every tree was
covered from top to bottom with painted ebony wherein bronze rings were
fixed. On the right bank of the pool there were fifteen statues of
mounted soldiers, clad in silk, who held spears in their hands as if
they were going to attack an enemy. Fifteen more statues had been
installed on the left bank.

After the ambassador had been taken round twenty three magnificent
palaces he was brought in a courtyard which was called “Tas\`eeni”. In
this court-yard young slaves were standing and all of them were fully
armed. Then he was brought before the caliph Muqtadir in Qasr al-Taj
which was situated on the bank of the river Tigris. He was wearing a
crown which was called Taweela and was dressed in silk and brocade from
head to feet. His throne was made of ebony and its carpet was made of
painted silk and brocade. Nine strings of very precious pearls were
suspended on the right side of the throne and as many on its left side”.
(Sakhi al-Islam, vol. 1, page 100 - 102).

The Abbasid caliphs continued to spend large sums of money in this
manner. Every caliph who ascended the throne tried to excel his
predecessors in the matter of extravagance till the turn of Muhtada
came. He was a devout person, but he was not destined to live long, for
he was killed by his own kinsmen.

The ministers too did not lag behind in the matter of extravagance.
Mutawakkil's minister Fateh bin Khaqan built such lofty palaces that
their minarets appeared to touch the sky. The poet Behtri says: “The
minarets which are as lofty as the sky appear like the plumage of white
pigeons flying in the space”.

The minister lbn Maqla had collected so many wild animals and birds in
his palace that it is not possible for a government treasury to bear
their expenses.

The minister Ibn Furat owned vast tracts of land and possessed enormous
wealth. He took his meals with crystal spoons. He used one such spoon
for one morsel and did not use it again. More than thirty spoons were
placed on his dining-table.

The minister Mohlabi was fond of flowers. A person who had seen him
says: “Red roses worth one thousand dinars were purchased for Mohlabi in
three days. The same were strewn in his assembly and in the spacious
pool of his palace. Strange fountains had been built in the pool. The
flowers were thrown into the pool and the fountains scattered them in
the assembly of Mohlabi where they fell on the heads of those present.
When the assembly dispersed the flowers were looted by the people”.

A thick silken cloth called Thiyab al-Na\`al used to be purchased for
the shoes of the mother of the caliph Muqtadir. Same silk was used for
the upper part and the sole of the shoes, and they were joined by means
of melted musk and ambergris. The queen-mother did not use these shoes
for more than ten days. Thereafter the servants appropriated them,
extracted the musk and ambergris and utilized them.

The ministers and high officials also endeavoured not to lag behind the
caliph in the matter of pomp and wealth.

Ali bin Ahmad Razi the Governor of Jundishapur, Sus, and Mazaria left
behind, on his death, gold, silver, pearls, precious stones and other
articles which were so costly that if they had been distributed among
the poor all of them would have become rich. Moreover, he left behind so
many eunuchs and black and white slaves that if they had been sent in
the capacity of an army to some country they would have conquered it.

The quantity of wealth possessed by other governors can be guessed from
what has been stated above about the wealth of Ali bin Ahmad Razi. The
rich merchants also lived a luxurious life. The lives of poor people
depended on the will of the caliph, his chamberlains and ministers. They
were safe and secure only so long as the persons at the helm of affairs
were not displeased with them.

Where did the affluent persons get all this wealth from? What reply can
be given to this question except that they accumulated all these riches
by exploiting the common people, who were reduced to penury and
helplessness? A most cruel system was adopted to realize government
taxes and to collect wealth. The caliph and his ministers and agents
sold the entire land revenue and other taxes to a single person. That
person paid a few millions of dirhams or dinars into the government
treasury and then realised as much money from the people on account of
taxes as he liked. This was like the system introduced by the Turkish
Sultans in the Islamic countries which were ruled by them.

The Justice Department, too, was topsy turvy. The dignitaries of the
state constantly interfered with the working of the courts and no judge
could dare give a judgment against the wishes of the rulers.

Bribery was rampant. The indigence of the people was on the increase and
their difficulties and afflictions were multiplying. So much so that if
a person died, he deserved congratulations rather than condolences.

lbn Luknak of Barah says: We are witnessing strange vicissitudes. If we
were to see in a dream what we see while awake we would wake up in a
state of distress”.  
 He prays to God that He may grant Job's patience to the people. He
himself cries for them like Jacob and says: “The people are so much
afflicted that when one of them dies he deserves to be congratulated”.  
 He adds: “By God we are caught in the clutches of cruel and oppressive
time and pray to the Almighty to grant us Job's patience. The world has
become devoid of its beauty. So cry like Jacob”.

The wise, learned and distinguished persons about whom Ali had made
recommendations to his sons Hasan and Husayn (for the guidance of the
people) that they should associate with them, hear their words carefully
and recognise their status. He had also instructed the governors to
consult and honour them as they are light amongst the Muslims and shall
remain till the world lasts. They were in an enviable condition during
the Abbasid period, except those who had sold themselves to the rulers.

Abu Hayyan who was a great scholar and author of many valuable books
says in his book entitled Al-Amta\` wal Mawanisah: “I have been obliged
to sell my faith and compassion and to resort to hypocrisy and to do
such indecent deeds that no gentleman may like to record them”.  
 He got so much fed up with the world during the last days of his life
and was so disappointed with the government of the time that he burned
up all his books.

Abu Ali Qali was also compelled to sell his books which were his dearest
capital. He says: “For twenty years these books were a source of solace
for me and I was immensely grieved when I had to sell them. I had never
thought of selling them even though I might have had to remain in prison
continuously on account of my being in debt. However, owing to indigence
and with a view to feed my small children I was obliged to sell these
books”.

Khateeb Tabrizi had a copy of Azhar's book entitled \`Tehzib-al-lughat'
which was in many volumes. He wished to hear its contents from an expert
and to investigate them. The people advised him to contact Abu'l \`Ala
Muarri. He put the book in a sack and proceeded to Muarratu'l No\`man on
foot carrying the sack on his back as he did not have enough money to
hire a conveyance. During the journey he perspired so much that all the
volumes of the book were spoiled. Complaining against adversity he says:
“Others may get tired of journeying but I am tired of standing. In Iraq
I had to live among people who are mean and the descendants of mean
persons”.

Complaining against the unsound judgment of time and its maltreatment of
noble-minded person Ibn Lunak of Basrah says: “O time! You have made the
noble persons wear the dress of humiliation and abjectness. I do not
consider you to be \`time'. You are paralysis. How can anyone expect
anything good from you when you consider ability and perfection to be a
shame. What is the reality of your condition as we see it? Is it
insanity, shamelessness or impudence?”

During the entire period of the Abbasids [^3] the people remained
divided in two groups. One of them was that of the rich and the other of
the poor. Both the groups suffered from numerous moral evils according
to their respective environments. Moral degradation prevailed to the
same extent during the last days of their rule as in the beginning.
Rather it was at a higher level.

The rich led a life of luxury and pleasure and indulged in unlimited
debauchery. As regards the poor enmity, envy, falsehood and deceit were
rampant among them. Owing to indigence the people resorted too much to
asceticism and mysticism. It was not, however, the mysticism, which
emanates from good morals and from considering the world to be
transient. It was the mysticism which is the consequence of
helplessness, failure and despair.

Owing to indigence many other bad habits like love for magic, jugglery,
and superstition, developed in the people. This was because when a
person fails to earn his livelihood by honest means he resorts to foul
means.

The governments which were established after the decline of the Abbasid
empire had more class differences and their moral degradation was more
dreadful. From the time when the hand of the oppressor (Ibn Muljim) was
stretched towards Imam Ali son of Abu Talib and that supporter and
defender of human rights was martyred, these calamities became the fate
of the Arabs and befell them constantly in new forms.

In short the people of the East were permanently subjected to these
sufferings and hardship.

[^1]: Islam permits enslaving of only infidels deserving to be fought
with, or prisoners who are captured as a consequence of jihad. During
the period of the caliphs and thereafter, however, the conditions became
such that whenever the ruffians found any unprotected person in an
Islamic city they caught and sold him.

[^2]: Islam does not permit enslaving a Muslim or a Zimmi or a
non-believer with whom a pact has been concluded. It so happened,
however, that during this period most of the slaves and slave-girls
belonged to these categories.

[^3]: No doubt, most of the Abbasid caliphs led lives of luxury and
pleasure and were ill reputed on account of their having oppressed their
subjects. However, there were a few amongst them who were just. Some of
them promoted literature and industry and worked for public welfare in
many ways. They constructed many observatories the like of which were
not known to the Romans and the Greeks. They also established big
hospitals and trained doctors and scholars. All these facts are recorded
in the pages of history.


