The two families of Quraysh
===========================

The Prophet had said very correctly: “My followers will meet destruction
at the hands of the youngsters of Quraysh”. These youngsters mentioned
by the Prophet who were to create trouble and to conspire, were born at
a place which served as a cradle for the shameless persons like Yazid
son of Mu\`awiya.

The Prophet could see that this party was waging war at one time to
safeguard its chiefdom and authority, and was surrendering and making a
show of Islam at another time to acquire chiefdom and authority. When he
glanced at different parts and saw these people he said with much grief
and anxiety: “My followers will meet destruction at the hands of the
youngsters of Quraysh”.

The readers are requested to keep before their eyes the history of the
Quraysh, which I am going to narrate, so that it may be possible to
identify each of them.

The enmity between Bani Umayyah and Bani Hashim was very old. They were
opposed to each other, before struggle for rulership and authority had
cropped up between them and even before Islam had gained predominance.

Their enmity with each other was based on various reasons. In fact all
the strong internal and external reasons for opposition had combined.
Among them were included tribal party spirit, superiority complex, old
grudge, desire for vengeance of the murder of kinsmen, political views,
personal sentiments, difference in ways of life and manner of thinking
etc. Bani Umayyah and Bani Hashim were the chiefs of Mecca and held high
offices even during the age of ignorance. However, the chiefdom of Bani
Hashim was spiritual [^1] whereas that enjoyed by Bani Umayyah was
political and they were also tradesmen and possessed enormous wealth.

All the Muslim historians and European Orientalists agree that before
the advent of Islam Bani Hashim were not habituated to cunning and
deceit like the idolatrous priests. They did not deceive the
simple-minded people on the pretext of their religious and spiritual
leadership. They neither exploited others nor kept their personal
benefit in view. They had faith in the Lord of the Ka\`abah and
sincerely believed in what had been permitted or disallowed by the
Almighty God. According to their code helping the oppressed,
sympathising with the helpless, warding off injustice, and meeting the
needs of the indigent, was compulsory. They were sincere in their
belief. They did not deceive anyone and did not consider hypocrisy to be
permissible. For example, it was possible that Abdul Muttalib, the
grandfather of the Prophet and Ali might have slaughtered one of his
sons in the path of God because he had firm faith in his Lord and had
vowed that if his ten sons survived he would slaughter one of them for
the sake of God on the threshold of the Ka\`abah. He was not satisfied
about the fulfilment of his vow until he was convinced in the light of
his faith that killing his son would not be a means of pleasing God.

His faith was so firm and he was so keen to assist the poor and the
needy that he concluded a pact with some families of Quraysh to achieve
this end. (Bani Umayyah did not become signatories to this pact). One of
the special conditions of this pact was that they would side with the
oppressed person and make the oppressor restore his right, help one
another in financial matters and restrain the powerful persons from
molesting the weak. The incident which led to the conclusion of this
pact was as follows:-

A Qurayshite purchased some articles from a person belonging to another
place and promised to pay the price after a fixed time. He did not,
however, make payment on the due date. He was confident that on account
of his family dignity and the support of his kinsmen none would compel
him to make payment. Furthermore, the person from whom he had purchased
the articles was a non-Meccan and belonged to an ordinary family, and
did not enjoy support from anyone. However, Bani Hashim decided to
assist him. They made a mutual pact whereby they decided to realize the
price of the articles purchased by the Qurayshite and to enforce
justice. However, as this pact did not accord with the nature of Bani
Umayyah they opposed it vehemently.

The religious and spiritual leadership inherited by Bani Hashim from
their ancestors generation after generation, accorded with their nature.
They had inherited pure disposition and nobleness from their ancestors.
Every generation of theirs displayed the virtues inherited by it and
Bani Hashim continued to maintain dignity and excellence till Almighty
God appointed Muhammad to the prophetic mission and also created Ali son
of Abu Talib as representatives of the morality and perfection of the
Hashimite Family.

Have a look at the history of Bani Hashim (i.e. the descendants of Abu
Talib) after the passing away of the Prophet, and you will find that,
whether that history covers one hundred years or two hundred years or
five hundred years, they have always been a specimen of the noble
qualities and virtues. The manliness, bravery, piety and truthfulness
which was possessed by their forefathers can also be observed in their
sons and grandsons. History continued to turn its leaves, but whoever
from amongst them came was a specimen of his forefathers.

If this family had not been virtuous and noble by nature it would not
have become a specimen of piety and purity, because in those times
egotism, selfishness, flattery and ambitiousness were so rampant that
all were morally degraded and these vices were very common among them.

It is much easier to go down into an abyss as compared with ascending or
standing firm at one's place. However, notwithstanding the fact that the
atmosphere was unfavourable and corruption was prevalent everywhere Bani
Hashim were not affected by these things and their noble qualities and
virtues remained intact.

However, Bani Umayyah were quite the reverse of this. During the age of
ignorance they were traders and politicians; and it is evident that
whoever is engaged in trade and politics possesses wealth and authority
and endeavours to continue to possess these things and make them remain
within his family. No intelligent person can deny the reality that when
a person is engaged in trade and his near ones are also tradesmen he can
do anything which serves his interests. He can at least defraud his
customers, hoard wealth, indulge in deception, and dilly-dally in the
performance of his duties.

Bani Umayyah chose these things for themselves as they accorded with
their nature. It was just as Bani Hashim chose purity of nature, honesty
and chastity for them- selves as they accorded with their nature and
disposition. Bani Umayyah were addicted to these abominable acts,
because they had been engaged in their habits for long and they had
become their second nature. They did not assist the oppressed because
this did not bring them any profit and in fact entailed great
expenditure. They did not join the said pact (which condemned the
oppressors) because this meant involving themselves in trouble.

Umayyah, the ancestor of Bani Umayyah was not as noble-minded and chaste
as Hashim so he could not desist from molesting gentle women. When a
dispute took place between Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather of Ali and
Harb son of Umayyah, the grandfather of Mu\`awiya, they referred the
matter to Nafeel bin Adi. Nafeel decided the matter in favour of Abdul
Muttalib and praised him. Addressing Harb he also recited a verse
wherein he drew a complete picture of Umayyah and Hashim. The verse is
as follows: “Your father was an adulterer and his father was chaste. He
(Abdul Muttalib) compelled the army of Abraha to go back from Mecca”.

In this verse Nafeel referred to the event of Abraha who, mounted on an
elephant and accompanied by a large army, had come to demolish the
Ka\`abah. He also denounced the vices of Umayyah, the father of Harb and
the ancestor of Bani Umayyah, who had earned an ill fame in the matter
of women. Once, owing to this evil habit of his, he escaped death. He
outraged the modesty of a woman belonging to the tribe of Zohra. The
people of that tribe attacked him with swords but the injury sustained
by him was not very effective. Many surprising stories have been
narrated about his voluptuousness.

When Muhammad, the distinguished son of the Hashimite Family was
appointed to the prophetic mission he met opposition from most of the
people. However, foremost among his opponents was Abu Sufyan, who was at
that time the chief of the Umayyah Family. He instigated all the
polytheists against him. He was the central figure in all the
conspiracies and the mobilization of forces against the Prophet. It was
he who invented different kinds of torture for the Prophet and his
companions and supporters.

If Abu Sufyan's opposition to the Prophet had been on account of
religious faith and if he had done all that he could to defend his old
principles and beliefs, there could be some justification for it,
because when one sincerely believes in something, whether it be right or
wrong, he is justified in defending his belief. However, that was not
the case with Abu Sufyan. He never considered himself justified in
opposing the Prophet nor did he make any such claim with his tongue. His
opposition to the Prophet was not on account of any religious
sentiments. What he really wanted was that the predominance and
authority of Bani Umayyah should not be affected - the same predominance
and authority which was based on monopolizing trade, profiteering,
personal interests and enslaving the weak. He decided to oppose the
Prophet when he saw that the power and authority of his family which had
already been weakened and become shaky was going to be destroyed by the
Prophet.

On account of his profiteering nature, which it will be right to call
Umayyad nature, Abu Sufyan did not believe in Islam sincerely even after
he had embraced it. He always weighed it in the scale of wealth and
power and thought that Islam was nothing except that authority had been
transferred from Bani Umayyah to Bani Hashim. He could not appreciate
the character of the Prophet and his companions and the sacrifices made
by them, and had never even thought of the human values for the pro
motion of which the Prophet had come in this world.

When at the time of the conquest of Mecca he saw a large army consisting
of the devotees of the Prophet he said to Abbas, the uncle of the
Prophet: “O Abul Fazal! Your nephew has acquired a very great kingdom”.
He uttered these words because he could not even imagine the sublime
objects and the spiritual teachings for which the Prophet had come. It
was those very sublime objects and spiritual teachings which Bani Hashim
had understood very well and in propagating them they even sacrificed
their lives.

After the conquest of Mecca the Family of Abu Sufyan did embrace Islam
but it was a very bitter pill for them to swallow. In the eyes of Abu
Sufyan and his wife Hind, Islam meant their own humiliation. For a long
time after embracing Islam Abu Sufyan continued considering the
predominance of this religion as his personal defeat. He did not
consider the success of Islam to be the result of its being a true
faith. He thought that it was due to the weakness of his own people.

One day he glanced at the Prophet in the masjid like a perplexed man and
said within himself: “O that I could know on what account Muhammad has
gained victory over me”. The Prophet perceived the meaning of Abu
Sufyan's look. He touched his shoulder with his hand and said: “O Abu
Sufyan! It has been on account of God that I have gained victory over
you”.

The Prophet tried to console Abu Sufyan before the conquest of Mecca as
well as thereafter. Before the conquest of Mecca he married his daughter
Umm Habibah, and after Mecca was conquered he declared his house to be a
place of refuge by saying that whoever entered his house would remain
unmolested. The Prophet placed his name at the top of
***\`muallefatul-qulub'*** (those persons who were given a larger share
of the booty as compared with other Muslims, so that they might be
consoled and the hatred which they entertained in their hearts for Islam
might vanish) and granted him many concessions.

In spite of all this the Muslims did not rely upon him. They were
careful in dealing with him and refrained from associating with him. Abu
Sufyan was worried on this account and wished that the Muslims might
have a soft corner for him and his family in their hearts. He,
therefore, requested the Prophet to appoint Mu\`awiya as his scribe.
When the Prophet breathed his last and differences arose about the
caliphate between the Muhajirs and the Ansar and later between the
Muhajirs themselves, Abu Sufyan considered it a good opportunity to
exploit these differences and acquire the chiefship of Quraysh himself.
He thought that after this achievement it would not be difficult for him
to become the head of the entire Muslim nation. He, therefore,
approached Abbas and Ali instigating them to oppose the caliph by
assuring them of his own support. He said: “O Ali and O Abbas! How has
the caliphate been assumed by a family (i.e. the Family of Abu Bakr)
which is the meanest as well as small in number? I swear by God that if
I so desire I can fill the streets of Madina with horsemen and
foot-soldiers''.

Abu Sufyan had not realized that he was talking to that Ali who would
not be reluctant to give away the entire world to comply with one true
order, and who was not unaware of the fact that his (i.e. Abu Sufyan's)
annoyance was not on account of Bani Hashim having been deprived of the
caliphate, because if it had remained with Bani Hashim he would have
been annoyed all the more, and might have made his family, his tribe,
and the entire world, against them.

Ali reproached Abu Sufyan and said to him! “O Abu Sufyan! The believers
are the well-wishers of one another and as regards the hypocrites they
are deceitful and insincere, although their houses are adjoined and
their bodies are connected with one another”.

Abu Sufyan belonged to the aristocratic class - the class which
considers itself to be superior to others and the common people to be
its slaves. He looked at Islam from this point of view. According to him
the prophet's invitation to Islam was only a means of attaining to
authority and power. According to him there was no difference between
the principles and fundamentals of Islam and the idols, and both of them
were sources of profit. He considered the principles of Islam to be a
source of income for the founders of that religion in the same way in
which the idols were the source of income for the idolatrous priests. He
could not think on any line except that the people were to obey their
elders and chiefs - whether they be the priests of the Ka\`abah or the
dignitaries of Islam.

According to Abu Sufyan the only difference between Islam and idolatry
was that Islam was more profitable and in it there was a greater
possibility of the people belonging to the lower class submitting to the
nobility and the aristocratic class. In case, however, the common people
were not submissive to the aristocrats in Islam this system, according
to him, was worthless and deserved to be replaced by a more useful and
profitable one.

When after Abu Bakr and Umar the caliphate was assumed by Uthman who was
an Umayyad, Abu Sufyan thought that the power and authority which
belonged to Bani Umayyah previously had returned to them. The grudge and
rancour which he had in his heart for Hamzah made him go to his grave.
He kicked the grave of Hamzah with his foot and said; “O Hamzah! Rise
and see that the rulership for which we had been fighting with each
other has once again returned to our family”. The bitterness and
animosity which this sentence contains is self-evident. This is how he
expressed his sentiments.

So long as the caliphate remained with Abu Bakr and Umar, Bani Umayyah
could not disclose what was hidden in their hearts and the plan
according to which they had made a show of the embracement of Islam viz.
that as soon as they got an opportunity they would convert the Islamic
government into a kingdom. They got this opportunity when Uthman
attained to the caliphate.

Nobody can believe that Bani Umayyah were aware of the true concept of
caliphate. According to their viewpoint there was no difference between
caliphate and kingship and they could not visualize the good points of
Islamic caliphate. Their faith in Islam was extremely superficial and
they had embraced it reluctantly. Their party-spirit of the age of
ignorance instigated them to readopt the ways and practices of that age.
They could not forget that the prophet did not belong to their family
but was a member of Bani Hashim and they had always been inimical to
that family. They were, therefore, looking for an opportunity to grab
the rulership.

The caliphate of Uthman opened the way for the fulfilment of their
desires. As soon as he became caliph all the Umayyads gathered round him
and secluded him from the public. None could, therefore, see him and
acquaint him with his problems. The Islamic government now became the
Umayyad government. Only Bani Umayyah could benefit from it. It was only
Bani Umayyah and their friends who could aspire to become governors and
to hold other key posts.

Marwan son of Hakam headed them. He was the first person who instigated
the Muslims against the Muslims and incited the people to rise against
the caliph. He was the first person who declared that kingship was
better than caliphate, and only Bani Umayyah were entitled to become
kings. He compelled Uthman to dismiss the governors who were holding
offices since the days of Abu Bakr and Umar and to replace them by the
Umayyads. Wealth and sovereignty became the exclusive property of Bani
Umayyah. None else could hope to benefit from it or to hold property and
position.

We shall mention in the next chapter how vicious and ill-natured Marwan
was, what malpractices he committed when he was in power, and how many
innocent persons he slaughtered to satisfy his personal desires. It was
the same Marwan bin Hakam who had suggested to the governor of Madina to
kill Imam Husayn and had reproached him for not complying with his
wishes when he (the governor) failed to take that heinous step.

Marwan coveted power, sovereignty and luxuries, just as his ancestors
had coveted them during the age of ignorance, and was keen that even if
he did not possess authority himself it should remain with any other
Umayyad, but should not go out of their family. The methods which he
adopted to acquire authority and rulership go to show that he did not
possess even one quality which might create least love for him in the
hearts of the people.

[^1]: Shamsu'l Ulema Shibli No\`mani writes thus in the twelfth volume
of his book entitled Seerat al-Nabi. “He had vowed that if he saw his
ten sons fully grown up he would slaughter one of them in the path of
God. The Almighty God granted this wish of his. He then brought all his
sons in the Ka\`abah and asked the worshipper to draw lots. It so
happened that the lot fell upon Abdullah. He then proceeded along with
Abdullah to the place of sacrifice. Abdullah's sisters who were present
began to cry and suggested that ten camels might be sacrificed instead
of Abdullah. Abdul Muttalib asked the worshipper to draw lots to find
out whether the lot fell on Abdullah or on the camels. By chance the lot
fell on Abdullah. Abdul Muttalib increased the number of the camels to
twenty but the lot again fell on Abdullah. He continued to increase the
number of the camels and the lot fell on them only when their number
reached one hundred. Abdul Muttalib then slaughtered one hundred camels
and the life of Abdullah was saved. Historians say that Abdul Muttalib
was not satisfied even when the lot fell on the camels and said: “I
swear by God that I shall not agree (to one hundred camels being
slaughtered instead of Abdullah) unless the lots are drawn thrice and
everv time they fall on the camels”. This was done and Abdul Muttalib
was satisfied only when the lot fell on the camels thrice.


