Husayn and Yazid
================

All those events which Husayn had to go through prove that from the
point of view of morality he occupied the highest place of glory and all
the events through which Yazid passed are an evidence of the fact that
he was at the lowest ebb of ignominy. The tragedy of Karbala is a
sufficient proof for it. This event speaks volumes for his stark
wickedness.

Yazid was a drunkard. He used to wear silken clothes and played on a
tambourine.

Husayn son of Ali and Yazid son of Mu\`awiya were the persons who came
in the world as perfect specimens of the qualities of the two families
viz. the Hashimites and Umayyads. Husayn was a perfect Hashim of his
time as Yazid was Abd al-Shams. If the special qualities of a man can be
the true picture of the environments in which he is brought up there is
no doubt about the fact that Husayn and Yazid were the true models of
their families. Husayn represented the Hashimites and Yazid the
Umayyads. The only difference was that Husayn was the best specimen of
the Hashimite virtues and excellences whereas Yazid was devoid of even
the good qualities which were possessed by Bani Umayyah.

Husayn was the son of the Prophet's daughter Fatima and Ali son of Abu
Talib. When he was born the Prophet took him in his lap and pronounced
\`Azan' in his ears so as to infuse his own spirit into the spirit of
his grandson, make him a part and parcel of his own being, and to
impress upon him that he was born to perform a special mission, and that
purpose of life had been fixed for him.

On the seventh day of his birth the Prophet said with great happiness:
“I have named this son of mine Husayn”.

The child grew up day after day in such a condition that he had in him
the soul of his grandfather, the beatings of the heart of his father,
and a deep impression of prophethood on his mind. All the virtues and
excellences of his forefathers had combined in his person and as he
continued to grow up these virtues and qualities of his also continued
to become more apparent. Transmission of the qualities of forefathers to
their children is a law of nature about which there cannot be any doubt
whatsoever. Just as the children inherit the colours, facial
appearances, material qualities etc. from their ancestors they also
inherit their characteristic virtues.

Husayn remained under the supervision of his grand- father till the age
of seven years. After the Prophet's demise his companions continued to
imitate him in the matter of love for Husayn. A special reason for their
displaying love for him was that his features very much resembled those
of the Prophet. This is borne out by the statements of those persons who
had seen the Prophet as well as Husayn.

The great names of the ancestors and their achievements have a great
deal to do with the development of their children and the making of
their future bright. When the child hears about the achievements of his
ancestors from his very early age a picture of theirs is drawn on his
brain, and consequently he acquires the qualities of his ancestors. A
child naturally inherits the qualities of his forefathers, but his
living with them at the same place casts a great influence on them.

Besides the Prophet, Husayn also saw his revered father. He saw his
perseverance, steadfastness, justice, sympathy, help for the oppressed
and anger for the oppressors as well as good treatment and kindness
shown to the enemies. He accompanied his father in the Battles of Camel,
Siffin and Nahrawan, and saw his astonishing bravery, and learnt from
him the ways of fighting for the sake of goodness, and also knew from
him how to sacrifice one's life to protect the oppressed and helpless
from tyranny.

Husayn's revered mother was a very tender-hearted and kind lady. On
account of this very tender-heartedness she was always grieved to see
the hardships to which her father, the Prophet, and his companions were
subjected by the Quraysh. She was extremely sad on the day of the Battle
of Uhad when many Muslims were killed at the hands of the polytheist
Quraysh and their dead bodies were cut to pieces. It was a very
depressing scene for her to see her father weeping for his uncle Hamzah.

It is said that after the death of the Prophet, Anas bin Malik went one
day to see lady Fatima and requested her to control her grief in the
interest of her own health. She said only this reply: “O Anas! How did
you tolerate to entrust the pure body of the Prophet to the grave?” Then
she burst into tears, and Anas too began to weep. He came back with a
heart which was shattered by the grief of Fatima.

Husayn used to see his grief-stricten younger sister Zainab and felt
extremely sad for her.

Husayn looked at his mother and sister and then imagined the sufferings
and hardships which time had in store for himself, his sister and their
descendants. He felt that very soon he and his sister would have to shed
tears on the death of their mother and then to mourn the martyrdom of
their father, and their descendants would have to face great hardships.

A few days later Husayn heard his mother making the following
recommendations to his sister Zainab: “Do not leave Hasan and Husayn.
Take complete care of them. After me perform the duties of their
mother”.

His mother breathed her last after three months of the death of her
father. Husayn was standing by her side and saying goodbye to her. At
times he glanced at his sister who was stunned with grief. Then he
looked at his father and brother who were crying bitterly on the passing
away of lady Fatima.

Husayn spent his childhood in such an atmosphere of sorrow and grief.
When he grew up he saw the people contending with, and blocking the way
of his revered father at every step. The attitude of the mother of the
faithful Ayesha and her supporters made him all the more sad. He also
saw the treachery committed by Mu\`awiya, Amr bin Aas, and their
henchmen with his father. This increased his grief all the more and he
felt that unless evil was suppressed with that bravery and force with
which his father endeavoured to suppress it, life would be meaningless.

The most grievous day was that on which the hand of a criminal and a
sinner wounded the forehead of his illustrious father when he was
offering his prayers in the Masjid Kufa. Imam Ali could not survive this
injury and breathed his last after two days. Thus the impediment in the
path of the oppressors and tyrants to establish their authority was
removed.

After some time his brother Hasan met martyrdom due to poisoning. And
his grief and wonder knew no bounds when he saw that Bani Umayyah and
their supporters were shooting arrows on the funeral bier of his
brother. He also came to know that Mu\`awiya had ordered that Husayn's
father and brother should be abused from the pulpits. In fact he heard
Mu\`awiya doing so himself. In short new causes for his grief continued
to appear. These were the very causes which culminated in the tragedy of
Karbala-the place where the most heinous crime was committed with the
co-operation of mean soldiers of Yazid and his wicked officers. They
committed atrocities on Husayn and a small group of his companions and
members of his family which one shudders to imagine.

This was how Husayn was reared from the point of view of inheritance and
training and these were the causes of his grief which he had to
experience from the very time of his birth. As he had observed the
sufferings of his grandfather, father and mother, grief and sorrow were
ingrained in his nature.

It was on account of the qualities inherited and acquired by Husayn that
he used to say: Forbearance is a ladder, fidelity is manliness, pride is
folly and weakness and association with the wicked is something which
makes one doubt and waver.

Try to acquire that thing which you deserve. It is humiliation and
abasement to live with the oppressors. Truth is dignity and falsehood is
helplessness.

Who was Yazid?
--------------

Yazid was a man who had inherited all the bad qualities of the Umayyad
Family. His disposition, beliefs, way of thinking and the manner of
looking at various matters were exactly the same as those of Bani
Umayyah in general. Besides the evils inherited by him from his
ancestors he had other mischievous tendencies and satanic qualities as
well. He did not possess the apparent qualities of his father which are
considered to be his (i.e. Mu\`awiya's) merits although they were only
tools to strengthen his rule. In fact it may be said that whereas all
the bad qualities of his family had combined in him he did not at all
possess any good quality.

There has been no other reveller amongst Bani Umayyah like Yazid and it
was on account of his being wildly festive that he lost his life. It is
said that one day, while mounted on a horse, he was trying to out-pace a
monkey. During this competition, however, he fell down from the horse
and died. His contemporaries have drawn a very precise and concise
picture of his in these words: “He was a drunkard. He used to wear
silken clothes and played on a tambourine”.

If Husayn proved to be a model of virtue and good morals, Yazid proved
to be the worst specimen of his ancestral vices. If Husayn was
sympathetic towards others as magnanimous persons usually are, Yazid had
no human sentiments and was absolutely shameless.

Yazid had been brought up in a family which considered Islam to be a
political movement. According to Bani Umayyah the prophethood of the
Prophet was only a pretext to acquire power and authority and Islam
meant transfer of power from the hands of Bani Umayyah to the hands of
Bani Hashim. Yazid considered his countrymen to be only an army whose
duty it was to remain faithful to the ruler. In his eyes the object of
the existence of his countrymen was that they should pay land revenue
and taxes and increase the wealth of the treasury which was to be spent
according to the sweet will of the ruler.

As Yazid was born and brought up in such a family it was necessary that
he, too, should adopt the ways which were adopted by his forefathers and
other members of his family during the age of ignorance and after the
advent of Islam. Furthermore, he was brought up in the house of a father
who spent large sums of money of the public treasury at his pleasure.
When wealth and ignorance are combined the result can be nothing else
except profligacy and debauchery.

It was for this reason that like every ignorant person who possesses
wealth Yazid was a drunkard and was fond of a life of pleasure and
played with dogs. As soon as he ascended the throne he began spending
money lavishly to lead a life of debauchery and sensual pleasure. He
gave enormous sums to his asociates, slaves, slave-girls, singers etc.
He had a large number of dogs who slept by his side and were made to
wear ornaments of gold and silver and silken dresses, while the poor
people, from whom taxes were realized under coercion, starved and
suffered hard- ships. He ruled for three and a half years only but
during this short period he combined in him all the disgrace, absurdity
and impudence which were the result of Umayyad politics.

Besides the above-mentioned revelry and debauchery which Yazid inherited
from his ancestors he also committed other most heinous crimes. During
the first year of his reign he murdered Imam Husayn and his companions
and made the people of his family captives. During the second year he
plundered Madina without caring in the least for its sanctity. He
permitted his soldiers to do whatever they liked with the people of the
city for a period of three days. Consequently eleven thousand persons
including seven hundred companions of the Prophet from amongst the
Muhajirs and Ansar were killed and the modesty of more than one thousand
virgins was outraged.

It was the natural disposition of Imam Husayn that he should fight
against injustice and oppression following the example set by his
grandfather and father. He used to say: “It is humiliation and disgrace
to live with the oppressors”. On the contrary Yazid always bestowed
honours on cruel and wicked persons and gave them large presents for
committing heinous crimes. He also asked others to respect and honour
such persons. For example, one day when he was engaged in feasting and
drinking along with his friends and Ubaidullah Ibn Zaid, the chief actor
of the tragedy of Karbala, was sitting on his right hand side he
addressed the cup-bearer as under:

“Give me such a wine that it should make my heart cool. Then give the
same wine to Ibn Ziad who is my confidant and trustee and the source of
my acquiring war booty and winning the battles”.  
 (This incident took place only a few days after the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn).  
 The honouring of Ibn Ziad by Yazid resembles the honouring of the
greatest tyrant and criminal, Hajjaj.

In short if during the time of Mu\`awiya \`divine army' consisted of
poisoned honey the \`divine army' during the days of Yazid was only
poison without the admixture of honey. During the reign of Yazid the
Umayyad party-spirit of the days of ignorance was fully revived. None of
the events of history can produce a man more ignorable than Yazid - the
same Yazid who was the author of the tragedy of Karbala. And similarly
none of the events of history can produce a person who should possess as
lofty a character as Husayn - the same Husayn who was the martyr of
Karbala.

The pages relating to Yazid are absolutely black whereas those relating
to Husayn are replete with dignity and honour. On the one side there
were the trade and chiefship of Umayyah and his slaves and executioners;
and on the other side there were the lofty character and bravery of the
Family of Abu Talib and their free and zealous persons and martyrs in
the path of truth and justice.

Logic and reasoning are not so successful to prove a reality as are the
events which are related to it. As events contain conclusive arguments
within themselves there is no doubt about the fact that all those events
which Husayn had to go through prove that from the point of view of
moral character he occupied the loftiest rank; all the events through
which Yazid passed are an evidence of the fact that he was at the lowest
layer of degradation. The tragedy of Karbala is a sufficient proof for
this fact. This event speaks volumes for, and shall always be pointing
to the most noble character of Husayn, and the wickedness of the vilest
of the vile Yazid.

Before the tragedy of Karbala there occurred another event, in which
there was on one side Husayn the model of sincerity and human sympathy,
and on the other there was Yazid who was an embodiment of debauchery and
licentiousness. This event, besides bringing to light the respective
characters of Husayn and Yazid, also reminds one of the pact made by
Bani Hashim, which was called ***\`Hilfal-Fuzul'.*** This pact was made
by them with the co-operation of some Arab tribes. One of its items
purported to say that the signatories of the pact would support the
oppressed, and realize their rights from the oppressors, and would
restrain the powerful persons from doing injustice to the weak and
helpless. The ancestors of Yazid had opposed this pact and those of
Husayn had lent it whole-hearted support.

Of course, one character of this event is Husayn and the other is Yazid.
Yazid son of Mu\`awiya came to know about the beauty of Urainab daughter
of Ishaq who was the wife of the Qurayshite Abdullah bin Salam. Urainab
was the most beautiful and accomplished woman of her time and possessed
enormous wealth. Yazid fell in love with her without having seen her. He
lost all patience and mentioned the matter to Mu\`awiya's favourite
slave named Rafiq. The slave informed Mu\`awiya about this love and told
him that his son was very keen to marry Urainab.

Mu\`awiya called Yazid and enquired from him about the matter. Yazid
admitted that whatever Mu\`awiya had been told was correct. Mu\`awiya
said: “Be calm and patient. Something will be done in this behalf”.
Yazid said: It is no use consoling me now because the matter is already
finished. She has already been married. Mu\`awiya said: My dear son!
Keep the secret to yourself, because if it is divulged it will do you no
good. God completes what He ordains and what has already happened cannot
be helped.

Mu\`awiya began thinking of solving the problem and meeting the wish of
Yazid to marry Urainab. Abdullah son of Salam, the husband of Urainab
was at that time the Governor of Iraq. Mu\`awiya wrote a letter to him
saying: “I have an urgent business with you. Please come and see me as
early as possible. The matter is beneficial to you”

On receiving Mu\`awiya's letter Abdullah proceeded to Syria at once and
met Mu\`awiya. The latter received him with great honour and respect. At
that time Abu Darda and Abu Huraira, two companions of the Prophet were
also available in Damacus. Mu\`awiya called for them and said to them:
“Such and such daughter of mine is now of age and I am anxious to give
away her hand in marriage. I think Abdullah son of Salam is a good man
and I wish that she may marry him”.

Both of them praised Mu\`awiya for his intelligence and devoutness and
said that whatever he had thought of was absolutely proper.

Mu\`awiya said to them: “Both of you should meet Abdullah and mention
the matter to him and find out his opinion about it. Although I have
authorised my daughter to marry a man of her choice, but I am sure that
she will like Abdullah bin Salam and will not refuse to marry him”

Abu Darda and Abu Huraira went to see Abdullah. In the meantime
Mu\`awiya went into his palace and said to his daughter: “Dear daughter!
Just hear what I have to say. When Abu Darda and Abu Huraira come to you
and tell you that I want to get you married to Abdullah bin Salam, you
should say: “Of course, Abdullah is a good man and a near relative and
of equal status with us. However, he has already married Urainab
daughter of Ishaq and I am afraid that if I marry him I may also become
jealous of her like all other women. If, in that event, I say something
unbecoming about Abdullah I am afraid that I may invite the wrath of God
by doing so. However, if Abdullah divorces Urainab I am agreeable to
marry him”.

When Abu Darda and Abu Huraira conveyed the message of Mu\`awiya to
Abdullah bin Salam he was overjoyed and told them to inform Mu\`awiya
that the proposal was acceptable to him. When they informed Mu\`awiya of
the developments he said to them: “As I have already told you I would
like this marriage. However, I have authorised my daughter to marry a
man of her own choice. You should, therefore, go to her and ask her
whether she is ready to marry Abdullah bin Salam”.

When they approached the girl she gave them the same reply which
Mu\`awiya had taught her to give. They then conveyed her reply to
Abdullah.

When Abdullah son of Salam came to know that it was not possible to
marry Mu\`awiya's daughter unless he devorced his wife he was
overpowered by avarice and divorced Urainab. He said to Abu Darda and
Abu Huraira: “Bear witness to the fact that I have divorced Urainab. You
should inform Mu\`awiya about this and also convey my proposal to him”.

When they came to Mu\`awiya and told him what had happened he said: “Oh!
What has Abdullah done? Why has he divorced his wife? He should not have
been so hasty. Had he waited for a few days I might have arranged his
marriage with my daughter without allowing things to come to such a
pass. Anyhow, you should go now and ask my daughter whether she is
agreeable to this marriage”.

Abu Darda and Abu Huraira approached Mu\`awiya's daughter once again and
told her that Abdullah had divorced his wife. They also stated that
Abdullah was a very noble-minded and competent person and enquired from
her whether she was prepared to marry him.

Mu\`awiya's daughter replied: “Abdullah no doubt enjoys a high position
amongst the Quraysh. However, as you are aware marriage is not something
trivial so that one may agree to it without seriously pondering over the
matter. It is a contract for one's whole life. You gentlemen may,
therefore go now. I shall think over the matter and give you a reply
later”.

Both of them blessed her and departed. They then went to Abdullah bin
Salam and informed him about what the girl had said. Abdullah said: “All
right. Let us wait. If it is not settled today, it will be settled
tomorrow'.

It was the talk of the town that Abdullah bin Salam had divorced his
wife and had proposed to Mu\`awiya's daughter. As all were aware of the
cunning of Mu\`awiya and the loose character of Yazid they blamed and
censured Abdullah for having divorced his wife without first winning the
consent of Mu\`awiya's daughter.

After a few days Abdullah sent Abu Darda and Abu Huraira again to the
daughter of Mu\`awiya. They advised her to give a final reply whereupon
she said: “I am sure God has decided well for me, because He does not
forsake one who relies upon Him. I have pondered over the matter and
have come to the conclusion that my marrying Abdullah bin Salam will not
be a successful one. I have also consulted my well-wishers in the
matter. Some of them have approved the marriage but others have opposed
it”.

When Abdullah came to know about the reply which had been given by
Mu\`awiya's daughter he became sure that he had been duped. This grieved
him very much. The news spread was the talk of the town. The people
blamed Mu\`awiya for having defrauded Abdullah and making him divorce
his wife so that she might later marry Yazid.

Mu\`awiya was successful at the first stage of his scheme to fulfil the
desire of his son but eventually the divine will frustrated his program.
His plan failed owing to the interference by Husayn who had grown up on
the pattern of life of his illustrious father. Helping the oppressed had
become his second nature.

When the waiting period (Idda) of. Urainab expired Mu\`awiya sent Abu
Darda to her to convey to her proposal for marriage on behalf of Yazid.
Abu Darda left Damascus and reached Kufa. It so happened that Husayn son
of Ali was also in Kufa at that time. Abu Darda considered it proper to
pay his respects to the son of the Prophet in the first instance. He,
therefore, presented himself before the Imam. Imam Husayn enquired from
him the reason for his visiting Kufa.

Abu Darda informed him that he had been sent by Mu\`awiya to propose to
Urainab daughter of Ishaq on behalf of his son Yazid. He then related to
the Imam in detail the events which had already taken place. Imam Husayn
said: “I also thought that Urainab would marry some other person and
intended to propose to her after her “Idda” ended. Now that you have
arrived here it will be better if you convey my proposal to her. She may
choose whomsoever she likes. However, I am prepared to give her dower
equal to that which Yazid has promised her”

Abu Darda promised to convey the Imam's message to Urainab. Then he took
leave of Imam Husayn and reached her house. He said to her: “Madam! It
was destined that Abdullah son of Salam should divorce you. You are not
going to be a loser on this account. Yazid son of Mu\`awiya and Husayn
son of Ali wish to marry you. Both of them have conveyed their proposals
to you through me. You may choose whomever you like”.

Urainab kept quiet for some time and then said: “If some other person
had brought these two proposals to me I would have called you for
consultation and would have acted according to your suggestion. Now that
you yourself have brought these proposals I leave the final decision to
you”.

Abu Darda replied: “It was my duty to convey the proposals to you, but
you are yourself the best judge in the matter”. Urainab said: “No; that
is not so. I am your niece and cannot act in this matter without your
advice”.

When Abu Darda saw that she was bent upon obtaining his opinion he said:
“I feel that the son of the Prophet is a better choice”. Urainab said:
“I agree with you. Also I like him”.  
 Imam Husayn then married Urainab and paid her the stipulated amount of
dower.

When Mu\`awiya came to know what had happened he was very angry and
abused Abu Darda. Then he said to himself: “Abu Darda has not been at
fault. It was my own mistake. If a person entrusts such a difficult task
to a simpleton he must fail”.

At the time of his departure for Damascus Abdullah bin Salam had
entrusted a large sum of money to Urainab. Later when he divorced her
and Mu\`awiya's daughter also refused to marry him it became known to
the people that Abdullah had been deceived by Mu\`awiya and made to
divorce his wife. This was a matter of disgrace for Mu\`awiya and he
held Abdullah responsible for it. He, therefore, dismissed him from
service and stopped his stipend. Abdullah became penniless. He,
therefore, returned to Iraq with the hope that he might get back from
Urainab the money which he had left with her. He was, however, afraid
that she might decline to return the money on account of his
misbehaviour and for his divorcing her without a just cause.

After his return to Iraq he met Imam Husayn and said: “As you must be
aware I was duped and made to divorce Urainab. While leaving for
Damascus I left some money with her as a trust”.  
 Then he praised Urainab much and said: “I shall be grateful if you
speak to her and ask her to return that money to me. It is possible that
with that amount in hand I may be saved from indigence”.

Imam Husayn went to Urainab and said: “Abdullah bin Salam came to see
me. He praised you very much for your honesty which pleased me much. He
also told me that he entrusted some money to you at the time of his
departure for Damascus. It will be only proper that you should return
that money to him because I think that what he has stated is correct”.

Urainab replied: “It is true that he left some bags with me, but I don't
know what they contain. They are still lying sealed, as they were. I
shall bring them to you and you may return the same to him”.  
 Imam Husayn praised Urainab on hearing this and said: “Will it not be
better if I call him here so that you may return the bags to him
yourself?”.

Then he met Abdullah bin Salam and said to him:  
 I have conveyed your message to Urainab. She admits your having left
some bags with her; they are still lying sealed, as they were. It will
be better if you come to Urainab and take back the bags from her”.

Abdullah felt very much ashamed and said: “I would request you to make
arrangements for the return of money to me”. (i.e. I feel ashamed to
face Urainab). Imam Husayn replied: “No. That cannot be. You should take
back the money from her in the same manner in which you gave it to her”.

He, therefore, brought Abdullah to his house and then said to Urainab:
“Abdullah son of Salam has come and demands the things which he
entrusted to you. Return the same to him in the same manner in which you
took them from him”.

Urainab brought the bags and placing them outside the curtain said to
him: “Here it is what you entrusted to me”. Abdullah thanked Urainab and
praised her for her honesty. Imam Husayn then left the place leaving
them alone. Abdullah broke the seal of the bag, took out some dinars
from it and presented them to her requesting her to accept the same from
him. Thereupon tears trickled from their eyes and they began to cry
loudly. Imam Husayn heard the sound of their crying. He then re-entered
the room and said with great kindness: “Just hear me. I call God to
witness that I have divorced Urainab just now. I call God to witness
that I did not marry her for the sake of her beauty or wealth.What I had
desired was that it might become lawful for her to re-marry her first
husband.

Thus Urainab became the wife of Abdullah bin Salam once again and
Mu\`awiya's scheme failed.  
 After re-marrying Urainab Abdullah said to her: “You should return the
amount of dower which Imam gave you”.  
 She brought the money and gave it to Abdullah to give it to the Imam.
However, Imam Husayn declined to accept the money and said: “The
spiritual reward which I shall get in the Hereafter for this good deed
is much better than worldly wealth”.

The Hashimite Ali son of Abu Talib said: “I swear by God that I have not
accumulated a treasure from your world like others and have not
collected wealth and property. I have not used any dress other than this
worn out cloak. If I had desired I could have eaten honey and wheat and
could also wear silken dress. However, it is impossible that passions
may overpower me and greed may make me eat dainty food. It is possible
that there may be a person in the Hijaz and Yamama who may not hope for
even one morsel of food and may not have eaten his fill throughout his
life. Should I satiate myself with food and sleep a sound sleep when
there may be around me many persons who may be starving? Should I be the
Commander of the Faithful only in name and should not share the
difficulties and sorrows of the people?

He wrote to the Governor of Ahwaz: “I swear by God that if I come to
know that you have misappropriated anything big or small which belongs
to the Muslims I shall award you such a severe punishment as will make
you indigent, burdened and disgraced”.

On the contrary Mu\`awiya son of Abu Sufyan used to say: “The earth
belongs to God and I am His caliph. I may take whatever I like out of
the property of God and am also entitled to what I leave”.

Mu\`awiya, Yazid, Marwan son of Hakam and other Umayyad rulers spent
public money on their supporters and friends in order to strengthen
their government and perpetuate their authority. They cut off the heads
of the people. They had an army of honey mixed with poison and also of
poison without honey. Both the parties i.e. Ali and his descendants as
well as Mu\`awiya, Yazid and other Bani Umayyah had their respective
supporters.


