The volley of criticism
=======================

As we have explained above, Bani Umayyah and their supporters and the
wealthy and influential persons of the time were responsible for the
shortcomings in the administrative, political and financial policies of
Uthman which resulted in great evils, disturbances, and chaos. Uthman
himself was responsible for this state of affairs in no lesser a degree
because he relied on Bani Umayyah and favoured them, ordered whatever
they desired and forbade what they disliked. In fact they were the real
rulers and Uthman was their obedient servant.

Imam Ali has drawn a very true picture of the caliph by saying: “He is
like a man who is choked by drinking water” (because the remedy for
being choked is drinking water, but if a person is choked owing to
drinking water there can be no remedy for him). He further says: “A
person whose favourites and confidants are corrupt is like one who is
choked by drinking water”.

Just as Uthman had given complete freedom to Bani Umayyah to acquire
influence and authority and allowed the dignitaries to accumulate and
hoard wealth by exploiting the common people, he had also permitted his
advisers to curb the freedom of the distinguished companions of the
Prophet if they raised any objection, and asked them to do justice to
the public.

It so happened very often that only placing restrictions on the truthful
and justice-loving believers was not considered sufficient but Uthman
awarded them severe punishment either of his own accord or on the
suggestion of Marwan. He considered them to be his enemies as if they
wanted to deprive him of the goodness of Marwan and his brother Harth.
Uthman in all matters, whether big or small followed the advice of Bani
Umayyah who were his chief advisers and had eventually lost his life on
account of them. They took all powers in their own hands, whether with
or without Uthman's willingness, and made him helpless. They really
wanted his death, and secretly revolted against him, so that another
Umayyad might become the caliph. All their supporters helped them in
this matter and when Uthman got encircled by his enemies, they (i.e.
Bani Umayyah) flew away leaving him in the lurch just as his other
supporters had slipped away.

Uthman kept away from himself all those well wishers of his with whose
help the conditions could improve, and made Bani Umayyah his confidants
and advisers. They advised him to keep at arm's length all those persons
who were considered to be his enemies although in fact they were not his
enemies.

A mischievous and ill-natured person, Marwan, was his chief adviser, but
he did not consider Ali fit to be trusted, although if his views had
been accorded weight he would have given Uthman sincere and far-sighted
advice and would have stopped him from nepotism and showing special
favour to his friends. He would have set the government on a stable and
profitable path, and preference would have been given to welfare of
common people, who have been protected from oppression and tyranny.

Marwan enjoyed such an influence on Uthman that he never acted then,
went up to Uthman and told him that Ali and other distinguished
companions were conspiring against him. He used to say: These people are
instigating the public against you. The only way to maintain law and
order and to save the caliphate is that you should kill Ali and all
other distinguished companions of the Prophet so that the affairs of the
State should be set up according to the advice of Bani Umayyah. It is
they who are your relatives and real well-wishers who would like your
rule to continue.

When general revolt against Uthman took place in all the cities he
called a conference to consider ways and means to restore law and order.
Only Bani Umayyah and their supporters were invited to attend this
conference.

It was these very Bani Umayyah against whom the companions of the
Prophet and the public had complaints and it was on account of them that
the people had revolted. However, instead of calling the companions of
the Prophet and holding consultations with them to improve the situation
Uthman called those who were the root-cause of all troubles, and because
of whom the people had became the enemies of Uthman.

All those who participated in the conference expressed their views and
suggested ways and means of tackling the situation. It would appear that
some of them wanted disturbances to continue because their interests
could be served better by this. Others wanted the trouble to flare up
for the same reason. Still others wanted improvement of the situation
provided that their own influence and authority did not suffer.

All those who participated in the conference were inimical towards Ali.
They were afraid that his justice, truthfulness and piety might spoil
their own game and repress their oppressive activities, and his policy
of equity and equality might make their capitalist government fall to
the ground. The most active members of the conference were Mu\`awiya,
Marwan and Amr Aas. It can, therefore, well be imagined what the result
of those consultations should have been.

Ali did not care if Uthman did not consult him in those difficult
circumstances. He was anxious that the conditions of the Muslims should
improve and justice and equity should be established, even though Uthman
and his supporters might become his enemies. He continued to advise
Uthman till the last moment to redress the grievances of the people and
compensate them for the oppression suffered by them so that his
caliphate might not be endangered. Once when the people became furious
and wanted to attack Uthman he pacified them, and also advised Uthman in
these words: [^1]

“People are waiting for me outside and they have sent me to you to
settle the differences between you and them. I swear by God that I
cannot understand what to tell you when I do not know anything of which
you are not aware, and have not to communicate to you any news which has
not already reached you. I know what you know. I did not know anything
which I might tell you nor have I heard anything in private of which I
might inform you. You saw as I saw and you heard as I heard. You have
been in the company of the Prophet as we have been. The responsibility
to act rightly did not rest more on the sons of Abi Quhafa and Khattab
than it rests on you. In fact you are nearer to the Prophet on account
of kinship than they were, and you are in a way the son-in-law of the
Prophet, while they were not so.

You must feat God, I swear by God that I am not tendering you this
advice because you cannot see anything and I am not telling you all this
because you do not know it. And there is no question of your ignorance
because the path of religious law is quite evident and clear. Take it to
your heart that out of His slaves God likes most the just ruler, who is
a guided person himself and guides others also, strengthens known
practices and destroys unknown innovations. And the most despicable of
the people before God is that unjust ruler who remains misguided and
others too are misguided on account of him. I have heard the Prophet
saying that on the Day of Judgment an oppressor will be brought in such
a manner that there will be none who will help him or intercede for him
and he will be thrown into the Hell straightaway”.(Nahj al-Balaghah)

Uthman was nonplussed when he heard logical remarks of Ali. He only
said: “I have done nothing wrong. I have been only kind and benevolent
to my kith and kin”.

Truth was intermingled with falsehood and good with evil. The
malpractices of Bani Umayyah went on increasing. Uthman gave them plenty
of rope and himself became helpless before them. Ali has drawn a concise
and precise picture of the caliphate of Uthman in these words: “He
supported his kinsmen in the most absurd manner”.

About his Umayyad kinsmen he says: “With him stood up Bani Umayyah, the
descendants of his father, and they began to munch God's property just
as a camel grazes spring grass”.

Thus Bani Umayyah and their supporters brought Uthman on a path which
was the path of annihilation and ruin. It was for his nepotism that he
lost his life. His wife Na\`ela also knew to what direction Bani Umayyah
were carrying him. She also knew that Ali was the most sincere and
truthful person and the real well-wisher of Uthman. She, therefore,
insisted upon him persistently that he should consult Ali. However, the
wicked and mischievous advisers who were constantly hovering around
Uthman opposed Na\`ela's suggestion and said that she was an imprudent
woman and he should not lend ears to what she suggested.

Once Marwan said to Uthman: “I swear by God that it is better to stick
to your sins and apologize to God, than that you should repent with
fear”.

It means that Marwan admitted that Uthman's policy was wrong and his
methods were the methods of wrong-doers, but according to him (i.e.
Marwan) it was better to stick to one's sin and evil-doing than to feel
ashamed and repent of it.  
 No advice could reach the ears of Uthman except that which was uttered
by Marwan. Uthman agreed immediately to what Marwan said but did not
listen to what was said by others.

Marwan spoke to the people in the name of the caliph and what he said
consisted of nothing except censure, threats and obstinacy, and was
sufficient to create an uproar against Uthman. Once he said, addressing
the insurgents who had besieged Uthman's house: \`\`What has happened to
you people? Why have you gathered here? Do you want to take away the
government from us?'' This sentence of Marwan is sufficient to indicate
the way of thinking of all the Umayyads, according to them all those
oppressed persons who had come to get their grievances redressed had
come only to loot and plunder.

Demand for the restoration of usurped rights and a just government, and
stopping oppression and taking action against those who had violated the
rights of the people, and similar other things in connection with which
the people had come to lodge their complaints, were things which,
according to Marwan, did not deserve any attention.

According to him the caliphate, sovereignty and rulership were the means
of displaying power and authority and had nothing to do with the
protection of the rights of the people or the safeguarding of the faith
and the religious law. According to him it was the kingship of Bani
Umayyah which they had been waiting for a long time to seize, and thus
re-establish their power and authority which had been destroyed by
Islam. And that being so he could not understand why the people should
endeavour to deprive Bani Umayyah of their hereditary government.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

All those persons who disliked the financial and administrative policies
of Bani Umayyah and criticized them sincerely became the target of
Uthman's wrath on the suggestion of Marwan and his other associates and
advisers. One of those persons who opposed these policies and methods
was Abdullah bin Mas\`ud, a distinguished companion of the Prophet. In
order to explain how much the people were grieved on account of the
oppression to which this companion of the Prophet was subjected, it
appears necessary to give a brief account of his life history.

Abdullah bin Mas\`ud was one of those persons who embraced Islam first
of all. It is said that his number was sixth on the list. He had the
honour of migrating twice in the first instance to Ethiopia and then to
Madina. He always remained in the company of the Prophet. He was one of
those whom the Prophet loved and respected for their truthfulness,
honesty and piety.

The Muslims of the early era considered Ibn Mas\`ud to be one of the
greatest scholars. It was on account of his profound knowledge that Umar
sent him to Kufa to guide and educate the people of that city, although
he himself needed his advice in Madina. While sending him to Kufa Umar
sent a letter to the citizens of Kufa. He wrote: “I am sending Abdullah
bin Mas\`ud to educate you. By sending him to Kufa I have given you
preference over myself. You should acquire knoweldge from him”.

Many Kufans benefited from Ibn Mas\`ud. The number of his pupils
increased day after day and they became renowned scholars. The famous
Tabe\`i (companion of the companions of the Prophet) Sa\`id bin Jaybar
used to say: “The pupils of Abdullah bin Mas\`ud were the lamps of this
city”. (i.e. Kufa).

All the Muslims acknowledged Abdullah bin Mas\`ud to be an erudite
scholar. So much so that during the time of Umar it was he to whom the
Kufans referred their religious problems and only his judgments were
accepted by them. In the matter of exegesis also he was one of the
topmost authorities, and his rank was almost equal to that of Abdullah
bin Abbas. He had many pupils who distinguished themselves in this
branch of learning, such as Qatada and Masrooq ibn Ajda\`.

In short Abdullah bin Mas\`ud was the most respectable personality of
his time. He was honoured in all Islamic cities more than every other
companion of the Prophet. How did Uthman behave towards this
distinguished companion? Ibn Mas\`ud was one of those distinguished
companions who openly disapproved and fearlessly criticized the policies
and the modus operandi of Bani Umayyah. On every Friday he used to say
in Kufa: “The most correct word is the Book of God and the best guidance
is that provided by Prophet Muhammad and the worst things are
innovations. Every innovation is deviation and every deviation leads one
to Hell”.

The above statement of lbn Mas\`ud contained clear criticism of Uthman
and the actions which he took for the benefit of only Bani Umayyah and
the wealthy and influential persons ignoring the welfare of the common
man. He said many things criticizing Uthman, for example, he said: “In
the eyes of God Uthman does not have even as much value as the feather
of a fly”.

Walid bin Uqbah, the Governor of Kufa, resented very much the remarks of
Ibn Mas\`ud about Uthman. This Walid was a brother of Uthman from his
mother's side and was a great drunkard and a licentious person. Uthman
had appointed him as the Governor of Kufa notwithstanding the
displeasure of the residents of that city.

Walid wrote to Uthman informing him that Ibn Mas\`ud criticized and
abused him (Uthman). Uthman asked him to send Abdullah to him. It has
been narrated that when Abdullah left Kufa for Madina many persons came
to bid him farewell. Everyone of them requested him not to leave Kufa
and assured him that they could not let him suffer any harm. He,
however, replied: “There is something which must happen soon”.

Abdullah bin Mas\`ud reached Madina on Friday night. When Uthman came to
know about his arrival he made the people gather in the masjid and said
to them: “Just see a mean animal is coming towards you who tramples on
his food, vomits and excretes”. lbn Mas\`ud said: “I am not like that.
Of course, I am a companion of the Prophet. I was with him in the Battle
of Badr and also participated in ***Bai\`at al-Rizwan*** (the oath of
allegiance taken under a tree at Hudaibiya).

Ayesha said loudly from her house: “Uthman! You are saying these words
about a companion of the Prophet!” Others also disliked these remarks
and expressed their resentment. As ordered by Uthman his officials and
slaves turned Ibn Mas\`ud out from the masjid in a very rude manner.
They dragged him to the gate of the masjid and there they threw him down
on the ground. Then they beat him so mercilessly that he broke his bones
and from there he was carried home like a dead body.

Uthman was not satisfied with the beating and insulting to which this
great companion of the Prophet was subjected. He stopped the stipend
which he used to get from the Public Treasury and deprived him of all
his sources of livelihood. He also ordered the people not to visit him
to enquire about his health. Eventually Ibn Mas\`ud passed away and
Ammar Yasir offered his funeral prayers and buried him secretly. When
Uthman was informed about it he became very furious.

Another respectable person who became the target of Uthman's wrath was
Ammar Yasir. He was one those great personalities of Islam who are
well-known for their virtues, high morals and piety. His worth and value
was best known to the Prophet and he knew what great merits he
possessed. That is why he paid him glowing tributes which he amply
deserved. For example he said about him: “When dissensions take place
between the people the son of Sumayyah (i.e. Ammar) will be on the side
of right”

Many differences arose between the Muslims during the early days of
Islam and Ammar always sided with Ali. It was on account of these
qualities and virtues that the Muslims loved him and Bani Umayyah and
their supporters were his sworn enemies.

The first action of Uthman which Ammar disliked was that he made wealth
a plaything in the hands of the affluent persons. As explained by Ammar
himself he used to meet Uthman very often and advised him to administer
justice, avoid nepotism and refrain from making Bani Umayyah the
overlords of the people. Consequently Uthman got annoyed with him as he
was annoyed with other virtuous people.

It has been narrated that there was a casket in the Public Treasury
which contained ornaments and gems. Uthman removed this jewellery from
the treasury and gave it to one of his wives to wear. The people
objected to this and criticized him severely which made him furious.
Speaking in a public gathering he said: “I shall take whatever I like
out of the war booty, and damn care if some one dislikes it”. Thereupon
Ali said: “In that event you will be restrained from doing so and a wall
will be raised between you and the Public Treasury”. Ammar said: “I call
God to witness that I am the first person to dislike this
misappropriation”. Thereupon Uthman said: “O Ammar! How dare you speak
against me? Arrest him”.

Suddenly Marwan got up and said to Uthman: “O Commander of the Faithful!
This slave (Ammar) has instigated the people against you. If you kill
him others will learn a lesson”.

Uthman got ready immediately to act on Marwan's suggestion. He picked up
his stick and beat Ammar mercilessly. His slaves and other members of
the Umayyad Family also helped him. Uthman also kicked him in a very
insulting manner and inflicted him so many kicks on his belly below the
navel that he developed hernia. Thereafter he was thrown on the road
while it was raining and thundering, and he became almost dead.

The third distinguished companion of the Prophet who was subjected to
dreadful torture by Uthman and other members of the Umayyad Family was
the great reformer Abu Dharr Ghifari. It was the same Abu Dharr who is
renowned for his philanthropy and love for justice. He was a supporter
and most devoted follower of Ali.

In order to explain the true position of the opponents of Uthman's
policies and the conduct of Bani Umayyah we give below a brief account
of the life history of Abu Dharr who was one of the greatest men of his
time.

During the age of ignorance Abu Dharr was an indigent person but in
spite of that he was the chief of his tribe. When he heard about the
Prophet he came to Mecca in such a condition that he was wearing a worn
out and tattered cloak. On reaching Mecca he began roaming about on the
streets. At last when he got tired he lay down on the ground near the
Ka\`abah, placing his cloak under his head. In the meantime Ali chanced
to pass by him and took much pity on him, because it appeared that he
was a poverty-stricken stranger, who was not acquainted with anyone in
the city. They got themselves introduced to each other and Ali took Abu
Dharr to his house. Later he took him to the Prophet. On meeting the
Prophet Abu Dharr immediately embraced Islam. He was the fifth to adopt
this religion.

Abu Dharr was so sincere and brave that after embracing Islam he stood
near the Ka\`abah where a large number of Quraysh - the fell enemies of
Islam - were assembled. There he ridiculed the idols and invited those
present to Islam. Till then none had been able to show such valour.
Quraysh assaulted him and beat him so much that he was almost dead.

Abu Dharr was the most favourite and dear companion of the Prophet on
account of his foresight, prudence, wisdom, zeal for reform, and love
for the poor. The people also relied upon him and respected him very
much. All the companions held him in great respect. Ali has said about
him: “Abu Dharr has such vast knowledge that none has been able to equal
him”.

When Uthman attained to the caliphate Abu Dharr's astonishment knew no
bounds. He could not understand why Uthman had been made caliph in the
presence of a learned and pious person like Ali. However, he did not
open his lips against this selection because Ali did not want that any
disturbance should take place for his sake. Soon afterwards, however,
Abu Dharr saw that whereas the common people were leading very miserable
lives Bani Umayyah were amassing wealth and living in luxury. He felt
that Uthman showering wealth upon his relatives by depriving the common
people of their rights, and this disturbed him very much. He openly
criticized this policy which had divided the people into two groups -
the affluent and the indigent.

Abu Dharr often addressed the people in these words: “Such things are
taking place as were never seen or heard of previously. I swear by God
that such actions are neither sanctioned by Qur'an - the Book of God nor
supported by the Sunnah of the Prophet. I swear by God that I see that
truth is being suppressed and falsehood is being encouraged. Things
which are right and true are being refuted and impious persons are being
preferred. O assembly of the wealthy and persecuters of the poor! Inform
“..***those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend their wealth in
the path of God..”*** of burning from the Fire ***“..with which their
foreheads, flanks and backs will be branded..”. (9:34-35)***

He added: “You have adopted silken curtains and seats and have become
habituated to lying in azrabi silk whereas the Prophet used to sleep on
a mat. You eat food of various kinds whereas the Prophet did not eat
even barley bread to his fill”.

Abu Dharr demanded from the party in authority to do justice to the poor
people who had been deprived of their rights. He encouraged the people
to wrest their rights by force and to put an end to indigence which is
the source of humiliation and an enemy of virtue. He used to utter the
following sentences often:

• “I wonder as to why a person who has nothing in his house to eat, does
not draw a sword and attack the people”.

• “When poverty proceeds towards a town infidelity asks it to take it
with itself”.

He was so disgusted with the egotism and profiteering of Bani Umayyah
that he left Hijaz and went away to Syria, so that he might not see the
extravagance of Uthman and Marwan with his own eyes. However, on
reaching there he found that the activities of Mu\`awiya were even more
objectionable than those of Uthman and Marwan. (The fact is that Abu
Dharr did not go to Syria of his own free will. He was exiled there by
Uthman). There he said that Mu\`awiya's extravagance had far exceeded
that of Uthman and Marwan.

He saw that Mu\`awiyah had become the master of the Public Treasury as
well as of the lives and property of the people. He observed that he
squandered away the property of the Public Treasury, grabbed the
earnings of the Muslims and killed whomsoever he wished to. All this
made him too furious. When Mu\`awiya constructed the Green Palace Abu
Dharr sent him a message saying: “If you have built this palace by
spending the property of God you have been guilty of misappropriation
and if you have spent the money from your own pocket you have been very
extravagant”.

Bani Umayyah could not tolerate such a truthful, freedom loving and
out-spoken person, nor could they permit him to mix up with the people.
Marwan instigated Uthman every now and then to get rid of him. Uthman
asked Mu\`awiya to take repressive measures againt Abu Dharr.

Mu\`awiya turned Abu Dharr out of his court and issued orders that none
should associate with him. It was at Uthman's behest that Mu\`awiya said
to that distinguished companion of the Prophet: “O enemy of God! You
instigate people to be against me and do whatever you like. If I had
killed any companion of the Prophet without the prior permission of the
ruling caliph it would have been you”. Abu Dharr replied: “I am not an
enemy of God or of His Prophet. Rather it is you and your father who
have been the enemies of God. Both of you embraced Islam only outwardly
and infidelity still lies hidden in your heart”.

Abu Dharr did not attach any importance to Mu\`awiya's threats, and
continued reforming the Syrian society with so great a zeal and
enthusiasm, that Mu\`awiya was out of his wits. The rich people of Syria
were as scared of his reformative activities as the people of Madina
were. They feared that the common people might attack them.

They, therefore, considered it necessary that Abu Dharr should be turned
out of Syria as early as possible, and should also be restrained from
making any speeches so that he might not bring their malpractices to
light. In the meantime a man named Jundab bin Fehri came to Mu\`awiya
and said as a sincere adviser and in a meek tone: “Abu Dharr will create
trouble for you in Syria. If you need Syria, you should take care of it
immediately”.

Mu\`awiya thought of killing Abu Dharr but feared that the people might
revolt. As said by Hasan Basri: “Mu\`awiya did not refrain from killing
a distinguished companion like Abu Dharr, because he feared Uthman's
displeasure. He did not kill him, because he was afraid of the
displeasure of the public. He therefore, wrote to Uthman and sought his
advice. Uthman replied: “Send Abu Dharr to me mounted on a vicious
animal along with a man who should subject him to as much trouble as
possible on the way”.

Mu\`awiya did as he was advised by Uthman. He made Abu Dharr mount a
camel with a saddle on which there was no cover. By the time he reached
Madina pieces of flesh were cut off from his thighs and owing to the
long journey he had broken his back. From Damascus to Madina he was
accompanied by cruel and savage soldiers who did not care either for the
hot weather or for his fatigue. He was very much tired and had become
lean and weak when he reached before Uthman.

Immediately on seeing Abu Dharr Uthman protested against his activities.
Abu Dharr replied: “I wished you well but you decieved me. Similarly I
wished your friend (Mu\`awiya) well but he also deceived me”.  
 Uthman said: “You are a liar. You want to create trouble. You have
turned the entire country of Syria against us”.

Abu Dharr said with great confidence and composure: “You should follow
in the footsteps of Abu Bakr and Umar. If you do so none will say
anything against you”.

Uthman said: “May your mother die! What have you to do with this
matter?”

Abu Dharr replied: “So far as I am concerned I had no alternative but to
order the people to do good and to restrain them from evil”.

Ite contention between Abu Dharr and Uthman became much more serious.
Abu Dharr accused Uthman of being subservient to his wishes was
disobedient to God, and unkind to His creatures. Uthman got very much
annoyed and cried out: “O people! Tell me how to deal with this aged
liar. Should I beat him or kill him or banish him from the Islamic
territories? He has created a split among the Muslims”.

At that time Ah was also there. He was very much grieved to see the
treatment meted out by Uthman to a great reformer and distinguished
companion like Abu Dharr. He turned towards Uthman and said: “I heard
the Prophet saying that between the earth and the heavens there is none
more truthful than Abu Dharr”.

Uthman continued harassing Abu Dharr. He ordered the people not to
associate with him. Then he thought of becoming reconciled with Abu
Dharr. He, therefore, sent him two hundred gold coins to meet his needs.
Abu Dharr asked the man who had brought the money to him: “Has Uthman
given the same amount to every Muslim?” The man replied in the negative.
Abu Dharr returned the money to Uthman and said, “I am a member of the
Muslim society and should, therefore, get only as much as others get”.
When he returned the gold coins there was nothing in his house to eat
except a stale loaf of barley bread!

In the first instance Uthman handed over Abu Dharr to the executioners.
On reconsideration, however, he decided to banish him to Rabazah. It was
a barren region where neither man, nor animal nor vegetation could
survive.

When the time of Abu Dharr's departure drew neat Uthman prohibited the
people, in order to grieve, insult and humiliate him, to see him off.
None except five persons, therefore, picked up courage to see him off.
The five persons were Ali, his brother Aqil, Hasan, Husayn and Ammar
Yasir.

The responsibility to supervise the departure of Abu Dharr rested with
Marwan who was the source of all evils. It was he who had enforced
Uthman's order that none should converse with Abu Dharr and the members
of his family or see them off. He was so bold as to prevent Ali and his
companions from seeing off Abu Dharr. Ali rebuked him, struck him with
his stick and shouted: “Be off from here! May God throw you into the
Hell”.

Then he bade farewell to Abu Dharr in these words: “O Abu Dharr! You
were annoyed with these people for the sake of God. So you should expect
your recompense also from Him only. They feared you because on account
of your activities they might lose the world (i.e. worldly gains) and
you were afraid of them because you wanted to safeguard your faith. So
leave to them that thing on account of which they feared you (i.e.
worldly gains) and keep aloof from them along with your faith. See how
much they need that faith on which you did not permit them to gain
control, and see how independent you are of the world of which they have
deprived you!

You will come to know tomorrow (i.e. on the Day of Judgment) who has
been the winner and who has displayed envy. Even if a person is
precluded from the earth as well as from the heavens but he fears God,
the Almighty certainly opens a path for him. You will always remain in
love with truth and will shun falsehood. If you, too, had accepted their
world they would have liked you and if you had borrowed from this world
they would have provided you asylum”.(Nahj al-Balaghah).

Then Ali asked Aqil and Ammar to bid farewell to their brother and also
asked Hasan and Husayn to say goodbye to their uncle. When Uthman came
to know about this incident he was very much annoyed with Ali.

One may ask as to how it happened that Ali saw Abu Dharr being subjected
to torture and oppression but took no steps to save him from the tyranny
of the caliph of the time? Abu Dharr was a distinguished companion of
the Prophet and a great supporter of Ali and was opposing the caliph not
for any personal gain but to ensure the welfare of the people. Then why
did Ali remain quiet?

If he had so desired he could restrain Uthman from banishing Abu Dharr
and could use all his resources to make the people stand up in
opposition to Bani Umayyah. And there is no doubt about the fact that
the Muslims would have supported Ali whole-heartedly. Then what was the
reason for this silence of Ali?

Just as this question occurs to everybody's mind, it occurred to my mind
also. I thought that whereas one aspect of Ali's remaining quiet on this
occasion is quite clear and evident and the other is very intricate and
not understandable by everyone.

The intricate aspect is that Ali's time was not the present one. He
lived more than 1300 years ago. Circumstances and conditions which
existed at that time cannot be assessed properly in the present
twentieth century nor can we understand all their aspects. Probing the
real causes has not been possible in spite of deep investigations
conducted by many researchers. Ali knew and understood many subtleties
of his own time which were not visible to others, and his line of action
was based on the exigencies of the time which were known to him only.

However, the aspect of his quietness which is quite evident is that the
spirit of sacrifice was present in the very nature of Ali and he was
prepared to suffer any hardship for the sake of the welfare of the
people. He was so mindful of the safety of Islam that he did not care
for anything except that.

The more deeply we study the conduct and character of Ali, and examine
all aspects of his life, the more we are convinced of this reality. He
could not tolerate that the advancement and propagation of Islam should
slacken in the least. He knew very well the mentality of Bani Umayyah
before and after their embracement of Islam, but he was afraid that if
the Muslims arrayed themselves against them dissensions would take place
among the followers of Islam and they would be harmful for this
religion.

Ali knew that Bani Umayyah wanted to kill all the true believers who
constituted the real support for Islam so that they might free
themselves from the restrictions imposed by Islamic law and there should
be none left to object to their activities.

Is it not a fact that Marwan bin Hakam instigated Uthman to kill Ali and
other distinguished companions like Abu Dharr and Ammar? His object in
making this suggestion was that with the removal of these persons from
the scene Bani Umayyah should be free to do what they liked, because
while these pious and dauntless companions of the Prophet were present
Bani Umayyah could not create mischief and act as despotic ruler.

Had Marwan's desire been fulfilled it cannot be assessed how much
trouble Bani Umayyah would have created. It was, therefore, the height
of Ali's foresight and prudence that he expressed only so much
resentment in the matter of injustice done to Abu Dharr as he used to
express in connection with the oppression to which he himself was
subjected.

He did this so that the Muslims might not become the enemies of one
another.

This had happened earlier also on the occasion of ***Saqifa***. Umar
came to Ali's house and dragged him at the point of sword to take oath
of allegiance to Abu Bakr. The Muslims were gathered round Ali at that
time. Some of them were astonished whereas others were beside themselves
with rage. All were expecting a hint from him so that they might fight
for his defence. No doubt Ali, who was rhe pillar of Islam, the citadel
of justice, and the Imam of all the people, but what did he do for
himself?

When the people saw Umar taking Ali before the caliph at the point of
the sword, they were much surprised. However when they looked at his
face they did not find any sign of anger on it. He neither incited the
people nor raised his voice, nor allowed them to draw their swords. The
people were surprised all the more when a few moments later they saw Ali
standing before them (i.e. Abu Bakr, Umar etc.) very calmly and arguing
his case with a view to convincing them about his right. None dared to
open his mouth in reply. He was establishing his right with solid
arguments but tolerated the usurpation of his right in the interest of
the people. Ali was justified in proving his right through protests and
arguments, and was also justified in showing patience, calmness,
forbearance and forgiveness. He knew himself very well.

The supporters of Ali were surprised at the attitude adopted by him. But
there was one thing which Ali knew but others did not know. And that was
the thing which Ali aimed at and which was the source of his peace of
mind. This refers to the fact that he had worked with the Prophet to lay
the foundation of Islam. He equally shared the responsibility of
propagation of Islam. How could he tolerate that this religion should
suffer destruction? That was the reason why he sacrificed his own
rights, and he acted in the case of Abu Dharr in the same manner in
which he had acted in his own case.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

What happened to Abu Dharr after his banishment?
------------------------------------------------

The aged and great companion of the Prophet died of hunger. He and the
members of his family lived in extremely hard conditions and had to
suffer unprecedented miseries. Their children also passed away due to
lack of food.

It has been narrated that after the death of their children Abu Dharr
and his wife grew very weak on account of hunger. One day Abu Dharr said
to his wife: “Let us go upto that mound. It is possible that we may find
some wild fruits there”. They went upto the mound. Inclement winds were
blowing and they could not find anything to eat. Abu Dharr began to
faint. Although very cold wind was blowing but Abu Dharr was perspiring
and wiped his sweat again and again. When his wife looked at him she
realized that he was going to die. She began to weep. Abu Dharr asked
her why she was weeping. She replied: “Why should I not weep? You are
breathing your last on this barren land, and I don't have even a piece
of cloth which maybe used as a shroud for you and me”. Her words grieved
Abu Dharr very very much. He said to her: “Go and stand by the side of
the road. It is possible that you may meet a believer who may be passing
that way”. She replied: “Who will pass this way now? The caravan of the
pilgrims has already passed and the road is deserted”.

Abu Dharr recalled the words which the Prophet had uttered about him. He
said to his wife: “Go and see carefully. If you find someone coming you
will be relieved of your worry. And if you don't find anyone you should
cover my dead body and place it by the side of the road. As and when you
chance to meet the first rider tell him: “Abu Dharr the companion of the
Prophet has died. Now assist in bathing and shrouding him”.

Abu Dharr's wife ascended the mound time and again but could not find
any human being. After some time, however, she saw some riders at a
distance and beckoned them by moving her cloth. They came up to her and
said: “O bondwoman of God! What is the matter?” She replied: “Here is a
Muslim who is dying; please arrange for his bathing, shrouding and
burial. God will recompense you for this”. They asked: “Who is the man?”
She replied: “His name is Abu Dharr Ghifari”.

The men could not believe that such a distinguished companion of the
Prophet could die in the desert. They, therefore, asked her: “Who is
this Abu Dharr? Is he the companion of the Prophet?” She said “Yes”.
They said: “May our parents be his ransom! God has granted us a great
honour”. They then hurried to the place where Abu Dharr was lying. Abu
Dharr was feeling the pangs of death. He fixed his eyes on their faces
for some time trying to recognise their faces, and then said: “By God I
have not told a lie. By God if I had sufficient cloth for my and my
wife's shroud I would certainly have been shrouded in that cloth. I ask
you in the name of God that if anyone of you has been a ruler or a
government employee or a messenger or a chief at any time he should not
shroud me”.

Those present were bewildered to hear these words because almost all of
them had held these offices at one time or another. Suddenly a young man
from amongst the Ansar stepped forward and said: “O uncle! I shall
shroud you with this mantle which I had purchased with the money that I
had earned through hard work. I will shroud you with this cloth whose
thread was spun by my mother so that I might use it as ***Ehram***
(pilgrim’s garb)”.

He said to the young man: “Shroud me with these pieces of cloth, for
they are pure”. Now he was happy and satisfied. Then he cast a glance at
them again and passed away peacefully. Then the dark and thick clouds
covered the sky. Strong and severe winds began to blow and the desert
sand sprang up and darkened the atmosphere. It might be said that the
desert of Rabazah got converted into a roaring ocean.

The Ansari young man stood by the grave of Abu Dharr and prayed in these
words (The historians have attributed them to Malik Ashtar): “O God!
This Abu Dharr is one of the companions of Your Prophet. He worshipped
You amongst the worshippers. He performed jihad against the
idol-worshippers. He did not alter any Sunnah (practice) of the Prophet
nor did he tamper with any law. He saw bad and indecent things being
done and expressed his disgust at them with his heart and tongue. As a
result of this people oppressed and insulted him and turned him out of
his house. They deprived him of his rights and humiliated him and
eventually he passed away in a helpless condition. May God break the
feet of the person who deprived him (of the amenities of life) and
banished him from the sacred city of Madina to which he had migrated”.

All those who were present said “Amen!” very sincerely. Blessed be Abu
Dharr who rose and endeavoured, to establish truth till he breathed his
last. He had faith in the greatness of man and his rights. He was a
magnanimous and kind man. He was never afraid of death, nor was he never
enamoured by life.

The tragic events of Abu Dharr and his wife and children stirred the
blood of the people and every one of them sympathised with the oppressed
family. While many other actions of Uthman had raised the people against
him this one incident added to their resentment against him and Bani
Umayyah. It was considered to be a very wicked policy that anyone who
objected to nepotism and family bias should be treated savagely as was
done in the case of Abdullah bin Mas\`ud, Ammar Yasir and Abu Dharr.
They were insulted and beaten and their pensions and stipends were
stopped.

On the contrary, Bani Umayyah were showered with all the benefits,
wealth, and ranks. Uthman bestowed honours on them and gave them
enormous wealth, although it was necessary for him that he should have
ousted them from important positions on account of their nefarious
activities.

Another action of Uthman which aroused the anger of the people was his
maltreatment of the persons who went to him to complain against Walid
bin \`Uqba. The details of this incident are as follows:

Uthman dismissed Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas from the governorship of Kufa and
replaced him by Walid bin \`Uqba, who was Uthman's brother from the side
of his mother. The people of Kufa were very much displeased on account
of this appointment. It is said that when Walid arrived in Kufa and
passed by the house of Umar ibn Zararah Nakh\`i Umar stood up and said:
“O Bani Asad! Uthman has treated us very badly. Was it just on his part
to remove from amongst us Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas, who is a mild and
well-behaved person, and to oppoint in his place his brother Walid who
is an idiot, a madman and an old debauchee. After the appointment of
Walid it was commonly said by the people of Kufa that Uthman had
humiliated the followers of Prophet Muhammad and had tried to honour his
brother.

Many complaints were lodged with Uthman against Walid but he did not
remove him from the governship, although most of the complainants were
the companions of the Prophet. Uthman's conduct in respect of Walid was
the same as it was with regard to his kinsfolk. Just as he did not
accept any suggestions, or entertained any complaint against his near
relations, he never paid any heed to the complaints against Walid as
well.

Allama Bin Abd Rabbih quotes Sa\`id bin Musayyab in his book entitled
***\`Iqd al-Farid*** as saying that the companions of the Prophet
disliked the caliphate of Uthman very much because most of the officers
appointed by him belonged to Bani Umayyah and they did things which were
abhorred by the companions. Complaints were lodged against these
officers with Uthman but he did not remove those officers.

The poet Hati'ah says about Walid:

“Hati'ah will give evidence on the Day of Judgment that Walid is
innocent”.  
 “When the prayers were finished he asked the people in a loud voice:
“If you say, I may increase it”.  
 “He wanted to make an increase upon something good. If the people had
agreed he would have led the dawn prayers which would have exceeded ten
***rak\`ats*** (units)”.  
 “But O Abu Wahab, the people refused to agree. If they had accepted
your suggestion you would have combined ***Shaf\`*** with ***Witr”***.  
 “You moved on, but the people held your bridle. If they had released it
you would have walked on and on”.

A number of men came from Kufa and complained to Uthman against Walid.
Uthman, however, rebuked and threatened them instead of paying any heed
to their complaints and flogged those who gave evidence against his
malpractices, although their only offence was that they brought the evil
deeds of Walid to the notice of Uthman.

The most severe treatment meted out by Bani Umayyah to their opponents
or to those whom they considered to be in the category of their
opponents (because they desired that the masses should have a right in
caliphate, and it should not become property of Bani Umayyah) was seen
in their treatment with Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and the Egyptians who were
going to Egypt. As this incident has a very close connection with the
murder of Uthman we shall discuss it in detail in the following chapter.

[^1]: In order to make the bitterness of advice palatable Imam Ali spoke
at the outset in such a way that instead of getting irritated Uthman
should feel his duties and responsibilities. Ali wanted to draw his
attention towards his obligations, and with that purpose in view he
mentioned his (Uthman's) companionship of the Prophet as well as his
importance and proximity to the Prophet on account of kinship. Otherwise
this was evidently no occasion to praise him and these words should not
be treated to be a panegyric ignoring the latter part of the remarks of
Ali. The opening words simply go to show that whatever Uthman did was
done by him intentionally. It was not that he committed unintentional
mistakes, which might be overlooked. If it be a virtue that even after
remaining in the companionship of the Prophet and knowing all the rules
and regulations of Islam a man should act in such a way that the entire
world of Islam should begin to cry on account of his oppression, these
remarks may be treated to be a praise. If it is not a merit, then its
being mentioned cannot be termed as praise. In fact the words that have
been used as praise are a proof of the seriousness of his offences. An
offence committed intentionally is much more serious than the one
committed inadvertently. It is said that Uthman is entitled to great
honour in the capacity of the son-in-law of the Prophet as the Prophet
married to him, his two daughters named Ruqayya and Umm Kulthum one
after the other. Before considering these matrimonial alliances a source
of honour, however, the nature of this son-in-lawship should be looked
into. History tells us that Uthman did not enjoy precedence in the
matter. Ruqayya and Umm Kulthum were previously married to Atba and
Ateeba, the son of Abu Lahab. In spite of this these two persons were
not treated to be entitled to any honour or respect even before the
advent of Islam. In the circumstances how can this relationship be
treated to be a source of honour for Uthman without taking into account
his personal qualities? Furthermore, it is also not an established fact
that the two ladies were the real daughters of the Prophet. There are
some who do not admit them to be his real daughters but say that they
were the daughters of lady Khadijah's sister named Hala or her own
daughters from her former husband. Alkuti (died 352 A.H.) says: “A short
time after lady Khadijah getting married to the Prophet her sister Hala
died and left behind two daughters named Ruqayyah and Umm Kulthum. They
were brought up by Khadijah and the Prophet. It was customary before the
advent of Islam that if an orphan was brought up by someone it was
called his son or daughter”. (Kitab al-Istighatha, p.69). “Before
marrying the Prophet lady Khadija was married to Abi Hala bin Malik and
had one son named Hind and one daughter named Zainab from him. Earlier
than that she was married to \`Atiq bin \`Aa'ez and had one son and one
daughter from him”. (Seerah lbn Hisham, Vol.4, p.293). This shows that
lady Khadijah had two daughters before she married the Prophet. As
mentioned above, according to the custom then prevailing, they were to
be called the Prophet's daughters and their husband was to be called his
son-in-law. However, his position as son-in-law would be commensurate
with the position of the daughters. Hence, before treating these
marriages to be a source of honour the actual position of the daughters
(i.e. their real parentage) must be kept in view.


