Facts about Uthman's murder
===========================

Eleven years and many months passed. The resentment of the people
against the policies of Uthman went on increasing day after day. The
citizens of all Islamic territories were deadly against Uthman, so much
so that there was tension all round. The thing which frightened the
Muslims most was that during Uthman's rule all the ways and practices
prevalent in the days of the Prophet and Abu Bakr and Umar which they
liked most, were made topsy-turvy and nothing of the past period
remained intact.

They were used to see that the caliph protected their rights and
promoted their interests. As and when the governors and the officers
oppressed someone or mis- behaved, the caliph dismissed them and
redressed the grievances of the people. However, as soon as Uthman
became caliph he ignored the rules and regulations based on justice, and
founded his government on the policy of nepotism, which the people had
never previously seen, and which they could not tolerate.

The thing which disgusted the people most was that Uthman's relatives
usurped their rights and became richer day by day and the common man was
deprived even of the necessities of life. They also resented the
treatment meted out by the caliph to their deputations which approached
him to complain against the governors and other officers.

The people were also very much annoyed on account of the insults and
humiliation to which the distinguished companions of the Prophet like
Abu Dharr, Ammar, and Ibn Mas\`ud, were subjected. They also disliked
his policy of removing reliable and popular governors and officers and
replacing them by the persons who were unjust and oppressive.

The pious Muslims did not also like that the rulers should oppress the
***Zimmis***, because, after all, they too were human beings. They did
not wish that the society should be poisoned with discrimination and
egotism, and incompetent persons should be given preference over honest
and competent ones.

During the last days of the caliphate of Uthman the people became so
impatient that they revolted against him. This was quite natural because
the seeds of revolt were present in his own policies. It is said that
one day Uthman chanced to pass by the house of a man named Jabala bin
Amr Sa\`di. Jabala was sitting amongst the people of his tribe and held
a chain in his hand. Uthman saluted them and those present replied to
his salutation, with the exception of Jabala. He said to his tribesmen:
“Why have you replied to the salutation of a man who has done such and
such thing”. Then he addressed Uthman saying: “I swear by God that
unless you turn away your wicked favourites like Marwan, Ibn Aamir and
Abi bin Sarah, I will put this chain round your neck”.

Allama Ibn Abi'l Hadid says that the people had become so daring that
one day when Uthman was addressing the people holding in his hand the
stick which was held by Prophet and Abu Bakr and Umar while delivering
sermons, a person named Jehjah Ghifari snatched the stick from his hand,
pressed it on his knee and broke it.

In the beginning the people did not pick up enough courage to misbehave
towards Uthman. However, when the malpractices of Marwan and others
continued to increase and Uthman, instead of restraining them from their
evil deeds showed indulgence to them the disturbances and rebellion also
became widespread. Till then only the people individually opposed and
criticized Uthman and only one or two persons misbehaved towards him.
However, as time passed on the entire Muslim nation became his enemy.
The people of Madina wrote letters to the Muslims of other cities on
these lines: “If you are desirous of undertaking jihad you should come
here, because the religion of Muhammad is being made corrupt by your
caliph. Come and remove him from the caliphate”.

The residents of all the cities turned against Uthman. By the year
35A.H. the events took such a turn that the inhabitants of various
cities wrote letters to one another suggesting that something should be
done to get rid of Bani Umayyah and Uthman and all his governors and
officers should be removed from their offices. The news about these
activities reached Uthman also. He wrote letters to the residents of
different cities and tried to reconcile them.

Then he called his governors and senior officers and held consultations
with them. Some of them suggested to Uthman that he should rule justly
and adopt the policies of Abu Bakr and Umar. Others minced their words
and did not give any clear-cut advice. One of those belonging to the
latter group was Mu\`awiya ibn Abi Sufyan. There were still others who
were not fit to tender any sincere advice because their suggestions were
always based on selfishness. One such person was Sa\`id bin Aas who said
that the state of affairs then prevailing was only transitory and the
only remedy for them is the unsheathing of the sword.

The conference ended without taking any unanimous decision to tackle
with the situation. The reason for this was that all the governors and
officers of Uthman liked his policy through which they could encroach
upon the people's rights and make as much money as they could. They did
not, therefore, give any sincere advice.

There were some amongst them however, who thought that their interests
would be best served if they could get rid of Uthman and were,
therefore, endeavouring secretly, and some of them even openly, to
achive this end. Reasons for this attitude of the persons concerned will
be explained later. And the most important thing about the conference
was that Marwan was keeping a very close watch on all the participants.
Hence, even if some of them had made good suggestions they would have
been of no use because the last word on the subject was to be that of
Marwan. Uthman always acted on his advice.

Eventually rebellion broke out. The Muslims of all the countries and
provinces had turned against Uthman's administration, policy, and
caliphate, which were virtually in the hands of Marwan and his
associates.

In the meantime some persons from Egypt approached Uthman to complain
against lbn Abi Sarah, the Governor of Egypt. Uthman heard them
attentively, reproached Ibn Abi Sarah for his malpractices and promised
those people that their grievances would be redressed. Then he wrote a
letter to Ibn Abi Sarah asking him to mend his ways and threatened him
that if he disobeyed his orders he would be punished. Marwan did not
like these developments. When the complainants came out of the caliph's
palace he too came out and rebuked them. Then he insisted that the
caliph should ignore the promises made by him to those persons and
should not take any notice of their complaints.

The Egyptians returned with the letter and handed it over to Ibn Abi
Sarah. He was very much displeased on reading it and declined to obey
the caliph's orders. He became so furious that he killed one of the
members of the deputation. This arrogance of Ibn Abi Sarah was due to
the fact that he was the foster-brother of Uthman and it was on account
of this relationship that he had appointed him the Governor of Egypt.

The people of Egypt resented the treatment meted out to them by lbn Abi
Sarah. They decided to send another deputation to Madina consisting of
one thousand persons. They stayed in the masjid of the Prophet and
proclaimed that they would not interfere with those who remained within
doors and did not take up arms against them. Thereafter some of their
distinguished persons met the companions of the Prophet. They explained
to them the atrocities committed by Ibn Abi Sarah including the murder
of an innocent person whose only offence was that he was a member of the
deputation which had waited on Uthman earlier. Some companions saw
Uthman and discussed with him the state of affairs prevailing in Egypt.

Thereafter many other persons headed by Ali met Uthman in this behalf.
They spoke to him in a very rational and logical manner and said: “These
people only want that you should remove Ibn Abi Sarah from governorship
and appoint some other person in his place. Earlier also they had
complained about the murder of an innocent person. You should remove Ibn
Abi Sarah from office and also take a decision on their complaint. If
lbn Abi Sarah proves to be guilty you should punish him and thus provide
justice to these people”.

Uthman swore before the people and assured them that he would try his
best for the good of the people. He also asked them to suggest the name
of a person who might be appointed Governor of Egypt in the place of Ibn
Abi Sarah. The Egyptians after due deliberations suggested the name of
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr. Uthman appointed him as governor and sent with
him a party consisting of the Muhajirs and the Ansar to investigate the
malpractices of lbn Abi Sarah.

Three days after their departure from Madina Muhammad bin Abi Bakr and
his companions saw on the way an Ethiopian slave who was driving his
camel hastily towards Egypt. These people felt surprised. They therefore
stopped him and enquired of him why he was running so fast and what was
the purpose of his journey. After some questioning he said: “I am the
slave of the Commander of the Faithful Uthman and have been sent to go
and see the Governor of Egypt”. The people said to him: “The Governor of
Egypt is here with us”. The slave replied: “I don't mean him”. When
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr was informed of the matter he called for the slave
and asked him as to who he was. He said: “I am a slave of the Commander
of the Faithful”. Then contradicting himself he said: “No, no. I am a
slave of Marwan”. He thus went on saying contradictory things. Then
Muhammad asked him: “Where are you going?” He replied: “I am going to
Egypt to see the governor”. “What for?” asked Muhammad. The slave
replied: “I have to convey a message to him”.

Upon Muhammad asking the slave whether he was carrying a letter he
replied in the negative. Thereupon Muhammad ordered his person to be
searched. After a very minute search a letter was found with him which
was addressed by Uthman to Abdullah lbn Abi Sarah. Muhammad opened the
letter in the presence of the Muhajirs and the Ansar who were
accompanying him. It read as follows: “When Muhammad son of Abu Bakr and
other such and such persons arrive in Egypt you should kill them on one
pretext or another. Consider the letter which Muhammad is bringing to
you as cancelled and continue to occupy your office until further
orders. Imprison any person who approaches you with a complaint and then
await instructions from me”.

When the letter was read out all those present were bewildered and
complete silence prevailed. No one could imagine that the caliph could
make such a wicked plan to take the lives of his subjects including the
Muhajirs and the Ansar.

Muhammad bin Abi Bakr closed the envelope again and affixed on it the
seals of the Muhajirs and the Ansar. The party then decided to return to
Madina and to show the letter to the companions of the Prophet. When the
letter was read out in Madina before the companions, including Imam Ali
all of them were deeply grieved. This conspiracy against the Muslims and
Islam which was unprecedented made them furious.

The wrath of the people who were already annoyed on account of the
treatment meted out to Abu Dharr, Ammar Yasir, etc. knew no bounds. A
deputation headed by Ali which included Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas and Ammar
Yasir was formed and they went to see Uthman. They also took with them
the letter, the slave and the camel on which he was mounted. The
following conversation took place between Ali and Uthman:

Ali: Is this your slave?  
 Uthman: Yes  
 Ali: Is this camel also yours?  
 Uthman: Yes  
 Ali: Is the seal affixed on the letter also yours?  
 Uthman: Yes

Ali: Then does it mean that this letter was sent by you?  
 Uthman: No. I swear by God that I neither wrote this letter myself nor
ordered anyone else to write it, nor sent this slave to Egypt.

The companions got the impression that Uthman was telling the truth. On
further scrutiny they realized that the letter was in the hand-writing
of Marwan. They, therefore, asked Uthman to call Marwan before them so
that they might inquire into the matter, and ask him as to why he wrote
the letter. Uthman declined to summon Marwan. Although Marwan was then
present with him in the capital he did not have the moral courage to
appear before those persons, admit his fault, and thus prove the
innocence of Uthman.

The companions, therefore, returned to their house in consternation.
They believed that Uthman could not swear falsely, but some of them said
that they would consider him to be innocent only when he handed over
Marwan to them so that they might question him and investigate the
matter, and find out the real facts about the letter. They also said
that if the letter had been written by Uthman they would depose him, but
if it had been written at his behest by Marwan they would ponder over
the matter and decide as to how Marwan should be dealt with. However,
Uthman did not agree to surrender Marwan. The insurgents now began
insisting all the more vehemently that Marwan should be handed over to
them, so that they might question him and inquire into his activities.
Uthman, however, flatly refused to agree to this demand.

Thereafter many developments which are recorded in the books of history
took place. Imam Ali tried his level best to bring about reconciliation
between the insurgents and Uthman so that bloodshed might be avoided. He
saw Uthman again and suggested to him that he should come before the
public and deliver a speech which should be heard by all, and in that
speech he should confirm the promises made by him with the people so
that they might be satisfied. He also said to Uthman: “I swear by God
that all the Islamic territories have turned against you. I am afraid
the people of Kufa and Basra may also come to Madina like the Egyptians
and you may be obliged to ask me to cool them down”.

Uthman came out of his house and delivered a speech before the
gathering. He expressed his regret for his past lapses and promised that
such things would not happen in future. He also promised that their
demands would be met and Marwan and his associates would be cast aside.

Uthman's speech had a salutary effect. While he was speaking tears
trickled from his eyes. Others also began to weep and their beards
became wet with tears. When he dismounted from the pulpit of the masjid
and went home, he saw Marwan, Sa\`id bin Aas, and some other members of
the Umayyad Family waiting for him. They had not been present when
Uthman was speaking but had become aware of what he had said. When
Uthman sat down Marwan asked him: “O my chief! Should I say something or
keep quiet?” Uthman said: “Say what you want to say”.

Marwan then said in a reproaching manner: “You have only encouraged
these people and done nothing else”. Uthman replied somewhat
regretfully: “I have said what I have said. I cannot take back my
words”. Marwan said: “The people are crowded before the gate of your
house like a mountain and this is so because you have encouraged them.
If one of them complains of oppression the other demands the dismissal
of a governor. You have been very cruel to your caliphate. It would have
been better for you if you had remained patient and quiet”.

Uthman said: “I feel ashamed of going back on my words. You may,
however, go and talk to them”.

Having got the permission Marwan came at the gate of the house and said
to those who were gathered there: “What is all this crowd? It appears
that you have come to plunder the house. May your faces be blackened!
Have you come to wrest the government from us? By God, if you intend
doing harm to us we shall deal with you in a manner that you will never
forget. Go to your houses. We cannot tolerate interference with our
authority by anyone”.

The people went away in despair, abusing and threatening the rulers.
Some one informed Ali about the new development. As Uthman had ignored
his suggestion and acted on the advice of Marwan, Ali could very well
refrain from going to Uthman again and tendering him any advice.
However, pity for the aged caliph, heart-felt desire for reconciliation
among the Muslims, and a slight hope that Uthman might follow the path
of prudence compelled him to advise Uthman once again.

When night fell and Uthman came to see Ali for consultations on the
suggesttion of his wife Na\`ela, Ali said to him: “After making a speech
from the Prophet's pulpit you went home and then Marwan came out and
abused the people. Thereafter what is left to be done and what can I do
for you?”

Uthman cursed himself much for his lapse. Ali then said to him: “I swear
by God that I have endeavoured more than anyone else to keep the people
away from you. However, whenever I suggest to you something which I hope
will please you Marwan intervenes. And unfortunately you accept what he
says and ignore what I suggest”. Ali was quite correct in saying this
because this time also Marwan had spoiled the case.

The insurgents began insisting on their demands once again. They wanted
the fulfilment of all the promises made with them. They also demanded
that Marwan, who was the root-cause of all the mischief, should be
surrendered to them so that they might take revenge on him. However,
Uthman's attitude hardened and he sternly refused to hand over Marwan to
them. The insurgents also became adamant. The disturbance and rebellion
became acute and the insurgents besieged the house of Uthman.

In fact the insurgents did not want to harm Uthman. All they desired was
that he should repent for his lapses and abdicate. This is proved by the
fact that a man named Nayyar bin Ayaz who was one of the companions of
the Prophet took his place in the first row of the insurgents and said
to Uthman loudly: “You should abdicate and I assure you that you will
remain unhurt”. While he was saying this Kathir bin Salat Kandi, who was
a supporter of Uthman and was in his house at that time shot an arrow
and killed Nayyar bin Ayaz. The insurgents cried: “Hand over the
murderer of Ibn Ayaz to us”. Uthman replied: “How can I surrender to you
a man who is defending me?”

The insurgents attacked the gate of the house which was closed
immediately. They then put it on fire and their archers began to shower
arrows on the caliph's palace.

Eventually Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr and his two companions entered the
house from the side of the house of Muhammad ibn Abi Khurram Ansari.
When they reached near him they found his wife Na\`ela with him. The two
companions of Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr attacked him with a sharp weapon and
put him to death. [^1] Then they escaped through the way they had
entered the house. Na\`ela cried: “The people have assassinated the
Commander of the Faithful!”

Uthman met his death in this manner. The people who were responsible for
his murder were of two kinds. To one group belonged those who became
furious for the sake of truth. They asked Uthman to repent of his lapses
and when he declined to do so they besieged his house and killed him.
Amongst them were included the people of the Hijaz, Egypt and Iraq and
all the Islamic cities. To the second group belonged those who were mad
after the war booty. With them there was a leader who was obeyed and
these people left Uthman in the lurch. We have already written about the
persons belonging to the first group. As regards the second group we
shall speak about them in the chapter entitled. “The greatest
conspiracy” because these people are closely concerned with the
treatment which was meted out to Ali and the fraud and deception to
which he was subjected.

[^1]: Although it is said that Ali tried to save Uthman and sent his two
sons Hasan and Husayn to guard the gate of his house but the factual
position is that Ali was not present in Madina when Uthman was killed
and the assertions made in this behalf are not correct. Refuting a
similar narration Allama Haithmi says: “It is quite clear that this
narration is not authentic. Ali was not present in Madina either when
Uthman's house was besieged or when he was killed. (Majma\` al-Zawaid,
Vol.7, p.63). Uthman had himself asked Ali to go to his estate at
Yanb\`u so that people might not suggest his name for the caliphate.
Such a request had already been made many times as has been mentioned by
Ali in Nahj al-Balaghah: “Uthman treats me like a camel which carries
water to and fro. At times he tells me that I should go to Yanb\`u. When
I go there he calls me back to solve some problems. And when I have
relieved him of his difficulties he again asks me to go back to
Yanb\`u”.


