A great conspiracy
==================

Persons Responsible for the Assassination of Uthman
---------------------------------------------------

We have explained fully in the foregoing pages that people developed
hatred in their hearts against the policies of Uthman in Madina as well
as in other Islamic territories. Originally the people became
dissatisfied at heart, but later began complaining and thereafter the
complaints assumed the shape of disobedience which ended in the siege of
the house of Uthman and his murder. We have also mentioned that those
who criticized Uthman's policies and gave him good and useful advice
were not ordinary persons but distinguished companions of the Prophet.

However, instead of Uthman abandoning his wrong policies and nepotism he
and his kinsmen subjected the companions to harassment and torture and
severe punishment. If these companions criticized the methods and
policies of Uthman it was not due to their desire for any personal gain
but on account of their love for justice and faith. They were the pick
of the bunch. They knew fully well their responsibilities, which
resembled those of the Prophets.

If Ali criticized Uthman's policy of granting big estates to his
relatives without any justification it was not because he himself wanted
any estate. And if he objected to his financial policies it was not
because he was himself inclined to gain wealth. Everyone knows that he
never cared for wealth. If he found fault with the nepotism of Uthman
and his Umayyad mentality it was not because he wanted the welfare and
superiority of his own family. It is impossible even to imagine that Ali
could be prompted by such motives.

Ali was a pillar of Islam, the cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet and
the father of his dear grandsons. It was he who uttered this sentence:
“The worth and value of every person is judged by his actions. One whose
actions are better will enjoy more worth and dignity”. This sentence of
his demolished the edifice of family and tribal dignity which one
inherits.

The opposition to and hatred against Uthman's policies by Ammar and Abu
Dharr was based on the same reasons on which Ali's opposition was based.
Hence, their opposiuon did not mean that it should have culminated in
Uthman's death. What they desired was that he should abandon Umayyad
mentality and nepotism and equity and justice should prevail. None of
them wished him to be killed.

The Islamic State during the days of Uthman had covered vast areas and
it was natural that in such a big State opposition of another kind
should also take place. This opposition was from those persons who
coveted power and authority and more gains, and wanted to expand the
area of their influence. They opposed Uthman with the hope that if he
was removed from office and was succeeded by another person more
favourable to them, their dignity and influence would increase.
Opposition of this type takes place in every region and in every age.
The associates of every ruler change their attitude from time to time to
achieve their personal ends.

The opponents of this kind during the time of Uthman were not all alike.
His favourites who were accumulating wealth as a consequence of the
gifts bestowed by him were opposed to him, and so also were those who
were deprived of such bounties. And similar was the case with his
relatives, officers and supporters, whom he had permitted not only to
control the people but himself as well. These people were his real
murderers.

We have already explained in the foregoing pages how Uthman provided the
means of his own death and how Marwan and his favourites turned the
Islamic world against him by their nefarious activities.

The reality was understood very clearly by those persons who had close
connections with Uthman. One of them was Muhammad bin Muslimah. When he
was about to die someone said: “Uthman has been killed”. Thereupon he
(Muslimah) said: “Uthman himself has been responsible for his death”.
Uthman's wife Na\`ela said to Marwan and other favourites of her
husband: “I swear by God that you will kill Uthman and make his children
orphans”. And addressing Uthman she said: “If you act on Marwan's advice
he will kill you”.

As regards the Umayyad governors, officers, and his supporters, whom
Uthman had allowed to subjugate the people, and some of whom availed of
his bounties and others, who were dissatisfied with him, we shall
discuss them one by one soon, because a large number of these people
hatched a great conspiracy against Ali- a conspiracy which was
unprecedented in the East.

The conspiracy was engineered by those very persons who instigated the
people against Uthman and thus besmeared their own hands with his blood.
The conspiracy was that they accused Ali of the murder of Uthman. They
took away the blood-stained shirt of Uthman and said that they wanted to
avenge Uthman's murder.

Mu\`awiya who ostensibly wanted to avenge the murder of Uthman was in
reality keen to strengthen his own rule as well as that of his
descendants. His efforts were directed towards strengthening his rule in
Syria in the first instance. Then he wanted to expand his kingdom by
grabbing other countries and eventually to hecome the despotic ruler of
all the Islamic territories. He did not pay any heed to Uthman either
during his lifetime or after his death. All that he wanted was that
Uthman might make him powerful day after day so that he might eventually
achieve his final goal. Thus he desired that Uthman should allow him
maximum freedom of action and should become a shield for him, so that he
might achieve his objectives.

Even when Uthman was killed Mu\`awiya did not care for his death. He
only wanted to avail of the opportunity to claim to be the caliph's
heir, and to get rid of the new caliph. What did he do with the
murderers of Uthman when he himself became the sole ruler of the Islamic
territories? Had he really been grieved on account of the murder of
Uthman he could then locate and kill every one of his murderers.
However, he completely forgot Uthman's murder and revenging him,
although it was on this very pretext that he had revolted against the
new caliph and thus became the cause of bloodshed of hundreds of
thousands of the Muslims.

Furthermore, he could send a large army from Syria to defend Uthman when
his house had been besieged by the insurgents. He was the permanent
Governor of Syria and Uthman had allowed him maximum freedom. He could
do what he liked and there was none who could call him to account. Thus
he could send a large Syrian army to Madina before as well as after the
house of Uthman was besieged. In fact he could also advise Uthman not to
be adamant to public opinion. However, he did not do any of these
things, because he was keen to grab the caliphate after Uthman and could
not think of anything else.

From the very day on which Uthman called a conference of his confidants,
which was also attended by Mu\`awiya, and which ended without taking any
decision, Mu\`awiya decided finally to seize the caliphate, because he
became sure that Uthman would be killed. As Syria was in his hands and
the inhabitants of that region were obedient to him, he realized that if
Uthman was killed he would acquire the best weapon (viz. vengeance of
the murder of Uthman) to achieve his purpose.

He also knew that amongst the governors of Uthman none was as powerful
and as competent to mobilize an army by threatening the elders and
chiefs of the tribes as he himself was. Hence, on that very day he
decided to become the caliph one day and became active towards achieving
his goal. He himself said once: “None is as powerful and as competent to
rule as I am. Umar appointed me as governor and was also satisfied with
my conduct”.

Mu\`awiya was sure of Uthman's murder and he also possessed sufficient
power in Syria to seize the caliphate.

Allama Ya\`qubi writes that when the insurgents tightened the siege of
Uthman's house, he wrote a letter to Mu\`awiya asking him to come to his
help. Mu\`awiya left Damascus with a large army, but when he reached the
Syrian border he left the army there, saying that he would in the first
instance meet the Commander of the Faithful himself to assess the
situation. He then reached Madina and met Uthman. The latter asked him
as to where his army was. He said in reply: “I have left the army behind
because, in the first instance, I wanted to hold consultations with you.
I shall now return and shall meet you again along with the army”. Upon
this Uthman said: “O Mu\`awiya! That is not true. The fact is that you
want me to be murdered so that you may be in a position to claim that
you are entitled to avenge my blood. Go at once and bring the people to
help me”.

When quite some time had passed since the murder of Uthman, Mu\`awiya
came to Madina and visited Uthman's house. Uthman's daughter Ayesha then
remembered her father and began crying. Mu\`awiya consoled her and began
crying. He said: “Dear niece! The people have become obedient to me and
I have given them peace. I have displayed forbearance under which anger
was hidden and they showed obedience which had enmity and rancour under
it. Every man has a sword in his hand and he also knows who his
supporters are. If we deceive them they too will deceive us and it
cannot be said as to who will win. You should be satisfied that at
present you are called the daughter of the Commander of the Faithful
Uthman and niece of the Commander of the Faithful Mu\`awiya. If I rise
to take revenge on your behalf and consequently I am deprived of
government you will become an ordinary woman”.

Hence, when Mu\`awiya himself became the Commander of the Faithful and
consequently Uthman's daughter became the niece of the Commander of the
Faithful he ceased to think or talk about Uthman, although, so long as
the caliphate remained with Ali, Uthman's murder was the most burning
topic with him. Now the government was with Mu\`awiya and he had
acquired an opportunity to fulfil his father Abu Sufyan's wish which he
had expressed when Uthman had assumed the caliphate. Abu Sufyan had
said: “O children of Umayyah! Play with this government as children play
with a ball. I swear that I have always been desirous of this government
for you. Now it will go down to your children as inheritance”.

Evidently, after Mu\`awiya the caliphate was to go to Yazid and then to
other children of Bani Umayyah.

In the letters written by Ali to Mu\`awiya he has mentioned clearly that
when Uthman sought help from Mu\`awiya he did not accede to his request.
He neither came himself nor sent any army to defend Uthman. In a letter
to Mu\`awiya he says:

“Then you have mentioned the matter about me and Uthman. You are
entitled to get a reply in this behalf, because you are related to him.
Well, then tell me (correctly) as to who out of us two was more inimical
towards him and who provided means for his death? He who offered help
which was refused by Uthman, or he from whom he sought help and who
failed to help him and provided means of his death till death overtook
him in the manner in which it was destined for him”.

In another letter Ali writes: “You helped Uthman when helping him served
your own interests and refrained from helping him when Uthman was likely
to benefit”. (What is meant by Ali's above remarks is that Mu'awiya
stood in support of Uthman after his death, because he could collect
people in his own interest by raising the slogan of vengeance of
Uthman's murder but when Uthman was alive and his help could be
beneficial to him he withheld it. Uthman remained besieged and Mu\`awiya
did not allow his army to proceed to Madina to defend him).

Whatever has been said above about Bani Umayyah and their prominent
persons like Mu\`awiya and Marwan in connection with Uthman's murder can
also be said about other persons mentioned above. In fact the same
things can be said about the enemies of Ali and those who conspired
against him. Those persons were responsible for Uthman's murder and not
Ali. It is possible that there might be some persons who did not smear
their hands with Uthman's blood but it is an undeniable fact that they
were pleased when he met his death.

Amr ibn al-Aas, who had a great hand in hatching conspiracies against
Ali and slandering him, had instigated everyone he met to rise against
Uthman and had encouraged the people to kill him, because he had
dismissed him from the governorship of Egypt. He himself used to say:
“Not to talk of the dignitaries and the chiefs I instigated even the
herdsmen to rise against Uthman”.

When the disturbances broke out in Madina he went away to Palestine
where he had built a palace. One day while he was sitting in his palace
with his two sons named Muhammad and Abdullah a rider was seen coming
from the side of Madina. People made enquiries from him about Uthman and
he told them that he had been assassinated. Thereupon Amr ibn al-Aas
said: “I am Abdullah. When I scratch a wound I ensure that blood comes
out of it”! (He meant to say that he instigated the people to rise
against Uthman as a result of which he (Uthman) lost his life).

Talha bin Ubaidullah, who first took oath of allegiance to Ali, and then
fought against him on the pretext of avenging Uthman's murder was
another such person. He took an active part in inciting the people to
rise against Uthman. It has been narrated that Uthman sought assistance
from Ali against Talha a number of times and Ali always acceded to his
request. On one such occasion Ali went to Talha and saw that a large
number of insurgents were gathered round him. He felt that Talha had a
great hand in Uthman being besieged and he (Talha) was thinking of doing
away with him.

Ali reprimanded him and said: “O Talha! What treatment have you meted
out to Uthman?”He also endeavoured to restrain Talha from his activities
but he declined to act on Ali's advice. Ali then went to the Public
Treasury and desired that it might be opened. Keys were not, however,
available. The door of the treasury was then broken under his
instructions and he divided the entire money found in it, amongst those
whom Talha had collected to kill Uthman. When Uthman came to know about
it he was very happy and realized (although at a very late stage) that
none else was as sympathetic and sincere, and capable of solving the
problems of the Muslims, as Ali.

Then Talha came to Uthman and apalogized to him and said: “I repent
before God. I had decided to perform an act but God intervened”. Uthman
said: “You have not come as a repentant, but like one who has become
helpless. May God punish you!” (Tarikh al-Kamil, v.3, p.7. Tarikh
Tabari, v.6, p. 154. Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, v.2, p.297).

Tabari narrates that as soon as the insurgents besieged the house of
Uthman Talha began getting ready to become the caliph. He was certain
that after Uthman the people would choose him as the next caliph. The
first action taken by him was that he assumed control over the Public
Treasury, obtained its keys, and appointed his watchmen to guard it.

When the siege of his house became serious Uthman said, “God! Help me
against Talha. He has incited the people to revolt against me. I swear
by God that I hope, he will not attain to the caliphate and will lose
his life also”. This sentence uttered by Uthman shows that Talha wanted
to finish him and to become the caliph himself. Uthman had given freedom
to Talha to utilize the property of the Public Treasury in any manner he
liked, but he was a man who could not be satisfied with anything lesser
than the caliphate. Uthman used to utter this sentence time and again
during the last days of the siege of his house: “Woe betide Talha! I
gave him so much gold and now he is thirsty for my blood”.

Those who have recorded the events related to the siege of Uthman's
house have said that on the day on which Uthman was killed Talha had
veiled his face and was shooting arrows secretly towards Uthman. It has
also been related that when the besiegers could not find a way to enter
the house, Talha arranged their entry from an adjoining house belonging
to an Ansar and then they killed Uthman.

Tabari has narrated through Hakim bin Jabir that when Uthman's house had
been besieged Ali said to Talha: “I ask you for God's sake to save
Uthman from the people”. Talha replied: “By God this is not possible
until and unless Bani Umayyah liquidate the entire debt”. (Tarikh
Tabari, Vol.5, p.139).

After Uthman's assassination Ali used to say: “May God curse Ibn
Sa\`abah (Talha)! Uthman gave him so much and he (in return) behaved
towards him like this”.

A remark of Ali about Talha shows that he was the person who incited the
people most to revolt against Uthman and he was more keen than anyone
else to see Uthman killed. He says: “By God Talha hurriedly put forth a
demand for avenging the murder of Uthman lest revenge might be taken on
him, because he, too, was involved in the matter. None was more thirsty
for Uthman's blood than he. By ostensibly claiming revenge he tried to
mislead the people so that the reality might remain hidden and the
people might be involved in doubt”.

As regards Zubayr bin Awam it has been narrated that he did not do
anything to turn away the insurgents from Uthman, rather it is said that
his sympathies were with the insurgents. The policy adopted by him with
regard to Uthman shows that he too desired that he might be finished as
early as possible and he was very hopeful of becoming the next caliph.
He told Ali openly that he wanted the caliphate for himself. When Ali
asked him a few moments before the commencement of the Battle of the
Camel as to how he had come there he replied: “You have been the cause
of my arrival here. I do not consider you fit to be a caliph nor do I
consider anyone else to be more deserving for this office than myself”.

Every student of history knows how vehemently Ayesha instigated revolt
against Uthman. She often criticized him very severely and incited the
people to kill him. She was annoyed with him from the very day he
reduced her stipend and was always seeking an opportunity to harm him.
One day she heard him delivering a speech from the pulpit of the
prophet. She immediately took out a shirt of the prophet and showing it
to the people said with a loud voice: “O Muslims! The shirt of the
prophet has not yet worn out and Uthman has corrupted his ***Sunnah”.***

Ibn Abi'l Hadid says on the authority of his contemporary scholars that
Ayesha instigated every person she met to rise against Uthman. He
further says: “Ayesha took out a piece of the prophet's dress and
suspended it on a wall in her house. Whoever came to see her she said to
him: “The dress of the prophet has not yet worn out but Uthman has
polluted and ruined his ***Sunnah”.***

Balazari says: “Once Ibn Abbas chanced to meet Ayesha. That year Uthman
had appointed him as the Amir of Hajj. Ayesha said to him openly: “O Ibn
Abbas! God has given you intellect, wisdom and power of speech. Make the
people turn away from this rebel (Uthman)”.

Balazari has quoted a sentence of Ayesha which shows that she hated
Uthman more than anyone else can hate another human being. She said to
Marwan: “O Marwan! I wish that Uthman had been in one of my bags so that
I might have picked up that bag myself and drowned it into the sea”. She
used to say very often: “Kill Na\`athal. Na\`athal has become an
infidel”.

Ayesha so much wished Uthman's death that she began asking the people
openly to kill him. It was because of this that she was sure that after
Uthman's death Talha and not Ali would become the caliph. This is proved
by the fact that when the news of Uthman's assassination was
communicated to her at Mecca she said at once: “A curse upon Na\`athal!
Very good, O man with the fingers! Very good Abu Shabal! What a great
man you are, O my cousin! It appears as if I can see with my own eyes
his fingers and the people taking oath of allegiance to him”.

The man with the fingers means Talha. His fingers were cut off in the
Battle of Ohad and from that day onwards he was called the man with the
fingers.

When Talha's son Muhammad was questioned about the details of Uthman's
murder he accused his father as well as Ayesha of being involved in it.
The author of Al-Badr wa al-Tarikh says: “The greatest enemies of Uthman
were Talha, Zubayr and Ayesha”.

There were many other dignitaries who instigated revolt against Uthman
and thus participated in his murder. For instance when Abdur Rahman bin
Awf whose wealth had increased many times during the period of Uthman
fell ill, and the people went to enquire about his health he said to
them: “Do away with Uthman before he assumes strength”. Among the
enemies of Islam who instigated the people to rise against Uthman were
also included many persons who later fought against Ali, and demanded
revenge on him for the murder of Uthman.

The author of ***\`Halif Makhzum'*** writes in his book: “Those of the
Quraysh who were Uthman's fell enemies became his supporters after his
death, and possibly the role of Ayesha in this tragedy is a clear
example of being more dreadfully contradictory as compared with that of
the greedy Qurayshites. She openly instigated the people to kill Uthman
because she hoped that the government would then return to the Family of
Tayim (Ayesha's family) and her cousin Talha would become the caliph.

Uthman was killed by Talba, Zubayr and Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas. He was
killed by Mu\`awiya and his party through their wealth and conspiracies.
They left him in the lurch. He was killed by Marwan and his descendants
and the friends of Bani Mu\`iz, on account of their egotism, and their
failing to give any importance to Uthman's affairs.

However, when Uthman was killed and the Muslims selected Ali unanimously
as the new caliph all these persons suddenly changed their attitude. The
same Uthman who was called a tyrant and an infidel during his lifetime
begun to be called by them an oppressed person and a martyr after his
death”.

It will not be out of place to mention here the sentences which were
uttered by Sa\`id bin Aas and Mughayrah bin Sho\`ba when they met Ayesha
and her army at Khaybar while she was going from Mecca to Basra to fight
against the army of Ali. What they said shows clearly that Talha and
Zubayr were fully responsible for Uthman's murder. On that occasion
Sa\`id met Ayesha and the following coversation took place between them:

Sa\`id: O Mother of the Faithful! Where are you going?  
 Ayesha: I am going to Basra.  
 Sa\`id: What for?  
 Ayesha: To take revenge on the murderers of Uthman.  
 Sa\`id: The murderers of Uthman are already with you. Why don't you
kill them?

Then Sa\`id addressed Marwan and they conversed as follows:  
 Sa\`id: Where are you going?  
 Marwan: I am going to Basra.  
 Sa\`id: What will you do there? Marwan: I shall take revenge on the
murderers of Uthman.

Sa\`id: The murderers of Uthman are already with you.  
 He has been killed by Talha and Zubayr. They coveted the caliphate
themselves. However, when they were vanquished (i.e. when people took
the allegiance to Ali) they said: “We shall wash away blood with blood
and atone for our sins with repentance”.

Then Mughayrah addressed the people thus: “If you have come to accompany
the Mother of the Faithful it will be better for you if you return along
with her. And if your anger is on account of Uthman's murder, you should
know that these very chiefs of yours have killed Uthman.  
 And if you are annoyed with Ali for some cause let me know what that
cause is. I ask you for God's sake not to create two disturbances in one
year”. (Al-Imamat wa al-Siyasah, Vol.1, p.58).

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

This was the method and the conduct of the persons who instigated revolt
against Uthman and caused his death. And when Uthman was murdered they
procured his shirt and rose to claim revenge on Ali. As regards Ali we
have already explained his position during the episode, described
earlier.

As we have stated above Uthman was pessimistic about Ali. Marwan advised
Uthman time and again to kill Ali and other companions as soon as an
opportunity was found. His object was that these magnanimous persons who
watched and criticized the nefarious activities of Bani Umayyah should
depart from the scene so that they (i.e. Bani Umayyah) might do what
they liked and there should be none to find fault with them. However,
Ali was too magnanimous and noble-minded a person to entertain personal
grudge in his mind for anyone.

Ali was much above those petty considerations, that he should have
entertained grudge against Uthman on account of his not consulting him,
and should have become happy if Uthman favoured him. Distance from
Uthman and his proximity were immaterial to him. The things for which
Imam Ali was anxious were Islam and public welfare. He always avoided
contention, unless it was necessary to resort to it to get rid of
tyranny and establish equity and justice.

Hence, whenever it was possible for Ali to give useful advice to Uthman
he did not withhold his sincere advice, even though it might have been
unpleasant to Uthman's favourites. Nor did he show laxity in helping
Uthman, turning away his enemies from him and saving him from the jaws
of death. People approached Ali many times with the request that he
might assume the caliphate himself but he turned down their request very
sternly and dismissed them from his presence. He restrained people many
times from creating disturbance, and saved Uthman from his own
favourites and associates who were themselves the root-cause of all the
troubles.

We have already explained in the foregoing pages how Ali assisted Uthman
when the latter's house had been besieged by the insurgents although
Ali's action must have displeased the advisers and associates of Uthman.

It was Ali's ardent wish that the gulf of differences between the
insurgents and Uthman should not widen and no untoward incident, which
might harm the Muslims should take place. He sincerely believed that
bloodshed was not the only remedy for improving the conditions. They
could achieve their purpose without resorting to bloodshed.

It is not possible to imagine how magnanimous and noble-minded Ali was.
When Uthman's house had been besieged by the insurgents he at times
asked Ali to leave Madina and after his departure he felt ashamed and
sent a messenger to call him back. Ali complied with his instruc- tions
every time and never asked him why he wanted him to leave Madina and why
he wanted him to come back. It was Ali's spiritual loftiness that he was
always kind to others.

Uthman asked Ali to go away from Madina so that he might not be present
before his devotees, and they might not hear his name. He called him
back so that he might advise the insurgents and save him from them. This
happened a number of times Once when Ibn Abbas was deputed to convey the
caliph's message to Ali to leave Madina Ali said: “O Ibn Abbas! Uthman
wants to make me a camel which carries water to and fro. He first asked
me to leave Madina, and then he asked me to come back. And now he has
sent a message that I should go away from here. By God I have defended
him so much that I fear I may be treated to be a sinner”.

Muhammad bin Hanafiya reports him to have said: “If Uthman orders me to
go away I shall obey him”. He said this only to protect Islam and to
eliminate the causes of mischief.

The following sentence appearing in a letter written by Imam Ali to
Mu\`awiya fully depicts his innocence as regards Uthman's murder. “You
want to take revenge on me for something in which neither my hands nor
my tongue are involved. I gave him suggestions and showed him the right
path. If that is my offence then it often happens that one is blamed
unjustly for the sins which have not been committed by him”.

Ali helped Uthman during his lifetime and was very sympathetic to him
even after his death. However, when Uthman was killed some persons
accused Ali unjustly of having taken part in his murder. Muhammad bin
Sirin has remarked very correctly when he says: “I am not aware whether
anyone accused Ali of having participated in the murder of Uthman till
the oath of allegiance was taken to him. Such a blame was levelled
against him when the oath had been taken”.


