Revolt against Ali
==================

Silence prevailed in Madina for many days after the assassination of
Uthman. The residents of Madina, the Muhajirs and the Ansar, as well as
those persons who had arrived there from other places were on the
look-out for a new caliph. The Egyptians specially insisted that Ali
should become the caliph but he declined to accept this office. During
this struggle of insistence and refusal he addressed the people and said
inter alia: “Leave me and find out someone else for this caliphate. If
you leave me alone my position will be the same as yours. In that event
it is possible that I may be more attentive and submissive to the ruler
whom you choose than you are. It is better (from the point of view of
your material interests) that I should be an adviser rather than a
ruler”.

He continued refusing to accept the caliphate till the entire population
of Madina gathered at his door and insisted that he should accept the
office. The crowd was so huge that he feared some of them might be
trampled upon by others. All of them were saying with one voice: “We
cannot find anyone more deserving of this office than you, and we do not
choose any other caliph. Kindly accept our oath of allegiance.
Thereafter there will be no differences or grouping among us”.

Malik Ashtar Nakhai's held Ali's hand in his own hand and took the oath
of allegiance and all others also followed suit. Every one of them was
saying: “None except Ali is fit for the caliphate”.

Every person was repeating the name of Ali and all were filled with joy.
They were happy because they knew that they had taken oath of allegiance
to a person who knew their needs and recognized their rights and was
sincere, learned and wise, and was like a father to them. They were
happy that Ali had accepted the caliphate. As they had suffered great
hardships for a long time during the dark Umayyad rule, they had pinned
high hopes on him.

The Commander of the Faithful himself draws a picture of the oath of
allegiance taken to him by the people in these words: “The people were
so happy when the oath of allegiance was taken to me that the children
began to rejoice, the old men came forward with trembling legs to take
the oath, those who were unwell also managed to come somehow, and even
the young girls came out of seclusion”.

When Ali mounted the pulpit on the first Friday those who had not been
able to take the oath of allegiance earlier did so on that day. On that
day Talha was the first to take the oath and he was followed by Zubayr.
They were the same Talha and Zubayr who said later: “When we took the
oath of allegiance to Ali the conditions were such that a sword was
hanging on our necks”.

It may very well be asked as to what Talha and Zubayr meant by saying
this. It may be said in this connection that this was not the view of
Talha and Zubayr only but the majority of Quraysh had similar ideas
about the caliphate of Ali.

They did not like Ali's caliphate on account of envy, or because they
feared that Ali would not allow them the power and authority to which
they had become accustomed, and would not tolerate their making unlawful
gains. They knew that he did not consider it permissible to be
improperly kind to incompetent persons or to give money to undeserving
persons. He could not waste the property of the Public Treasury which
was meant for the needy and the poor.

Now consider the fact that all the persons of dignity and rank among
them were desirous of attaining to the caliphate. Ali has mentioned in
unambiguous terms the grudge which Talha and Zubayr and other Quraysh
nursed against him in their hearts. He says: “What relation do I have
with Quraysh? In the past I had to fight against them on account of
their infidelity, and now I shall have to fight against them because of
their being rebellious. For them I am the same today as I was
yesterday”.

The majority of Quraysh disliked Ali and many of them rebelled and
conspired against him. The foremost of his opponents among Quraysh were
Talha and Zubayr. These persons could not, however, avoid taking oath of
allegiance to Ali because the inhabitants of all Arab and non-Arab
conquered lands and especially the Egyptians were not prepared to accept
any other persons as caliph. It was only Ali who possessed the qualities
which the opponents of Uthman wanted to see in their ruler.

Talha and Zubayr were the two great rivals of Ali in the matter of the
caliphate. They were most keen to attain to this office. However, none
of the attributes which the opponents of Uthman wanted to see in their
caliph were found in them. Both of them were just like Uthman, and those
things which made the people revolt against him were present in them.
They were dying for power and authority. In the foregoing pages we have
already quoted Uthman as saying about Talha: “May Talha be cursed! I
gave him so much gold and still he wants to take my life”.

The people were fully aware of these things in the aspirants to the
caliphate and had no doubt about their unsuitablity for that office.
That is why all of them inclined towards Ali and compelled Talha and
Zubayr also to take the oath of allegiance to him. (We have already
discussed in detail under the caption ***\`Hazrat Amir al-Mo'mineen'***
part III), whether Talha and Zubayr took oath of allegiance to Ali
willingly or unwillingly and have also quoted the verdict of the
Egyptian scholar Dr. Taha Husayn that both of them took the oath
voluntarily with the hope that Ali would make them his partners in the
affairs of the caliphate but when he declined to fulfil their wishes
they broke the oath and joined Ayesha, saying that the oath was obtained
from them under duress.

As regards their taking the oath of allegiance to Ali and then breaking
it and revolting against him Ali says:

“These two entered the allegiance with the faces of the sinners and went
out of it with the faces of the disbelievers”. (It means that whereas
other people took the oath of allegiance to Ali so that the matters
might be set right but these two did not take the oath with that object
in mind and when they broke the oath it was mere unfaithfulness and
treachery with Ali's creed which was based on truth and justice).

From the very first day Ali assumed the reins of the caliphate he became
busy making reforms. He removed the oppressive and unjust governors and
officers from their offices and started investigations regarding the
wealth taken by various persons unlawfully from the Public Treasury. In
taking these steps he did not care for the enmity of those who were
opposed to him and to the reforms which he intended to introduce.

During the period of his caliphate Imam Ali had to face very difficult
situation. All the influential persons had united against him. Same was
the case with the self-seekers whose number was very large. Ali decided
to fight on both the fronts. He decided to establish justice and destroy
oppression. He also decided to establish a government based on true
economic, social and moral values. And he fought on these two fronts
with bravery and steadfastness which was unparalleled and unusual. He
made a firm resolve that he would remove all darknesses and that his
knowledge like the rays of the sun will illuminate all the corners of
the globe.

As soon as the people elected Ali as their leader to reform the society
Bani Umayyah and their friends in Madina and other cities collected
their wealth and arms and went underground. Later, as soon as they got
an opportunity, they went away to Mecca, where they could indulge in
subversive activities against Ali's government, and instigate the people
to revolt against him, and if they did not meet success there they could
also go to Syria and join Mu\`awiya. If these people had thought of
public welfare and had not coveted the caliphate it was not at all
necessary for them to make all this planning.

However, they indulged in such activities with the hope that they would
regain the caliphate and if they were successful in removing Ali from
their path this office would never slip off their hands. Futhermore,
they had accumulated fabulous wealth during the days of Uthman and this
also prompted them to go beyond the reach of the just caliph, because
they could utilize this wealth to strengthen themselves for the
achievement of the objective.

Ali was not unaware of the plan of Bani Umayyah. He knew with what
object they had run away with their wealth and arms. He, therefore,
imposed restrictions on their leaving Madina so that they might not
become a danger to the new government.

During these difficult circumstances some companions of the prophet,
including Talha and Zubayr, came to see the Commander of the Faithful
and said: “We took the oath of allegiance on the condition that penal
laws would be enforced. You should, therefore, punish those persons who
revolted against Uthman”.

Ali replied to them: “Dear brethren! As you are aware I am not unmindful
of this matter. However, the question is whether I possess sufficient
strength to achieve this purpose. At present the insurgents are very
powerful. It is they who dominate us (at present) and not we who
dominate them. Furthermore, your slaves and the desert Arabs have also
joined them and they are in a position to do you every harm. In the
circumstances is there any possibility of achieving what you desire?”
All of them replied in the negative. Ali then continued: “I swear by God
that I do not think as you do. When this matter is discussed the people
will have different views about it. Some of them will have the same view
which you have, whereas others will have a view opposed to yours. And
there will be still others who will be neutral. You should, therefore,
wait till the conditions settle down, the people get peace of mind and
it becomes easy to acquire rights. So far as I am concerned you should
rest satisfied and await my orders. It is only then that you should come
to me”.

These persons had come to see Ali with doubts in their minds regarding
his government and its attitude towards the people. He, however, gave
them a reply which changed their doubts into certainty. They had laid
down a condition for his holding the office of caliph that he should
punish those persons over whom neither he nor they themselves had any
control. Their own slaves and the desert-Arabs were among the opponents
and murderers of Uthman.

He gave them such a convincing reply that they had to acknowledge that
he had a better knowledge of the conditions than they had, he was making
greater efforts to improve the matters, and he understood the delicacy
of the situation better than they did. Unfortunately, however, these
persons were oblivious of the reality which the Commander of the
Faithful had perceived very clearly and while it was necessary to remain
patient, they wanted him to take a hasty action.

These persons were under the wrong impression that all the Muslims
viewed the murder of Uthman alike, and considered that his blood must be
avenged. However, as Ali had a better knowledge of the situation than
they had, he removed their misunderstanding by saying that if the
question of punishing Uthman's murderers was taken up at that stage the
opinions of the people on the issue would be divided.

Those people had come to Ali with their sentiments, desires and personal
aims. However, Ali faced them with arguments and logic. Instead of
addressing him as ***\`Amir al-Mo'mineen'*** (Commander of the Faithful)
they said: “O Ali!” The harshness and boldness of these words are quite
apparent whereas the word brethren used by Ali for them carried the
sense of love and affection.

They came in connection with the claim of revenge for the murder of
Uthman, although many of them were themselves responsible for his
murder. However, in reply to their demand Ali displayed the unparalleled
forgiveness which was inherent in his nature.  
 Ali began keeping Quraysh under strict observation lest they might
create disturbance. Of course, this action on his part was perfectly
correct and based on farsightedness and prudence.

Ali began removing Uthman's governors from office one by one. There was
no question of retaining any of them and dismissing others because they
were all alike in the matter of corruption, oppression and disrespect
for the Islamic law. It was because of oppression and corruption that
unrest took place in various parts of the Islamic territories as a
consequence of which Uthman had to lose his life. Ali did not agree to
allow these people to continue in their offices even for a short period
of time because truth and falsehood cannot go together and tyranny
injustice and corruption cannot be eliminated unless the root-cause of
these evils is removed.

Ibn Abbas and many others suggested to Ali to allow the former governors
to occupy their position till his government was firmly established but
he did not agree to resort to political contrivances or to strengthen
his government by pleasing the self-seekers. He, on the contrary, relied
upon his responsibilities, reason and sword, and remained steadfast in
his determination to eradicate all evils.

Syria was his greatest worry. We have already mentioned in the forgoing
pages the opinion which Ali held about Mu\`awiya. He decided to remove
Mu\`awiya from the governorship, and Mu\`awiya was adamant that he would
not take oath of allegiance to him. One day Ziad bin Hanzala met Ali to
find out what decision he had taken about Mu\`awiya so that he might
inform the people about it.

Imam Ali said to Ziad: “O Ziad! Get ready”. Ziad asked: “O Commander of
the Faithful! For what should I get ready?” Ali replied: “To mobilize
the forces to attack Syria”. Ziad said: “O Commander of the Faithful! It
will be better to be mild and forbearing”. Thereupon Ali recited a verse
which meant: “You will become free from injustice only when a mind with
quick understanding, a sharp sword, and a nose possessing sense of
honour combine”.

Ali started making preparation to advance against Syria and punish
Mu\`awiya. On observing his enthusiasm the people also became active and
got ready to support him. However, there were also some persons who were
bent upon opposing him and Talha and Zubayr belonged to this group. They
came to see him and said: “O Commander of the Faithful! Permit us to go
to Mecca and perform ***Umra***. If you are still here till we have
performed the ***Umra*** ceremonies we shall return and join you. And in
case you accompany us we will follow you”.

Ali looked at their faces for sometime and then said: “Your real purpose
is not to perform Umra, but to commit treachery against me. However, you
may go wherever you like”. Talha and Zubayr then left for Mecca.

Bani Umayyah, Talha and Zubayr combined to conspire against Ali. They
practised every kind of deception and fraud and spent money lavishly to
turn the people against him. The governors who were appointed by Uthman,
and had been removed by Ali helped these persons in every manner. They
had already shifted their wealth and arms to Mecca which was now their
headquarters. Ayesha, daughter of Abu Bakr and wife of the prophet was
busy making preparations for war against Ali from the day she received
information about his being chosen as caliph. How she received this news
and what her reaction was can very well be assessed from the incident
narrated below.

Allamah Tabari says that when returning from Mecca Ayesha reached a
place named \`Sarf'. She met a man named Abd ibn Umm Kilab who was a
relative of hers from her mother's side. She enquired from him about the
conditions prevailing in Madina. The following conversation took place
between them:

Abd ibn Umm Kilab: The people killed Uthman and then waited for eight
days.  
 Ayesha: What did they do then?

Abd ibn Umm Kilab: The entire population of Madina found a way out
unanimously. All of them agreed to Ali becoming the caliph.  
 Ayesha: If what you say is true I wish that the sky may fall on the
earth. Take me back. Take me back.

Ayesha was going from Mecca to Madina after performing Hajj. However,
when she heard about Ali having become the caliph she immediately
returned to Mecca saying: “Uthman has been killed unjustly. By God I
shall avenge his murder”.

Abd ibn Umm Kilab: What is all this? I swear by God that you were the
foremost in accusing him. You used to say: “Kill Na\`sal. He has become
an infidel”.  
 Ayesha: The people killed him after he had repented. I did utter these
words but what I am saying now is better than what I had said earlier.

Abd ibn Umm Kilab: O Mother of the Faithful: It is a very lame excuse.

Here Tabari has quoted some verses of Abd ibn Umm Kilab, who has thrown
the entire responsibility for the murder of Uthman on Ayesha. He says:
“It was you who took the initiative. The changes were brought about by
you, and all the trouble started from your side. You ordered us to kill
Uthman. You said that he had become an infidel. We obeyed you and killed
him. We hold the view that Uthman's murderer is the person who ordered
that he should be killed. Neither the sky fell upon us nor were the sun
and the moon eclipsed”. (Tarikh Tabari, Vol. 5, p. 140).

Ayesha returned to Mecca and was engrossed in her own thoughts. When she
reached Mecca Talha met her. He told her how Ali became caliph and what
the people did with him (i.e. with Talha). He said: “The people took the
oath of allegiance to Ali and then came to me and pressed me so hard
that I, too, had to take the oath”.

Ayesha said: “How can Ali exercise control over us? So long as his
government exists in Madina I shall not return to that city”.

From that moment onwards she started a mischievous movement against Ali.
She began instigating the people to avenge the murder of Uthman and kill
Ali.

On scrutinizing the attitude adopted by Ayesha at this juncture one can
very well realize the grudge she had been nursing against Ali in her
heart. To understand this attitude of hers it is necessary to know the
reasons for her enmity against Ali.

Ayesha's hatred and enmity against Ali was very old, and according to
many historians it commenced from the very day on which she entered the
Prophet's house as his wife. One great reason for her enmity against him
was that he was the husband of Fatima. Fatima was the daughter of
Khadijah and Khadijah was the lady who was highly esteemed by the
Prophet during her life as well as after her death for her sincerity,
magnanimity, and excellent morals and manners. In spite of all her best
efforts Ayesha could not make the Prophet forget Khadijah. In this
connection the following extract from the magazine \`Al-Azhar' which is
the organ of Al-Azhar University deserves consideration:

“Besides other qualities which Ayesha possessed she was very courageous
and was keen to attain the highest degree of greatness She was not
contented with the superior position which she enjoyed in the heart of
the Prophet vis-a-vis his other wives, but wished to find a place in his
heart equal to that of lady Khadijah, the first truthful one, whom he
loved most. The Prophet was never tired of talking about lady Khadijah
and praising her. It was on account of her that he also showed
consideration to the women, who had been her friends. With all her
attributes and accomplishments Ayesha made vain efforts to make the
Prophet believe that God had given him a better wife than lady Khadijah.
She ought to have acknowledged the superiority of Khadijah and should
have realized that it was useless to contend with the Prophet on account
of the wife who was the greatest amongst all the noble and distinguished
women, was the most truthful one, and was the first to embrace Islam.
This jealousy of Ayesha did no harm to Khadijah. On the contrary it made
her greatness known to the entire world and gave her a lasting fame”.
(The Magazine Al-Azhar May 1956).

Ayesha herself says: “I never felt as much jealous of any other wife of
the Prophet as of Khadijah, although I had not even seen her. The
Prophet talked about her every now and then. At times he slaughtered the
sheep and sent pieces of meat to her friends as presents. I told him
many times that (from the manner in which he talked about Khadijah) it
appeared that there was none else in the world except Khadijah. He,
however, replied that she had such qualities and she also bore him
children”.

Thus Ayesha admits that the Prophet preferred Khadijah to all his other
wives and this made Ayesha jealous of her. And naturally enough as this
extreme love of the Prophet for Khadijah, was the cause of Ayesha's
jealousy against her. She also felt jealous of Fatima and also hated her
husband Ali and her sons Hasan and Husayn.

Another reason for Ayesha's nursing grudge against Ali was the
suggestion made by Ali to the Prophet at the time of the incident called
Ifk (false accusation). On that occasion he had said: “O Prophet of God!
There is no scarcity of women for you. You can marry many other women
besides Ayesha”.

Furthermore, it is also a fact that Ayesha was confident that after
Uthman was murdered the caliphate would return to her own family (i.e.
Bani Tayim) and Talha would become the caliph. We have already mentioned
before, how happy she felt on hearing the news of the assassination of
Uthman, hoping that Talha must have been chosen as the caliph in his
place.

Immediately on her arrival in Mecca Ayesha began recruiting an army to
fight against Ali and his government. Her open enmity with Ali
strengthened the hands of Bani Umayyah as well as those of Talha, Zubayr
and their supporters. All were united on the issue of waging war against
Ali. At this juncture the members of the Umayyah family had gone
underground in Hijaz etc. On Ali's having become caliph they reappeared.
They tried to make the maximum profit from the revolt of Quraysh against
Ali. They joined hands with Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr, and placed at
their disposal the wealth which they had grabbed during the period of
Uthman; so that they might utilize it to make preparations for war, and
the government of Ali might be nipped in the bud. They left the places
where they were hidden and reached Mecca to assist Ayesha.

The stand taken by them was that Uthman had been killed unjustly and as
Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr had risen to avenge his murder it was necessary
to support them. Mu\`awiya considered the situation very favourable to
him.

However, his interests differed from those of Talha and Zubayr because
each one of them aspired to become the caliph. Mu\`awiya wished that
Talha and Zubayr should fight with Ali, because as a a result of the
clash one party was sure to be defeated and the party that won would
also become weak and it would be easy for him (Mu\`awiya) to subdue it.

It was due to her own personality and because of being the wife of the
Prophet that Ayesha was able to mobilize a very large army in Mecca.
However, when the army was ready differences arose between Talha, Zubayr
etc. as to where they should proceed and what the next step should be.

If the activities and affairs of the persons who were acting as the
leaders of this gathering are scrutinized and an effort is made to find
out their motives for mobilizing such a large army the real position
will become clear. It will then become known that they had not gathered
to avenge the murder of Uthman, as claimed by them, nor for correcting
the prevailing conditions, which according to them, Ali had not been
able to do, nor for any other thing about which they talked in their
speeches to instigate the people to revolt against Ali. In fact they had
aims and objects different from one another.

If one of them was against Ali, because, on account of him, he could not
attain to the caliphate, another had joined this gathering on account of
some old grudge against the new caliph and still another wanted to
regain the lost glory and power of his family which was not possible in
the presence of Ali in the capacity of caliph.

Ayesha was of the view that the army should march towards Madina so that
the capital might be conquered before Ali was in a position to defend
it, and his caliphate brought to an end. Some others suggested that they
should go to Syria which was a safe place. Bani Umayyah, however,
opposed this suggestion. They were of the view that the security of a
region in which they were already firmly established should not be
endangered. They knew very well that Mu\`awiya had been ruling Syria for
a long time and the people were obedient to him.

They did not, therefore, wish that Syria should become the theatre of
war. Furthermore, Bani Umayyah considered Syria to be their last resort
in case they were defeated by Ali and they did not, therefore, consider
it in their interest to create problems for Mu\`awiya, who was busy
establishing a kingdom there, and to make it a battle field.

Talha and Zubayr rejected the idea of going either to Madina or to Syria
and suggested that they should go to Basra, because they had a large
number of supporters in Kufa and Basra. By suggesting that they should
proceed to Basra, Talha and Zubayr had a deep plan in their mind. They
knew that if they succeeded against Ali with the help of the poeple of
Kufa and Basra one of them would be chosen as caliph, because the
caliphate would naturally go to a person whose supporters were more in
number.

The Umayyads also supported this suggestion. All of them, therefore,
went to Ayesha and said to her: “O Mother of the Faithful! You had
better abandon the idea of going to Madina, because the people with us
will not be able to fight against the insurgents successfully. You
should, therefore, accompany us to Basra. It is possible that the people
of that place may disagree with us and put forward the excuse that oath
of allegiance to Ali has already been accomplished. In that event you
should prepare them to avenge the murder of Uthman in the same manner in
which you have prepared the people of Mecca for this purpose”.

Bani Umayyah spent large sums of money for the procurement of war
equipment. A public announcer made the following announcement in the
streets of Mecca: “The Mother of the Faithful Ayesha, Talha, and Zubayr
are proceeding to Basra. Whoever sympathises with Islam, desires its
glory, and wants to fight against the enemies and avenge the murder of
Uthman, should accompany them. If a person has no animal of riding and
other necessary equipment, he should take it from them”.

When Ayesha had mobilized the army and was ready to depart for Basra,
Umm Salamah, another wife of the Prophet, met her and remonstrated with
her. She said: “Till recently you used to instigate the people to revolt
against Uthman, and spoke ill of him. You did not call him with any name
other than Na\`thal”.

Then she insisted upon Ayesha that she should stay at home and not lead
an army against Ali. However, when she realized that Ayesha was bent
upon waging war against Ali she sent her son Umar bin Abi Salamah to Ali
with a letter which read as follows: “O Commander of the Faithful! If it
had not amounted to disobeying God and if I had not also been sure that
you would not like my accompanying you, I would have accompanied you in
this battle. I am sending my son Umar. I swear by God that he is more
dear to me than my own life. He will remain with you and will
participate in every battle on your side”.

Ayesha also invited other wives of the Prophet to accompany her to
Basra. All of them, except Hafsa daughter of Umar, declined to accede to
her request. Hafsa got ready to join her to fight against Ali. However,
her brother Abdullah bin Umar prevented her from doing so saying: “You
must stay in like other wives of the Prophet”. Hafsa, therefore, sent a
message to Ayesha to excuse her as her brother was not agreeable to the
proposal.

The entire army proceeded to Basra under the command of Ayesha. When
they reached Khaybar, Ayesha, Talha, Zubayr and Marwan met Sa\`id bin
Aas and Mughayrah bin Sho\`ba. We have already reproduced their
conversation in the foregoing pages.

Then according to the general plan of Bani Umayyah Sa\`id bin Aas
endeavoured to divide these people and make them fight with one another
so that by doing so they might lose their strength and the government
should revert to Bani Umayyah. He, therefore, conversed privately with
Talha and Zubayr as follows:

Sa\`id: Tell me solemly, whom will you make caliph if you are
successful?  
 Talha and Zubayr: Whosoever from among us two is chosen by the people.

Sa\`id: No. You should give this office to one of the sons of Uthman,
because it is his murder which you propose to avenge.  
 Talha and Zubayr: Pooh! Should we elevate a youngster to this position
in the presence of so many distinguished pesons?  
 Sa\`id: Of course, then I must endeavour that the caliphate should not
go out of the hands of the descendants of Abd Munaf.

Marwan also tried time and again, like Sa\`id bin Aas, to divide these
people. He did so with the machinations which were the best specimens of
fraud and deceit.

Imam Ali also came to know that a large army had proceeded from Mecca to
Basra on the pretext of taking revenge on the murderers of Uthman. He
was very much disturbed on account of the differences and dissensions
between the Muslims. It also pained him that owing to these differences
and dissensions it would not be possible to continue and accomplish the
reformatory program introduced by him, because following the example of
these rebels others would also be encouraged to revolt and various
governors appointed by Uthman might also follow in the footsteps of
Mu\`awiya and refuse to acknowledge the authority of the central
government.

As soon as he heard this news he gathered the people of Madina, and
addressed them in these words: “Almighty God has promised forgiveness
for the unjust of this nation and success and salvation for those who
are obdient and firm. Only that person who cannot bear truth resorts to
falsehood. You should know that Talha, Zubayr and the Mother of the
Faithful Ayesha have combined against my government and caliphate and
have invited the people towards reformation. So long as I do not feel
any danger from them to you and myself I shall remain patient and so
long as they withhold their hands, I, too, shall withhold mine. And I am
contenting myself with the news about them which I have received so
far”.

Imam Ali considered it necessary to nip the mischief in the bud and to
stop the Meccans on the way before they should reach Madina, because
this was the best way of avoiding disturbance and bloodshed. He,
therefore, appointed Sahl bin Hanif as his representative in Madina and
proceeded to Mecca along with the army which he had previously collected
to attack Syria.

On the way many persons belonging to Kufa and Basra also joined him.
When Ali reached Rabazah along with his army he came to know that Zubayr
and Talha had left Mecca and had already crossed Rabazah on their way to
Basra. He stayed in Rabazah for a few days and made necessary
preparations. In the meantime he made all possible efforts that the
conditions which had deteriorated on account of the activities of Talha,
Zubayr and Ayesha might improve.

He, therefore, sent a letter to Ayesha saying: “You have disobeyed God
and His Prophet by stepping out of your house. You are aspiring
something with which you do not have the least concern. You also claim
that you want to reform the people. Will you please tell me as to what
women have to do with the command of the armies? You also claim that you
want to avenge the murder of Uthman.

Now Uthman was an Umayyad whereas you are a woman of the tribe of Taym
Bani Murrah. I swear by God that the crime of those who have tempted you
into adopting this course of action and made you disobey God and His
Prophet is much greater and more dreadful than that of the murderers of
Uthman. You did not become indignant yourself but you were made
indignant. You did not get excited yourself but other persons have been
instrumental in exciting you. Ayesha! Fear God and return to your house
and remain indoors. Good wishes to you”.

Ali wanted to treat Ayesha as excusable in the matter of her revolting
and commanding an army. That is why he said: “You have not become
indignant yourself but you have been made indignant, and you did not get
excited yourself but other persons have been instrumental in exciting
you”. The regard for the sentiments of women and the respect for Ayesha
which this sentence contains is evident. By saying that she was
disobedient at others behest he also provided her a path for
dissociating herself from revolt and mischief.

He held at fault those people who had incited her to be disobedient and
made her leave her house. He also declared their action to be a much
greater and dreadful sin than that of the murderers of Uthman. In the
end he advised her to fear God and return to her house, because only in
that case peace could be restored in the country and the people would
also have liked such a development.

Ayesha did not, however, pay any heed to Ali's advice. She stuck to the
decision already taken by her. In reply to the letter of Ali the
Commander of the Faithful, she wrote only one sentence which, though
brief, indicates fully the personal enmity and the grudge which she
nursed against Ali in her heart. She wrote: “O son of Abu Talib! No room
is now left for reconciliation. We shall never submit to you. You may do
whatever you like. And peace (be upon you)”. Talha and Zubayr too, sent
him similar replies.

When Ayesha's army reached near Basra the commanders held consultations
as to whether or not they should enter the city. They knew very well
that the number of the supporters of Ali in Basra was not small. Hence
they considered it expedient to hold mutual consultations and to
correspond with the people of Basra to find out to what extent they were
faithful to Ali. Eventually it was decided that before entering the city
the elders and distinguished persons should be instigated to rise
against Ali and efforts should be made to win their sympathies. Talha
and Zubayr, therefore, wrote a letter to the judge Ka\`b bin Soor
saying: “You are a distinguished person of Basra and a chief of the
Yemenites and were appointed as judge by the caliph Umar. You were angry
with Uthman on account of the injustice done by him to you. Now you
should be angry with those who murdered Uthman”.

Ka\`b bin Soor wrote back in reply: “If Uthman was killed because of his
being unjust why are you anxious to avenge his murder, and how does he
deserve that his murder should be avenged? And if he was killed without
justification there are others who deserve more than you to take revenge
on the murderers. And if the matter of Uthman was difficult for those
who were present at the time of his murder it is more difficult for
those who were not then present”.

These two (i.e. Talha and Zubayr) wrote a letter to Manzar bin Jarood
also which read as follows: “Your father was the head of your tribe
during the age of ignorance and also a chief in Islam. Your position
vis-a-vis your father is the same which a horse which stands second in a
horse race enjoys as compared with a horse which stands first. Uthman
has been killed by people who are inferior to you, and those people who
have become angry on account of the murder of Uthman are better than you
And peace (be upon you)”.

Manzar bin Jarood said in reply: “I shall associate with the righteous
persons only if I can remain better than the evil-doers. Uthman's right
was as much essential and mandatory yesterday as it is today. He was
among you but you left him undefended and did not help him. When have
you made this new discovery and how has this new idea occurred to you?”

Ayesha wrote a letter to Zaid bin Sauhan on these lines: “From Ayesha,
daughter of Abu Bakr, Mother of the Faithful and the beloved wife of the
Prophet to her sincere son Zaid bin Sauhan.  
 “Rush to my help immediately on receiving this letter of mine and even
if you do not come restrain the people from supporting Ali”.

Zaid bin Sauhan wrote in reply: “I am, no doubt, your sincere son,
provided you dissociate yourself from this affair and return to your
house. Otherwise I shall be the foremost among your opponents”.

In \`Iqd al-Farid, Jamhra Rasail al-Arab and Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah of
Ibn Abi al-Hadid the reply of Zaid bin Sauhan has been quoted in these
words: “Peace be upon you. Almighty God has given you one order and has
given us another. You have been ordered not to leave your house and we
have been ordered to fight so that evil may be suppressed. You have,
however, abandoned what you were ordered to do and are restraining us
from doing what we have been ordered to do. Your wishes will not be
complied with and your letters will not be replied to. And peace (be
upon you)”.

Bani Umayyah did not write letters to their supporters openly like
Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr. They conducted secret correspondence with
those, who, as they expected, would be ready to oppose Ali and assist
them in pulling down the edifice of his caliphate. This secret
correspondence fully explains their psychological condition. If these
people rose to avenge the murder of Uthman it was not necessary for them
to contact their individual supporters secretly, and in case they had
revolted against Ali only to assist Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr, even then
it was not necessary for them to consider their own affairs separately
from others. The fact is that all their efforts were directed towards
creating favourable conditions for themselves and they contacted only
those persons about whose support they had no doubt in their minds. That
is why their correspondence was usually secret.

When the commanders of Ayesha's army were carrying on correspondence
with the people of Basra, the son of Abu Sufyan, sitting in Damascus,
was watching the conditions of all those who had revolted against Ali as
well as of those who had declined to fight against him. He had made
separate assessment in regard to both the parties and also knew the fate
which both of them were destined to meet. It was his earnest desire that
Talha and Zubayr should weaken Ali's government by fighting against him.
It was only then that he could convert the Islamic government into
Umayyad dynasty because he knew that as regards other Bani Umayyah none
of them was as powerful and influential as he himself was.

Mu\`awiya began instigating secretly every person to revolt against Ali
particularly those who were not already opposed to him. He was well
aware that as soon as Ayesha, Talha, Zubayr and other ring-leaders of
their army were successful in gaining a victory, they would start
fighting with each other. All this contention and mobilization of forces
against Ali was only for the sake of the caliphate. After his defeat
Talha and Zubayr were bound to quarrel with each other to become caliph,
and then Mu\`awiya, whose strength had been safe throughout, could very
well step in and grab the caliphate,

Mu\`awiya wrote a letter to Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas saying: “It was
incumbent upon the members of the consultative council to assist Uthman
because it was they who had elected him as caliph. Talha and Zubayr
assisted him, (by claiming revenge for his murder). Both of them were
the members of the council like you, and the importance which you enjoy
in Islam is also enjoyed by them. The Mother of the Faithful Ayesha has
also decided to assist Uthman. Hence you should not dislike the thing
which they have liked and should not reject that which they have
accepted”.

It can very well be observed how dexterously an effort was made to
instigate Sa\`d bin Waqas (who was one of the candidates for the
caliphate nominated by Umar) to revolt against Ali without disclosing
the real object. How ever, Sa\`d bin Abi Waqas sensed the deceit and was
not trapped. After all he too was one of Quraysh and was fully aware of
machination which Bani Umayyah always employed to achieve their ends.

He, therefore, sent Mu\`awiya a blunt reply which he must not have
expected. He (Sa\`d) praised Ali for his virtues and attainments and
declared that none else could equal him. He also told Mu\`awiya that the
intention with which he was instigating the people to revolt against Ali
was known to him and it was obviously that he wanted to attain to the
caliphate. He, however, added that all his efforts in this behalf were
useless because it was not permissible for a man like him (Mu\`awiya) to
hold that office.

He wrote: “Umar nominated to the consultative council only those
persons, who were elegible to become caliph. None of us had a prior
right to that office vis-a-vis others except that we might have selected
one of us as the caliph. Of course Ali possessed all the qualities which
we possessed, but he also possessed some special attributes which none
of us possessed. As regards Talha and Zubayr it would have been better
for them to stay at home. And as regards the Mother of the Faithful may
God forgive her”. This reply sent by Sa\`d to Mu\`awiya clearly shows
what views Sa\`d held about those who had risen to fight against Ali and
create mischief in the land.

The letters, which were exchanged between the people of the camel and
the citizens of Basra and also between the citizens of other cities,
some of whom were the supporters of the people of the camel and others
were not, make it clear that the people were fully aware of the causes
of the disturbance. They also manifested the personality of Ali. It also
becomes known that the righteous persons loved Ali very much and
considered his words and deeds to be true and correct.

Another important thing also becomes known and that is that the
supporters of Ali tried their level best to prevent the people of the
camel from creating mischief and disorder and to act according to wisdom
and reason. This shows that they thought and spoke on the same lines on
which Ali did. Ali had impressed upon them with his words and deeds that
creating disturbance and disorder is a satanic action and peace and
tranquillity is the best thing. Hence, the attitude adopted by him
before as well as after assuming the office of caliph keeping in view
the exigencies of time was considered by them to be absolutely correct.

One could very well ask: What did these people of the camel want Ali to
do when his newly-formed government was not yet fully established? What
action of Ali could they dislike when they had displayed great enmity
with him and started inciting people to revolt against him immediately
on hearing the news of his selection as caliph? Why were they annoyed
with him when they could not face his rational arguments? And how could
they treat him to be responsible for Uthman's murder when they them
selves were his murderers?

These questions were asked by the supporters of Ali time and again in
their correspondence with the people of the camel. Furthermore the
representatives of the citizens of Basra who came to see them also asked
them these questions again and again When Ayesha's army had not yet
reached the surroundings of Basra, and the persons carrying the letters
written by her and Talha and Zubayr to the people of Basra were still on
their way, Uthman bin Hanif sent Abu'l Aswad Du’ali and lmran bin Hasin
to Ayesha to find out from her as to why she had revolted against Ali
and to advise her to refrain from pursuing the object with which she had
come out from her house.

He then sent a deputation to Talha and Zubayr also with the same purpose
but they repeated what they had been saying and tried to enter Basra
forcibly. However, Uthman bin Hanif could not tolerate their entry into
the city. He collected the people, equipped them with arms and proceeded
to the quarter called Marbad where Ayesha's army had encamped.

When the two armies stood face to face with each other Talha stepped
forward and delivered a speech. Standing between them he praised God and
then spoke about Uthman. He enumerated his virtues, stated how he was
murdered unjustly and asked the people to avenge his murder after peace
was restored. Then Zubayr stood up and delivered a similar speech. After
both of them had spoken, their supporters said from his right hand side:
“Whatever you have said is true”. However, the people with Uthman bin
Hanif said from the left side: “Whatever you have said is wrong. You
took oath of allegiance to Ali and then violated it and formed a front
against him”. This resulted in an uproar and everyone started shouting.

Then Ayesha stood up to speak. She said: “The people criticized Uthman
and found faults with his officers. They used to come to Madina and
consulted us. When we pondered over the complaints of the people against
Uthman we found him to be innocent, pious and truthful, and those, who
created disturbance, to be sinners and liars. They had something else in
their hearts. When their numbers increased they entered into Uthman's
house without any justification, for he was not at fault, and shed the
blood which it was not lawful to shed. They looted the property
unlawfully and desecrated the land which they were duty bound to
respect”.

The people of Basra got annoyed and interrupted her speech by making a
noise. She, however, cried: “O people! Keep quiet”. Thereupon the people
became silent.Continuing her speech she said: “Of course, the Commander
of the Faithful Uthman did make innovations but he continued to wash his
lapses with repentance till he was slaughtered unjustly like a camel.
You can see that Quraysh shot arrows on the targets and wounded their
own faces. They gained nothing by killing Uthman and they did not also
pursue the policy of moderation. I swear by God that they will have to
face very violent afflictions - afflictions which will awaken those who
are asleep and make those who are sitting stand up. And they will be
dominated by a people who will not take pity on them and will subject
them to the severest torture”.

“Look here! Uthman has been killed unjustly. Find out his murderers and
when you have them in your grip kill them. Then let the consultative
council take a decision regarding the selection of a caliph. The members
of the council should be the same as were nominated by the Commander of
the Faithful Umar, with the exception of that person who may have
participated in the murder of Uthman. You have taken oath of allegiance
to Ali ibn Abi Talib under coercion and sentimentally without consulting
the nation”.

Ayesha thus began instigating the people to assassinate Ali. She said
that the oath of allegiance taken to Ali had been taken under coercion
and sentimentally without consulting the nation. She added that Ali
deserved to be killed as he had taken part in the murder of Uthman and
on that score it was necessary to select a new caliph through the
committee constituted by Umar of which Ali could no longer be a member.

The hearers were bewildered to hear the speech of Ayesha. Many of them
including Ahnaf bin Qais and Jariyah bin Qadamah Sa\`di asked her some
very incisive questions. When she finished her speech Jariyah said to
her: “O Mother of the Faithful! I swear by God that Uthman's murder is
not at all important as compared with the dreadful situation that a
personality like yourself should step out of her house to fight against
the Muslims.

You have torn the veil which God had provided you, and have violated the
sanctity which He had ordained. You should just reflect that whoever
decides to fight against you will certainly also intend to kill you. In
case, therefore you have accompanied this army voluntarily you had
better return to Madina and if they have brought you forcibly you should
seek help against them from the public. I shall then be with you”.

Talha and Zubayr were also asked many questions by various persons, to
whom they could not reply. Prolonged debate took place but without any
result except that Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr got very much annoyed and
became more determined to fight.

Ayesha herself was the Supreme Commander of her army and she commanded
it mounting on a camel. It was for this reason that the battle fought at
Basra came to be known as the Battle of the Camel. She appointed the
junior commanders and wrote letters in her own name to those persons who
were expected to help her. We have already reproduced above one of her
letters addressed to Zaid son of Sauhan.

Ayesha's letters were mostly of this kind: “From Ummul Mo'mineen Ayesha
daughter of Abi Bakr, to such and such of his sons: “As soon as you
receive this letter you should get up and come to help me and if you are
unable to come to my help, you should at least prevent people siding
with Ali”. Many persons responded to her call and there were also many
who declined to follow her.


