God! Be a witness
=================

Ayesha's army forced its way into the city of Basra during a very cold
night. They killed many citizens in the masjid. Then they entered the
house of Uthman bin Hanif and maltreated and insulted him.

Talha and Zubayr resented very much the treatment meted out by the
soldiers to Uthman bin Hanif because he too was one of the distinguished
companions of the Prophet. (We have already written in detail in
***“Hazrat Amirul Mo'mineen”*** part III that the ill-treatment with
Uthman bin Hanif at Basra was done on Talha and Zubayr's orders). They
went to Ayesha and expressed their grief over that incident. In reply
she ordered that Uthman bin Hanif might be put to death. The order was
about to be complied with when a woman cried: “O Mother of the Faithful!
For God's sake take pity on the son of Hanif. Just have regard for his
being a companion of the Prophet”.

Ayesha thought over the matter for a while, and then said: “All right.
Do not kill him but make him a prisoner”. (Tarikh Tabari etc.)  
 An officer of Ayesha's army however said: “Beat him (Uthman bin Hanif)
severely and pull the hair of his beard”.  
 The soldiers beat him mercilessly, pulled the hair of his head, beard,
eyebrows and eyelashes and then made him prisoner.

Talha and Zubayr began roaming about in both the armies and delivered
speeches asking the people to take revenge of Uthman's murder on Ali.
While Zubayr was delivering one such speech a man belonging to the tribe
of Abd al-Qais stood up and said to him: “Please keep quiet for a while
because I want to say something”. Then he addressed the Muhajirs who
formed part of the people of the camel in these words: “O Muhajirs! You
are the people who embraced Islam earlier than others and are,
therefore, superior to them in this respect.

After the Prophet's death you chose a man for the caliphate without
consulting us. After his death you chose another man as caliph without
consulting us and we accepted him. After the second caliph the question
of selecting his successor was decided by a six-man committee and you
took the oath of allegiance to Uthman without consulting us. Then you
were dissatisfied with him and killed him without consulting us. Now you
have taken oath of allegiance to Ali without consulting us. We have not
declined to accept either of them as Head of the State and have endorsed
your choice.

Now you should tell us why you have got ready to fight against Ali. Has
he misappropriated the war booty, and deprived you of it? Has he done
anything unlawful? Has he committed any offence which has disqualified
him for the caliphate? And then the questions: Why are you so keen that
we, too, should join you in fighting against Ali?” He ended his speech
with these words: “When no such thing has happened why have you created
all this nuisance?”.

None could give any reply to his speech. All were dumbfounded. However,
brute force follows no logic. The supporters of Talha and Zubayr
attacked the man but his kinsmen came to his help. Fierce fighting took
place and eventually the speaker was killed along with seventy persons
of his tribe.

The people of the camel gained control over all the key points and took
hold of the amount of revenue as well as the Public Treasury. Zubayr and
his son Abdullah distributed the entire property of the Public Treasury
among their supporters.

Hakim bin Jabalah who was obedient and faithful to the Commander of the
Faithful was very much disturbed on account of the activities of these
people. He gathered many of his supporters and attacked the people of
the camel. He said about Talha and Zubayr: “They took oath of allegiance
to Ali voluntarily and promised to obey him. Now they have come to fight
against him as his opponents and want to avenge the murder of Uthman.
They have created differences between us although we belonged to the
same city and were the neighbours of one another. O Lord! It is not the
intention of either of them to avenge the murder of Uthman”.

Hakim was killed and so was his son and brother. Thereafter Talha and
Zubayr mercilessly put the people of Basra to sword. The people of the
camel had now full control over Basra, and had become its despotic
rulers. The people of Basra took oath of allegiance to Talha and
Zubayr - some of them voluntarily and others in duress. After having
subdued Basra, the people of the camel became over-joyous. Zubayr said:
“If I had one thousand horsemen I would have proceeded to meet Ali and I
am sure that I would have killed him before he arrived here.”

Ayesha conveyed the good news of her success to Hafsa who was in Madina.
She wrote: “I have to inform you that Ali has halted at a place called
Zi Qar. He is very much afraid because he has received news about our
large army and equipment. At present his position is that of a camel
whose feet would be cut off if it steps forward and who would be
slaughtered if it goes backward”.

Talha and Zubayr now resorted to mean and indecent propaganda against
Ali . Propaganda really means that news is spread according to one's own
wish. Truth is shown to be falsehood and vice versa, and they make a
mountain of a mole-hill.

As has been narrated by Ibn Abi'l Hadid on the authority of Madaini and
Waqidi they (Talha and Zubayr) began addressing the people thus: “O
people of Basra! If Ali is victorious he will kill you one by one, and
destroy your honour and dignity. He will kill your children and enslave
your women. You must, therefore, defend your dignity and honour and
fight against him like one who is prepared to lay down his life for the
sake of his honour and family.”

Notwithstanding this open enmity and organised attack the Commander of
the Faithful did not take any immediate steps against them, but waited
for them to take the initiative. He hoped that they might even then
forsake rebellion and avoid bloodshed, because the pretext on which they
wished to fight against him was absolutely flimsy. He hoped that they
might realize that the path which they were pursuing would deprive the
caliphate of its dignity and the public who had pinned high hopes on the
justice, piety and steadfastness of Ali would be disheartened.

From Rabazah Ali sent letters to the people of Kufa and invited them to
join him against the people of the camel. Abu Musa Ash\`ari, the
Governor of Kufa, refrained from assisting him and also prevented others
from rendering him any assistance. The Commander of the Faithful
dismissed him immediately from his office.

After the people of the camel had occupied Basra the people belonging to
the tribe of Abd al-Qais left the city and gathered at a place between
Zi Qar and Basra. They were waiting for Ali to arrive there so that they
might join his army. Nine thousand Kufans also joined him. Imam Ali
delivered a lengthy speech before them. He said inter alia: “I have
called you to assist me against the people of Basra. My only object is
reconciliation. If the people of Basra desist from their activities my
object will be fulfilled. However, if they persist in their stubbornness
we shall deal with them mildly and shall refrain from fighting till they
commit oppression and resort to fighting. We shall leave no stone
unturned to achieve reconciliation and shall prefer peace to disturbance
in all circumstances”.

From what has been stated above it becomes evident as to what a great
difference there was between the two parties. On the one side there were
the people of the camel who accused Ali of something of which they
should have accused themselves. Ali was absolutely innocent of any such
accusation. These persons accused him unjustly, violated their oath of
allegiance to him, and rebelled against him. They decided to fight
against him and also incited others to do so, although those persons had
sworn allegiance to him. They raided one of his cities under his
control, insulted and beat the governor, maltreated and killed the
citizens and divided the property of the Public Treasury among
themselves although it belonged to all the Muslims. They also thought of
attacking Ali with one thousand horsemen and assassinating him.

On the other side was the Commander of the Faithful the true Imam to
whom all the people had taken the oath of allegiance. Of course, he was
not prepared to accept their oath but they insisted upon it, and said
that they could not find anyone else fit to be their leader and if he
agreed to accept the office of caliph their differences would come to an
end. These people then asked others also to take the oath. Ali accepted
the allegiance of those who took the oath and let go those who did not.
He never compelled anyone to swear allegiance to him.

A few days later, however, he saw that some persons were instigating
others to revolt against him and were trying to create mischief and
disorder. They were attacking his treasurers, governors and followers
and planning to remove him from the caliphate and to assassinate him. He
received news about all their activities, but he did not nurse any
grudge against them in his mind. He addressed his supporters in words
which show what a high regard he had for humanity. He said: “O People of
Kufa! I have called you to assist me against our brethren in Basra
........”.

He did not content himself with the manifestation of this kindness but
also sent messages to Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr asking them to refrain
from rebellion and oppression and invited them to help him towards unity
and good will.

Here we quote an incident which will go to show what idea he had about
his opponents, and what responsibilities he felt after his being
selected as caliph, about equity and justice, and why the people were
inclined towards him.

When the Commander of the Faithful reached near Basra the people of that
city sent to him a man named Kulaib Jarmi to find out the causes of
differences between him and the people of the camel, so that the
position which was till then doubtful in their minds might become clear.

Ali explained to him the entire position. He told him how those people
had taken oath of allegiance to him but later violated it in order to
grab the caliphate themselves. Kulaib was convinced that Ali's stand was
just, and he admitted it before the Commander of the Faithful. Thereupon
Ali asked him to swear allegiance to him. He, however, said in reply
that he had come as the representative of the people of Basra and could
not take any such action till he returned to the city and submitted a
report to those who had sent him.

The Commander of the Faithful then said to him: “Suppose those people
had sent you to locate vegetation and water and you had informed them
that these things were present at such and such place, but they had
declined to go there and had gone instead to a barren place, what would
have been your line of action? Would you have gone to the place where a
spring and vegetation were there, or followed those people to the barren
land?” Kulaib replied: “I should certainly have gone to the place where
there was water and verdure”. Thereupon Ali said: “Then stretch your
hand and take oath of allegiance to me”. The man said: “By God! After
being reduced to silence by your convincing argument there is no reason
for my opposing you. Now stretch your hand and I swear allegiance to
you”.

When the people of the camel arrayed themselves against him the
Commander of the Faithful Ali said to his army: “O People! Control
yourselves and do not attack them, nor say anything with your tongue.
They are your brethern-in-faith. Bear injustice with patience, and do
not begin fighting because whoever quarrels today will have to account
for it on the Day of Judgment”.

Ali continued to make efforts for peace in this manner. At the time of
leaving for Basra with twenty thousand men his real intention was to
advise the people of the camel to refrain from mischief and rebellion
and to invite them to peace and unity.

He loved peace so much that even when the two armies were arrayed
against each other and there was no hope for reconciliation, he made an
earnest effort at the last moment to avoid bloodshed. On seeing Talha
and Zubayr he stepped forward absolutely unarmed, to indicate that he
wanted peace and not war, and called out “O Zubayr! Come to me”. Zubayr
came forward fully armed. When Ayesha saw this she shouted with fear “No
fighting!” because she was aware that fighting with Ali meant sure death
for Zubayr. She believed that Ali's enemy however strong and brave he
might be would surely meet his fate.

However, when Ayesha and her supporters saw that Ali and Zubayr were
embracing each other they were very much perplexed.

Ali kept Zubayr stuck to his bosom for a long time and began conversing
with him in a very kind and affectionate manner. He said: “Woe be upon
you! Why have you revolted against me?” Zubayr replied: “We want to
avenge the murder of Uthman”. Ali said: “May God kill that one from
among us two whose hands have been besmeared with Uthman's blood”.

The part played in the murder of Uthman by Talha and Zubayr was as much
known to themselves as it was known to Ali and others like Ibn Abbas who
had made the following suggestion to him on his assuming the office of
caliph: “Appoint the son of Talha as the Governor of Basra and that of
Zubayr as the Governor of Kufa, and allow Mu\`awiya to continue as the
Governor of Syria, till the conditions become normal and the people feel
safe and secure, and the murderers of Uthman and those who want to
avenge his blood are pacified”.

Ali had all these things in view and the following words of Talha and
Zubayr were also ringing in his mind: “We are taking the oath of
allegiance to you subject to the condition that we shall be allowed to
participate in the affairs of the caliphate”. As such all their
activities were only means of securing the caliphate, none had in view
the revenge for the murder of Uthman.

Before the two armies came face to face with each other Ali ordered his
troops to array themselves. Then he gave them instructions: “Look here!
Don't shoot an arrow and don't attack with a spear or a sword to start
the battle, so that you may not be blamed (for starting the battle)”.

A few moments later the people of the camel killed a soldier of Ali's
army with their arrows. Ali said loudly: “O God! Bear witness”. Then
another man was killed and the Commander of the Faithful again said: “O
God! Bear witness”. Then Abdullah bin Badil was killed and his brother
brought his dead body before Ali. Thereupon he said again: “O God! Bear
witness”, and ordered his army to attack. Then fierce fighting started.

With sword in hand Ali attacked the rebels. His sword flashed like a
flame of fire. He drove back the Quraysh and put their centre as well as
the right and left wings in disorder. The infantry which was being
commanded by Zubayr flew away. Zubayr became encircled by the soldiers
of Ali's army, but none attacked him and allowed him to escape. Ammar
Yasir launched a severe attack. When Zubayr felt that Ammar might strike
him with his sword he said: “O Abul Yaqzan! (Kunyah of Ammar) are you
going to kill me?” “Not at all, O Abu Abdillah!” said Ammar, and stepped
aside.

Ammar's treatment of Zubayr was just like that which was meted out by
Ali in the Battle of Siffin to Amr bin Aas. Its details will be given
later. In fact Ammar and his compatriots had been trained by their
teacher Ali - the real Commander of the Faithful, to respect human life,
as far as possible, even in the battlefield.

Zubayr quitted the battlefield and went away to a valley called
al-Saba\`. It has been said by some narrators that ever since Ali had
embraced him and reminded him of old love and affection his conscience
had heen awakened and he was not inclined to fight. However, Ayesha and
his son Abdullah reproached him on this account and he was obliged to
stay on in the battlefield. After Ammar had spared his life he decided
to go away.

Ayesha tried her best to keep up the morale of her army which consisted
of thirty thousand men. She called the members of various tribes by name
and asked them to fight bravely to avenge the murder of Uthman. The
result was that the fighting became all the more intense. Some of the
warriors threw away their weapons and attacked each other with their
hands.

Ayesha's standard was fixed on the back of her camel and her supporters
were guarding it with great zeal. When one of them was killed another
took his place. There were no signs of either party winning the battle.
Ayesha's supporters were also fighting very bravely. Slogans in favour
of Ayesha and against Ali and vice versa could be heard from both the
sides. The fighting was so intense that it is difficult to find its
example in history.

So many persons were killed in the battle that the whole battlefield was
strewn with dead bodies. This state of affairs worried Ali very much.
He, therefore, thought of a plan which, when implemented, might ensure
the safety of those who were still alive. He ordered his soldiers to cut
off the feet of Ayesha's camel. Some brave men rushed forth at once and
struck their swords on the feet of the camel. The camel staggered and
fell down. Thereupon all those who were guarding it ran away and the
entire army followed suit. Talha and Zubayr were also killed.

As regards Zubayr's death the versions differ. One of them is that a man
named Amr bin Jazmooz pursued him upto the valley of al-Saba\` and
killed him there with his spear. Talha was killed by Marwan with an
arrow, although he had been fighting side by side with him so long as
the battle lasted. It is reported that while shooting the arrow Marwana
had said: “After this time I may not get an opportunity to avenge the
murder of Uthman”.

Those who are aware of the mentality and past actions of Marwan can very
well understand that this action of Marwan was not something unusual for
him. He acted according to the general policy of Bani Umayyah viz. to
remove from the path everyone who aspired to become a caliph, so that
there should be none left to contend with Bani Umayyah on this account.

As regards Marwan himself he was made captive and brought before the
Commander of the Faithful. He hoped to be forgiven and his hope was
fulfilled. Ali forgave him.

The result of this battle was very dreadful. Seventeen thousand
supporters of Ayesha and one thousand and seventy persons belonging to
the army of Ali were killed. All these poor men fell victims to the
greed of the opponents of Ali.

When some companions of Ali thought of killing Ayesha (as she was
responsible for all this trouble), Ali at once stopped them and issued
the following proclamation: “None who is wounded should be killed and
none who flees should be pursued. Whoever lays down his arms or remains
indoors shall be safe”.

The entire history of warfare in the world goes to show that Ali was the
most magnanimous, noble-minded and forgiving person and the treatment
which he meted out to his opponents was extremely gentle.

After the hostilities were over Ali looked at the battlefield and tears
trickled down from his eyes when he saw the human misery and bloodshed
which could not be avoided in spite of his best efforts. He then prayed
to God in these words: “O God! Forgive us and also forgive these persons
who were our brethren, although they had been unjust to us”.

Then he performed funeral prayers for the dead of both sides. As regards
Ayesha he sent her back to her house in Madina in a very honourable way.


