Two impostors
=============

The organized conspiracy which was afoot against the Commander of the
Faithful did not come to end even after the defeat of his opponents in
the Battle of the Camel, because the aspirations of his opponents and
the causes of their enmity against him were still there. If one group of
those who conspired against him was in Hijaz the other was in Syria and
both of these groups had many supporters of Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr.
The ring-leaders of these people were the governors and other officers
who had accumulated large wealth illegally during the period of Uthman
and did not expect any such indulgence from Ali.

The supporters of Ali in Hijaz were all indigent believers or the pious
companions of the Prophet. His position in Hijaz was similar to that of
his cousin, the Prophet and if there was any difference it was only due
to the time and circumstances. The similarity is proved by the fact that
his enemies were mostly the Quraysh, who had been the enemies of the
Prophet earlier. Ali says: “Let the Quraysh involve themselves in
deviation and do not bother about the dissensions which they create or
the egotism which they display. They have united to fight against me
just as they had united to fight against the Prophet of God”.

In Syria Mu\`awiya was busy in his nefarious activities against Ali -
the lawful caliph. He was spending enormous sums of money and making
very attractive promises to win the support of the people. He had also a
large army of which he was the despotic head. This army may briefly be
described thus: “They were foolish mercenaries. They were paid by
Mu\`awiya who took care that as far as possible they should remain
devoid of intellect”.

We mention below an incident which explains the nature of the soldiery
of Mu\`awiya and also shows that he was convinced that his rival Ali was
on the right, and it was not difficult for him to achieve success
against him because he was to face Ali having with him (Mu\`awiya) the
soldiers, who did not possess the capability of differentiating between
injustice and justice or in other words between Mu\`awiya and Ali.

After the army of Ali returned from Siffin, a Kufan came to Damascus
mounted on his camel. One of the Syrians claimed that the she-camel
belonged to him and had been snatched away from him by the Kufan during
the Battle of Siffin. The matter came up before Mu\`awiya and the Syrian
produced fifty witnesses to prove that the she-camel was his. Mu\`awiya,
therefore, decided the case in his favour. The Kufan said to Mu\`awiya:
“May God forgive you! It is a he-camel and not a she-camel. Mu\`awiya
said that as the decision had been taken it was not possible to reverse
it. When the court was dispersed and there was no one there, he called
the Kufan secretly and enquired from him about the value of his camel.
When he mentioned its cost Mu\`awiya gave him double the amount and
something more and said: “When you reach Kufa tell Ali that I will bring
to fight against him one hundred thousand such persons who don't
differentiate between a he-camel and a she-camel”.

Jahiz has also confirmed these remarks of Mu\`awiya and has explained as
to why the Syrians were so obedient to him. He says: “The reason for the
Syrians being so submissive was that they were very stupid and foolish.
It was in their nature to follow others blindly and to stick to the
views once formed by them. If someone was slandered before them in his
absence, they never cared to verify if it was true or false”.

As mentioned above the conspiracies of the enemies of Ali were not
limited to the Battle of the Camel but it was only a link of the chain
of even greater conspiracies againt him. After defeating the army of
Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr, he started making preparations to bring
Mu\`awiya to his knees. His sole object was to guide the people towards
high morals and good deeds, to prevent them from committing oppression
and to establish a government which should consider the protection of
their rights to be its foremost duty.

Ali's method was quite different from those who flatter the powerful,
forgive the rebels to seek their assistance, and approach the
influential persons to help them in establishing their rule.

We have already mentioned before that Ali did not seek any recompense
from the people for the services rendered by him to them except that
they should obey him. He often uttered this sentence: “If knowledge,
wisdom and justice could be measured I would have measured them for you
gratis. However, what is necessary for it is that I should get competent
persons and intelligent brains”.

Mu\`awiya was not a receptacle in which knowledge, wisdom and justice
could be contained. Justice and public rights were not safe in his hands
and if they were left with him there was no surety that he would pass
them on to the people. That was why Ali did not allow him to continue as
the Governor of Syria. If Ali had been lax in administering justice it
was possible that he might have practised simulation with Mu\`awiya.

Mu\`awiya did not take oath of allegiance to Ali and did not obey his
orders. This shows that he was planning to establish a kingdom of his
own. Opposition to Ali by Ayesha, Talha and Zubayr and the consequent
Battle of the Camel provided him an opportunity to strengthen himself.

After the Battle of the Camel was over Ali wrote letters to Mu\`awiya
impressing upon him to refrain from antagonism and asking him to take
oath of allegiance to him as had been done by others. Mu\`awiya replied
to him as follows: “I swear by my own life that I do not mind whosoever
may have sworn allegiance to you. You would have been like Abu Bakr and
Umar if you had been innocent of the murder of Uthman. However, you
instigated the Muhajirs to revolt against him and restrained the Ansar
from helping him. The ignorant people obeyed you and the weak became
powerful because of you.

The Syrians will not refrain from fighting against you unless you hand
over to them those persons who murdered Uthman. Thereafter the question
of the caliphate will be decided through a consultative council. The
people of Hijaz were the rulers of the people so long as they supported
truth. They have now forsaken truth and consequently the Syrians now
deserve to rule. The argument advanced by you against Talha and Zubayr
does not hold good in the case of the Syrians. They took the oath of
allegiance to you but we have not done so.

As regards your excellence and greatness in Islam and your kinship with
the Prophet it is something which I cannot deny. And peace (be upon
you)”.

The letter reproduced above makes the intention of Mu\`awiya quite
clear. He wanted to avoid taking oath of allegiance to Ali on one
pretext or another. He knew that he could not deceive Ali with his
words. He was also aware that Ali had nothing to do with the murder of
Uthman. He, therefore, said that even if those persons who had taken
oath of allegiance to Umar and Abu Bakr had also taken such oath to him
and he deserved to become the caliph it was incumbent upon him to hand
over to the Syrians the murderers of Uthman who had been given asylum by
him.

However, even Ali's innocence in regard to Uthman's murder was proved
Mu\`awiya was not prepared to acknowledge him as the lawful caliph but
wanted the matter to be referred to the consultative council.
Furthermore, he was not prepared to allow the people of Hijaz and Iraq
to select the caliph, because, according to him this right had been
transferred to the Syrians because they were the rightful rulers.

It is evident that if all these conditions were fulfilled none other
than Mu\`awiya could become the caliph.

Ali showed unusual patience. However, this patience was not due to any
lack of resolution or laxity on his part. The position was that at that
time the Arabs were divided into two groups and one of them was bound to
be defeated in spite of the differences between them. On the one side
were the weak and helpless persons who wanted a life of peace and
security for themselves as well as for their brethren. There were also
the pious companions of the Prophet who longed for a country where
justice should prevail. And on the other side were those who wanted to
exploit the helpless people and to accumulate wealth by all possible
means.

The first group was headed by Ali ibn Abi Talib. All those who desired
justice were his supporters and well wishers. The chief of the second
group was Mu\`awiya bin Abi Sufyan, and all those who were accustomed to
oppress others were his followers. The recompense for the first group
was their clear conscience and the gift for the second group was
Mu\`awiya's treasure. There were numerous truth-loving persons who left
Mu\`awiya and joined Ali and similarly there were many worldly-minded
persons who left Ali and went over to Mu\`awiya. We mention here some
cases in which some persons left Ali and joined Mu\`awiya. It will
become clear what sort of people they were and why they sided with
Mu\`awiya.

A man named Yazid bin Hujiyah Tamimi was appointed by Ali as Governor of
Ray and the adjoining areas. He accumulated a large amount of wealth and
misappropriated it. When Ali came to know about it he called him back
and imprisoned him. He appointed a man named Sa\`d as a sentry. When
Sa\`d went to sleep Yazid slipped away from the prison. He mounted his
animal of riding and reached Damascus where he joined Mu\`awiya.

He composed the following verses with regard to his escape: “I mounted
my animal of riding deceiving Sa\`d and came over to Damascus. I chose a
superior person”.  
 “When Sa\`d went to sleep I escaped. Sa\`d is nothing more than a
misguided and perplexed slave”.

This Yazid satirized Ali in his verses which he sent to Iraq and made it
known to Ali that he (Yazid) was his enemy. Mu\`awiya gave him a large
sum of money whereupon he praised him and the people of Syria, and said
that Syria was a sacred land and the Syrians were true believers.

He said: “I loved the Syrians in preference to others and wept bitterly
for Uthman”.  
 “Syria is sacred land and its inhabitants are the true believers and
the followers of the Qur'an”.

Another man named Za\`qa\` bin Sa\`d was appointed by the Commander of
the Faithful as the ruler of Kaskar. He accumulated a large quantity of
wealth by all possible means and spent it lavishly. So much so that he
married a woman and gave her one hundred thousand dirhams as dowry. When
he came to know that Ali had become aware of his malpractices he left
for Syria taking away as much money as he possibly could.

Ali punished a man named Najashi for drinking wine. He was one of the
supporters of Ali and, therefore, thought that he deserved indulgence as
compared with others. He did not like that Ali the Commander of the
Faithful should punish him as he had punished others. When Mu\`awiya
promised him asylum he, therefore, ran away to Syria. On arriving there
he composed this verse satirizing Ali.  
 “Who will convey this message of mine to Ali that I am safe now and do
not feel any danger”.

When Najashi was punished many Yemenites were annoyed, as he, too, was
one of them. They, therefore, deserted Ali and joined Mu\`awiya.

Just as the worldly-minded people are numerically larger than others the
number of those who deserted Ali and joined Mu\`awiya was also large.

Every person is not capable of tolerating the truth or of saying or
doing the right thing. Therefore every person could not love Ali who was
very strict in the matter of truth and justice and could not deviate
from truth and righteousness even for his very near relatives. In the
circumstances why should that governor have not left him and joined
Mu\`awiya whom Imam Ali wrote as under: “I swear by God that if I come
to know that you have misappropriated the property of the Muslims even
to a very small extent I shall award you a punishment which will make
you indigent, heavy-laden and disgraced”.

Similarly why should that governor not have deserted him when he
addressed in these words: “I know that you have made the Public Treasury
empty and have grabbed whatever you could lay your hands on. You have
misappropriated whatever came into your hands. Will you please send me
the account that you have maintained?”

How could mean persons attain to the heights of piety and the
truthfulness and how could such a ruler like the following message of
the Commander of the Faithful?  
 “If the information which I have received about you is correct, your
camel and the lace of your shoe are better than you”.

How could the powerful capitalists and their unjust associates tolerate
that Ali should be the caliph - the same Ali who wanted to spend the
wealth for the welfare of the common man and was always at war with the
oppressors and their associates? How could they like a caliph who said:
“I swear by God that it is preferable for me to lie on thorns and be
chained rather than that I should oppress anyone or usurp even the most
ordinary thing”.

Why should these people not have rebelled against him who openly said:
“It is my duty to wage a war against oppression and the oppressors, and
against those who unlawfully grab the wealth of others, and I shall have
to account for it on the Day of Judgement”. Had Ali not considered this
responsibility essential, he would have left matters as they were. He
would have left the people to their own fate. Some would have been the
oppressors and some the oppressed.

He says: “If the Almighty God had not taken a promise from the rulers
that they will not sit quiet in the event of the oppressor becoming
oversatiated with food and the oppressed one remaining hungry, I would
have thrown the reins of the caliphate on his shoulders (i.e. would have
allowed the affairs to continue to take the turn they had already taken)
and would have satisfied its last one like the first one. You would then
have found your world to be more worthless in my eyes than the sneezing
of a goat”.

How could the treacherous persons let such a person assume the
administration of their affairs when Ali held the following view about
them and his contemporaries: “A person who knows how he will have to
render his account cannot be treacherous. We are living during a time in
which the people commit treachery and deceit considering it to be
prudence, and the ignorant persons treat it to be a good policy”.

That is why a large number of powerful persons who opposed Ali were
those who had amassed large quantities of wealth by unlawful means and
wished Mu\`awiya to make them richer at the cost of the common man and
through the Public Treasury. As regards persons other than these
capitalists who were against Ali they were those foolish persons who did
not know what was good and what was harmful for them.

As we have mentioned above the Arabs of that time were divided into many
groups. Evey group was obedient to a chief. They obeyed their chiefs
blindly and did not ask them as to why they were pleased or displeased
with someone. Ali has referred to his contemporaries of this kind, time
and again. In his remarks about them there is grief as well as annoyance
of a kind father with regard to the children who disobey him and provide
intentionally or unintentionally, the means of their own ruin. He says
about them: “I complain to God against those people who are spending
their lives in ignorance”.

Addressing those people he says: “Your enemies are not unmindful of you
whereas you have forgotten everything on account of your heedlessness”.

Explaining how such people feel when they are called upon to fight
against the rebels he says: “Some of them come unwillingly, others make
false excuses and still others withhold assistance intentionally”.

He adds: “The questioner from amongst them tries to confuse and one who
gives a reply gives it without reflecting on it. Usually the sentiments
of pleasure and displeasure make a man holding correct views deviate
from the right path. As regards that person from amongst them whose
intellect is mature it is possible that one look may impress him and one
word may bring about a revolution in his mind”.

In his last sentence the Commander of the Faithful has described the
mental condition of the distinguished personalities of his time in a
very lucid manner. He says: “During this time if there are some sensible
persons their sensibility is subservient to their greed and avarice and
their views depend on their pleasure and displeasure. If they are
pleased with somebody they take decisions in his favour without any
justification; if they are displeased with someone they give wrong
decisions in his case simply on account of their displeasure.

As regards those with mature intellect one look at the things which they
like is sufficient to make them deviate from the path already being
followed by them, and one word of an influential and powerful person or
a briber is sufficient to make them support injustice and assist the
oppressor”.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

When, after the defeat of the people of the camel, the centre of
conspiracies against Ali shifted to Damascus, Mu\`awiya bin Abi Sufyan
the leader of Bani Umayyah intensified his preparations to fight against
Ali and topple down his government. On the receipt of the first letter
of Ali wherein he had asked him to take the oath of allegiance to him
like others, he summoned to Damascus for consultation all those persons,
from whom he could expect assistance. The most prominent among them was
Amr ibn al-Aas. On receipt of Ali's letter Mu\`awiya wrote immediately
to Amr:

“You must have come to know the fate which Talha, Zubayr and Ayesha have
met. Marwan, after having left Basra, has since joined me. Now Jarir bin
Abdullah has brought to me a letter from Ali. I do not wish to send him
a reply without consulting you. You should, therefore, come as early as
possible”.

On receiving Mu\`awiya's letter Amr called his sons Abdullah and
Muhammad to consult them about the reply which might be sent by him.
Abdullah said: “I think that when the Prophet breathed his last he was
pleased with you, and Abu Bakr and Umar were also pleased with you when
they died. In case you corrupt your faith now by siding with Mu\`awiya,
you and he both will go to Hell on the Day of Judgment”.

Then Amr asked his second son Muhammad to express his views in the
matter. He replied: “You should go expeditiously and join Mu\`awiya. It
is better to reach early and become a chief rather than go later and
become a camp-follower”.

In the morning Amr ibn al-Aas called his slave named Durdan and asked
him to saddle his animal of riding. Then he asked him to unsaddle it. He
got it saddled and unsaddled thrice. Durdan asked him: “Sir! What is the
matter? I hope you won't mind if I tell you what is in your heart”. Amr
said: “Speak out what you have to say”. Thereupon Durdan said: “At
present this world and the hereafter have created a storm in your mind.
You reflect that the hereafter is with Ali but not this world and this
world is with Mu\`awiya but not the hereafter. You are wavering between
these two. My suggestion is that you should stay at home. If the
believers succeed, you may pass your day amidst them and if the
worldly-minded are victorious, they will certainly need your
assistance”.

However, the promises made by Mu\`awiya to Amr ibn al-Aas were not so
insignificant that he might have ignored them and might have stayed at
home acting on the advice of his son Abdullah or his slave Durdan. He
decided to oppose Ali and joined Bani Umayyah and Mu\`awiya.

As Amr ibn al-Aas was active in plotting against Ali in no lesser a
degree than Mu\`awiya it is necessary to give briefly his life sketch so
that we may know the reason why he left Ali and joined Mu\`awiya's
company and what the value he had for his company.

Before he adopted Islam Amr ibn al-Aas was well known for his bargaining
and profiteering. This is a fact which cannot be denied. He has himself
explained clearly this trait of his in these words: “On return from the
Battle of the Ditch I gathered together some men from amongst the
Quraysh who usually accepted my views and heard me attentively. I said
to them: “I swear by God that I can foresee that Muhammad is going to
succeed.

In the circumstances it will be better for us to migrate to Ethiopia
permanently and settle there. It is better to live under the Negus than
to submit to Muhammad. If Muhammad overcomes our people we shall remain
beyond his reach and if our people overpower him we shall stand to gain
much. They agreed with me and said: “Whatever you have said is
absolutely correct. Then I asked them to procure some presents for the
Negus............”.

Dr. Hasan Ibrahim Hasan of Egypt who is a great admirer of Amr and has
obtained a doctorate from the London University on the basis of his
thesis entitled “Amr son of Aas” writes thus while commenting on the
nature of his Islam:

“When we look into the affairs of Quraysh that in the beginning every
one of them was bent upon destroying Islam. Every victory of the Prophet
and every defeat of the Quraysh instead of dismaying them, made them
more furious. However, after they had suffered successive defeats and
all their chiefs and distinguished men were killed the young men felt
very uneasy and began thinking about their future line of action. They
could see darkness on one side and a ray of hope on the other.

They knew that even if they sided with the ever-increasing strength of
Islam at that stage they would stand to gain. However, they also feared
that by doing so they would lose the honour and dignity which they
enjoyed among their people and they would also lose their former
freedom. Some of them ignored all these misgivings and reaching Madina
took the oath of allegiance to the Prophet. Others who could not take
any decision desisted from opposing Islam and when it became perfectly
clear to them that in any case Muhammad was going to gain victory over
Quraysh they also decided to avail of the opportunity before it was too
late and adopted Islam. This happened before the conquest of Mecca.

The foremost persons among the two respective groups were Khalid bin
Walid and Amr ibn al-Aas. Amr had gone away from Arabia to Ethiopia to
study the conditions there. However, when he realized that very good
relations existed between the Prophet and the Negus, and in Arabia Islam
was going to reach the height of success and the fall of Mecca was a
matter of days only, he decided to join those who had already embraced
Islam and to do voluntarily what he would have to do willy-nilly later”.
(***Amr ibn al-Aas*** by Dr. Hasan Ibrahim Hasan Egyptian also Urdu
translation published by Idara Maktaba Jadid, Lahore. p.43-44).

Opportunism remained alive in the heart of Amr ibn al-Aas throughout his
life. In this respect he was just like the chiefs of the tribes and
other distinguished persons against whom Abu Bakr, Umar and Ali had to
wage war. We have explained in the foregoing pages that when, Amr ibn
al-Aas was the Governor of Egypt, he accumulated a large amount of
wealth. Umar ordered him to surrender half of it to the Public Treasury.
He tried to evade payment on different pretexts but Umar was not
satisfied. He wrote to Amr ibn al-Aas saying: “I swear by God that I am
not going to be deceived by your fraudulent words. You people have
amassed wealth and are not afraid of anything.......Look here! You
collect disgrace and leave fire behind you as inheritance. I am sending
Muhammad son of Muslima to you. You should hand over half of your wealth
to him”.

When Muhammad son of Muslima met Amr with the letter in question he got
very sumptuous dishes prepared for him, but Muhammad declined to eat
them. Amr asked him: “Do you consider it unlawful to take meal in my
house?” Muhammad replied: “If you had placed before me the food which is
ordinarily offered to the guests I would not have refused to eat it.
However, the food which you have arranged for me is a prelude to
corruption (i.e. it is nothing short of bribe). You should, therefore,
remove this food from here and surrender to me half of your property.

Amr, therefore, handed over to him one half of everything belonging to
him. A pair of shoes was left with him out of which Muhammad took one
shoe also, and let the other shoe remain with him. Amr ibn al-Aas could
not tolerate this. He, therefore, said to Muslima: “Woe be to the time
when I was appointed as governor by Umar. By God I am aware of the
condition of Umar's father Khattab when he used to carry a bundle of
firewood on his head and Umar too carried another bundle. Both of them
did not have enough clothes to hide their bodies. Each of them wore a
loin-cloth which did not reach even upto their knees. And I swear by God
that my father Aas lived such a luxurious life that he was not satisfied
even with a silken coat with gold buttons on it”.

This incident shows how keen Amr ibn al-Aas was to avail of every
opportunity to acquire wealth. It also shows the complex mentality of
the distinguished persons. Amr could not find any fault with Umar and
his father except that they were poor and did not have enough clothes to
wear and worked with their hand and carried bundles of firewood on their
heads and he could not mention any quality of his own father except that
he used to wear silken clothes.

It would be wrong to imagine that what Amr ibn al-Aas said about Umar
was occasioned by sudden agitation and anger. No. That was not so. The
fact is that he had always been thinking that as Umar and his father
were poor and his own father Aas was a rich man his father was better
than Khattab and he himself was better than Umar. Amr's point of view
was that all human beings were not equal.

According to him some persons were mean and others were noble and the
criterion of nobleness was one's descent and nothing else. Whoever
belonged to a noble and rich family was noble and one was low-born was
despicable. The noble persons possessed rights which were not admissible
to others and it was the duty of the people to obey them. All historians
agree that as regards the administration and government of Egypt Amr's
view was that it was necessary for one who wanted improvement and
development not to lend ears to the complaints made against the nobility
by the persons belonging to the lower classes”. (Al-Islam wa al-Hazarat
al-Arabiyyah).

In this way Amr ibn al-Aas was completely occupied with greed for
indulgence and luxury. He believed that exploitation of the lower
classes was the birth-right of those who belonged to the noble families.
At times his mind wavered as to whether he should keep his conscience
alive or to kill it for worldly gains, but he soon decided in favour of
luxury and wealth. As mentioned above the same thing happened when
Mu\`awiya called him. He reflected for some time as to whether he should
side with Ali or with Mu\`awiya, but eventually he decided to proceed to
Syria.

The historians and narrators attribute some verses to Amr ibn al-Aas. He
composed them while he was going to Mu\`awiya. In these verses he has
clearly expressed his views about Ali and Mu\`awiya. In his eyes Ali was
a very great man and Mu\`awiya stood no comparison with him. It might he
said that he had two hearts in his bosom. One of them stopped him from
going to Mu\`awiya whereas the other ordered him to go and see
Mu\`awiya. He concludes his poem with the following verses:

“I adopted the world intentionally on account of avarice, although there
was no sound reason for adopting the world”.

“I know very well the losses involved in adopting the world, but it is
also a fact that I possess various worldly desires”.

“The real thing is that my mind desires to lead a life of honour and
dignity. Who can agree to lead a life of humiliation”.

According to Amr ibn al-Aas life of honour and dignity was confined to
immediate worldly gains and Umayyad promises. Just as in the days of
Umar the criterion of dignity in his eyes was such that his own father
used to wear silken clothes, the standard of humiliation, according to
him, during the time of Ali was assisting who neither did any bargaining
himself nor allowed others to do it. This standard of humiliation was
like that of the poor clothing of Umar and his father.

When Amr ibn al-Aas reached Mu\`awiya's court the latter said to him: “O
Abu Abdillah! I invite you to perform jihad against that man (i.e. Ali
ibn Abi Talib) who has disobeyed God created dissension among the
Muslims and dispersed the nation”. Amr ibn al-Aas said: “What will you
give me if I join you to fight against Ali knowing as you do that the
matter is so dangerous”.

Mu\`awiya said: “I shall give you whatever you ask for”. Amr ibn al-Aas
said: “I want the Governorship of Egypt”.

Thereafter a long deceptive conversation took place between them. Each
of them tried to dupe the other. Each of them had his personal gain in
view.

Their deceptive conversation, however, ended with bargaining with each
other. Amr ibn al-Aas acknowledged Mu\`awiya as the caliph and took oath
of allegiance to him and in return Mu\`awiya gave him absolute authority
over Egypt and its inhabitants and promised non-interference from his
side. Ali has drawn a picture of this bargaining in the following words:

“He did not swear allegiance to Mu\`awiya until he agreed to pay the
price of his allegiance. May the hands of one who swore this allegiance
be not victorious and successful! And may the purchaser of this
allegiance be disgraced and humiliated! (The time has now come that) you
should get ready for war and procure the necessary equipment”.

Ali further says about this bargaining: “I have been given to understand
that Amr ibn al-Aas has not taken oath of allegiance to Mu\`awiya for
nothing. He made him agree beforehand that he would have to pay its
price - that he would have to give a present for forsaking the faith”.

Amr ibn al-Aas did not content himself with the aforesaid bargain. His
motive was something else. He advised Mu\`awiya to organize a propaganda
movement against Ali so that it might be useful in connection with a war
which might be fought later. He said to him inter alia: “Send reliable
persons to different cities to propagate that it is Ali who has killed
Uthman”.

Amr ibn al-Aas did all this in spite of the fact that he knew very well
that Ali was not at all involved in the murder of Uthman and in fact the
party to which he himself belonged had a great hand in the matter, as we
have explained in an earlier chapter.

When at the time of the Battle of Siffin Mu\`awiya asked Amr ibn al-Aas
to array the forces he did not comply with his wish until he had
obtained a promise from him once again that when Ali was killed and his
(Mu\`awiya's) govern- ment was established he would give him the
Governorship of Egypt.

Another proof of the fact that Amr ibn al-Aas was very skilled in
bargaining and safeguarding his own interests is that when he and Abu
Musa Ash\`ari sat together in connection with the well-known event of
Arbitration and those who were representing the two parties suggested
the names of different persons for the caliphate, Abu Musa put forth the
name of Abdullah bin Umar al-Khattab. Others also supported him saying
that Abdullah was the most deserving person for the caliphate. Abu Musa
said time and again: “I would like to revive the name of Umar
al-Khattab) if I could. Thereupon Amr ibn al-Aas said to Abu Musa: “If
you want to make Abdullah bin Umar the caliph for his religiousness why
don't you select my son Abdullah for that office? You are well aware of
his merits and competence”.

This was how Amr ibn al-Aas used to bargain. He had come as an
arbitrator nominated by Mu\`awiya but as soon as he felt that there was
a possibility of his son becoming the caliph he tried to avail of the
opportunity and put forward his name for that office. At that time he
also forgot that in the Battle of Siffin he was the Commander-in-Chief
of Mu\`awiya's forces and in the event of success he had promised him
the Governorship of Egypt, and ignored the fact that he was the
arbitrator from Mu\`awiya's side and the arbitration was also taking
place on account of his machinations and deceit.

The fact is that both Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn al-Aas knew that they were
doing injustice to Ali. In the heart of their hearts they were aware
that Ali was better than them. Both of them were endeavouring to achieve
their own purpose. Apparently they were friends and well-wishers of each
other but in reality they were very much inimical and their enmity
became manifest from the colour of their faces and from the sentences
they uttered. After the Battle of Siffin was over Mu\`awiya asked his
courtiers one day: “What is the most surprising thing?” Every one of
them expressed his views on the subject. When the turn of Amr ibn al-Aas
came he said: The most strange thing is, that falsehood should gain
victory over truth”. By saying this he alluded to Mu\`awiya and Ali.

Mu\`awiya said in reply at once: “No. The most strange thing is that a
man may, without fearing another man and knowing that he can do him no
harm, give him something which he does not deserve”. He meant that he
had given the Governorship of Egypt to Amr ibn al-Aas although Amr could
do him no harm and did not also deserve to be the governor.

The views held by Amr ibn al-Aas about Ali and Mu\`awiya become manifest
from the acknowledgement made by him in these words: “I have been
deceived. It was a great mistake to leave Ali and to support Mu\`awiya”.
This admission and acknowledgement by Amr shows the extreme moral
degradation of Mu\`awiya's associates and supporters. They were
deceiving themselves intentionally.

When Ali was martyred and soon afterwards Mu\`awiya became the sole
ruler of the Islamic territories he began to adopt dilly-dallying
tactics in appointing Amr ibn al-Aas as the Governor of Egypt. Amr
demanded that Mu\`awiya should fulfil his promise. However, when
Mu\`awiya did not comply with his request he wrote a long poem and sent
it to him. Some of its verses are as under:

“O Mu\`awiya! Do not forget the prize which you promised me. Do not
deviate from the right path”.  
 “O son of Hind! I assisted you against the greatest and the most
distinguished chief (i.e. Ali ibn Abi Talib) on account of my
ignorance”.  
 “What comparison do you bear with Ali? How can a sword be compared with
an axe, the Milky Way with the last layer of the earth, or Ali with
Mu\`awiya”.

On receiving this poem Mu\`awiya immediately appointed Amr ibn al-Aas as
Governor of Egypt.

How much Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn al-Aas, whom their personal interests,
and give and take matters had brought together, hated each other is also
proved by the following incident:

When Mu\`awiya deputed Amr ibn al-Aas to strengthen the plot of
Arbitration and to take advantage of the foolishness of Abu Musa
Ash\`ari, he (Mu\`awiya) said something which displeased Amr. He,
therefore, recited a satirical verse about Mu\`awiya which is
well-known. Thereupon Mu\`awiya asked one of his courtiers named Abdur
Rahman bin Umm Hakam to reply to that verse and write a satire on him.
Abdur Rahman satirized Amr in a number of verses wherein he threatened
and cursed him and also censured him for having run away from the
battlefield of Siffin while he was facing Ali. Abdur Rahman said: “You
should give up rebellion and stubbornness because a rebel is an accursed
person. Did you not run away on the day of Siffin while facing Ali? You
were very keen to save your life and feared you might have to face
death, although every person has to die one day”.

Evidently both of these persons possessed a strange mentality. On the
one hand they had joined hands to claim revenge for the murder of Uthman
and to declare Ali to be an oppressor and take revenge on him, and on
the other hand they threatened, abused and censured each other.

There was a sect among the Muslims who decided most of the matters
according to the dictates of reason and good conscience. They have
treated both Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn al-Aas to be treacherous, because
they fought against Ali who was the lawful caliph. The Mu\`tazilah held
this view. The Mu\`tazilah were more bold as compared with other Muslim
sects in the matter of analysis and criticism of the actions of the
people. As explained by the author of ***al-Munyah wal-Amal,*** most of
the Mu\`atazilites have dissociated themselves from Mu\`awiya and Amr
ibn al-Aas and declared them to be thieves and robbers, who looted
public property. (See ***Fajr al-Islam*** p.240).

Mu\`awiya was exactly as depicted by Ali. He says: “He is a man with a
big mouth and a swollen belly. He ate what he could find and was on the
look-out what he could not get”.

As regards Amr ibn al-Aas he says: “He told lies and broke promises. If
he wanted to borrow something from another person he pestered him for
it, and if someone else asked him for something he showed stinginess.
And if he made any pact or promise he violated it”.

All these qualities were common in Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn al-Aas and that
is why they joined hands with each other. When a man with a big mouth
also possesses a big belly he naturally eats what he finds, and remains
on the look-out for more. He does not care whether the thing being
utilized by him is lawful or unlawful nor is he acquainted with the
sense of equity and justice, cruelty and oppression, good and bad, and
virtue and meanness. And when a person is a liar he breaks the promises
made by him. When he wants to borrow something from another he presses
him hard but shows stinginess when he himself is asked for something. He
violates the pacts and promises made by him. He does all these things
for his personal gain.

What Ali has said about both of them means that their actions were based
on their selfish motives. In the circumstances nothing could prevent
them from collaborating with each other on treachery and rebellion
especially when both of them stood to gain by it, although in the heart
of their hearts they hated each other. Ali refers to this fact when he
says:

“I have read the letter of these two evil-doers (Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn
al-Aas) who have joined hands to disobey the orders of God”.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

The enemies of Ali plotted against him with great dexterity. The
conspirators were many and their aims and objects were also different
from one another. They were, however, united on one point and it was
that Ali should not be their ruler. Mu\`awiya had a great hand in
organizing and strengthening the conspiracy. He was the ring-leader and
all others were his supporters and followers. In fact it was he who
caused the Battle of the Camel also. If he had not provided equipment to
the insurgents, without himself coming into the forefront, this battle
would not have taken place. This claim is also proved by the fact that
immediately on receiving information about Ali's having assumed the
caliphate he sent a letter to Zubayr through a man belonging to the
tribe of \`Amis. The letter read as follows:

“From Mu\`awiya bin Abu Sufyan to the Commander of the Faithful Abdullah
al-Zubayr. After salam (greetings) I have to inform you that I have
obtained the oath of allegiance to you from the people of Syria and they
have promptly acknowledged you as their caliph. Now it is necessary for
you to endeavour that the people of Basra and Kufa should also join you,
because if the citizens of these two cities submit to you, the matters
will become very easy for you. After you I have obtained the oath for
Talha bin Ubaydullah. Now you claim the revenge of the murder of Uthman
on Ali and should invite the people to yourselves. Both of you should
make utmost efforts in this matter and quickly too. May God grant you
success and destroy your enemies”.

When Zubayr received the said letter he was very happy and showed it to
Talha also. Both of them were deceived by Mu\`awiya's show of sincerity.
They immediately broke their allegiance to Ali, acting on the advice of
Mu\`awiya, and decided to fight against him. Consequently the Battle of
the Camel took place. Mu\`awiya's desire was fulfilled as he wanted that
the caliph of the time Ali and the aspirants of caliphate Talha and
Zubayr should fight together so that their strength might be weakened.

When the Battle of the Camel was over Mu\`awiya spent enormous sums of
money to bribe those about whom he felt that they would assist him or
would not at least support Ali. And if he knew that someone would
neither help him nor would remain a silent spectator when he (Mu\`awiya)
revolted, he adopted novel methods to deceive and misguide them. Amr ibn
al-Aas was Mu\`awiya's chief adviser and helper in all these
conspiracies. Ali did not try to coax or flatter Amr ibn al-Aas and to
win him over even when he came to know that he was collaborating with
Mu\`awiya. He remained as upright and truthful as ever and even the
alliance of Amr ibn al-Aas and Mu\`awiya did not affect his
steadfastness. He, therefore, wrote a letter to Amr ibn al-Aas as
follows:

“You have made your faith pursue the world of a man, whose deviation is
not something hidden, it is known to all. He is one who brands even a
noble-minded who sits with him, and befools one who is judicious and
forbearing. You have followed him and crave for his crumbs just as a dog
followed a lion looking at its claws greedily and expecting to get the
remains of its prey. By doing so you have ruined your present world as
well as the hereafter, although you would have gained your object even
if you had stuck to truth. Now if God grants me victory over you and the
son of Abu Sufyan I shall punish both of you properly for your misdeeds
and even if I cannot gain control over you and you continue to live
after me your fate will be extremely bad”.


