Was it justified?
=================

In continuation of what has been stated and before giving an account of
the Kharijites, it appears necessary to mention two particular events
which took place in the Battle of Siffin. We feel that these two
incidents are an abundant proof of the fact that Ali successfully
achieved his aim, because real success means winning the hearts and not
planting one's standard on the fort of the enemy.

We propose to mention these incidents in detail in particular, because
many admirers of Ali think that on these two occasions he did not act
expediently and treated Mu\`awiya and his army in a manner which they
did not deserve.

These persons say that if he had not acted on these occasions as he did
he could succeed without actual fighting and even if it had been
necessary to fight the battle would not have been so bloody and so
lengthy.

The first event was the one we have already mentioned in the foregoing
pages viz. when Ali obtained control over the bank of the Euphrates he
permitted his enemies to utilize the water of the river like his own
army, although earlier, when the bank of the river was controlled by the
Syrians, they had declined to allow Ali and his companions access to
water, and had said, “We won't give you a drop of water until you die of
thirst”. But Ali beat them off, and after gaining control over the
river, left its bank open for the enemy.

Mu\`awiya had treated the control of the bank of the river to be his
first success and had vowed that he would not allow the Iraqis to have
even a drop of water, unless they gained control over the bank of the
river by force. However, after Ali had beaten off the Syrians and
occupied the bank of the river he said to them: “You can drink water
just as we were drinking it”.

The second event relates to Amr ibn al-Aas who was at one moment at the
mercy of Ali during the battle, but he did not kill him. Briefly the
story is as follows:

When Ali saw that a fierce battle was in progress and so many persons
were being killed, he ascended a mound and said: “O Mu\`awiya!”
Mu\`awiya said: “Yes”. Thereupon Ali said: “Why should these people kill
one another unnecessarily for our sake? Leave them alone and come into
the battlefield yourself so that we two should decide the matter by
combating each other. Whoever is victorious should be the caliph”. Amr
ibn al-Aas said to Mu\`awiya: “Right it is! Ali has said a just thing”.
Mu\`awiya laughed and said: “O Amr! You too have become a victim of
greed”. He meant to say that if he went to fight with Ali he would
certainly be killed, and his death would pave the way for Amr to become
the caliph. Amr said: “I swear by God that you can save your honour only
if you fight against Ali”. Mu\`awiya replied: “By God you are joking. I
shall fight with Ali along with my army”. By this he meant that it was
not possible to engage with Ali in a single combat.

The historians say that Amr ibn al-Aas said ridiculing Mu\`awiya. “It is
a pity that you show cowardice in facing Ali and injure the feelings of
your well wisher I swear by God that even if I had to die a thousand
times I would not have desisted from fighting against Ali”.

Amr came up to fight with Ali. Within the twinkling of an eye Ali
attacked him with his spear and down fell the enemy on the ground. Then
the sword of the Commander of the Faithful flashed on Amr's head like
lightning and Ali was about to kill him, but he (i.e. Amr) became naked.
Ali then turned his face and left the place because his inherent modesty
and magnanimity did not permit him to glance at the private parts of any
person.

Those who admire Ali, and wish that he had been successful, say that on
both these occasions he did not act expediently. They are of the view
that when he had gained control of the bank of the river he was entitled
to deprive the Syrians of water on two accounts:

Firstly it is permissible in war to resort to a strategy which makes the
enemy surrender or weakens him so much that he is not in a position to
fight effectively. With these things in view Mu\`awiya had gained
control over the river and had called it his first success.

Secondly Ali had gained control over the bank of the river after
fighting, and now it amounted to war booty. According to military laws,
therefore, he would have been justified in refusing its use to Mu\`awiya
and his army.

Similarly, they say that Ali acted inexpediently when he allowed Amr ibn
al-Aas to run away and spared his life .Amr was the Commander-in-chief
of Mu\`awiya's forces, a shrewd political intriguer and Ali's sworn
enemy. He instigated the people to revolt against Ali and mobilized a
large army to fight against him. If he had killed him there and then
when his Zulfiqar had reached his head he would have been justified in
doing so on three accounts.

Firstly, according to military laws, killing Amr would have meant the
killing of one of the dangerous brutes of the Syrians. After his death
the enemy forces would have been demoralized and would have run away.
Mu\`awiya would have lost his right hand man and Ali would have killed
his most deceitful, cunning, and influential enemy.

Secondly Amr ibn al-Aas belonged to an army which did not owe allegiance
to Ali and was inimical towards him and his friends.

Thirdly it was Amr ibn al-Aas who had come to fight with Ali and had
challenged him. If he had been as brave as Ali and had got an
opportunity to kill him he would certainly not have spared him. That
being so if Ali had killed Amr nobody would have blamed him.

In view of the fact that Ali was the Commander of an army and on these
two occasions success was at his feet, it was necessary for him not to
lose that opportunity, because it is the law of war. The real attribute
of a military commander is that he does not lose even the smallest
opportunity of winning the war.

From purely military point of view the objection raised by the critics
is correct. But the question is: “Was Ali only the Commander of an
army?”

What we have said about Ali so far shows clearly that there was not the
least double-dealing or contrariety in his personality. Then how could
it be possible that on the one hand he should possess virtues of the
highest degree and look at things with broad-mindedness and on the other
hand he should be so narrow-minded and selfish that he should forsake
all the values and principles only to gain victory? The fact is that he
did not desire only victory in a war like other commanders but he also
safeguarded rational and human principles and had a great regard for
human values.

Ali's virtues and moral principles were the concomitants of his
personality and he never abandoned them for even a moment. His conduct
was the same in the Battle of Siffin as in the Battle of the Camel. His
enemies had blocked his way to the bank of the river and had said that
they would not allow him to have even one drop of water till he died.
But he advised the people in these words:

• “If your brother is displeased with you try to reconcile him by means
of goodness, and ward off his mischief by being kind to him”.

• “Overpower your enemy by means of goodness and kindness. Such a
victory is more delicious”

• “What is the use of that goodness which is acquired through evil?”

• “The rank of one, who performs jihad and is martyred in the path of
God, is not higher than one who does not permit his enemy to be harmed
after overpowering him. Such a man is very near to the angels”.

He is the same Ali who had said about his assassin after the Battle of
Siffin: “If you forgive him your act will be nearer to virtue”.

Undoubtedly a great personality is not bound by the limits which the
admirers of Ali wish to prescribe for him. Ali's qualities were not
those of the commander of an army who wants to achieve victory at any
cost. During war high morals and human virtues are usually ignored and
no importance is attached to human life. The conscience and reason of
great and magnanimous persons, however, have a regard for these things.
Of course, Ali was too magnanimous a person to deprive even his enemies
of water, although by doing so he could bring them to their knees. He
had formulated principles for the dignity and honour of human life which
were much superior to the prevalent rules and regulations. His modesty
and magnanimity could not permit him to kill Amr ibn al-Aas when he was
subdued by him although it would have been quite in order to kill him in
accordance with the rules of warfare.

By adopting on these two occasions the unique behaviour, Ali added a
golden chapter in the history of mankind. Magnanimity is one thing and
bravery is another. Magnanimity combines the concept of bravery with
noblemindedness and love for mankind. A person in whom all these
qualities are combined is supernatural as compared with others, and
respectable in the eyes of all who are wise and learned.

If bravery means attacking the enemy and gaining victory over him,
magnanimity and manliness means all this as well as fear of God,
forbearance, love, kindness and sacrifice. The so-called brave man does
not believe in any limit or condition in the matter of victory and wants
to overpower the enemy by all possible means. A manly and magnanimous
person, however, follows some rules and principles in this matter. He is
not happy with his victory unless it is in keeping with morality and
human dignity. He prefers to die himself rather than to violate human
dignity and honour. And if these qualities were ever combined in any
person it was Ali son of Abu Talib.

Could it be possible for Ali to deny to human beings, even if they were
his enemies, that water which was being utilized even by animals and
birds? Could he tolerate killing a man who wanted to live like all
others?  
 Could Ali like to kill a man, who wanted to live with others, look at
the sun and the moon like other human beings, eat bread, and drink
water?

Do the admirers of Ali not realize that these two events which occurred
at Siffin resemble many others on account of which his critics object to
his general policy of government? These critics say that he committed a
number of political mistakes.

Firstly he dismissed Mu\`awiya from the governorship of Syria
immediately upon his becoming caliph although it was necessary for him
to have delayed this action till his government was firmly established.
Secondly, he antagonized Talha and Zubayr. If he had maintained good
relations with them the Battle of the Camel would not have taken place
and his strength would not have diminished. Thirdly, he was very strict
with his governors and officers and did not allow them to accumulate
wealth by unlawful means, although he should have been lenient towards
them so that they might support him.

These very actions of Ali which are criticized by his critics were in
our view his best acts and were the outcome of his tender sentiments and
good conscience. We think that his critics raise these objections
because they judge his actions according to the standards of the time
when honesty and integrity had ceased to exist. His actions may be
objectionable in the light of the moral standards of the days of Bani
Umayyah and Bani Abbas but they are certainly not objectionable when we
keep his own time in view.

In the matter of planning and politics Ali was more prudent and wise
than even the greatest Arab politicians. He had a deep insight into
political and military matters and knew the inner feelings of the people
much better than the hypocrites like Mu\`awiya. However, he hated
political intrigues and opportunism. He despised everything which made
man dishonourable. He did not desire any sucess which was achieved by
fraud and deceit. He always liked uprightness.

Even when Mu\`awiya was notorious for his intrigues and deceit and it
was said that Ali was not shrewd like him he said: “I swear by God that
Mu\`awiya is not cleverer than me but he is treacherous and wicked. If I
had not despised treachery I would have been the cleverest man among the
Arabs”.

We have briefly discussed the two events of the Battle of Siffin to show
that not only the critics of Ali but also his admirers have not been
able to understand Ali's personality properly. Some criticize his
administration and others say that he did not avail of the opportunity
for victory in the Battle of Siffin. In fact both of them have failed to
understand Ali fully because in his eyes the origin of the meaning of
politics and the rules of warfare was the same or in other words it was
the soul of Ali, whose different manifestations were in perfect harmony
with one another, and they are the different rings of the same chain.
According to him the criterion for goodness and evil, lawfulness and
unlawfulness was good conscience and kind manners.

A friend of mine who is a well-read literary man and takes keen interest
in the history of Islam said to me once: “You cannot convince me that
Ali was well-versed in politics and competent enough to administer the
affairs of the people as claimed by you”.

I replied to him: “Suppose that Ibn Muljam had not planned to
assassinate Ali, and even if he did he had not succeeded in achieving
his object on account of the presence of Ali's friends around him and he
had remained alive. And suppose that he had then fought against
Mu\`awiya, as he had already intended and had gained victory over him,
as was very probable. Or suppose that the arbitration scheme of
Mu\`awiya had failed and Ali's army had not been divided into two groups
and he had continued the battle and captured Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn
al-Aas. In other words the result of this battle had been similar to the
Battle of the Camel, and Ali had defeated Mu\`awiya as he had defeated
Talha and Zubayr. In all these cases much would have depended on the
circumstances or luck.

Then what would you have said about the administration and war strategy
of Ali? Then would you not have said like us that in spite of his
oratory, wisdom, nobleness and high morality Ali was a cleverer
politician than Mu\`awiya and more competent to solve the problems than
Amr ibn al-Aas. Hence if he did not gain victory over Mu\`awiya why
should it be said that he was ignorant of politics and war tactics. Why
should it not be said that chances were the real cause of his remaining
unsuccessful. And what we have said about the politics of Ali in
connection with the events of Siffin is equally applicable to the
dismissal of Mu\`awiya and other governors. Just as his failure in
Siffin was due to circumstances in the same way he did not succeed in
the case of the dismissal of Mu\`awiya and others. The chances of the
time, the politics of Uthman and the changed circumstances, provided
such weapons of deceit and injustice to the governors as could not be
utilized by Ali owing to his magnanimity, nobleness of mind, wisdom,
greatness and dignity’.

All persons including the critics and the historians have become
habituated to look upon various events and give verdicts about them
according to the popular opinion, and assess the competence of great
personalities in the light of their successes and failures. They do not
keep in view the means used by them nor do they take into account the
high morality and base qualities of the opposing parties. It has often
happened that the greatest politicians and very efficient persons failed
because of chances and sudden occurrences, and ordinary persons
succeeded because of those very reasons. Neither the efficient
politicians could prevent those occurrences from taking place, nor could
the ordinary persons cause them to happen by means of their own strength
and will.

In short the admirers of Ali wish that Ali too should have adopted
diplomacy and a policy of fraud and deceit and should have consequently
been victorious. Ali was not, however, prepared to deviate from truth
and righteousness. These people desire that Ali should have become
Mu\`awiya son of Abu Sufyan, when he was Ali son of Abu Talib, an
embodiment of the attributes of the Prophet of Islam.


