The divine will
===============

Now we turn to the events which we had discontinued earlier. The group
of persons who were annoyed with Ali (i.e. the Kharijites) left Kufa and
settled in a nearby village called Harura. For this reason they are also
called \`Haruriyah'. And as their slogan was ***“La Hakam illallah”***
(There is no judge except God), they are called ***\`Muhakkamah'*** as
well. However, their most well-known name is Kharijites.

Ali proceeded towards them along with his army. He, however, desired
that no bloodshed should take place and they might be made to renew
their allegiance to him and forsake their false belief by means of
discussion. He, therefore, sent a message to them saying: “Send to me
from amongst you the one, whom you consider to be most intelligent and
judicious, so that he may argue with me. If he is able to convince me I
shall do as you want me to. Otherwise you should renew your allegiance
to me”.

The Kharijites sent their leader Abdullah bin al-Kawa as their
representative. Long discussions took place between him and the
Commander of the Faithful. Ali gave satisfactory and convincing replies
to all the questions asked by him. He went back to his friends, informed
them about the matters which had come under discussion and told them
that Ali had convinced him fully and he (i.e. Ali) was on the right.

The Kharijites, however, remained adamant and did not accept the advice
of their leader. They said that as they had already declared Ali to be
an infidel it was not possible for them to renew their allegiance to
him. They accused Abdullah bin al-Kawa of having shown incompetence in
arguing and proving his faith and asked him not to hold any further
discussions with him nor disclose to anyone what he had already
discussed with him. Thus they continued to be rebellious and inimical
towards him and treated him and his companions as infidels and atheists.

Ali was very much grieved to find that his former friends and supporters
had become his enemies and were not prepared to listen to reason. They
were worldly minded people and were slaves to their carnal desires. He
realized that only sword could settle the matters between them and
himself. This had become necessary because those people had taken the
law into their own hands. They killed those on whom they could lay their
hands, and looted and plundered peaceful citizens.

Even then the Commander of the Faithful did not give up advising those
people to come to the right path. He also impressed upon his soldiers
not to take the initiative in starting the battle. However, the
Kharijites suddenly raised their slogan: “There is no judge except God”
and attacked Ali's army with full force. Thereupon the Commander of the
Faithful and his soldiers also drew their swords and the dreadful Battle
of Nahrawan started. When fighting came to an end almost all the
Kharijites were killed. Only four hundred persons survived, who had also
sustained serious wounds. Had they not been half-dead owing to their
wounds it was possible that they too might have died fighting, or would
have gained victory. Ali ordered these persons to be dealt with kindness
and handed over to their families and tribes, so that they might make
arrangements for their proper treatment.

After having dealt with the Kharijites Ali desired to proceed to Syria
to punish Mu\`awiya. However, this time also Ash\`ath bin Qais
frustrated his plans by his deceitful activities. He made a large number
of soldiers desert the army and hide themselves in adjoining cities. He
argued that the soldiers had got tired of fighting for a long time and
needed rest. He added that they would rejoin the army after they had
taken rest and become fresh.

The Commander of the Faithful returned to Kufa to make preparation for
attacking Syria.

Mu\`awiya's own army was faithful to him and the Kharijites also helped
him unconsciously by fighting against Ali. As regards Ash\`ath bin Qais,
the historians say that in his heart of hearts he was a supporter and
sympathiser of Mu\`awiya .Some historians have stated clearly that he
went to Damascus, met Mu\`awiya, obtained enormous wealth from him and
began awaiting future developments.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

At this stage fate shot an arrow at Ali to which that great man fell
victim and thereby his enemies achieved their object. However, this
success of his enemies was not the result of their deceit, cleverness,
wisdom, strength or prudence. It was a sheer chance and a sudden
accident which paved the way for their success. Some fanatical
Kharijites assembled at a place and began talking about their friends
and kinsmen who were killed in the Battle of Nahrawan. They expressed
the view that the responsibility for the bloodshed lay on the shoulders
of three persons who were, according to their belief, the leaders of
those who had deviated from the right path viz. Ali, Mu\`awiya and Amr
ibn al-Aas.

One of the Kharijites named Bark son of Abdullah undertook to kill
Mu\`awiya; another named Amr bin Bakr promised to do away with Amr ibn
al-Aas; and a third named Abdur Rahman ibn Muljam took the
responsibility of assassinating Ali.

The above-mentioned three Kharijites decided to kill Ali, Mu\`awiya, and
Amr ibn al-Aas, during one and the same night.

These three persons were very fanatical, revengeful and daring and were
prepared to achieve their object at any cost. However, in the case of
Abdur Rahman ibn Muljam a strange thing happened which spurred his
resolve and made it so firm that even if the other two Kharijites had
hesitated in killing Mu\`awiya and Amr ibn al-Aas; there was no
likelihood of his wavering in the assassination of Ali. It so happened
that he came from Mecca to Kufa and stayed there with a friend of his.

There he suddenly met a woman named Qattam daughter of Al-Akhzar who was
a matchless beauty of her time, and whose father and brother were killed
in the Battle of Nahrawan. Abdur Rahman fell in love with her and
proposed to her at once. She asked him as to what dowry he would give
her. He told her that he would give her anything she desired. Thereupon
she said: “I want you to give me three thousand dirhams, one slave and
one slave-girl and also to assassinate Ali son of Abu Talib”. He
replied: “It is easy to provide three thousand dirhams, a slave and a
slave- girl, but how can I assassinate Ali?” She replied: “Kill him with
some trick. If you kill him you will feel satisfied and will also enjoy
my company for a long time”.

Before having met Qattam and conversed with her Abdur Rahman ibn Muljam
was somewhat shaken in his resolution to assassinate Ali, because in
spite of all his meanness it was not an easy task for him to kill the
Imam for an offence with which he had no concern. Similarly it was also
not easy for him to take a dreadful step, whose result was likely to be
extremely dangerous. However, fate willed it that Abdur Rahman ibn
Muljam should become confirmed in his resolve and get ready to commit
the most heinous crime. Fate took out a new arrow from its quiver and
gave it in the hand of ibn Muljam to aim it at the Imam's bosom.

Fate took Abdur Rahman ibn Muljam to his friend's house and also brought
Qattam at that place. Then there took place the strange conversation
about dowry, about which a poet says:

“I have neither seen in Arabia nor anywhere else any person so generous
that he should have given to any woman dowry equal to that of Qattam
i.e. three thousand dirhams, one slave, one slave-girl and the
assassination of Ali with a sharp sword. Howsoever large a dowry may be
it cannot be greater than Ali, and every murder is easier as compared
with that of Ali, which was committed by ibn Muljam”.

The conversation of Qattam and ibn Muljam ended with this remark of the
latter: “All right. It will be as you wish. I undertake to assassinate
Ali”.

The three Kharijites who had plotted against the lives of Ali, Mu\`awiya
and Amr ibn al-Aas during an appointed night proceeded to their
destinations. And then something strange and possibly unprecedented
happened, for which none could be held responsible.

The man who had gone to kill Amr ibn al-Aas did not succeed in achieving
his end. Perhaps fate had willed that he should not overpower Amr ibn
al-Aas. It so happened that during that night Amr became indisposed and
this indisposition saved his life. He did not come out of his house
either to offer prayers or to perform any other job. He asked the
police-officer of the city named Kharija ibn Huzafa to lead the dawn
prayers in his place. When the police-officer came out of the house Amr
bin Bakr took him for Amr ibn al-Aas and killed him.

When Amr bin Bakr was captured and taken before Amr ibn al-Aas the
latter said to him: “You wanted to kill me but God willed that Kharija
should be killed”. Then he ordered Amr bin Bakr to be beheaded.

When Mu\`awiya came to the masjid and Bark bin Abdullah saw him he aimed
his sword at his head, but the sword actually struck his buttocks and
the attack proved to be abortive. Mu\`awiya's buttocks served as his
shield and his life was saved.


