Let them mourn
==============

A stranger is sitting in a corner of the world, away from the people, in
a state of extreme anguish. He is sitting alone and his loneliness
weighs heavily on him.

He is a stranger although he is living among his people, but he is
extremely grieved on account of them. Time did not recognize him,
although he had pervaded it.

The earth did not recognize him, although his sweet and wise sayings
continued to ring in it and it saw with its own eyes his great feats.

This stranger used to spend everything he possessed on others but did
not seek anything from them. He was subjected to great oppressions, but
he never thought of taking revenge. He forgave his enemies after gaining
victory over them. He never did any injustice to his enemies and never
performed any unlawful act for the sake of his friends. He was the
helper of the weak, the brother of the indigent, the father of the
orphans and a kind friend of those who were fed up with their lives.
They always approached him for the solution of their problems and hoped
sympathy from him in all difficulties.

He was erudite, and was extremely forbearing. However, his heart was
full of grief. His majesty and loftiness were resounding in all the
mountains and deserts. He cut off the heads of big giants but was
himself overcome by love and kindness. During daytime he administered
justice and enforced the divine laws and in the darkness of night he
wept bitterly for the sake of the indigent and the helpless.

He was a stranger whose thundering voice made the oppressors tremble as
and when any oppressed person approached him with a complaint. Whenever
a man complained to him his sword flashed like lightning and consumed
the darkness of the deceitful. Whenever a deprived person called him,
love and kindness began to flaw from his heart which quenched the thirst
of everything dry and famine stricken.

He was a stranger on the face of the earth whose every word was true and
correct. He wore coarse dress and walked meekly and whenever the people
went downwards he kept his face high. He was a stranger and a lovely
person who suffered all sorts of hardships so that the people might
remain happy.

Who was this unique and brave stranger who knew everything and kept his
eyes towards all sides? Who was he who sought the welfare of the people
in this world as well as in the hereafter although they always grieved
and harmed him?

Who was this unique and angelic person whose enemies denied his virtues
on account of their envy and avarice and whose friends deserted him on
account of fear? He fought alone against corruption and destruction. His
behaviour towards the people was constantly based on truth and
sincerity. He was never enamoured of victory and was never disheartened
by defeat. He was an embodiment of truth and never cared for anything
other than truth, whether some persons denied his virtues and some
others feared him.

Who could this unique person be except Ali, the vexed and distressed
Commander of the Faithful with whose blood a wicked and impure man was
going to besmear his hands so that it might serve as dowry for an impure
and wicked woman?

It was a dark and terrible night. The sky was overcast. At times the
lightning flashed and spread light on all sides.

The eagles were sitting in their nests with their heads cast down,
because on the following day their feathers were going to fall and they
were to go in mourning for the chief of the world.

The Imam was awake and his eyes were sleepless, because the people were
groaning on account of oppression; some people indulged in luxuries and
were ready to revolt. The powerful people were extremely tyrannical
towards the weaker ones. His enemies in collusion with one another were
creating mischief and planning to revolt. Among them there were some
evil-doers who professed love for one another.

Some of his own followers had also forsaken truth and refrained from
helping one another. All this was very painful to Ali. That night he
reviewed his entire past life. He recollected that from his very boyhood
his sword had made the Quraysh tremble and he did his best to spread
Islam. His people considered his activities to be childish, but he
remained steadfast and rendered all possible assistance to the Prophet
to make his mission a success.

He also remembered the night of migration when he slept in the bed of
the Prophet under the shadow of the swords of the Quraysh with the hope
that Abu Sufyan and other polytheists would be mistaken and would not be
able to do any harm to the Prophet.

He remembered the battles in which he defended the Prophet and Islam
against the enemies. He could visualize the infidels scattering like the
locusts which are scattered by a dust storm. He visualized the Prophet
embracing him with ardent love and saying: “This is my brother”.

He remembered the time when the Prophet came to his house one day while
he was asleep. Fatima wanted to awaken him but the Prophet said: “Let
him sleep, because after me he will be deprived of sleep for a long
time”. And thereupon Fatima wept bitterly.

He recollected the time when the Prophet had said: “O Ali! God has
adorned you in the best manner. He has endowed you with the love for the
poor and the helpless. They will be happy to make you their Imam and you
will be pleased to see them as your followers”.

He also remembered the time when the Prophet cast this last look on his
face and then breathed his last. He as well recollected the grief of
Fatima which made her pass away forty days after the death of her
father.

He also recollected the faces of the companions of the Prophet who used
to say: “During the time of the Prophet we could identify the
hyprocrites because of their enmity with Ali”.

The Prophet had said not once but many times: “O Ali! Only a hypocrite
will be inimical towards you”.

At this moment he recollected his comrades who had performed jihad along
with him during the lifetime of the Prophet. They were united, helped
one another, and had maintained the ties of brotherhood. But later,
during his own time, some of them joined him whereas others opposed him.
Some who had wished to become rulers or to acquire worldly gains had
died and others were still alive. Those noble-minded companions who were
determined to promote truth and justice (May God bless them!) were
strangers in this world. They laid down their lives in the path of
justice and fidelity and the oppression of the enemies buried them in
the depths of the earth.

One of them was Abu Dharr Ghifari - the distinguished companion of the
Prophet who could not tolerate that human life should be insulted and,
therefore, stood up to oppose oppression and injustice. He was a great
man who had no friend left on account of his truthfulness except Ali and
who met a very tragic end. Ali recollected the time when Abu Dharr was
in the presence of the Prophet wearing a worn-out cloak and placed
himself at the disposal of the Prophet for any service whatsoever. From
that time onwards he remained a staunch supporter of truth, so much so
that during the time of Uthman he opened a campaign against Bani Umayyah
in support of the oppressed and the helpless.

As a consequence of this he was exiled by Marwan and Uthman to a barren
place called Rabazah, where his children met death before his very eyes.
His wife was herself seeing them dying and was praying that she might
die before Abu Dharr so that she might not survive after him, for
otherwise it would be her double death. Abu Dharr died of hunger,
whereas Bani Umayyah had the entire wealth of the earth at their
disposal. He also remembered his pious and faithful brother Ammar Yasir
who was martyred during a similar night a few days earlier by a
rebellious and oppressive group in the Battle of Siffin.

Yes! Where were those faithful brothers of Ali who were the followers of
the right path - those who neither indulged in idle talk, nor slandered
anyone nor practised fraud and deceit? All those righteous men had
departed from the world one after the other and only Ali was left to
fight a fierce and dreadful battle against the oppressive and wicked
persons. If God had granted victory to Ali over the rebels he would have
put an end to rebellion and dealt with the rebels in an appropriate
manner.

It was a battle in which truth was alone on one side although previously
it had many supporters.

It was a battle in which he was opposed by the people whose children
were misguided, whose young men were murderers and whose old ones were
not used to order others to do good and prevent them from doing evil.
They feared only that person, whose tongue could do them harm and
respected only him from whom they hope to get something. If he had let
them go their way they would not have left him, and if he had pursued
them they would have attacked him all of a sudden. They were companions
in perversion and slandered one another when they separated.

The battle which Ali was forced to fight against his will was like the
wave of a sea which does not care whether a person gets drowned or not,
or like a flame of fire which burns anything and reduces it to ashes.

It was a battle between Ali, who wished others to enjoy the bounties of
the world, and those persons who wanted to eject their subjects from the
fertile lands and throw them into barren deserts and scorching wind.

Oh! What a life Ali led! His life was spent either in performing jihad
or in suffering hardships.

Oh! How noble and righteous persons there were in the world! They passed
away one after the other and left Ali alone. After their departure the
world was filled with tyranny and injustice.

This unique stranger visualized the following day, whose darkness would
last longer than the darkness of the nights of the indigent, and which
would be colder than the conscience of those who are unfaithful to their
promises. It would tread heavily on the unfortunate only. The following
day on which those persons who would become the rulers by deceitful
means would not attach any importance to their subjects. Only the
flatterers, slanderers and mischief-mongers would gain the favour of
those rulers. That will be the day on which the unjust and cruel persons
would be made the chiefs and only those persons, who are base and
shameless, would lead a peaceful life.

Ali was visualizing the state of affairs on the next day with his heart
and intellect. It was going to be a very sad day. After that night none
of the persons in position would prefer truth to falsehood, if falsehood
was more profitable to him. After that night there would be no ruler who
should be like a father to the people and should love truth in spite of
all the hardships which he might suffer leaving all the pleasures
emanating from falsehood.

After that night there would exist no such heart and intellect as treats
the people justly and follows truth even though the mountains tremble
and the earth splits.

Alas! The following is the day when an ignorant person was going to
commit the most heinous crime till a boastful tyrant king would come to
rule, and the noble man was going to meet death and destruction while
fighting against the injustice of the tyrants.

The Commander of the Faithful drew his hand on his beard and kept
weeping for a long time.

He looked towards the sky and saw in that dark night the patches of the
clouds and the stars which were reflecting light on the palaces of the
capitalists and the huts of the poor alike, and were hiding the
corruption and mischief of the wicked as well as the afflictions of the
righteous. He looked at the world and addressing himself to it said: “O
world! Deceive someone else and not me”.

The time passed on and the night grew darker and darker. Ali felt
himself alone in the world. What a lonely, dreadful and strange place
the world is!

He went to sleep for a short while with all the remembrances fresh in
his mind. While sleeping he had a dream in which he saw the Prophet and
said to him: “O Prophet of God! I have suffered much at the hands of
your followers and have had to face acute opposition from them”. The
Prophet said: “Call down curses upon them”. Ali said: “O Lord! Provide
me better companions than these people and impose on them, in my place,
the worst ruler”.

When it was dawn light air was blowing and the sky was shedding tears.
Ali ibn Abi Talib proceeded to the mosque slowly as if his feet were
conversing with the earth and telling it the story of those gloomy
moments. The birds were also grieved. He had not yet reached the
courtyard of the mosque when the ducks ran towards him and began to cry.
Simultaneously with them the cold morning winds also began to moan.

Those who had come to offer their prayers stepped forward and tried to
turn away the ducks. However, they neither went away nor stopped crying.

Similarly the wind also continued producing a rustling sound. It would
appear that the ducks and the wind had already come to know that the
Commander of the Faithful was procceeding towards his last calamity.

The Commander of the Faithful heard the cries of the ducks very
attentively and then turning to the people said: “Do not turn them away,
for they are mourning”.

With these words the Commander of the Faithful foretold the impending
calamity which was to befall him.

Why should these ducks not have mourned? Why were the people
endeavouring to prevent them from crying? And why should the Commander
of the Faithful not have looked upon them with love and affection? He
had already seen thousands of mornings but this morning carried in its
bosom a secret, which other mornings did not. On that day he was feeling
something which he had never felt before. Was this great man not
entitled to hear his elegy in the form of the cries of the ducks and the
moaning of the winds? Did he not possess the right to say good bye to
the sun and the shadow which he was not likely to see again?

Was he not entitled to cast his last look on the places, where he lived
a life of indigence to make others well-to-do? These places had seen
many sights of his bravery and courage, manifestations of his
awe-inspiring personality, and many a hard suffering and tribulation
which he had to bear. They had also seen the long long nights which he
passed weeping in submission to God.

If the inhabitants of the world had stuck to truth and justice he would
not have felt sad on leaving its days and nights. What pained him was
that the world had become overfilled with wicked and treacherous people.

The world was groaning under the pressure of those people and its
inhabitants had fallen prey to despair. The deprived persons in Iraq,
Hijaz and Syria were leading very burdensome lives. The hypocrites were
making immense profits.

Of course, the world had lost nothing if it had allowed Ali to take one
or two more steps to bring about a change in the state of affairs then
prevailing. Unfortunately the world does not like that a change should
he brought about in the prevailing conditions.

This great person possessing a celestial soul felt that his feet were
making him proceed on a long journey. He stopped at the gate of the
mosque for a short while and looked at the mourning ducks. Then he
turned to the men who were standing at a distance from him and uttered
this sentence a number of times: “Do not turn them away, for they are
mourning”.

Ali arrived in the mosque and prostrated himself before the Almighty
God. Abdur Rahman ibn Muljam also entered the mosque carrying with him a
sword with a poisoned blade. He dealt such a blow on the head of the
Imam that, as said by him (ibn Muljam) if it had been dealt on the heads
of all the residents of the city, none of them would have survived. May
the malicious criminal be subjected to divine vengeance and may the
curse of God and of all His creatures befall him! May he suffer the
severest torture in Hell!

Violent winds began to blow and everything turned topsy- turvy. Dust
storms rose from all sides and caused a havoc. The bright day became
dark like a moonless night. It was a terrible sight. The birds wept and
the trees trembled. The followers and admirers of Ali were shocked and
burst into tears. The lovers of truth and justice will continue to weep
over this tragedy till the Day of Judgment.

Everything in the world became broken-hearted and sad except the face of
Ali which was perfectly cheerful. He did not express any desire for
revenge nor did he express any anger. The people were gathered at the
gate of his house with extremely sad faces and were praying to God for
his speedy recovery. They attacked Abdur Rahman ihn Muljam and captured
him. When he was brought before the Commander of the Faithful he said:
“Give him good food and a soft bed”.

However, the cheerfulness of his face was more saddening than all the
calamities of the world. At that time his face resembled the face of
Socrates when the ignorant and stupid people made him drink a cup of
poison. It resembled the face of Jesus Christ when the Jews scourged
him. It resembled the face of the Prophet of Islam Muhammad when the
ignorant persons of Taif showered stones at him and did not know that
they were stoning the greatest human being ever born.

The best physicians of Kufa were called for the treatment of the Imam.
Athir bin Amr bin Hani who was the most proficient among them examined
very carefully the wound on Ali's forehead and said with extreme grief
and despair: “O Commander of the Faithful! You had better make a will
whatever you wish to, because the blow dealt by ibn Muljam has
penetrated into your brain.

The Imam was not offended by the physician's remark nor did he utter any
word of complaint. He resigned himself to the will of God.

Ali called his sons Hasan and Husayn and made some recommendations to
them. He also insisted upon them that they should not cause any
disturbance nor resort to bloodshed on account of his assassination. As
regards the assassin he said: “If you forgive him it will be nearer to
piety”.

Some of the recommendations made by Ali to his sons Hasan and Husayn
were as follows:

• I put you on an oath in the name of God that you shall have regard for
your neighbours.

• I administer to you an oath in the name of God that you shall take
care of the needy and the indigent and make them share your sustenance
and income. And as ordered by God you shall talk mildly with everyone
and say something good whenever you speak and shall not abandon ordering
others to do good and restraining them from doing evil.

• It is your duty to have good and kind relations among yourselves. You
should behave informally and observe simplicity. You should neither
sever relations with one another nor live separately.

After a short time he turned to the people and said: “Till yesterday I
was your ruler, today I am the means of your taking a lesson from me,
and tomorrow I shall leave you. May God forgive all of us!”

Ali received a wound on his head on Friday morning. After that he spent
two days in great agony, but he did not complain of pain or
inconvenience. He continued to seek God's assistance and to recommend to
the people to do good to the needy and the helpless. He breathed his
last during the night of the 21st of Ramazan 40 A.H.

That great and unique man, who suffered at the hands of his enemies as
well as his friends, passed away. It was that magnanimous person who was
a martyr during his life-time and the father of the martyrs at the time
of his death.

The martyr of the path of steadfastness, uprightness and sympathy, was
dead. The martyr of purity and magnanimity, who never showed the least
laxity in the matter of truth and sincerity, departed from the world.

That great man passed away. It is very unfortunate that he did not get
an opportunity to establish a government which might have served as a
model for the future governments, and the common people might have led
peaceful lives with the blessing of his name, and subjected the
mischief-mongers to humiliation and disgrace.

He left the world and left behind a family every member of which met
martyrdom in the path of truth. He left behind his grief-stricken
daughter Zainab to bear hardships and the people of the world behaved
towards her with unprecedented cruelty and meanness. He left behind
Hasan and Husayn to the tender mercies of his sworn enemies like the son
of Abu Sufyan and others.

The first period of conspiracies against Ali and his children came to an
end. It was followed by many other periods which were replete with more
dreadful and severe hardships for them.

Consequent upon the martyrdom of the Commander of the Faithful the lofty
palaces shone like mirages in barren deserts. The water springs became
dry. The fields became waste lands. The government of the rebellious and
the deceitful got strengthened. Those persons, who considered treachery
and deceit to be permissible for a ruler, became active immediately
after Ali's martyrdom. How sinister are the governments whose
foundations are laid on the assassination of those who are entitled to
reverence!

What a great disappointment the admirers of Ali must have felt owing to
the calamity which befell them as a result of his tragic assassination.
How grieved the righteous persons must have been for a long time on
account of this dreadful event. What a great calamity, for it was due to
it that the whole of Arabia remained a theatre of disturbances and
corruption for centuries. How great was the grief which continued to
increase and became firmly-rooted with the lapse of time and eventually
destroyed the power of the tyrant rulers and their supporters. Of what
use was the government which was founded on the tears which the
oppressed and helpless were shedding to mourn the assassination of Ali
son of Abu Talib?

Ali used to console the people. He was kind to the needy and the
helpless like a father. The entire wealth of the world and all its
treasures could not equal the lace of his shoe. All the oppressive
caliphs and their wealth are simply farcical in the face of a sentence
of Nahj al-Balaghah and the views that he has expressed in it. They are
worthless even before a drop of his tear.

That great and magnanimous person passed away and those who considered
themselves to be great without any justification remained behind. One
man died and was honoured, and a nation remained alive and proved to be
mean and despicable.

The Imam left his enemies alive in the world, but their life was as good
as destruction.


