A glance over history
=====================

If you lend ear to the history of the world you will hear the news of a
great event the like of which has not happened even after a passage of
more than ten centuries. If you reflect carefully about the various
happenings in the world you will be fascinated by a grand personality
before whose high thinking everything appears to be trivial. The world
and its life, and the children, the kinsmen, wealth and rulership do not
enjoy any importance in his eyes.

This personality is too great to be placed in the row of ordinary people
and his insight is so keen that it resembles the reasoning of common
people only in name.

If you hear with the ears of your heart, history will narrate to you
that story of the martyrs in the path of truth and justice with whose
blood the border of the sky is covered. If you look at the horizon you
will observe two kinds of redness; one the natural redness and the other
that of the blood of the martyrs in the path of truth and justice.

Have a look at the history of the East and find out that great power of
comprehension and understanding which is the centre of every circle of
high thinking, and the origin of every true reasoning and logic. Every
modern research and new idea about the life of this world and the
Hereafter is related to him. The opinions which may have come to your
notice with regard to human system and laws, principles of civilization
and rules of morality has originated from this spring. These rules and
principles are based on the mutual relations, co-operation and
partnership of humanity.  
 Which reflective power[^1] has invented a new policy and a new method
in philosophy and placed it at the disposal of the people who have
passed it on to the posterity? Everyone has benefited from it according
to his understanding, but none has so far reached its real philosophy
and its depth. It is necessary that other brains and intellects should
make new discoveries from what he has said.

Who is that enlightened person who himself is involved in suffering and
pains but others are blessed and happy because of him? He who has
prepared and continues to prepare the path for his friends as well as
enemies! A scholar who is prepared whole-heartedly to explain things for
others after discussing the cause and effect of everything!

Who is that subtle scholar who has pondered over everything and there is
nothing about which he is not well-informed? So much so that he knows
even those things which the people have not done but have only thought
about them. He possesses such a powerful intellect that the knowledge
which appeared in the East after him is also associated with him; in
fact it is he who is the foundation and the fountain-head of all such
sciences.

Have you ever observed so perfect an intellect as should have recognized
the greatest reality? And that reality is the basis for social
relations, the cause for everyone pursuing his own particular path. It
tells why one group follows the right path and the other wrong path.

This reality which was understood by Ali thirteen hundred years ago has
been made the new subject of discussion by the scholars of the East and
the West. By this I mean the need for the necessities of life, to
acquire which the people are following different paths. One group has
transgressed its limits. It has ignored the rules of justice and is
endeavouring to mislead the people. In order to achieve their nefarious
ends deception is being practised and illogical things are being spread
by the capitalists to accumulate wealth, by government officers to get
things done gratis and to keep the masses under control and by the
innovators to collect obedient followers.

Do you recognize that great sage who established more than a thousand
years ago a reality which superseded thousands of superstitions and
extravagant ideas and said: “If a person starves it is due to the fact
that his share has been taken by another” and added: “I have not seen
any excessive bounty which is not associated with a right which has been
violated”.

As regards hoarding he wrote to one of his governors: “Prohibit the
people from hoarding, because it is something which entails loss to the
public and brings a bad name to the rulers”.

A great and enlightened person realized the real secret of humanity more
than a thousand years ago and concluded that those persons who had no
value in the eyes of the kings and the rulers were endowed with virtues
and good morals, and every kind of oppression practised upon them was
considered by them (i.e. by the rulers) to be permissible.

The Italian sculptor Raphael prepared an image of the Virgin Mary in the
shape of an Italian farmer woman and made all good human qualities
visible in it. Tolstoy, Voltaire and Goethe also recommended and
approved with their mental labour and imagination the same thing which
had been indicated by Raphael in the image. However, Ali clarified this
concept centuries ago. He campaigned against the aristocrats, the ruling
class, the profiteers and the selfish persons, opposed their wrong and
absurd way of thinking about the oppressed and said: “By God! I shall
realize the right of the oppressed person from the oppressor and shall
pull the oppressor to the fountain-head of truth by putting a cavessor
in his nose, even though he may not like it”.

The things which he said about the people of his time go to show that he
had understood them very well. They consisted on the one hand of the
worthless aristocrats and others who were holding high positions
notwithstanding their inefficiency, and on the other hand of persons who
were helpless and oppressed and who had no alternative but to obey. He
therefore, said briefly: “Your down-trodden are honourable and your
powerful ones are base and mean”.[^2]

By these words he means that the subordinate people cannot display their
good morals and talents due to their helplessness and oppression by the
powerful class and the persons holding high position keep their defects
hidden under their costly dress.

He told the people that truth and virtue are established and eternal
things which have always been and will remain forever. In the heart of
his hearts every human being believes in this, although different
persons may interpret it in different ways. Even the oldest nations have
flourished under the protection of this belief although they may not
have known it. They have inherited their views and beliefs from their
ancestors and adopted them because by doing so they have been saved from
the trouble of investigation and research. Imitation has thus become
their second nature.

The basis of all the beliefs and thoughts is this that there is an
absolute reality which should be the starting point of all discussions
and opinions.

The qualities of his head and heart enabled Ali to realize this fact and
he believed whole-heartedly that anything which is based on truth does
not become shaky. He was a perfect specimen of steadfastness and found
himself successful in the event of victory as well as defeat. In the
battlefield as well as in the arena of politics it was immaterial for
him to win or lose, because he knew that the reality was with him and it
was he himself who was the standard for distinguishing between truth and
falsehood.

Throughout the history of the world it is not possible to find a man
with such a firm determination that he should not waver in any
circumstances and the flames of revolt should not make him tremble. No
other thing can shake the faith of a man than this that the enemies
should be accusing him of worst offences and even deviation and heresy.
And nothing can make a man more unsettled than the threat of death or
attack on one's faith which is worse than death. However, Ali did not
waver in any circumstances and nothing could make him deviate from his
path. He did not give up his efforts for the enforcement of Islam and
did not crave for wealth or position as a reward for these efforts. His
only reward was the success of the faith.

Have you seen in the history of the world a magnanimous person with a
kind and loving heart encircled by greedy, rebellious and revengeful,
stone-hearted persons, keen to exploit one another, but he may be
inviting them to peace and welfare and they may still be joining hands
to fight against him?

There are many sayings which people repeat verbally or in writing and
every person selects one of them according to his nature to serve as his
motto. However, have you seen any other person who may be the embodiment
of purity and modesty in its true sense?

Amongst the great personalities of the world Ali was foremost in the
matter of love and sincerity.

Sincerity was his habit and nature, and his heart and soul were imbued
with it. He loved the people but did not associate love with his own
self. He kept his promises. Sincerity was the essence of his being. By
his natural and profound intelligence he found out that freedom is the
most sacred thing. The entire world craves for it and does not consider
any other blessing to be equal to it.[^3]

Only the free persons possess power of correct thinking and good habits,
and true love and pure sincerity are also not possible without freedom.
He, therefore, said: “The worst brother is he with whom you have to
observe formalities”. Hence, the best man is he who is not of this type.

Do you know any ruler who never ate his fill because many persons
amongst his subjects did not get sufficient food to fill their bellies,
or did not wear fine clothes because many persons wore coarse dress, or
did not accumulate wealth because there were many poor and needy
persons?

Ali recommended to his children and friends to follow in his footsteps.
He declined to give as much as one dinar to his brother, because he was
not entitled to it. He took severe action against his companions,
subordinates, and officials, if they took even a loaf of bread as bribe.
He warned a person against breach of trust in respect of public property
in these words: “I swear by God that if you commit breach of trust in
respect of public property I shall take such severe action against you
that you will become poor, burdened and disgraced”. And he addressed
another person in these eloquent words: “I have been given to understand
that you have swept the earth clean, have appropriated whatever was
under your feet and have spared nothing. You should, therefore, send
your account to me”.

He also admonished in these words a person who became rich by taking
bribes: “Fear God and return the property of the people to them. If you
do not do so and God provides me hold over you I shall perform the duty
which I owe to God with regard to you and shall strike you with the
sword which has dispatched to Hell every one whom it has struck”.

Have you ever heard about a monarch who used to grind the grains with
his own hands and prepared for himself the bread, which could be broken
only by pressing it with the knee? He who mended his shoes himself? He
who did not accumulate any worldly wealth, because he had no object in
view except to help the afflicted and the oppressed, so that he might
realize their rights from the oppressors and make them happy?

He who never cared for his food and never thought of sound sleep,
because some persons in his country had to starve. He who uttered this
eloquent sentence: “Should I content myself with this that people call
me 'Commander of the Faithful' and I should not share the hardships of
life with them?”

If government and sovereignty do not serve the purpose of establishing
truth and eliminating falsehood they are the worst things of the world
in the eyes of Ali.

Which person out of those who are famous for their justice is such that
even if all the inhabitants of the world combine against him it must be
said that he is truthful and all his opponents are false. It was Ali who
possessed this qualification, because his truthfulness and justice were
not acquired but inherent and from them others learnt lessons.

His laws were not formulated on account of the exigencies of government
and polities but government and polities were based on those laws. He
purposely did not adopt a path which might lead him to rulership, but
adopted that which might enable him to make his place in the pure
hearts. Justice was a part of his soul and was ingrained in his heart
and it had combined other virtues also with itself. It was not possible
for him to deviate from justice and from the demands of his nature.

Justice was an element which was entwined in his entire body and ran in
his veins like blood.

Have you seen any brave man in the pages of history who was opposed by a
group of self-seekers which also included his kinsmen and then a battle
took place, and those persons were victorious and he was defeated, and
even then he dominated over them? It so happened in the case of Ali and
he dominated over them, because they were devoid of human qualities and
had risen in the capacity of oppressors using the weapons of deceit,
bribery, covetousness and fraud, whereas he sacrificed all gains and
even his life in the path of human excellence, justice and protection of
the rights of others. It was for this reason that the victory of his
enemies was in fact their defeat and his defeat was a great success for
human virtues.

Have you come across a great warrior in the pages of history who should
love even his enemies and wish to see them endowed with human qualities?

Ali was such a person. He was so kind to his enemies that he recommended
to his companions: “Do not take the initiative in fighting with them.
When they are defeated by the will of God do not pursue or kill those
who run away. Do not kill the helpless and the wounded and do not molest
the women''.

The army of the enemy consisting of eleven thousand persons, who were
keen to shed his blood blocked his approach to water so that he might
die of thirst. However, when he regained control over water he said to
them: “We are quenching our thirst with water. The birds are also
availing of it. You too should come and carry away water to meet your
needs”.

Imam Ali used to say: “If a person is killed while performing jihad in
the path of God his spiritual reward is not more than one who can take
revenge, but refrains from doing so, because such a person is one of the
angels of God''.

When a wicked person struck on his head and as a result of it, he was
departing from the world he said to his companions: “In case you forgive
him your action will be nearer to piety and virtue''.

He was a great warrior, who had combined his valour with kindness. He
reproved only verbally the enemies, who had gathered to oppose him,
although he could curb their power with his sword. Even when he went to
admonish them he was bare-headed and without any armour, whereas they
were armed so heavily that their faces could hardly be seen through
their helmets and coats of mail. Then he reminded them of old
brotherhood and friendship and wept much on account of their having
adopted the wrong path.

However, even when he realized that the advice was not having any effect
on them and they were bent upon shedding his blood he did not commence
fighting himself but delayed it till they themselves started it. At that
moment he drew his sword for the sake of the oppressed and launched an
attack which scattered them like the particles of sand in the desert.
After the spiteful oppressors who openly displayed enmity and rebellion
were killed and he himself gained victory he wept on their dead bodies,
notwithstanding the fact that they had met this fate on account of their
selfishness and worst greed.

Have you heard about any king who was well-equipped with all means of
sovereignty and wealth which were not available to others, but he chose
sufferings and pains for himself? Of course, Ali made such a choice. He
was of noble descent but he said: “No dignity is greater than humility
and meekness''.

He said to some persons who loved him: “Whoever loves me should prepare
a robe of poverty for himself''.

A group of persons went to the extreme in the matter of love for him.
Thereupon he said: “Persons of two kinds got involved in destruction in
connection with me - the friends who went to the extreme, and the
spiteful enemies''.

Ali severely punished a group which considered him to be their deity. He
advised like brothers a group of persons who were inclined favourably
towards him. Some persons abused him. His adherents did not tolerate
this and abused those people in reply. Thereupon he said: “I do not like
that you who are my friends should become persons who use abusive
language''.

Some people were inimical to him. They harmed and slandered him and rose
in opposition to him. In spite of this he used to say: “Punish your
brother with goodness and improve his nature with prizes and honours''.
Ali also said: “Your brother is not more powerful than you in breaking
the bonds of love and friendship, provided that you try to cement them,
and is not quicker than you in doing harm if you behave well with him''.

Some persons suggested to him to behave towards the oppressors kindly
and leniently so that his government might be strengthened. He said in
reply: “Your friend is he who prevents you from doing evil, and your
enemy is he, who induces you to do evil''. He also said: “Adopt truth
even though it may be harmful to you and refrain from telling lies even
though you may derive benefit from it''.

Ali had done good to a person. Once the same person came to fight with
him. Ali then said addressing himself: “If a person is not thankful to
you for your goodness this should not mean that you should discontinue
your goodness''.

Once, the blessings of the world were being discussed in his presence.
Ali said: “Out of the worldly blessings good morals are sufficient
blessings''.

When some persons suggested to him to use all possible means like the
kings to achieve victory Ali said: “A person whose heart is overcome by
sin is not a victor, and he who dominates by means of bad deeds is
actually the vanquished person''.

Ali overlooked those bad deeds of his enemies of which only he was aware
and said repeatedly: “Among the most exalted acts of a noble person is
that he ignores what he sees''.

If his enemies or the simpletons among his friends said something which
he did not like he used to say: “If you hear something from someone and
there is a possibility of its being good do not be suspicious about
it''.

Do you know any religious leader who has given directions to his
officials in these words: ''The people are either your brethren-in-faith
or equal to you in the matter of creation. You should, therefore,
overlook their shortcomings in the same manner in which you wish God to
overlook yours''.

Do you know any king who may have forsaken his kingdom to establish
truth? And have you seen any wealthy person who may have contented
himself with only a loaf of bread to sustain his life, and life in his
eyes should mean doing good to mankind and he should have told the
\`world' not to deceive him but someone else?

Amongst the monuments of the East have you read Nahj al-Balaghah (The
English version of the glorious book has been published by Islamic
Seminary) and seen how eloquent and impressive its sentences are? It
deals with various matters and also provides information about the other
world. It is like the events of the world which cannot be altered, and
if even one word is removed from its place the entire purport will
undergo a change.

This book will continue to remain attractive so long as man and his
intellect and sentiments exist. Its eloquence surpasses every other
eloquence. It contains all the attributes of the Arabic language which
existed at that time and were introduced later. Hence, it has been said
that it is lower than the word of God and higher than that which has
been said by God's creatures.

Great wisdom, knowledge of the highest standard, unparalleled eloquence,
perfect valour and unlimited love and kindness were all combined in Ali.
If a person possesses even one of these attributes it is sufficient to
dazzle others and when they are combined in one person his greatness is
evidently beyond comprehension.

At times it so happened that this philosopher, man of letters, scholar,
administrator, ruler and commander sequestered himself from the world,
and did not have any dealings with others. He then desired only to
stimulate human qualities and rouse the sentiments, and made these nice
and pure words, which are the proof of love and intense feelings, reach
the ear of the hearts gently:

• “To lack friends is tantamount to poverty''.

• “Do not express joy on the adversity of others''.

• “Bring people nearer to you by means of gentleness and munificence''.

• “Forgive one who oppresses you''.

• “Do not deprive of your munificence a person who deprives you of his
munificence''.

• “Establish new relations with the person who cuts off his relations
with you''.

• “Be friendly towards one, who is inimical towards you''.

He was a great man, who surpassed the philosophers of the world in high
thinking, the righteous of the world in beneficence, the scholars of the
world in the matter of vast knowledge, the researchers of the world in
the matter of deep insight, all the philanthropists as regards love and
kindness, all the pious persons in the matter of abstemiousness, and all
the reformers of the world in the matter of reformatory views. He shared
the sorrows of the helpless and helped the oppressed in their distress.
He taught the literary persons of the world the art of literature and
trained the brave men in the methods of warfare. He was always prepared
to sacrifice his life for the establishment of truth. He went higher
than the highest stage of human virtue and perfection. He displayed
these qualities equally in his words and actions.

He was so great that the domination of his enemies over him was
meaningless and their victory carried no importance, because at that
time everything had turned upside down. The right hand was on the left
side and the left hand was on the right side. High and low, light and
darkness, the earth and the sky, had all assumed a reverse shape.

It makes no difference in the position of Ali whether or not history
recognizes him and whether his eminence appears greater or lesser.
Notwithstanding this, history has testified that he was the deepest
stage of human thought. He sacrificed his life for the sake of truth and
reality. He was the father of the martyrs and the proclaimer of justice.
He was the unique man of the East, who will live forever!

[^1]: In fact the knowledge of Ali should not be treated to be the
outcome of reflection because it was derived from divine inspiration and
was communicated to his heart through the prophet. The knowledge which
was possessed by him or even a small part thereof cannot be acquired by
reflection and reasoning however profound and extraordinary it may be.

[^2]: Here the Commander of the Faithful has referred to the trouble
which was created during the period of his caliphate and which did
irreparable harm to the Muslim nation. Although these words do not carry
the meaning inferred by the writer still it is an established fact and
is evident from his other remarks. As a matter of fact the greatest
object of the appointment of the prophets to their mission and the means
of their success was this that they introduced freedom of the individual
and freedom of thought as opposed to the policy of the tyrants like
Nimrud and Pharaoh who controlled the lives and property of the people
and kept their power of thinking paralysed.

[^3]: Man loves freedom. In case, therefore, a person is put in a prison
and all amenities of life are provided to him he will even then prefer
freedom to the prison life. The prophets campaigned against the tyrants
and succeeded, because they declared that man is entitled to possess
control on his own activities and property whereas the despotic rulers
deprived the people of this right and subjected them to all sorts of
torture and tyranny.


