The Prophet and Ali
===================

A very good and pure spirit existed in the family of Abu Talib. It
looked at the world in a peculiar manner and saw all things connected
and united with one another.

This spirit was very strong in the Prophet and Ali and a very firm
relationship existed between them, because Ali had been brought up by
the Prophet from his childhood till he grew up to be a youth. When we
admit that it is possible that good morals should become firm naturally
in a heart and a soul we have also to say that Ali was born with perfect
faith in the prophethood of Muhammad and support for him, because the
qualities and virtues of the Family of Abu Talib in which the Prophet
was brought up were transferred to his cousin from his birth [^1].

The personality of Ali developed with the virtues of his family. It was
this place where he heard Muhammad speak and the call to Islam also
started from here. Ali was quite young when the Prophet attached him
with himself and called him his brother.

In his sermon entitled “Qase'a,” Ali mentions the attention paid to him
by the Prophet and says: “Do you know, that due to my relationship and
on account of my worth and merit, what were my relations with the
Prophet?

From the very beginning of my life he loved me and I loved him. He took
me in his lap when I was a baby and thence I was always with him, he
often kept me embraced to his heart, he used to make me sleep next to
him; we used to be so close to each other that I felt the warmth of his
body and smelled the fragrance of his breath. When I was a baby, he fed
me with his hands often chewing hard bits for me. He never found me
lying nor weak and wavering. From the time of his babyhood God had
appointed the Holy Ghost to be always with him and this archangel was
leading him towards exemplary qualities and high moral values and I
followed the Prophet step by step as a baby camel follows its mother.
Daily he used to place before me a fresh standard of efficiency and used
to order me to follow it. Every year he used to stay in a grotto of the
Hira Mountains for sometime, and nobody used to be with him but I. None
could then see or hear him or be near him but I.

During those days Islam was the religion of only the Prophet and his
wife Khadijah, I was the third of the trio (the Prophet, Khadijah and
Ali himself). Nobody else in this world had accepted Islam I even then
used to see the divine light of revelation and prophethood and smell the
heavenly fragrance of prophethood. When the Prophet received the first
revelation Satan lamented loudly. I asked the Prophet “Who is lamenting
and why”? He replied, “It is Satan who had given up hopes of acquiring
complete sway over human mind. In this disappointment he is lamenting
over the chance lost. Verily, Ali, you also hear whatever is revealed to
me and you also see whatever is being shown to me. With this difference
that you are not entrusted with prophethood, but you will be my
successor, helper and vizier, and you will always uphold truth and
justice”.

Childhood is the age when one is fully capable of acquiring good
qualities. Ali spent a good deal of his life with the Prophet alone. He
imitated the Prophet's conduct and remained separated from his community
which was leading a miserable life and was firmly bound with the chains
of hereditary customs.

For years Ali lived in a pure atmosphere by the side of his cousin and
was loved very much by him. None of the companions and followers of the
Prophet could develop such a close relationship with him. Ali opened his
eyes on the path which had been opened for him by his cousin.

He learnt how to worship God from Muhammad's prayers. He enjoyed the
Prophet's love, kindness and brotherhood. His relationship with Muhammad
was similar to the one between Muhammad and Abu Talib. When Ali first
felt the sentiment of love in his mind he loved Muhammad. When he spoke
for the first time he spoke with Muhammad. On the very first occasion
when he was required to display manliness and valour he showed readiness
to support Muhammad. Muhammad's friends were friendly with him and his
enemies also respected his personality. Ali was such a protege and
disciple of the Prophet that he became his soul and a part of his limbs.

In the early days of the prophetic mission of the Prophet, some elders
amongst Quraysh who hated worship joined him. The slaves and helpless
persons came round him in expectation of justice and freedom. And after
he was successful and victorious a third group also joined him, because
those people had no alternative left. They wanted to benefit from the
new situation and most of Bani Umayyah belonged to this group. These
different groups embraced Islam on different occasions and although they
resembled one another in the matter of obedience to the Prophet the
degrees of their faith differed.

However, as Ali was born and brought up in the lap of prophethood, his
faith was natural and innate, and he emerged from the body of his mother
with this faith in his heart. His faith had nothing to do with age or
the vicissitudes of time. He offered prayers and testified the
prophethood of Muhammad at an age when a child cannot even express his
thoughts. And he did all this without obtaining any order or advice from
anyone.

Most of the persons who embraced Islam in the early days of Muhammad's
prophethood had worshipped the idols in previous days. However, when Ali
prostrated for the first time it was before the Allah of Muhammad. This
was the quality of the faith of the person who was destined to grow up
as a supporter and well-wisher of the Prophet, to lead the faithful
after the Prophet, and to save the people from the calamities of time.

[^1]: The correct position is this that Abu Talib and the members of his
family or the ways and manners of the time or the environments had no
influences on the prophethood of Muhammad or the Imamate of Ali. These
things were related with divine inspiration and neither Abu Talib nor
the members of this family shared the secrets of prophethood and
Imamate.


