The attributes of Ali
=====================

Out of the persons who have narrated the attributes of Imam Ali son of
Abu Talib the author of Zakha’ir\_al-Uqba writes thus: “His stature was
moderate and slightly short. His skin was of wheaten colour and his
beard was white and long. His eyes were large and black. He had a
cheerful face and was good-natured. His neck was long like a goblet made
of silver. His shoulders were broad. The joints of his hands were like
those of a roaring lion, because his hands and wrists were completely
joined with each other and distinction could hardly be made between
them. His hands and fingers were strong, moderately fat and fleshy. His
calves were fleshy and their lower part was thin. His arms were also
fleshy in a similar manner.

He walked calmly like the Prophet. However, as and when he proceeded to
give a fight he walked briskly and did not turn his head to see anything
else. His bodily strength was unimaginable. He usually picked up the
fighters whom he laid his hands on and threw them on the ground without
any difficulty or effort, as if they were small children. And if he held
the arm of any warrior in his hand the latter could not even breathe. It
is well-known that he did not fight with anyone whom he did not
vanquish, even though he might have been very strong and a renowned
champion.

At times he picked up a big gate which a number of strong persons could
not even close or open, and used it as a shield to defend himself. On
some occasions he threw away with one hand, a stone, which could not
even be shaken by a number of men. At times he roared in the battlefield
so loudly that the bravest men got frightened although their number
might be quite large. He possessed such a great power to bear hardships
that he did not fear any harm from heat or coldness. He used to wear
summer clothes in winter and winter clothes in summer''.

Once a man lodged a complaint against Ali with Umar who was then the
caliph. Umar summoned both of them and said: “O Abu’l Hasan! Stand side
by side with the other party. Signs of displeasure appeared on the face
of Ali. Thereupon Umar asked him whether he did not wish to stand by the
side of the other person. Ali replied: “No. That is not so. However, I
have observed that you have not maintained equality between me and my
opponent. You have addressed me with my Kuniyah and thus shown me
respect whereas you have not meted out the same treatment to him''. [^1]

It is very difficult to explain fully the nature and habits of human
beings and especially of great personalities because personal qualities
of men are related with one another and everyone of them influences
others. Every quality is related with another quality and every habit is
the cause of another habit and the result of a third one, or two of them
are effect of another and so on and so forth.

Hence, I propose to study a few of the personal qualities of Ali from
different angles and to compare them within one and the same personality
so as to arrive at some conclusions by means of this intellectual
analysis. In the first instance I shall briefly present the various
qualities of Ali by deducing them from his simple dealings and
well-known actions so that his nature, habits and disposition are known
and our detailed discussion in the following chapters may be limited to
those qualities and characteristics.

We now commence the discussion with reference to his acts of worship.

Ali was well-known for his piety and continence. He did many things for
his own self as well as for his own people and others, as he was
extremely pious. I believe that Ali's piety was not the outcome of
circumstances like that of other pious persons, who engage themselves in
worship on account of the weakness of their souls, or to escape the
vicissitudes of life and to keep aloof from the people, or in imitation
of their ancestors, and the effects of the events of life confirm it,
because as a rule people accord respect to ancestral customs and
traditions.[^2]

The fact is that the piety of the Imam Ali was based on a firm footing
and was linked with the mutual tie which exists in all parts of the
creation and has bound the sky and the earth with each other. His
worship was in fact a continuous effort and a campaign against mischief
for the sake of human life and prosperity. He fought against all aspects
of evil and wickedness. On the one hand he fought against hypocrisy and
selfishness and on the other hand against dastardliness, abjectness
meanness, helplessness and other bad qualities which had been acquired
by the people during those evil days. According to Ali the essence of
piety is to sacrifice one's life for the sake of truth and justice. He
has said: “Your faith should be at such a level that you should prefer
truth to falsehood even though it may cause you loss and falsehood may
bring you gain''.

His piety was of the same type as defined by him. He was martyred on
account of this very truthfulness, and if it be possible to give the
title of “Martyr'' to living persons it may be said that even while
alive he was a martyr in the path of truth and righteousness.

If a person studies the piety of the Imam carefully it will become known
to him that even in politics and government, he had a special method in
the matter of worship which he pursued firmly. When he stood before the
Almighty God he made his supplications with full attention, just as a
poet is lost in the beauties of nature. The following remark of Ali is
very instructive for those who worship God and observe piety: “One group
worships God to be favoured with His blessings. This is the worship of
the tradesmen. Another group worships Him on account of His fear. This
is the worship of the slaves. A third group worships Him by way of
thanksgiving. This is the worship of the free man''.

Unlike many persons the Imam's worship was not on account of fear, and
it was also not a tradesman-like worship with the hope of acquiring
Paradise. On the other hand when great men stand before the Almighty God
they find themselves meek and obliged to consider themselves His worst
slaves. The basis of this worship is reason, conscience, and spiritual
perfection.

One who accords the same position to worship as was accorded by Ali will
certainly view life in the same manner in which it was viewed by Ali.
Such a person does not seek life for worldly gains and transient
pleasures. On the other hand he seeks it to attain high morals and to
achieve the ends which are compatible with his nature. It was for this
reason that Ali chose piety in the world and did not seek fame and
ostentation. He was true in the matter of piety in the same way in which
he was true in the matter of his actions, words and intentions. He was
disinclined towards the pleasures of life in the same way in which he
was disinterested in rulership, and other things, which were so much
coveted by others. He lived with the members of his family in a hut
which was also his seat of government. His rulership was not in the form
of kingship but in the form of caliphate.

He ate barley bread prepared from the flour ground by his wife. Of
course his governors and officials availed of the luxuries which became
available from Syria, Egypt and Iraq. Often he did not make his wife
take the trouble of grinding the mill and did this job himself. Although
he was the Commander of the Faithful he ate bread which was so dry and
hard that it could be broken by pressing it with the knee. When it was
very cold during winter he did not have any clothes for that season and
contented himself with thin summer clothes.

Haroon son of Antara relates thus from his father: I went in the
presence of Ali in Khurnaq Palace in winter season and saw that he was
wearing an old cloak and was trembling with cold. I said to him: “O
Commander of the Faithful! God has fixed a share for you also in the
public treasury and in spite of that you are living in this condition''.
He replied: “I swear by God that I do not take anything out of your
(i.e. public) property and this cloak is the same which I brought from
Madina''.

He spent his days in the small house with perfect contentment till he
was martyred at the hands of lbn Muljim. Although he was the caliph
there was none amongst the Muslims who lived as simple and contented a
life as he did.

In fact this lack of interest on his part in worldly comforts was
related with his valour. Some persons think that these two qualities are
apart from each other, but this view is not correct. Really speaking his
valour consisted of the greatness of his soul and his efforts to achieve
great objects and to help the poor and the needy without caring for his
own benefit. The fact is that he was not prepared to enjoy the pleasure
of life while living in a city in which many helpless and indigent
persons were also residing.

Umar son of Abdul Aziz was a caliph of the family of Bani Umayyah. This
family was inimical towards Ali, slandered him and abused him from the
pulpit. In spite of this he was obliged to remark thus keeping in view
the sublime conduct of Ali: “The most chaste and pious person in the
world was Ali son of Abu Talib''.

It is said that Ali did not place either a stone on a stone or a brick
on a brick and did not also join a reed with a reed. In other words he
did not construct for himself even a house made of reeds. Although the
White Palace had been constructed for him he did not occupy it because
he did not wish to live in a house which was better than the huts made
of wood occupied by the poor people. The manner in which Ali led his
life is reflected in his well-known remark: “Should I content myself
with this that the people call me the Commander of the Faithful and I
should not share the vicissitudes of life with them?''

lbn Athir has narrated that when Ali married the Prophet's daughter
Fatima their bed consisted only of the hide of a sheep. They used it as
a mattress during night and placed fodder on it during the daytime to
feed their camel. They did not have more than one servant. During the
caliphate of Ali some property was received from Isfahan. It was divided
by him into seven parts. It also included a loaf of bread and he broke
that also into seven pieces.

Manliness was incarnated in Ali in all respects and included every
quality necessary for it. Broad mindedness and forgiveness are the
necessary concomitants of manliness and they were ingrained in the
Imam's nature. It was on this account that he did not even think of
harming any person although he might have harmed him, and did not
oppress a person about whom he knew that he wanted to kill him.

Bani Umayyah abused and slandered him but he did not retaliate in the
same manner because magnanimous persons do not abuse a person who abuses
them. Imam Ali prohibited his own companions from abusing Bani Umayyah.
At the time of the Battle of Siffin he was informed that some of his
companions were abusing Bani Umayyah. Upon this he said: “I do not like
that you should be one of those who use abusive language. However, if
you mention their misdeeds and their behaviour you will be justified in
doing so and will be pronouncing an ultimatum.

In reply to their abuses you should say: “O Lord! Protect our blood as
well as theirs. Relieve our and their hearts of deviation, and guide us
so that he who has not recognized the truth should recognize it, and he
who is involved in injustice and deviation should forsake it''.

He has no peer in history in the matter of forgiveness and chivalry, and
there are innumerable incidents which throw light on these qualities of
his. It is said in this connection that on the occasion of a battle he
gave inter alia the following instructions to his soldiers: “Don't kill
an enemy who runs away. Don't withhold assistance from one who is
helpless and wounded. Don't strip any one. Don't take the property of
anyone by force”.

At the conclusion of the Battle of the Camel he offered funeral prayers
for the enemies who had been killed and prayed to God for their
forgiveness. When he gained control over his fallen enemies like
Abdullah son of Zubayr, Marwan son of Hakam, and Sa'id son of Aas, he
forgave them, behaved with them kindly and prohibited his companions
from punishing them although he was in a position to give them a harsh
treatment, and they too did not hope that they would be set free.

Another example of his chivalry is this that when he gained the upper
hand on Amr Aas he turned his face aside and let him go, although he was
by no means a lesser danger for Ali than Mu'awiya and remained inimical
towards him even after this kindness. When he saw Zulfiqar (Ali's sword)
on his head he committed a particular act and hoped that if he did so
Ali would shut his eyes and leave him.[^3] If Ali had killed Amr bin Aas
at that time, cunning and deception would have been eliminated and
Mu'awiya's army, too, would have been destroyed.

In the Battle of Siffin Mu'awiya and his supporters decided to overcome
Ali by subjecting him and his companions to thirst. For some days,
therefore, they blocked his way to the Euphrates and threatened that
they would not allow his army to utilize the water and would make them
die of thirst. However, Ali's army launched an attack and gained control
of the bank of the river. But Ali behaved with Mu'awiya in a different
manner. Notwithstanding the fact that he could stop supply of water to
the Syrian army as a measure of retaliation he allowed them to utilize
water in the same way in which his own men were utilizing it.

Once he was given to understand that two persons were accusing Ayesha of
having started the Battle of the Camel and of plotting to kill him. He
ordered that each of them might be administered one hundred lashes by
way of punishment.

After achieving victory in the Battle of the Camel he sent Ayesha back
to Madina with due honour and respect. He accompanied her upto a few
miles distance and also sent some persons with her so that they might
serve her on the way, and she might reach Madina comfortably.

In spite of his being so brave Ali avoided being oppressive. The
narrators and historians are agreed that he hated warfare and did not
resort to it except when no other alternative was left. He always tried
that matters might be settled with the enemies without bloodshed and
fighting. He used to advise his son Hasan not to invite anyone to
fighting. He was always sincere in what he said and followed the policy
which he recommended to his son till he was obliged to act otherwise.

For example when Kharijites were equipping themselves for warfare the
companions of Ali suggested to him that he should attack them (i.e.
Kharijites) before they became ready to wage a war. Ali, however,
replied: “I shall not start fighting till they begin the battle
themselves”. His faith and human attributes compelled him to keep the
people from deviation by means of advice. One day he was delivering a
sermon to a gathering and many Kharijites who considered him to be an
infidel were also present and were hearing him. One of them who was
wondering at his sweet language and eloquence said: “May God kill this
infidel! How wise and intelligent he is!” The followers of Ali wished to
kill that man. He, however, said to them: “He has done something wrong
with his tongue. You should, therefore, either take revenge from him
with the tongue or forgive him”:

We have already mentioned above that Mu'awiya's army blocked the path of
Ali's army to the Euphrates so that they might surrender on account of
thirst but when Ali gained control of the bank of the river he did not
stop Mu'awiya's army from utilizing the water. Many other similar
incidents took place so far as Mu'awiya was concerned, but it is not
possible to give their details here.

All these events show that as demanded by his angelic soul he was kind
even to his enemies and was just and magnanimous to all. A historian
narrates thus with reference to the Battle of Siffin: “A man named
Kareez son of Sabah Humeri came out of Mu'awiya's army into the
battlefield and said standing between the armies: Is there anyone who
may come and fight with me? One of the soldiers of Ali's army went to
combat with him and was killed. He again asked for an adversary. Another
man went but he too was killed and still another person also met death
at the hands of Kareez.

When he demanded an adversary for the fourth time none went to oppose
him. The men in the first row stepped back. Ali felt that there was a
danger of his army becoming demoralized. He, therefore, went himself to
give a fight to Kareez and killed him. Then he killed another man and
thereafter a third man also met the same fate. After having killed three
warriors Ali said loudly these words which were heard by all: ‘If you
had not started the battle we would not have fought with you’. Having
said this he returned to his place”.

It is also related in connection with the Battle of the Camel that when
the enemies gathered for an attack, Ali also arrayed his troops but said
to them: “Don't throw an arrow nor make an attack with a spear or a
sword until we have first invited them to peace”. He did not wish that a
battle should take place resulting in bloodshed and loss of life. After
a moment someone belonging to the opposite army shot an arrow which
struck a companion of Ali and killed him. Ali said: “O Lord! Bear
witness”. Then another arrow came and killed another man. He said again:
“O Lord! Bear witness”. Then an arrow struck Abdullah son of Badil and
his brother brought him before Ali. Ali again said “O Lord! Bear
witness”. And then the battle started.

To shun cruelty and oppression was a moral principle of Ali and formed
part of his nature and disposition. He never broke covenants and was not
inimical towards his former friends unless they themselves broke the
covenants and showed enmity in reply to kindness.

The best form of friendship and the meaning of fidelity is that a
warrior, while standing in the battlefield should look at the former
friends who may have come to fight in the capacity of enemies, with the
same brotherly eye, should invite them to peace and remind them of
former love and friendship, so that they may possibly refrain from
breach of covenant and treachery, or should take away the arms from
their hands and solve the difficult problems by negotiations and peace
talks. Fighting with a former friend should not be started all at once,
because it is possible that he may be reminded of former relations and
may refrain from fighting and opposition. If keeping promises and regard
for former friendship had not dominated the spirit of Ali he would not
have depended on them for warding off the enemies.

The Imam's firmness in keeping the promises is evident from the
treatment which he meted out to Zubayr son of Awam and Talha son of
Ubaidullah. These two persons separated the Imam's friends and helpers
from him and took them to his enemies. They also misguided Ayesha and
made her come up as opponent of Ali.

Those who were present on the spot whether they were friends or enemies,
have reported that when Talha and Zubayr decided to fight against Ali,
broke the oath of allegiance and displayed their evil intentions in the
Battle of the Camel, Ali went to them bare-headed and without wearing
any armour or coat of mail, meaning thereby that he had come with
peaceful intentions. He then called Zubayr saying: “O Zubayr! Come to
me”. Zubayr came fully armed. When Ayesha heard about it she cried:
“What a pity it is that there should be a combat”!

She said this because she knew that whoever went to fight against Ali
would be killed, however brave and strong he might be. And it may be
said with certainty that Zubayr could not have saved himself if he had
fought with Ali. However Ali embraced Zubayr. Ayesha and her supporters
were very much upset to see this. Ali said in a tone of love: “O Zubayr!
Why have you come to fight against me?” Zubayr replied: “To avenge the
murder of Uthman”. Ali said: “May God kill that person who has been
responsible for the murder of Uthman”.

Then Ali reminded Zubayr of past companionship and brotherhood and wept
a number of times while talking. However, Zubayr was bent upon fighting
and opposed the Imam till he (i.e. Zubayr) was killed. Ali, who attached
great importance to the tie of friendship, was very much grieved when
Zubayr met his death. Ali did not withhold his suggestions from the
former caliphs and assisted them in their words and actions. [^4]

Although this magnanimous person was steadfast in his friendship, his
friends did not accord due respect to his friendship, because they did
not expect that he would act contrary to his nature and let their hands
loose to usurp the rights of others.

Imam Ali has been reported to have said: “Even if all the seven regions
of the world and whatever is under the sky is offered to me so that I
may disobey God and take away unjustly the husk of barley from an ant I
shall not do so. In my eyes this entire world is inferior to a leaf
which may be pressed in the mouth of a locust”. In this matter Ali's
words and actions conformed with each other. He was not like others who
indulge in tall talk which their actions belie. He was prompted to say
these words by his nature which formed the basis of his character.

Ali was more kind to the people than anyone else and refrained from
harming any person. He became oblivious of his own self in order to
assist others and considered this self-abnegation to be a part and
parcel of his life. His entire life was dedicated to the support of the
oppressed and the helpless so that he might realize their rights from
the tyrants who considered themselves entitled to usurp the rights of
others on account of noble descent and racial discrimination.

Ali opposed the Quraysh and fought with them, because they coveted the
caliphate for the sake of personal gain and in order to acquire
position, wealth and rulership. He renounced the caliphate and even the
worldly life and forsook everything because he could not act like
worldly persons and could not agree to allow them to exploit the weak
and the helpless.

Ali was so kind to the common man that when his brother Aqeel requested
him to give him something more from the public treasury than his due
share, he turned down his request and as a consequence thereof Aqeel
went away to Mu'awiya. Ali tolerated separation from his brother but did
not agree to give him anything from the public treasury of the Muslims
without entitlement.

Ali was like a kind father for all human beings. He gave directions to
the officers and governors to behave with the people gently. He behaved
harshly with those who oppressed the people and warned them of severe
consequences. The following directions given by him reached the ears of
the governors continuously: “Redress the grievances of the people and
meet their needs because you derive your capital from them. Do not
deprive anyone of what he needs, and do not obstruct him from attaining
his object. Do not sell the summer or winter dress of anyone to realize
revenue. Do not take away from any person a quadruped which is required
by him for his business and do not whip a person for even a penny”.

Ali was the person who wrote an excellent testament for Malik Ashtar
Nakha\`i at the time of appointing him the governor of Egypt and the
adjoining areas. He wrote: “Do not live with people like ferocious
animals, and do not treat their sustenance to be war booty, because the
Egyptians fall under one of the two categories: either they are your
brethren-in-faith from the point of view of religion or your equals
because of their being human beings. Ignore their shortcomings and
forgive their mistakes, just as you hope that God will forgive your
crimes and sins. Do not regret your forgiving a person and do not insist
upon awarding punishment”.

He added: “Prohibit hoarding”. Ali strictly forbade hoarding, which was
the main reason for Mu'awiya and his party opposing him, because they
wanted the country, the wealth and the war booty for themselves whereas
Ali wanted them for all human beings.

Ali was so kind to human beings that, as we shall mention in detail
later, he ordered that his murderer, the wicked Ibn Muljim might be
treated kindly.

In the recommendations made by him to his sons Hasan and Husayn he said:
“Be enemies of the oppressors and supporters of the oppressed”. He also
said: “Be enemies of the oppressor even though he may be your near
relative and support the oppressed person even though he may not be
related to you and may be a stranger”. He always endeavoured to punish
the oppressors and relieve the people of their wickedness. To achieve
this purpose he used his heart, tongue, sword and blood. He always
remained a helper of the oppressed and an enemy of the oppressors.
Following this path he never relaxed till the end of his life.

One should not be surprised that Ali was just. It would have been a
matter of surprise if he had not been just. The instances of his justice
which have been narrated are the most valuable assets in human history
and man should be proud of them.

His brother Aqeel asked him to grant him a special pension out of the
public treasury, but he refused to accede to his request saying: “It is
not my personal property that I may give it to anyone I like. There are
also other helpless and needy persons, who are more deserving than you
are, and I must be mindful of them”. Aqeel said: “If you do not allow me
a pension out of this property I shall go to Mu'awiya”. However, Ali did
not care for what he said, and did not revise his decision.

His brother went away and joined Mu'awiya and used to say: “Mu'awiya is
better for my world”, Mu'awiya's treatment satisfied him, because the
public treasury was a tool in his hands with which he strengthened his
kingdom, achieved his objects and wanted to revive the past politics and
importance of Bani Umayyah.

The Imam did not claim any privileges vis-a-vis his subjects and
appeared in the courts as their equal. This was so because the spirit of
justice had penetrated into the depth of his heart.

Once Ali saw his coat of mail in the possession of a Christian. He took
him in the court of a judge named Shurayh so that he might give a
decision regarding its ownership. When both of them appeared before the
judge, Ali said: “This coat of mail is mine. I have neither sold nor
gifted it to anyone”. The judge asked the other person: “What have you
to say about the claim made by the Commander of the Faithful?” The
Christian said: “This coat of mail is mine. In spite of this, however, I
do not consider the Commander of the Faithful to be a liar”. Then the
judge Shurayh turned to Ali and said: “Can you produce any witness who
should depose that this coat of mail is yours?” Ali smiled and said:
“Shurayh is right. I cannot produce any such witness”.

The judge gave a judgment in favour of the Christian who took the coat
of mail and departed. The Commander of the Faithful kept looking at him
from behind. After having gone a few steps, however, he returned and
said: “I testify that such an order resembles the order of the Prophets,
because one who is the Commander of the Faithful has appeared along with
a person like myself in the court of the judge who is also his
subordinate and the judge has given a judgment against him”. [^5] Then
he added: “O Commander of the Faithful! I swear by God that this coat of
mail is yours and my claim was false”.

Later the people saw that Christian serving in the army of Ali as a
faithful soldier and he fought most enthusiastically against Kharijites
in the Battle of Nahrawan.

Ibn Abi Rafe' has narrated thus: “I was the administrator of the public
treasury during the period of the caliphate of Ali and was also his
scribe. The property received from Basra for the public treasury
included a pearl necklace. The daughter of Ali sent word to me saying:
“I understand that there is a pearl necklace in the public treasury
which is controlled by you. Send that necklace to me on loan so that I
may wear it on Eid al-Azha day. Thereafter I shall return it”.

I sent the necklace to her on the conditions that she would be
responsible if It was lost or damaged, and that she would return it
within three days. She accepted these conditions.

By chance the eyes of the Commander of the Faithful fell on the necklace
and he recognized it. He asked his daughter as to where she had obtained
it from. She replied: “I have taken it on loan from Ibn Abi Rafe' the
in-charge of the public treasury to wear it on Eid al-Azha day and have
promised to return it to him within three days”.

The Commander of the Faithful summoned me and said; “Do you consider it
lawful to commit breach of trust with the Muslims?” I replied: “May God
forbid that I may commit treachery with the Muslims”. Thereupon he said:
“Then why did you lend such and such necklace to my daughter without
obtaining my permission and without the concurrence of the Muslims?”

I replied: “O Commander of the Faithful! She is your daughter. She
borrowed it to adorn herself and guaranteed its safe return so that I
might restore it to its proper place”. Ali said: “Take it back today and
do not do so in future otherwise I shall punish you”.

When Ali's daughter came to know about it she said to him: “O father! I
am your dear daughter. Who else is more entitled to wear this
necklace?”  
 Ali replied: “O daughter of Abu Talib! Don't deviate from the right
path. Can you tell me how many Muhajir and Ansar women adorn themselves
with such necklaces?” Eventually I took back the necklace from the
daughter of the Commander of the Faithful and restored it to its proper
place.

Ali observed justice even in small and insignificant matters. If it
became necessary for him to divide something with others he gave the
right of selection to the other party so that people might not think
that discrimination was being made in the matter of division between the
persons in authority and the subordinates.  
 One day he went to the shop of a draper named Abu al-Nawar accompanied
by his slave and purchased two dresses. Then he asked his slave to
choose one out of the two dresses. The slave picked up one of them and
Ali retained the other. [^6]

All the orders and letters which he sent to the governors and other
officials rotate on the pivot of justice.  
 Ali's near ones as well as others joined hands in opposing him. It was
on account of the fact that he did not give them preference from the
point of view of equity and justice, and did not grant any concession to
his relatives. He was not influenced by anyone and accepted only the
right things from others.

When Uthman son of Affan became caliph, he gave full freedom to his
relatives, friends and associates to accumulate wealth, and he followed
those who gave him wrong advice. Marwan had the greatest influence on
him. He did not benefit from the wise recommendation which Abu Bakr had
made to Umar. Abu Bakr had said: “Don't be in proximity to those persons
who are eager to fill their bellies and acquire position and wealth.
Don't be enamoured of the fact that they have associated with the
Prophet and served him. Assess the nature of every person and find out
what sort of man he is”.

Ali hated such greedy persons. Hence when he became the caliph he
decided to deal with them justly. He, therefore dismissed some of them
and checked the greed of others for position and wealth.

There was a group of persons who wanted to give the principles of Islam
a new form and make them a means of acquisition of position and wealth
and to treat the Islamic territories as hereditary property of their
family. Ali fought against them and said to them in loud words: “I know
what can keep you from rebellion and mischief, but the thing which is a
source of happiness for you is the means of evil for me”. The stage at
which Ali's dealing with such people reached is well-known. When the
oppressors were defeated they resorted to deceit and the spirit of
justice succeeded in the hearts of Ali and his followers, although
apparently they were the sufferers.

When Ali met martyrdom at the hands of Ibn Muljim, a Nakha'i woman named
Ummul Haitham wrote an elegy for him. A verse of that elegy goes to show
the opinion of the people about his character and justice: “He
established truth and entertained no doubt about it. He behaved justly
with his kinsmen as well as strangers”. Sincerity and intrepidity are
the qualities of great men and they were possessed by Ali par
excellence.

Sincerity, truthfulness, intrepidity and manliness and all other similar
qualities are inter-connected. Hence he did not express anything which
was opposed to his real intention and determination. He did not practise
deceit, although he knew very well that by doing so he could get rid of
the mischief of the enemies.  
 What has been said above about the truthfulness and character of the
Imam fully proves his sincerity and intrepidity.

One of his principles and morals consisted of simplicity in everything.
He hated formality very much and used to say: “The worst brother is he
for whom one has to involve onself in trouble”. He also used to say: “If
a believer observes formality with his brother it means that he has
separated himself from him. If he expressed an opinion or tendered an
advice or gave some present, then this act of his was not tainted with
ostentation. This habit was so much ingrained in his nature that the
selfish people could not make him act according to their wishes, and the
flatterers should not hope to attract his attention. These people used
to say that the Imam was hard-hearted, ill-natured and proud. However,
the Imam was neither hard-hearted nor ill-natured nor proud. On the
contrary, as demanded by his nature, he said whatever he had to say
without any formality or deceit.

A large number of persons who gathered around him coveted personal
gains. Ali became suspicious about them and did not conceal his
misgiving. Expression of his views about them cannot be called pride or
rudeness.

Ali hated pride and was absolutely free from egotism. He also forbade
his children, companions and officials to show pride and practise
egotism. While giving them advice he used to say: “Shun egotism. You
should know that egotism is a bad quality and a calamity for reason''.
He hated formality. He also restrained the people from going to the
extreme while praising him and told them: “I am lesser than what you
say”.

At times it so happened that he considered the person concerned to be
his enemy. On such occasions he did not refrain from mentioning the
mental condition of that person of which he was aware and told him: “I
am better than what you believe about me in your heart”.

Ali disliked some of his friends exalting him too much in the same
manner in which he disliked his being belittled by his enemies. He has
said: “Persons of two types have been destroyed on account of their
attitude towards me - the friends who have exaggerated my qualities and
the spiteful enemies”. He neither showed pride nor humiliated himself
unnecessarily. He presented himself as he was. He was free from
affectation and hypocrisy. It is difficult to find a straightforward man
like him. He purchased a bagful of palm-dates and was carrying them
home. Some persons observed this and volunteered to carry the bag for
him. He, however, told them frankly that the head of the family was more
responsible to carry it.

It is said erroneously that artificial humility and meekness constitute
good qualities. In fact it is falsehood and mere affectation that one
should pose to be inferior to what one actually is. Ali was not humble
in that sense and he was also not proud. He displayed himself as he
actually was without any meekness or pride, because these two things are
not the qualities of manly persons. The writer of “Abqariyatu'l Imam”
says: “Ali entered the battlefield bare-headed to fight against the
enemies whereas they were completely covered with steel and iron. How
can it be said that this action of his was based on hypocrisy?

Another attribute of Ali was his noble disposition. He did not entertain
grudge in his heart against anybody, even though he might be his fell
enemy. As we have already mentioned he directed his sons and friends not
to kill his murderer (Ibn Muljim). Although Talha had come as an enemy
to kill him, he wept on his dead body and recited a heart-felt elegy for
him. Although the Kharijites were his deadly enemies and had fought
against him, and his murderer was also one of them, and in fact they had
not given him lesser trouble as compared with Mu'awiya and Amr bin Aas,
but he advised his friends and followers not to fight against them. He
gave this direction because he knew that those people had fallen prey to
misunderstanding and had been misguided. They were seekers of truth but
had been mistaken in the matter of its assessment as opposed to Mu'awiya
and his companions who were seekers of falsehood and succeeded in
acquiring it.

Nothing can be seen in the biography of Ali which may go to show that he
was revengeful. In all circumstances he showed truthfulness, honesty,
straightforwardness and swordsmanship.

Magnanimous persons are not revengeful and do not also tolerate
injustice and oppression. They get annoyed with one who oppresses
others. Although Ali did not entertain any grudge in his heart against
anyone, he had to face a spiteful group. His meaningful words show how
grieved he was. His grief was such as arose from sympathy and kindness.
He was grieved to see that people harmed themselves.

Another quality which distinguished him from others and was
complementary to his other attributes was his perfect faith in his
actions and beliefs, and whenever he did anything he believed in its
correctness and in his being on the right path. When he decided to fight
against Amr son of Abd Wudd, the famous champion of Arabia he was warned
by the Prophet and his companions about the consequences. He however,
decided to fight because besides being brave he possessed enthusiasm to
support Islam.

We repeat that when the enemies had encircled Ali from all sides he
busied himself in offering prayers without there being any guard to
protect him from the mischief of those enemies, and consequently lbn
Muljim succeeded in wounding him with his poisoned sword. This very
thing is a great proof of the fact that he was certain of the
correctness of what he did, because a righteous person does not fear
anything.

All the words and acts of Ali go to prove that he had perfect and firm
faith in his actions. This was so because all his actions emanated from
wisdom and capability. [^7]

When the people were divided into two groups in their attitude towards
him (i.e. friends and enemies) he did not become afraid of the enemies
and did not lay down arms before them, because he had perfect faith in
his own truthfulness and justice and correctness of his actions. It was
in this context that he said: “Even if I strike on the nose of a
believer so that he may become my enemy he will not become my enemy and
even if I shower all the bounties of the earth on him so that he may
become friendly towards me he will not become my friend”. He has also
said in this behalf. “I am not afraid of fighting against these people
alone even though the entire world may join their army”.

When he came to know that a group of the people of Madina had joined
Mu'awiya he wrote to Sahl son of Hanif the governor of Madina: “I
understand that a group of the inhabitants of your city has secretly
joined Mu'awiya. However, you should not be worried on this account that
some persons will leave you and will not assist you. I swear by God that
these persons have not forsaken injustice and oppression and have not
stuck to equity and justice”.

[^1]: The Arabs did not consider it proper to address the respectable
persons with their real names. In case, therefore, they wished to accord
respect to someone they addressed him with his Kuniyah.

[^2]: According to the Christians \`worship' consists of sequestered and
monastic life. However, monasticism is not permissible in Islam. It was
for this reason that the pious Muslims neither avoided effort in life
nor kept aloof from other human beings. On the other hand at times they
heroically staked their very lives even when it was expedient to remain
silent (and they do so even in these times).

[^3]: It is said that when Amr b. Aas came to fight against Ali in the
Battle of Siffin he was very much afraid. He could think of no other
alternative except that he should lie on the ground and uncover his
private parts so that Ali might shut his eyes, and he himself might
escape. He, therefore, did so and thus saved his life.

[^4]: Ali assisted the caliphs because every action of his was for the
sake of the benefit of Islam and he did not let the interests of the
religion suffer in order to acquire his own right

[^5]: In the free countries of the modern world the court and judges
have been made permanent and none can remove them from their office.
This has been done so that they may take decision without any fear or
favour, and may give judgment against influential persons and even
against the members of government.

[^6]: Such incidents show that the leaders of the faith were very
mindful of the rights of their subordinates. Those who make a show of
supporting the helpless persons, and accuse religion of being an
impediment in the matter of weak persons getting their due rights have
not done as much for their subordinates as Imam Ali did.

[^7]: Its reason was that Imam Ali was infallible and he said and did
everything in accordance with the inspiration and traditions of the
Prophet of Islam. Hence, he did not entertain any doubt about his views
and actions..


