About The Author
================

Allama Muhammad Al-Baqir Majlisi was a scion of a very erudite family.
His ancestor was Maqsood ‘Ali Majlisi who migrated from Jabal Aamil to
Isfahan city in Iran. He had two sons, Muhammad Taqi and Muhammad
As-Sadiq. Both of them received instruction in Islamic Studies from
Allama Abdallah Shustari. Allama Muhammad Taqi Majlisi, himself an
erudite Islamic Scholar, was the father of Allama Muhammad Al-Baqir
Majlisi. Allama Al-Baqir was born in the year 1037 H (1616 AD).

He opened his eyes in a scholarly atmosphere. His two elder brothers,
Mulla Azizullah and Mulla Abdallah were scholars of high repute and his
sisters too were ladies of high learning. Within no time, the young
Muhammad Al-Baqir acquired mastery in logic, philosophy, mathematics,
hadith(traditions), fiqh(jurisprudence), literature and Qur’anic
commentary.

Allama Muhammad Al-Baqir Majlisi’s tutors too were of very high repute.
Among them were Hasan ‘Ali bin Abdallah, Sayed Muhammad Haidar
Tabataba’i, Mir Muhammad Mu’min and Allama Muhsin Faid. When the
scholarly atmosphere honed his capabilities, Muhammad Al-Baqir commenced
his authorship. The work that the erudite scholars did in a millennium,
Allama Majlisi achieved in a short span of 77 years.

It is a fact that what Allama Muhammad Yaqub Kulaini commenced, Allama
Majlisi took up capably as a rena’Isance to his efforts. Bihar Al Anwar
is Allama Majlisi’s monumental work consisting of 25 volumes. Mirath ul
Uqool fi Sharh el Kafi is a commentary on authentic and
weak*narrations.*

Allama Majlisi had hundreds of disciples studying under him. His
prominent students were Allama Sayed Nematullah Jazairi, Mirza Abdallah
Affendi, Mulla Abdallah Ardabeli, Mulla Muhammad Fadil, Mulla Muhammad
bin Hasan Isfahani and Mulla Muhammad Husayn bin Yahya Noori.

This great luminary of Islamic learning passed away at the age of 77
years in 1111H (1690 A.D.).


