Chapter 10: The Stars
=====================

The First Star: The Superiority Of Supplication
-----------------------------------------------

A superior way of prayer and an easy method to achieve nearness to Allah
is through supplication. The method of supplication, as prescribed by
the Infallible Imams (as), is that after offering the mandatory prayers,
one must recite supplications depending on the time that can be taken
out from the other duties.

The Creator of the Universe Himself says, “Call Me (*through
supplication)* and I shall respond! Those who don’t believe in
supplication are conceited people. Their place will be the Hell in the
Hereafter. If man wants to call Allah and wishes the prayers to be
answered, then he has to implicitly follow the Commandments of Allah.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said to Ma’Isar, “O Ma’Isar! Offer prayer to
Allah and don’t say that what is destined will happen. You should
remember that Allah has absolute control over the destinies and
supplication can change the fate of persons.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “The best prayer is supplication and
the worst enemy of Allah is a person who, in his pride, refuses to do
supplication and invocation. To the contrary one who supplicates to
Allah with due humility will get his prayers answered. It is like the
door opening for a person who keeps knocking at it!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) says, “Supplication is the dearest act of
the creature in the consideration of Allah.”

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Supplication is the sword of
the*mu’min* to subdue his adversaries. It is a pillar of the Faith that
makes the structure of the Faith stronger. It illumines the Firmament
and the earth.”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said, “Supplication is sharper than the spear
and the arrow. It wards away calamities. Supplicate, and supplicate the
more! Supplication is the key to Allah’s Blessings. It is the cure for
all pains and aches.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that for warding out the wave of
calamities one should have access to supplication even before the
calamitous situation arises. He also said that calamities visit
the*mu’mins* fast like the water falling down the hill. In such
situation the only alternative for the person will be prayer and
supplication.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that three things are there for a
person’s protection: 1. Prayer when a calamity comes. 2. Repentance
after committing a sin. 3. Thanking Allah for the Bounties.

The Second Star: The Etiquette Of Supplication
----------------------------------------------

Supplication is petitioning Allah for fulfillment of one’s legitimate
desires. It is therefore necessary that the supplicant should be
conversant with the meaning of the prayer and the etiquette of reciting
the prayer. He must recite the supplication with dedication of heart and
his attitude should be equally submissive if not more than what he
adopts for asking a favor from a fellow human being.

First Condition: When a person approaches another person for a favor, he
keeps in mind certain things. Firstly, whatever he says, he says with
full

understanding. Whatever he plans in his mind to say, he communicates to
the person verbatim. While supplicating to Allah, a person should have
his specific purpose in his mind.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “Allah doesn’t answer the prayer
of a person whose prayer doesn't come from his heart.” Therefore, one
should pray from the depths of his heart and should have a conviction
that Allah will fulfill his wish.

Second Condition: When a person seeks help from another in time of
difficulty, it is necessary that the person has to be known to him. It
is an added advantage if the two have been acquainted with each other in
the past. Similarly when one has to approach Allah for the grant of a
wish, it is necessary that the person should have been offering thanks
to the Almighty for His Bounties!

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that when a person wants Allah to
help him in times of difficulty, he must make it a habit to supplicate
to Allah before any such difficulty arises. He should not present
himself to Allah as a total stranger when he needs help.

One person asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Allah exhorts people to
ask for things and he would grant them. But he said that he keeps
praying but the prayers remain unanswered. The Imam (as) replied, “Have
you fulfilled the covenants you made with Allah? Have you observed the
do’s and don’ts prescribed for you. If not, then how can you expect Him
to grant your wishes?”

Third Condition: When we expect favors from a person, we serve him
meticulously to keep him in good cheer. Similarly those who are more
particular in offering prayers to Allah, generally get their wishes
granted.

Therefore the prayers of those who are closer to Allah get answered. For
this one has to be pious, honest and truthful.

Fourth Condition: Another condition for the effectiveness of
supplication is the state of understanding of the Almighty. Firmer the
Faith of the supplicant, better the chance of his prayers getting
answered.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) was asked by someone, “O son of the Prophet
(S)! We pray, but our prayers are not answered.” The Imam replied, “Do
you know Him whom you approach for granting your wishes!”

Fifth Condition: Beseeching and lamentation during supplication is very
effective for acceptance of the prayers. The more humility a supplicant
manifests, the more there will be the chance of Allah granting his wish.
It is common knowledge that even in mundane affairs, the persons in
power respond to those who appeal to them for help with humility and
beseeching.

Sixth Condition: The etiquette of supplication demands that the
supplicant doesn’t reveal the purpose his prayer. The belief is that
Allah prefers the individual prayer of a suppliant over that of a group.
However, if the suppliant feels that he is a sinner, he can join a group
of persons of piety to make a supplication. Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
has said in this regard that if forty persons supplicate as a group on
Friday, their prayers will definitely be answered. The Imam (as) also
said, “Whenever my revered father did supplication, he used to call all
the members of the family to join in. He would recite the supplication
and the rest would say, ‘*Amen* ’*!* ”

Seventh Condition: The timing of a supplication too is very vital for
the effectiveness of the prayers. Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said
that four times are most suitable for prayer: 1. When there is a
sandstorm. 2 When it rains. 3. At the time when a battle is going on. 4.
When a*mu’min* is martyred and the first drop of his blood falls to the
ground.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that four timings are specific for
supplications: 1. While reciting the Holy Qur’an. 2. When one hears the
call for prayer-*Adhaan.* 3. When it rains. 4. When a battle is raging
and*mu’mins* get martyred.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said that the best time for supplication is
near dawn (*Sahar).*

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said “Do your supplication before
sun-rise. This is the time when the rivers of the Firmament are opened,
sustenance is distributed and prayers are answered.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “If one wants to supplicate to
Allah, three timings are the most suitable: 1.On Fridays before the
congregational sermon is delivered. 2. At the time of sunset. 3. Before
sunrise (every day).”

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) narrates that Lady Fatima Zahra (as) heard the
Prophet of Allah (S) say that there is a particular time on Fridays when
prayers are generally answered. When asked, what is that timing, the
Prophet (S) said that it is the time when the sun is half way to set.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said on Friday there will be a wind of
Allah’s Blessing around sunset. The doors of the Heaven are open at that
time. This is the best time for supplicating to Allah.

Eighth Condition: Crying and beseeching makes the supplication
effective. If tears flow from the supplicant’s eye while he prays, or
even one drop of tear comes out of the eye, the prayer will definitely
be answered.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said the creature nearest to Allah is one
who, while prostrating in prayer, cries and if he has lost hope of his
prayer getting answered he should raise his hands towards the Heaven as
if importuning Allah for granting his wish.

Nineth Condition: The supplicant should give alms to poor and needy
because these are the servants of Allah. They are like the janitors at a
king’s palace. To reach the king, one has to please the janitors.

Tenth Condition: One should make others needs the medium of conveying
his own prayers for acceptance. If one approaches a munificent person
and places the needs of others ahead of his own requirement, the donor
will be pleased with the concern of the person for others and fulfils
his demand.

Therefore, the Prophet of Allah (S) has said that when one prays, he
should pray not only for himself but pray for others as well. Such
prayers will be answered.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that a person remembers forty*mu’mins* in
his prayers, his own prayer too will be accepted.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that a person’s prayer may not be
accepted as soon as the prayer for the one who is away, and the person
prays for him, from a distance.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said that the most acceptable prayer is
one that is offered for a*mu’min* who is not present at the place.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that when a person prays in general
for the*mu’mins,* Allah will keep in mind the numbers of*mu’mins* past
and those yet to come and fulfils his wishes accordingly. If the
person’s actions qualify him for going to Hell, the spirits of
the*mu’mins* would plead with Allah for his pardon that he used to pray
for them. Then Allah would pardon him and send him to Heaven

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) has said when a*mu’min* prays for another who
is not present, Allah will reward him a hundred times for this act.

Eleventh Condition: For acceptance of the prayers, one should thank
Allah for His Bounties before supplicating. This is the same way, when a
person of status is approached for help, his past munificence is
mentioned with profuse thanks.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said: If you wish your prayers to be
answered, you should first praise Allah, then say*durood (* benediction)
for the Prophet and his Holy Progeny (S) that your prayers are answered
soon. It is like when one wants to approach a king, he makes presents to
those who are close to him. Therefore it is essential that one offers
benediction to the Prophet (S) and his family. This benediction should
always be repeated before and after any prayer is made. It is natural
that when what is accepted before and after the prayer, the prayer too
will be accepted!

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Say benediction on me and
my*Ahl-ul-Bayt* so that the angels will say benediction for you.
Benediction removes dissensions amongst people.”

It is said: When you hear the Prophet (S)’s name, offer benediction
again and again. Because when a person says the benediction once, all
the creatures would praise the person. Ignorant and unfortunate is the
person who is not aware of this requirement. Allah, the Prophet (S) and
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* will be annoyed with such persons.

It is mentioned in a tradition that in the balance of actions, no act
has so much weight as the benediction of the Prophet (S) and
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* On the Day of Judgment, the actions of the men would
be put in the balance, but since they will be light, the scale would
tilt to the other side. Then the Prophet (S) would put the benedictions
uttered by the person on the side of the scale where his actions are
there. Thus the balance will tilt in favor of the person!

There is another tradition that if one wishes to save his face from the
Hellfire, then say the benediction (*Salawat* ) a hundred times after
the morning prayer.

A person who says the benediction a hundred times after the Friday
prayer, Allah will fulfill his sixty wishes--- thirty in this life and
thirty in the Hereafter.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that on the eve of Friday the angels
descend from the firmament and their number is equivalent to the
particles in the atmosphere or the ants on the earth. These angels will
have golden pens and tablets in their hands. They will not record the
actions of the persons who were not attended by the benediction to the
Prophet till

Saturday of the week. It is therefore advised that on the eve and the
day of Friday, the benediction is repeatedly uttered. The Imam (as) also
said that it was the Prophet (S)'s exhortation (*Sunna Mu’akkadah or
emphasized)* that one should repeat the benediction a thousand times on
Fridays and a hundred times on the week days.

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said, “If a person doesn’t have the means to pay
expiation (*Kaffarah* ) for his sins, he should utter benediction to the
Prophet and his*Ahl-ul-Bayt (as)* that it will reduce the burden of his
sins.”

Imam ‘Ali Naqi (as) says, “Allah has deemed Prophet Ibrahim (as) His
friend because he used to excessively utter benediction to Muhammad (S)
and his*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* ”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that one who says the benediction like
this,

<p dir="rtl">
صَلَواتُ اللهِ وَصَلَواتُ مَلائِكَتِهِ وَأنْبِياءِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ
وَجَمِيعِ خَلْقِهِ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، وَالسَّلامُ عَلَيْهِ
وَعَلَيْهِمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكاتُهُ.
</p>

*May Allah send His blessings and His angles, His prophets, His
messengers, and all of His creatures send their blessings upon Mohammad
and the progeny of Mohammad, and salutations, Allah’s blessings and
mercy upon Mohammad and the progeny of Mohammad?*

His sins would be obliterated and he would be as clean as he way at his
birth.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) is quoted by an authentic source as having
said: When one gets a sneeze, he should say:

<p dir="rtl">
اَلحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ العَالَمِينَ وَصَلَّى اللهُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَأهْلِ
بَيْتِهِ.
</p>

*Praise to Allah the Lord of the worlds and may Allah send his blessings
upon Mohammad and the progeny of Mohammad?*

In another tradition it is said that when one hears the sound of
sneezing by someone else, he should say the benediction mentioned above.
He will never, then, get pain of the teeth or the eyes.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said: One who does not say benediction on
me and my progeny, will never get the fragrance of the Heaven although
this smell reaches as far as the distance that can be traveled over a
period of five hundred years.

Then the Prophet (S) said, “One who says the benediction on me and
my*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* the doors to the Heaven will open for him and the
angels say benediction on him a seventy times. If he has sinned, the
sins will be obliterated like the leaves in the season of fall. Allah
says, ‘O creature!*Sadaika—* I have accepted your prayers and I shall
give you succor!’ Then Allah will order the angels to say benediction
for the person a seventy times.” Then the Prophet (S) says, “If someone
sends benediction for me and not for my*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* then seven
curtains will obstruct it in the Firmament and Allah says, ‘*La labbaik
wa la sadaika—neither your prayer is acceptable nor shall succor come to
you’”*

Allah further says, ‘O My angels! Don’t allow his prayers to reach the
sky. Till he includes the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* in his benediction for the
Prophet (S)’

In another tradition of the Prophet (S) it is recorded, “When I am
mentioned before a person, and he doesn’t say benediction for me and
my*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* his sins will not be pardoned and he will be denied
Allah’s Rewards.”

At another place the Prophet (S) has said, “The most miserly and evil is
the person who has not uttered my benediction when my name is mentioned
to him.” Then the Prophet (S) added, “One who forgets to send
benediction for me has forgotten the way to the Heaven.”

Malik Jehni narrates that he presented a flower to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq
(as). The Imam (as) took it, smelled it, touched it to his eyes and
said, “When a person smells a flower, touches it with his eyes and says
benediction to Muhammad (S) and his*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* before the flower
leaves his hands, his deliverance would have been granted!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “A person who says the benediction a
hundred times, his wishes will definitely be fulfilled!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Whosoever says the benediction on me
a hundred times on Fridays, Allah will fulfill sixty of his wishes,
thirty in this life and the other thirty in the Hereafter!” It is
a*Sunna Mu’akkadah* that a believer should say the benediction a
thousand times on the eve and the day of Friday.

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said that if a person is unable to pay
reparations for his sins, should say repeatedly the benediction for the
Prophet (S) and his*Ahl-ul-Bayt* that his sins are pardoned by Allah. A
person who says the benediction when he gets a sneeze, will never suffer
from any ailment of the eyes or the teeth.

The Third Star: Non-Acceptance Of Prayers
-----------------------------------------

Although the Almighty has promised the creatures that their
supplications would be answered, there are certain reasons for
non-acceptance of some prayers.

Since He is Omnipotent and Omniscient, His will is dominant over all
that happens. If the wishes of the people are in accord with His will,
their prayers would most certainly be answered. For example, can a
generous person, if asked, put a venomous snake in the hand of another
person or give a bottle of poison that the other desires of consuming?

The generous person knows the consequences of such actions and his
denying acquiescence would be in the best interest of the prospective
recipient. Similarly, some people pray to Allah for grant of such wishes
that, if fulfilled, they might harmful for them. But these people are
ignorant of the harmful consequences of what they wish to have. Allah is
all-knowing and has the best interest of the creatures in view. Someone
might say, if Allah decides what is in the best interest of an
individual, then what is the need of supplicating to Him. They think
that we might as well leave everything to the wish of Allah.

The reply to such doubts is that there are three types of wishes of the
people that come to the consideration of Allah:

There are certain wishes that are granted by Allah without ever asking
for.

There are certain wishes that are not granted despite repeated
supplications.

There are certain other wishes for granting of which one has to make
supplications.

Since man, in most cases, cannot categories the wishes, he has to pray
and supplicate to Allah for fulfillment of all his desires and wishes.
Men should know that supplication itself is a very superior prayer.

The other reason for supplication is that everything is governed by
certain norms. For example, offering mandatory prayers is a means of
one’s salvation. True! But prayer too is subject to certain norms. If
someone offers prayer without the mandatory ablution, his prayer would
not be accepted although, as mentioned earlier, prayer is a means of
salvation of the person. Similarly for supplication there are certain
norms to be observed.

Unless a person supplicates with humility, tears (*Giria), knowledge of
Allah, regularity in prayers, abstention from bad deeds, fair means of
sustenance, truthfulness in words and actions etc* his wishes may not be
granted. Therefore, for Allah to keep His promise to answer the prayers
of his creatures, they have to abide by certain conditions.

The third reason is that Allah wants that the prayers are answered with
some delay. Perhaps, immediate acceptance of the prayers of people is
not in their best interests. Or perhaps Allah wants the creature to
supplicate again, and again, in a tone of submission and capitulation so
that his status in piety enhances. Certain other times the prayer is
answered but there is delay in its taking effect. Prophet Musa (as)’s
prayer for the destruction of Pharaoh took thirty years to fruition.

### Reasons For Delayed Acceptance Of Prayers

###

It is narrated through authentic sources that Ahmed bin Abi Nasr told to
Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as), “O Imam! Several years passed that I have been
supplicating, but my wish has not been granted till now. I am getting
doubts in my mind because of this delay!”

The Imam (as) said: O Ahmed! Keep your heart free of the Satanic doubts!
It is the Satan who makes you doubt Allah’s Munificence. My ancestor,
Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as), said,’ It is necessary for a*mu’min* to
pray the same way during times of hardship as he does when times are
good. When the wishes are granted, he should not stop supplication. He
should not tire of supplicating. In the eyes of Allah, prayer has a
superior status. It is necessary that you remain calm and patient in
difficult times.

Ask for legitimate things from Allah. Don’t delay helping your kith and
kin. Abstain from people’s differences and fights. Remember! We*Ahl al
Bayt keep* cordial relations even with those who mean harm to us. By
Allah! We pray for their welfare too! You should know that if a rich
person gives some help to a needy person, the recipient becomes hopeful
of getting more help from him. When Allah grants bounties to a person,
he should remember that in return Allah wants him to meet certain norms.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said that the prayers of a*mu’min* are
answered with some delay because Allah wants to hear His sincere
creature again and again! The Imam (as) asked a person if he would
believe if he (the

Imam) made a promise to him? The man said, “O son of the Prophet (S)!
How could it be that I don’t believe you!” The Imam (as) said, “You are
ready to trust the word of a creature like you, will you not believe in
the promises that Allah has made to you?” Then the Imam (as) added, “It
is necessary that you believe in Allah’s promises. He has promised:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِي إِذَا دَعَانِي.﴾
</p>

****My creatures ask you questions about me; tell them I am near them. I
accept the prayer of one who prays.* (2:186)***

Then Allah says, “Don’t lose hope in Allah’s Mercies.” And said, “Allah
promises you of great rewards and lots of bounties” It is imperative for
you that you trust in Allah more than you can trust anyone else. When
you have good thoughts in your heart, don’t give way to other doubts.
Thus your sins will be pardoned.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Many a time Allah accepts people’s
prayers but the benefits take time in reaching the supplicant. Allah
instructs the two angels guardian over the person that the supplication
has been accepted but he should not be given the benefits immediately
that he continues to be suppliant for some more time. Allah will also
mention to the angels that he likes the way the person supplicates.”

In another tradition the Imam (as) has said, “Man is always in a good
state and rightly keeps expecting Allah’s bounties unless he loses faith
in the Munificence of Allah and stop praying for His mercy. He should
not be in a hurry to get his prayers answered!” The narrator asked, “O
Imam (as)! What do you mean by the supplicant making hurry?” The Imam
(as) replied, “When a supplicant complains that lot of time has elapsed
ever since he initiated his supplication and the wish remains
unfulfilled, then he is trying to hurry in the matter.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has narrated that one day Prophet Ibrahim (as)
was surveying the environs of*Mount Bait al Maqdis* for a pasture. He
heard the voice of a person calling. He proceeded in the direction of
the sound. He found a person in the process of offering his prayers. The
height of the person was about twelve yards. When the person was through
with the prayer, Prophet Ibrahim (as) asked him, “To whom were you
offering the prayers?”

The man replied, “I was offering my prayers to the Creator of the land
and the skies.”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) asked, “Where be your dwelling?”

The man pointed to a hill in reply.

Prophet Ibrahim(as) said, “I too wish to visit your abode.”

He replied, “There is a river enroute that you cannot cross.”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) asked, “Then how do you go across?”

He said, “I can walk on the water.”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) said, “Perhaps Allah might endow to me the
capability to walk on the water.”

Consequently both of them walked across the girth of the river.

Prophet Ibrahim (as) asked, “Tell me which is the greatest of all days?”

The man said, “The Day of Reckoning!”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) said, “Come! Let us both pray to Allah for
Deliverance on that fateful day.”

The pious man said, “Why do you make me a partner in your prayer? I have
been supplicating for the last three years and my wish has not been
granted so far!”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) asked, “What is your wish?”

The man said, “One day I found a handsome lad grazing a flock. I asked
him who owned the flock. The lad replied that the owner was*Ibrahim
Khalil-ur-Rahman.* I prayed to Allah that if He had a*Khalil (* friend)
on the earth, then He must give me the honor of setting eye on that
revered personality. But my prayer has remained unanswered.”

Prophet Ibrahim (as) said, “Your wish has been fulfilled. I am*Ibrahim
Khalil Allah!* The reason for the delay in answering your prayers was
that Allah appreciated the way you modulated your supplication and He
wanted to hear you making the call again and again. Your repeated
supplication enhanced your status in the consideration of Allah.”

The fourth reason for Allah not answering the prayers of a supplicant is
that the wish that granting the wish might be against the person’s own
interest. Allah has the intention of rewarding him with something more
useful. As, for example, someone approaches a generous person for a
pecuniary help of a certain amount. The generous person, after due
consideration, which might take some time, helps him with an amount ten
times more than the man expected! Therefore it is not the rejection of
the prayer but, in fact, it is an enhancement in the generosity.

### The Advantages Of Prayer

###

There are several benefits accruing from prayer. All the time spent in
preparing for the nearness to Allah and supplication is a part of one’s
prayer.

Dear reader! You must have observed that Allah attracts the ignorant
creatures towards Himself by making innumerable promises. This can be
explained by the simile of a king making the hawk sit on his arm with
affection to train it to hunt. He gives a variety of food to the bird to
befriend it. When the hawk is fully trained, he lets it go hunting and
to return and perch on his arm. Another example is of parents training
and educating their children and, in the process, informing them the
myriad uses of learning and skills. When the child is not attentive,
they give him pretty dresses and other goodies to attract him towards
learning. When the child gets motivated, he himself tries to excel in
the skills that the parents wanted him to acquire. Then, whatever comes
in the way, the child continues making progress. Similar is the
disposition of man.

Man doesn’t understand the pleasures and the successes of the Hereafter.
Therefore, the Almighty, with His kindness and indulgence invites men
towards Himself thus:

“O my creatures! Come. Whatever you ask for, I shall give you! I have
everything that can bring you closer to Me! They can thus accomplish
their wants in the world and also in the Hereafter. What degree of
Munificence that, notwithstanding the Omnipotence, I have, I am calling
you closer to Me. But the ignorant creatures are worrying futilely that
their prayers have remained unanswered!”

Therefore Allah says:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّ الإِنسَانَ لِرَبِّهِ لَكَنُودٌ﴾
</p>

*Truly man manifests ungratefulness to his Creator (100:6)*

Man wonders why his prayer remained unanswered. He doesn’t think that
supplication is a part of the prayer required of him. When he made
entreaty to Allah, he came closer to Him! He communicated his feelings
and wishes to the Creator and the Sustainer! He heard Allah's*labbaik
(thy beck? and call)!* O supplicant! If you realize the true happiness
of prayer and supplication, and the eyes of your heart fathom the
mysteries of the attention Allah gives to your lamentations, you would
sacrifice your own self not to talk of your mundane wishes! Imagine, a
person gets the opportunity with a man in authority, say, a king! And
that monarch looks with some attention at the visitor. In his wonderment
the man might forget to make his submission to the worthy!

What a pity that when people supplicate before the Almighty Allah, they
forget that they have an opportunity to address Allah who has the
control of everything in the Universe.

Allah says, “O My creature! Pray and trust Me for your welfare!” And man
in his ignorance behaves stubbornly. If he hadn’t a screen of negligence
over his mind, he could understand the truth. Allah says: O angels!
Delay fulfilling his wishes! I like the voice in which he is
supplicating. If man realizes this, he will submit himself totally to
the wish of Allah and shun praying for mundane wishes.

### Those Whose Prayers Are Answered

###

Authentic sources quote that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said: There
are three types of persons whose prayers are answered:

Those who go on the holy pilgrimage of Hajj, their prayers are answered.
It is advisable that people at home are taken good care of.

Those who do Jihad in the way of Allah. His family and children must be
provided support in his absence.

The prayers of the sick are also answered. People should, therefore take
care of the sick and should not upset them in any way.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said that five prayers are such that Allah
will certainly accept them:

Prayer by the Just Imam.

Prayer of the oppressed (*mathloom* ).

The prayer of a pious son for his parents.

The prayer of pious parents for their son.

The prayer of a*mu’min* for his brother*mu’min* in his absence.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said: Allah shall definitely accept six
types of prayer:

Prayer of a pious father for his son.

Curse of a father for his disinherited (*Aaq)* son.

.Curse of an oppressed person against a tyrant.

The prayer of one*mu’min* for another.

The prayer of an oppressed when he receives a consideration from a cruel
person.

Prayer for the pleasure of the*Ahl-ul-Bayt.*

### Beware Of The Curse Of The Oppressed

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) says, “Beware of the curse of the oppressed
that it goes beyond the skies and Allah looks at him with kindness and
says, ‘Raise his prayer, I shall accept it!’”

The Prophet (S) also said, “Prevent yourself from your father’s curse.
It is sharper than the spear!”

It has come in the traditions that four types of prayer are not rejected
by Allah::1. A father’s prayer for his son. 2. Prayer of the oppressed
against the oppressor. 3. Prayer of the person who is on the minor
pilgrimage (*Umrah* ). 4. The prayer of a person who is fasting.

It is said that the prayers of five types of persons are not answered:

1. A husband, despite being capable of divorcing a nagging spouse by
giving her the*mehr (alimony* ), bears with her and doesn’t divorce her,
but prays against her.

2. A person whose slave had escaped from his custody thrice but he
doesn’t sell him and just curses him.

3. A person who doesn’t walk hurriedly away from a wall precariously
about to fall and prays,’ O Allah! May the wall not fall on my head!’

4. A person who advances a loan to someone without taking any witnesses
and then prays, ‘O Allah! Get back my money to me!’

5. An able bodied person capable of earning his livelihood, but doesn’t
exert himself to earn, prays’ O Allah! Give me livelihood!’

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, O Abu Dharr! If in a town only
disobedient sinners are there with only three pious persons, Allah will
not send curse to that place.

O Abu Dharr! Allah is proud and appreciative of three persons. The
first: One who says the*Adhaan (* call for prayer) and*Iqamah* (the call
to rise for prayer) while alone in a forest and offers his mandatory
prayer. Allah asks the angels with pride to look at his sincere creature
who has not forgotten the Creator even in the loneliness of the jungle.
The second: One who does the*Namaz al-Shab* (the night prayers) and
prostrates in the loneliness of the night despite being overwhelmed by
sleep. Allah tells to the angels that the spirit of the sincere creature
is with Him while he is in prostration. The third: A person on the
battlefield steadfast fighting the enemies while his own comrades have
fled with fear in their hearts!:.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that offering mandatory prayers in
the view of the people is preferable. Praying in the mosque is
preferable to praying in the loneliness of the home. Similarly
giving*Zakat* in the precincts of the mosque is better as it would
encourage others to follow suit. The non-mandatory prayers and charity
and alms to poor and needy is better given in privacy. This will
preclude the chance of giving a feeling to the people that the person is
proud of his status and the recipients of the help might also feel
embarrassed if the help is preferred in public.

Then the Imam (as) said, “Offering*namaz al-shab* was the practice of
the Prophet (S) and the pious persons followed suit. It removes pains
and makes the faces radiant. One who offers these nightly prayers
becomes good-natured and presentable. It boosts the means of livelihood
of the person. The

eight*rakaat* (genuflections) of*namaz al-shab* are the adornment of the
Hereafter for one who offers these prayers. It gives light to the eyes
and expels sadness.”

It is mentioned in the traditions that*namaz al-shab* enhances the
radiance of the face and the fragrance of the body. It gives boost to
the person’s livelihood. The person who offers these prayers finds means
of discharging his debts.

In another tradition it is said that a household where the Qur’an is
recited and the*namaz al-shab* is offered, the house appears to the
people of the Firmament as if it is a shining star.

It is recorded that the Prophet of Allah (S) said while making a
commentary on the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّيِّئَاتِ.﴾
</p>

***No doubt virtues obliterate the sins (11:114)***

said that the verse means that when a mu’min offers the namaz al-shab,
his sins committed during the day are obliterated.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “Whosoever is given the privilege of
offering*namaz al-shab* by*Allah,* remains awake in the nights and with
total dedication offers the prayer duly purifying himself with ablution,
Allah will arrange nine rows of angels to join the prayer behind him.
Only*Allah* will know the number of angels in each of the nine rows. One
end of each row of the angels will be in the North and the other in the
South. When the person completes the prayer, virtues will be added to
his list (*inventory of acts* ) according to the number of angels who
had offered prayers behind him.”

It is narrated also from the Prophet that Allah will infuse light in the
heart of the pious person who stands in prayer during the late hours of
the night. When the person utters, “*Ya Rab, Ya Rab!”, Allah* responds
with*“Labbaik, Labbaik!” and says, “* O My creature! Ask for what you
want from Me! Depend on Me that I am sufficient for the solution of your
problems!” Then Allah tells to the angels, “Look! How My creature stands
in My Presence in the dead of the night! That is the time when the
thoughtless persons will be in their slumbers. You must bear witness
that I have obliterated the record of all his sins!”

It is narrated in the traditions that the Prophet of Allah (S) has said,
“Jibrael always exhorts me about the*Namaz al-Shab* so much that I
worried perhaps the people in my*Ummah* might not get any sleep in the
thought of this prayer.”

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that one who has faith
in the Day of Reckoning and Allah will not let a night go when he has
not performed the*Namaz al-Shab.*

It is narrated that a person approached*Amir al Mumineen (as)* and said,
“O Imam! I am unable to offer the*Namaz al-Shab!”* Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali(as) said, “Your sins are preventing you from doing so.” And added,
“Prophet Sulaiman (as)’s mother advised him,’ O son! Don’t sleep much in
the nights! Such a habit will render a person a beggar (*faqir* ) on the
Day of Reckoning!’”

It is also narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) that a person asked
him to tell about the superiority and significance of the*Namaz
al-Shab.* ” The Imam (as) replied: Be informed that when a person spends
a tenth of the night in sincere supplication Allah would tell to the
angels, “Write virtues in the name of My creature equivalent to the
leaves and flowers in the trees that grow on the banks of the Nile.”

In another tradition it is mentioned that Allah orders the angels to
write virtues in the record of a supplicant equal to the leaves in all
the trees in the universe. The Imam (as) said, “One who spends a ninth
part of the night in prayer, his*Nama al-Aamaal* will be placed in his
right hand on the Day of Judgement!” “A person who spends an eighth part
of the night in supplication, Allah will give him the status of a martyr
who fought valiantly in the way of Allah and met with death.” “One who
spends a seventh pary of the night in prayer, would rise from his grave
with the face as radiant as the full moon and will cross the*Bridge of
Siraat* with great ease!”

“One who spends a sixth of the night in supplication will get pardon of
his sins from Allah and would be counted in the group of repentent
people.” “One who spends a fifth of the night in prayer will find a
place in the neighborhood of Prophet Ibraheem (as) in the Heaven.” “One
who spends a fourth of the night in supplication will will rise with the
group of successful people on the Day of Judgement and will cross
the*Bridge of Siraat* like a breeze and enter the precincts of the
Heaven.” “One who spends a third of the night in prayer Allah will endow
him with such a status that every angel wishes to attain it. On the Day
of Reckoning there will be Orders that he should have freedom to enter
the Heaven through any of the gates he wished to use!”

“One who spent half the night in prayer will get so much reward that if
the entire surface of the earth is made of gold and offered to
that*Mu’min* in place of the Reward*,* he would refuse to accept it.
This act of the person will be more valuable in the consideration of
Allah than freeing seventy slaves from the progeny of Prophet Ismail
(as).” “One who supplicates two thirds of the night, Allah will write
virtues in his name equal to the grains of sand in a desert. The lowest
number of virtues for such a person would be equal to ten times the size
of the*Mount Ohad.”*

*“* One who supplicates the whole night, sometimes in prostration and at
other in genuflection, sometimes reciting the Holy Qur’an and then
uttering Allah’s names, Allah will reward him so much that all his sins
would be pardoned and would be as innocent as a just born baby. The
virtues written in the name of such a person will be equal to the
creatures in the world. The grave of the person would be filled with
light. Jealousy and greed would be obliterated from his heart.

He will be freed from the prosecution that takes place in the grave
after death. He will be exempt from the Hellfire. He will be raised from
the grave on the Day of Judgement who will be free of any fear of
Retribution. Allah would say to the angels,’ Look at my creature who
spent the full night in My Remembrance. Give him a place in the*Jannat
al Firdous* and give him a hundred thousand cities in the Heaven and
every city should be adorned

with what he wishes to have! Give him much more than what has already
been endowed on him!”

O Abu Dharr! Every spot of land where one puts his head down in
prostration will bear witness on the Day of Judgement. There is no
resting place where travellers tarry for rest that will not pray for
their safety if they had offered their prayers in that place. The place
will curse a person if he had committed any act contrary to the dictates
of Allah while tarrying there.

O Abu Dharr! There is no dawn or dusk when places don’t call each other:
“O my neighbor! Did any passerby talk of Allah while staying with you!?
Did any traveller put his forehead down in prostration?” Some places
would affirm that the travellers did prostrate in prayer and the others
would own that they just rested and went their way. The place confirming
about the visitors offering prayers while visiting it would proudly feel
that it had the privilege of people offering prayers to Allah while
being its guests.

Remember! Forgetfulness has so much engulfed the human race that the
inanimate things are more adept at praying to Allah. The inanimate
things, although in posession of very feeble senses, busy themselves in
prayer.

Someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) whether one should offer
optional (*Naafila* ) prayers at one place or at different places. The
Imam (as) replied that it is better to offer these prayers at different
places that these places will bear witnerss to the act on the Day of
Reckoning.

It is narrated that when people assemble at a place and don’t praise the
Prophet and his Holy Progeny (as), such assembly will be the harbinger
of retribution of the concourse on the Day of Reckoning

O Abu Dharr! When Allah created the land and trees grew on it, there was
no tree from which the progeny of Adam had not derived benefit. The land
and its flora kept providing benefits to man that he praised Allah for
His Bounties. But the misguided said, “God has a son!” When this
happened, the earth had a cataclysm and the benefits that the trees
provided to man faded away. The Qureish believed that the angels are
God’s daughters. The Jews thought that Aziz (*of Egypt* ) was God’s
son.The Christians said, “Jesus is the son of God.”

It is narrated from authentic sources that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has
said: Allah has not created any tree that did not give fruits. But when
people started saying that God has a son, half the flora went barren of
fruits. And when people started being polytheist, many a tree grew
thorns.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (as): Allah deputed a messenger
to a nation. He preached with them for forty year. He invited them to
have faith in Allah, but none of the people agreed. The people of the
place used to congregate on a festive occasion at a ground. On one such
occasion the Messenger too went to the assemblage and said, “O people!
Have faith in Allah! He is one and only and has no partners!”

The people said, “O person! If you are the messenger of Allah, ask Him
to give us fruits of the color of our robes!” That day the people were
wearing orange colored dresses. The Messenger went a little distance
from there and brought back a dried branch of a tree. He offered prayer
and the dried branch became fresh and green. It put on orange fruits.
The people saw and ate the fruits. Those who got convinced of the
existence of Allah

found that the stone of the fruit was sweet. But the others who still
had doubts, found the stones bitter.

The Prophet of Islam (as) has said, “O ‘Ali (as)! There are three things
that sooth the hearts of the*Mu’mins:* 1. Meeting brother*Mu’mins.* 2.
Breaking of the fasts. 3. Offering the late night prayers (*Tahajjud* )”
The Prophet (S) added, “O ‘Ali (as)! In my view offering two*Rakaat* of
the night prayers is better than everything in the world. O ‘Ali (as)!
A*Mu’min* has an elevated status! When he dies, the angels lament in the
Heaven because he was like a rampart for a city for the other*Mu’mins*
against the evil intent of the Satan, the innovators and the infidels.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “We are incapable of praising Allah
that He is beyond our comprehension! Similarly we cannot enumerate the
qualities of the Prophet of Islam (as) because Allah says, ‘His praise
is My praise, his injunction is My injunction, his obedience is My
obedience!’ Similarly we*Ahl-ul-Bayt* cannot be praised that Allah has
kept us free of all defects and rendered us pure. Also*Mu’mins* cannot
be praised that when a*Mu’min* meets another, his sins fall away as do
the leaves in autumn!”

### The Benefits Of Mu’anaqah Or Embrace

###

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “When two*Mu’mins* embrace each other,
the Allah’s Blessing will be on them! When they embrace each other only
to please Allah, without any worldly motives, the angels say, ‘all your
sins have been pardoned! Repeat the act of embrasure!’ When two*Mu’mins*
start speaking, the angels responsible for recording the deeds of the
people ask one other to stay away from them that perhaps they desire to
exchange secrets and Allah wishes to keep them from others hearing!” The
narrator asked: Do the angels not record these exchanges despite Allah
observing,

<p dir="rtl">
﴿مَا يَلْفِظُ مِنْ قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ﴾
</p>

****No person utters a word which our chroniclers don’t record.*
(50:18)***

The Imam (as) took a sigh and said: Allah has ordered the angels to keep
away from them in reverence to their greatness. Although the angels
don’t hear their conversation Allah (*Alam as sir wal khaffiyat* ) knows
their acts and hears their talk!

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) says, “A*Mu’min* moves amidst five lights
(*anwaar* ). In congregations (*majalis* ) and matters of religion his
entry and exit are both accompanied by light.His knowledge is light and
his talk has an aura of light. On the Day of Judgement a*Mu’min’s*
glance towards the bounties of Allah too is accompanied with light.”

It is evident from the traditions that the actions and the morals of a
person are a reflection of his faith. Shunning the mandatory acts and
perpetration of major sins ostracises a person from the faith. Sometimes
a pious person is termed a*Mu’min,* sometimes a*Shi’a* and at others
a*wali.* A person is called a*Mu’min* or*Shi’a* when his actions are
upright.But one should not become proud and conceited learning about
these traditions that define a*Shi’a* and*Mu’min.* One should understand
that persons fitting the description of a*Mu’min* are hard to come by.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “Allah has endowed a*Mu’min* with
three traits: 1. Respect in the world. 2. Deliverance in the Hereafter.
3. Fear in the hearts of the tyrants.”

Some companions of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) approached him on a moonlit
night. Impressed with the serene ambience, one of the companions told to
the Imam (as), “How brilliant is the night with the moonlight and the
stars. The attractiveness of the sky is enhancing with the passage of
time.” The Imam (as) said, “When you say this about the sky,*Jibrael*
and*Mekael* are waxing eloquent praising the brightness of the earth and
and the*Mu’mineen* living on it.*Izrael* and*Israfeel* too have a
similar opinion about the earth.”

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said that a*Mu’min* is so important in the
consideration of the Almighty that the angels in the Heaven know him
well. The Prophet (S) also added that a*Mu’min* sees with the light
provided by Allah.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that a*Mu’min* should have
the following qualities He should be calm and collected in times of
accidents and calamities, in penury he should be patient and forbearing,
he should be thankful and grateful in affluence, he should be contented
with whatever Allah provides to him, he should not be harsh with his
adversaries, he should not unjustly support his friends, he should be
ready to bear hardship for the purpose of prayer and he should be
considerate and caring of others. Knowledge is a friend and companion of
a*Mu’min.* Patience and tolerance are the viziers of a*Mu’min* and
fortitude the chief of his forces. Camaraderie and capability are
a*Mu’min’s* brothers and good behaviour and manners are like his father.

### The Qualities of A Mu’min

###

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) says: A*Mu’min* remains silent that he desires
to protect himself from sinning. He speaks with a purpose of getting
reward from Allah. Whatever is told to him in confidence he never
reveals to his best of friends. What he bears witness to, he doesn’t
hide from his friends. Whatever good deed a*Mu’min* does has no element
of stealth in it. He is never ashamed of performing an act of prayer and
obedience. If people praise him for his good qualities, he expresses
fear that the praises might go to his head. At such time he
does*istighfar* seeking Allah’s protection from the Satan that the
person praising him is not aware of his faults. He doesn’t remain
oblivious of his own faults not to get carried away by the talk of
others. A*Mu’min* is always conscious of the the record keeers of his
deeds (*the karamain Katibain)*

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says: A*Mu’min* is steadfast in his affairs of
religion. Every moment he has the thought of the Hereafter in his mind.
He behaves softly and affably with others. In faith he will be in the
stage of firm belief. He will be always seeking knowledge on facts and
the understanding of Allah (*Maarifath* ). He enjoys tasks that help to
enhance his knowledge. He performs good deeds with patience and justice.

Despite possessing vast knowledge, he is humble in his behaviour with
others. Although intellectually superior, he never makes a show of this
trait to others. In the cause of truth he is bold and just. Even if he
is rich, he

adopts an equanimous way of life. If he is poor, he takes pride in his
poverty. He is generous to a fault and forgives when others cause him
some harm. Revenge is not in his nature. He considers goodwill for other
Muslims as obedience to Allah. He controls evil desires with great
courage.

Despite the pleasures of sin, he keeps himself away from such acts. He
has great desire for Jehad. While at prayer, his mind is totally
dedicated to Allah. In times of great difficulty he is patient. He is
never overwhelmed with the worldly hardships. He is thankful to Allah
for the comforts and blessings available to him. He never does
backbiting about others. He always thinks well of his kinsmen and
friends. He is never tardy in doing a good deed. He is never short
tempered and rude in his behaviour with others. He controls his eyes and
whenever he views anything Allah’s goodwill is always in his mind.

To satisfy his palate he never does taboo things. Carnal desires never
overwhelm him. He is free of all desire of jealousy. He is not a
spendthrift but is always ready to help others to the extent possible.
For making others comfortable, he is ready to bear some hardship. He
doesn’t run after worldly fame and pomp. He is never scared of the
hardships that confront him. He can never be faulted for any act of his.
When asked for his advice, he gives a considered opinion on matters. The
poor and impecunious always look forward to his help. He abstains from
foolish, bawdy and useless talk.

Someone asked the Prophet of Islam (S), “Kindly tell me about the
qualities of a*Mu’min.* ” He said, “A*Mu’min has twenty qualities. A
person is not a* Mu’min if he doesn’t have these traits, his faith
(*Iman)* will not be perfect. These traits are: A*Mu’min* prays
regularly, gives*Zakat* , feeds the hungry, is kind to orphans, wears
neat and clean clothes, does supplication to Allah with great fervor,
never tells lies, he always keeps his promises, shows great integrity,
always upholds the truth, supplicates during the nights, lives boldly
during the days, makes sincere effort in the way of truth, remains awake
in the nights and fasts during the day, is kind to his neighbors, is
helpful to widows, joins the funeral processions, takes part in Jehad
and walks on the land with humility. May Allah help us to acquire the
traits of a*Mu’min.”*

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that someone asked the Prophet of
Islam (S) to give a description of good pewople. The Prophet (S)
replied: A good person is one from whose hands and tongue people are
safe. A good person is one who thanks Allah for the bounties endowed on
him. In times of difficulty he should be patient and equanimous. When
someone inflicts hardship on him unnecessarily, he should bear it
patiently and forgive the person. When he commits a sin, he should seek
Allah’s forgiveness (*Astaghfar* )

### The Shi’as Of ‘Ali

###

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “The Shi’as of ‘Ali (as) are the people
whose stomachs touch their backs as an effect of hunger. Their lips will
be parched dry with fasting. They are kind of disposition and serious of
demeanour. They are intelligent people and well known for intensity in
their prayers. Therefore friends! Assume piety and help us intercede on
your

behalf on the Day of Reckoning! Busy yourselves in prayer and obedience
to Allah.”

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that one day
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) was one day offereing his morning prayer in Iraq.
After the prayer he delivered a sermon. Talking of the fear of Allah the
Imam (as) cried. The others too cried a lot. Then he said, “By Allah’s
Greatness! I have seen a group of*Mu’mins* in the time of the Prophet of
Islam (S). They used to be unkempt, dusty and of emaciated bodies. Their
stomachs used to cling to their backs. The foreheads of these*Mu’mins*
were calloused because of perpetual prostration. These calousses were
like the ones that are found on the flanks of the camels. Offering
prayers and prostrations in the nights they used to see the dusk in this
act. They used to cry inconsolably seeking protection of Allah from the
Hellfire. When Allah’s name was mentioned before them, they used to
shiver like the tree in times of strong winds. This used to be their
condition whenever they thought of Allah’s Retribution. And when I see
the people now I find them in a state of oblivian and forgetfulness.
After delivering this sermon Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) went to*Bayt al
Sharaf* and never ever laughed till the day he was martyred.”

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that someone inquired of
the Prophet of Islam (S), “Ya Prophet! Who are the good and noble
creatures of Allah?” The Prophet (S) said, “These are the people who
perpetrate good deeds and if ever they commit any sin they seek Allah’s
forgiveness by doing*Asthagfar.* When Allah bestows a bounty on them,
they thank Him profusely. When confronted with any calamity, they are
patient and forbearing. When angry on others, they generously forgive.”

One night Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) was proceeding from the mosque towards
the wilderness of Najaf. It was a moonlit night. He noticed some persons
following behind him. He tarried and asked them, “Who are you?” They
said, “Ya Imam! We are your Shi’as.” The Imam (as) looked at them and
said, “Your appearances are not those of Shi’as!” The men said, “Ya
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ! How do your Shi’as look?” He replied, “With
sleepless nights in prayer their faces will be flushed. As a result of
excessive crying, their eyes look like the eyes of blind persons. Their
backs will be hunched because of excessive genuflection in prayer.
Because of spending most of the days in fasting their stomachs touch
their backs. Because of constant prayer the lips of these persons will
be dry and parched. Their fear of Allah (*Khushu wa Khuzu* ) is
reflected from their faces.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says: A*Mu’min* cannot be a possessor of faith
unless he has perfect intelligence. The intelligence cannot be perfect
unless the person has the following ten traits:

People expect good treatment from him.

People donot expect ill treatment from him.

He rates his good deeds as very little.

He considers others’ small good turns of great value.

He considers his small fault as major and rates others major faults as
trivial.

He never tires of giving ear to the seekers of help.

He tirelessly works in search of knowledge.

He prefers ignominy over worldly fame.

He prefers penury over riches and remains contented with small worldly
comforts.

The tenth trait is the most difficult. Whenever he meets anyone, he
rates the person more pious and better than himself.

The Imam (as) further said, “There are two types of men. There are some
who consider all others better and more pious than themselves. The other
type is of people who consider others inferior to themselves. The best
attitude is that when one finds a person better than himself, he should
interact with him humbly and try to emulate his good qualities. When he
finds a person who appears inferior to himself, he should think that the
person might have some latent qualities worthy of emulation.” The Imam
(as) also added, “Adopting this attitude you will acquire respect and
eminence.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that one day the Prophet (S) met
Haritha bin Noman Ansari and said, “O Haritha! How was your morning
today?” Haritha said, “Ya Imam! I started the morning with perfect faith
and firm belief!” The Prophet (S) said, “Every thing needs a proof. What
is the proof that your faith is perfect?” Haritha said, “Ya Imam! My
heart is dejected with the world. I have no interest in the world. This
belief has encouraged me to pray during the nights and fast during the
days. This is tantamount to say that I see the accounting of deeds in
Allah’s Firmament. I perceive that the people of the Heaven interact
with each other happily and the people of the Hell are undergoing the
Retribution.” The Prophet (S) said, “No doubt! You are a*Mu’min.* Allah
has illumined your heart with faith. Remain steadfast in this condition.
May Allah help you in your endeavour!” Haritha said, “Ya Imam! I have
fear of nothing that can involve me in sins other than my eyes.” The
Prophet (S) prayed for him and Haritha went blind that the cause of his
fear of sinning was removed.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that the Prophet of
Islam (S) came across a group of riders. He inquired of them, “Who are
you?” They replied that they were*Mu’mins.* The Prophet (S) asked them
to give a proof of being*Mu’mins.* They said, “Ya Imam! We are committed
to Allah’s wish. We obey His Commandments. We entrust all our affairs to
Allah and only trust in Him.” The Prophet (S) said, “These persons are
wise and sagacious. With their wisdom and sagacity they have come quite
close to the status of prophethood!” Then the Prophet (S) added, “If you
wish to befriend Allah, don’t make an abode in this world that it is
transient. Don’t amass weath that you will not be able to consume it.
Beware of Allah’s adversary that soon you will have to return to Him
(Allah)!”

### The Reward For Adhan and Iqamat

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “O Abu Dharr! When a*Mu’min,* alone
in the wilderness, can do*Tayyamum* (dry ablution) if water is not
handy, say the*Adhan* and the*Iqaamah* and offer his prayer. Allah
orders His angels to join in prayer with this*Mu’min* in large numbers.
The angels are ordered to form rows behind the*Mu’min* that nothing else
is visible to the extent a human eye could see. When the*Mu’min* does
genuflection, the angels too follow suit as people do in a
congregational prayer. Likewise when the*Mu’min* prostrates, the angels
too prostrate. In the end when the*Mu’min*

supplicates, the angels say*Aameen* .” The Prophet (S) added, “O Abu
Dharr! If this*Mu’min* only says*iqamah,* at the mandatory time of a
compulsory prayer, and not the*Adhaan* , then only the two angels who
are always in attendance with the person will join him in the prayer.”

Some jurists deem it compulsory to say the*Adhaan* and*Iqamah* for every
mandatory prayer while others say that*Iqamah* is sufficient. Some say
that both*Adhaan* and*Iqamah* are compulsory for the morning and evening
prayers.The latter is a better practice.

*Adhaan* and*Iqamah* are prescribed only for the mandatory prayers. The
optional prayers can be offered without saying the*Adhaan* and*Iqamah.*
Those who say these for the optional prayers are commiting a*bidaa* (an
innovation).

It is narrated ina tradition of the Prophet (S) that one who says
the*Adhaan* with true spirit will get Reward from Allah equivalent to
that for forty thousand martyrs and forty thousand men of piety
(*siddiqoon* ). On the intercession of this person Allah will admit
forty thousand sinners into the Heaven. Remember, when the*meuezzin*
says ‘*Ash-haduan la ilaha il Allah’* ninety thousand angels say*Durood*
(Invoke Allah’s Blessings) for him. They also seek Allah’s forgiveness
(*Astaghfar* ) for him.On the Day of Reckoning this person will be under
the shadow of Allah’s Firmament till he is through with the process of
accounting.

When the*Meuezzin* says ‘*Ash-haduanna Muhammedan Rasool Allah’* forty
thousand angels record blessings for him. Any person who takes
precedence to join the first row of a prayer congregation, and listens
to the first*Takbeer* (announcement of commencement of the prayer) he
will be getting reward equivalent to that of many*meuezzins.* But there
is a proviso that this person has never been the cause of harm to
any*muslim.*

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that a person who says
the*Adhaan* for ten years in the cause of Allah, his sins, as far as he
can think of having perpetrated, will be pardoned. The voice of such a
person would reach the very Firmament. All the animate and inanimate
objects in the vicinity of the place where he recited the*Adhaan* would
bear witness to the fact. He would also get a share of the reward of the
persons who pray in the congregation at the mosque in respone to his
calling the*Adhaan.* As the numbers of worshippers swell at the mosque
in respons to his*Adhaan,* his account of good deeds too will swell
accordingly.

Bilal(r.a.) narrates from the Prophet of Islam (S) that the*meuezzins*
are the keepers of the believers. They are also the keepers of their
mandatory fasts and prayers. Whatever they ask in return for this
service, Allah would grant them. On whomsoevers behalf they intercede,
Allah would accept the intercession. The Prophet (S) also said that when
a person continuously says the*Adhaan* in the name of Allah for forty
years, Allah will give to him the reward equivalent to that for forty
truthful ones (*Siddeeqoon* ). One who says the*Adhaan* for ten years
will get a place in the accommodation (*Qubba* ) of Prophet Ibrahim
(as). One who says the*Adhaan* for one year, his sins, as heavy as the
mountains, would be forgiven on the Day of Judgement. If a person says
the*Adhaan* only once at the precribed time of prayer, Allah will

forgive all his past sins and protect him from commiting any more sins.
He will be given the status of martyrs in the Heaven.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S), “The*Muezzin* , in the
interregnum between the*Adhaan* and the*Iqamat* , gets the reward
equivalent to that of a martyr who flails his limbs in a gory condition
and dies in the cause of Allah. A person who is not getting off-springs
should recite the*Adhaan* within the four walls of his house.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that the Prophet of Allah(S) has
said, “When you come across evil spirits (*Ghouls)* on the way, recite
the*Adhaan* aloud and they would flee.” “When a person says the*Adhaan*
and*Iqaman* before praying, two rows of angels join in the prayer behind
him. If he says only the*Iqamat,* only one row of angels joins him in
the prayer.The row of angels behind the person will be equal to the
distance between the east and the west. And equal to the distance
between the earth and the sky.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that three types of persons would be sent
to the Heaven in large numbers: 1.The just Imams. 2. The honest traders.
3. The old person who spends his life in obedience of Allah.”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that seven type of person
will be under the shade of the*Firmament* on the Day of Judgement. On
that fateful day, there won’t be any other shade for the multitudes than
this. These seven categories of persosn will be:!. The just Imams. 2.
The youth who spent his time in the worship of Allah. 3. A person who
comes out of the mosque but his heart is in the mosque. 4. The two
companions who were together while going for the congregations. 5. The
person who thinks of Allah while alone and gets tears in his eyes with
His fear.6. A person who is tempted by a beautiful damsel to sin, but
out of fear of Allah he abstains. 7. A person who does charity in secret
that his right hand gives and the left hand is not aware of the act.

### The Reward of Reciting The Qur’an

###

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when a young*Mu’min
recites the Holy Qur’an,* the Qur’an will become a part of his flesh and
blood. Allah will raise him on the Day of Reckoning with the Prophets
(as) and angels. The*Holy Qur’an* will express its love for him and
say,’O Allah! Every person expects reward for his good acts! Therefore I
demand rewards for the persons who used to recite me!’ Then Allah would
bestow two*Hillas* (Heavenly Raiment) to the youth. The crown of
excellence would be placed on his head. Then Allah would ask the Holy
Qur’an,’ Are you happy now?’ The Holy Book would then respond, ‘O Allah!
I expected much more than this! Your reward is far less than the person
deserves!’ Then Allah would award to the person the pemit to enter the
Heaven in his right hand and the permit not to enter the Hell in his
left hand. The person will then be admitted to the Heaven and asked to
recite one verse from the Qur’an and enter the higher echelons of the
Heaven. Now Allah will ask the Qur’an,’ Are you happy now?’ The Qur’an
would respond,’ No doubt! I am happy now!’

The Imam (as) also said, “When a person recites the Holy Qur’an to learn
it by-heart, Allah will double the reward for the person.”

A person who recites the Qur’an for the benefit of the unlettered, it
will be like doing the Jehad. Heaven will be mandatory for such a
person.

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! Don’t adopt the company of
any other person than a*Mu’min.* Share your repast with none other than
the pious. Don’t share the table with hypocrites and evil persons. O Abu
Dharr! You share your food with those whom you consider your friends and
share the food with those who keep your friendship for the sake of
Allah!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “My revered father, Imam
Zain-ul-’Abidin (as), has said, ‘O son! Don’t meet, converse or befirend
five types of persons: 1.Don’t sit in the company of a liar. He will be
like a mirage that distant things seem near to you and nearer objects as
distant. 2. Don’t keep the company of a hypocrite that he can sell you
for a morsel or less. 3. Don’t befriend a parsimonious person who will
value his money more than you in time of your need. 4. Don’t be friends
with a fool that with all good intentions he might put you to harm in
his foolishness. 5. Don’t befirend a person who deprives the rights of
his kin (*Qateh al-Rahem* ). In the Holy Qur’an Allah curses such a
person thrice.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), in one of his sermons, said, “O Believers!
It is necessary that you refrain from the company of three types of
persons: 1. The shameless sinners and hypocrites. 2. Foolish idiots. 3.
The liars.” He added, “The hypocrite will present to you the bad deeds
as good and try to make you follow in his footsteps. He will not guide
you properly in the matters of faith. His company will be the cause of
shame for you. The company of a foolish person will not help to take the
right path. Don’t expect him to come to your succor in times of
difficulty, however much he tries to do it. Don’t expect any happiness
from the company of a liar. He will tell lies to others about you.To
uphold one falsehood, he will invent many lies. Even if such a person
tells a truth, people wouldn’t believe him. He might create enmities
amidst people by telling lies. You must always seriously consider whose
friendship you should cultivate.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “Be friends with a person who makes
you cry with the fear of Allah and is your wellwisher. Don’t follow one
who makes you laugh and tricks you into faults. Soon you will have to go
before Allah for accounting of your deeds!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “Amongst my brothers the best friend is
one who points out my faults to me.” And added, “There are limits to
friendship and truthfulness. Those who don’t recognise these limits,
they don’t realise the value of truthfulness. A true friend is one who:
1. Keeps the same attitude with you openly and in secret. 2. Who
considers what is good for him as good for you, and what is bad for
himself he considers bad for you. 3. If he acquires high station in
society, doesn’t change his behaviour towards you. 4. He doesn’t deny
you what he has control over. 5. He doesn’t cold shoulder you if you are
confronted with any worldly hardship.”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that the most felicitous
person is one who keeps the company of good persons. Prophet ’Isa (as)
was once asked by his companions, “O Prophet of Allah (S)! What sort of
person we should befriend?” Her said, “Looking at whom you remember
Allah! Their

talk enhances your knowledge! Their deeds make you seek the rewards of
the Hereafter!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) says, “One who sits in a place of ill-repute
should not complain against persons pointing fingers at him!”

The Imam (as) said, “When a person keeps his own counsel, he keeps
control over himself. If he reveals his matter to two persons, it
becomes public property!”

He also said, “Think well of the actions of your brother*Mu’min* and
whatever he utters accept as the truth. Try to cultivate virtuous
friends as far as possible. Such friends are the ornaments in good times
and the shields during the times of hardship.”

“If you need to consult someone in difficult matters, seek the counsel
of the God Fearing persons.”

“Keep friendship with your brothers to the extent that they are God
Fearing.”

“Abstain from the company of women of ill-repute and maintain distance
from women of good character too! Even if the women encourage you to do
something good, abstain from it that you don’t don’t get embroiled in
any evil deed.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “A person who cannot give you benefit in
your faith, never trust his friendship! Don’t crave his company because
an action that is not in the way of Allah its end is never good!”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S), “There are three types of
persons whose friendship extinguishes the heart! Mean and timid persons.
2. Women. 3. Rich persons.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “There are four things that become
useless and vanish: 1.Friendship with an unfaithful person. 2. Good turn
done to an ungrateful person. 3. Advice and precept to persons who don’t
give a ear to such talk.4. Secrets that are revealed to irresolute
persons.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says: he company of rich persons should be
avoided. One who sits near them feels in the beginning that he has been
endowed with every bounty, but with passage of time he starts thinking
that he has received nothing.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Four things kill one’s heart: 1.
Sinning repeatedly.2. Talking a lot with women. 3. Arguing with a
foolish person. 4. Sitting near the dead.” The companions asked him, “O
Prophet of Allah (S)! Who are the dead?” The Prophet (S) replied, “The
dead are the rich persons who have become head-strong with possession of
extreme wealtrh!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “Feeding the*Mu’mins* is a very good
deed. Always feed others that some of them might qualify as*Mu’mins* and
become the cause of reward for you”

A person who feeds a hungry*Mu’min* Allah will satiate him with the
fruits of the Heaven. Whoever gives a draught of water to a*Mu’min*
Allah will provide him with sealed beverages in the Heaven. Whoever
clothes a*Mu’min* will get raiment of silk and satin (*Hareer wa
istabarq* ) in the Heaven. As long as a thread of the garment given to
a*Mu’min* remains, the angels keep praising the bebnefactor. Whoever
helps a*Mu’min* in his time

of need, Allah will give him a place in the shadow of the Firmament on
the Day of Judgement. At that time others will be facing extreme heat in
the Ground of Resurrection.

It is authentically narrated that Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said,
“Three things elevate a*Mu’min:* Greeting everyone. 2. Feeding people.
3. Praying at the time while others are lulled by sleep.”

### Feeding The Muslim Brothers

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) said: Whoever feeds three Muslims, Allah will
give him three meals in the Heaven! 1. The meal from*Malakoot al Samawat
in Jannat al Firdous.* 2. The meal from*Jannat al-Aden.* 3. The meal
from*Tooba* which is a tree in the Heaven. This tree has been planted by
Allah in the*Garden of Eden.*

The acts that earn Allah’s forgiveness include feeding of the hungry
Muslims to their satiation.

Whoever quenches the thirst of a Muslim in a place where water is
scarce, against every gulp of water seventy thousand good deeds will be
entered in his account of deeds. He will get reward equal to freeing ten
persons from the progeny of Prophet Ismail (as). When a guest enters a
home, he sends away the sins of the inmates of the house.

At one place the Prophet (S) said, “When guests come, they come with
many hopes and when they depart they go as a cause of your Deliverence.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “Whoever entertains a rich person over a
meal, he will get reward equal to saving a progeny of Prophet Ismail
(as) from getting executed. One who feeds a poor*Mu’min,* his reward
will be equal to saving a hundred persons from the progeny of Prophet
Ismail (as).”

Feeding a*Mu’min* once is better than releasing ten slaves and
performing Haj ten times.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has prohibited people from accepting invitation
of the hypocrites.

The Prophet (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! Refrain from irrelevent talk. It is
enough for you to talk as much as it is necessary!”

He added, “O Abu Dharr! It is sufficient to make a person a liar if he
keeps repeating to persons what he has heard from others!” Remember,
there is none more deserving of locking up than the tongue. While
repeating any talk it is better to reveal the name of the person who
originally talked about it. If the narrater is pious and truthful, he
will get the reward. If it is a falsehood, the original narrator will
get the punishment.

The Prophet (S) said: O Abu Dharr! Respect the following types of
persons: 1. The persons who follow the precepts of the Holy Qur’an. 2.
Respecting the just and kind ruler.

Jabir Jaufi narrates that Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “O Jabir!
For a person who claims to be a Shi’a, it is sufficient only to proclaim
his love for us, the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* ? By Allah! Our Shi’a is only the
person who is afraid and obedient of Allah. Our Shi’as are recognised by
their hospitable natures and kind hearts, they are men of integrity and
busy in the thoughts of Allah. They are regular at their prayers and
fasting, they treat their parents well, they care for their neighbors,
poor, needy and the orphans. They are truthful and regularly recite the
Holy Qur’an. They keep their

mouths shut about others except in the matters of*Amr bil maroof nahi an
il munkar* (the matters of dos and don’ts according to*Shariah* ), they
are accepted as trustworthy in their family circles.”

Jabir Jaufi said, “These days I don’t find anyone fitting this
description!” The Imam (as) replied, “O Jabir! Beware! Lest the
different routes take you astray! People thought it sufficient to merely
claim the love for Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and to express acceptance
his*Wilaya* (Supremacy) without trying to be righteous and practicing
the precepts of Islam.

Therefore, if a person says that he has love for the Prophet of Islam
(as) who is better than Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and he does not
follow the*seerat* (example) and the*Sunna* (the traditions) of the
Prophet (S) then he will not get any benefit for his shallow expression
of love for the Prophet (S). Therefore, have fear of Allah and
participate in the good deeds prescribed by Him. Remember! There is no
relationship between Allah and anyone else. The dearest person in the
view of Allah is one who is pious and obedient to Him. O Jabir! Nearness
of Allah is possible only for the person who is obedient to Him! We
don’t have any permit for exclusion from the Hellfire! Whosoever is
obedient to Allah, he is from ouir friends. Whoever is sinning against
Allah, he is our enemy. Our*Wilaya* reaches only those who are
practicing piety and good deeds.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “Our Shi’a is one who guards against two
things: One is the thing that lies between the two cheeks and the other
that lies between the two loins.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said, “Two persons will have the shade of the
Firmament over their heads when even the virtuous would fend only for
themselves: The first is the one: who prays and laments in loneliness
and the second is one who is in company of a young and strange damsel
but is not attracted towards her.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A perfect*Mu’min* is one who has ten
qualities: 1. People expect good from him. 2. The people are not afraid
of any harm from him. 3. Who considers his own good deeds as trivial. 4.
Who considers his small mistakes as big sins. 5. He considers others’
small good deeds as big. 6. He considers others’ big sins as trivial. 7.
He keeps himself busy in acquiring knowledge throughout his life. 8. He
considers a poor person better than the rich. 9. He is contented with
the sustenence he gets. 10. He rates every one he meets better than
himself.”

One companion asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “O Maula! Please
describe a*Mu’min* to me!” The Imam (as) pointed towards the wall in
front of them and said, “A*Mu’min* is one who can order the wall to turn
to gold and it would turn to gold! “When the companion looked towards
the wall, he found that it had turned to gold! He was astonished and
asked, “O Maula! You didn’t order the wall to turn to gold and had just
told me as an example of the trait of a*Mu’min.* Even then the wall
turned to gold!” The Imam (as) replied, “This is the difference between
a*Mu’min* and the*Amir al Mu’mineen!”*

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that charity (*Sadaqa* ) is a big form
of piety. What your right hand gives as charity, your left should not
know about!

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “O Abu Dharr! Don’t seek the company
of anyone other than a*Mu’min.* Share your fare with a*Mu’min.* O Abu
Dharr! Invite one to the meal who is a friend of Allah and he befriends
you because of Allah! Abstain from the company of bad people lest they
turn you bad. A good person too appears bad in the company of the evil!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “Four things are a waste: 1. Friendship
of a disloyal person. 2. Doing a good turn to an ungrateful person. 3.
Moralising an inattentive person. 4. Revealing one’s own secret to a
foolish person.”

It is narrated that the Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) was coming out of the
mosque one night. He went towards the wilderness of Najaf. He had gone
some distance when he noticed some persons were coming behind him. When
the persons came near him, he asked who they were. They said that they
were his*Shi’as. The Imam (as) looked cursorily at their faces and said,
“* I find that your foreheads are not those of my Shi’as!”

They asked, “O Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as)! How are the foreheads of your
Shi’as?” He replied, “Therir faces are yellow. Their eyes look like the
eyes of blind persons due to spending late nights in prayer. They have
hunched backs because of excess of prayers and their tummies almost
touch their backs because of excessive fasting. Their lips are parched
because of excessive supplication and they give the appearance of
persons in fear.”

Husayn bin Naam narrates that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) asked him if he
loved a brother*Mu’min?* He affirmed that he did love*Mu’mins.* The Imam
(as) asked did he ever share his meals with*Mu’mins?* He said that
generally one or more guests are there to share his food. The Imam (as)
said, “They are more generous to you in this act than you are in feeding
them!” He asked, “How is it! It is I who shares the sumptuous fare with
them?” The Imam (as) replied, “When they enter your threshold the sins
of all the members of your family are pardoned. When they depart they
take away all the sins of the inmates.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said that repeating hearsay too is tantamount
to lying.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “If ever you repeat the hearsay, tell
the name of the person who narrated the story to you. Then you will get
rewarded if the matter is true and if it is a falsehood, the punishment
will go to the one who told you the lie.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said: O Abu Dharr! Respect the grey bearded
Muslim. Respect those who follow the precepts set by the Holy Qur’an.
Respect the just ruler. All these acts are akin to showing respect to
Allah. We are describing these as three*Yanabeeh* or streams in the
following chapter.


