Chapter 11: The Yanabeeh or Streams
===================================

The First Stream: About Aged Muslims
------------------------------------

Allah respects the grey haired Muslims. It is an authentic tradition
that one must treat youngsters with affection and the elders with
respect.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said: One who reaches fifty years of age
will have the accounting easier on the Day of Judgement. One who reaches
sixty years of age, even the angels will be friendly towards him. One
who touches seventy, his atonement for sins will be accepted. Allah will
order the angels to record only the good deeds of the person who reached
the age of eighty years. One who reaches ninety years, all his past sins
will be pardoned and even the sins that he might commit later might be
forgiven.He will be listed in the group of Allah’s captives and will
intercede on behalf of his kinsmen on the Day of Judgement.

The Second Stream: About Superiority of The Holy Qur’an
-------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that if you have a matter that appears
like the darkest of dark nights and you are unable to ravel the puzzle,
then the Holy Qur’an, the brightest of lights, will help you dispel all
the doubts you have pertaining to the matter. This will help one in
strife, in solving irresoluble problems and is the beacon for showing
the way to Jannat. It is the negligence of the Qur’an that might
dispatch one to the Hellfire!

Qur’an is the best Guide and Leader. This is the Book that has in it all
the commandments and details. It has two types of commandments—clear and
hidden. Its clear aspect is full of Allah’s Commandments to humanity.
The hidden aspect of the Qur’an is about unending store of knowledge.

The clear aspect of the Book is a harbinger of good for its followers
and the hidden aspect is profound. There are some stars, big and small
(*Kawakib* ) for it’s interpretation. These stars are Infallible Imams
(as) who put the wayward on the right path. These Infallible Imams (as)
possess the knowledge about the Qur’an.

From them only the Knwledge can be acquired. They are the ones who
disseminate the Knowledge about the Book. The Chapter of*Bara-at* is
proclaiming in the Holy Qur’an that the chapter could be presented to
the infidels of Mecca either by the Prophet (S) himself or his*Nafs (*
the personal and rational mouthpiece).

Men have to perceive with the eyes of their hearts the path shown by
these Infallible Imams (as) and follow them with true hearts. They have
said that the Qur’an is a guide for the ignorant, helper for those who
go astray, a light in the darkness, the best friend in this world and
the Hereafter. The Qur’an contains the complete faith within its two
covers.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Allah, who has the knowledge of
everything hidden, has sent this Book to you. This Book has knowledge
about the things past and those to come.It has the information about the
land and the firmament. Those who have total knowledge of the Qur’an
(*The Aalam* ) and the practitioners (*perhaps here the Infallible Imams
are meant)* can reveal facts about the hidden matters (*the Ghaib* ).”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “I am departing from you midst and
leaving behind two weighty things—One is the Book of Allah and the other
is my*Itrat (* the progeny) and*Ahl-ul-Bayt* (the Infallible Imams). If
you remain attached to these two, you shall never go astray!”

A note by Maulana Syed ‘Ali Akthar Amrohi: This was one and only
prescription for the welfare of Islam and unity of the Muslims. If the
Muslims honestly followed this tradition of the Holy Prophet (S), they
wouldn’t have followed different teachers and the schism of 73 sects
wouldn’t have come about!

### The Superiority of Bearers of The Holy Qur’an

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said that when on the Day of Judgement
people will be brought for accounting of their deeds, the Qur’an will be
there in the form of a handsom and good looking person to bear witness.
It will say, “O Allah! This*Mu’min* spent sleepless nights reciting me!
At the time of the*Tahajjud* prayer in the night he used to have parched
lips and wet eyes. O Allah! Forgive him his mistakes! ‘Allah will fill
the person’s

right hand with His Acceptance (*Ar-Ridha’* ) and the left hand with His
Blessings (*Rehmat* ) and will enter the Heaven reciting the Qur’an.”
Then the Prophet (S) added, “After the Superior prophets (*Anbiah* ) and
other prophets (as), the reciters of the Qur’an will have a high status
in the Heaven. Don’t under-rate the people who recite the Qur’an! They
have a great status in the eyes of Allah!”

In another tradition the Prophet (S) has said, “Allah addresses the Holy
Qur’an thus,’ I swear by My Greatness! Whosoever respected you, I shall
respect him! One who belittled you, I shall belittle him!’”

It is narrated from the Prophet (S) that he said, “Recite the Qur’an and
memorise it! On the Day of Judgement the Holy Qur’an will approach those
who recited it. It will be in the guise of a very good looking person.
It will say, ‘I am the same Qur’an reciting which you spent sleepless
nights. During the days you moved with parched lips because of loss of
sleep in the nights! Because of excessive recitation the moisture in
your mouth used to run dry. Tears used to run from your eyes because of
the strain of reading! Therefore, wherever you go, I shall be with you!
Whatever trading you wish to do, do it today! I am there with you to
bring to you more profits than other traders can get! I bear witness
that Allah’s Blessings are about to come your way!’”

Then a crown will be brought and placed over the head of the person and
the letter of permission for freedom from Allah’s Retribution will be
placed in the person’s right hand. In his left hand letter of permission
for perpetual residence in the Heaven will be placed. Two Heavenly
Raiments (*Hillay* ) will be given to him to wear. He will be Ordered,’
Recite the Holy Qur’an, and for every verse recited, you will rise one
step higher in the Heaven!’” If the parents of the reciter of the Qur’an
were*Mu’min,* they too will be provided two*Hillay* each and will be
told that this reward was in rturn for instructing their son in the
recitation of the Holy Qur’an.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet, (S) “The noble and big persons
among my people (Ummat) are those who are the bearers (*Hamilan)* of the
Qur’an and remain awake in the nights in prayer. The bearers of the
Qur’an will be termed superior amongst the people of the Heaven.”

Allah will not give Retribution to the Heart that has memorised the Holy
Qur’an. The bearers of the Qur’an will be in the second echelon in the
Heaven after the Prophets (S). Therefore, don’t under-rate the reciter
of the Holy Qur’an. They have a very high status in the consideration of
Allah.

### The Qualities of The Reciters of The Qur’an

###

The phrase*Haamilan al-Qur’an* (Bearers of the Qur’an) has several
meanings:

First, one should properly learn the words in the Qur’an.

Secondly: he should learn the correct meaning of the contents of the
Book. Such a person will have a status higher than the first.

Thirdly: One should practice the Qur’anic precepts. Therefore, the true
bearer of the Qur’an is one who understands the words, their meanings
and practitioner of the Qur’anic Precepts.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that the Holy Qur’an is the table laid
with the Bounties of Allah.as there will be various types of victuals on
the table of a generous person.

There are some people who draw benefit from the words of the Qur’an.
There are other who benefit from the meanings of the Qur’an. The people
who supply the ink for writing or printing the Book or those who supply
the paper too derive benefit from the Holy work. In a nutshell, everyone
associated with the publication, translation, commentary, and
distribution of the Book gets his share of reward for the work.

To put it briefly, people of all fields such as scholars, jurists,
mathematicians, poets, scholars etc derive benefit from the Qur’an’s
unfathomable store of knowledge. Those who possess total control over
the contents of the Qur’an are the Prophet and his Infallible
Descendents (as). Therefore the very word ‘Qur’an’ is associated with
them. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has observed, “I am the Speaking
Qur’an (*Qur’an al-Natiq)* ”

All the knowledge contained in the Qur’an is in the possession of the
Infallible Imams. It is said that a third of the Qur’an has come in the
praise of the*Infallible Masoomeen* , another third of the Book as
criticism of the enemies of the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* and the rest contains the
commandments about the duties and precepts for the Believers. Whatever
good qualities that are alluded to in the Qur’an pertains to
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* and whatever criticism is there is about their enemies.
From where has the Qur’an in its present shape come? First it was with
Allah (*Ilm al-Wajib al Wajood* ), then it was transcribed to the*Lauh*
(the Tablet), then it was revealed to the Propphet(S) directly or
indirectly through the Angel Gibraeel. From the Prophet (S)’s heart it
was transferred to the hearts of the*Ausia* (the Infallible Descendents)
and then it was rendered to paper.

Therefore, the real Qur’an is one that is etched on the hearts of the
Infallible Imams (as). When those who show disrespect to the Qur’an
printed on paper are rated infidels, then those who showed disrespect to
the*Qur’an al-Naatiq* will be the worst of infidels.

It is said about the Holy Prophet (S) that the Qur’an is his character
and he is the character of the Qur’an. In fact the real Qur’an are those
Infallible Personalities who have in them the words, the meanings and
the character of the Qur’an. Now, for one to understand the opt repeated
tradition quoted by Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that the Qur’an would come
on the Day of Judgement in the garb of a handsome person and intercede
on behalf of those who recited or studied it. The Imam (as) also said
that*Salat* (the Prayer) has a face and tells about*Amr wa Nahi* (dos
and donts).

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Haj and circumambulation of the
Kaaba is necessary because after these rituals the people should meet us
to learn about the tenets of the Faith”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: There are three categories of the
reciters of the Holy Qur’an: 1. Those who recite the Book for worldly
gains, name and fame. 2. Those who recite the Qur’an but don’t act on
it’s precepts.(Allah will rid the world of these two types of people).
3.Those who consider the Qur’an as a cure for the ailments of their
hearts. They

remain awake in the nights and light the lamps of spirituality in the
mosques and the homes. They derive benefit from the recitation of the
Book themselves and for the Love of Allah (*Qurbatan il Allah* ) pass
the benefit to others. With the blessings of such persons Allah wards
off calamities in store for people. But there are very few such
dedicated reciters of the Book

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said: Derive ornamentation from the Qur’an
for Allah and not to show to the people! One who completes the
recitation of the Qur’an has acquired the messengership (*Paighambari* )
between his flanks that has no element of revelation! The reciter of the
Qur’an should abstain from the company of ignorant persons. He should
stay away from carnal desires and worldly wants. He should be grateful
to Allah that He has made him the reciter of the Qur’an who becomes
eligible for the Riches of the Hereafter!

### The Etiquette of Reciting The Holy Qur’an

###

*Qir-at* or recitation of the Qur’an has one basic requirement, that
is,*the Tarteel* or the distinct intonation and pronunciation of the
words. While reciting one has to keep in mind the*fasl* {division)
and*wasl (* joining) of words and sentences.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that*Tarteel* is delivering words
according to their*Makharij* (outlets for sound or intonations).
Uttering the words clearly and slowly and reciting with understanding
and uttering the contents correctly is of prime importance. One should
not recite the Qur’an with such speed that it might become
incomprehensible and bore the listener. Neither the recitation be so
slow that it takes long time and puts the listeners off.*“Khair al
umoore ausatha”* or it is better to follow the middle path.

The other important aspect of the recitation is the reading with
understanding and thought. One should keep his eyes on the meanings of
the Qur’an. While reciting the verses about Allah’s Blessings, one
should seek*Astaghfar (* Allah’s Help and Foregiveness).

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) used to recite the Qur’an with feelings and tears.
He used to cry when reference to the Heaven and Hell came during the
reading of the Book. At these points he used to seek Allah’s Help. When
the Imam (as) recited the verse*Qul huwallahu ahad,* he used to
say*Kadhalik Allahu Rabbi* three times. Similarly after reciting the
verse*Qul ya ayyuhal kaferoon* in the prayer, the Imam used to say*Rabbi
Allaho Deenalislam* three times. After reciting the verse*Wat-teene
wazaitune* Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) used to say*bala wa ana zaalika min al
shahedeen.* On reciting the verse*Ala uqsimo beyoumilqiyamah* the Imam
(as) said*Subhanaka Allahumma Balah.* On reciting*Sura al-Fateha* the
Imam (as) said*Alhamdu lillahe Rab al Aalemeen.* Whenever the Imam (as)
came across the words*ya ayyuhal lazeena aamanu* during the recitation
of the Qur’an he would say slowly the words*Labbaek Allahumma labbaek.*

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that whenever one recited*In Allaha
malaekatahu yusalloona alan-nabi….* It should be followed by benediction
(*durood* ) whether during the prayers or while at the session of
recitation. He said that after reciting the verse*wat-teen* one should
say*Nahnu ala zalika min al shahedeen.*

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) used to say*deenilislam alaihi ahya-an wa
alaihi amwaatu insha* *Allah* after reciting the verse*Qul ya ayyuhal
kaferoon* .

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) has said: If a person wishes to converse with
Allah, he should recite the Qur’an. When he comes to the passages where
Allah addresses the people, he should say*labbaek Allahumma labbaek* and
in the passages where Allah addresses the Prophet (S) or the people of
the earlier times, he should feel that the communication is for his own
benefit only. When he reads about the spread of victuals of the Heaven
in the Qur’an, he should draw pleasure from the very thought of the
delicacies. He should visualise that his Friend has made the spread for
him. Sometimes Allah recounts His most superior qualities of Beneficence
and Sustenence in the Qur’an, and at other places He talks of the
unfathomable treasures of knowledge.

Thus Allah recounts his innumerable Bounties to His creatures in the
Book and shows them the way of happiness and pleasure. He promises them
a place in the Heaven and also warns them of the Hellfire. The gathering
for the recitation of the Qur’an is the most wonderful gathering. In
this gathering Allah is the Host and the courtiers the Prophets and
their Vicegerents (as). How could one not be happy in such a gathering!
Due respect for such a gathering is very important. One should therefore
purify oneself with ablution (*Wadu)* is necessary.

### About Isti’adha: Seeking Allah’s Protection From The Satan

###

Before commencing the recitation of the Holy Qur’an one should
do*Isti’adha* or seek the protection of Allah against the machination of
the Satan. For this one should say*Aa-uzu billahi.* This has been
mandated by the Qur’an.

There are two ways of doing the Isti’adha. The first is saying,*‘Aa-uzu
billahi min al shaitan ir rajeem’* and the second is*‘Aa-uzu billahi
samiul aleem min al shaitan ir rajeem’* . According to some other
traditions, one should say*‘Aa-uzu billahi min al shaitan ir rajeem in
Allaha huwal fattahul aleem.’* But the first two methods of seeking
Allah’s Help to ward off the Satan are very much in vogue.

### Facing The Kaaba Or Qibla While Reciting The Qur’an

###

It is advised to face the Kaaba while reciting the Qur’an, be it in
loneliness or in congregation. One should not sit at the back of anyone
while reciting the Qur’an.

### About Khatam al-Qur’an or Finishing A Recitation of The Holy Book

###

One person told to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that he used to complete
the recitation of the Qur’an in a single sitting in the night. (Abu
Baseer).

The Imam (as) said, “It is better if you do one complete recitation of
the Qur’an in one month. Qur’an should be recited with*tarteel* or
slowly with proper pronunciation and punctuation. The reading should be
such that the words are comprehensible to the reciter and the listener.
Whenever there is mention of the Heaven in the Qur’an, the reciter
should seek Allah’s help for his deliverence. Similarly when the Hell is
mentioned, he should seek

deliverence.One should recite the Qur’an more during the Holy month of
Ramadan.”

‘Ali bin Mugheera asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “My father asked your
ancestor, the Prophet of Islam (S) about completing a recitation of the
Qur’an in one night. The Prophet said (S), ‘Yes! It can be done!’” Then
Bin Mugheera said, “My father used to complete forty recitations of the
Qur’an or even more during the month of Ramandan. I follow the same
practice and on*Idd al Fitr* I complete one recitation to felcitate Holy
Prophet (S), one for Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), one for Lady Fatima
Zahra (as) and one each as tribute to each of the Holy Imams (as). This
is my practice from the beginning and what Reward I could get for this?
Will it be entered in the account of my deeds?”

The Imam (as) said, “Because of this practice Allah will treat you with
these Infallible persons on the Day of Judgement!” Bin Jaseem was
astonished and said, “Is there so much reward for an insignificant
person like me?”

The Imam (as) said thrice, “Yes, yes, yes!”

### The Reward For Learning, Teaching and Memorising The Qur’an

###

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said one whose memory is weak should learn
the Qur’an with more practice. Allah will give him more reward. The
Qur’an should be recited in a good tone but not with rhythm.

It is not good for a person to memorise the Qur’an and forget it. The
verses that he had memorized, and forgotten, will salute the reciter in
the Heaven from an elevated place by saying,’*Salam alaik’.* The person
would respond to the greeting and ask who they were and why they were
greeting him from that distanceThey will reply that they were the verses
of the Qur’an that he had memorised and didn’t care to retain in his
memory. If he had tyaken care to retain the memory, he would have been
in the higher echelons of the Heaven with them!

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “A person who memorises the Qur’an and
purposely forgets it will be raised on the Day of Judgement in a manner
that his hands will be tied to his neck. For every verse that he had
forgotte Allah would impose a snake on his body and he will be consigned
to the Hell.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that when Allah wants to send his curse
and retribution to a people who have been sinning very much and finds
that amongst the evil persons there are some people who offer prayers
and some children are reciting the Qur’an, he puts away the Retribution.

### The Benefits of Reciting The Qur’an

###

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that Qur’an is a Commandment of Allah
for His creatures. Therefore it is the bounden duty of every Muslim to
study the Qur’an with deep thought.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that a house where the Qur’an is
recited the angels would descend there and the Satan flees away from the
precincts. The house where the Qur’an is recited appears like a star to
the people of the Firmament.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “A person who recites the Qur’an while
standing will get reward equal to fifty good deeds. If a person seeks

succor against his enemies from the Qur’an with true spirit, he will be
safe from the adversaries. However strong the enemy might be!”

It is narrated by Bashir bin Ghalib that Imam Husayn (as) said, “When a
person recites the verses of the Qur’an while standing, Allah will
reward equivalent of ten good deeds for every word recited. If someone
listens to the recitation with intent, he will get one good deed
recorded in his account for every word that he listens to. If a person
completes the recitation over-night in one sitting, in the morning the
angels say his praises.

If a person completes the recitation during a day, the angels praise him
and one of his wishes that he makes after completing the recitation
would be fulfilled. The Reward for completing the recitation of the
Qur’an is better than the reward for any other good deeds.” The narrator
asked the Imam (as), “Ya Imam! If a person has not learned to read the
Qur’an, what should he do?” The Imam (as) replied, “Allah is Kind and
Munificent! He should recite as much as he knows! He will certainly get
the Reward!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “When a person completes the
recitation of the Qur’an in Mecca from one Friday to the other, or a
similar period of time, he will be Rewarded amply by Allah.”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S): A person who recites as
few as ten verses in a night, he would not be counted amongst the
negligent people. If he recites fifty verses, he will be counted as
a*Dhakir* (a person who remembers). If one recites a hundred verses, he
will be counted amongst the*Qaneteen* (the obedient). One who recites
two hundred verses in a night, then he is amongst the*Qashe-een* . If a
person recites three hundred verses overnight, he one of the*Fayezeen*
(the elevated). If a person recites five hundred verses in a night, he
will be counted in a group of persons who prayed their whole lives. When
a person recites a thousand verses in a night, he will get a*Qantar* of
Reward. A*Qantar* is equal to fifteen thousand*Mishqal* (a*mishqal* is
equal to 24 carat of gold) This will be equal to the Mount Ohud.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “When a person recites any hundred
verses of the Qur’an from any chapter, and after the recitation says
thrice the words,’*Allah humma akshif anni bala’,* all his calamities
will be warded off.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said, “If one has pain in the chest, he must
seek succor from the Qur’an. Allah has promised that the Qur’an cures
the chest pain!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Every place has a spring season.
For the Qur’an the spring is the Holy Month of Ramadan!”

It is narrated from Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) that if one listens to
even a word of the Qur’an with interest, Allah will order writing one
good deed in his record and obliterates one sin committed by him. The
person will be elevated one stage upward. If a person memorises even one
word from the Qur’an, Allah will record ten good deeds in his name and
removes ten sins from his record. He will also be raised ten stages
upward in his status. When a person recites the verses of the Qur’an
sitting at prayer, Allah will record fifty good deeds for him and remove
fifty sins from his record. And raises his status fifty stages. When a
person recites one verse standing in prayer,

He will record hundred good deeds for him, remove a hundred sisn from
his account and raise his status a hundred stages.When a person
completes a full recitation of the Qur’an, Allah will fulfill his wish
for this life or the Hereafter.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that when a person recites a
hundred verses from anywhere in the Qur’an and then says*Ya Allah* seven
times and order a stone to shatter, it will shatter with Allah’s wish!

### The Superiority Of Reciting The Holy Qur’an Looking At Its Words

###

The eyesight of a person will improve if he recites the Qur’an looking
at it pages. Allah will reduce the punishment for the sins of this
person’s parents, even if the father or the mother was an infidel.

The house where a copy of the Qur’an is kept the Satan cannot come.

Authentic traditions indicate that three things would complain to Allah:
1. A mosque where people don’t go to offer prayer. 2. A scholar who
lives amongst ignorant people and none respects him. 3. A copy of the
Qur’an that takes dust in a house and no one reads it.

Someone asked the Prophet of Islam (S), “I have memorised the Qur’an. Is
it better to recite it from the memory or by looking at the Book?” “The
Prophet (S) replied, “It is better to recite looking at the pages of the
Book because even looking at the book is auspicious.” Then the Prophet
(S) said that there are six things that would be the cause of benefit to
a person even after his death: 1. A pious son who prays for the
deliverence of his parents after their death. 2. A copy of the Qur’an
that will be read and recited by others after a person’s death. 3. A
well that has been dug for the benefit of the populace. 4. Creating a
canal or a source of running water. 5. A tree that has been planted to
give shade to the others. 6. The good examples set by the person for
others to follow after his death.

The Prophet of Islam (S) said that looking at the face of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (as) is equivalent to prayer. He
also said that looking with affection on the faces of one’s parents too
is prayer. Looking at the Holy Qur’an is prayer and setting eyes on the
Kaaba too is prayer.

### The Benefits Of Certain Verses Of The Holy Qur’an

###

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said*Ism al-Azam* (the ineffable word) is so close
to*Bismillah* as the white of the eye is to it’s black!

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “To get rid of any ailment
reciting*Al-Fatiha* seven times is sufficient. Even then if there is no
relief, then recite the verse seventy times and I guarantee relief from
the sickness!”

Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) said, “The Prophet of Allah (S) says that
Allah has divided the verse*Al-Fatiha* into two parts. One part for
Himself and the other for His creatures. When a person says*Bismillahir
Rehman ir Rahim,* Allah says, ‘My creature has commenced with My Name! I
shall complete all his works with felicity!’ When the person says
‘*Alhamdu lillahi Rab il Aalimeen’, Allah says, ‘* My creature has
expressed gratefulness for my Bounties.and therefore I have increased
for him the Bounties in this world and the Hereafter!’ Now, when the
person says, ‘*Ar Rehman ir Rahim’* Allah observes,’ My creature has
borne witness to My being Most Beneficient and Merciful! I shall enhance
My Rewards for him!’

When the person recites,’*Maalike youm id Deen’* Allah says, ‘O ye
angels! You must bear witness that the person has accepted that I am the
Arbiter of the Day of Judgement. Therefore I shall pardon all his sins
on that fateful day!’ Now the person recites, ‘*Ayyaka naabudu’,* Allah
says, ‘You have worshipped me and I shall Reward you for this act!’. The
person then recites,’*Wayyaka nastaeen’ when Allah responds,’I shall
come to your rescue in all calamities and difficulties!* ” The person
now implores, ‘*Ehdinus sirat al mustaqeem* ’ when Allah joins with,’
Whatever you have asked for I have Awarded to you and whatever fears you
had I have removed them!’”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “For any pains and aches
recite*Al-Fatiha* seventy times and the pain will vanish. If*Al-Fatiha*
is recited seventy times over a dead body, there is no wonder if the
dead comes back to life!”

A person complained to the Prophet of Islam (S) of acute headache. The
Prophet (S) said,’ “Put your hand near the spot where you have the pain
and then recite*Al-Fatiha* and*Ayat al Kursi.* Thereafter recite the
following:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللهُ أكْبَرُ اللهُ أكبَرُ لا إلَهَ إلاّ اللهُ وَاللهُ أكبَرُ وَأجَلُّ
وَأكْبَرُ مِمّا أخَافُ وَأحْذَرُ وَأعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنْ حَرِّ النّارِ.
</p>

***“Allah is the most great, Allah is the most great, there is no God
but Allah and Allah is the most great, He is higher and greater from
what I fear and from what I am causious about and I seek refuge in Allah
from the hellfire.”***

One person complained of fever. The Prophet (S) said, “Open your collar,
put your head in the garment and say the*Adhaan* and*Iqamat* and
recite*Al-Fatiha* seven times.” The man did likewise and the fever left
him.

The Prophet (S) also said that one who regularly recite the verses*Al
Baqarah and Aal al-Imran* , these verses will provide him shade out
through the hot Day of Judgement!”

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) has said, “The Prophet of Allah (S) has
observed,’ Whoever recites the last three verses of the chapter*Al
Baqarah* then he will not suffer any material losses, the Satan will
never come near him and the person will never ignore the Holy Book!”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said that when a person recites the*Ayat al Kursi*
at bedtime he will never get afflicted with paralysis. If he recites
this verse after mandatory prayers, he will never suffer from the bite
of poisonous insects.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said that if a person recites the*Ayat
al Kursi* once, Allah will remove a thousand calamities from him.

It is narrated that Abu Dharr Ghiffari asked the Prophet (S), “Which is
the greatest verse of the Holy Qur’an?” The Prophet (S) said, “The*Ayat
al Kursi!”*

Someone complained of a fever to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam
asked him to write the*Ayat al Kursi* on a plate, wash it with water
into a tumbler and drink it.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) narrates that amongst his ancestors heard a
person reciting*Al-Fatiha* and told him, “He has thanked Allah and has
been pardoned!” Then he heard the man recite*Qul huwallahu Ahad* and
said,

“The person has faith in the Unity of Allah and has become fearless!”
When the person recited*Inna Anzalna,* the Imam (as) said, “The person
has borne witness to the Prophethood of Muhammad (S.A) and he has been
pardoned by Allah.” When the man recited*Ayat al Kursi* the Imam (as)
said, “*Subhan Allah!* The person has escaped from the Hell!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that if one has any ailment of the
eye, he should recite*Ayat al Kursi* with full faith and he will be
cured of the disease. If a person recites*Ayat al Kursi, Qul hu wallah,
Inna anzalna* eleven times each at dawn, his properties will remain
safe.When a person leaves his home for some errand, he should
recite*Ayat al Kursi, Inna anzalna and Al-Fatiha* before starting on his
journey. The person will be successful in his errand.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Whoever recites*Ayat al Kursi* a
hundred times will get reward equal to his prayers offered over a
lifetime.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “If a Muslim knows the benefits of
reciting*Ayat al Kursi* then he will never forget to regularly recite
this versae.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When Allah had revealed*Ayat al
Kursi, Al-Fatiha, Shahed Allaho annahu la ilaha, Qul Allahumma
Malikalmulk* then these verses clung to the Firmament and said, “O
Allah! Where are you revealing us? These people are sinners?” Allah
ordered them to go to the earth and observed, “By My Might! Whoevr
amongst the Progeny of Muhammad (S) and their Shi’as recite you, I shall
secretly shower My Blessings on them. I shall fulfill seventy wishes of
the person every day. I shall accept their penitence despite their
having committed many sins!”

Ashjah Salma told to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “I have to pass several
times through fearsome wilderness. Teach me a prayer that I negotiate
these places safely.” The Imam (as) said, “Keep your hand on the head
and recite the*Ayat al Kursi* ”

### The Benefits of Other Verses of The Holy Qur’an

###

#### Surat An N’isa

####

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said that one who recites this verse on Friday
will be safe from pressures (*Fishar)* of the grave.

#### Surat Al Maida

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: One who recites this verse on
Thursdays will never become a hypocrite.

#### Surat Al Inaam

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: If a person suffers from a serious
disease, he will get relief by reciting this verse.

#### Surat Al Aaraf

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has narrated that a person who recites this
verse will be amongst the friends of Allah.If one recites this verse on
Friday, he will be exempted from the accounting of deeds on the Day of
Judgement.

Asbag bin Nabata narrates that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said: By the Great
Allah who sent Prophet Muhammad as the true Prophet (S) and endowed
his*Ahl-ul-Bayt* with august status, that people used to search for
amulets and tablets, to save themselves from drowning, fire, theft and
to guard their slaves and animals going astray. All these safety
measures are there in the Holy Qur’an.Whoever wants help can ask me. One
person stood up and asked, “Ya Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as)! Please do
instruct me with thos verses of the Qur’an.” The Imam (as) recited two
verses,

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّ وَلِيِّي اللَّهُ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْكِتَابَ وَهُوَ يَتَوَلَّى
الصَّالِحِينَ﴾
</p>

***Surely my guardian is Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He befriends
the the righteous. (7:196)***

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ سُبْحَانَهُ
وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ﴾
</p>

***And they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to Him;
and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the day of resurrection and
the heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be
exalted above what they associate (with Him). (39:67)***

The man recited these verses and he escaped unhurt from a ferocious fire
that had burnt down many houses in his neighborhood.

Another person got up and asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “Ya Imam! I
have a flock of animals. Some of them have the tendency to flee” The
Imam (as) said: Recite this verse in the ear of the animals that have
tendency to run away from the flock:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ﴾
</p>

***Is it then other than Allah's religion that they seek (to follow),
and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or
unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned. (3:83)***

The person followed the Imam (as)’s instruction and the animals remained
docilely in the flock.

One more person got up and asked, “Ya Imam! The place where I dwell
there are plenty of wild animals. They enter my barn and harm my
domestic animals.” The Imam (as) said, Keep reciting the following two
verses:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ. فَإِنْ
تَوَلَّوْا فَقُلْ حَسْبِي اللَّهُ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ عَلَيْهِ
تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ﴾
</p>

***But if they turn back, say: Allah is sufficient for me, there is no
god but He; on Him do I rely, and He is the Lord of the Throne (of
Glory) Supreme! (9:129)***

When the man started reciting the verses regularly, the wild animals
kept away from his place.

Another person rose and said, “Ya Imam! I suffer from excessive
biliousness which is troubling me much. Kindly teach me a verse that I
get

rid of the ailment.” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said: O person! Hear
carefully! You will spend neither a Dirham nor a Deenar for this
treatment! Write*Ayat al Kursi* on your tummy wash it down. Also write
the*Ayat al Kursi* on a plate, wash it with water and drink it. Allah
will give you cure.

Another person asked, “Ya Imam! My slave has run away. What can I do to
bring him back?” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “Recite this verse:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿أَوْ كَظُلُمَاتٍ فِي بَحْرٍ لُجِّيٍّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ إِذَا
أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ اللَّهُ لَهُ
نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ﴾
</p>

***Or (the Unbelievers' state) is like the depths of darkness in a vast
deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by (dark)
clouds: depths of darkness, one above another: if a man stretches out
his hands, he can hardly see it! for any to whom Allah giveth not light,
there is no light! (24:40)***

When the man started reciting the verse, the slave returned home by
himself.

Another person asked, “Ya Imam! Kindly instruct me with a verse to guard
against thieves and burglars.” The Imam (as) said: When you go to bed,
recite the following two verses. Your property will be safe:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿قُلْ ادْعُوا اللَّهَ أَوْ ادْعُوا الرَّحْمَانَ أَيًّا مَا تَدْعُوا
فَلَهُ الأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى وَلا تَجْهَرْ بِصَلاتِكَ وَلا تُخَافِتْ
بِهَا وَابْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ سَبِيلاً. وَقُلْ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي
لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَدًا وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ
يَكُنْ لَهُ وَلِيٌّ مِنْ الذُّلِّ وَكَبِّرْهُ تَكْبِيرًا﴾
</p>

*Say: Call upon Allah or call upon, the Beneficent Allah; whichever you
call upon, He has the best names; and do not utter your prayer with a
very raised voice nor be silent with regard to it, and seek a way
between these. And say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has not taken
a son and Who has not a partner in the kingdom, and Who has not a helper
to save Him from disgrace; and proclaim His greatness magnifying (Him).
(17:110-111)*

Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said: If a person is in a wilderness in
the night, he should recite the*Ayat Sakhra* and angels will guard him
and the satans dare not come near him. The ayat is,

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ
رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ﴾
</p>

***Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods of time, and He is firm in power; He throws the veil of
night over the day, which it pursues incessantly; and (He created) the
sun and the moon and the stars, made subservient by His command; surely
His is the creation and the command; blessed is Allah, the Lord of the
worlds. (7:54)***

One person, who had heard this, happened to stay in a wilderness in the
night. He did not remember the verse. Two satans cam to him. One shut
his mouth to stop him from reciting the verse and the other said, ‘Don’t
gag his

mouth! Give him some time!’ The man suddenly remembered the verse and
recited it. The angels immediately appeared and stood in guard around
him and stayed with him till the morning. The man went to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) and said, “Ya Imam! I found your instruction
right!” He recounted his experience of the night. He said, “I went to
the place after the sunrise and found the footmarks of the Satans who
dragged away from there.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said that those who are exposed to the dangers of
drowining in the high seas, should recite the following verses to have
safe voyages:

<p dir="rtl">
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْرَاهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
بِسمِ اللهِ المَلكِ الحَقِّ المُبينِ
</p>

***And he said: Embark in it, in the name of Allah be its sailing and
its anchoring; most surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful. (11:41)***

<p dir="rtl">
. وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ سُبْحَانَهُ
وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

***And they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to Him;
and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the day of resurrection and
the heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be
exalted above what they associate (with Him). (39:67)***

#### Sura Bani Israel

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that a person who recites this verse
every Friday night will not die till he sets his eyes on the*Saheb al
Asr* (The Twelfth Imam). This person will also have the status of the
companions of the Prophet of Islam (S).

It is narrated that Omer bin Hanzala came to the presence of Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as) and complained of a headache. The Imam (as) said: Put your
hand at the spot you feel the pain and recite the following verses,

<p dir="rtl">
﴿قُلْ لَوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ آلِهَةٌ كَمَا يَقُولُونَ إِذًا لابْتَغَوْا إِلَى
ذِي الْعَرْشِ سَبِيلاً﴾
</p>

***Say: If there were with Him gods as they say, then certainly they
would have been able to seek a way to the Lord of the Throne!.
(17.42)***

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَإِلَى
الرَّسُولِ رَأَيْتَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَنْكَ صُدُودًا﴾
</p>

***And when it is said to them: Come to what Allah has revealed and to
the Messenger, you will see the hypocrites turning away from you with
(utter) aversion. (4.61)***

#### Sura Hood

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said: Whoever recites this verse on every
Friday, he will be raised on the day of Resurrection along with the
prophets (as).

#### Sura Yusuf

####

One who recites this verse regularly everyday, his face will be bright
on the Day of Judgement like the face of the Prophet of Islam (S).

#### Sura Raad

####

The one who recites this verse will be safe from the strike of
lightning.

#### Sura Ibrahim and Sura Hajr

####

One who recites these verses on Fridays with a prayer of two
genuflections will never be penurous.

#### Sura Nahl

####

One who recites this verse will never be indebted.

#### Sura Kahf

####

One who recites this verse on Fridays will have the status of a martyr
when he dies.

#### Sura al-Hajj

####

One who recites this verse once in every three days, he will perform
Hajj the same year.

#### Sura Ankaboot and Alrome

####

One who recites these verses on 14th of Ramadan will go to Heaven.

#### Sura Yaseen

####

This verse is the heart of the Qur’an. Reciting this verse enhances
livelihood and wards away evils. Someone asked Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) a
cure for piles. The Imam asked him to write Sura Yasin on parchment with
honey, wash it and drink the fluid.When a person has leukoderma the same
process of treatment should be followed.

One person asked Ameeral Mu’mineen (as) to give him a prayer for
recovering lost valuables. The Imam (as) asked him to offer two*rakaat*
of prayer and in every*raka* recite sura Yasin. Then he should say,*‘ya
hadi alzallat rad ala zaallati.’* .

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that a person who recited the sura
Yasin once in his lifetime, Allah will enter good deeds in his record
equal to the numbers of the creatures in the entire universe. Allah will
also pardon two thousand sins of the person. He will be safe from
penury, indebtedness and disease. The death qualms and the pressure of
the grave will be light for him. He will prosper in the world and get
rewards in the Hereafter. Allah will reward him so much that He will
announce to the angels to keep praying for the person’s deliverance.

The Imam (as) also said that a person who has marks of leukoderma on his
face should write Sura Yasin with honey, dissolve in water and drink.

#### Sura al-Saffaat

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said: Whoever recites this verse on Fridays
will be safe from all sorts of calamities. His livelihood will increase.
No harm will come to his life, property and the family. No cruel ruler
or Satan would trouble him. He will enter the Heaven with the martyrs.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Ameer al Mimineen (as) narrates that when a person has
the fear of getting stung by a scorpian or snake should recite this
verse.One who desires to have plenty of Reward on the Day of Judgement,
should recite the following after every prayer:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ. وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى
الْمُرْسَلِينَ. وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.﴾
</p>

***Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, above what they describe.
And peace be on the messengers. And all praise is due to Allah, the Lord
of the worlds. (37:180-182)***

If any person recites this verse while getting up from sitting posture
everytime, whatever sin he committed while sitting will be pardoned.

#### Sura al-Saad

####

A person who recites this verse on the eve of Friday Allah will bestow
on him so much reward in this world and the Hereafter that He Has not
given to any mortal other than the Prophets (as). The kin of the person,
and even his slaves and servants, will enter Heaven on his intercession.

#### Sura Haa Meem Sajda

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Any person who recites this verse,
Allah will provide him a light on the Day of Judgement that there will
be illumination to the extent his eyes could see. Allah will bless him
with contentment and happiness. Looking at the person, others would
express their desire to be like him.”

#### Sura Haa Meem Ain Seen Qaaf

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that a person who regularly recites
this verse will rise from his grave on the Day of Resurrection with a
face as white as snow and would shine like the sun. While he will stand
in front of Allah’s Firmament, Allah would say ‘O My creature! You
always recited this verse! If you were aware of the Reward for reciting
it, you would never have tired of doing it!’ Now, know the Reward for
doing it.

The angels will be ordered to take the person to the Heaven. He will be
guided to the palace speciaally erected for him. The walls of the palace
would be made of red rubies. The parapets would be of green emeralds. It
will be delicately constructed that everything outside the palace will
be visible through the walls from inside. In the palace there will be
virgin houris, young women and a thousand slaves and slave girls to
attend on him.

#### Sura al-Zhaqraf

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “Whoever recites this verse regularly
Allah will prevent him from the vermin in the grave and he will remain
safe from the pressure of the grave. This verse will intercede on behalf
of the person on the Day of Judgement.and lead him to the Heaven.”

#### Sura al-Muhammad

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “Whoever recites this verse will be safe
from commitment of sins. He will not carry any doubts about the Faith.
He will not be afflicted with penury. He will be free of the fear of the
rulers. Allah will appoint a thousand angels to pray for him at his
graveside after his death. Thousand angels will be beside him when he is
raised from the grave on the Day of Resurrection. These angels will
protect him from the hardships of that eventful Day. The person will be
in the trust of Allah and His Prophet (S)!”

#### Sura al-Rehman

####

This verse has much felicity. The person who recites it will have a face
as bright as the moon. It is advised that whenever one recites*fabe ayye
aalaye Rabbekuma tukazzebaan* he should say*la beshaiyun min alaayeke
Rabbe akzib.*

#### Sura al-Jinn

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A person who recites this verse
regularly, will be safe from any harm from the jinns and magicians in
this world. He will be amongst the companions of the Prophet (S) in the
Heaven.”

#### Surat Al Waqia

####

One who recites this verse every night, Allah will befriend him. The
person will never suffer from poverty or hunger.

#### Sura Inna Anzalna

####

A person who recites this verse will get the satatus of a martyr. If one
recites it during prayers, all his sins will be padoned. If a person
recites this verse continuously during Ramadan and a thousand times on
the eve of 23rd Ramadan, he will witness such wonders on the morning of
the 23rd that he will get amazed! His belief and Faith would become
firmer!

Whenever Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) wore a new dress he would recite*sura inna
anzalna, sura Qul huwalla, sura qul ya ayyuhal kaferoon* ten times each,
blow on a small quantity of water from his mouth and sprinkle it on his
new clothes. The Imam (as) used to say that whoever does this will be
given good sustenence by Allah till a thread of the dress remained with
him.

Someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “Ya Maula! I have married a few
women, but still I am issue-less!” The Imam (as) replied, “Before
copulation you must recite*Sura Inna anzalna* seven times in a manner
that your right hand is near the umbilicus of your wife Till the
pregnancy becomes evident, keep placing your hand near the umbilicus of
your wife and recite the verse every night.” When the person adopted
this practice, his wife became pregnant and he was blessed with seven
sons thereafter.

The Imam (as) also said, “One who recites the verse*Inna anzalna* in the
prayers instead of*Qul hawalla,* there will be doubt about the
acceptance of his prayers. Even if it is accepted, there may not be any
Reward for such a prayer.”

#### Sura Zalzaal

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A person recites this verse in optional
prayers, Allah will save him from earth-quakes, lightning strikes and
other calamities. At the time of his death an angel will recommend to
the*Malak al Maut* (the angel of death) to make his death easy. The
person would see his place in the Heaven before his death. All the
curtains would be raised from in front of him and his spirit would be
taken away peacefully.”

It is narrated from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that the Prophet of Allah (S)
has said, “A person who recites the*Surat al Zalzaal* four times, it
would be like reciting the complete Book.”

#### Surat Al Qareaa

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Whoever recites this verse
regularly, will be rendered safe by Allah from the tortures of Dajjal.
He will be spared the Hellfire in the Hereafter.”

#### Surat Al Takasur

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “One who recites this verse will be
given the rewards equal to that for a hundred martyrs. Whoever recites
it in the optional prayers, rewards equal to that of fifty martyrs will
be entered into his account. Such a person will be having forty rows of
angels praying the mandatory prayers standing behind him.”

#### Surat Al Asr

####

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “If a person recites this verse in
his optional prayers, Allah will raise him on the Day of Judgement with
a radiant face, smiling teeth and bright eyes. He will be sent to the
Heaven.”

#### Sura al-Kawthar

####

A person who recites this surat during his mandatory and optional
prayers, Allah will quench his thirst at the Cistern of Kawthar and will
give him a place in the vicinity of the Prophet of Allah (S).

#### Sura Iza Ja-Aa Nasr Allah

####

Reciting this verse in the prayers protects one from the machinations of
his enemies.

#### Surat Al Iqlas

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that if a person recites this verse
once, Allah will shower Blessings on him. When the person recites it
twice, Allah will Bless his children. If the person recites the verse
thrice, Allah will also Bless the person’s friends. Thus, the more a
person recites this verse, the more he shall be Blessed by Allah. For
reciting the verse a thousand times, the person will get the august
status of a martyr.

While the Prophet of Allah (S) was offering the funeral prayer of Saad
bin Ma-aaz, he noticed that seventy thousand angels were present at the

prayer. He asked Jibraeel the reason for this honor to the dead person.
Jibraeel replied that he used to recite*Sura al-Iqlas* frequently.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “If you desire Allah’s protection
from your enemies, recite*Sura al-Iqlas* on your six sides, that is,
right, left, up, down, front and back.”

And when you go to confront a superior, recite this verse thrice in
front of the person and at every recitation close one finger of you left
hand. With Allah’s help you will come out successful!

Then the Imam (as) said, “If a person has not recited the*Surat al
Iqlas* for one week, his Reckoning will be along with the accursed abu
Lahab.”

The Imam (as) further said: If one is suffering from an ailment, and
doesn’t take help from this verse, then he is a denizen of the Hell.

Also said: If your believe in Allah and the Day of Judgement, then after
the mandatory prayers don’t forget to recite*Sura al-Iqlas. Allah will
pardon the sins of your forbears and your offspring.*

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said: A person who recites the*Sura
al-Iqlas* eleven times after the mandatory morning prayer, the Satan
cannot make him commit a sin even if he tempts the person a hundred
thousand times.

Also Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (a.s..) said, “When a person recites the verse in
the night, Allah will depute fifty thousand angels to keep vigil the
whole night.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When a person reads*Sura al-Iqlas*
it is like reading a third of the Qur’an, a third of Torah, Injeel and
Zaboor.”

Also the Imam (as) said, “Allah has subjugated fever to Lady Fatima
Zahra (as) in lieu of the*Garden of Fadak.* Therefore if a friend of
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* recites*Sura al-Iqlas* a thousand times and blows over
a person suffering from high fever, the person will recover with Allah’s
Help.”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said, “If one sits near a sick person,
recites*Surat Al-Fatiha, Al Iqlas, Qul Aooz berabinnaas, Qul Aoozo
berabbil falaq* and touches the face of the ailing person,*Insha Allah,*
the sickness will vannish.”

#### Surat Al Kaaferoon

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When a person recites*Surat al
Kaaferoon and Iqlas* during the mandatory prayers, Allah will pardon his
parents and siblings. If he is a callous(*Shaqi* ) person, Allah will
remove his name from the roster of such persons and put him on the list
of the virtuous. Allah will give him felicity in the worldly affairs, he
will die the death of a martyr and will be raised a martyr on the Day of
Reckoning.”

#### Surat Al Mauzateen

####

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) say, “There are two verses,*an Naas and
Falaq,* that when they were revealed, the Prophet (S) was having fever
and this verse was used as an amulet for him and he recovered.”

#### Surat Ad Dahr

####

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Whoever recites this verse on the
morning of Thursdays, Allah will grant to him in the Heaven a group of
eight hundred virgins and four thousand houris. The person will be in
the company of the Prophet (S).”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said that it is a fact that there will be effect
of bad eyes. A person can set a bad eye even on himself. Therefore to
prevent against the effect of bad eyes one should recite thrice the
following:

<p dir="rtl">
مَا شَاءَ اللهُ لا قُوَّةَ إلاّ باللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظِيمِ.
</p>

***Allah’s will prevails and there is no might but the Most High, the
Great.***

When one has the fear of bad eye affecting him, he should recite the
verse*Mauzatain* while going out.

The Third Stream: About Dealing With The Kings
----------------------------------------------

It is said about the justice and tyranny of kings that the welfare of
the subjects of a kingdom depends much upon the fairness of its ruler.
Therefore, The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “My*Ummat* depends for its
prosperity on two types of persons: the first the*Fuqha* (the jurists)
and the second, the nobles.”

Also the Prophet (S) said: On the Day of Reckoning the Hell will address
three categories of people:

1. The*Umra* (the nobles)

2. The*Quraa* (the reciters) and

3. The*Aghnia* (the rich).

It will tell to the*Umra* that Allah had given them the authority and
you abused it for perpetrating tyranny on the hapless people. Now you
have to pay for your deeds.

The Hell will tell the*Quraa* that to make a show of their prowess and
to acquire false fame they were reciting the Qur’an and involved
themselves in disobedience of Allah. Now they would have to taste the
Hellfire.

The Hell will address the*Aghnia* that Allah had blessed them with
wealth and they didn’t spend it in any way to please Allah. How will
they now bear the retribution.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Amir al Mu’mineen (as) said that obedience of a
tyrannical and cruel ruler is a major sin. Obeying the*Ulu al Amr* who
are the Infallible Imams is the bounden duty of the believers.
Disobedience of these Imams is a major sin. These Imams are Infallible
and Allah is Just that He doesn’t Ordain obedience of fallible rulers.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) also said: Allah will send His Retribution
to six types of persons for their foul traits:

On the Arabs for their bigotry.

The rich for their pride and conceit.

On the nobles and kings for their tyranny.

On the jurists and scholars for their jealousies.

On the traders for their unfair business practices.

On the rustics for their ignorance.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that there is a mill in the
Hell that rotates perpetually. People asked him, “Ya Imam! What does
this mill grind?” The Prophet (S) replied: It will grind the sinful
scholar (*Ulema* ), sinning reciters, tyrannical kings, untrustworthy
viziers and dissimulating courtiers.

The Prophet of Islam (S) said: I curse seven types of persons. All the
prophets (as) who came prior to me have also d’Isapproved of such
persons. These persons are:

One who adds or removes anything from the Book of Allah.

One who denies the Divine Decree (*Qaza wa Qadr)* and doesn’t believe in
the fate Decreed by Allah.

One who acts against my*Sunna* and creates hypocricy (*Bidaa* ) in
Religion.

One who usurps the rights of my*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* Allah has termed such
usurpation*Haram.*

One who imposes himself forcibly on the people and gives honor to those
who have been disgraced by Allah and disgraces those who have been
honored by Allah.

One who imposes himself on the material assets of the Muslims and
considers himself the sole owner of everything.

One who decrees haram that which has been termed Halal by Allah.

It is authentically narrated from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as), “When the persons
at the helm of affairs start lying and give partial and unjust
decisions, then it stops raining from the skies. When the kings are
tyrannical and unjust, their realms become weak. When people stop
paying*Zakat* , the cattle start dying!”

### Behavior Of People In Power

###

It is narrated that Ziyad Qandi came to the presence of Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as). The Imam (as) asked him, “O ziyad! Are you the chief
appointed by those tyrannical caliphs?” Ziyad replied, “O son of the
Prophet (S)! No doubt I am the chief. But I am considerate! I am not one
of those who hoard riches. Whatever I get, I share with the
deserving*Mu’mins.* I treat them equitably!”

The Imam (as) said, “If you do this, then it is very good. Remember!
When your conscience takes you towards unjust acts, and you have control
over the conscience, then remember Allah’s Rights. One who wreaks
tyranny on people, Allah will wreak Retribution on him! When other
people give you trouble, the trouble passes by! But when you unjustly
terrorise others, the punishment will await for you!”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when Allah gives a
kingdom to someone, he fixes the days, nights, months and years for
which the realm would last. If the ruler is just, Allah orders the angel
incharge of keeping the time for the epoch of the king to prolong it.
Then the days, nights, months and years of the realm are revised
upwards. When a king is unjust and cruel to his subjects, then Allah
orders the angel to shorten his realm.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) told to Naufil Bakali, “O
Naufil! Listen and act on my advice! Never accept chieftaincy,
commission for collecting taxes and the position of a proclaimer
(*Naqeeb).* ”

One person came to Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) and said, “Ya Imam! I
have been the chief over the people from the times of Hajjaj till now.
Will my repentence be accepted by Allah?” The Imam (as) kept quiet and
did not reply. The man repeated his question. Now the Imam (as) replied,
“Your penitence will not be acceptable till you restore the right of
every person you have wronged!”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that one had been unjust to
someone and wishes to make amends, but the person is not traceable.In
this event the repentent person should pray for the Deliverance of the
wronged person and this way his sin might be pardoned.”

The Prophet (S) then added, “The first to enter the Hell will be the
chief who was unjust. The second person will be the rich man who did not
distribute Allah’s Right from his wealth. The third person will be the
beggar who was proud of his penury.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) told to one chieftain, “Abstain from tyranny
and injkustice! The suppreed overcomes the pangs of tyranny, but the
tyrant faces Retribution for the tyranny for ever.”

The Imam (as) further added: On the Day of Judgement three persons will
be the dearest to Allah:

One who is not unjust to a persaon even in a state of acute anger.

One who is an arbiter in some matter and doesn’t take sides unjustly.

One who tells the truth even at the risk of harm to his own person.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “One must be scared of doing an
injustice to a person who has no helper in the world except Allah.”

The Imam (as) further added, “The cruel person doesn’t usurp as much
value by usurping anything from the weakling than what the weak person
takes away from the tyrants faith!”

“And when a person does wrong to anyone, he infact wrongs himself
because, as you sow, so shall you reap!”

### The Rights Of The Rulers And The Ruled Over Each Other

###

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) says that since Allah has given authority to
the kings and the emirs, it is imperative for them to be just and
sagacious with their subjects. They should show affection for the
subjects like the parents do for their children. They should be thankful
to Allah for the position bestowed on them. In this regard the long
epistles written to Malik al-Ashtar, Sahl bin Haneef and Muhammad bin
Abi Bakr are worth perusal.

It is authentically reported that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A
fair person in authority over the affairs of Muslims deals with them
justly. He keeps his doors always open for them, erects no curtain or
obstruction between them and himself. He considers their affairs with
keen interest and fulfills their legitimate needs. Allah will remove all
his fears and give him admittance to the Heaven on the Day of
Judgement.”

Remember, Allah has made every individual a sort of a king in his own
way. It is in place to quote the following tradition here:

<p dir="rtl">
كُلُّكُمْ رَاعٍ وَكُلُّكُمْ مَسْؤُولٌ عَنْ رَعِيَّتِهِ.
</p>

*“Everyone of you is a ruler and you will have to account for your
subjects”*

Questions will be asked and enquiries made. Like enquiries are made with
a shepherd about his flock.

On the Day of Judgement everyone will be asked about how he treated his
subjects. As Allah has given authority to kings over the subjects of his
realm, the courties and nobles have authority over smaller numbers than
the king, every house-holder has authority over his family, servants and
slaves.The house-holder is responsible for the maintenance of the
persons under his authority.

Similarly every individual is the master over his own limbs and body. He
has to keep his senses in control that they don’t become the cause of
Retribution for him on the Day of Reckoning. Allah has mad the behaviour
and habits subordinate to the individual. There is none in this world
who is not a ruler in lesser or greater measure. Every person is
bestowed with the power to rule according to his ability.

Allah expects him to be thankful and perform his task according to the
Dictum of the Creator.If the person does his task properly, Allah will
enhance his authority and bounty for him.One who goes in the contrary
direction, Allah will withdraw the bounty from him.If the rulers are
just to the subjects and express their thanks to Allah along with the
subjects, Allah will extend the period of their dominance. Therefore he
has said that even if the king is an infidel, but he deals with the
subjects judiciously, his realm will prosper. To the contrary the realm
of a cruel Muslim king disintegrates.

### About Helping Mu’mineen And Keeping Them Contented

###

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says that making a*Mu’min* smile is a big
virtue. There is no supplication more than making a*Mu’min* happy and
helping him to meet his needs.

It is in the traditions that Prophet Musa (as) received a revelation
from Allah, “O Musa! I have made the Heaven lawful for some of my
creatures.” Prophet Musa (as) asked, “Who are these persons?” Allah
replied, “These are the persons who make their fellowmen happy!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said that a*Mu’min* tired of the repression
of the Muslim king flew to another realm of an infidel and took refuge
there. The kind ruler there treated the*Mu’min properly and provided him
all the necessary facilities. In the meantime the infidel king died.
Allah revealed to him that but for his being an unbeliever He would have
sent him to the Heaven. However the fire of the Hell was made cold for
him.*

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that one who pleases a*Mu’min,* it is
like pleasing the Prophet of Islam (S). One who has pleased the Prophet
(S), he has pleased Allah. And a person who pleases Allah, qualifies to
enter the Heaven.

It is narrated from Sadeer Sarraf that once he was with Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as). At that meeting a discussion came up about the rights of
brother*Mu’mins.* The Imam (as) gave his attention to me and asked, “If
you wish I shall tell you about the rights?” Sadeer said, “Ya Imam!
Kindly tell!” The Imam (as) said: When Allah orders the death of a
person, the*Karamain Katibain (* the two angels who keep an account of
the deeds of the person) go to the Firmament and tell to Allah,’ O
Allah! This was your pious creature! He was always busy in your
obedience and always abstained from anything that can be termed your
disobedience! Now you have taken away his spirit. What is your order to
us in his regard?’

Allah will say, ‘You return to the world and sit praying near his
grave.and enter the reward for your prayers in his account till I raise
him on the Day of Resurrection!’ The Imam (as) added, “O Sadeer! Do you
want to hear further of the virtues of a*Mu’min?* ” He said, “Ya Imam!
Kindly relate!” The Imam (as) said: At the time of raising the person
from the grave, a pleasant looking apparition will emerge from the grave
and go in front of him. When the person would get scared on seeing the
manifestations of the Doomsday, this apparition would put his fears to
rest. It will give him the tiding of the happiness and comforts in store
for him and that he need not worry for anything. It will remain with the
person up to the place where he will have to give the account of his
deeds.

Allah will ease the process of accounting for the man. And will order
his conduct to the Heaven. At that time the apparition will move in
front of him. The*Mu’min* will tell to the apparition,’ May Allah be
kind on you! You have kept company with me ever since I emerged from the
grave and have been the harbinger of good news at every step. You are
now leading me to the Heaven! Tell me, who you are?’ The apparition
would reply, ‘I am that happiness and comfort which you gave to
such-and-such a*Mu’min.* Allah has created me on account of that
happiness only that I keep giving you tidings of happiness coming your
way!’

Mashal narrates that one year he went for the Haj. After the Haj he went
to the presence of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam (as) inquired of
him, “From where are you coming?” He said, “After performing the Haj.”
The Imam (as) asked, “Do you know that the felicity of performing the
Haj for a person is that in his account of deeds, six thousand good
deeds are recorded. Allah also pardons six thousand bad deeds of the
person!” Masaal said, “Subhan Allah! There is so much reward for a
Haji!” The Imam (as) said, “I shall tell you of an act that brings much
more reward. The*Mu’min* who helps a brother*Mu’min* or makes him happy,
gets reward equal to performing Haj ten times.”

### The Felicity Of Coming To The Help Of Mu’mins

###

It is narrated from Mufazzal bin Omer that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
said, “O Mufazzil! Listen to what I say and act on the advice! Inform
your pious*Mu’min* brothers too of what I am saying.” Mufazzil asked,
“Ya Imam! I offer myself in sacrifice for you! Who are the people who
take pleasure in helping their brother*Mu’mins?”* The Imam (as) replied,
“When a person helps fulfill one need of a*Mu’min,* Allah will fulfill
his hundred thousand needs in the Hereafter. One of his wishes will be
taking his next of kin, friends and relations to the Heaven. The only
condition required of him will be that the persons on whose behalf he
intercedes have not been hypocrites (*Nasibi).* ”

It is narrated in another tradition that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) told
to Mufazzil, “O Mufazzil! Allah has selected one group from His
creatures who attend to the needs of our poor Shi’as. In return for this
Allah will award Heaven to them. Therefore, to the best of your ability
help them.and become a part of the chosen group!”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) when a*Mu’min* approaches
him for help, and he thinks that the person coming to him is a matter of
felicity, and helps him suitably, it will be the cause of our friendship
for him. Our friendship is Allah’s friendship. And if he turns down the
request of the*Mu’min* for help, despite having the means to do it,
Allah will put a fiery snake in his grave. This snake will trouble him
till the Day of Judgement.Later on, it will be Allah’s decision either
to punish him or reward him.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that in his view helping
meet the needs of a*Mu’min* is better than performing twenty Haj
pilgrimages when on each pilgrimage one has spent a hundred thousand
Dirhams.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: If a*Mu’min* finds another in
trouble, desires to help him, but is not in a position to come to his
aid, Allah will award Heaven to such a person.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said that if a person himself takes the
trouble of going to help a brother*Mu’min,* then seventy five thousand
angels would provide the shadow of their wings over his head and for
every step that he takes for this purpose, Allah will add one good to
the account of his deeds and pardons all his sins. Allah will also raise
the person’s status by a degree. When the person returns after
performing the good deed, the reward for performing a Haj and Umra is
entered in his record.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said: When a person doesn’t come to the aid
of a*Mu’min* , despite having the means of doing it, then Allah will
demean him in this world and the hereafter.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says: There are four types of persons on whom
Allah will Bestow Blessing on the Day of Reckoning:

One from whom someone bought something, but returned it and the person
has willingly accepted back his merchandise.

One who comes to the rescue of a person in trouble.

One who frees a slave.

One who extends a helping hand for the marriage of a poor person.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said, “A person who removes
the danger of fire, flood or the enemy from Muslims, Allah will pardon
all his sins”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “One person was brought back to life
from the grave by angels and told him,’ We shall inflict on you a
thousand blows of the whip of Allah’s Punishment!’ The person said, ‘I
don’t have the strength to bear so much flogging.’ The angels said, ‘All
right! We shall reduce one blow!’ He said, ‘I don’t have the strength to
bear this severe punishment.’ In this way the angels kept reducing the
number of blows they wanted to give the person and he kept on peading
that he didn’t have sufficient strength to bear the flogging. In the end
the angels said, ‘Atleast, we shall flog you once!’ the man asked, ‘You
have not told me for what fault of mine you want to punish me?’ The
angels said,’ Once you had prayed without doing the mandatory ablution
and on another occasion you passed by an old man who needed help, but
you didn’t help him.’ Saying this the angels flogged him once, The blow
was so intense that a small fire started in the grave.”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that whosoever denies to
fulfill the need of a needy person, despite having the means to help
him, his sin will be like the sin of*Ashari.* Someone asked, ‘Who
is*Ashari* ?’ The Prophet said, “A sinner who is cursed by Allah, the
angels and all the creatures every day and night. One who is accursed of
Allah, can be helped by none.”

Also the Prophet (S) said, “One who hides one fault of a*Mu’min,* Allah
will overlook his seventy faults in the Hereafter.”

The Prophet (S) said that Allah will not Reward one who embezelled.
Someone asked, ‘Who is an embezeller?’ The Prophet (S) said, “He is one
who is miserly in helping a brother*Mu’min.”*

### Censuring, Belittling Or Harming The Mu’mins

###

It is narrated from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that there were four pious
persons (*Mu’mins* ) during the period of the bani Israel. Three of them
were one day having a tete a tete when the fourth knocked at the door.
The slave of the house came out. The*Mu’min* asked him if his lord was
at home. When the slave replied in the negative, the*Mu’min* went away.
The master asked the slave of the identity of the caller. The slave
replied that it was so-and-so and that he had told him that the master
wasn’t home. The master and the other two*Mu’mins* did not object to the
slave’s act. The next day the*Mu’min* visited the place when the three
of them were emerging from the house. He greeted them and said that he
visited the place the previous day too. The three of them laughed and
didn’t even express regrets for not being able to meet him. They then
proceeded towards their farm. On the way a cloud hovered over the heads
of the three persons. The angel Jibraeel called,’ O lightening of the
cloud! Fall on the heads of the three persons and render them to ashes!’
Lightening emerged from the cloud and burnt them to ashes.

The fourth*Mu’min* expressed deep sorrow and anguish for the tragedy
that had befallen their friends. He went to the prophet (S) of those
times, Prophet Yusha (as) and narrated the happening to him. He said
that ‘Allah dislikes one*Mu’min* belittling and making a laughing stock
of another. Your three friends did that to you. You visited them the
frst day, they were at home and their slave had lied to you that they
were not at home. They silently approved of what the slave did. On your
second visit they didn’t express any regret for the inconvenience caused
to you. To the contrary, they belittled by laughing at you! You were not
aware of their intentions, but Allah knows everything and He didn’t like
their behavior. They have been punished for their misbehavior!’

The*Mu’min* said, ‘O prophet of Allah! I have pardoned my friends!’
Prophet Yusha (as) replied,’ There is scope for pardon only before the
arrival of Allah’s Retribution! But there is no possibility of pardon
after the Retribution has visited the sinners! It is possible that your
friends may not be asked to account for this misdeed of theirs.’

### Frightening A Mu’min

###

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that if a person views
a*Mu’min* with a threatening look, Allah will frighten this person on
the Day when there will be no succor other than Allah’s Mercy for
anyone! The Imam (as) also said that if a Muslim visits another person
who neither admits him into his premises nor he comes out to meet him,
then he will be under the Displeasure of Allah till he meets the
visitor.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that a person who
frightens a*Mu’min* with his status and clout, and thinks of harming
him, will earn a place for himself in the Hell. Moreover, if he causes
physical harm to the*Mu’min,* then he will be in the company of Pharoah
and his progeny in the Hell.

In another narration it is mentioned that when a person utters a single
word to harm a*Mu’min* and takes sides with the tyrant, he will have
written

on his forehead the following words on the Day of Judgement,’ This
person is hopeless of My (Allah’s) Forgiveness.’

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that there is a mountain
in the middle of the Hell called*Sa-ada* . Along this mountain there is
the valley of*Saqar.* There is a well in the valley by the name
of*Habhab.* Whenever the curtain is raised from this well, the denizens
of the Hell raise cries in remorse. The tyrants are the residents of the
area in the neighborhood of this well.

The Imam (as) also added,’ One should not harm or ridicule others in a
hurry! Who knows the subject of such treatment is a*Mu’min* of which
fact he is unaware!’

Adopt softness and kindness in your attitude. Anger and stealth are the
weapons of the Satan. Allah likes nothing more that softness and
humility.

In another narration the Prophet (S) says, ‘When a muslim slaps another,
Allah will take asunder all his bones on the Day of Judgement and put
him in the Hellfire with a collar around his neck.’

A person who attends on a tyrannical king with a whipcord in his hand,
then Allah will turn the whipcord into a snake on the Day of Judgement.
The snake will be of seventy yards in length and will enwrap around the
body of the person.

When a person reports against a*Mu’min* to a tyrant and makes false
allegations against him, the reporter would lose the Rewards for all his
good acts, even if the subject doesn’t come to any harm because of the
reporter carrying malicious tales.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) asked the Prophet of Islam (S), ‘Ya Rasool
Allah! What will happen to a cruel ruler who doesn’t treat his subjects
in accordance with Allah’s Dicvtates?’ The Prophet (S) replied, ‘He will
be the fourth in the Hell after Satan, Qabeel and Pharoah.’

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when a person slays
a*Mu’min* for no fault of his, will be asked at the time of his own
demise,’ Accept the death of a Jew, a Christian or a Fire-worshipper!’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘A person remains a Muslim till he condescends to
kill another Muslim! If he intentionally kills a Muslim, then his
repentence will never be accepted by Allah!’

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that a murderer would be
raised on the Day of Judgement as the worst offender and sinner. He will
swear that he didn’t ever kill anyone nor was he a party to bloodshed.
Allah will reply, ‘You reported maliciously against a particular
creature of mine that became the cause of his execution!’

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that there are three types of persons
who will never enter the Heaven: Those who shed blood for no valid
reason, those who drink intoxicants and those who are backbiters.’

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that the first Judgement
that Allah would deliver on the Day of Reckoning will be about the
shedding of the blood of innocent Muslims. Prophet Adam (as)’s two sons
will be the first to be questioned. Then the others involved in the
killing of Muslims will come up for judgement. The killers will produce
their victims before Allah in the condition they were at the momemt of

commitment of the crime; their bodies and faces smeared with blood. The
killed persons would say, ‘O Allah! This person has rendered me to this
state!’ The killer will not be able to deny his sin. Also, when a person
kills an innocent person in this world, Allah will kill him in a similar
manner a hundred times in the Hereafter.

The Prophet of Islam (S) also said, ‘When someone kills a*Mu’min*
intentionally for no fault of his, Allah will enter all the sins of the
victim to the account of the killer.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that, ‘On the Day of
Judgement one person would go near another and smear his face and body
with blood. The first person would say, ‘What have I done to you to
deserve this treatment?’ He will reply,’ On such-and-such a day you had
uttered a falsehood about me that became the cause of my execution!’

Authentic tradition mentions that Allah says, ‘One who puts a*Mu’min* to
ridicule would be tantamount to have rebelled against Me! ‘In the eyes
of Allah the worst sinner is one who has ridiculed or killed a*Mu’min.*
When a person kills another innocent person Allah will transer all the
sins of the victim to the account of the killer.

### The Rights Of The Rulers

###

Religiously upright rulers have plenty of rights over their subjects.
This is because of the fact that they honor the rights and privileges of
the people and protect them from enemies and help them in times of
natural calamities.

It is narrated in an authentic tradition that just rulers have to be
respected and adored. This act on the part of the subjects would be like
respecting Allah. In certain other traditions a*sultan-eadil* (just
ruler) is referred to as*imam al-adil* (a just Imam).

It is narrated from Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when Nimrod pushed Prophet
Ibrahim (as) into the fire, and he emerged safe and sound, he was exiled
from the city and he reached the realm of the kings of*Qabt.*
Accompanying him was*Sarah(r.a.)* hidden in a wooden chest
that*na-mahrams* didn’t set eyes on her. The inspectors at the border
made a search of Prophet Ibrahim (as) and wanted him to open the chest
for their scrutiny. He said that in the chest was his spouse who was
also his maternal cousin. But they forcibly opened the chest and
discovered an extremely beautiful damsel emerging from the chest. They
informed the king of the matter who ordered all his courtiers to
assemble.

When Prophet Ibrahim (as) presented himself at the court, the king
insisted on him to open the chest. Prophet Ibrahim (as) said ‘whatever
tax you wish to levy, do take from me, but don’t ask me to open the
chest. Any stranger (*na-mahram)* setting eyes on her is taboo for me.
But the king didn’t give heed to Prophet Ibrahim (as)’s entreaties. When
he saw the extremely beautiful Sarah(r.a.), he proferred his hand to
her. Prophet Ibrahim (as) then prayed to Allah, ‘O my sustainer! Do
protect my honor!’

The king’s hand suddenly dried up like the dead wood. He pleaded to
Prophet Ibrahim (as) to pray to Allah that he got restored to his former
condition. Prophet Ibrahim (as) prayed to Allah and the king’s hand was
restored to the former condition. The king was full of remorse and
treated Prophet Ibrahim (as) with respect. He presented to Prophet
Ibrahim (as)

with a slave-girl who was Hajar(r.a.) who was later to mother the
prophet Ismail (as). Prophet Ibrahim (as) started from the place when
the king accompanied him some distance as a mark of respect. Then
Prophet Ibrahim (as) received a revelation that he should not demean the
king by making him walk behind himself. Prophet Ibrahim (as) then told
to the king that Allah didn’t like him walking ahead of the king of the
realm and that he must walk behind the monarch. The king was much
impressed with what Prophet Ibrahim (as) said and willingly embraced his
Faith.

The Prophet of Allah (S) said that Allah exhorts one should not talk ill
of kings that they are in their position with His Consent. The people
get a ruler they deserve! If the people are unruly, disobedient to
Allah, then they would get a tyrannical ruler. Therefore, instead of
complaining against an unjust ruler, they should try to reform
themselves that Allah appoints a just monarch over them.

### The Disadvantage Of Nearness To A Ruler

###

Nearness to the kings and nobles are the cause of loss both in this
world and the Hereafter.When a person gets recognition for being close
to the rulers, he will be subject of ridicule for falling from the good
books of the rulers, he will also be deprived of the Rewards of the
Hereafter for upholding the wrong deeds of the ruler. This way he goes
fuirther and further away from Allah.

Being close to the rulers, one becomes party to the acts of omission and
commission of hi masters and secondly he has to maintain affection for
the masters all the time. Allah’s dictates are definitely against this
practice.

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَلَا تَرْكَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّكُمْ النَّارُ وَمَا
لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ ثُمَّ لَا تُنصَرُونَ﴾
</p>

****Don’t get attracted towards the unkind?* (11:113)***

Doing this, one will taste the Hellfire.

Therefore, there are many traditions against maintaining closeness with
such people. The person has to accede to the bad deeds of such people.
This becomes an act of*shirk.* The person, observing the misdeeds of
these people develops the proclivity to commit wrong deeds himself. He
cannot sit quietly in the company of such masters and has to uphold
their misdeeds. This in itself is disobedience of Allah and the Prophet
(S). The person will have no power to oppose the master’s wrong deeds
and, therefore, will be abandoning*nahi an al munkar.* For his selfish
ends the person has to force himself to follow their wrong example to
protect his own honor. He also turns callous hearted because of living
day and night in the company of the masters.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that a parsimonious person
is never happy. The jealous is deprived of the ordinary pleasures of
life. The kings are never considerate. A lier is never thoughtful. A
foolish person devoid of wisdom never achieves importance. The Imam also
said that if a friend acquires power and pelf, his good behaviour
towards you reduces nine times when comparing his attitude in the past.
Even then, one should not deem him a bad friend!

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) has been quoted authentically,’ Four things mar
the heart and make a person unkind.

Watching dances and listening to music

Using foul language.

Frequently visiting the kings and rulers.

Being constantly in search of game.

It is narrated from the Prophet 0f Islam (S) that one who keeps company
of the kings, becomes a scheming person. The closer he goes to the king,
the farther away he goes from Allah.

It is authentically narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
(as) that a person who perpetuates unkindness and the one who helps and
abets in this act will both be sinners.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said: A person who praises an unkind ruler
and for the sake of worldly gains behaves in a submissive manner, he
will be the companion of that ruler in the Hell. One who shows the way
of unkindness to a tyrant, he will be thrown into the Hell with*Haaman.*
One who picks up quarrel with others in support of an unkind person,
the*Malak al Maut* (the angel of death) will tell him at the time of his
death,’ I give you foreboding of Allah’s curse and a place in the
Hell!’.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that one should not go
to a company where a tyrannical ruler might punish or kill people. This
is advised because one will not be able to come to the rescue of the
downtrodden. It is mandatory to go to the rescue of a person who is the
subject of tyranny. When one is not present in such a situation, nor
will there be the chance of getting news of any such harsh treatment,
then the person will not be under any obligation to act.

### Helpers Of The Cruel People

###

After getting fatally struck by the assasin’s weapon, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
(as) made the following will to Imam Hasan (as), “My son! Befriend a
virtuous person for the sake of his virtues; maintain acquaintance with
the transgressor (faasiq) only to the extent necessary that your Faith
is guarded against his evil designs.Your heart should beware of the
transgressors.”

It is narrated that those who willfully help the cruel will remain under
fiery curtains on the Day of Judgement. An angel will herald on the
orders of Allah asking for the cruel people and their helpers and
abetters who put wool (*sauf* ) in their ink-pots, sealed their hampers
of wealth and provided them with other kind of help. Such abetters too
would be counted amongst the cruel.

It is also mentioned in the traditions that,’ One doesn’t come closer to
a king, unless he moves away from Allah. None becomes very rich that it
becomes harder for him to render account on the day of Judgement. A
person doesn’t have more followers and hasn’t Satans in his following.’

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that one should guard
himself from evil by adopting piety and virtue. One should strengthen
his Faith by recourse to*Taqiyyah* (permitted subterfuge). Instead of
approaching kings for succor, one should supplicate to Allah. Learn to
be contented. A*Mu’min* who cringes before a king or a faithless person
for worldly gains, Allah considers him as His enemy! The worldly
possessions

of such a person lose their value. He will not get any reward for
performing Haj and Umrah, nor for freeing of slaves!’

### Meeting The Men In Authority

###

Although it is not desirable for*Mu’mins* to become regular retainers at
the courts of kings and nobles, there are definitely certains conditions
under which maintaining such contacts becomes imperative. These
conditions are:

If there is danger to life and property by keeping totally away from
persons in authority. In such circumstances, keeping contact with them
under*Taqiyyah* is allowed.This was the reason that the Holy Imams (as)
never tried to antagonize the rulers.

Maintaining relations with rulers is allowed when securing help for
a*Mu’min* or getting him relief from some hardship is achieved through
such contacts.

If the persons in authority are cruel but are amenable to mellow their
stance through good advice, then it is desirable to keep good rapport
with them.

It has been narrated in the traditions that the*Zakat* for holding
office of authority is providing help to the*Mu’min* brothers. As wealth
increases by virtue of taking out Zakat, similarly the authority and
respect of a person enhances if he helps*Mu’mins* through his authority
and position.

In another tradition the Prophet of Islam (S) has said: I would rather
fall from a hill and shatter into pieces than getting imposed on people
as the representative of a tyrannical ruler or condescending to set foot
in such a court. I might agree to go there only if a*Mu’min* finds
relief with my initiative in going there or someone gets absolved of
false and serious charges or his debts get cleared with my intercession.

The Prophet (S) added,’ remember! The least punishment for the abetters
of the tyrants is that they will have a curtain of fire in front of them
till the time when Allah Has taken the full account of their deeds.’

Further the Prophet (S) told to Ziyad bin Qalaad, ‘O Ziyaad! When you
are appointed to a position of authority by cruel rulers show kindness
to your*Mu’min* brothers. Perhaps that would become the cause of your
deliverence!’

It is authentically narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as),’ There is
no cruel and unjust ruler who is not having a*Mu’min* administrator on
his rolls. Allah administers justice to*Mu’min Shi’as* through him.and
saves them from the cruelty of the tyrant. But the reward for
that*Mu’min* on the day of Judgement would be the least. Of all
other*Mu’mins.* This, because of his proximity to the tyrant during his
living years!’

Luqman (as) used to visit kings and nobles to give them sermons and
advice. He used to take pity on them observing them surrounded by
umpteen calamities. He used to wonder over their craving for the worldly
riches. He always derived lessons from the aberrations in their
characters and behaviors. This way the Prophet (S) used to keep his
worldly desires in control.

### About Good Morals

###

It is authentically narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that the
Faith of such*Mu’mins* is perfect who have excellent morals.

The Prophet of Islam (S) says, “On the Day of Judgement nothing would be
rated better than the good behavior of the people.”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that in the eyes of Allah
no action of a person is more acceptable than making others one’s
followers through good behavior.

In another tradition it is mentioned that good moral behavior takes one
to the status of the person who had fasted all his life and offered
prayers late into the nights.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S), “The major cause of my
people achieving Heaven will be abstention from things termed taboo by
Allah and adopting piety and good behavior.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that good moral behavior melts away
sins like the rays of sunlight melt the snow.

He further said that doing good to fellowbeings and living amicably
amongst the people, keeping the dwellings inhabited enhances longevity.

In another tradition he said that good behavior is a Gift from Allah.
There are certain traits of behavior that are hereditary and there are
certain others that are cultivated by the person. The narrator asked,’
Ya Imam! Which is better of the two?’ The Imam (as) replied, ‘The traits
that are there in the person from birth that they are the fortunate ones
whom Allah has endowed with these good traits and he cannot act contrary
to these. One who adopts good traits by practice has to control his mind
and actions as a penance to gain the Pleasure of Allah! There is much
reward for such effort!’

In another tradition that Allah give reward equal to that of Jehad to
creatures who behave well with their fellow-beings.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that one day the Prophet
(S) was in the mosque when a slave-girl of one of the Ansar came and
caught hold of the lapel of his robe. The Prophet (S) stood up with the
thought that the girl wished to say something. But the girl remained
mum. She acted similarly three times. When the Prophet (S) rose a fourth
time, the slave-girl cut away a corner of his robe.

The companions were upset at the impertinence of the girl.and said,’ O
girl! Why did you trouble the Prophet (S)?’ She said,’ There is a sick
person at our place. My master has asked me to fetch a small piece of
the Prophet’s raiment that with it’s aura the ailing person would get
well. Whenever I tried to clip a piece of the raiment, the Prophet (S)
rose and I felt shy of doing the task. Alas! In the fourth attempt I
took courage in my hands and am going home with the clipping in my
hand!’

### Discourtesy

###

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that illtemper and bad
manners spoil faith and neutralize the good deeds of a person the way
vinegar spoils the honey.

The Imam (as) also said that the penitence and repentence of an
ill-mannered person is not accepted because while he is repentant of one
bad deed, he perpetuates another through his misbehavior!

The Imam (as) added that a*Mu’min* has always to be good mannered, soft
spoken and of amiable disposition. An infidel, to the contrary, is ill
tempered and harsh in his behavior.

Someone asked the Prophet (S), ‘Ya Imam! What is the guage of good
behavior?’ The Prophet replied,’ Keep your temperament soft that no one
feels hurt from your attitude. Adopt soft and sweet language that
pleases others. When you meet your*Mu’min* brothers, meet them with
warmth and pleasantness!’

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said,’ If you cannot please all the people in
the world with your wealth, then make them your friends with yuour good
behavior and temperament!’

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when the Prophet (S)
got the news of the death of Saad bin Maaz Ansari, he proceeded along
with the companions to join the funeral procession. He stood near Saad
while he was given the ritual final bath. When the bath was over, he
accompanied the bier without footwear and bare-head as is the custom of
the mourners. He sometimes carried the bier on his right shoulder and at
other on his left.

On reaching the graveside, the Prophet (S) himself descended into the
pit and with his own hands lowered Saad into the grave. Then he arranged
the bricks in the grave and put soil to fill the grave. While putting
soil into the grave the Prophet (S) said, ‘Saad’s mortal remains will
get lost in the soil but Allah likes that the deeds one does are good
and durable!’ When the Prophet (S) was giving the last touches to the
grave of Saad, the dead companion’s mother cried,’ O Saad! Greetings on
your achieving the Heaven!’

The Prophet said, ‘O mother of Saad! Keep quiet! At the moment Saad is
undergoing the pressures (*Fishaar)* of the grave!’ When the Prophet
returned from the grave- yard, the companions asked him,’ Ya Imam! The
way you have attended Saad’s funeral, we have not seen you do any time
in the past. You went bare-footed. You kept your head uncovered.’ He
replied,’ I saw the angels do likewise and I followed suit.The
companions asked,’ Sometimes you carried the bier on your right shoulder
and at others on the left?’ The Prophet replied,’ I was with Jibrael,
whichever side he went, I went the same way!’ The companions asked, ‘You
have yourself given bath to Saad, led the funeral prayer, lowered him
into the grave and in the end said that he was undergoing the*Fishaar*
of the grave!’ The Prophet replied, ‘Saad was undergoing the*Fishaar*
because he used to treat the people of his house and friends with
ill-temper.’

It is narrated that the Prophet (S) has said, ‘Two traits should not be
there in Muslims, the first is miserliness and the other bad temper.’
The Prophet said,’ O Abu Dharr! The sign of a*Mu’min* is that he is good
mannered. An ill- tempered person is never a friend of Allah! A good
mannered*Mu’min* is far better than the pious person who is rude to
other fellow beings.

The Prophet of Islam(S) has said,’ Good manners are the pleasant
behavior of a*Mu’min* towards others by way of warmth in looks and talk.
He offers help to a brother*Mu’min* in times of need and profers gifts
on him that please him!’ The Prophet (S) added, ‘O Abu Dharr! A good and
clean

word is a sort of charity. If the word has benefited a*Mu’min,* the one
who uttered it would get rewarded!’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘O Abu Dharr! Going to a mosque and sitting there
is futile unless one does these three things: Offers prayers, recites
the Qur’an and teaches or learns the things about religious rites.’’ O
abu Dharr! Allah is not limited to time and space! He doesn’t need any
house! Hypocrites are those who say that He is everything while
everything is the reflection of Hiss Intrinsic Traits (*Sifaat
al-Kamaliah)* . One can only imagine His Greatness looking at things
around oneself. The*Kaaba,* constructed out of bricks and mortar, which
has neither gold nor precious stones embedded in it, is the place of
prostration for the monarchs and the populace. The old and dilapidated
mosques resembling the Kaabah are so much revered that even the rugged
mats in them are better than the the tributes of Ceaser and Qaqaan. Of
all the benefits derived from the mosques, the one most valuable is that
they are the places for congregations of the Muslims. These are the
places where people t gather and exchange greetings and news about each
other.’

### The Benefits Of Congregational Prayer

###

It has appeared in the traditions that space should not be left vacant
in the rows of the congregational prayers; it is said that the Satan
occupies such vacant positions.

There is another version that one should not stand in prayer at a
distance from the congregation because, if a sheep grazes at some
distance from the flock, there will be the likelihood of the wolf
devouring it.

It is authentically narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S),’ On the land
there are rows of my followers like there are rows of the angels in the
Firmament.’ Then he (S) added, ‘One genuflection (*Rakat* ) in
congregation is equivalent to the 24, each of which genuflection is
superior in the eyes of Allah to continuous prayer offered over a period
of forty years. The day when Allah will gather all the creatures from
the Day of Creation to the end, He will protect from the hardships of
the Day of Reckoning one who has taken even a step to go and join the
Congregational Prayer. To such a person Allah will provide a place in
the Heaven.

In another tradition the Prophet (S) says, ‘Whoever offers the*Fajr*
(morning) prayer in congregation and then recites the supplications till
the sunrise, Allah will award him seventy echelons in the Heaven. Every
echelon will be equal to the distance traversed by a fast steed in
seventy years. One who offers the*Zuhr* prayer in congregation,, Allah
will grant him fifty echelons in the Garden of Eden. The distance of
each echelon will be equal to the distance traveled by a fast horse in a
period of fifty years. One who offers the*Asr* prayer in congregation,
his reward will be equal to freeing eight thousand slaves from the
progeny of Prophet Ismail (as). A person who prays*Maghrib* in
congregation, on his name will be entered reward equal to performing a
Haj and Umrah. One who prays*Isha* in congregation, his reward will be
equal to the prayers of*Lailat al Qadr.* ’

It is narrated that the Prophet of Allah (S) told to his companions,’ Do
you wish to be informed of an act that can obliterate the effects of
your sins and the virtues enhance in the consideration of Allah?’ They
all said in

unison, ‘Ya Imam! Please do tell!’ The Prophet (S) said,’ Perform
ablution thoroughly, unmindful of coolness of weather or water, go for
the prayer in the mosque and tarry there for the next prayer. One who
goes to the mosque after doing the ablutions, prays in congregation and
awaits arrival of more people there for the next congregation, the
angels pray for him, “O Allah! Forgive him! Be kind on him and shower
Your Blessings on him!”

In another tradition it is mentioned, ‘When a person leads a
congregation, with the consent of the gathering, he should maintain
moderation during the prayer. He should recite verses keeping in mind
the physical status of the group joining the prayer. Allah willl reward
him equal to the combined reward for the congregation and there will be
no reduction in their rewards too.’ And said, ‘As many steps as a person
takes to go and join a congregation in a mosque, seventy thousand
virtues will be added to his record for every step taken. He will be
raised seventy stages in his status.If a person dies while going for a
congregation, Allah will appoint seventy thousand angels to visit him in
the grave and remain with him and pray for him till he is raised from
there.

It is said in another tradition, ‘A person who hears the*Adhaan* and
comes out of the mosque for no valid reason, is a hypocrite.

It is authentically narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that one
must keep a good opinion about a person who prays in congregation five
times a day. One should accept the witness of such a person.’

In another tradition the Prophet of Islam (S) said, ‘One who offers
the*Fajr and Isha* prayers in congregation, will remain in Allah’s Care.
If someone inflicts hardship on such a person, it will be like
inflicting hardship on Allah. One who breaks a promise given to such a
person, it will be like making a promise to Allah and breaking it.’

One congregational prayer is equivalent to twentyfive prayers offered
individually.

Seek sustenance from Allah from the time of commencement of*Fajr* till
sunrise. Its effect is more pronounced than traveling in search of
trade.

O Abu Dharr! More knowledge is definitely superior tnan more prayer
without knowledge. Without piety even if you pray to the extent that
your back hunches with the exertion, even then it will not benefit you
if there is no piety in your effort. Those who abstained from taboo
things, adopted piety and abstained from worldly wishes, are certainly
Allah’s friends and His select beings!

### Piety and Abstinence

###

There are many stages of piety and abstinence.

The first stage is avoidance of disbelief and hypocricy. These acts will
be the cause for one burning in the Hellfire.One who doesn’t overcome
disbelief and hypocricy, cannot go any further on the path of piety. The
prayer and supplication of such persons willl be futile.

The second stage of piety is abstinence from all taboo things.

The third stage of piety is avoiding things that are not taboo but
should better be avoided. These are termed the*makroohat.* A pious
person who has reached the third stage will not be attracted to anything
other than riveting

his attention on the Creator, Allah. The first two stages of piety are
the formative stages of a person perfect in piety.

The more a person excels in these two stages, the more acceptable he
becomes in the consideration of the Creator. His acts reflect nearness
to Allah, love for Him, understanding of the Creator and exemplary
behaviour with fellow- creatures. It is said in the Holy
Qur’an,*“Attaqullaha haqqa tuqatehi’.* While doing commentary on this
verse, Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “True piety is that men obey
Allah and don’t commit sins. They remember Allah every moment of their
lives and don’t ever forget Him! They thank him profusely for His
Bounties and abstain from ungratefulness to Him!

Someone asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as), “Ya Imam! Which is the best of
acts?” He said, “Piety and abstinence!”

It is narrated fom Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “Little action with piety
is better than excessive and unpious deeds.”

The Imam (as) also said, “Avoid things that are termed taboo by Allah!
Strive in the way of prayer and obedience! Remember, effort at prayer
without avoiding the taboo is always futile!”

Omer bin Sayeed asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) to give him some advice.
The Imam (as) said, “Abstain from taboo acts! Adopt piety. Abstain from
everything that Allah forbids you to do! Strive in prayer and
Rememberance of Allah. Be sure that any effort at piety is futile if the
taboo are not avoided!”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that protecting oneself
from*Haram* , which is termed*wara,* is binding on Muslims. There is no
reward for good deeds in the court of Allah without*wara.*

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that among all the
prayers,*wara* is the most difficult.*Wara* means saving oneself from
doing haram acts.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, Only those are counted my companions who
are more pious and pray to Allah with hope for Rewards from Him.

It is narrated in a tradition that a person should be termed a*Mu’min*
who fulfils our commandments. He will have the desire in his heart to
follow our instructions. One very important requirement to be met by
such a person is that he is pious and abstinent. He should make piety
his adornment that he craves for Allah’s Bounties and with*wara* he
saves himself from the guiles of our enemies. He avoids doubtful things,
offers more prayer and dutifully observes the mandatory commandments.

The most pious is one who abstains from the taboo.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that “It is necessary for Muslims to
practice*Wara* by abstaining from taboo and suspicious acts.*Wara* is a
component of the Faith that we uphold and that is the basis of our
prayer to Allah. We expect the same from our friends and Shi’as.
Therefore, don’t commit Haram acts and put us to the trouble of
interceding on your behalf on the Day of Judgement! Intercession in such
a situation will be very difficult!”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “Allah has not given respectability
to anyone who lives in ignorance and has never belittled anyone for his
simplicity and affability.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said: A person who has three traits will
be awarded*Hur al-’Ayn* in the Heaven:

*He controls his anger gets wounded fighting in the way of Allah and
keeps calm.*

Despite opportunities presenting themselves for making illegitimate
(*Haram)* earnings, he abstains from it for the fear of Allah.

Authentic sources narrate from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that, “Allah sent a
revelation to one of His Prophets (as) that’ when you stir out tomorrow
morning, you must eat the first thing that comes in your view!.
Secondly, whatever you see, hide it away. Thirdly, whatever presents
itself to you, accept it. Fourthly, Whatever comes before you, don’t
d’Isappoint it! Fifthly, run away from the thing.’ At dawn the Prophet
stirred out. The first thing that met his eyes was a mountain. He
wondered that Allah has ordered him to eat the first thing that he saw.
He again thought that if he had no ability to do the thing, Allah would
not have ordered him to do it.

With this thought he went nearer the mountain to eat it. The nearer he
went, the smaller the mountain became. When he touched the mountain, it
was the size of a morsel. The Prophet ate it and found it very
delicious. The Prophet went a little further and noticed a tray made of
gold. Since he was under instructions to hide it, the Prophet dug a
small pit and buried the tray in the ground. He proceeded a little
further.

When he turned back, he noticed the golden tray jutting out a little
from the ground. He thought, I have fulfilled Allah’s order about the
tray and that he had no more concern about it. Travelling a little
further, the Prophet found a bird flying. He also found a hawk hot in
pursuit of the bird. The bird sought the Prophet’s protection from the
hawk. The Prophet therefore opened his sleeve for the bird to take
refuge there. The hawk approached the Prophet and complained that it was
trying to hunt the bird for quite sometime and that now he was depriving
it of its food. The Prophet was under instructions not to disappoint
anyone. Therefore he carved a portion of the flesh from his own loin and
gave to the hawk.

The Prophet went a little further and noticed a putrifying animal
carcass. Vermin were crawling out of the carcass. He was under
instructions to run away from it. Therefore the Prophet moved away from
there and proceeded towards his home. In the night he dreamed that Allah
was saying,’ O my Prophet! You have done whatever I had instructed you
to do! But you didn’t realize what these things were in reality?’ The
Prophet said, ‘Yes! I don’t know.’ Allah replied, ‘O my Prophet! The
mountain that you saw was the human trait of anger. When a person gets
angry, he goes out of control and forgets himself. But, if he controls
his anger, then the result will be like the delicious morsel that you
consumed! The golden tray was an example of good deeds. However much you
hide them, Allah exposes them to view that you get respect in this world
and Reward in the Hereafter. The example of the bird and the hawk is
that when someone seeks help from you, don’t

d’Is appoint him. The example of the putrifying carcass is like
back-biting and carrying of tales which must be avoided.’”

### The Affability of The Imams (as)

###

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) says that the Prophet used his own cloak as his
bedding and the skin of sheep filled with the bark of datepalm as the
pillow while sleeping. One night the cloak was folded double to make the
bed more comfortable. At this the Prophet (S) said, ‘Because of sleeping
on a softer bed I couldn’t rise early in the morning and was delayed for
the prayer. In future don’t fold the cloak while making my bed!’

It is not a hidden fact that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) faced untold
hardships at the hands of the Prophet’s companions and of his own
companions. But, despite the capability and authority he bore all this
ungrudgingly. A case in point is the Battle of the Camel (*Jang
al-Jaml).* In this battle his favorite companions were martyred. But
after victory in the battle Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) pardoned the
litigants. He had the complete authority to punish the combatants. He
sent Um-ul-Mu’mineen Ayesha with due respect to Medina. He sent a
retinue of seventy women to accompany her. He released Marvan bin Hakm
despite all his impertinence. Abdallah bin Zubair was taken prisoner and
released. He was a sworn enemy of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and had
behaved very badly with the Imam.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) gave similar treatment to the*Khawarij of
Nehrwan.* When the accursed Ibn al-Muljim mortally wounded
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), he didn’t order immediate execution of the
culprit. He instructed Imam Hasan (as) not to inflict more than one blow
of the sword to the accused. He also asked him not to sever the ears and
the nose of Ibn al-Muljim, as was the custom of dealing with such
criminals those days. He told that he should be provided with the same
food that the Imam partook of. During the time of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) there were thousands of*Khawarij* who openly used to accuse him of
infidelity and criticized him in several ways. But the Imam (as) forgave
them and never took them to task.

It is narrated that one day Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) noticed a woman
carrying a canister full of water on her shoulder. He took the canister
from her and told her that he would help her carry it to her home. On
the way the Imam (as) inquired about her affairs. The woman said, “My
husband was deputed by Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) to the field of battle
where he was martyred. Now I am left with my orphaned children. I am
left with no means of maintaining them. I do small tasks with the
neighbors and try to eke a living from what little I earn.”

The Imam (as) left the canister at the woman’s house and returned home.
The whole night he was worrying about her and the orphans. At dawn he
took a sack full of flour, dates, meat and other eatables and headed for
the woman’s house. The companions said, “Ya Imam! WE shall carry the
burden!” The Imam (as) said, “You can certainly carry the burden here.
But who will carry my burden on the Day of Reckoning?” Carrying the
sack, the Imam (as) knocked at the door of the woman. The woman opened
the door and asked, “Who are you, please?”

The Imam (as) said, “I am the person who helped you carry your water
canister yesterday! Now I have fetched some provisions for your
children!” The woman said, “May Allah give you Reward for your kindness
and may Allah also Judge between me and ‘Ali (as)” The Imam said, “To
earn a little more reward, I wish to dough some flour and make bread for
your children. Either you take care of the children in that time or I
shall tend the children and you bake the bread!” The woman said, “I can
make better bread. If you take care of my children, I shall do that
comfortably!”

Therefore the woman got busy with her work and the Imam (as) cooked some
meat and also looked after the kids by giving them some dates to eat.
When the meat was done, he fed small morsels to the children and said,
“O kids! Forgive ‘Ali for being the cause of depriving you of the love
of your father!” When the dough was done, the woman asked, “Kind sir!
Please light the oven that the dough is ready.” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) started warming the oven when a woman from the neighborhood
visited. This woman knew Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) She told to the
lady of the house, “What has happened to you?! You are asking the
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) do these small tasks for you!” Hearing this, the
woman ran and fell at the feet of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and said,
“Ya Amir’ul-Mu’mineen! With what face can I go infront of Allah! Please
forgive me!” The Imam said, “To the contrary, I am ashamed! With what
face I can approach Allah for the hardship I have caused to you and your
children!”

It is narrated that one day Muhammad bin Hanafia (r.a.) and Imam Hasan
(as) had some difference of opinion. Muhammad bin Hanafia(r.a.) wrote a
letter to Imam Hasan (as), “Brother! Your and my father, is
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). But your mother is Lady Fatima Zahra (as),
the daughter of the Prophet (S). If the entire world turns to gold and
comes in the possession of my mother, even then she cannot claim
equality with Lady Fatima Zahra (as). As soon as you read this letter,
please come to me and make up the difference we have between us! I am
asking you this because you are much higher than me in the status;
greetings!” When Imam Hasan (as) received the letter, he immediately
went to Muhammad bin Hanafia(r.a.) and reconciled the difference with
him. They never again had any differences between them.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said: Three things elevate a person: performing
ablution in cold weather, waiting in the mosque for the next
congregation after joining one congregation, participating in every
congregational prayer.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “I shall ask ‘Ali (as) to torch every
person’s house who missed a congregational prayer without any reason
whatsoever!”

The Prophet (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! Adopt piety that no good deed is as
useful as being pious.” Abu Dharr asked, “O Prophet (S)! What is piety?”
The prophet (S) replied, “A person does good deeds, feeds the hungry,
take care of the neighbor. But on the other hand commits sins. Piety is
doing all the good deeds and not commiting sins!”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said, “The most virtuous person is one who
forgives the tyranny of the tyrant, he does good to a person who has
harmed him, he is generous to one who caused him loss!” Then the Prophet
(S)

added, “*Muttaqi (pious)* is one who bears ill-treatment with calm and
controls his anger in obedience to Allah! He is steadfast in Jehad!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) never illtreated his worst enemies. He always
forgave them. One person came from the Prophet (S)’s rear and forcefully
pulled his shawl. This sudden jolt caused a sprain in the neck of the
Prophet (S).He (S) turned back and asked, “What is the matter?” The man
said, “Give me some help!” The Prophet (S) immediately fulfilled his
want.

After the conquest of Mecca the infidels were certain that the Prophet
(S) would wreak revenge against them. To the contrary the Prophet (S)
pardoned all of them and even gave help to many of them.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) was asked, “Who is the most powerful?” The Imam
replied, “On who is the most affable and gentle!” Then he (as) was
asked, “Who is the most affable?” The Imam replied, “One who can control
his anger the best!”

There was no limit of affability and gentleness of the Last of the
Prophets (S). He could pardon the cruel woman who chewed the liver of
his martyred and adorable uncle, Hamza(r.a.). The Prophet (S) also gave
the house of his mortal enemy the status of the place of amnesty in the
city of Mecca. From the day of his proclamation of Prophethood till his
death, the Prophet (S) faced untold hardships with great equanimity. The
Intensity of these hardships was such that he had himself observed that
no Prophets of the yore had faced such opposition in their times. But he
(S) faced the hardships without any complaints.

Similar was the attitude of his Vicegerent, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as).
The hardships that he faced after the departure of the Prophet (S) were
not bearable for any lesser mortal. He proved to the world that ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (as) was not only the most chivalrous but had the greatest
quality of patience and equanimity in adversity. It was his ken that he
bore patiently the hardships heaped on the beloved daughter of the
Prophet (S). In the Battle of Jaml Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) achieved
victory over his mortal enemies and magnanimously pardoned them. It was
his greatness that he sent the vanquished lady to Medina in the care of
seventy armed female guards. When his assassin was arrested,
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) ordered cool beverage to be served to him to
set his wracked nerves at rest.

An authentic source quotes that one day Muawiya was holding court. Zarar
bin Hamza was present there. Muawiya asked him to recount the qualities
of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). Zarar said, “By Allah! ‘Ali (as) was
extremely thoughtful and firm in the way of Allah! Whatever he said,
used to be the truth! Whatever he ordered, always served the path of
justice! From all his sides the sea of Allah’s Knowledge used to flow!
His thoughts used to be full of learning. His eyes used to be wet in the
love of Allah and supplication to the Creator! He always wore coarse
cloth and didn’t relish delicious food. Amongst us, he used to be one of
us! When we approached him, he would gently ask us to sit near him. But
because of his indescribable aura, we were not able to speak to him!

When he smiled, his teeth shone like the pearls. He respected the
persons with learning and showed love to the poor and needy. By Allah! I
have seen

him supplicate to Allah with such bathos as one bitten by a snake or a
scorpion cries! I have heard that mostly he used to say during his
supplications the following words,’ o world! Don’t attract me! Go and
mislead someone else! You cannot decoy me! I have divorced you thrice! O
world! Your life is very short! You can’t be faithful to anyone! It is
futile to crave for you!’” Zarar had reached in his narrative up to this
point when tears started flowing from Muawiya’s eyes and all those
present in the court too started crying.

Abu Dharr Ghiffari narrates that Ja’far bin Abi Talib(r.a.) bought a
slave-girl from Abyssinia for four hundred Dirhams and presented to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as). But Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), to please Lady
Fatima Zahra (as), freed the slave-girl and gave away four hundred
Dirhams in charity. At this juncture a Revelation came to the Prophet
(S), “Of Prophet (S)! Tell ‘Ali (as) that for the act of releasing the
slave-girl we have gifted to him the Heaven and for giving four hundred
Dirhams in charity we have given him the charge of the Hell. Whosoever
‘Ali (as) wants to send to the Heaven, he has the right to do!
Similarly, whoever he decides to consign to the Hell, he can do it!” Abu
Dharr continued, “From that day Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) used to say that
he was the*Qaseem al-Naar wa Jannat* , the Distributor of the Hell and
the Heaven.

Similarly, the patience and forbearance that Lady Fatim (as) manifested
after the departure of her father is exemplary. Books of history are
full with the description of her forbearance. The breaking of the door
of her house and the martyrdom of Mohsin through miscarriage was no less
a calamity!

Imam Husayn (as) has set an example for the annals of human history by
offering the supreme sacrifice in the cause of Allah.He saw his friends,
relatives, brothers, nephews, sons getting martyred one after the other
in the course of one day! On his own body there were innumerable wounds
inflicted by spears, arrows and swords by the inhuman enemy! Under the
dagger of the assassin the Imam (as) offered a prayer of thianks to his
Creator, Allah!

### The Affability of Imam Husayn (as)

###

It is narrated from Imam ‘Ali bin al Husayn (as) that, “When I proceeded
along with my revered father from Medina towards Kerbala, I noticed that
he used to talk a lot about Prophet Yahya (as) wherever he halted or
departed. One day he said,’ The world in the eyes of Allah is such a
futile thing that the severed head of the prophet Yahya (as) was given
to a fornicating woman of Bani Israel as a gift!’ The affability of the
Imam (as) was of such intensity that although his entire entourage was
martyred in his presence and, despite the fact that all the angels,
jinns and wild beasts were at his beck and call, he never for once
thought of wreaking revenge on his enemies! Nor did he pray to Allah
cursing the enemy!

According to a narration, three hundred and sixty deep wounds were found
on his martyred body. Another narration says that there were one hundred
and eighty wounds inflicted with spears, and four thousand wounds from
the arrows that were literally rained on his body! Even then the Imam
didn’t raise his hands to pray for the punishment of his cruel
tormenters! He continued to make efforts to lead them to the path of
righteousness till his

last breath! With Allah’s strength and the valor inherited from Haidar
al-Karar, the Imam (as) dispatched many an infidel to Hell with his
swordsmanship on that fateful day! In some narratives it is said that he
killed one thousand nine hundred and fifty wretches! The number wounded
by him is in addition to this number!”

It is narrated that whenever Imam Husayn (as) sat in a dark place in the
night, his forehead and neck used to radiate so much that people used to
notice his presence there.

### The Affability of Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) and Others

###

It is narrated that one day a crystal bowl slipped out of the hands of a
slave girl of Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) and shattered into pieces. The
girl was shaking with fear. The Imam said, “Why are you so much afraid?
Go, I have freed you in the name of Allah!”

One day a person used undesirable language against Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin
(as). When he ignored the matter, the person reminded the Imam that he
was the subject of the outburst. The Imam said, “I have forgiven you and
overlook your mistake!”

It is narrated that Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin had freed one of his slaves and
gave a small farm in his charge. One day the Imam (as) went to inspect
the farm and found to his dismay that the man, owing to his neglect, had
spoilt the crop. The Imam was upset and hit the person once with a whip
as a measure of reprimand. The Imam was very unhappy over what he had
done in anger. He went home and called the person. When the man reached
there, he found the Imam (as) without his shirt and the whip in his
hand. The man was scared that more punishment was on its way.

The Imam picked up the whip and gave to the man saying, “Today I have
committed an excess against you! The way I whipped you, the same way you
should whip me back!” The slave said, “O Master! I was thinking that you
have called me to give me more punishment for my carelessness! Whatever
punishment you mete out to me is justified!” The Imam again insisted
that the slave should whip him back. The slave said, “May Allah protect
me! I have forgiven you my*Qasas* !” When the Imam saw that the person
was not budging an iota from his resolve, he told him, “All right! As a
compensation I give you the ownership of the farm on which you are
working!”

It is narrated that one day a few persons were invited for a meal at the
place of Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as). The slave, who was detailed to serve
the fare, was carrying a hot victual to the table. The tray in which the
slave was carrying the hot dish slipped off his hands and fell on the
Imam’s little baby who was crawling in the room. The burn was so severe
that the child instantly expired. The slave was mortified with fear. The
Imam said, “Don’t be afraid! You have not done anything intentionally!
Go, I have freed you!” Then the Imam partook the meal with his guests.
After the guests left, the Imam (as) attended to the last rites of the
dead child.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Allah sent a
Revelation to the Prophet (S) that when He didn’t give to a*Mu’min*
anything that he wished for, there is always his best interest in the
denial. The person must remain contented with what he has received. He
should be equanimous in

hardships. Thank Allah for His bounties.that he gets counted amongst the
truthful!

In another tradition the Imam (as) narrates that whenever something
happened, the Prophet (S) never said that it would be better if the
incident happened in a different way! The Prophet would say, “A person
who talked in this manner is never a*Mu’min* because this way he would
be questioning the Will of Allah. A person who resigns himself to the
will of Allah, I witness that his prayers will definitely be answewred!”

It is narrated that someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “Ya Imam!
What is the way of recognizing a true*Mu’min* ?” The Imam (as) said,
“From the way he submits to Allah’s will; whether in difficulty or in
ease!”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that Allah says, “O sons of
Adam! Obey me and don’t remind Me of things that are of advantage to
you! I know them better than you do!”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “Affluence and
respectability are in circulation! Wherever they find affability, they
settle down and make a place for themselves!”

The Imam (as) said at another place that Allah sent a Revelation to the
Prophet Dawood (as), “O Dawood! When a person trusts me, is righteous,
and turns his face from the populace, despite all the hurdles from the
earth and the sky, I shall create the way of freedom for him. When a
creature trusts my other creatures, I know the condition of his heart. I
shall extinguish his means in the sky and obliterate his passages on the
earth. Then I shall not care in which wilderness he gets killed!”

The Imam said in another tradition: When a person pays attention to
tasks that please Allah, Allah will get attracted towards him and
provide to him the things he likes to have. Whoever seeks help from
Allah to abstain from sins, Allah will help him. One who receives the
attention of Allah, never worries whatever calamities confront him!
Because of his piety and abstention he is in a group of people that is
in the care of Allah. Therefore, Allah says,

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي مَقَامٍ أَمِينٍ﴾
</p>

****Doubtless, the pious are in the place of peace!* (44:51)***

It is narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as), “Instead of craving for the
thing you wish to have, think of Prophet Musa (as) who saw the light and
went in search of fire from his spouse and became the*Kaleem* and
achieved Prophethood! The queen of Sheba, Bilqis, went on an outing and
adopted Islam. The magicians in Pharoh’s court came there to give him
respect and themselves came to get the respectability of True Faith!”

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that Prophet Musa bin
Imran (as) addressed Allah, “O Lord! You send me out and leave behind my
infant sons!” Allah replied, “O Musa! Are you not satisfied that I am
their guardian and provider of sustenance!”

It is authentically narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) that Luqman
(as) advised his son, “O son! A person who doesn’t trust Allah in search
of sustenance, he must pity himself. He should think that Allah has
created him and gave him sustenance in three situations where there is
no provider other

than Allah. Therefore, in the fourth stage, none other than Him will
provide the livelihood!”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! If you wish to become the
strongest person, then adopt patience, forbearance and affability!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A*Mu’min* is one who is contented both
in plenty and in penury!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said that man should thank Allah in all
circumstances because His Bounties ar unaccountable.

Luqman (as) advised his son, “O son! There are four stages of the human
life. Three stages are such that a person has none to help him. Allah
Himself provides the person the sustenance during these stages. He saves
the person from the heat and the cold in the mother’s womb. In the
second stage when the person emerges from the mother’s womb, then Allah
arranges the streams of milk for him. Then Allah creates the love of the
child in the hearts of the parents that they strive hard to maintain
him. When the same person grows into a full-fledged man, why should he
have any doubts Allah’s kindness! He should now believe that Allah
helped him when he was totally dependent and even at present He is more
kind and loving than his own parents!”

### Trusting On Allah

###

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Satan claims that all
the people are in his control excepting five types whom he cannot
influence:

Those who honestly trust in Allah for their tasks.

Those who are busy supplicating to Allah day and night.

The*Mu’mins,* who desire for other*Mu’mins* what they wish for
themselves.

Those who donot wail and cry in times of difficulty.

Those who remain contented with whatever they earn and don’t complain of
scarcities.

It is narrated by an authentic source from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that Imam
Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) inquired about a companion who was not present at
his meeting.The companions said, ‘Ya Imam! He is unwell!’ Therefore, the
Imam went to the house of the person to inquire about his health. When
he saw him, the Imam (as) noticed that the person was about to expire.
The Imam sat near his head and said, ‘Have faith in Allah!’ The man
replied, ‘I have strong faith in Allah, but I am extremely worried about
my sons. They are the reason for my ailment!’ The Imam (as) said,’ The
One whom you ask to forgive your sins and enhance your virtues, depend
on Him in the matter of your sons too!

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said,’ On the Night of Meraj, while I was
passing through the*Sidrat al Muntaha* and looked at its branches and
leaves, I noticed that from some leaves udders were hanging and milk was
oozing from them. Honey dripped from some leaves and oil from some
others. From certain other leaves flour and fruits of different types
were falling.to the ground. From some branches rich raiments were
hanging. I thought from where all these things are coming. At that time
Jibrael was not with me that I could ask him for an explation for these
things. I was, at that time, beyond the jurisdiction where Jibrael was
permitted to go!. Then Allah

communicated to me, ‘O Muhammad (S)! I have grown these things at the
elevated place with the purpose of providing sustenance to your
children! Tell the fathers of the sons that they should not be
disheartened at their penury. As I have given birth to them, so shall I
provide them their sustenance!

The Prophet of Allah (S) has narrated that Allah has said, “One who has
no faith in My Will and doesn’t believe in what I have ordained, he
should look for some other sustainer! Whatever is written in your fate
in the world, shall come to you however weak you might be! Whatever
hardship is ordained for you, you shall have to face it even if you are
the strongest person in the world. If you give up hope of getting back
whatever you have lost, you will remain happy thereafter.’ One who is
contented with whatever sustenance Allah has provided, he will always be
happy.”

Someone asked Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) about Contentment with Allah’s Wish
(*Tawakkal ba khuda)* , The Imam (as) replied, “*Tawakkal* means the
conviction that when Allah is with us, there is no reason to be afraid
of anything else! We remain contented in all circumstances—whether there
are comforts of life available to us or we are faced with hardships!
Depending on others than Allah even for small things is termed*Shirk
al-khafi* or minor hypicricy!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said: Shifting a ring from one finger to
another as a remembrancer for some task to be done too is
a*Shirk-Khafi.* This is so because the person depends on the finger to
keep him reminded of his task.

It is authentically narrated that the Prophet of Islam (S) asked Jibrael
(as) the meaning of*Reliance upon Almighty.* Jibrael (as) said, “This
means that men should know that they don’t have absolute control over
the profit or loss in their matters. They can neither give anything nor
can they stop anything from changing hands. Therefore, they should stop
having expectations about things happening to them. One who does this,
will do everything depending on Allah’s Will. He will not expect
anything from anybody else. He will be afraid of none else than Allah.
Such a person will never envy others for their possessions. With a
thankful heart he will receive whatever he gets from Allah. He will have
the conviction that whatever Allah does for him, is for his best!”

Someone asked Bahlool about his condition. Bahlool replied, “Ask him
about his condition, on whose orders the universe is rotating! On His
orders the earth will stand still and whatever is happening on the earth
and the firmament is on His express orders!” Peope said that Bahlool has
turned an infidel. Bahlool said, “Listen! The day when I acquired
senses, I have entrusted my will to the Creator! I consider His will as
mine! Therefore whatever He is doing with His Wish, it is my wish too!
But everything that happens is only with His Wish! Whatever Allah has
written in a person’s fate, he will certainly get it! However much a
person runs away from the sustenance destined for him, he will get it!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “In the view of Allah, forbearance
is like the head of a person and the faith is like his body. If there is
no forbearance (*Sabr)* in a person, then the faith will remain as a
lifeless body!”

### Abiding By Allah’s Will

###

It is authentically narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that
whosoever bears with equanimity the hardships and travails of the world
will certainly go to the Heaven. One who pursues his carnal desire s in
the world, will end up in the Hell

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq that when a*Mu’min* is put into
the grave, then his prayers (*namaz)* would be on his right, the*Zakat*
that he distributed on his left, the good that he had done for his
parents and relations near his head and his forbearance on his side. The
two angels,*Munkir and Nakeer,* will visit the grave to question the
person at this juncture. At this point forbearance addresses its
companions*namaz, Zakat and good deeds thus, ’* Now is the time to come
to the help of our master! If you cannot do it, I shall help him!’

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S), “A time will come when
power and pelf will be impossible to achieve without blood-shed.
Affluence will not be possible without robbing others and practicing
parsimony. Mutual friendship among people will not develop except by
abandoning the faith and following the dictates of vile desires. Those
of you who remain contented with penury in those times despite having
the means of getting rich through foul means, who are troubled by others
for following the right path. Allah will Award to such persons reward of
fifty truthful ones who bore witness on my behalf!”

### Types of Forbearance

###

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam that there are three types of
forbearance:

Forbearance on the toil undergone in Allah’s obedience: One who
exercises forbearance in obedience to Allah, Allah will award him six
hundred echelons. The distance between two consecutive echelons will be
equal to distance between the ends of the earth and the sky.

Forbearance in avoidance of commiting sins: One who exercises
forbearance in avoiding sins, Allah will award him nine hundred echelons
and the distance between two consecuive echelons will be equal to the
distance between the earth and the Firmament.

Forbearance in bearing hardships and calamities: One who bears hardships
Allah will award three hundred echelons. The distance between two
echelons will be equal to the distance between the earth and the sky.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when a*Mu’min* is
afflicted with some difficulty and bears it with equanimity, Allah will
give him reward equal to that earmarked for a thousand martyrs.

It is authentically narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S) that on the
Day of Judgement when Allah will gather all the creatures at one place,
then a herald would announce on His behalf. Where are those persons who
exercised patience and forbearance! One group of people will come
forward. The angels will welcome them and ask them, “In what
circumstance did you exercise forbearance?” They will reply, “We
exercised forbearance in bearing the hardships in praying to Allah, we
bore hardship in avoiding sins!” Then a herald will announce on behalf
of Allah, “These creatures are thruthful! Let them enter the Heaven in
large numbers!”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as) had lot of affection for his slave Qanbar (r.a.). When
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) went out, Qanbar (r.a.) used to carry a
sword in his hand as a measure of protection for his master. One moonlit
night Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) emerged from his residence. On the way
he noticed that Qanbar (r.a.), as usual, was following him. He asked,
“Qanbar! Why have you come?” Qanbar (r.a.) said, “I have come, lest
someone harm you!” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) asked him, “Do you intend
to protect me from the creatures of the other world or from those on the
earth?” Qanbar said, “I can protect you from the creatures that are on
the earth!” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali said, “Unless Allah wills, none on
this earth can harm me. Go back home in peace!” Qanbar (r.a.) went back
home as ordered by his master.

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said, “*Iman* (Faith) is one stage more superior
than*Islam* (bearing witness to Allah and His Prophet).*Taqwa* (piety)
is one stage superior to*Iman.* For the progeny of Adam, Allah has not
gifted anything more valuable than*Yaqeen* (firm belief).” Someone
asked, “What is*Yaqeen* or firm belief?” The Imam (as) said, “Dependence
on Allah, implicitly obeying Him, exercising forbearance on what He has
Willed for the person and entrusting everything to Allah!”

The tradition narrated by Abu Dharr (r.a.), “Four traits are found only
in*Mu’mins* . 1. Quietness: This is the first form of prayer to Allah.
2. Politeness (*Tawazoh* ); that is, humility in front of Allah or
showing politeness to the creatures of Allah for His sake! 3. In all
circumstances remembering and talking about Allah. 4. Bearing with
equanimity the paucity of means.

O Abu Dharr! Strive for good deeds and virtuous acts, even if you fail
to achieve them! This is better than getting your name liasted amongst
those who are negligent.

O Abu Dharr! One who keeps control over what lies between the loins and
what lies between the jaws from*haram (* illegitimate) acts, will enter
the Heaven.

Abu Dharr asked, “Ya Imam! Do we have to account for what we utter from
our tongues?” He (as) replied: O Abu Dharr! What else will take people
to the Hell except the words uttered by them through their tongues! You
will be safe till you open your mouth! If you uttered a good thing, you
will be rewarded. To the contrary, if you uttered something foul, the
record for your punishment will be updated!

O Abu Dharr! When a person speaks in a meeting and makes them laugh, he
will be taken to a stage in the Hell the distance of which will be equal
to the distance between the earth and the sky.

O Abu Dharr! Death and the Hell is for one who talks falsehoods! For him
who talks to make others laugh is the Hell. One who kept quiet got his
deliverence! Whenever you talk, you must tell the truth. Don’t utter
falsehoods from your mouth! Abu Dharr asked, “What is the penitence for
the person who has been lying purposefully?” He (as) replied: Repenting
over the past untruthfulness and praying five times regularly. This will
wash away his sins. A truthful person never misses his mandatory prayers
and

always abstains from taboo acts. A person, during his prayers, tells ten
times to Allah. ‘We pray to You and seek only Your succor

### Lies Condemned

###

It is evident from innumerable traditions that a lie, whether told in
jest or in seriousness, is taboo act. But in certain special
circusstances telling the bare truth is not good. Similarly there are
circumstances when one must perforce uphold a lie. For example, telling
a truth is*haram* when there is the likelihood of harming a*Mu’min*
through its utterence. Conversely, if one has to tell a lie to save the
life of a*Mu’min,* he must do it. Suppose a*Mu’min* has kept with
someone an amount in trust. If a tyrant claims that amount from the
person who has been entrusted the safekeeping, then the person can go to
the extreme extent of making a false oath that the money is not with
him.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when a person speaks
the truth, his acts too will be pure and popular.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) was once sitting under a dilapidated, leaning
wall giving a sermon. One person said, “The wall near which you are
seated is dilapidated. It might collapse.” The Imam (as) replied, “Death
is the keeper!” When the Imam (as) rose and moved from there, the wall
collapsed.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “The first to bear witness of the
truthful person will be Allah! Then He will bear witness that what He
says is always the truth!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) says: The adornment of words is the truth. Tell
the truth. The truthful persons are remembered by Allah with the
sobriquet of*As-Sadiqeen!* He is always with the truthful. Save
yourselves from falsehood. Falsehood takes one away from the Faith. The
truthful is at the threshold of deliverence. The one who lies will be in
the abyss of shame and destruction.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that Allah has provided
locks for sins and hypocricy is their key. Telling lies is worst than
consuming alcohols.

Then the Imam (as) said, “Telling lies is tantamount to spoiling one’s
faith!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that telling lies about Allah and his
Prophet (S) is a major sin.

It is narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that the first to bear
witness about a lier will be Allah. Then will follow the witness of the
two angels who keep a record of the words and deeds of every person. In
the end the person himself will confess to his lying.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Prophet ‘Isa (as)
said, “The face of a liar will lose its radiance and good looks!”

### Contentment and Opulence

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! Adopt contentment that you
raise yourself in the consideration of Allah!” Abu Dharr asked, “Ya
Imam! What is*Ghina* or contentment?” The Prophet (S) replied, “The

contented person is one who has two square meals for the day and the
night!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “O Abu Dharr! One who is happy with the
frugal sustenance provided by Allah, Allah will be satisfied with his
small acts!”

### Abstain From Untruths

###

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “One who protects that which lies
between his two jaws and that which is between the two loins, Allah will
give him a place in the Heaven!” Protection of the tongue consists in
abstaining from telling lies. There should be thruth both in the words
and deeds of a person.

A man who prays regularly, atleast repeats the following words ten times
a day: “We only worship You and seek help ony from You.” As a matter of
fact they are not telling the truth because whatever they do, they seek
help of persons other than Allah. When they perpetuate any wrong acts,
they register the help of the Satan.

Allah curses the liars and befriends the truthful. He exhorts people to
join ranks with the truthful. Telling lies is not only an abhorrent act
but is also a major sin. Telling a lie even in jest is a sin. But
certain times telling lies is permissible. If one can save an innocent
person from execution by telling a lie is considered a noble act. In a
similar situation, if someone tells the truth and becomes the cause of
the killing of an innocent person, then he has committed a major sin. If
a rapprochement can be arranged between two litigant*Mu’mins* by telling
a lie, it can be done.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that telling lies in three
circumstances is not a sin: In the war breaking a covenant with the
enemy, lying to one’s own spouse for the purpose of peace at home and
trying to establish amicability between two friends who have been
fighting.

The Prophet (S) also said: The biographies of kings (*Shah-nameh* ),
tales of the Fire Worshippers, stories of Laila Majnoon etc, although
true, should not be read or retold.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates from the Prophet of Islam (S) that
‘talking of ‘Ali (as) is prayer. This, because talking of him is like
talking of me; and talking of me is like talking of Allah. And talking
of Allah is prayer in itself!’

Someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq about the stories told by the
mendicants. The Imam (as) replied, “When one gives ears to the teller of
the tales, he is in a way worshipping him! If the person is talking
about Allah, then it will be the worship of Allah. If the person talks
about the Satan or false things, then the listener would be worshipping
the Satan!”
