Chapter 13: Masabeeh, The Lamps
===============================

Condemning Pride
----------------

The Satan was the first to commit this sin when he refused to prostrate
to Adam expressing his pride that he was made of the superior fire and
Adam (as) was made with the lowly soil.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said in his Sermon (*Qutba al-Qasa-aa)* after
a thosand praises to Allah Who Has given great importance to His Traits
of Respect and Greatness. He has kept these traits only for Himself. And
made*haram (* taboo) for others creatures of His. Whosoever from His
creatures assumes these traits, he will be the accursed!

In the first instance Allah tested the angels. He said, “I am creating a
human with the lowly soil. When I put spirit in the creature, you must
all prostrate to him in respect!”

All the angels prostrated before Adam (as) as commanded by Allah,
barring the proud Satan. He said, “Adam (as) is made of soil and you
have made me with the superior fire!. Therefore, I am superior to him!”
By the Creator of all beings! Satan became the leader of all the pride
and conceited beings in the universe! He became the accursed of Allah
forever by this attitude! If Allah wished, he could create Adam (as)
with such a light that even the angels would be put in a shade before
him! For Allah doing such a thing was very easy, but He wished to put
the angels to test! If the angels were awed by Adam (as)’s*noor (light)*
and prostrated, then it would be the prostration under the influence of
the light and, perhaps, not in obedience to Allah’s Commandment.

Allah wanted to test the angels, and test them in such a way that the
obedient and the disobedient were clearly distinguished from each other.
Therefore,*Iblees,* who spent six thousand years in supplication to
Allah, was turned into Satan for his disobedience and turned away from
the Heaven. He was the first proud creature who misled*Qabeel* to act
against Allah’s Commandment and kill his*Mu’min* brother*Habeel* only
out of jealousy and pride.

Therefore, one must abstain from pride. People should take a lesson from
those who are buried under heavy loads of soil. They were those who were
very proud and never considered anyone equal to them. If pride was
considered by Allah a desirable trait in humans,, He would not have kept
his Prophets (as) devoid of it. The Great Allah likes his*Abd al-Zaleel*
(the lowly creature) to prostrate their foreheads on the dust as a test
of their Obedience.

Wealth and pelf are great evils and penury and piety the supreme tests.
Allah tests the proud people through these weak and insignificant
creatures.

Prophet Musa (as) and Prophet Haroon (as) reached the court of the
Pharoh wearing coarse wollen raiment and carrying a staff. They told
Pharoh that if he wished to have permanent respectability and desired to
rule for long, then he should embrace Islam. Hearing this Pharoh laughed
and told to his courtiers that the two mendicants who neither had good
dress nor pompous appearance, hold a beggar’s staff in th hand, offer
him eternal life

and respectability! If they have so much power, then why they are not
rulers and kings? They even don’t wear bracelets of gold!

It became evident from the talk of the Pharo that in his consideration
wealth, pelf and bracelets etc were signs of respectability and power.
If Allah has attached any importance to these things, he certainly would
have provided all these to His Prophets (as) But the Intention of Allah
was to test the proud, conceited rulers of the world through His
Prophets (as) who were the paragons of simplicity and humility. If the
prophets were rich and powerful, people would have respected them for
their outward pomp. But Allah wished to see who were his sincere
creatures. Similarly Allah built His House with ordinary stones and
sand. It was possible for Him to Order it to be made with gold, silver
and precious stones. That would perhaps have put the pride of the world
to a shade! But the Creator wanted people of all shades of power and
pride to bow down to His Humble Abode!

The philosophy of*Salah* too is the same. Proud and conceited persons
prostrate their foreheads on the dust in acknowledgement of the
Greatness of Allah. Wealthy persons fast in the Holy month of Ramadhan
to earn the Goodwill of Allah!

They take out and distribute the*Zakat* thinking that Allah has gifted
them with wealth and it must be shared with the needy. Although
the*House of Allah* is in an isolated and desolate place, but since it
is related with the great Creator, people have to respect the Black
Stone (*Hajr al-Aswad)* in obedience to His Commands!

The Types Of Pride
------------------

The proud consider themselves big and powerful. There are several
categories of these men of pride

The pride that touches the borders of infidelity when the proud person
belittles the prophets, the men of piety, the scholars and the
abstemious. Such proud persons build grand mansions for themselves, wear
expensive raiment and ride on pedigree steeds to make a show of their
wealth to the people. They will have a fleet of slaves and servants
hovereing around them. All these things are the concomitants of the
pride of the person.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that the man of false pride is one
who has no knowledge of the truth and belittles and looks down upon the
men of truth.

One person asked the Imam (as), “Ya Imam! I live in a decent house, eat
good food, I use a horse for my traveling and a slave accompanies me on
my visits out. Are all these the signs of pride?”

The Imam (as) asked him, “Are you doing all this to show-off to the
people?” “Definitely not!” The man replied. The Imam (as) rejoined,
“Then it is not pride! Pride is that which makes one forget the truth
and makes him belittle the truthful ones. If a person has this pride to
the extent of the size of a sesame seed, he will not be able to enter
the precincts of the Heaven!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) once passed through a place where lots of
people were gathered. He enquired why such a large assemblage of people
had gathered there. He was told that a mad person lived in the
neighborhood and people have come out of curiosity to see him. The
Prophet (S) said: He is neither mad nor deranged. The person is sick. In
fact, mad are those

people who think that others are abnormal and make a curiosity out of
them. Making a jest of such sick persons, they are ridiculing God’s
will!

In another tradition the Prophet of Allah (S) says, “When my*Ummat*
walks in misplaced pride, and walks with a proud gait with the slaves
from Persia and Rome in attendance, then there will appear war and
fighting amongst them.”

Then the Prophet (S) added, “The fragrance of the Heaven will travel to
a distance equal to the length traveled in one thousand years, but those
who are disobedient to their parents, who deny others’ rights, who are
adulterers, who have their coat tails trailing behind them in pride, who
harm others with cunning, who brag about small mercies shown to others
and who are victims of avarice will not be able to smell.”

In another tradition the Prophet of Allah (S) says, “One who has
constructed grand mansions more than necessary for his use, just to make
the show of his riches to others, Allah will convert these mansions as a
fiery ring and tie to the neck of the proud person. Then the person will
be consigned to the Hell with the fiery ring around his neck.”

The prophet then said, “A person who shows off wearing expensive
raiment, Allah will keep him in the lower echelons of the Hell in the
company of Qaroon. Qaroon was the first person who expressed pride over
his wealth and was interred into the land!”

A person who beats a beggar or considers him inferior, Allah will raise
him on the Day of Judgement in the size of an ant and consign him to the
Hellfire!

The Cure For Pride
------------------

The cure for the ailment of pride is that one always keeps in view his
beginning, the inevitable end, his weaknesses, his failings, failures,
illnesses and hardships faced during the lifetime.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said that he wondered at the person born
out of insignificant seed, destined to die and putrify in the end,
behaves during the lifetime with a huge degree of pride!

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has wondered over the person who started in the
form of a drop and ends up with the final funeral bath! His body
throughout his life serves as a container for urine and feces. Even then
the person behaves with a high degree of pride. One who wishes to banish
the trait of pride from himself, he should eat his meals with his
servant, milk his goats with his own hands, sit in the company of
beggars and abstain from the company of the affluent!

Reforming The Esoteric Self (Baatin)
------------------------------------

Man should search his inner self while he tries to mind his external
appearances. The aim should be to ensure that both his outward and
inward self is pure and good. Like the*Sufis,* spoiling one’s outward
appearance in consonance with the condition of the esoteric self is
haram or taboo. Commiting a sin in the open is worse than doing it in
private.Confronting a superior will bring more of his displeasure than
privately planning against him and talking ill of him at his back. The
Islamic Shariah doesn’t permit

such acts. It is said that Allah doesn’t like criticizing anyone on his
face or in the open. But the oppressed can criticize the oppressor.”

Wearing The Woolen Blankets
---------------------------

Using wollen blankets as raiment has received lots of praise in the
Sunni literature. In certain Shi’a traditions this practice is condemned
and in certain others it has been praised. Perhaps the traditions
praising this practice has an element of*Taqiyyah.* If the raiment of
woolen blanket is worn at the time of prayer, or to manifest one’s
humility, or to prevent oneself from the effect of the cold weather,
then there is no problem. But always wearing such dress as a personal
mark of identification is not proper.

It is narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) that one should wear dress
made out of cotton. This was the preference of the Prophet of Allah (S)
and the*Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).* The Prophet (S) never wore leather headgear
unless it was absolutely necessary due to the weather conditions.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “I shall not abandon five things till
the time of my death that they remain as part of my*Sunna:* 1. Sitting
on the floor and eating my meals with the slaves. 2. Riding on the long
eared mules with stirrup and halter. 3. Milking the goats with my own
hands. 4. Wearing the raiment made of wool. 5. Taking precedence in
wishing the children.”

“O Abu Dharr! In the last days of this world people will wear wollen
raiment both during the warm and cool seasons as a mark of status.
However, the angels on the land and in the Heaven will curse them for
doing this. The people deserving of the Heaven will be in dusty dresses,
disheveled hair and getting scant attention from those around them. If
these persons pray to Allah for anything, Allah shall grant their wish.”

The Prophet of Allah (S), being in the know of the hidden things said
that after him there will be people who will adopt stealth and deceit
and involve others in hypocricy and waywardness. Therefore the Prophet
(S) said, “People who adopt that garb are the accursed. Don’t be misled
by their subterfuge!” This is also one of the miracles of the Prophet
that he had forecast the doings of the group before it appeared on the
scene and condemned it. One who denies the fact of the group of*Sufia*
being wayward, will deserve the curse of Allah and his Prophet (S). It
is not only the wearing of the blanket that is a curse for them, but the
main cause is their interference with the*Shariah.* Their wont is to
adopt the ways of infidels and heretics (*Zanadeeq)* and abandoning
the*Shariah.* With their innovations they divert the people from the
right path.

There are several other traditions that condemn the group of*Sufia.* The
Shi’a scholars have always condemned the*sufi* cult. Some have even
written treatises on the condemnation of these sects. For example, ‘Ali
bin Babawiyah, whose letters on the matters of*Shariah* used to
reach*Saheb al Asr (a.j.)* and he used to receive prompt replies too.
Also his son, Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Babawiyah, who is the doyen of Shi’a
traditionists, has received the commendation of*Saheb-ul-Asr (a.j.).* He
has written a voluminous book reproving the*Sufi* cult.

Sheik Toosi, Mulla Hilli and Sheik Shaheed too have written tomes in
condemnation of the cult. Sheik ‘Ali has written a book,*Mataan
Mujramiah* , condemning the*Sufi* cult. His son Hasan too wrote his
book,

*Umdat al Miqaal,* on the same subject. Jaffar bin Muhammad Dooresti in
his book,*Aeteqaad,* has convincingly dealt with the*Sufi cult.* Bin
Hamza and Sayed Murtada Raazi too have written extensively on the
subject. Maulana Ahmed Ardbeel has condemned the sect very convincingly
in his writings.

Friends! Why do you rate this sect well? This, despite the Prophet (S)
and the Ahl-ul-Bayt having condemned them in very clear terms. Will you
claim that you are a follower of Hasan Basri? He was a person who has
been the butt of many an authentic tradition! Or you will term yourself
the follower of Sufian Suri who was a mortal enemy of Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as). Or will you toe the line of Ghazali who was an
outright*naasibi* . He writes in his book that the way in which ‘Ali
Murtada (as) is an Imam, he too is one in his own right! He writes that
whoever curses Yazid is a sinner. He has written several books against
the Shi’as in the genre of ‘*Al Mutaqaddameen az Zalaal.* Or will you
project his brother, Ahmed Ghazali, as proof that he believes the
accursed Satan is amongst the chiefs of the pious (*the aulia)!* Or will
you adopt maulana Rumi as your intercessor that he says
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) will intercede on behalf of the
accursed Ibn al-Muljim and guide him into the Heaven? He says that Bin
Mulji has not committed any sin and that what he had done was the
destiny!

There is no page of the*mathnavi* of Maulana Rumi on which he has not
written about the futility of prayer and the depraved beliefs. His
followers believe that hearing to tambourine, harmonica and fiddle is a
type of prayer.

Will you make Mohiuddin Arabi your symbol that who has given pride of
place to meaningless beliefs in his book. He says that the saints
(*Aulia)* are a group of people to whom the*Rafizis* look like pigs. He
also says that when he went for the*Meraj* he found that the status of
‘Ali (as) on the Firmament was lesser than that of Othman, Omer and Abu
Bakra! He says that when he came back, he told to ‘Ali (as) that he
claimed in the world that he was better than the other three then how is
it that his status in the Firmament was lesser than the three of them!

There are several other such canards, writing about them will
unnecessarily lengthen the narrative. Therefore, one should not be
misled by their talk. What all they have done is to get worldly
benefits. These people claimed that they visit the Firmament ten times
in a night but are incapable of throwing light on simple questions
of*fiqh* !

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that the sign of an
imposter is that he will give you news about the frmament, the east and
the west lucidly. But when asked about the legitimate (*Halal)* and
taboo (*Haram)* he will draw a blank! He claims that he has understood
the intricacies of*Wahdat al Wajood* (the Unity of God) that other
erudite scholars have not been able to! But he has not understood a
simple fact that has been explained to him umpteen times. These people
say that*kashf* (manifestation) and*kufr (* infidelity) are not
antithetical and can be always clubbed together! They believe that there
have been practitioners of*Kashf* amongst the non-believers in India.
Suppose their*kashf* is a reality and not a hypocrisy, then

what superiority they have achieved by adopting it!. They have remained
infidels and shall be infidels till the Day of Reckoning!

It is written in the*Ehtejaaj* of Tabrisi that once Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
(as) passed through the place of Hasan Basri. The person was performing
the ablution. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “O Hasan! Do the
ablution properly!” He said, “Ya Ameer al Mimineen! Yesterday you have
killed the persons who used to do the ablution thoroughly! Today you are
asking me to do the ablution properly!” The Imam asked him, “Why didn’t
you turn up to help them?” He replied, “By Allah! In the morning I took
bath. Rubbed camphor on my body and took my arms that I hadn’t the
slightest doubt about opposition to Ayesha is infidelity.

On the way I heard a sound saying,’ Where are you going! Return back!
Those who kill and get killed will all go to the Hell!’ I was scared of
that herald and returned home. The next day again I got ready to go to
the help of Ayesha. I again heard the same voice and returned home!” The
Imam (as) said, “You are telling the truth! Do you know who the person
was who called you?” Hasan said, “No! I don’t know!” The Imam (as) said,
“He was your brother, the Satan! He has told you the truth that the
those who kill and also those who get killed from the troops of Ayesha
will go tto the Hell!”

In another tradition it is narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen that he said to Hasan Basri, “Every time there is
a*Samiri* (magician) and you are the*Samiri* of your time!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: O Hasan Basri! Whether you go the
East or to the West, you will not acquire any knowledge! The only source
of knowledge are we the*Ahl-ul-Bayt!* “Remember, this Hasan Basri is the
same person who is the chief of the Sufis. The Sufis associate
themselves with him very ardently. They mostly quote from him. They
narrate that one big sheik was Ibad Basri. He used to ridicule Imam
Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) and used to criticize him in the matter of Jehad.

Once a group consisting of Ayub Sajistani, Saleh Marni, Utba, Habib
Farsi, Malik bin Dinar, Abu Saleh aami, Ja’far bin Suleiman Rabia and
Saadana started from Basra for the Haj. Those days there was scarcity of
water in Mecca. The entire gathering in*Khana al-Kaaba* prayed for
rains. But the prayers were not answered. In the meantime, Imam
Zain-ul-’Abidin arrived there with a sad mein. After circumambulating
the Kaaba he asked everyone assembled there to move away from the Kaaba.
Then he prostrated near the Kaaba and prayed. Before his prayer was
over, the clouds gathered and rained so hard that the scarcity turned
into plenty! Remember, the names of the persons from the group of
Basrans are all the chiefs of the*Sufi* cult! They were not the
adherents of the Imam (as) of the time! One of the group was Tawoos
Yamani whose debates with Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) are well known!

Sheik Toosi writes in his book,*Ghaibat* , that some people falsely
claimed the vicegerency of*Saheb al Asr (a.j.)* . They were discredited
and ridiculed. If they were really the vicegerents of the Imam (as) then
they could have shown miracles as did the*Saheb al Asr (a.j.)* . The
first such imposter was*Shariyi* who got ridicule after making the
claim.*Saheb al Asr* issued an edict refuting his claim. The Sheik says
that*Talakbari* said that it

became evident to people that the imposter was an infidel. First he used
to spread canard about the Imam (as) to attract the ignorant people.
Progressing in his foul acts in this manner he progressed into believing
in the*Hallajia* cult in the manner of persons like Abu Jaffer
Shalmafani.The Sheik adds that besides other imposters, Husayn bin
Mansoor too was prominent amongst them.

It is narrated from Hibtullah bin Muhammad Katib that Sahl bin Ismail
Naubhakti, who was an ardent Shi’a, sent word to Mansoor Hallaj that he
would become his follower on condition that he should show a miracle by
making his hair permanently black. He said that he had to perforce dye
his hair every Friday for the purpose of visiting his slave girls and
the exercise was very tedious for him. When Hallaj heard this, he said
that Sahl has made a mistake asking him to perform such a miracle. Sahl
used to repeat the story everywhere and make people laugh at Hallaj!

It is mentioned in*Ehtejaj* of Tabrisi that the edict of*Saheb al Asr*
was issued through Husayn bin Rooh condemning the group that was headed
by Husain bin Mansoor Hallaj. Such people were always adversarial to
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* The Shi’a chroniclers in that period, and the period
following immediately after that, always expressed dislike of the group
and gave sufficient proof of their infidelity. Even then if some people
abandoned the rightful path of the*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* the sin definitely goes
to their account!


