Chapter 2: The Fundamentals
===========================

The First Fundamental: Knowledge of The Exalted Creator
-------------------------------------------------------

The most important fundamental in all Prayer is the knowledge and
understanding of the Creator. The understanding of the Creator is
directly related to the degree of Faith the believer has in his Creator.
Where there is no faith, all worship is futile. To the contrary, worship
sans Faith is subject to Retribution.

### What is faith?

###

Faith is the belief in the Existence of the Creator and His
Attributes--- the Positive Attributes (*Sifat al-thubutiah)* and
Negative Attributes (*Sifat al-Salbiah).* The other important components
of the believer’s faith are the Belief in Allah’s Justice, His being One
and Only God, the Belief that Muhammad (S) is the Last and Final of the
line of the Prophets and acceptance of the Twelve Imams (as) from the
Family as his Vicegerents; the belief in*Mi’ad Jismani* (The Hereafter-
when people will be raised before the Day of Judgment for questioning).
Belief in the existence of the Heaven and the Hell and the concept of
Reward and Retribution too are important aspects of the Faith.

The Second Fundamental: The Faith
---------------------------------

Faith is the Eternal Wealth for a believer. Loss of Faith can be the
Eternal Curse for a believer. Satan is the veritable consumer of Faith
and Actions because the thief always aims at the most precious object of
his target. When he fails in that attempt, he contents himself with
burgling less important things.

For example: Creating doubts about Belief in the Existence of Allah in
the minds of the believers, Satan thus consigns them to the Hell. To
save themselves from this eventuality, the believers should steadfastly
adhere to the*Safina-tu-najat* (the Ship of Deliverance). Those who are
dedicated to the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* will board this ship to find cure for all
the ailments, it is the succor for the drowning and the guarantee
against the machinations of the Satan. Unless a person gets a clear
understanding of Allah, it may be difficult for him to understand the
Prophet (S) and the Imams (as). For understanding of Allah there are two
definite requirements:

### 1. Knowledge of the Certainty of Existence

###

This is evidenced by examples. The knowledge of Certainty of Existence
is in the nature. Therefore the unbelievers were not asked to believe in
Allah, but they were asked not to believe in a comity of deities.

It is narrated that the Prophet asked an Arab as to how he identified
Allah? He said, “I saw the droppings of the camel on the way and knew
that some camels had passed by. I saw the foot- marks of men and knew
that some men had used the path. We have such vast land, the sky the
sun, the moon and the stars. Don’t they indicate that there must be
someone who has made them?”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that someone wanted him to give an
explanation about the existence of Allah. The Imam (as) asked him, “Have
you ever been on any voyage at sea?”

The man replied in the affirmative.

The Imam (as) rejoined, “Have you come across a storm while on board a
ship?”

The man replied in affirmative.

The Imam (as) said, “Did you get a feeling at that time that there must
be some power that could come to the rescue of the ship?”

The man replied in the affirmative.

The Imam (as) rejoined, “Yes! That Power is Allah!!”

But the atheists and agnostics who raise objections at every step and
find fault with the creations of Allah are like the blind men who have
been left in a palatial mansion to partake of the dainty food laid out
for them. Some blind persons trample the bread, some other person puts
his foot in the bowl of the soup. The blind persons

complain of the host being careless in spreading the food in a wrong
place. They are, no doubt, blind to the fact that they have been
provided with the best of food in the best of surroundings.

### 2. Idrak al-Kunha

###

The second type of Knowledge of the Existence of the Creator*Idrak
Al-Kunha* (that means, Realization of the Reality) of His Person. This
is impossible for the human intellect. When a human being is not capable
of understanding its own personality, how could he delve into
understanding the Personality of the Creator! But it is the human
intellect that has created innumerable sects of various beliefs.

Some sects have concluded that Allah is a handsome youth and others
believe that He is old with a flowing white beard! Some others say that
He is everywhere and everything is Him!! There are also those who
believe that Allah has transmigrated or penetrated into the bodies of
those excellent in piety!!!

Therefore, we have to bear in mind Allah’s clear instruction in this
matter, “Whatever the Prophet (S) gives, take it.” The Prophet (S) has
said, “I am leaving behind two weighty things amidst you; one is the
Qur’an and the other my*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* Follow them and you shall find
Deliverance.” We have to follow these and should not use our intellect
in this matter!

In short, the perfect in piety is one who says about the person of the
Creator that he has not understood Him. Because understanding Him
consists in knowing that no one has the faculty to understand Him.
Therefore one who says that he has not understood his Creator, he is the
one who has understood Him!

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) was once asked about the Unity and the
Existence of Allah. He said, “Allah was aware that in times to come
there will be people who will think and discuss about Him. Therefore He
revealed the verses of*Ikhlas* and*Hadeed* . One should not go beyond
these in interpreting the existence of Allah, lest they go astray.”

It is narrated that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “The Twelve
Infallible Imams (as) are the Chapters of Knowledge and Understanding of
the Creator. By following them one can achieve the path of guidance and
understanding. If they were not there, none would have understood Allah.

Through them Allah has completed the*Hujjat* (Proof).” There are several
traditions of the Prophet (S) and the Masoomeen in this regard.

But Satan has led astray many intellectuals who have used their thinking
instead of depending on the dictates of Allah, the Prophet (S) and the
other Infallible persons. With their fertile imagination they gave Allah
several forms. The Platonic Mystics (*Ulema al-ashraqi?)* and Scholastic
Philosophers (*Mutakallemeen)* differ very much in their concept of
Allah. Some of the*Mutakallemeen* believe that Allah has a body and is
like the radiant light.

### The Sects of Sufis

###

Some Sunni sufis say the face of Allah is like a simple youth. Some
others say that He is like an old man with flowing silvery beard. Some
others say that Allah has a huge body and is sitting in the firmament.
Some Sufis, Mutakallameen and the Christians believe in the
transmigration or penetration of God. While the Christians restrict the
phenomenon of the penetration only to Jesus, the other two groups
believe that Allah will penetrate into anyone who has reached the height
of piety. Because of this belief Allah has termed the Christians
unbelievers (*Kuffar* ) in the Qur’an and Has cursed them.

There is another sect of the Sufis that is worst than the believers of
transmigration. They believe in the Unity of Allah. They believe that
Allah is everything and everywhere. He can come in different forms and
shapes. Sometimes he is Zaid, at others he is Amr, sometimes He assumes
the shape of a cat or a dog or anything else. Some Hindus too have a
similar belief. The book of Brahmins,*Jog* , is on the same subject.

The Sufis value this book very much. They think that this book is better
than the theological works of the*Shi’as.* Even some*Shi’as* think that
the Sufis are right. In their ignorance they are accepting these beliefs
and rendering themselves unbelievers (*Kafirs* ).Only those who remain
steadfast in following the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* are on the Right Path.

Most of the Sufis are from the*Sunni Ashari* sect. But there is a lot of
diversity in their beliefs and ways. If in some book it is said that*Abu
Hanifa* advises praying in a particular way, then another says
that*Sufian Suri* advises another method.

*Kulaini* narrates through an authentic source that one day*Sadeer* was
on his way home from the mosque and Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) was
proceeding towards the mosque. The Imam held*Sadeer’s* hand and turning
towards Kaaba said, “O*Sadeer!* People are required by Allah to come to
his House, the Kaaba, circumambulate it and express their allegiance to
the Imam (as) as Allah says in his Holy Book,’ I shall forgive one who
repents, adopts the Faith, does good deeds and is guided’”

Then the Imam (as) pointed towards his chest and said, “O Sadeer!
Getting guided means loving, obeying us. I shall show to you the
pilferers of the Faith. Look there! (At that moment Abu Hanifa and
Sufian Suri were sitting in the mosque. The Imam pointed his finger
toward them.). These are the bandits of the Faith and have not received
Guidance from Allah! If these persons stay at their homes and send the
people to us, then we shall guide

them on the path of the Faith and instruct to them the teachings of
Allah and his Prophet (S).”

Another reliable source narrates that an inhabitant of Mecca said that
one day Sufian Suri asked him to accompany him to the presence of Imam
Muhammad bin Ja’far (as). We reached him at a time when the Imam was
about to mount his steed. Sufian said, “Kindly repeat to us the Sermon
delivered by the Prophet (S) in the Mosque of Kheef.” The Imam (as)
said, “I am now proceeding on some work. I shall relate to you the
Sermon some other time.” Sufian said, “In the name of your relationship
with the Prophet (S), I implore you to relate the Sermon now.”

The Imam (as) dismounted from the horse and related the Sermon and
Sufian Suri started writing it down. Sufial Suri read back what he had
noted. Then the Imam (as) mounted the horse and went on his way. Then
the person asked Sufian to give him the manuscript that he wanted to see
the contents.

After reading the contents, the person told to Sufian Suri, “By Allah!
The Imam (as) has made something obligatory on you that the Prophet (S)
has said,’ Anyone who has three qualities shall never be subject to
malice and guilty of breach of trust: 1.Righteous deeds that are done in
the way of Allah, 2.Being a well-wisher of the Imam (as) and the
Believers. 3. Living amicably with the Muslims.” He asked Sufian Suri,
“Who are the Imams (as) whose obedience is obligatory?”

Sufian replied, “Muawiah, Yazeed and Marwan bin al Hakm!” The person
also asked Sufian, “Which is the group of Muslims with whom people are
required to live amicably?” Sufian Suri replied, “The Sunnis of Marjia
Sect*(Who say that a person who missed prayers and fasts, is not aware
of the method of the Bath of Purification, demolishers of Kaba, have
done incest with their own mothers, have a Faith equivalent to the Faith
of angels Gabriel and Mekail)* or Sunnis of the Sect of*Qadaria* (*who
say Allah cannot do everything that He wishes* ) or the*Kharijites,* the
Dissenters (*who call Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) an unbeliever and
curse him* ).”

Sufian added, “However what is the opinion of the Shi’as and their Imams
(as) about this tradition?” The person said, “The Shi’as believe that it
is obligatory to obey Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and the Infallible
Imams of the Ahl-ul-Bayt!” Hearing this Sufian Suri tore the paper on
which he had noted the Sermon of the Prophet and said, “Don’t mention to
anyone what transpired today!”

It is a truth that such hostility and denial of the Holy Imams (as) was
practiced not only by Abu Hanifa but also by many who were from the
earlier period. Mention of these will be made at appropriate places in
this book

In the book,*Futuhat,* it is said,*Subhan min azhar al ashiya wa Huwa
aina* (Pure is the Allah who has manifested things, and the things are
Him.”

At another place in “*Khusoos al Hakm”* it says, “Prophet*Noah (as)*
made a mistake as the Prophet. His people were righteous and were
drowned in the sea of Piety”. The author writes at several places in the
book that people should neither adhere to any particular religion nor
deny any religion. They should not deny even the idols because they are
the manifestations of god.

God is present in everything. Allah had not given ascendancy to Harun
(as) over the cow worshippers because He wanted to be worshipped in
every manifestation. In the eyes of Allah there is nothing in the world
that isn’t a deity. The author says that the Christians are termed
unbelievers only because they believe in the Unity of God with the
proviso that Jesus too is God.

Some people came to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and said that they
considered him god because of his attributes. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) was furious at this blasphemous thought and ordered them to be
drowned in a deep well. Imagine, when calling such a revered personality
god is blasphemy, then how grave it is to term dogs, cats and stones as
gods. One will wonder when some people believe that god is in everything
and everything is god!

Therefore some wrongly believe that a person who reaches a stage that he
sees Allah in everything, he is exempt from offering prayer. The Verse
in which Allah exhorts people to offer prayers, “*Wa aabudu Rabbaka
hatta yatiakal eqeen,* and worship thy Lord till death catches up with
you”, they interpret the following way to suit their belief, “and
worship thy Lord till you have faith in His Unity”. Maulana Hilli says
in his book,*Kashf al Haq wa Nahj al Sidq, “* Allah doesn’t penetrate
into anything, because if this premise is accepted, then Allah will be
bound to a place and His Attribute is that He is everywhere and not
subject to any restriction of time or place.

### Discussion On The Concept Of Transmigration Or Penetration

###

One sect of Sunni Sufis believes that Allah penetrates into the Sufis of
high piety. Therefore people visit the mausoleums of saints. Sometimes
Sufis claim that Allah and all things are united and at others they say
that Allah has transmigrated or penetrated into things. The prayer of
these sects is singing, clapping, whistling and dancing.

They do this, despite the fact that Allah has forbidden such activities.
Allah addresses the unbelievers thus, “*Wa ma kaana salatuhum
indalbaithe illa makaan wa tasdeeyatan-* their (meaning the hypocrites)
prayer and supplication is nothing more than whistling and clapping near
the Kaaba.” What more impunity one can expect from the people that when
Allah expresses His displeasure at the actions of the hypocrites, they
perpetrate them.

I have experienced once that some Sufis came to the mausoleum of Imam
Husayn (as). at dusk. Eryone of them offered prayers excepting one who
sat quietly. Similarly at the*Isha* prayer, everyone joined the
congregation barring the one who sat quietly at the earlier prayer. I
asked one of the Sufis as to why that person didn’t join the prayers. He
replied, “The person is not obliged to pray because he has reached
Allah. For those who have reached Allah, there is no curtain between
them and Him. Then why should they have the curtain of Prayer between
them and Him.Prayer is the*Haajib* (the janitor or the door keeper)
between the Creator and the Creation!”

O wise people! Evaluate their beliefs and way of worship! Imagine their
excuse of foregoing the Obligatory Prayers! The height of their perfidy
is that such persons are considered the*Abdals* (the saints)!

The Sufis write down their thoughts in verse and their followers read
them, sing them, do clapping in unison, jump and dance! They term these
acts as prayers. More about them later on!!

The Third Fundamental: The Stages Of Understanding
--------------------------------------------------

There are several stages of the knowledge and understanding of the
Creator. The Understanding progresses and reaches the next higher stage
with the development of the degree of Faith in the person. Khawaja
Naseeruddin Tusi says that the Stages of Understanding of the Almighty
are like the stages of knowledge about fire.

The first stage of knowledge about the potentiality of the fire is
through the word of mouth. We are told that fire is that which will burn
anything it comes in contact with. Similarly, the knowledge about the
Existence of the Creator is through the word f mouth. One hears from
others that there is Allah, and he believes. This is the Faith through
Emulation (*Taqleed)* .

The second stage of knowledge about the fire is that when a person
notices the smoke, he believes there is some fire in the neighborhood.
Similarly, the second stage of the Knowledge of Existence of Allah is
through the signs one gets to confirm the Belief.

The third stage of knowledge about fire is when someone personally
experiences nearness to the source of the fire. This Third Stage of the
Knowledge about the Existence of the Creator is the privilege of those
pious persons who derive contentment from the Light in their hearts
about the Knowledge of the Existence of the Almighty Allah. They wonder
at experiencing the Lord’s creations around them and rivet their
attention on Him.

The fourth stage of understanding about the fire is that a person dares
to come in personal contact with the fire. This stage of Understanding
Allah is when the pious persons whose dedication has reached such
heights that they are ready to sacrifice themselves (*fanafillah)* in
the way of the Creator. This stage is reached after achieving highest
degree of Devotion.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates the following tradition of the Holy
Prophet (S):

“When a person offers optional Sunna prayers (*Nawafil and Awaqib* )
after the Mandatory (*Faraed)* prayers, Allah says that He makes him
such a friend that whosoever is the friend of that person will in turn
be Allah’s friend. Then the eyes of the person through which he sees
will not remain his own, but they will be Allah’s eyes. Similarly the
ears through which he hears, will be Allah’s ears. His tongue which he
uses to express his thoughts will be Allah’s tongue.”

Hearing this Holy Tradition, the Sufis have drawn wrong conclusions and
thus sprang up several orders of these groups. If they had heard the
interpretation of the Tradition from the Perfect in Knowledge (*Rasiqoon
fil Ilm* ) this confusion would not have resulted. The true purport of
this Tradition is that when a pious person gets deeply engrossed in the
thought and love of Allah, the Almighty becomes his tongue. He sees and
hears what Allah approves of.

### The Ranks Of The Knowledge Of The Creator

###

Perhaps the meaning of this Divine Tradition (*Hadith al-Qudsi* ) is
that when a devout person attains a high degree of piety, Allah becomes
his eye. It would mean that whatever his eye sees, the person visualizes
the attributes of Allah in that. The person doesn’t focus his eye s on
anything that Allah forbids to be seen. He doesn’t hear anything that
Allah does not want him to hear. The Tradition can also have the meaning
that every person, by nature, prefers to use his limbs and senses as per
his own wish, but a pious person subjects all his actions to the express
wish of Allah. The love of Allah dominates all other thoughts in his
psyche.

There is another very appropriate meaning of the Tradition. May Allah
make those who have gone astray accept this interpretation and mend
their ways.

Allah has created many instincts and faculties in the human beings. He,
the Creator, has exhorted the people to use them the way He wants them
to use. And then Allah promises:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَمَا أَنفَقْتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَهُوَ يُخْلِفُهُ.﴾
</p>

***“Whatever you spend in the Way of Allah- He gives you more in
return”*** **(34:39)**

Or, He will give you such bounties that might not be similar to those
given earlier. Therefore, wealth or property that might be lost by way
of fire or theft, or is spent in charity or for a good cause, a person
would get immense benefits in the Hereafter. These rewards would be
unimaginably more than the satisfaction one would derive from acquiring
and hoarding the transitory material things of this world. Here, a verse
from the Holy Qur’an is quoted:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿ يُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ وَلاَ يَخَافُونَ لَوْمَةَ لَائِمٍ.﴾
</p>

***“They strive to spend in the way of Allah and are not afraid of
taunts.”*** **(5:54)**

One must spend in the way of Allah. Those who are not worried about the
concerns of the worldly people and boldly act in the way of Allah, shall
be rewarded handsomely in the Hereafter.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen and his companions used to spend their energies in the
Obedience and Prayer of Allah. Allah endowed them with such energy that
their strength was far more than usual for the humans. Therefore
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “I have not broken and lifted the
gate of the fort of Khaiber with my human strength. It was the Divine
Strength that helped me achieve the impossible.” This is such a strength
that can bring together the earth and the sky without moving a hand.
This strength or faculty does not vanish with the demise of the persons.
Because they don’t do anything without the wish of Allah, they become
subservient to the Wishes of Allah.,Who infuses His wishes in their
hearts and all their actions are according to the plans of Allah.

There is an oft- repeated tradition that says, “The heart of a pious
person is held in the two fingers of Allah.” It means that the heart of
the person is in the control of Allah and He turns the subject whichever
way He wants. The verse of*Ad-dahr, “Wa ma tashaoona illa ainyasha
Allah,* which has

been revealed in the praise of the*Ahl al-Bayt* also means that they
don’t intend to do anything unless Allah wishes them to do it.

Therefore, the pious cry for long hours in fear of Allah and spend the
whole nights in prayers without any concern of losing their eyesight
with such heavy stress. They care only for their subservience to their
Friend, that is, Almighty Allah. Therefore, Allah endows them with a
special light that never fades and they are able to witness things that
are beyond the ken of the mortal eyes!

Here we quote another Tradition, “Be aware of the intellect of
the*Mu’min* that he sees with the light provided by Allah. Allah opens
the springs of eloquence to him without his knowledge. He benefits
others from these springs as he derives benefit for himself. The springs
have no end.”

“Reaching this stage, he hears, sees, moves and speaks only with My
strength.”

It is evident therefore that this august status is reserved for those
who are the Closest to Allah and not for all and sundry. The meaning of
the Tradition*Taqlaqu baqlaq Allah* too means that one should endeavor
to acquire manners like those of Allah Almighty. It will be like
tempering the iron in the fire. The iron becomes red hot like the fire,
although it is not fire itself but has acquired the colour and effect of
the fire.

Similarly Allah endows some of His attributes to men in lesser or higher
degree. But the knowledge of men is infinitesimal when compared to the
Knowledge of Allah. When one acquires this meagre knowledge, he becomes
vainglorious. When Allah bestows some power to an individual and he
becomes a king, he proudly proclaims,*lemanil malak al youm!- ‘who is
the king today!!* There are two sides to the human excellence. One is
positive and the other is negative. The positive excellence of a person
is from and with the Consent of Allah and the negative excellence is an
aberration of the person’s own thinking process.

May Allah protect the*Shi’as of Muhammad’s Progeny* from the
machinations of Jinn and men and they keep steadfast on the Right Path.

When one becomes a true bondsman of Allah, his heart will be the Abode
of Allah, then all machinations of the evil against him will go in vain.
A true lover of Allah like Abu Dharr shall always be remembered with
respect. However much Yazid felt that he had subdued Husayn; Husayn will
be eulogized from the pulpits and Yazid cursed till the end of this
world.

The Fourth Fundamental: Transitory Nature Of The World
------------------------------------------------------

The previous tradition also is indicative of the fact that this material
world is transitory and only Allah the Creator is Immortal. He was there
when there was nothing, He shall always be there when nothing will
remain of the world. The people of all the faiths who believe in the
coming of the Prophets, subscribe to the belief that everything in this
world is transitory and only God (*Allah)* is immortal.

But some philosophers, who hold the view that all the living things will
perish and the universe with the land and the skies shall remain
forever, are unbelievers in the eyes of the Faith of Islam. All the
Revealed Books have asserted again and again about the Day of Reckoning
when the earth, the sky, the mountains and the stars would break into
smithereens and fly

around like shreds of paper. Barring God (*Allah) nothing will remain in
the universe.*

The Fifth Fundamental: About The Individuality Of The Creator
-------------------------------------------------------------

*Faradiat* or the Individuality of Allah means that He is One,
Incomparable and Unique. He is*Wahdahu la Shareek,* that is, He is Alone
and Has no Equals. If there was any other god, he would certainly have
introduced himself, and would send his laws and assertions through
messengers. Further there would have been conflict in the Universe. One
god would order something and the other god would ask for the contrary.
If both the gods issued the same edicts then what would be the need for
having more than one!

“He has always been there and shall always be there.” This expression
does not mean that Allah is there ever since the Universe has come
about. But it means that even when the Universe was not there, Allah was
there and He will be there even after the Universe is destroyed.

There are several traditions of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (as), which can be summarized as follows:

“The beginning of Faith consists in knowledge about Allah and its height
is in the belief that Allah is incomparable. The claim of
incomparability of Allah is at its height when the person accepts the
Attributes and the Individuality of Allah as one. Because if the
Individuality and the Attributes are different, then there can be a
doubt of duality and it is impossible that the Creator will have an
equal.”

### The Attributes Of Allah

###

Reliable traditions indicate that on the ninth day of the demise of the
Holy Prophet (S), Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) delivered a sermon, the
initial part of it was as follows:

“Praise be to Allah who has rendered the wisdom incapable of finding
about His Individuality and Attributes. Allah is One, Is not of many and
Is Incomparable. He is away from everything. This distance is not
because of location but is because of Excellence and Purity. He is
Omnipotent and in Control. These Attributes are not such that they are
there in the things but with His own Knowledge and Potentiality, He
knows about everything. He does not have to physically look at anything.
It is believed that He has always been there. But this doesn’t mean that
His always having been there is time bound. He is in fact since the
beginning and shall always be there. His not being there is impossible.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “Allah is Ancient (*Qadeem* ), One
(*Wahed* ) and Eternal (*Samad* ). His Attributes are Unique and there
cannot be another equal of His.”

The narrator asked the Imam (as), “In Iraq there is a sect of people who
believe that the Attribute with which Allah listens and that with which
He sees are different.”

The Imam (as) replied, “They are liars and apostates that they compare
the Attributes of Allah with human attributes. Allah has His own way of
hearing and looking at things.”

It is said that Imam Ar-Ridha’ observed that one who has such beliefs is
a polytheist and not our Shi’a. Allah is Omniscient and Omnipotent; He
sees and He hears.

### Explanation of A Point

###

It is said that during the battle of the Camel (*jamal* ), an Arab
approached Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and asked him, “What is the
meaning of Allah being One?”

The companions of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) chided him for coming to
ask a question when they were in the midst of a battle.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) calmed them down and said that the very
purpose of the conflict was on the point of accepting the Unity of
Allah.

Then he addressed the questioner thus, “O person! You have said that
Allah is one. It has four meanings. Out of those four meanings, two are
impossible for the Individuality of Allah and the other two are
definite. The first two that are impossible are that we call Allah the
First because if we call Him the First then there must be another like
Him and that would be heresy; as the Christians say that God is the
third of the three gods.

The meaning of the second impossibility is considering Allah as an
object. For example Zaid is called one of the men. If anyone calls Allah
as one of several gods, it would be heresy. The other two meanings are
definite. The first is that He is Unique in His Excellence and there is
none other equal to Him or His partner. The other definite meaning is
that Allah has no definite physical personality.”

Here it is worth mentioning that philosophers and thinkers deliberated
for thousands of years to arrive at the truth but our Imams (as) have
provided much clearer explanation of the facts in their traditions.
However people don’t give serious thought to this matter.

The Sixth Fundamental: The Immortality Or Eternity Of Allah
-----------------------------------------------------------

Allah is Immortal and Eternal. Some people think that since Heaven and
Hell shall always be there, therefore immortality does not remain the
Unique Attribute of Allah because the inmates of the Heaven and the Hell
too will remain there eternally. This is not true, because the
Immortality of Allah is attributed to His own wish while the longevity
of the inmates of the Heaven and the Hell is not of their own choosing.
The Immortality of Allah is His Attribute and cannot be changed and the
common creatures have had different shapes at different times- they had
been dust, water, flesh, bones etc. They never remained in one physical
condition, while Allah is the same for ever, as ever!

The Seventh Fundamental: The Creator Of The Universe
----------------------------------------------------

This tradition also points towards the fact that Allah is the Creator of
the land and the sky and everything that is found on them. Some
philosophers believe that the*Uqool al-Ashara* are the creators of
these. Some*Ghaali* (exagerrating) Shi’as too believe that the creators
of the land and the sky are the Holy Infallibles. But according to the
traditions of the Imams (as), such belief is absolutely wrong.

Yasir asked Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as), “O son of the Prophet! What is your
opinion about*Tafweed* (delegation)?” The Imam replied, “Follow the
precepts communicated by Allah through the Prophet. The other attributes
of Creation and Sustenance, He has not delegated to anyone.”

Abu Hashim Jafferi narrates that Imam ‘Ali ar Ar-Ridha’ (as) was asked
by the people his opinion about the belief of the*Ghillat* (the
exaggerators) and the*Uquool al-Ashara.* The Imam replied, “Believing
anyone other than Allah as capable of creating the land and the sky is
sheer heresy. Friendship with such persons, eating with them and having
marital relations with them is strictly forbidden.”

In the book,*Ehtejajaat,* ‘Ali bin Ahmed Qummi writes that some Shi’as
had a difference of opinion that some said that Allah has given to the
Imam the power to create and provide sustenance. Others were denying
this. Muhammad bin Othman Umri, who was a deputy of the Twelfth Imam
(as), wrote a submission (*Areeza)* seeking the Imam’s clarification.
The Imam’s reply was that it is only Allah who creates and provides
sustenance. It is another matter that in response to the supplications
of the Holy Imams he creates and provides sustenance as per their
wishes.”

### The Eighth Fundamental: Creation of The Firmament

###

Reliable traditions indicate that the skies are not close to each other
and the distance between two skies could be the equivalent to travelling
for a period of five hundred years. All the skies are replete with
angels. The angels possess light bodies. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has
said that if an angel descends to the earth, there won’t be any space
left there for anything else. The number of the angels is more than all
the living creatures put together, and in size there is no creature
larger than some them.

Some angels are so huge that the distance between their ears and the
shoulders is equivalent to the distance that can be traveled in seven
hundred years. It is mentioned in the Traditions that there are seven
skies and also there are seven earths in the firmament. There are so
many creations in these skies and the earths that it would be impossible
to have a count of them.

### About The Angels

###

The philosophers say that the angels are the figment of imagination of
the present level of intellect and the psychic condition of the humans.
But endorsing this opinion of the philosophers would be tantamount to
denying the phenomenon supported by Divine Revelations and would go in
the realm of*Kufr.*

There is no other creation in the universe larger in number than the
angels and their bodies too are larger than those of any other creatures
excepting the souls (*Rooh* ).Bin Babawiya narrates through reliable
sources that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) was asked about the Omnipotence
of Allah.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), after praising the Beneficent and Merciful
Allah, said that Allah has created an angel who, when it descended on
the earth, would find the entire area of the planet insufficient for
itself. Certain other angels are so large that they occupy the entire
space of the sky. There

are also angels that are so large that the sky comes up to their waist.
Some others are standing in the atmosphere and the earth is near their
ankles.

Then the people asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) about the curtains
that are over the skies. He replied that the First Curtain (*Hijab
al-Awwal)* has seven strata. Every curtain has the width equivalent to
the distance traveled in 500 years and the intermediate distance between
any two curtains is the same as mentioned above. In the space between
any two curtains there are 70,000 angels and the strength of every
individual angel is more than that of all the men and*Jinns* put
together.

Above the curtains there is*Sirr al-Awqat al-Jalal.* These are seventy
thousand curtains and each curtain has 70,000 angels and there is a
distance of 500 years of travel time between any two curtains. Then
there is the*Saradaq al-Izzat, Saradaq al-Kibria, Saradaq al-Azmat,
Saradaq al-Quds* and*Saradaq al-Jabroot.* After these there are
the*Saradaqs of Noor al-Abyad, Saradaq al-Wahdaniyat.* After all these,
there is*Hijab al-Aala,* the Superior Curtain.

‘Ali bin Ibrahim narrates from Jafer al-As-Sadiq (as) that the Imam has
said that Allah has created the angels differently. The Prophet of Allah
has seen that the Angel Gabriel had six hundred arms and on his calf
there are pearls as if they were drops of moisture on the green verdure.
When the Prophet saw Gabriel he found him positioned between the sky and
the earth. When Allah orders the Angel Mekail to come to the earth, he
will have one of his feet on the Seventh Sky and the other he puts on
the earth.

Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, Allah has created such angels
that half their bodies are made of ice and the other half of fire. The
supplication of these angels is, ‘O Almighty Allah, Who has created
compatibility between the fire and the ice! Keep us steadfast in our
prayer!’

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) also said, “The angels do not eat or drink
nor do they mate for procreation. Their lives are like the breeze of the
Firmament. There are certain angels who will remain in the position
of*Ruku* (Obe’Isance) for ever. Some others are in the state of*Sajda*
(Prostration).

Every night 70,000 angels descend to the earth and circumambulate
the*Kaaba* , offer their respects to the Prophet (S), to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and then visit the Mausoleum of Imam Husayn
(as) and circumambulate there. Early in the morning they ascend into the
Firmament. Thus every morning a fresh batch of angels descends to the
earth and this practice goes on an on.

There is a reliable tradition that someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq
(as), “Are the angels more in numbers than the humans?”

The Imam replied, “By Allah who has the authority over my life, only the
angels that are on the sky are more in number than the particles of dust
on the earth. There is no place in the sky where there are no angels.
They are all engrossed in the worship of Allah. There is no plant or a
clod on the land where the angels are not there who have been appointed
as guardian angels (*Muwakkil)* for that spot. They report to Allah
every day about the goings on there. It is true that Allah knows
everything but the angels, through the love for the*Ahl alBayt,* wish to
have the opportunity of going closer to the Almighty.

Bin Babawiyah narrates through a reliable source that Zainab Attarah
went one day to the Holy Prophet (S) and inquired about the excellence
of Allah’s creations.

The Prophet (S) replied, “The earth, with all its contents, and in
relation to the one below it, is like a ring or a bangle lying in a
forest. These two, in relation to the third, are also looking the same
way. The situation is similar till the seventh earth”

Then the Prophet (S) recited the following verse:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ سَبْعَ سَمَاوَاتٍ وَمِنْ الْأَرْضِ مِثْلَهُنَّ.﴾
</p>

***“Allah created seven skies and similarly the earths.”*** **(65:12)**

These seven strata of the earth, on the back of a fowl, with their
contents look like the rings lying in the forest. One side of the fowl
is in the east and the other in the west. This fowl is located over a
wide rock that in relation to the earths, with all their contents,
appear like rings lying in a forest. The wide rock is lying on back of a
fish, and in relation to its width, all the things lying on it look like
rings in a forest. The fish is located in a dark sea and in relation to
its width, the things lying on it seem like rings in a forest. And below
this sea is the*Sara* (The Nether Region). In relation to the Nether
Region all other things look like rings lying on the floor of a forest.

The Holy Qur’an says:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَمَا
تَحْتَ الثَّرَى.﴾
</p>

***“It is for Him what all is in the skies and on the earth and what all
is in between them and what is in the Nether Region.”*** **(20:6)**

All these things, in relation to the first sky, are like circles or
rings that are lying in a forest. This sequence repeates itself till the
seventh sky.And all these earths and skies, in relation to the*Dariya
al-Makfoof* , are like circles and the*Dariya al-Makfoof* in relation
to*Koh al-Tagrak* too is like a circular ring. Then all these strata, in
relation to the*Hijab al-Noor* are also like rings. There are
seventy*Hijab al-Noor* that are so bright that one cannot look at them
with the eyes. All these things are like circles in front of the*Kursi*
(The Chair).

The Qur’an says:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿وَسِعَ كُرْسِيُّهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ.﴾
</p>

***“His Chair is more extensive than the skies and the
earth.”**(2:255)*****

The Ninth Fundamental: The Meanings Of Tender And Omniscient
------------------------------------------------------------

The word*lateef* (tender) is used in four contexts:

*Lateef* could be a thing that is very thin and not visible to the eyes.
This word can be an attribute for Allah that the human eyes cannot see
Him.

The art’Isan who manufactures delicate things too is referred to in the
Arabic lexicon as*lateef.* Because Allah is the Creator of all the
things, the smallest like the mosquito and the largest like the
mountains, and is not visible to the humans, He is referred to
as*Lateef.*

The one who has profuse knowledge of*lateef* (delicate) and*daqeeq*
(minute) things is called*lateef.*

The word*lateef* has its root in the word*lutf* that means kindness.
Therefore, one who is kind is referred to as*Lateef.*

The word*Khabeer* is used in two contexts:

1.*Khabeer,* the pronoun,that means one who is aware of everything.

2.*Khabeer,* in the sense of one who informs or gives information.

The attributes of Allah, including those of*Lateef and Khabeer,* are not
ancient that they existed before Allah. Otherwise Allah would not be the
Creator of all these attributes. All these Attributes are specifically
His and He has selected them at His own pleasure. His creatures, in
times of need, call Him with his Attributes, like,*Sami (One Who Hears),
Baseer (One Who Sees), Qadir (One Who is Empowered), Hai O Qayyum (One
Who is and shall Be), Lateef O Khabeer (The Delicate and the Omniscient)
etc.*

Some misguided critics say that the human beings too use these names,
and therefore they become sharers in these attributes with Allah. This
is a misnomer, because despite men being called with these names, the
meaning and context is absolutely different. For example, Allah is
addressed with the name*Aalim* (meaning the learned).

In the case of Allah the learning is not acquired learning. In the case
of humans, learning is acquired. When a man is called*aalim,* he would
have gone through the hard process of acquiring knowledge starting from
the stage when he was*jaahil* (unlettered) to the stage when he is
accepted as a learned person (*the aalim).* And, if for some reason he
loses his learning, he might revert to the status of being called
a*Jaahil.*

The Tenth Fundamental: The Omnipotent
-------------------------------------

Every thing in the Universe, small, big, elementary or complex owes its
existence to Allah. There is nothing about which Allah has no knowledge.
All the philosophers and thinkers agree on one point that Allah has
knowledge of and control over everything. He has control over the
Universe and Has the Power to create any number of such entities.

But, because he is the Ultimate Philosopher-Thinker, He, perhaps,
thought to create the only existing Universe. He could have created the
human being with more than two arms, but His Expedience was that
provision of only two arms to man was sufficient for his physical
existence. In any of Allah’s creations there is no pronounced defect.
Allah, Who has created the Universe with the utterance of the
monosyllable,*Kun* (let there be!), and the Universe came about.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrated that when prophet Musa (as) went to
the Mount of Toor he requested Allah to show to him His treasures.

Allah said, “O Musa! My treasure is in the fact that I ask for anything
to happen, saying*Kun,* and that thing happens instantaneously.

Doubting Allah’s Omnipotence is heresy for a believer. The Prophet of
Allah (S) has said,

“O Abu Dharr! After understanding Allah and acquiring Faith in His
Attributes, one has to bear witness that I am the Prophet of Allah (S)
sent by Him to give to the people the Message about the Bounties in
store for the believers and extreme retribution for the unbelievers and
heretics.

“Allah has given to me the beacon with which I guide people away from
the darkness of ungodly ways and heresy.”

One of the most important pillars of Islamic Faith is bearing witness
that Muhammad Sal Allaho wa Alaihi wa Sallam is the Prophet of Allah.
This shall be discussed at some length in the next chapter.


