Chapter 3: The Benefits
=======================

The First Benefit: Need For The Existence Of The Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------

It is a fact that Allah did not have any Personal interest in the
creation of the Universe because He is above all considerations of wants
and wishes. He has created the world with all its wonders to be
exploited by His noblest of creatures, man!

It is therefore natural that the human beings, to achieve excellence,
needed a mentor, endowed with all the superior qualities by none other
than the Creator. The mentor had the duty of bringing out the human
beings from the darkness of ignorance to the light of knowledge through
the Guidance received by way of Revelations. It was also necessary for
the mentor and guide to be one of the humankind that his compatriots
feel comfortable with him and at the same time he had to be endowed with
Spiritual Excellence received through Revelations from Allah.

It is recorded that a fire-worshipper came to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
and asked him some questions. One of his questions was that why there
was a need for Allah to send a Prophet, a Messenger?

The Imam (as) replied to him thus: “I have already explained to you
about the Existence of Almighty Allah. He is the Creator of everything
and all the living creatures in the universe. Everything happens in the
universe with His wish. His creations cannot see him with their eyes.
Their senses cannot gauge Him. He has no body that one could go to His
physical presence and converse with Him.

Therefore, it was imperative that there should be a medium through which
His Guidance could be communicated to the human race for treading the
right path. Therefore Allah’s selected few, who were termed*nabis,*
prophets or messengers, were the possessors of Allah’s most desired
characters and were of the same race and physical features as their
flocks. These messengers have been endowed with certain*maujezas,* or
incredible miracles like bringing back the dead to life, restoring
eye-sight to the blind, curing incurable ailments, breaking the moon
into two, bringing back the sun which had already set etc, etc. The
world has never been devoid of such*nabis.* If at a time there is
no*nabi,* then there will be his vicegerents to carry on the work of the
Mentor.

Man is a gregarious being. Every individual is dependent on the others
for his needs. This need sometimes becomes the cause of conflict,
differences and even wars. Therefore he needs a ruler who acts as
a*Hakm,* or arbiter, whose verdicts are fair and above all personal
considerations and is infallible.Such a*Hakm* can only be identified and
put in place by none other than the Great Creator, Allah.

Therefore it is cardinal that the*Nabi* and the*Imams*
are*mansus-min-Allah* or selected and appointed by Almighty Allah.

The Second Benefit: Mu’jizah Or Miracle
---------------------------------------

As a proof of Prophethood, the Prophets’ present miracles to the people.
These miracles are incredible happenings that the commoners are unable
to perform. For example: converting the staff into a snake, making the
dead alive, breaking the moon into two etc… etc…

When a person claims to be the messenger of God and performs miracles as
a proof, then there will not remain any doubt as to his veracity. To the
contrary, when an imposter claims that he is a prophet, then it is
impossible that Allah would provide him the means of performing any
miracle. As people believe in the veracity of a Prophet by witnessing
the miracles, so also people believe in him by hearing about the
miracles through authentic sources. It is just like people who have not
seen a city, say for example Mecca, believe in its existence only on
hearing about it from others.

The Third Benefit: The Prophethood Of The Last Messenger
--------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet (S) of the last epoch, the cause of the creation of the
Universe Prophet Muhammad Mustafa(S), has manifested innumerable
miracles. Besides all those miracles the most prominent is the Holy
Qur’an that he had presented to his followers as a miracle after
declaring himself the Prophet of Allah. He had challenged the erudite
scholars of the day to present a book equal in quality, or even a verse
equivalent to any of the verses of the Qur’an. None of the scholars of
that time was able to meet the challenge but in frustration, they
prepared to fight with the Prophet and his supporters.

Bin Babawia relates that Ibnal Sakeet, a renowned scholar went to Imam
Ar-Ridha’ (as) and asked him that Allah had given to Musa (as) the Staff
and the Shining Hand (Y*ad al-Baidah* ), to prophet ‘Isa (as) and the
miracle of healing and what miracles had Allah given to our Prophet (S).

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) replied that when Allah gave Prophet hood to prophet
Musa (as), the art of magic was at a peak. There used to be competitions
of the magicians those days. Therefore prophet Musa (as) was provided
with a miracle that could subdue the magic of those masters. Prophet
Musa’s staff had such incredible power that it could swallow the snakes
created by the magicians through their magical spell.

This event proved the prophethood of Prophet Musa (as) and the very same
magicians accepted him as the true Prophet. Prophet ‘Isa (as)’s period
was the time when the art of treatment of the sick was at its peak.
Expert physicians were living in that area those days. Therefore Allah
gave to Prophet ‘Isa (as) the miracle of curing serious ailments. For
example he could bring back the dead to life and give eyesight to
congenital blind persons. Prophet ‘Isa (as) performed all these miracles
and therefore the people accepted him as the Prophet of Allah.

During the times of our Prophet (S), the Arab scholars and poets were at
the height of their erudition. The poets used to vie with each other in
composing poems of great quality and hanging them on the door of*Kaaba*
for people to read and give their learned comments on them. Therefore
Allah provided to the Prophet (S) the Book that rendered all those
scholars and poets helpless who claimed, “*maa haada kalaam al bashr”* ,
this is not the work of any human being! Despite all this they prepared
to confront and fight with the Prophet.

Ibnal Sakeet said, “No doubt you have said the right thing. Now, kindly
tell me who is the Vicegerent (*hujjat al-Khuda* ) of the time?”

The Imam (as) replied, “Allah has provided you intelligence. Make use of
this intelligence, think and search the one who is disseminating the
word

of Allah to the people and showing to them the right path. Also use your
intelligence to recognize those who are Allah’s enemies. If you really
use your intelligence, you will definitely identify the*hujjat
al-Khuda.”*

Besides this there are innumerable miracles of the Prophet (S), for
example:

The breaking of the moon,

A tree coming to the Prophet and speaking with him and returning back to
its original place on his orders,

Water gushing forth from his fingers that was sufficient to quench the
thirst of his men and animals,

The pebbles in his hands speaking,

Small quantity of food sufficing for a large gathering,

The Jins accepting his suzerainty,

The sun emerging back immediately after setting,

The camel protesting about its master to him,

Despite not receiving any formal education the Prophet (S)’s knowledge
of things present and past, Giving correct news about things to happen.
For example; The conquest of Mecca, The conquest of Khaibar, The
conquest of Rome and Persia, Ayesha, Talha, Zubair and Muawiya battling
with Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), The sufferings of the Ahl-ul-Bayt (as)
etc… etc…

If a person thinks over these qualities of the Prophet (S), he will not
have any doubt about accepting his prophethood. Similarly if a person
makes a serious study of the jurisprudence brought by the Holy Prophet
(S), he will be convinced that these are the laws provided by Allah and
none else. Several Journals of the previous faiths have predicted about
the coming of Prophet Muhammad (S).

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) narrates that his father, Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as),
told him that a group of Jews came to him and asked him if he was the
son of the Prophet of Islam (S) who was the last of the Prophets?

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) replied:

Yes!

The Jews said, “we have read in the Torah that God had given the Book to
Abraham (as) and his son and endowed them with the kingdom of the
country. Then that dynasty continued. You say that you are the scions of
the Prophet (S). We see you weak and forlorn and others are in power.
What is the reason for this?

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)’s eyes watered and he said, “It has always
been there that the Prophets (S), their vicegerents and the men of piety
had been oppressed and suppressed. They had been assassinated for no
fault of theirs and the cruel people always dominated. Their following
of faithful supporters too had always been very small.

The Jews said, “The prophets and their descendents, without any formal
education, have been endowed with immense knowledge to guide their
flocks in this world on the Right Path and the Knowledge about their
Creator. Have you too been endowed with such Learning?

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) told me, “O Musa! Come to the front! Put your
hand on my chest. Then he prayed, ‘O Allah! In the name of

Muhammad (S) and his Progeny help this son of Your servant!’ Then he
told to the Jews, “Whatever you wish to know, ask this child.”

The Jews said, “What can we expect to learn from this little child who
has not read anything nor is literate as yet?”

The Imam (as) said, “this is the son of an Imam (as) and destined to be
the Imam (as) in the future. Please do ask him any question without any
reservation.”

The Jews asked, “What were the nine objects that were endowed to the
prophet Musa (as) as his miracle?”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as), a child of five years at that time, replied,
“The nine things were the Staff, that could turn into a serpent when put
on the ground, the*Yade Baida*

*(The* luminous hand), that made everything shine when Musa took it out
of his robe, the swarms of locusts*,* the frog, the blood, infesting the
people of Pharo with lice, suspending*Koh al-Toor* (the mountain of
Toor) over the heads of the Bani Israel,*Mann o Salwa* (Manna) falling
from the sky for the sustenance of the Bani Israel, the sea parting into
two making way for the Bani Israel to escape from the clutches of
Pharo.”

The Jews said, “you are telling the truth!’. Then they asked, “Now tell
us. What was the Miracle presented by the Prophet of Islam (S) that
convinced his people to accept his Faith?”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) replied, “there are many miracles of the
Prophet (S). Listen and listen with care!

(1) Before the*Baasat* (annunciation) of the Prophet of Islam (S) the
Satans and the Jinns used to visit the earth from the skies and tell to
the people about the events there. This phenomenon gave rise to
many*Kaahins* (soothsayers). After the*Basat* a stop was put to this and
the Satans and the Jinns were forbidden from leaving the earth at any
time. Even then if they attempted to escape into the firmament they are
prevented from doing so with the arrows of*Shehab* and the stars.
The*Kaahins* were thus made ineffective.

(2) Also the*garg* (the wolf) bore witness to the prophethood of
Muhammad (as mentioned earlier in this book while discussing about Abu
Dharr.)

(3) The Prophet (S), during his childhood and youth was well known for
his honesty and integrity.

(4) When Saif bin Ziyazn became the king of Ethiopia, and the group of
Qureish in the company of Abdul Mutallib went to his court, he asked him
certain questions about the Prophet (S) and, after hearing the replies,
said that he will soon be

the Prophet (S) of your people. The group of the Qureish agreed that the
qualities mentioned by the king were found in Muhammad (S).

(5) When Abraha bin Yaksoom came to demolish the Kaaba with a retinue of
elephants, Abdul Mutallib said that there is One Guardian of this house
and you cannot demolish it. Prior to that time Saif bin Ziyazan had made
the prediction of the coming of the Prophet (S). Therefore the people of
Mecca prayed and Abraha could not demolish the Kaaba.

(6) One day the Prophet (S) was relaxing near the wall of the Kaaba when
Abu Jahl brought one large boulder to smash his head. But the boulder
slipped off his hands. However much Abu Jahl tried to kill Muhammad (S),
he couldn’t do it.

(7) Abu Jahl had bought a camel from an Arab but was not paying the cost
to the man. The Arab complained about this to the Qureish. In order to
ridicule the Prophet (S), they asked the Arab to go to him to intervene
on his behalf with Abu Jahl. The Arab went to the Prophet (S) and made
his request. He took him to the house of Abu Jahl and knocked at his
door. Abu Jahl came out. The Prophet (S) told him, “Give the cost of the
camel to this Arab.”

Abu Jahl instantly made the payment. The Arab came to the Qureish and
thanked them. They were really surprised and went to Abu Jahl and told
him that as a jest, they had asked the Arab to go to Muhammad (S) and
ask him to request you to settle his payment. But they were surprised
that he had agreed to pay. Abu Jahl said, “I was helpless! I had seen
that Muhammad (S) had with him an animal that was taller than any camel
and was telling with its open mouth that I must pay to the Arab
otherwise it would eat me.

(8) The Qureish of Mecca deputed Nazar bin al Haras and Uqba bin Abi
Moheeth to Medina to do espionage on the Prophet (S). They informed that
most of the impecunious persons of the City are falling in line with the
Prophet (S). The Quriesh of Mecca then said,

“Verily, Muhammad (S) is the Prophet of Allah about whom we have read in
the Books of Yore that a Prophet will rise amongst us who will endear
himself to the poor and needy.”

(9) When the Prophet (S) migrated from Mecca, Queriesh sent Saraqa bin
Jaitham to Medina to cause harm to him. When he saw him arrive, the
Prophet (S) prayed to Allah to protect him from the evil person.
Suddenly the feet of the steed of the man got embedded into the ground
and he cried, “O Muhammad (S)! Kindly come to my rescue! I shall never
ever think of harming you!” The Prophet (S) prayed to Allah that if the
person was honest in what he said, then he must be relieved of his
hardship. The feet of the horse came out of the ground and the person
returned to Mecca.

(10) Aamir bin Tufail and Zaid bin Qais came to the Prophet (S) and
Aamir told to Zaid that while he engaged Muhammad (S) in conversation,
the other should look for the opportunity to cut his head with the
sword. Therefore Aamir kept the Prophet (S) engrossed in the
conversation but Zaid couldn’t complete his task. When they came out,
Aamir told to Zaid, “You are a cowardly person that you had broken your
resolve!” Zaid said, “I didn’t see anyone there besides you. If I had
swung the sword, I would have beheaded you!”

(11) Zaid bin Qais and Nazr bin Haras came to the Prophet (S) to find
out if the Prophet (S) had knowledge of hidden things. Before they could
ask any question, the Prophet (S) told to Zaid if he was the same person
who visited the Prophet (S) on a certain day along with Aamir with the
evil intention of killing him. He was very surprised to hear this from
the Prophet (S) because no other mortal person knew about this plan
other than the two conspirators. Then Zaid accepted Islam.

(12) Once a few Jews came to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and told him
that they have some questions to be asked of his cousin, the Prophet
(S). Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) sent their message to the Prophet (S).
The Prophet (S) said, “I am a humble creature of Allah! What questions
those persons want to ask of me?” Then the Jews came to the presence of
the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) said, “Do you want to put the question
to me or would like me to tell you about what is in your minds!” They
requested the Prophet to speak first.

The Prophet (S) said, “The purpose of your visit to me is to ask about
Dhual Qarnain!” The Jews admitted that their purpose of coming was to
ask about that person. The Prophet (S) then rejoined saying, “Dhual
Qarnai was a native of the city of Rome. When he grew up, he became the
suzerain of the East and the West. In the end he constructed a huge wall
which is famous even now!” The Jews were very much impressed and
embraced Islam.

(13) Wabasa bin Moid Asadi came to the Prophet (S) with a thought that
he would ask such an intricate question that the answer would not be
possible. He told to the Prophet (S), “Tell me about the things that are
good and also tell me about those that are evil?” The Prophet (S)
replied in two small sentences. He put his hand on the chest of Wabasa
and said, “A thing is good if it satisfies your conscience and your
heart bears witness that it is good. The evil thing is one of which your
heart is in doubt. However much you wish to do it, your heart stops you
from doing it.”

(14) The group of Abdul Qais visited the Prophet (S). After exchanging
greetings the Prophet (S) asked them to show to him the dates they
carried with them from their place. Everyone of the group put his
product before the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) inspected each date
carefully and told about the variety it belonged to. The group was
surprised that the Prophet (S) knew so much about their place that he
was able to identify the variety of dates grown by each individual. Then
they told to the Prophet (S) that they had their maternal uncle
accompanying them. He was suffering some mental disorder.

The Prophet (S) asked for a sheet of cloth to be brought. He put the
sheet on the head of the afflicted person and said thrice, “O enemy of
Allah! Don’t trouble this person!” The insane person turned sane
immediately. The group was having a sheep along with them. The Prophet
(S) pressed on one of the ears of the animal. It developed a mark on the
ear pressed by the Prophet (S). Even to this day the sheep of that breed
continue to have similar mark on one of their ears.

(15) During a journey, the Prophet (S) noticed that a camel was very
tired. He put a little quantity of his saliva into the mouth of the
animal. The camel became very active and trotted on faster than the
other camels in the caravan.

(16) During another journey, a camel of one of the companions of the
Prophet (S) was lost. The owner of the animal asked the Prophet (S) that
if he was the Messenger of Allah, he should inform about the whereabouts
of the camel. The Prophet (S) said that the camel was at such and such a
place

because its nose-string was entangled on the branch of a tree. The
person went to the place and retrieved his camel.

(17) One camel complained to the Prophet (S) that it was getting very
bad treatment from its master. The Prophet (S) asked the owner of the
camel to sell it away to someone else. The camel again protested to the
Prophet (S) that he should be sold to a good person that it received
better treatment. Then the Prophet (S) asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)
to buy the camel. This camel was in the use of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) during the Battle of Siffin.

(18) One day the Prophet (S) was sitting in the Mosque when a camel came
running towards him. The camel put its head in the lap of the Prophet
(S) and started wailing. The Prophet (S) told to his companions that the
animal was complaining that its master wanted to butcher it. One of the
companions affirmed that the camel belonged to a person who intended
cutting it for the feast in connection with the wedding (*Walima)* of
his son. The Prophet (S) called the person and recommended to him to
spare the life of the camel.

(19) Once the Prophet (S) was unhappy with the Tribe of Mudar and prayed
for famine in their area. The famine was so severe that the people came
running to the Prophet S..) and asked for his pardon. Again the Prophet
(S) prayed to Allah for His Kindness on the Tribe of Mudar. There was
such torrential rain that the people of Medina came to him asking him to
pray for the cessation of the showers. Then the clouds moved away from
Medina and rained in the environs for the next one month.

(20) Before the Annunciation (*Baasat)* of the Prophet (S) Abu
Talib(r.a.) took him along on a journey to Syria. The caravan halted
near the hermitage of the Hermit, Bahira Rahab. Rahab was a scholar of
the Divine Books and had read that a Prophet would pass through that way
at a particular time. When he saw the caravan, he arranged a feast for
them.

To his disappointment, Rahab didn’t find anyone fitting into the
description of a prophet in the group. He asked the people of the
caravan if they had left anyone near their luggage outside the
hermitage. They affirmed that there is an orphaned child stationed near
the luggage. Rahab rushed to the spot and found the orphan asleep near
the luggage and a cloud was hovering over his head. Rahab said that the
child was the orphaned jewel. He also affirmed that this child was the
last of the chain of Prophets of Allah and that he would soon be
annunciated. The Qureish were surprised to hear this and started holding
the Prophet in esteem.

This story traveled fast to Mecca and therefore Lady Khadija bint
Khuwiled expressed her wish of matrimony with him turning down proposals
of other prominent persons of Mecca. Thus she was blessed to be the
consort of the Prophet of Islam (S).

(21) Before the Migration (*Hegira)* the prophet (S) asked
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (S) to request Lady Khadija to prepare some food.
She did it. The Prophet (S) invited his close relatives, forty in
number, to partake of the food with him. He asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) to lay the food. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) brought forth the food
that was sufficient for three persons and requested the gathering of
forty guests to say*Bismillah (* in

the name of Allah) and start to eat. The guests did not say*Bismillah*
but the Prophet (S) uttered these words and started to eat.

The entire gathering of forty ate the food to their fill. Abu Jahl said,
“Muhammad (S) has performed a great magic. The food for three persons
sufficed for the large gathering! What could be a bigger magic than
this!” The prophet (S) again invited the same group after a few days and
sated them with the food sufficient for three persons!

(22) Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that he went to the market and
bought meat, flour of one Dirham each and brought home to Fatima Zehra
(as), the Prophet (S)’s Daughter, asking her to prepare the food that
the Prophet (S) was to join them for the meal. Then he went to the
Prophet (S) who was busy praying for provision against hunger of the
people! Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “O Prophet of Allah! The food
is ready. Please do accompany me to have your meal.”

He took the Prophet (S) home. The Prophet (S) told to his daughter,
“Bring the food to me.” When the food was laid in front of him, he
covered it with a sheet of cloth and prayed to Allah. Then he took out
nine bowls of the soup and nine*naans* and sent to his wives. Then he
asked Fatima (as), her husband, ‘Ali (as) and the children to eat out of
the food. He then sent portions to the neighbors and sufficient quantity
of food was left thereafter to suffice for many days.

(23) The wife of Abdallah Muslim sent to the Prophet (S) meat of a goat
marinated and cooked with poison. At that time Bashar bin Baraa was with
the Prophet (S) who ate the meat. The Prophet (S) said that the goat is
telling that it has been cooked in venom. After a while Bashar died of
the poisoning. The Prophet (S) called the woman and asked her why she
laced the meat with poison. She said that the prophet (S) was the cause
of the killing of her husband and many others of her tribe. She had
thought that if he were a king like any other king, he would consume the
meat and die. But if he were the Prophet (S), Allah would forewarn him.

(24) Jabir bin Abdallah Ansari says that on the day of the Battle
of*Khandaq* (the trench), they were busy digging the trench when the
group felt very hungry and the Prophet (S) was extremely famished as
well. Jabir rushed to his house and asked his wife to prepare some food
for the Prophet (S). She got ready some cooked meat and a few*naans (*
pieces of bread). Jabir then went to the Prophet (S) and requested him
to come to his house to partake of the food.

The Prophet (S) asked the entire group of the companions to accompany
him to Jabir’s house to have food. Jabir was very worried that he would
face embarrassment because of grossly insufficient food available at his
place for the group. He approached his wife and said, “There are so many
guests with us, how can we serve all of them?” His wife asked him, “Did
you invite them or the Prophet (S) has himself asked them to join him?”
Jabir said, “The Prophet (S) himself has asked the persons to come.” His
wife, who was a pious lady, said, “then why do you worry!

The Prophet (S) knows better than you!” The Prophet (S) then asked Jabir
about the quantity of food available at the time. Jabir informed that he
had some meat and a few*naans.* The Prophet (S) asked Jabir to lay the
food

in a dish and put a sheet of cloth over it. Then take out one*naan* and
some meat and distribute to each individual. Jabir complied. To Jabir’s
surprise all the 3,000 troops were served with the food and even some
food remained thereafter!

(25) Saad bin Ibada came to the presence of the Prophet (S) one day when
he was observing a fast. He invited the Prophet (S) and
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) to break the fast at his place. The Prophet
(S) accepted the invitation and went with Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) to
break the fast at Saad’s place. After breaking the fast, the Prophet (S)
offered the prayer. When the prophet (S) was leaving for home, Saad
presented him with an unbroken horse. But miraculously the horse became
very docile. The food prepared in Saad’s house that day lasted for many
days thereafter.

(26) When the prophet (S) returned after signing the*treaty of
Hudaibiya* he passed near a well along the way, that was almost dry. He
ordered that none should go near the well till he permitted them to do
so. Then he called for some water, took it in his mouth and put it in
the well. The water in the well swelled up and reached to the parapet of
the well. All the troops and the animals with them quenched their thirst
to the full.

(27) Whatever information the Prophet (S) had given about the coming
days had all come true.

(28) When the Prophet (S) related the events of the*Shab al-Meraj* , the
hypocrites questioned their veracity. The Prophet (S) then related to
the hypocrites all that happened to them that night in his absence. This
made them quiet.

(29) In the*Battle of Tabook* the Prophet (S)’s troops ran out of water.
They cried*al-atash! Al-atash* (thirst! thirst!). The Prophet (S) asked
if anyone of them had some water. Abu Huraira brought a pitcher of
water. The Prophet (S) put some water in a goblet, put up his hands and
prayed. Thereafter he put his fingers in the goblet. When he brought out
his hand from the goblet, water started gushing out of his finger. All
the troops and their animals quenched their thirst and filled their pots
and goblets for the rest of the journey.

(30) The Prophet (S) noticed the sister of Abdallah bin Rawaha carrying
something in her hands. He asked her as to what she was taking with her
and where she was heading for. She said she was taking some dates for
her brother. He called her near him, and distributed the dates to the
persons who were at that moment digging the trench. Everyone ate the
dates to his fill and therewere sufficient remaining for the girl to
take with her.

(31) During another journey, the Prophet (S)’s party ran out of food
supplies. The companions were restless with hunger. He asked if anyone
had any food left, should bring it to him. Everyone put forth whatever
was left with him. The total quantity was about 500 grams of dates. He
put all that in a container, and offered a prayer. The dates increased
so much in quantity that the entire group had sufficient to eat till
they arrived at Medina.

(32) In one journey the Prophet (S)’s party ran out of water. They
discovered a dry well on the way. The Prophet (S) put his saliva in the
dry well that instantly got filled with water from its springs and
everyone quenched his thirst. This information reached all the corners
of Arabia. The

*Imposter Masleema* too put his saliva into a well. The well suddenly
dried up of water and never had any water in the future.

(33) Once the steed of Saraqa bin Jaasim got stuck in a morass. The
Prophet (S) prayed to Allah and the horse came out of the marsh. On
reaching home, Saraqa presented a sheep to the Prophet (S) that was
neither bearing nor giving milk. The Prophet touched its udders and it
started giving milk.

(34) Once the Prophet (S) was a guest at the place of a woman, by
name,*Umm Shareek.* The woman brought to the Prophet (S) a leathern
container that had a small quantity of rancid oil. The Prophet (S)
prayed and the container got filled with good oil that never got reduced
in quantity.

(35). When the Verse of*Tabbat* about Abu Lahab and his wife was
Revealed, then*Umm Jamil,* his wife, was furious and she carried a big
boulder with the intention of harming the Prophet (S). Abu Bakr informed
the Prophet (S) that*Umm Jamil* was heading towards him with the stone.
The Prophet (S) said, “Let her come! Allah takes care of me!!” When she
came near Abu Bakr, she asked him, “Where is Muhammad (S)?” Abu Bakr
replied that he didn’t know. D’Isappointed, she went away. Abu Bakr
asked the Prophet (S), “Despite being here, how is that you were not
visible to her?” The Prophet (S) said, “My Allah had erected a curtainm
between me and her at that moment!”

Then Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) told to the Jews there is a book that has
recorded all the Miracles performed by the Prophet of Islam (S). This
Book is a witness of all the earlier Divine Books.

The Jews said, “You have recounted all these miracles. What is the
guarantee that they are aunthentic or not?”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) retorted, “What is the proof of the Miracles of
the prophet Musa (as) that you recount?”

The Jews said, “These accounts have reached us through noble and
truthful people of our tribe. That is why we consider them authentic!”

The Imam (as) said, all the Miracles recounted to you have also been
received from truthful and pious persons. Further, they have been
recounted to you by a child of five years, who at his age, cannot
receive any worldly instruction or learning except through the Divine
will of Allah. Hearing this, they all expressed, “We bear witness that
there is no god but Allah, Muhammad (S) is his Prophet and you are his
Vicegerent of the time!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) got up and kissed the forehead of his son and
said, “No doubt! You will be the Vicegerent of the Prophet (S) after
me!”

The Fourth Benefit: The Last Of The Prophets Of Allah
-----------------------------------------------------

Our Prophet, Muhammad Sal Allah Alaihi wa Aalehi wa Sallam, through
the*Nuss* (Definitive word) of the Qur’an, is not only the Prophet (S)
of the*Humans and the Jinns* but there is not going to be any other
Prophet after him. He is totally free of any sins, minor or major, and
is*Masoom* (innocent). There are reliable traditions to prove that from
his first ancestors, Adam (as) and Eve, up to him, all the generations,
were free of polytheism and infidelity. They have always been the
noblest, respected and learned of all their contemporaries. Some vested
interests, in order to protect their own

leaders, have spread the calumny that some of the Prophet’s elders
were*kafir* (infidels).

There are examples of people who have even gone to the extent of saying
that some of the prophets were*kafir* and not innocent. The Jews too
have blamed some of the prophets of committing*maasi* (minor sins) and,
therefore the prophets too became sinners along with their own leaders
who committed sins.

The Fifth Benefit: The Excellence and The Qualities Of The Prophet
------------------------------------------------------------------

Bin Babawiyah narrates from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) asked Hind bin Abi Hala
about the appearance and personality of the Prophet (S). Hind said, “The
Prophet (S) had an imposing personality. The face was radiant that it
would put the full moon to shame! He was of average height--- neither
too tall nor short. His head was neither big nor small and the hair was
somewhat curly and soft. When the hair on his head used to grow, after
tonsuring, he would part them in the middle to facilitate anointing
while performing the ablution. Tonsuring of the head was not fashionable
in Arabia of those days and, generally people did this during*Haj*
and*Umra.*

The Prophet (S) had a fair complexion, wide forehead and pronounced
eyebrows. There was a vein between the two eyebrows that used to become
prominent when he was excited for something. His beard was dense and had
an average sized mouth. Arabs don’t consider it good to have small
mouths. The Prophet (S)’s teeth were very bright and beautiful. His
teeth were having clefts between them. On his chest there was a growth
of soft hair. His neck was bright and long and gave one the impression
as if it is made of silver. His body was neither thin nor heavy. His
bones were strong; his stomach and chest were flat.

The prophet (S)’s hands were long and big. His gait was neither that of
a proud person nor feminist. He used to walk with gravity, poise and
with slight bow of the head. While speaking with anyone, he would be
polite and soft. While looking at anyone, he would have affection
reflecting from his eyes. He used to take precedence in greeting others.
His talk used to be short and meaningful. He used to refrain from
unnecessary talk. He would be seldom angry on any one and was never
profuse in praising good food. He used to thank Allah for every bounty,
big or small. For upholding the truth, he would not have any
consideration for a friend or foe.

While experiencing anything enjoyable, the Prophet (S) would be moderate
in his praise. His laughter would be limited to a smile when a part of
his bright teeth would be exposed to view.

Imam Husayn (as) says that he inquired of his father, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as), about the treatment meted out by the Prophet (S) to his
immediate kin. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “At home the Prophet
(S) would divide his time into three. One part he would spend in prayer.
The second part was reserved for meeting the inmates of his house and
the third part of his time was for rest and relaxation. In the time
apportioned for relaxation, the Prophet (S) used to meet his companions
and

others who wished to seek clarifications from him on different matters
of personal or general interest.

His practice was that he would give audition first to those companions
who were more pious. He used to give profuse attention to the questions
and demands made by his visitors. While giving advice on Spiritual and
Religious matters, he would ask his visitors to disseminate the
information to others in their circle. If a person is invalid and for
some reason was unable to come personally to the Prophet (S), he asked
his visitors to communicate his queries to him and take back the replies
to the person. The Reward for this would not only be for the person who
sought the clarifications but more for the person who had been the
vehicle of carrying the information.”

Then Imam Husayn (as) inquired about the way the Prophet carried himself
while going out of his residence.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “While away from home, the Prophet
(S) would not talk much, except on matters of interest and benefit to
people. He used to exhort people to maintain amity and affection amongst
each other. When elders of other tribes visited, he would treat them
with due respect. He used to give the tidings of Rewards for good acts
to everyone. Praising the pious, he used to encourage them to more
piety. He used to respect very much the persons who had sympathy for the
Muslims. When he saw or heard about the sinful acts (*ma-aasi* ) he used
to express his sorrow and encourage the person to turn towards good
deeds.”

Imam Husayn (as) then asked his father about how the Prophet (S) carried
himself at group meetings. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “While
going for a meeting, and returning from one, the Prophet (S) would offer
a Prayer. He never looked for any particular place to sit in a meeting.
Wherever he found some space at the venue, he would squat.

Generally he liked to be in the last row. He also advised people not to
vie with one another to get a vantage place to sit in a meeting. He used
to deal with such affection with everyone at a meeting that they used to
get overwhelmed with his personal attention. Those who asked questions,
would never go d’Isappointed or d’Isatisfied. His behavior was such that
all those who interacted with him, friends or foes, would praise him. He
was kind on people the way a parent would be on his own children. His
meetings would be highlighted with patience, straightforwardness,
honesty and integrity. None was allowed to do backbiting of others at
his meetings. There used to be a very high degree of amity and goodwill
that people used to discuss each others’ problems and solve them with
mutual help.”

Imam Husayn (as) further asked about the treatment meted out by the
Prophet (S) to those who were present at his meetings.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “The Prophet (S) used to speak softly
and kindly with everyone. He would never, overtly or covertly, hurt
anyone’s feelings. He wouldn’t d’Isappoint or neglect even a sworn enemy
who came to meet him. He disliked three things that he always refrained
from, viz: debate (*munazera)* , dispute (*Mujadela)* and unnecessary
talk. He always tried to avoid tasks which were not beneficial.

The Prophet (S) also shunned three things about the people: 1. He never
criticized anyone. 2. Never aired others failings. 3. Never chased
others for their failings.

Whenever the Prophet (S) started speaking, he would have the rapt
attention of the audience. People never found fault with whatever he
spoke. His talk would be replete with good advice. Whenever a rustic
person came to the meeting and behaved improperly, he used to ask his
companions to bear with him. He gave particular attention to such
persons to listen to them and to solve their problems. While others
spoke, he would never intervene or interrupt till the persons completed
their talk.”

Imam Husayn (as) also asked the reason for the tranquility and quiet of
the Prophet.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “The Prophet (S)’s tranquility was
of four types:

When the other person was unreasonable, he would listen with*patience.*
Whenever he felt that there was a chance of hurt in speaking out, he
would maintain a discreet silence for the time. He had made such a good
combination of patience and forbearance that he would never get angry
for any reason whatsoever.

Besides the above, the Prophet (S) had four other very pronounced
qualities:

He would continue and perpetuate the good deeds that the people get
motivated too to perform good deeds to emulate their Master.

He shunned all undesirable acts and his followers did likewise.

For the benefit of his following, he would uphold good counsel.

He was steadfast on the path of good for this world and the Hereafter.

Muhammad Yaqub Kulaini narrates from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that
the Prophet (S) had three qualities that have never been found in anyone
else:

His body never cast a shadow.

Wherever he went, he left behind a fragrance that lingered for the next
three days. This was the sign for people to know that the Prophet (S)
had passed that way.

Whenever he passed near a rock or a tree, it appeared as if these things
were prostrating before him.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says that in the darkness of night his face
used to radiate like the full moon. Therefore whichever way he passed
its environs would become bright.

It is narrated that one of his wives lost a needle in the night when it
was dark. When the Prophet (S) came home, everything became bright in
the surroundings and the needle was recovered. His sweat used to be so
fragrant that sometimes it used to be difficult on the sense of smell.
Whenever he rinsed his mouth, the water used for the purpose would
become fragrant. No birds ever flew over his head. The Prophet (S) had a
unique faculty of seeing things behind his back. Whenever he exposed the
Seal of Prophet hood on his back, it used to shine like the sunlight. No
one ever noticed his stools because the earth used to hide it. Whichever
animal he used for his travelling, it never aged. Whenever the Prophet
(S) passed near any tree, it

used to bow down in obe’Isance. Flies and mosquitoes never sat on his
body.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) says that the Prophet (S) had never eaten
any bread made out of wheat. He did not eat bread made out of barley
more than three times a day. At the time of the Prophet (S)’s death, his
armour was under a mortgage with a Jew for four Dhiram. Although he was
ruling over the entire Arabia he did not have any gold, silver or other
valuables. One day the Prophet (S) distributed three hundred thousand
dhiram received in reparation of war. In the night one needy person came
and asked for help. The Prophet (S) said, “By Allah! Today in the house
of Muhammad (S) there isn’t a single dhiram or a pound of barley!

It is said that the Prophet (S) used to ride on the naked backs of the
horses. He used to repair his own foot ware. The Prophet (S) always used
to take precedence in greeting others. He used to squat with the slaves
on the ground and eat food with them. He used to say with pride that he
was the biggest slave of his Creator, Allah, because He has endowed his
choicest blessings on him. He took particular care to go and inquire
about the health of indisposed beggars and slaves. He always made it a
point to attend the burial of the dead.

Reliable sources narrate that once an Angel approached the Prophet (S)
and conveyed Allah’s Message, “If you wish we shall convert the land of
Mecca to gold for you!”

The Prophet (S) raised his head towards the sky and said, “O my
Sustainer! It is the wish of Muhammad (S) that he gets sufficient
nutrition at a time that he busies himself in Your worship and for the
second meal he craved for your providing him sustenance to continue his
supplications!”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said,

“After bearing witness to my Prophet hood the most important thing for
my followers is the love and affection for my Ahl-ul-Bayt.” Therefore
the verse of Tatheer has been revealed as a part of the Holy Qur’an in
the praise of the Ahl-ul-Bayt.


