Chapter 4: Refulgence Or Rays Of Light
======================================

The First Ray Of Light: The Need For The Imam
---------------------------------------------

The Imam is the empowered entity who has been appointed by Allah as the
Vicegerent of the Prophet (S) as guide for the spiritual and the
temporal affairs of the believers. It has already been explained in the
earlier chapter that guidance is not possible without the presence of
the Prophet or his Vicegerents at all times.

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said that Allah has clearly ordered the people
about the do’s and don’ts. He has also warned that the people should not
go against His Commandments and become cause of controversy and
punishment. Therefore it is imperative that the people have a mentor
ordained by Allah who can enforce the Commandments and guide the people.
If this were not the case then everyone would go his own way running
after selfish motives.

Allah, therefore, in His wisdom, has nominated an Imam (as) for every
period to prevent the people from discord and make them follow the norms
laid down by Allah.

It is an established fact that no society or sect has functioned without
a leader. Then how was it possible for the all-knowing Allah to leave
His Creations without an Imam to guide them on the right path.

It is narrated that a group of people went to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as).
At that moment the Imam (as) asked his student Hisham, to narrate the
discussion he had with Umro bin Ubaid of Basra. Hisham said, “O Son of
the Prophet (S)! I feel shy to speak in your presence.”

The Imam (as) said, “you must comply with the orders of your Imam.”

Hisham said, “O Imam (as)! There was a lot of talk about the erudition
of Umro bin Ubaid in Basra and he used to lecture a group of
Ahl-ul-Jamaa. Having heard a lot about him I went to the Basra Mosque to
listen to his talk. Umro was sitting proudly clad in the raiment of the
learned. The people were asking him questions and he was answering them.
I was seated in the back row. I stood up and asked him:

O learned person! I am a traveller. Do I have your permission to ask you
some questions.

He replied, “yes.”

I asked him, “do you have eyes?”

He replied, “O son! What sort of question you asked? What reply can I
give to this foolish question!”

I said, “Yes this is my question; please reply.”

He said, “Yes I do have eyes.”

I asked him, “What do you do with these eyes?”

He said, “I see with my eyes.”

I asked, “Do you have a nose?”

He said, “yes.”

I asked him, “What do you do with your nose.”

He replied, “I distinguish between fragrant and foul smells with my
nose.”

I asked him, “Do you have a mouth?”

He said, “yes”

I asked, “What do you do with the mouth?”

He replied, “I find the taste of things through my mouth.”

I asked him, “Do you have a tongue?”

He said, “yes.”

I asked, “What do you do with your tongue?”

He said, “I speak through my tongue.”

I asked, “Do you have ears?”

He said, “yes”

I asked, “What do you do with your ears?”

He said, “I hear with my ears.”

I asked, “Do you have arms?”

He replied, “yes.”

I asked, “What do you do with your arms?”

He replied, “I lift things with my arms.”

I asked, “Do you have a heart?”

He said, “yes.”

I asked, “What do you do with your heart?”

He replied, “With the heart, I distinguish things that happen to the
different parts of my body and the senses.”

I asked him, “Are these limbs and senses subordinate to the heart?”

He replied, “yes.”

I said, “How is it that in spite of being fit, the limbs and senses are
dependent on the heart?”

He replied, “Whenever these parts of my body have a doubt about
something they seek the advice of the heart to convert the doubt into
clarity and decision.”

I asked, “This means that Allah has provided the heart in the human body
to make decisions when the limbs and the senses are in doubt?”

He said, “yes.”

I asked, “O father of Marwan! God has not left the limbs and other parts
of human body without the heart that controls and guides them. Is it
possible that he would leave the world without an Imam or a guide?”

The scholar of Basra sat quiet for a long while. Then he turned towards
me and asked, “Are you Hisham?”

I replied, “No.”

He asked, “Are you Hisham’s companion?”

I replied, “No.”

He asked, “Where do you hail from?”

I replied, “I am an inhabitant of Kufa.”

Hearing this he said, “Then! I have no doubt you are Hisham!”Then
getting up he embraced me and made me sit near him. After this dialogue
Umro refrained from making any remarks against the True Faith.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) smiled and asked, “O Hisham! Where did you
learn all this?”

Hisham said, “Master! These thoughts just came to my mind.”

The Imam (as) said, “the things which came to you as an intuition are
recorded in the books of Ibrahim and Musa (as).”

Imam Zainul ‘Abidin (as) has said, “we are the Vicegerents of Allah and
the Prophet (S) for the people of this world. We are the Masters of the
pious and the shield against the retribution of Allah for them, the same
way as the stars are the shields for the inhabitants of the sky. We are
the people for whom, and because of whom, Allah has protected and kept
the earth intact. With our intercession the rain falls. If the earth
were devoid of us, the Imams (as), then it would break and its
inhabitants would perish in the debris.”

Then the Imam (as) added, “Ever since Allah created Adam (as), the earth
has never been without a Vicegerent (*Hujjat).* This*Hujjat* or*Caliph*
of*Allah* has always been there, either publicly proclaimed or in the
state of hiding. If such was not the case, then there wouldn’t have been
the worshippers of*Allah* on this earth.”

The narrator adds that he asked the Imam (as), “O son of the Prophet
(S)! If the*Hujjat* or*Imam* remains in hiding, then what advantage will
be there?”

The Imam (as) replied, “The Imam (as) remaining in hiding is like the
time when the sun goes into hiding. You do understand the advantage
accruing while the sun remains in hiding!”

Jabir Jaafi narrates that he asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) about the
need of the people for prophets and Imams.

The Imam (as) replied, “The Prophet (S) or his Vicegerents are necessary
for the human race to remain in a constant state of progress and protect
them from Allah’s Punishment through their Intercession.”

Therefore, Allah has Himself observed, “O My Habeeb (*the endearment
Allah has used for the Prophet Muhammad)* ! As long as you are on the
earth, I shall not inflict My*azaab* (punishment) on its inhabitants”
The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “The stars provide protection to the
denizens of the skies so also my*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* the members of my family,
are a guarantee for the protection of the people of the earth. If the
stars are obliterated from the sky, the sky wouldn’t exist. Similarly,
if my Vicegerents are not on the earth, then the earth too would
vanish.”

The Prophet (S)’s*Ahl-ul-Bayt* is the group of Infallible members of the
Prophet (S)’s family about whom Allah says, “O believers! Obey Allah,
His Prophet (S) and the*Uli al Amr.” Uli al Amr* are those Infallible
persons who are free of all sin, are pure and*Masoom* or Innocent, and
the chosen people of Allah. Allah provides sustenance to the people with
the blessings of these Infallible persons.The Ahl-ul-Bayt are with
the*Qur’an* and the*Qur’an* is with them.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “If only two persons remain on the
earth, one of them would be the*Imam (as)* of the time.” He also said,
“Jibrael came to the Prophet (S) and said, ‘Allah has observed that He
would not make the earth void of the Imams (as) and the learned
(*Aalams)* who would instruct the people the ways of obeying Me and
following My Commands.I shall not allow an interregnum between two
Prophets (S) that the people don’t remain without Guidance. I shall not
leave the Satan unfettered that he goes about misguiding the people and
they remain without the Divine*Hadi,* the Guide. This Guide, either with
his physical presence,

or from hiding, would continue to provide guidance and advice to the
believers.’”

The Imam (as) also said, “Never shall this earth be without the person
who will not warn the people who commit excesses in the Faith or make
distortions*(thareef)* in the words, arrangement and interpretation or
commentary of the*Qur’an.*

Besides everything, it is common sense that to keep the people of the
world on the Right Path, an Imam, Guide and Leader is necessary at all
times. It is also necessary that the*Imam (as)* should be appointed by
Allah (*Mansoos min Allah).* When Allah has provided norms for every
aspect of human life in the Book, then how would he leave the selection
for the august office of the Imam to the discretion of the poor
intellects of men.

All the Prophets (S) of the past themselves nominated their Vicegerents
or successors. How is it possible that the Last Prophet (S), the Most
Immaculate of all the Prophets (S) would keep quiet on the crucial
aspect of succession after him. All the earlier prophets (as) were
certain that there would be Prophets to follow them. Even if they did
not appoint their Vicegerents, their followers would not have remained
without Divine Guidance.

But the last of the Prophets (S) knew that after him, till the Day of
Reckoning, there would not be another Prophet to come. In these
circumstances it was imperative for him to nominate a Line of
Vicegerents who would keep his people Guided till the Final Day. The
Prophet (S) was so careful about his succession that whenever he was
absent on his campaigns, he would take care to nominate a vicegerent to
take care of the affairs in his absence. Then how was it possible that
he would not prepare for his*Ghaebat al-Kubra* , The Final Departure,
from this world, without nominating his successor and vizier.

For his followers he has given the advice that every individual must
draw a will when the time for departure from this world draws nigh, then
how is it possible that he himself would have abruptly departed
intestate from the world! There is also a condition that the Successor
(*Wasi)* and the*Imam* (the spiritual and temporal leader) has to be
a*Masoom* (immaculate and infallible) individual. Such Imams are the
Chosen of Allah.

Saad bin Abdallah Qummi reports that once he had a discussion with a
hardcore imposter. The man said, “Pity on you*Rawafiz* (dissenters) that
you speak ill of the Prophet (S)’s companions and blame them that they
had no affection for him. To the contrary, Abu Bakr, because of his
eminence being one of the earliest converts to Islam, was better than
all other companions of the Prophet (S).

The Prophet (S) used to hold him so close to his heart that on the eve
of the Migration (*Hegira)* took Abu Bakr along in the cave for hiding
to save him from the sword of the enemy and later on become his
successor and Caliph. ‘Ali (as) was left to sleep in the Prophet (S)'s
bed that even if he was assassinated, it wouldn’t have made any big
difference in the matter of succession. Abu Bakr was the first to adopt
Islam. Tell me, was his conversion voluntary or under any duress?”

Saad thought for a while, “If I accepted that the conversion was
voluntary, then the person would say that there wouldn’t be any question
of*nifaq* (hypocrisy) in the conduct of Abu Bakr. And if I said that the
conversion of Abu Bakr was under duress, then it would be a wrong
statement that Islam had not become such a big force at that time that
one could even imagine any use of coercion.

I was totally confused and sought some time from him to be able to
answer his question. Along with some more queries I went to Sammara to
meet Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as). Along with me came Ahmed bin Ishaq, the
Representative*(Vakil)* of the Imam (as) who carried with him 160
sachets of Dinarts and Dirhams as a presentation to the Imam from the
Shi’as of our place.

We both went to the presence of the Imam (as) and respectfully greeted
him. The Imam (as) reciprocated our greetings and asked us to be seated.
The place was aglow with the radiance of the face of the Imam (as). On
the lap of the Imam (as) sat a pretty child whose look would put to
shame a hundred moons! In the hands of the child there was a pomegranate
made of gold, with which he was playing.

Ahmed brought out all the sachets from his bag and put in front of the
Imam (as). The Imam (as) put all that money in front of the child and
said, ‘Your Shi’as have sent you all this as a gift. Count it.’ The
child said, ‘Does the Imam (as) permit me to touch the tainted and dirty
money with my pure hands!’ The Imam (as) told to Ahmed, ‘Open one of the
sachets and keep the money in front of your Imam (as) in waiting.’ The
child looked at the money once and said, ‘This is so much money and is
from such and such a person from Qom.

Out of the money so much is legitimate (*Halal)* and the rest is
illegitimate (*Haram)* Out of the 62 gold sovereigns there are two with
faded markings, they are illegitimate.’ Ahmed counted the coins and
found them to be exactly 62 in number. He was able to identify the two
coins with faded markings. The Imam (as) looked at his son and said,

‘O son! You are absolutely right!’ Then Ahmed opened the other sachets,
one after the other and the child correctly told about the number of
coins in each and also about the legitimate and illegitimate money in
each of them. Then the Imam (as) said, ‘Collect the illegitimate coins
and give them back to their owners.’

Then the Imam said, “O Ahmed! Where is the piece of cloth that was sent
by a certain person for me?”

Ahmed said, “I have kept that cloth with my luggage. I shall immediately
fetch it for you.” When Ahmed went out to fetch the cloth, the Imam (as)
turned his attention towards me and said, “What do you want to say?” I
said, “I have certain questions for which I seek your guidance.” The
Imam (as) said, “You may refer yout questions to this son of mine.”

I said respectfully, “O Master! The son of My Master! We have heard the
Prophet (S) had given the right of divorcing his wives to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). Therefore, at the Battle of Jamal,
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) sent a message to Um-al-Mu’mineen Ayesha,
that she had become the cause of shedding the blood of Muslims. If she
didn’t refrain from

proceeding further with the conflict, he would be constrained to divorce
her from being the wife of the Prophet (S). What sort of divorce was
this, that was to become effective even after the demise of the Prophet
(S)?”

The Imam (as)’s son replied, “Allah has given the respected title of*Umm
al Mu’mineen* (the mother of the Believers) to the Prophet (S)’s wives.
The Prophet (S) had said to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) that if, after
his demise, his wives behaved disobediently towards the Commandments of
Allah, and confront you for battle, then you have the right to divorce
them. This would mean that such wives would be deprived of the title
of*Umm al Mu’mineen.”*

I said, “O son of the Prophet (S)! Tell me about the tradition that
Prophet Musa (as) was ordered by Allah to remove his footwear. Some
scholars say that the footwear was made out of the skin of a cadaver and
therefore it was unclean (*najis)* and unfit for wearing to the Holy
Place.”

He replied, “This is wrong. Prophet Musa (as) was a Prophet and there is
no question of his not knowing whether a thing was*najis* or not.
Prophet Musa (as) used the same footwear while offering his prayers.”

I said, “Then what is the meaning of Allah asking Prophet Musa (as) to
remove his*naalain* (the footwear)?”

He replied, “When Prophet Musa (as) reached the place where one should
not have the thought of anyone else in his mind than Allah, Musa (as)
was thinking of his wife. Therefore Allah told him, ‘O Musa (as)! This
is the Place of Nearness! One should not have the thoughts of love of
anyone other than Allah at this Place! Therefor abdicate the love of
the*Kafsh al-Pa* (the footwear) from your mind. (It is a general
practice in the East to allegorically refer to wives as*Kafsh al-Pa-*
Therefore if someone dreams of the theft of his footwear, the
interpretation of the dream would be that he might be separated from his
spouse.

Saad asked, “O son of the Prophet (S)! What is meant by the
expression*Kaaf-Haa-Yaa-Ain-Suad* in the Holy Qur’an?”

He replied, “These are Hidden Message (*Akhbare Ghaibat)* from Allah.
Their interpretation was first given to Prophet Zakaria (as) and then to
our Prophet (S).

Prophet Zakaria (as) had prayed to Allah to be taught the names of
the*Aal al-Aba* that he would recite them to ward off evil. Gibrael came
and taught to Prophet Zakaria (as) the names of the Five Infallible
Persons of the Prophet (S)’s Family.

Whenever Prophet Zakaria (as) uttered the names of Muhammad, ‘Ali,
Fatima and Hasan, he used to feel delighted. But whenever he uttered
Husayn (as)’s name, he would cry. Prophet Zakaria (as) asked Allah why
he felt like crying whenever he took the name of Husayn (as)? Allah
narrated about the Tragedy of Karbala and explained to him about the
occurrence of the acronym

*Kaa-Haa-Yaa-Ain-Suad* in the Holy Qur’an:.

*Kaa* stands for***Karbala,*** where the small entourage of Imam Husayn
(as) consisting of 72 persons was martyred,

***Haa*** *stands for* ***Husayn (as),*** who was the Chief of the
Martyrs of Karbala,

***Yaa*** **for** ***Yazid,*** the perpetrator of the Tragedy of
Karbala,

***Ain*** **for** ***Atash*** **or** ***Thirst*** **,** the thirst of
the children, men and women in Husayn (as)’s camp who were denied access
to water for three full days when the river Euphrates flowed nearby,
**and**

***Suad*** **for** ***Sabr,*** **or,** patience and forbearance facing
the cruelty of Yazid’s men in Karbala, during the battle and, by the
surviving members of the family, on the way to Syria and in the court of
Yazid.”

When Prophet Zakaria (as) came to know about the Tragedy, he didn’t
leave the Mosque for three days. He cried, wailed and repeatedly said,
“O Allah! You will put your Beloved Person to such an extreme test. How
will Your Habib, the Prophet Muhammad (S) feel about this episode? How
will ‘Ali (as), Your Prophet’s Vicegerent bear the great loss? What will
be the condition of Husayn (as)’s mother, Fatima Zehra (as)? How will
Hasan (as) bear the irreparable loss?

O Creator! For the sake of the Noble*Panjatan* (the five Immaculate
Persons of the Prophet (S)’s family give me one son, equal in looks and
qualities to Husayn (as), fill my heart with his love, and put him to as
severe a test as you would put Husayn (as)! Make me a witness to this
tragedy that I become as sorrowful as your Habib, Muhammad (S)!”

Allah answered prophet Zakaria (as)’s prayers and gave him prophet Yahya
(as) as his son. Prophet Yahya (as) was a premature born, delivered in
the sixth month of conception, as was Imam Husayn (as), and like Imam
Husayn (as) he too was martyred in similar tragic circumstances.”

Then I asked, “O! Son of the Prophet (S)! How is it that the people
cannot select their own Imam?”

He replied, “The people would select an Imam who would either turn out
to be the reformer of the society or can also turn out to be the enemy
of the society and the people.”

I rejoined, “Definitely, people would choose an Imam who would be a
well-wisher and reformer of the people!”

The Imam said, “Is is not a possibility that the people unanimously
select a person to be their Imam expecting him to be righteous, just and
capable of reforming the society. But in practice he might prove himself
unworthy of the trust placed in him, proves himself an enemy of the
people!”

This is why, an Imam can be Decreed only by One who is Infallible in His
actions and choice. And that Selector or Ordainer of the Imamate is none
other that Allah. He knows the feelings of the hearts and knows the
hidden things.”

Then the Imam (as) asked, “Could Prophet Musa (as), one of the Prophets
of Allah, have made an error in selecting his Succesor and Imam?”

I nodded in disagreement.

Then the Imam (as) said, “O Saad! Your opponent has also said that since
the Prophet (S) knew that Abu Bakr would succeed him as the Caliph, he
took him along on his journey of*Hegira,* lest he got killed staying
back in*Mecca* and the matter of the succession getting jeopardized.

Why didn’t you reply to the person this way. The Prophet (S) had said,’
The Caliphate after me shall be for thirty years’. According to you
people the thirty years’ period saw the terms of the first four caliphs.
Then, if the

Prophet didn’t want to put the Caliphate in jeopardy, he should have
taken all the four along with him to the cave and not only one. Do you
people think that the prophet (S) had no concern for the safety of the
other three prospective caliphs?”

I asked the Imam (as), “Another question my opponent asked was whether
the acceptance of the Faith of Islam by Abu Bakr and Omer was voluntary
or was under some sort of duress?”

The Imam (as) said, “Why didn’t you reply to your opponent that the
acceptance of Islam by the two persons was neither voluntary nor under
duress, but it was motivated by sheer avarice. These persons were in
close league with the Jews and infidels and had heard from them of the
predictions in the Torah of the coming of Muhammad (S) as the Prophet
and that his reign would be farther and wider than the kingdom of*Bakht
Nasr.* These two persons, therefore, adopted Islam that perhaps the
State would, at some future time, come in their hands. But in their
hearts, they continued with their original beliefs.

Therefore, whenever they felt that their plans were failing, they gave
overt and covert indication of their true color. When the Prophet (S)
was surrounded by the enemies during the battle of Ohud they thought
everything was lost, and flew like the*munafiqeen* (the hypocrites) to
the top of the hillock to save their own lives. There is also the
incidence when these people hung empty leather oil containers near the
Prophet’s house with the purpose of scaring his camel to run wild and
drop him down. But Allah forewarned the Prophet (S) of this foul scheme
and saved him from harm.

Similarly, during the temporal Caliphate of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as),
Talha and Zubair professed allegiance to him only with the craving to be
nominated governors to important provinces of the realm. But when they
failed in this attempt, they terminated the allegiance and prepared for
battle with Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as).

Saad says that when the son of Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) completed his
talk, the Imam (as) left to offer prayers along with his son. Saad came
out of the house and found Ahmed bin Ishaq very disturbed and crying.
When asked the reason, he said, “The piece of cloth that I had brought
for the Imam (as) is not there in my luggage!” Saad told him, “What is
the need for crying? Go to the Imam (as) and express your regrets that
the cloth was lost or misplaced.”

Ahmed went to the presence of the Imam (as) and immediately returned
with a smiling face. Saad asked him about the sudden change of his mood.
He said, “When I reached the presence of the Imam (as), I found the same
piece of cloth under his feet, in the act of offering his prayer!” They
stayed at Sammara for a few more days. Ahmed took two elderly persons
from Qom for an audition with the Imam (as) and said, “A thousand
salutations to you and your noble ancestors! Now I seek your permission
to leave, although I do it with a heavy heart! I pray to Allah that I
get another opportunity to meet you soon.

The Imam (as) said, “Ahmed! Don’t pray for the fulfillment of this wish!
This is your last journey in this world. After this, you will depart for
the Other World.”

When Ahmed heard this, he swooned with shock. When he regained senses,
he told to the Imam (as), “O Imam (as)! Give me something of your
raimeent that I use it in place of the shroud for my burial!”

The Imam (as) took out 13 Dirhams from under the carpet and gave to
Ahmed and said, “Use this money for personal expenses. Your coffin will
reach you in time!”

Saad says that on their return journey they halted at the stage of
Halwan. At nightfall Ahmed asked them to leave him alone. They all went
to every individual quarter to sleep. When they went to Ahmed’s room
early next morning, Kafur, the servant of Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) was
emerging out of the room. He said, “May Allah help you bear the loss
with forbearance! With the orders of the Imam (as) I have given the last
bath and the shroud to Ahmed. You may now arrange for his burial.”

Bin Babawiyah narrates from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that as many times
as the Prophet (S) went for the*Meraj,* the most important order that he
received from Allah was about the*Imamat,* Vicegerency, of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). When the time for his death drew nigh,
Jibrael brought a missive from Allah on which was recorded the duties of
the Prophet (S) and his Vicegerents.

Jibrael, after conveying the Greetings from Allah, asked the Prophet (S)
whether the instructions being conveyed are acceptable to him. The
Prophet asked all the visitors to leave his presence and called
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) near to him. He then read the instructions
given on the missive from Allah and told to Jibrael, “The Master’s
instructions are acceptable to his servant. Whatever hardships come in
the way of fulfillment of these orders, we; myself and my*Ahl-ul-Bayt* ,
shall bear with equanimity as our duty.”

Jibrael then departed. The Prophet (S) called his daughter, Fatima (as),
and her sons, Hasan (as) and Husayn (as). He read to them Allah’s
instructions. Then he asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “O Abu Turab!
Will you bear the hardships in store for you? You shall have to be
patient when the enemies inflict excesses on you. When they deprive you
of your rights, you will have to keep your calm. O ‘Ali (as)! When your
beard will get smeared with blood, you should not utter a word of
protest.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “O Prophet of Allah (as)! When all
these things are acceptable to you, then I am only your slave and
servant! Insha Allah! You will find me patient and forbearing.” Then the
Prophet (S) turned to his daughter, Fatima (as), and said, “O Fatima!
Will you bear all the hardships in store for you with patience? Your
belongings will be grabbed, the*Door of Imamat* will be demolished,
Mohsin will be martyred. You shall be the witness to the hardships
inflicted by his enemies on ‘Ali (as).”

The obedient and loving daughter of the Prophet (S) said, “O father!
When you are willing to bear all the hardships, then your daughter would
bow her head to Allah’s wishes.But, tell me, what have you read in the
missive about my son Husayn (as). What is in store for him? Will he
receive 1950 blows on his body after three days of hunger and thirst in
the view of his family and children, will he witness his friends and
sons martyred before

him, and, even the six months old baby, Asghar, becoming victim of the
venomous arrow. Will all this happen in your presence?”

The Prophet (S) replied, “No! My daughter! This will happen after me!”
She asked, “Will Ab al Hasan, ‘Ali (as), be a witness?” The Prophet (S)
said, “No!” She asked, “Shall I be there?’ He replied, “No! You too will
not be there.” When Fatima Zahra (as) heard this, she swooned and fell
unconscious. The Prophet (S) tried to console his daughter, “Won’t you
bow down your head to the wish of Allah!”

Lady Fatima (as) revived and said, “O Baba! How could Fatima go against
the wishes of the Creator, Allah! But Baba! I have nourished my child
through hard work at the grinding stone. Can you not pray to Allah to
spare Husayn (as) of the extreme Sacrifice? I am afraid, my delicate
child might not bear the insurmountable hardships!”

The Prophet (S) said, “My Daughter! What can I say to Allah! Even if you
lift your hands towards the Heaven and curse the cruel people, then no
living creature will remain on the face of the earth. But your son,
through this supreme sacrifice, will be the saviour of the True Faith,
and shall achieve a highly elevated position. O my daughter! Your two
sons, Hasan and Husayn (as), will be the chiefs of the youth of the
Heaven, you will be the lady of the Heaven and ‘Ali (as) will be keeper
of the Cistern of Kawthar, and your father will be the master of the
Heaven and the Intercessor on the Day of Judgement!”

Fatima Zahra (as) replied, “O Baba! If the Faith needs this supreme
sacrifice, I accept it. But you must get the consent of Husayn (as)
too.” The Prophet (S) then called Imam Husayn (as) near him and said, “O
my son Husayn (as)! Are you ready to offer the extreme sacrifice that
has been ordered by Allah for you? Are you willing to face this
difficult test? This will be in the best interests of the True Faith of
Islam!”

Husayn (as) smiled and said, “O Grand-Father! Don’t ask me. When on the
sands of Karbala, the weapon of the assassin will be on my throat, there
shall be the words of thanks for Allah on my tongue. You will yourself
hear about it and witness the forbearance of Husayn!”

The Prophet (S) departed from this world, The Missive remained with
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). The Prophet (S)’s daughter bore the
tribulations caused by her enemies with equanimity and passed away
within three months of the demise of her father. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) faced all the troubles and hardships till Bin Muljim attacked him
with a poisoned sword while he was prostrating in prayer.

At that moment Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “By the Lord of Kaaba!
I have succeeded! I have fulfilled my promise! I was, till now, the
conqueror of Khaiber, now I am the Cupbearer of the Cistern of Kawthar!
The Missive that I have will pass from hand to hand of the Imams (as)
till it reaches the Last of the Imams! Every Imam will fulfil his duties
exactly according to the norms laid forth in the Missive. But the Last
of The Imams (as), who will be endowed with long life, will have the
opportunity to reform the people of the Faith who have gone astray.

Finding the people disobeying the norms, then the*Hujjat* (object) of
calling the people to reform would be over and the time for Allah
sending

retribution for the hardships inflicted on the Prophet and the Imams
(as) would be ripe. All this will happen during the period of*Raj-at*
(the Resurrection). Every Shi’a has to have Faith in the Institution
of*Raj-at.* It has also to be borne in mind that the trials and
tribulations of the Imams (as) were not to test their strong Faith,
Allah, Who has the Knowledge of All Hidden Things is fully aware of the
Faith of these Immaculate Imams. The trials were with the sole purpose
to prove to the people that if Husayn (as) was chosen to be the Leader
of the Youth of Heaven, it was because of his supreme sacrifice in the
cause of the Faith.

In fact awarding the honor of the leadership of the Youth of*Jannat* is
the Exclusive Prerogative of Allah and the*Hasanain (as)* were the
chosen ones for that distinction.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Jibrael came to the
Prophet (S) and gave him a Missive from Allah that had described the
Duties of the Prophet (S) and all his successors. The Prophet (S) opened
the missive, read it and said to Jibrael that he totally agreed to the
orders of his Lord, the Creator.

Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) opened the portion of the Missive meant
for him, read it, acted on it and departed after bearing all the
tribulations in store for him. Lady Fatima (as) too fulfilled her
obligations according to the Missive. Then followed Imam Hasan and Imam
Husayn (as) who measured up to the norms prescribed in the Missive. The
Missive shall pass through the hands of all the Imams (as) till it comes
in the possession of the Twelfth, the Last Imam (as). He will take
revenge for the hardships inflicted by their enemies on
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt.*

The Second Ray of Light: The Chastity of The Imams
--------------------------------------------------

The True Faith of Ja’fariah professes that the Imam (as), from his
childhood to the death is possessor of Immaculate Chastity and free of
all minor and major sins. But those groups who say that chastity is not
a necessary qualifying characteristic to be sought in an Imam, is
because of the fact that candidates they put forth for the august
position were for years in the darkness of infidelity prior to accepting
Islam. Any person with right thinking knows that entrusting matters of
Religious Reforms to a person with a sinful past cannot be effective
when compared to the leadership of a True and Chaste Imam.

In fact, the edicts of a person of the former type might create a high
degree of sedition in the society. When such a person is deposed from
his office, on being discovered that he had been issuing harmful orders,
might create dissension and schisms in the community. Either way, such
leaders are a danger to the social fabric. The example of Yazid is a
case in point that the temporal caliphate falling in his hands became
the cause of great transgression and debauchery not only in him and his
retainers, but it spread as a disease to the society. Therefore, Allah
has ordered that the Chosen in Authority (*The Ulu al Amr)* are the
Immaculate Innocents (*The masoomeen)* whose obedience is mandatory for
the believers.

Therefore, Allama Fakruddin Raazi has written in his Commentary of the
Qur’an that*Ulu al Amr* connotes only the*Masoom* and none else, and
there is an injunction that they must be implicitly obeyed. To the
contrary,

obeying the orders of a person who approves of taboo (*Haram)* acts is
forbidden. Allah will not order people obeying a person who is a sinner
himself, and is advising others against sinning.

Allah, addressing Prophet Ibrahim (as), in the Holy Qur’an, clarifies
the point thus:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿لاَ يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ.﴾
</p>

***“My Authority shall not reach the transgressors.”**(2:124)*****

The person who remained an infidel even for a day, is in the ranks of
the transgressors (*thalemeen).* Therefore it is to the advantage of the
people to be with the*Sadeqeen (* the veracious). And verily veracious
are the Imams (as)!

The Third Ray Of Light: The Verse Of Purity (The Ayat al-Tatheer)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

It has been recorded at regular intervals that the Verse of Purity has
been revealed in the praise of the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* who are recognized as
the*Aaale Aba* and according to some traditions all the Imams (as) are
the subject of this Verse.

The author of*Kashaf,* although a very biased person, records in detail
the event of*Mubahila* . When the Prophet (S) invited the Christians
of*Najran* for*Mubahila* (mutual imprecation to prove one’s point), the
Christians requested for some time that they wanted to discuss the
matter with their Bishop. The Bishop said that Muhammad (S) was truly
the Prophet and he has presented the truth in front of you. Whosoever
takes recourse to an imprecation with a Prophet gets destroyed. If you
take any such step, it will be calamitous for your community. If you
wish to safeguard your community then go and seek for a truce.

On the morning of the appointed day the Prophet (S) came out for the
purpose of*Mubahila* with Imam Husayn (as) in his arms, Imam Hasan (as)
holding the finger of his right hand and behind him followed Fatima and
‘Ali (as). Thus arrived the small group into the selected ground and the
Prophet (S) told to the four Immaculates with him that the moment he
uttered the prayer against the opponents, all the four of them should
say, “Aameen!” On the other side, when the Bishop of Najran saw this
scene, he told to his people, “O group of Christians! I see in front of
me such faces that if they pray, the mountain will move from its place!
Don’t enter into an imprecation with them, otherwise there will not
remain a single Christian on the Earth!”

Therefore, all those persons came to the presence of the Prophet (S) and
told him that they decided not to have an imprecation with them.

The Prophet (S) then said, “If you don’t wish to have an imprecation as
per our previous agreement, then you accept Islam.”

The Christians refused to accept this suggestion.

Then the Prophet (S) said, “In this event, prepare for a battle!”

They said, “we do not have the strength to battle with you and we want a
truce.”

Therefore the truce was made on the condition that every year two
thousand*Hillas* were to be given in the month of*Safr* and one thousand
in

the month of*Rajab* , thirty high quality chains of arm to also be given
every year. After the truce the Prophet (S) told them that if the
Christians had not entered into this agreement and opted for the
imprecation, no single person of the group would have lived. Even the
birds on the trees of the forest would have perished and the entire
community of Christians would have perished within the period of one
year.

The author of the book*Kashaaf* quotes from Um-al-Mu’mineen Ayesha that
the Prophet (S) arrived from outside one day wearing a shawl made of
black hair. Then came Hasan, Husayn, ‘Ali and Fatima (as). He took all
of them under his shawl.Then the Prophet (S) recited the following verse
from the Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.﴾
</p>

***“Allah wishes, O Ahl-ul-Bayt, to keep all sin (rijs) away from you,
and keep you Pure as Pure could be.”*** **(33:33)**

Then the author of*Kashaaf* asks a question why the Prophet (S) took
along with him the same persons on the day of*Mubahila* ? Usually,
people don’t involve their near and dear on such risky ventures where
there is possibility of loss of lives. But the Prophet (S) was confident
of the Truth of his Stand and he knew that, as mentioned in the Verse of
Purity, they were all virtuous persons.

Malik, one of the Imams of Ahl-ul-Jamaa writes in his book,*Mauta:*

“After the Revelation of the Verse of Purity, for a period of about six
months, the Prophet (S) used to stop at the door of Fatima (as)’s house
every morning on his way to the Mosque for the*Fajr* prayer and say in a
loud voice”

<p dir="rtl">
الصَّلاةَ يَا أَهْلَ البَيْتِ! إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمْ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
</p>

*Prayer, OAhl-ul-Bayt. Allah wishes, O Ahl-ul-Bayt, to keep all sin away
from you, and keep you Pure as Pure could be.*

Saheeh*Abi Dawood* too records the event the same way. Anas, Saheeh
Bukhari (Vol 4), Saheeh Muslim etc have narrated from Um-al-Mu’mineen
Ayesha the same tradition. In the Saheeh Muslim, Volume 4, in the
Chapter on the Qualities of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen, it is quoted from Saad
bin Abi Wiqas that when the Verse of Imprecation (*Mubahila)* was
revealed, the Prophet (S) called ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn (as) and
asked them to enter under his shawl with him and told to Allah,“ These
are my Ahl-ul-Bayt!”

Abu Dawood narrates from Umme Salema that the Verse of Purity was
revealed in her house. She said that at that time ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan
and Husayn (as) were with the Prophet (S) under his shawl. She was
herself seated near the door when the Prophet (S) prayed to Allah, “O
Allah! These are my Ahl-ul-Bayt. Keep all sin (*Rijs)* away from them”.
Umme Salema went forward and told to the Prophet (S), “Am I not one of
your Ahl-ul-Bayt?” The Prophet (S) replied, “No! You are my spouse. You
r Hereafter will be good!”

Similar statements are recorded in several books of the Ahl-ul-Jamaa.
Here*Rijs* does not on ly mean sin, but implies all sorts of weaknesses
and ills. It is Allah’s Commitment that He will Keep the Ahl-ul-Bayt in

Immaculate Purity! Therefore, these Holy Individuals wouldn’t even utter
a falsehood. It is an established fact of the history that every Imam
(as) had publicly claimed that he was the Imam of the time appointed by
Allah. This proves their claim was right and true!

The Fourth Ray Of Light: The Excellence Of The Ahl-ul-Bayt
----------------------------------------------------------

Bin Babawiyah quotes through reliable source that Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir
(as) has said that the Prophet (S) has observed, “The love for me and my
Ahl-ul-Bayt will give succor to the believers on seven occasion, that
are:

At the time of death

In the Grave.

1. At the time of*Maba’th.*

2. When the*Nama al-Aamal* (The Inventory of Deeds is compiled)

3. At the time of Audit of Deeds (*Ba waqt al-H’Isab)*

4. At the time of balancing of deeds*(Ba Waqt al-Meezan)*

5. While on the Bridge of*Sirat.”*

Harith Hamadani says that once he went to the presence of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) who asked him,

“O Harith! What is the purpose of your coming here?”

Harith replied, “I have been drawn here by my desire to meet you!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “O Harith! Do you hold me as a
friend?”

Harith said, “Without any doubt!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) then said, “Harith! When you will be in the
throes of death, you will find me near yourself! I would be giving to
you the waters of the Cistern of Kauthur at that moment. I would be
warding away your enemies from you. You will be pleased to see me cross
the Bridge of*Siraat* with the*Lawa al-Hamd* in my hand! Insha Allah!!”

Abu Hamza Shamali has narrated from Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) that the
Prophet told to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “O ‘Ali! Whosever has your
love in his heart, while he traversed the Bridge of Siraat, if one of
his feet faltered, his other foot would stabilize his progress till the
moment Allah gave him entrance to the Heaven.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “The love of the Ahl-ul-Bayt wards
off sins as the winds blow away the leaves.”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said, “The Prophet (S) has said that he would
intercede on behalf of four type of person on the Day of Reckoning: 1.
Those who had whole-heartedly helped my Ahl-ul-Bayt. 2. Those who had
helped them in the times of need. 3. Those who had considered the
Ahl-ul-Bayt as their friends from the depths of their hearts. 4. Those
who made sincere efforts to keep my Ahl-ul-Bayt safe from the harm’s
way.” Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) also said that the Prophet (S) has said, “One
who befriended my Ahl-ul-Bayt, Allah will befriend him on the Day of
Judgement, and he will not have any fear of that Day.”

In the Book*Basair ad Darajat* it is mentioned that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq
(as) narrated that the Prophet told to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “O
‘Ali!

I have seen every child and adult of my believers in the realm of
spirits, I have seen you and your*Shi’as* and have prayed for their
Deliverance!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) asked the Prophet (S), “O Prophet of Allah!
Please tell me about the qualities of the Shi’as.”

The Prophet (S) replied, “O ‘Ali! When you and your Shi’as are raised
from the graves, their faces will shine like the full moon. Sorrow and
sadness will not come near you. Other people will be sad, but your group
will will be tranquil and happy under the shadow of the Firmament (*The
Arsh).* The others will be occupied in giving account of their deeds and
you, and your Shi’as, will be enjoying the Bounties of the Heaven.”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said that the Prophet (S) has said that, “whoever is
a friend of ‘Ali (as), will be at a place where the Prophets will be
accommodated on the Day of Judgement. ‘Ali’s enemies will find
themselves treated like the Jews on the Day of Reckoning.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said that there are seventy types of angels
in the sky. Each type of the angels is in numbers higher than the entire
human population in the world. All these angels believe and profess
our*Wilayat* (Saint hood).

Sheik Toosi narrates from Maitham al-Tammar that one night he was with
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) when the Imam told him, “Allah showers his
Blessings every morning on all the persons in the world who have our
love in their hearts. Allah curses those persons who have enmity for us
in their hearts. When I awake in the mornings, I feel happy that our
friends are receiving Allah’s Blessings! Pity on our enemies that with
dawn every day they draw nearer to Hell! Our enmity and friendship
cannot assemble in one heart. One who professes our friendship, he
should keep it clean as the gold is kept free of impurities.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) told told to Abi Abd Allah Jadli, I shall
show you that because of the good deeds you will not have any fears on
the Day of Judgement. For the sins committed Allah will throw the person
in the hell. When Abi Abdallah asked about the good and bad deeds,
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that the good deeds are your love for
us and the sins are the enmity that people have for us.

Salman narrates that one day he went to the Prophet (S) when
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) too arrived. The Prophet (S) had a pebble in
his hand. He put the pebble in Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)’s hand. The
pebble uttered the twin witness of*la ilaha ill Allah, Mohammadur Rasool
Allah.* Then the pebble also uttered its faith in the*wilayath* of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). The Prophet (S) then said that whosoever
witnessed that Allah is one, Muhammad (S) is His Prophet and ‘Ali (as),
the*Wali* and Vicegerent can have no fear of going to the Hell.

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has narrated from his ancestors that they had heard
from the Prophet (S), who in turn had received the information from
Jibrael and Mikael that Allah has said, “the*Wilayath* of ‘Ali (as) is
like a fort where every person is safe from My Retribution.”

Books of all the schools mentioned that the Prophet (S) has said, “If
all the people were united on the matter of the*Wilayath* of ‘Ali (as),
Allah would not have created the Hell.

Anas narrates from the Prophet (S), “Allah will send a group of people
who’s faces will radiate light, who will be sitting on shining chairs
and will be dressed in bright raiment. They will be seated under the
shade of the firmament. They will be sitting in the company of the
Prophets (S) although they will not be the Prophets themselves, they
will accompany the martyrs although they may themselves not be martyred
people.” Then the Prophet (S) also said, “(keeping his hand on the head
of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) that these people will be his*Shi’as*
(friends).”

Sheik Toosi narrates from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that the Prophet (S) told
to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) that on the Day of Judgement, after
completion of the account of good deeds and sins of the people, Allah
would give to him the Keys to the Heaven and the Hell. Then the Prophet
(S) would in turn hand over the Keys to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and
tell him, “O goblet-bearer of the Cistern of Kauther! Whomsoever you
wish to send to the Heaven or to the Hell, you may do that!”

Bin Babawiyah quotes from reliable source of having heard from the Imams
(as) that on the Day of Judgement a pulpit will be arranged.
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), with orders of Allah will sit on this
pulpit. An Angel will stand on his right and another on the left. The
Angel on the right will announce that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) is
sitting on the pulpit and he will send the deserving people to the
heaven. The Angel on the left too would announce that the persons
deserving of punishment will be sent by Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) to
the Hell.

Abdallah bin Umar reports that the Prophet (S) told to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as), “When the Day of Judgement comes, O ‘Ali! You will be astride
a horse made of light. On your head there will be a shining crown. The
light of this crown will make the eyes blink. At that time an
announcement will be heralded by Allah,’ O the friend of My friend
(Muhammad Mustafa)! Where are you?’ O ‘Ali! You will say that you are at
His service! Then Allah will say, ‘O ‘Ali! It is you who is the arbiter
who will decide as to who should go to the Heaven and who should go to
the Hell.’

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) narrates that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said
that one day he was sitting with the Prophet (S) near the Kaaba when one
old man with a bent body having a staff in his hand, wearing a red cap
on his head and a woolen overall came near the Prophet (S) and said, “O
the Prophet of Allah! Kindly pray that Allah pardons me!” the Prophet
(S) replied, “Your expectation is of no avail. Your wish to get a pardon
cannot be fulfilled.” When the person was departing in disappointment,
the Prophet (S) asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “have you recognized
this old person?” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “I have not been
able to place him.” The Prophet (S) said, “it was the accursed Satan.
Hearing this he rushed towards the Satan, caught hold of his neck and
threw him to the ground. He shouted, “O Abul Hasan! Allah has given me
respite till the Dooms Day! Please don’t kill me.”

Salman narrates that once the Satan came across some people who were
talking ill of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). He stood near them. The
people asked him who he was and he replied that he was*Abu Marra.* Those
persons

asked him if he overheard what they were talking about. He said, “May
evil overtake you! You talk ill of your own master ‘Ali (as)!” Those
persons asked him why he was saying that ‘Ali (as) was their master.

The Satan said, “According to the announcement of your Prophet, ‘Ali
(as) is the master of all those of whom the Prophet (S) is the master
and also that ‘Ali (as)’s friendship is Allah’s friendship and enmity
with ‘Ali (as) is enmity with Allah.” Those persons asked him, “Are you
a Shi’a of ‘Ali (as)?” the Satan said, “No. However I am a friend of
‘Ali (as) and I am also present in the progeny of his enemies.” Those
people asked him, “O Abu Marra! Can you recount some of ‘Ali (as)’s
excellence.

The Satan replied, “O group of misguided persons! You have become
heretics! I was busy in prayer with some people on the land for twelve
thousand years when those persons were destroyed by Allah. I was left
all alone. I protested to Allah about my loneliness. Allah, in His
Kindness, raised me to the Heaven where, along with the Angels I was
busy in prayers for another twelve thousand years. One day when I was
busy praying to Allah, I noticed a ray of light pass by. The Angels fell
down in prostration and said that this light was that of some great
Prophet (S). A proclamation came from Allah, “O My Angels! The light you
have seen is that of my*Wali* , Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali bin Abi Talib
(as).”

Abu Hurara narrates that a person came to the Prophet (S) and said that
a poor person went to China. From China he came back with so much riches
that the people in the town started envying him. The Prophet (S) said,
“can this transitory world cause people to envy others. The person who
is sitting here has acquired the riches about which even the Angels in
the firmament will be envious.

We noticed that one Ansari arrived near the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S)
said, “This man has amassed great amount of wealth and has deposited a
part of his treasure in the high seat of*Arsh* . The man shall receive
so much reward for this that if it is distributed amongst all the
inmates of the Heaven and the Earth, all their sins would be pardoned
and entry to the Heaven for them will become mandatory!”

The companions asked the person, “What good deed you have done today
that you have qualified for such a high reward?”

The man said, “I stirred out of my house for some important work. On the
way I thought that I have delayed myself in the matter and perhaps I may
not be able to achieve my end. Suddenly I had an idea at that time that
instead of going for my own task, I try to do some good turn. Therefore
I went to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) to get a glimpse of his radiant
face. I am aware of the Prophet (S)’s tradition that looking at
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali’s face is like offering prayer.”

The Prophet (S) said, “No doubt! By Allah looking at ‘Ali is like
offering prayer! You started from home in the search of wealth and went
to ‘Ali instead and set your eyes on his Holy face with the knowledge
and intention that it was like offering prayer. Since your act was with
purity of heart you have earned Allah’s reward. If the entire world
becomes of gold and all of it is distributed in charity, it will not be
equivalent to the reward for setting eyes on the face of ‘Ali!”

The Fifth Ray Of Light: Prayer And The Love Of Ahl-ul-Bayt
----------------------------------------------------------

The correctness of prayer depends on the Faith in the Twelve Imams (as).
Any prayer without this belief is futile. In fact any amount of prayer
without the love for the Ahl-ul-Bayt of the Prophet has negative
effects.

Bin Babawiyah narrates from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that when a person
goes for accounting of his deeds on the Day of Judgement, he will first
have to attest his Faith in the Wilayeth of the Imams (as) before he
accounts for his*Salat (* Prayer),*Sawm* (fasting),*Zakat (* the tithe)
and the*Haj.* If at the time of his death, a person has faith in
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt,* his compliance with the*Furoo al-Deen* , the religious
practices mentioned here, will be acceptable to Allah.

The Imam (as) also said that Jibrael came to the Prophet (S) and said,
“Allah sends you His Greetings and says that He has created the earth
and the sky as also the*Muqaam al-Ibrahim* (the Place of Ibrahim). If a
human being worships Him sitting near the Place of Ibrahim, at the Door
of the Kaaba, throughout his life, or even from the day the Universe was
Created till the Doomsday, with no love for ‘Ali Bin abi Talib (as) in
his heart, will be put in the Hell.”

It is also narrated that it was Revealed by Allah to His Prophet (S)
even if a person becomes lean like a dried leather water pouch in His
Prayer without the love for the Ahl-ul-Bayt, he will not earn an entry
to the Heaven.

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) narrates that the Prophet (S) said that a
person who has good deeds in his account equivalent to the good deeds of
seventy prophets, and has no love for the Ahl-ul-Bayt, will never be
admitted to the Heaven by Allah. The Imam (as) also asked his
companions, “Tell me, which place is the most sacred?” The companions
said, “The Imam (as) knows the best!” He said that the most sacred place
is the*Muqam al-Ibrahim.* But if a person, with the longevity equal to
that of*Noah,* sits there and prays all his life, and has no belief in
our*Wilayeth,* his prayers will be futile.”

This tradition is accepted by all the schools of thought that, “One who
did not recognize the Imam (as) of his time, he died an infidel.”
Therefore for every Muslim the knowledge about the Imam is absolutely
necessary.

The Sixth Ray Of Light: The Qualities Of The Imam
-------------------------------------------------

Since the commoners depend on the norms of the Faith and the Society, it
is essential that the Imam (as) must be fully versed with the Knowledge
of the laws and jurisprudence. He should have full knowledge of
the*Mohkam* (Firm), the*Mutashabeh* (Ambiguous), the*Mujmi* (Abstract),
the*Mufassil* (Detailed), the*Nasiq* (Current) and the

*Mansooq* (Void) verses of the Holy Qur’an. He has to be an erudite
scholar of the Traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and well versed in all
branches of knowledge and learning. The Imam (as) has to possess
exemplary bravery that he is capable of confronting the enemies of the
Faith. The Imam (as) should be superior in learning to all his followers
because it is undesirable that the students have knowledge superior to
the

mentor and the ignorant better informed than the scholar. Allah,
therefore, says in the Holy Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿فَاسْأَلُوا أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ.﴾
</p>

***“Whatever you wish to know, ask of the possessors of Knowledge.”***
**(16:43)**

This is the reason why Allah made Adam (as) superior to the Angels in
knowledge and asked them to prostrate before him. About knowledge Allah
poses a question in the Holy Qur’an:

<p dir="rtl">
﴿قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ.﴾
</p>

***“Are the learned and the ignorant equal?”*** **(39:9)**

It is also imperative that the*Imam* has to be the guide, the mentor,
superior and perfect in knowledge to show the Right Path to the*mamoom*
(the follower). The*Imam* is the Vicegerent of the*Prophet* and his
successor. Therefore the task of the*Imam,* as that of the*Prophet,* is
to Guide his*Umma* (the Flock). If the Imam is imperfect in Knowledge,
then the predicament of the flock can well be imagined!

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) says that there are certain characteristics by which
an Imam is recognized:

He should be the wisest of his time.

He should be most pious.

He should be most suave and forbearing.

There should be none equal in bravery and generosity to him.

He must be the most committed to the Prayer of Allah.

He is born naturally circumcised.

He is born totally clean.

He has the faculty to see in his back without turning his eyes
backwards.

His shadow is not cast on the ground.

At birth, he puts his hands on the ground and recites the Witness:*La
ilaha il Allah Mohammadur Rasool Allah.*

He doesn’t get night-dreams (*Ehtelam)*

Although his eyes sleep, the eyes of his heart are always awake.

He gets informed of the future events through his dreams.

The*angels* converse with him.

The chain armor of the Prophet would fit him like a glove.

None would have seen his feces.

His body would radiate a fragrance better than that of musk.

People would be willing to lay down their lives for him.

He will be more affectionate towards the*Mu’mins* than their own
parents.

He will be most generous and kind.

He always sets examples for his followers.

Whatever he asks his followers not to do, he himself abstains to do.

His prayer is so effective that if he wishes, stones would shatter to
smithereens in a moment.

All the arms of the Prophet would be in his possession.

He will be the carrier of the Twin-Edged Sword, the*Dhual Fiqar.*

He will possess a document on which the names of his friends and foes
are recorded.

He will be the exponent of*Jafr al-Akbar* and*Jafr al-Asghar* that have
record of all the events past, present and future.

He will have with him the*Sahifa al-Fatima.*

He will possess*Ilm al-Laddunni,* that is, he will not need a mentor or
tutor to teach him.

Kulaini narrates that Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has enumerated the
characteristics of the*Imam* :

The Imam is pure from birth and is born naturally circumcised.

Immediately after birth, the Imam would put both his hands on the ground
and loudly utter the Witness that there is no god, but Allah, and
Muhammad (S) is his Prophet.

The Imam will not have wet dreams.

The eyes-of- the-heart of the Imam never go to sleep.

The Imam never yawns.

The Imam can see things at his back as well as the things in his front
without requiring to turn his face backwards.

The Prophet’s Armor of Chain fits the Imams exactly.

The Imams converse with the Angels.

Humairi narrates in his book “*Qurb al Asnad”* that Abu Naseer once went
to Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) and asked him, “How to identify an Imam?”
The Imam (as) replied, “the first characteristic of an Imam is that he
must have been nominated by his father to succeed him as a mark of*Itmam
al-Hujjat,* or fulfilling his duty. This is the same way as the Prophet
(S) had nominated Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) as his Vicegerent
or*Imam.* The other characteristic of an Imam is that he is able to give
answer to any question that is asked of him, and has the faculty to give
the reply to a question before it is asked.The Imam can answer the
question in the language of the questioner.”

Then the Imam (as) said, “Be seated that I give you the Proof of my
Imamat.” At that time a Persian, from Khorasan, came there and asked a
question in the Arabic language. The Imam replied him in Persian, the
man’s mother tongue. The Khorasani said, “O Holy Imam! I had put my
question in the Arabic language thinking that you might not know
Persian! But you speak better Persian than me!” The Imam (as) told to
the man, “If I cannot reply you in your language, then you become
superior to me; but then, how could I be your Imam if I don’t know your
language?” Then the Imam (as) said, “O Abu Muhammad! The language of no
person is strange to the Imam. He knows the tongues of the animals,
birds and all the living creatures. The Imam can be identified and
recognized with these characteristics. If a person claims to be an Imam
and doesn’t have these manisfestaions, then he is not an Imam.”

Abu Baseer narrates that he asked Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) about the sign of
an Imam. The Imam (as) replied, “The first sign of the Imamate is that
the incumbent is the first born of the Imam. He is superior in
knowledge, in learning, to all his contemporaries. The Armor of the
Prophet (S) to be in his possession and would exactly fit him. He would
also possess the Standard

used by the Prophet (S). Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) had said, ‘The
Prophet had taught to me a thousand chapters of learning, and from every
chapter another thousand chapters became manifest to me.’”

The Imam (as) further said, “O Abu Muhammad! I have the*Jameah* ” I
asked him, “What is*Jameah?* ” The Imam (as) replied, “*Jameah* is a
document dictated by the Prophet (S) to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as).
This contains the details of everything that is legitimate (*Halal)* and

taboo (*Haram)* for the believers.” Then the Imam said, “We have
the*Mushaf al-Fatima* (the Book of Fatima). This Book is three times
more voluminous than the Holy Qur’an and contains, besides the Qur’an,
all the information about the past and about the times to come.”

It is narrated from Hammad bin Othman that the Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
has said that the*Zanadiqah* (Hypocrite Fire-Worshippers) will appear in
one hundred and twenty eight. I have myself read about it in the*Sahifa
al-Fatima.”* I asked, “What is the*Sahifa al-Fatima?* ”

The Imam (as) said, “When the Prophet (S) departed from this world, Lady
Fatima (as) became very sad and disconsolate. She used to grieve most of
the time. To console her, Allah deputed an angel to narrate to her the
events to take place in the future. As the angel continued the
narration, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) took notes. This compilation is
called the*Sahifa al-Fatima.* This Book does not contain any
instructions about*Halal* and*Haram* but contains the description of
events in store for the future.

Abi Yahya was told by Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “O AbuYahya! Allah has
rewarded us with high status! Every Friday night Allah permits all the
Prophets of the past and your current Imam to visit the Firmament When
they are in the Firmament, they offer two*Rakat* each of prayer at every
station there. They acquire lot of knowledge during the visit. Your Imam
too comes back with a fund of newly acquired knowledge.”

Saif Tammar narrates that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “If I was with
Prophet Musa and Al-Khidr (as), they would have accepted that I was
better informed than they were. I would have brought to their knowledge
certain things they were unaware of. They had knowledge of only the
things past, and we know everything of past, present and future! This
knowledge has come down to us from our Prophet as an inheritance.” Then
the Imam said, “The Beneficent and Merciful Allah bestows kindness on
His creations much more than their own parents. Allah has kept us
informed of the events taking place on the earth and the sky.”

The Imam (as) also said, “Jibrail came to the Prophet (S) and gave him
two pomegranates. The Prophet (S) ate one of them and made two portions
of the other. One half of this he ate and gave the other half to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) to eat. Then he said, ‘O ‘Ali! Do you know
anything about these pomegranates? One of the fruits, from which you did
not get any portion to eat, contained Prophet-hood. But the other
pomegranate, that we shared, contained knowledge.’ The narrator asked
the Imam (as),’ How was ‘Ali (as) a partner in the knowledge of the
Prophet?” The Imam (as) replied, “Allah has not endowed any knowledge to
the Prophet that He didn’t transmit to Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali! In turn,
that knowledge has come to us, the Imams!”

Then the Imam (as) added, “When Prophet Musa and Al-Khidr wanted to go
their different ways from the bank of the river, they noticed a bird.
The bird put a drop of water towards the east, another towards the west;
one skywards and another drop of water on the earth. Then finally, the
bird put one drop of water in the river. Both were wondering at this
riddle.

At this moment one hunter emerged from the river and explained to
Prophet Musa (as) and Al-Khidr (as) that the bird wanted to express that
in the final Epoch there will be a Prophet (S) who will possess the
knowledge of the east, the west, the earth and the sky. The bird put the
fifth drop in the river to demonstrate that the knowledge of the Prophet
(S) will be free flowing like the waters of the river. This knowledge
will be in the possession of the Vicegerent and cousin of the Prophet
(S). Telling this, the hunter vanished.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “I possess the knowledge of the Book of
Allah from cover to cover. The Qur’an, that contains information about
the earth and the sky, of the past and the future, is firmly in our
hands. We have the knowledge of everything!”

Then the Imam (as) said, “Allah has taught two*Ism al-Azam* (Miraculous
Words) to Prophet ‘Isa (as), which caused the miracles credited to him.
Allah taught four*Ism al-Azam* to Prophet Musa (as), eight to Prophet
Ibrahim (as), fifteen to Prophet Nooh (as) and twentyfive to prophet
Adam (as). There are 73*Ism al-Azam* in all, and our Prophet (S) has
been informed of 72. There is one*Ism al-Azam,* about which Allah has
not imparted the knowledge to anyone!”

Imam ‘Ali Naqi (as) narrates that Allah has 73*Ism al-Azam* out of which
only one was known to*Asif bin Barqiah* through which he was able to
fetch the*Throne of Bilqis* in the time taken to wink the eyes. We,
the*Ahl-ul-Bayt* have the knowledge of 72*Ism al-Azam!* There is one*Ism
al-Azam* of which, none other than Allah has the knowledge. Imam
Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said that the staff of Prophet Musa (as) was with
prophet Adam (as), then it came down to Prophet Shoeb (as) and then to
prophet Musa (as). The staff is now in our possession. It is still fresh
and green, as if, it has just been separated from the tree. If talked
to, the staff gives replies. This staff will reach the Last Imam (as),
from hand to hand. The Last Imam (as) will throw the staff towards his
enemies and it would turn into a serpent and swallow them.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “The Tablets of Musa (as) and his Staff
are with us. We are the inheritors of the Prophets (S).”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “When the Last Imam (as) will appear
in Mecca, it will be ordered that no person should carry any eatables
with him. The Imam (as) will have one Tablet of Musa (as) on his camel’s
back. With the help of this tablet food and other necessary things will
become available, whenever required.”

Mufassil narrates that one day Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) asked him, “Do
you know! What was the raiment of Prophet Yusuf (as)?” Mufassil
expressed his ignorance about this. The Imam (as) said, “When Prophet
Ibrahim (as) was thrown into the fire of Nimrod, Allah sent a raiment
for him. This raiment was not affected by extremes of heat and cold.
Prophet

Ibrahim (as) gave this raiment to Prophet Ishaq (as) at the time of his
death. Then it came to Prophet Yaqoob (as) who, in turn, gave it to his
son Prophet Yusuf.(as) This was the same raiment, smelling which,
Prophet Yaqub (as) said that he was getting the fragrance of his son
Prophet Yusuf (as) from it.”

Mufassil asked the Imam (as), “Then! Where did the raiment go?”

The Imam (as) said, “The raiment then went to the deserving, the*Ahl al
Baiyt!* It is now with us along with the other Holy Relics viz. The Bier
of Bani Israel, the arms and armor of the Prophet (S) etc.The one who
possesses these things is the Vicegerent and Successor of the Prophet
(S).”

“O Mufassil! The Vicegerent of the Prophet (S) is one who is visited by
the angels. These angels offer their prayers standing behind him. The
angels will protect the Vicegerent from the evil enemies. The angels
also inform the Vicegerent about the kings who are to die and those who
will ascend to the thrones!”

Sadeer Sairfi narrates that Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) ordered him to
go out from Medina for some errand. He was still on his way when a man
overtook him and gave him a letter that had a fresh seal on it. He
opened the letter and found that it was from the Imam a.s.). The letter
contained fresh instructions for him. He was wondering how the carrier
could reach him so fast that he had already travelled more than fair
distance towards his destination. Then he thought, the carrier must be
an angel to have reached him with the Imam (as)’s missive so fast!.

On his return he asked the Imam (as), “O my Master! Did you send that
letter to me with some angel?” He replied, “No! It was a Jinn who is
generally present in our service!”

Abu Hamza Shimali narrates that he was once travelling with Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as) half way between Mecca and Medina when he noticed a dog
coming in their direction. When it came near them, he saw that it was a
bird. Surprised, he asked the Imam (as), “O my Master! What is this?” He
replied, “This a Jinn who brings the news of the death of Hisham.”

Kulaini narrates from Saad Askaf that he went to the presence of Imam
Muhammad Al-Baqir (as). When he was taking leave, the Imam (as) said,
“Wait awhile!” In the meanwhile some tall persons with yellowish faces
entered the place of the Imam (as). I asked the Imam (as), “Who these
people are?” The Imam (as) said, “These are Jinns, your brothers In
Faith. They have come here to seek clarification about things*Halal*
and*Haram* .”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that, one-day, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as) was seated on the pulpit of*Masjid al-Koofa* when a serpent
entered the threshold of the mosque. The people tried to kill it.
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) prevented them from doing so. The serpent
came near the pulpit, rose and greeted the Imam (as). Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as) inquired the reason for its coming there. It said, “O Master!
I am Omer bin Othman. My father was appointedc the head of the Jinn by
you. He is no more. Before his demise he had asked me to come to your
presence and take your orders.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “I advise you to be pious! I order you
too to take the place of your father and continue discharging the duties
of the chief of the Jinns.’

The narrator asked Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) if Omer bin Othman ever
comes to him and is he duty bound to obey him? The Imam (as) replied,
“Yes!”

Noman bin Bashir narrates that after a visit to Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir
(as) in Medina he was on his way back to Kufa along with Jabir bin Yazid
Jaufi and other persons. On the way they noticed a very tall person
approaching them from the opposite direction. The person gave a letter
to Jabir having a very fresh seal on it. Jabir kissed the letter, put it
to his eyes, opened and read it.

On reading the letter, Jabir had a very sad expression on his face.
After reaching Koofa, I went to Jabir’s place one day. I found him
running around on the streets, riding on a bamboo stick along with
urchins, shouting that Mansoor has become the emir of Koofa. Jabir
looked at me, but he didn’t greet or talk to me. He recited a few
couplets of poetry and continued pranking with the urchins. People
expressed their sorrow that Jabir had gone mad.

After a few days Hisham bin Abdul Malik’s orders came to the chief of
Koofa to execute Jabir and send his head to him.

The chief of Koofa asked the people to identify Jabir for him. The
people said, “Jabir is a reputed scholar, narrator of traditions and has
performed the Haj several times over. But presently he has lost his
mental balance and has gone mad!”

The chief of Kooka said, “Alhamd u Lillah! It is not obligatory for me
to execute him now!”

A few days after the event, Mansoor was appointed chief of the city of
Koofa and Jabir’s prediction was proved true.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “Allah has two types of learning, one
is for Himself, that has not been taught to anyone else. The other type
of learning is that which has been transferred to the prophets (S) and
the angels, that also has come down to us.

Authentic traditions credited to the Imams (as) record that the Torah of
prophet Musa (as), Bible of the prophet ‘Isa (as), the Zuboor of the
Prophet Dawood (as), the Book of Ibrahim (as) and the books of other
Prophets (as) are there with the Imams (as). The Imams (as) recite the
Books as did the Prophets (as) of those times and are also familiar with
their commentaries and interpretations.

Jaweria bin Mushir narrates that he, with others, was returning with
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) after battling with the excommunicated
(*Khawarij).* When they reached near Babel, Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)
said, “Speed away from this place! This is the place where Allah’s curse
descended thrice and also it is the land whre pagan worship first
started in the world!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that the time for the*Asr* prayer was
running out and they were still not out of the precincts of*Babel.* We
were rushing fast, but the sun sank in the West before we could offer
our prayer. The time for the*Asr* prayer, therefore, was over. However
the Imam (as) asked the men to do the ablution for the prayer. Jaweria
was astonished to see that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), pointing his
finger toward the already

setting sun, brought it back on the horizon and we offered the*Asr
prayer* standing behind him. Then the sun set once again, immediately
thereafter, and the sky was aglow with the stars. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali
(as) said, “O Jaweria! Don’t be so much surprised! Allah has said,

‘*Fasabbeh beisme Rabbekal Azeem’* I called Him with His Great (*Azeem)*
name. For my sake He made the sun reverse its journey!”

Safar narrates that he, along with others, reached a place
called*Aaqool* in the company of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). They found
a dry and withering tree there. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali(as) touched the
tree and said, “Return to your pristine condition with Allah’s orders!”
Suddenly the tree put on fresh branches and fruits of the shape of guava
fruit on the branches.The next day when we looked at the tree, it was
fresh and green.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that Imam Hasan (as) was on his way
to Mecca for*Umrah,* the Minor Pilgrimage. One of the sons of Zubair was
travelling along with him. They rested for a while under the shade of a
tree. The son of Zubair said, “How I wish, the tree was bearing fruits
that we ate them!”

Imam Hasan (as) asked him, “Do you really want to eat the fruits?” The
son of Zubair said, “Yes! O Master! I have a desire to eat the fruits.”

Imam Hasan (as) raised his hands towards the sky and prayed. Lo and
behold! The tree was instantly loaded with the fruits! One of the camel
drivers said, “What a magic that fruits appear on the barren tree!”

The Imam (as) said, “Don’t call it magic. The Prophet (S)’s son’s prayer
has been answered by Allah!”

Salman bin Khalid narrates that he, along with others, was on a journey
with Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). They reached near a dried date palm. The
Imam (as) ordered the tree, “O tree! With the Orders of Allah, let us
taste of your fruits!” Immediately the tree put on fresh and juicy dates
that fell to the ground. Every person in the party ate to their fill.
Abd Allah Balqi said, “O son of the Prophet (S)! What we had heard
happening for Lady Maryam (as), we have seen happen before our eyes
today!”

Hasan bin Abdallah wanted Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) to show him his
miracle. The Imam (as) noticed that there was a tree nearby. He asked
Hasan to go near the tree and tell that the Imam (as) wanted it to come
to him. Hasan did likewise. The tree, rending the soil holding its
roots, proceeded fast towards the Imam (as). The Imam (as) ordered the
tree to return to its original place, which it did!

Hasan narrates from Abu Baseer that one day he was in the presence of
Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) when he asked him, “O Master! Are you the
Vicegerent of the Prophet (S)?”

The Imam (as) replied, “No doubt! I am the successor of the Prophet
(S).”

Abu Baseer said, ‘The Prophet (S) was the successor of the earlier
Prophets (as) and had all the characteristics of theirs in him.
Similarly these characteristics should be there in you too!”

The Imam (as) said, “No doubt! They are there!”

Abu Baseerasked, “O Imam (as)! Can you bring back the dead to life and
give light to the eyes of a blind person?”

The Imam (as) replied, “Yes! With Allah’s orders such thungs can
happen.” Then the Imam (as) called Abu Baseer near him and touched his
eyes with his fingers. The sight of both his eyes was instantly
restored. The Imam (as) asked him, “Do you wish to remain with the
restored eyesight? Or you wish to return to the former condition to be
eligible for entry to the Heaven?”

Abu Baseer said, “I want to be back to my earlier condition!”

‘Ali bin Mugheera narrates that in Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) was at*Mina*
when he passed near a woman who, along with her children, was lamenting
about the death of her cow. The Imam (as) asked her the reason for her
sorrow.

The woman said, “My children are orphaned and the cow was the only
source of sustenance for us.”

The Imam (as) said, “Shall I put the cow back to life for you?”

The Woman said, “Yes.”

The Imam (as) offered two*Rakat* of prayer, went near the cow and kicked
it, saying, “*Qum beizn Allah!* – Rise with Allah’s Orders” The cow was
restored to life.

Seeing this the woman cried, “You are no doubt, ‘Isa bin Maryam (as)!”
The Imam (as) mingled with the crowd discreetly to avoid the attention
of the people.

Dawood bin Katheer narrates that once he left home with his wife to go
the presence of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). On the way his wife expired.
He went to the Imam (as) and related the tragic incident.

The Imam (as) said, “Go! And you will find your wife is having her meal.

Dawood went back to the place where he had left his wife. He, no doubt,
found her busy eating.

It is narrated from Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) that one day his father,
Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), was proceeding towards*Areed* when a pious,
grey-bearded person met him on the way. The Imam (as), seeing the
person, went forward respectfully, greeted him and kissed his forehead
and the hand. The reverend person gave some advice to the Imam (as). The
person who met Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) was none other than Imam
Muhammad Al-Baqir (as).

Samaa narrates that one day, after the demise of Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir
(as), he went to the presence of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). He said, “Do
you wish to see my late father?” Samaa said, “Yes!” The Imam (as) said,
“Enter that room.”

Entering the room, Samaa found Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) sitting
there. Then the Imam (as) said that after Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)
was martyred, some Shi’as approached Imam Hasan (as) and asked certain
questions. After giving the replies the Imam (as) said, “Will you
recognize my father, if you see him?” The persons said they would,
certainly. The Imam (as) said, “Remove the curtain in front of you!”
They removed the curtain and found Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) sitting
there.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) nsrrstes that when Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)
decided to proceed for the battle of*Siffin,* he crossed the river

*Euphrates* and reached near a hill. It was the time of*Asr* prayer and
therefore he did his ablution mandatory prior to any prayer. The call
for prayer, the*Adhaan,* was given when the hill broke asunder and a
loud sound came, “O Vicegerent of the Last Prophet (S)! O Chief of the
believers! Greetings to you!”

In reply the Imam (as) said, “My greeting too, O brother*Shamoun bin
Hamoun,* the Vicegerent of ‘Isa (as) bin Marium*!* How are you!”

In reply Shamoun said, “Alhamdu Lillah!” He also said that he was
awaiting the arrival of prophet ‘Isa (as) that he comes and helps
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as)’s son and Vicegerent. He added, “O
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as)! If those people had realised your position in
the eyes of the Creator, they would never have thought of fighting with
you. If the persons, who have come forward to help you, had known about
your status, they would fight in your cause till any part of their
bodies remained!”

Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) offered his prayer. Amongst his
companions there were Ammar bin Yassir, Malik al-Ashtar, Bin Abbas etc.
They asked him, “O Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as)! Whose voice was that?” He
replied, “It was*Shamoun the Vicegerent of prophet ‘Isa (as).* ”

Ibada Asadi narrates that, once he went to the presence of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as). The Imam was busy conversing with a person.
After the person departed, he asked the Imam (as) who that person was.

He replied, “He was*Haroon* (as), the Vicegerent of Prophet Musa (as)!”

It is narrated from Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) that at the time of his
demise the Prophet (S) told him that after giving him the last bath,
the*Ghusl,* he should be put in a sitting posture. Then he may be asked
any questions Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) liked to ask.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that he accompanied his father,
Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as), to Mecca. On the way they found a person who
had a chain around his neck and another person was pulling him. The
person with the chain was crying and asking for water. The other person
was saying, “O! Accursed person! There is no water for you!” This was
the same person who fought with Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) in*Siffin*
and raised the Holy Qur’an on the lance.

Abu Hamza Shimali narrates that once he was in the presence of Imam
Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) when some birds came there. The Imam (as) asked, “O
Abu Hamza! Do you understand what these birds are saying? They are
singing the praises of Allah and claiming for the day’s sustenance!”

Fazeel bin Yasaar narrates that he went to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
when a pair of pigeons came there. The Imam (as) asked Fazeel if he knew
what the birtds were telling. When Fazeel replied in the negative, the
Imam (as) said, “The male is telling to the female that there is nothing
more dear to him that her! But this Imam (as), our Master, is dearer to
me than even you are!”

Muhammad bin Muslim narrates that one day he was in the presence of Imam
Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) when a pair of pigeons came and started
conversing with the Imam (as) and flew away. He asked the Imam (as)
about what transpired between them.

The Imam (as) said, “O Mohjammed bin Muslim! Allah has made all the
animals more obedient than the human beings to us. The male pigeon was
suspicious of its female about her chastity. The female was not able to
convince the male about her good character. Therefore, the female asked
the male that they would seek my judgement on the matter.

I told the male pigeon that his female was chaste and he should trust
her. This convinced him and the pair flew away happily.”

Salman Jafferi narrates that he was sitting with Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) in
his garden. At that time a bird came, started rolling on the ground. The
Imam (as) went inside the house for a while. On his return, he asked me,
“O Salman! Do you know what this bird was complaining about?” I said, “I
don’t know!”

The Imam (as) said, “A snake was eating away its chicks. Even today the
snake came to swallow its xhicks.The bird came to complain to me about
the snake. I went and killed the snake!”

Ahmed bin Haroon narrates that once Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) came to my
tent and left his horse near the rope of the tent and started conversing
with me. Suddenly the horse made a loud noise. The Imam (as) smiled
hearing this and told to the horse, “Go relieve yourself and come back!”
The horse went some distance away from the tent, relieved itself and
came back. The Imam (as) said, “O Bin Haroon! You know that Allah has
given more miracles to Muhammad (as) and the descendents of Muhammad
(as) than to Dawood (as) and the progeny of Dawood (as).”

Muhammad bin Muslim narrates that he was travelling with Imam Muhammad
Al-Baqir (as) from Mecca to Medina when a wolf came down a hill and
running towards the Imam (as)’s horse. It raised the forelimbs sky-wards
and put its face to the ground. The Imam (as) bent down and heard what
the wolf way saying. He then told something to the wolf. The wolf was
satisfied and ran away. The Imam (as) then asked me what had transpired
between him and the wolf. When I said that I couldn’t comprehend
anything, the Imam (as) said, “The wolf’s female is in the pains of
delivery. It said that we are the resolvers of difficulties and it
wanted me to pray that the delivery became easy for its female. It also
wanted me to pray that its off springs don’t cause harm to our Shi’as.”

It is narrated that one day Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) was sitting with
his companions when one female deer, a doe, came complaining. The Imam
(as) asked the companions about what the animal was saying. When the
companions expressed their ignorance, the Imam (as) said, “The deer said
that a certain Qureishi has captured its little one, the fawn. She
requested me to recommend its release so that it can be suckled. It
would return the fawn to the Qureishi after feeding it.”

The Imam (as) then asked his companions to accompany him to the
Qureishi’s house. He called the person and told him to release the fawn
that it would get a feed from its mother and comes back. The Qureishi
brought the cub, the deer fed it and returned to the man. The Imam (as)
asked the Qureishi to give the little fawn to him. The man readily
agreed. The Imam (as) then returned the fawn to its mother. The deer
raised its head towards

the Heaven as if it was saying a prayer. The companions asked the Imam
(as), what the deer was saying.

The Imam (as) replied, “The deer was praying to Allah that the way we
helped her to get its little one, our children to be safe with us!”

Yunus bin Tabian narrates that once he and some other persons were in
the company of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam (as) observed, “Allah
has made us the masters of the treasures of the earth.” Then he hit the
ground with his foot and gold emerged out of it.

We said, “O master! When you own such treasures, why your Shi’as are in
abject penury!”

The Imam (as) said, “The wealth of this world is transitory! We don’t
prefer transitory gains for our Shi’as. The wealth of the Hereafter is
Permanent, that is in store for our friends!”

It is narrated that one day Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) was seated in
the*Koofa Mosque* with his companions They asked him, “How is that more
wealth and riches have been bestowed by Allah on your foes than your
friends?”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) replied, “Do you think that we aver the
worldly riches, and that Allah is not bestownig them on us! “Saying
this, he picked up a handful of pebbles from the ground. They saw that
all the pebbles turned into precious stones.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) then said, “If we wish, the entire surface
of the earth will turn into jewels But we are not fond of worldly
riches!” Saying this, he threw all the precious stones on the ground and
they again turned into pebbles.

Abdu Samad bin ‘Ali narrates that a person went to Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin
(as) and said that he was a sooth-sayer. The Imam (as) told him that he
would tell him of a person who has, since you have arrived here, has
travelled around fourteen worlds, each one thrice as large as This!”

The man asked, “Who could be such a person?”

The Imam (as) said, “I am that person! If you ask I can tell you in
detail what you have eaten today and what all you have hidden in your
house!”

‘Ali bin Hasan says that while he was at*Sammurah* he heard that a
person was arrested and brought from Syria with the accusation that he
had claims to prophet hood. ‘Ali went to the person and made some
inquiries with him. The man said, “I was at the place in Syria where the
severed head of Imam Husayn (as) was kept. While I was offering prayer,
a person appeared and said,’ Get up and come with me!’ I went with the
person.

After a while we reached the*Mosque of Koofa.* He asked me if I
recognized the place. I replied in the affirmative. Both of us offered
prayer there and were blessed with the sighting of the Prophet (S).Then
we reached*Mecca* and performed Hajj. Immediately after the Hajj I found
myself again in Syria and the person I had accompanied had vanished. The
following year same person again met me and took me round, as he did
earlier, and brought me back to Syria. I was surprised and under an oath
of the Creator asked him as to who he was? He stood with his head bent
for a while and then said, ‘I am Muhammad bin ‘Ali bin Musa (as)!’ This
news spread like wildfire and Abdul Malik called and imprisoned me.”

I asked him to write down all the details and petition for his release.
I provided a quill and ink to the man. He wrote down the details and
sent the petition to Abdul Malik. Abdul Malik wrote back saying that one
who could take him round to all the places in one night, can as well
release him!

When I heard this outcome of his petition, I started crying but I also
tried to commiserate with the person. The next day I went to the gaol?
to inquire about the person. The gaolers? were confounded as to where
the prisoner would have vanished despite the strict vigilance.

Hafs Tammar narrates that when Maala bin Khanees was to be executed, he
went to the presence of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam (as) said,
“Maala did not pay heed to what I said and is bearing the consequences.
One day he was very morose. I asked him if he was worried because of
separation from his family?” He replied in the affirmative. After a
while I put my hand over his face and asked him, ‘Where are you now?’ He
replied that he was with his family. Again after sometime I put my hand
over his face and asked him where he was? He replied that he was with me
in Medina.

Then the Imam (as) told him, “O Maala! One who protects our secrets
Allah protects him Do not reveal our secrets to others. One who betrays
us, meets a very sorry end. He will either be executed or incarcerated
for long terms. You have revealed our secrets and you must prepare
yourself for your execution!”

It is narrated by Abd Allah bin Sinan that Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as)
said, “We own a pond that lies between Basra and Yemen. Would you like
to see it?”

Abd Allah said, “I shall certainly like to see the pond!”

The Imam (as) held his hand and brought him out of Medina and hit his
foot on the ground. A canal became visible, one side of which very pure
water flowed and on the other side flowed milk of the highest purity. In
the center of the canal flew a beverage of red hue. The scene was very
attractive.

Abd Allah said, “My Master! Where is this canal!”

The Imam (as) replied, “Allah has referred of this canal in the Holy
Qur’an. This is one of the canals in the Heaven!”

Abdallah noticed very pretty*houris* on the branches of the trees along
the banks of the canal. They held goblets of different hues in their
hands. The Imam (as) looked towards one tree which bent low and
the*houri* thereon offered him a cup from which the Imam (as) drank the
beverage and gave some to him too. He had never tasted such a
delicious*sherbet.*

The Imam (as) said, “This will be the resting place for our*Shi’as* when
they enter the Heaven. Their thirst will be quenched with the*Sharab
al-Tahoor* and our enemies, when they die, will be taken to the*Valley
of Barhoot* where they will be fed on*Zhaqoom* (a bitter fruit) and they
will get*Hameem* (very hot water) to drink. May Allah protect people
from the hardships of this valley!”

Jabir Jaufi narrates that he asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) to tell him
about the journey made by prophet Ibrahim (as) under Allah’s orders to
the Dominions (*Malkoot)* of the earth and the Firmament. He was sitting
with

his head bent when the Imam (as) pointed skywards with his finger and
said, “Look up!” When he looked up, he saw the roof of the house
developed a hole and there was a strange light in the sky. The Imam (as)
said, “Prophet Ibrahim (as) had seen the*malkoot* of the sky and the
earth like this!” The Imam (as) asked me to look down. I did, and found
the roof of the house intact again.

Then the Imam (as) held my hand and took me to another place and said,
“Do you know what place is this! This is the place where*Dhual Qarnain*
went, this is called*thulmat* (the region of darkness).” Jabir said, “O
Master! Can I open my eyes?” The Imam (as) said, “You may open your
eyes, but you cannot see anything in the darkness!”

Then the Imam (as) took him to another place. He said, “This is the
ma’ul*Hayat* (the water of Eternal Life) which Al-Khidr (as) had drunk.”
Then the Imam (as) added, “These are the domains of the sky and the
earth that prophet Ibrahim (as) was taken around.”

Then the Imam (as) took Jabir on a trip to many other worlds in the
universe. Alas, the Imam (as) asked him to open his eyes. When he opened
his eyes he found himself in the same place from where they went. Jabir
asked the Imam (as), “My Master! How much time we have spent going
round?” the Imam (as) replied, “Three hours!”

Abu Baseer narrates that he went to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam
(as) stamped his foot on the ground when a river appeared at that spot.
On the bank of the river there were boats made of silver. We boarded
those boats and reached a place where there were tents made of silver.
The Imam (as) entered all the tents pitched there and came out. He said
that the first tent he entered at the place belonged to the Prophet (S).
The second was for Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) and the third that of
Lady Fatima Zahra (as), the fourth of Lady Khadija (as), fifth of Imam
Hasan (as), sixth of Imam Husayn (as), the seventh for Imam ‘Ali bin al
Husayn (as), the eighth belongs to my revered father (as) and the ninth
is for me. Whosoever of us departs from the world, rests in his tent
here.

Saleh bin Saeed narrates that Imam ‘Ali Naqi (as) was made to camp in
the*Serai of the Faqirs.* He went to the presence of the Imam (as) and
said, “O Master! I am very sorry that you have been accommodated in such
a place. The cruel people have tried to belittle you!”

The Imam (as) said, “O Saleh! You still don’t know us!” Then he pointed
in the direction opposite him. Saleh saw a beautiful garden in which
canals of fresh water were flowing. There were groups of*houris* from
the*Heaven* everywhere. There were fruits and flowers of all hues and
fragrance in plenty. Saleh was surprised at this spectacle.

The Imam (as) then said, “Wherever we are, all these things are
available to us!”

A reliable source quotes Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) as saying, “the world
is like a walnut for us that we can turn it the way we want!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that*Du al Qarnain* was given the
authority to select one of the two types of clouds (*Sahab)* —the*Sahab
al-Zalool (* the soft clouds) or the*Sahab al-Saab* (the hard
clouds).*Du al*

*Qarnain* selected*Sahab al-Zalool* and left the*Sahab al-Saab* for the
Holy Imams (as).

The Imam (as) was asked, “What is*Sahab al-Saab?* ”

The Imam (as) said, “It is the cloud that has thunder, lightning, and
thunderbolt. The*Saheb-al-Amr, the Twelfth Imam (a.j.),* will ride on
these clouds on his weekly trips of the Seven layers of the universe.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that when Allah wishes, He Creates
the Imam (as).Then he asks an angel to take the beverage from the*Taht
al Arsh* to the Imam (as) for drinking. When the Imam (as) drinks this
beverage, his successor is conceived. He keeps quiet in the womb of the
mother for forty days. After this period he starts to speak from within
the womb. After birth, he observes the actions of all the creations.

The Imam (as) also said that when the mother of the Imam (as) is
pregnant, she feels a kind of laziness and hears a voice congratulating
her of the arrival of the wise and sagacious son. After this, there are
no symptoms of pregnancy in the mother. After completion of the nine
months, the mother of the Imam (as) again hears a voice and only the
parents see a light in their surroundings. Then the Imam (as) is born.
After the birth, the baby sneezes thrice and after every sneeze utters,
“*Al hamdu Lillah”* loudly. The Imam (as) is born naturally
circumcised.”

Safar narrates from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as) has said, “There is a city of Allah on the rear of the West,
by name*Ja Balqa?.* There are people of 70,000 Faiths (*Ummas* ) living
there. The population of every faith is equal to the entire population
of this world. They never ever indulge in any sins or misdeeds. They
don’t have to do any work other than uttering*curses on the enemies of
the Ahl-ul-Bayt!* ”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said that the other side of the sea there is a
city whose width is equal to the journey made by the sun in forty days.
The inhabitants of the city are unaware of sinful acts and they even
don’t know the name of Satan. Whenever they meet us, they ask lot of
questions and are very pleased to hear our answers. They ask as to when
the Last, the Twelfth Imam (as), will arrive. These people keep
themselves busy in the worship of Allah. They recite the Holy Qur’an as
instructed by us. They are our true followers. These people will join
the*Jihad* when the Twelfth Imam (as) makes his appearance to banish
evil from the face of the earth. No weapon will have any effect on their
bodies. Their swords are made of such tempered steel that if they hit a
rock with them, the rock will get sliced.

The Imam (as), after his appearance, will be accompanied by these troops
to Rome, Turkey, Deelam and Tabriz. Then he will make a skirmish on a
place lying between*Ja Balqa* and*Ja Balsa?.* These are the two cities,
one in the East and the other in the West. People of all the places will
be invited to profess the Faith of Islam. A time will come when the
entire population of the world would have embraced Islam.

Imam Hasan (as) says that there are two cities, one in the East and the
other in the West. Around each of the two cities there is a rampart made
of steel. Every rampart has seventy gates and from every gate seventy
thousand caravans enter. The people of every caravan speak a different
tongue. But

we can understand and converse in all these languages. None other than
my brother Husayn (as) and me can visit these cities.

The Prophet of Islam (as) has said,

“O Abu Dharr! Allah has compared my Ahl-ul-Bayt to the Canoe of Noah.
Whosoever boarded the Canoe, got deliverance. The dissenters got drowned
in the rough waters of the storm. The people who board the ship of my
Ahl-ul-Bayt’s love and obedience, will get free of the curse of
infidelity. Others who turn away from them, will drown in the sea of
wretchedness and depravity. The only way to deliverance is through love
and affection (*Mawadda)* for us.”

Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) wrote to Ishaq bin Ismail, The duties made
mandatory for you by Allah are His favors on you because He is not in
need of your prayers. His purpose in making prayer compulsory has been
to distinguish between the righteous and the evil. He gauges the
righteous through the yardstick of regularity in offering of prayers and
awards them the higher place and position.

Therefore, it is mandatory on you also to perform*Hajj, give Zakat* ,
fast during the month of*Ramadhan,* offer mandatory prayers and have
Faith in the*Wilayah of the Ahl-ul-Bayt.* For you the entrance to all
virtue is through the obedience of the*Ahl-ul-Bayt.* If Muhammad (S) and
his Vicegerents (as) were not there, the people would have been in gross
ignorance like the animals. Can you enter a city without going through
the gateway? Allah has appointed the*Imams (as)* after the Prophet (S)
for the Guidance of the people. It is His Favor on the mankind. Allah
says in the Holy Qur’an, ‘Today I have completed the Faith of Islam,
completed all the favors and bounties for you and Am satisfied with
it.’”

Bin Babawiyah narrates from a reliable source that Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as)
has quoted Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) saying that the Prophet (S) had
observed. “Allah has not created others better than us.”
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali asked, “O Prophet of Allah! Are you superior than
the angel Jibraeel?” The Prophet (S) replied, “O ‘Ali (as)! Allah has
made the Prophets (as) and the Messengers superior than the angels and I
have the distinction of superiority over all other prophets (as). After
me, you and the Imams (as) in your progeny have been bestowed with
superiority. The angels are all at our service! O ‘Ali (as)! The angels
who are stationed in the Heaven, keep praying for the deliverance of our
friends. ‘Ali (as)! If we were not created, Allah would have created
neither prophet Adam (as) nor Hawwa (as); neither there would be the
Janna nor the Jehannam, even the earth and the skies would not have come
into existence! And how is it possible that we are not superior to the
angels that we had the Knowledge of the Creator, Allah much before they
did.

Our Spirits were the First Creations of the Almighty before anything
else came into existence! We have been the first who bore witness to His
Unity and busied ourselves in His Worship and Prayer! Then, later on,
the angels were created. We were all in the form of a Light. When the
angels saw us, they wondered very much. Observing their wonderment, and
fearing that they might think of us as the greatest, our Light said,
“*Subhan Allah!* hearing this Glorification, they too started emulating.
Fearing that they

might include us, too, in the Glorification, we uttered, “*La Ilaha il
Allah”.* The angels now understood that the Glorification can only be
for Allah. To preclude the chance of their terming us the greatest, we
uttered, “*Allah Akbar* !” The angels understood what we meant, and
followed suit.

We said, “*La haula wa laquwwata illa Billah”* that the angels
understood that all the power that we can exercise is given by Allah,
and none else! The purpose of saying this also was that the angels might
start thinking wrongly that our power was perhaps because of our
ceaseless supplication and prayer! In the end we said, “*Alhamdo Lillah,
Praise be to Allah,* This is how the angels learned from us the method
of Glorifying Allah. Then prophet Adam (as) was created by Allah and He
put our*Nur* in him. Because our*Nur* was with prophet Adam (as), Allah
ordered the angels to prostrate before him. The angels then prostrated
to prophet Adam (as)!”

“Therefore we are, because of precedence in our creation and knowledge
of Allah, superior to the angels. When Jibrael took me to the Firmament,
he said the*Adhaan and Iqamah* and requested me to lead the prayer. I
asked him, ‘Do you consider me superior to yourself?’ Jibrael said, ‘Of
course! Allah has made the prophets (as) superior to the angels and you
are the most superior of all the prophets!’Then, when we reached
the*Hijab al-Noor* (the Curtain of Light) Jibrael said,’ You must enter
this place alone. I am not permitted to go any further!’I asked him,
‘Are you departing leaving me alone?’ Jibrael replied, ‘If I venture any
further all my feathers and hair will get burnt!’

“Then I entered the*Nahri-Noor* (the River of Light). This is the place
where the angels don’t enter. I heard a voice there saying, ‘O Muhammad
(as)!’ I said, ‘*Labbaik, Ya Rub* (At Your beck and call, O Allah!).
Allah said, ‘O Muhammad (S)! You are My Creation! I Am your Lord!
Worship Me only and depend on Me! You are My Noor that I have sent to
the people as My Manifestation. I have created the Heaven for you and
your descendents. There are elevated positions for your Vicegerents (as)
and great rewards fot their Shi’as!’ I asked, ‘Who are my Vicegerents?’
The voice came, ‘The names of your Vicegerents have been engraved on
the*Saq al-Arsh* (the Shank of the Firmament)’ I looked in that
direction and found written in the gold the names of all the Vicegerents
(as) starting with the name of ‘Ali (as) and ending with that of*Mehdi
(a.j.), the Last of the Imams (as).*

I asked, ‘O my Allah! Are all these my Vicegerents?’ The voice came,
‘They are all my*Aulia* who will be My*Hujjat (* Representatives) for
the people after you. I shall keep my*Faith and Religion* flourishing
and thriving in the world through them. The last of these Vicegerents
(as),*the Qaim,* will cull the world of all My enemies and purify it. He
will be the sovereign of the East and the West. His sway will be there
till the world lasted’”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that whenever Jibrael visited the
Prophet (S), he used to sit politely like a slave. He never entered
without obtaining the permission of the Prophet (S)

Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) narrates that someone asked the Prophet (S),
“Is ‘Ali (as) superior or the angels?”

The Prophet (S) replied, “A person who has true love for ‘Ali (as) in
his heart is superior to the angels!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that one day a Jew came to the
presence of the Prophet (S) and asked, “Tell me! Are you, and your
Vicegerents (as), superior to Prophet Musa (as)?”

The Prophet (S) replied, Praising oneself is not right. But, since you
have asked the question, I shall have to give the reply! Therefore,
listen, and listen with care!

When prophet Adam (as) committed the mistake, then he offered a prayer
to this effect: ‘O Allah! For the sake of Muhammad (S), and his progeny,
forgive my mistake!’ Allah, therefore pardoned Adam (as).’

When Noah (as)’s Ark was caught in the cyclone, he prayed to Allah,’ O
the Creator! For the sake of Muhammad (S) and his progeny, guide my ark
safely out of the cyclone!’ His prayer was answered.

When Nimrod consigned Ibrahim (as), the Friend of Allah, to the fire,
Ibrahim (as) prayed, ‘O Creator of Ibrahim (as)! For the sake of
Muhammad (S) and his progeny, make the fire cool on me!” The fire went
cold.

When the magicians in the court of the Pharaoh attacked Musa (as) with
their serpents, Musa (as) got scared and prayed, ‘O Allah! For the sake
of Muhammad (S) and his Vicegerents (as) deliver me from this danger!’
Musa (as) was ordered to throw his staff. He complied, the staff became
a bigger serpent and swallowed all the serpents of the magicians. Musa
(as)’s prayer was thus answered.

O Jew! If Musa (as) comes today and does not accept me as the Prophet
(S), then his own prophet hood would go void! O Jew! I have a
descendent; when he appears with the Order of Allah, ‘Isa (as) will
descend from the Heaven and offer prayers standing behind him.

An authentic source records that on the day when Allah took an oath from
the progeny of Adam (as), He asked all the prophets (as) and the angels,
“Am I not your Creator, your Lord? Isn’t Muhammad (S) your Prophet?
Aren’t ‘Ali (as) and his Immaculate Progeny (as), your*Imams* ?”

All of them replied in unison, “Definitely! Yes!!”

Those prophets who took the earliest initiative in affirming this, were
put in the rank of*ulu al azm (* The superior) prophets. The angels who
took precedence over the other angels in responding, they
became*Muqarrabeen,* or the angels closest to Allah!

The prophet of Allah (as) said,

“O Abu Dharr! Please remember what I am advising you and act on it!
There are two blessings that men are oblivious of! One, the health of
the body and the second is the leisure they get! They don’t make good
use of these two blessings and repent later on!

And Abu Dharr! Be thankful for five things and appreciate them:

Appreciate that youth is before old age! Because there is no pleasure of
prayer in the old age!

Appreciate good health before you fall ill, because prayer can be best
offered when one is in good health.

Appreciate affluence before you become a beggar that you might do
charity in the name of Allah!

Appreciate the leisure you have, before you get busy that you offer
prayers to your heart’s content.

Appreciate life before death catches up with you, that you cannot do
anything once you are dead.

And O Abu Dharr! Don’t delay doing good deeds! What good turn you have
decided to do, do it today! Who knows, you may be there tomorrow or not.
O Abu Dharr! There were lots of people there, but they are no more now!
There were lots of them who kept their tasks for the morrow! But before
the morrow came, they were no more!

O Abu Dharr! If you know the speed with which the steed of death is
running and the speed with which it is taking you closer to death, you
will abstain from lots of wishes and desires!

O Abu Dharr! This world is like a*serai* ?! Spend life like a traveler
in it. Don’t consider it your land. Your land is only the small area of
the grave, and always think of inhabiting it!

O Abu Dharr! In the morning stop thinking of the evening! It might
happen that your evening might not meet you!

O Abu Dharr! Make good use of your health, before ill health catches up
with you! Make good use of life, before death overtakes you! Who knows,
tomorrow your name might be in the list of the living, or the roster of
the dead! Or on the Day of Judgment, whether your name will be on the
list of the good people or with the sinners.

O Abu Dharr! Do whatever good turns, now, when you live. Don’t neglect
the Hereafter by chasing and accumulating transitory riches. The persons
to whom you leave behind the riches, will not praise you for your
largesse!

O Abu Dharr! I am wondering that people worry at the slightest hardship!
How will they bear the Hellfire and hardships of*Jahannam!* I see the
people spending sleepless nights to acquire the worldly pleasure! I also
wonder seeing people sleep and neglect their chances of acquiring the
pleasures of the Heaven as a recompense for their prayers.

O Abu Dharr! Appreciate the short span of life given to you! Be miserly
in not spending it on the transitory wealth of this world.

One very well known astrologer came to the presence of Amir’ul-Mu’mineen
‘Ali (as) and said, “I am a sooth sayer! I have heard that you too
predict about the events of the future! Do you want me to ask you some
questions or wish to answer my queries?”

The Imam (as) said, ‘Only Allah knows what is not in our present
knowledge and sight! But I know whatever He has taught me! If you have
claims of knowing the unknown, tell me what is enclosed in my fist.’
Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) put before him his folded fist.

The man thought for a long while. Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said,
“You are unable to answer!”

The man replied, “This is a very small matter! I was, in fact,
wondering, as to how, whatever is in your hand, has come there. In your
folded fist there is the nest of a bird and its egg from the peak of a
mountain which has never been scaled by any human being! I am really
wondering how you have brought it almost in the time needed for the
winking of the eye.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) opened his fist that did contain the egg and
the nest! Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) folded his palm once again and asked
him, “Now tell me, what is there in my folded fist?”

The astrologer said, “The nest and the egg have been restored to their
original place on the peak of the mountain!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) opened his fist and, there was nothing
there!

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) told to the man, “I shall ask you another
question, if you agree to reply truthfully!”

The man promised to tell the truth.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) asked, “From where you have learnt your
tricks?”

The astrologer said, “This is the first question you have asked,
otherwise I wouldn’t have been obliged to reply. This skill is because
of a mystic exercise I had undertaken. The exercise is that whatever my
base instinct (*nafs)* desires, I persevere and insist on its
fulfillment.

The Imam (as) asked, “What does your*nafs* say about becoming a Muslim?”

The man refused to reply.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “Why didn’t you persevere and insist
on becoming a Muslim?”

The man wondered and converted to Islam.

Now Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) asked, “Tell me, what is there in my
closed fist?”

The man thought for a long while and was unable to give any reply. He
said, “By accepting Islam, I have put myself to great loss. I have lost
the faculty that I possessed earlier!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, O Person! You have not lost anything!
In fact, you have gained! The*tazkia nafs* (purification of the mind)
that you have undergone shall bring you great benefits in this life and
the life Hereafter. You will have an august position in the Other World,
which I guarantee.

For the description of the above, study of the three objectives is
essential, which are dealt in the next chapter.


