Who was Victorious, Yazid or Husayn?
====================================

Although the hosts of the Devils numbered in thousands and the
supporters of the cause of Truth for which the Holy Imam stood, could be
counted on fingers, and the Holy Imam, with his numbered devotees, was
mercilessly massacred and the ladies, the queens of virtue and chastity
along with the innocent children were taken captives and put to every
disrespect, indignity and the bitterest tortures, but soon after the
massacre, the world understood who was the Arch-Devil and who was the
Divinely Chosen Guide for Humanity.

Many people embraced Islam at the guidance they received from the
severed head of Husayn when they saw it glorifying the Lord even from
the point of the lance during the torturous journey to Kufa and from
Kufa to Damascus. The realization of the Truth, the World exhibited
after the martyrdom of the Holy Imam, made even the Devil acknowledge
the virtual, spiritual Victory of the Holy Imam.

Identifying oneself as the admirer of Yazid is far beyond any
possibility when there is none today who would even like the idea of
taking the Devil's name in connection with any goodness save those who
would like to associate themselves with the Brute in the lincentious
performances enacted.

Whereas ever since the martyrdom of Husayn, the act of admiring and
appreciating the Holy Imam and his devotees is enjoined as a duty of
every true believer in God and the sincere lover of Truth, deeming it
with a conviction that admiration of the Great Sacrifice and feeling for
the sorrowful plight of the Holy Imam and his godly devotees carries
special blessings in this world, and with high spiritual honours and
great rewards in the life hereafter.

What is 'Shahadat' or Martyrdom
-------------------------------

Whoever is taken unawares or shot dead or suddenly killed be that even
for any matter of goodness on the part of the murdered one, other than
God's cause, cannot be ailed a martyr. It can no doubt be said that the
assassin had been cruel and the good man had been unjustly killed, but
he cannot be a martyr in the proper or the right sense of the term, for,
perhaps, if the murdered one had an opportunity or the chance to escape
death, he might have successfully avoided it, or if he had been warned
of the fate, he would have changed his views or conduct to avoid the
cause for the murder.

*A martyr in the true and the proper sense of the term is the one who
stands for Truth and Righteousness even at the cost of his life and
property not excluding his near and dear ones.*

Jesus and Husayn
----------------

The Holy Qur'an asserts in unequivocal terms that Jesus was neither
killed nor crucified by the people: 4:157 and 158. Even taking for
granted the statement of our Christian brethren the crucifixion of Jesus
under the evidence of the Holy Bible of the Christian Church itself, can
never be a martyrdom at all as the Bible says that Jesus avoided the end
by hiding himself, which suggests his unwillingness to meet death in the
cause of Truth.

Besides, when caught by the enemies, he began imploring God to see that
the cup was passed over and he be saved, and while he was put on the
cross as alleged by the Christian belief, he began crying aloud to God
in agony saying that he had been forsaken by Him. Could this he becoming
even of any ordinary believer in God with the conviction of his faith in
Him? How could such a weak-hearted one totally void of faith in the
All-Merciful Lord, be a religious leader, even that the son of God? How
could the one forsaken by God be the saviour of Humanity? The Bible
itself declares:

**“And he went it little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed
saying O' my Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.” (Matthew, 26:39)**

**And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, “ELi,
ELi Lama Sabachthani,”to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsakenme.”
(Matthew, 27:46)**

The above statement of the Bible of the Christian Church establishes the
following points against Jesus:

1. Jesus was frightened of death.

2. Jesus was unwilling to drink the cup of death in the way of the Lord.

3. Jesus wanted God to avoid his drinking the cup of death.

4. Jesus wanted God to avoid His Will to take place.

5. In the agony against the fear of death Jesus lost all faith in God
and believed to have been forsaken by Him. Thus according to his own
words, the for- saken son can do nothing for others for he himself has
been forsaken.

Let us take the ease of Husayn.

1. Husayn travelled all the distance from Madina to Karbala to drink the
cup of death accompanied by untold miseries and tortures.

2. Husayn offered not only himself but the dearest ones of his nearest
kith and kin, and the sincerest of friends with matchless faith in God
and devotion to Him.

3. At every step, Husayn suffered the worst tortures and the greatest
loss with perfect patience, fortitude, submission and surrender to the
Divine Will, every time praying for his offerings to be accepted by the
Lord.

4. While under the swords of the heartless assassins, he only prayed to
God for the salvation of the Faithful, far from being a complainant, he
prayed for his sacrifices to be accepted.

5. He proved his being the Greatest Martyr, the King of Martyrs, who
offered not only himself but his dearest ones counted to about
seventy-two, by glorifying God in God's own Words when his head was
severed and raised on the point of the lance.

*In short, Husayn's martyrdom has no parallel in the history of
Mankind.*

The following statement is taken from the research work by the great
scholar Imaduddin Husayn Ispahani known as Imad Zadeh, Tehran. His
inquiry is based upon the following sources:

1. Tabari

2. Ibn Athir

3. Kitabul Jamal of Shaik Mufeed

4. Rijal Mumqant

5. Abu Maqnaf

6. Zakhiratud Darain

7. Hadaiq

8. Irshad

9. Uyunal Akhbar

10. Manaqib al-Ibn Shahr-Ashoob

11. Absarul Ain fi Ansaral Husayn

12. Kifayatur Talib

13. Tabaqaat Ibn Sa'd

14. Badayah-wan-Nehayah

15. Al- Husayn- (Egyptian-Edition)

16. Majalis e Ismail (Constantinople Edition)

17. Minhaj-as-Sanah of Ibn Taimiah

18. Amaali Ibn Shaikh (Iranian Edition)

19. Masailal jahiliah (of Md' bin Abdul Wahab)

20. Aasarul Baqiah

21. Beharul Anwaar al-Majlisis

22. Al Ardhu wat Turbatual Husayn (Ayatullah Kashiful- Ghita)

The Martyrs of Karbala:

The Hashimites-from the seed of Abu Talib:

1. Those mentioned in the Ziarate Nahiyah 18

2. Those not mentioned in the Ziarat 13

3. Young children 3

No. distributed according to the immediate parentage of the Martyrs:

The Holy Imam Husayn 1

The sons of the Holy Imam (Two in Karbala and one in Abdullah was
martyred later and buried in Asqalan) 3

The sons of Amirul-Momineen Ali 9

The sons of Imam Hasan 4

The Sons of Aqeel 12

The sons of Ja’far 4

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

33

The comrades of the Holy Imam:-

1. Those whose names are mentioned in the *'Ziarat al-Nahiah*’ 70

2. Those whose names are not mentioned in theZiarat 27

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

97

3. Total number of Martyrs in Kufa 8

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Total comrades martyred 105

Total martyrs including the Bani Hashim

and the Holy Imam 138

The Martyrs of Karbala-the Kind of Men they were
------------------------------------------------

As already said in the foregoing pages, those who surrendered their
souls in the way of the Lord at Karbala were the divinely selected ones
of the human family. They were ideal personalities with unique qualities
which humanity could justly be proud to own in their kind as the
matchless gems which the world had ever seen. Each one of the great
martyrs was a model of the integration of the unique personality traits
some of which each one of them possessed as peculiar to him.

They were the noblest models divinely set up for the members of the
human family to follow. The faith in God, the sincere devotion, the
dauntless courage, the unconquerable fidelity, the unfailing patience,
the charitable disposition, the ideal consideration for the life after
death and the ever mindfulness of the Day of Judgment which the great
martyrs manifested the hour of their trial at Karbala were obviously the
qualities they were divinely conditioned with for the fulfilment of the
Divine Plan of the enactment of the glorious *'Zibhe-Azeem.'*

Every one of the martyrs was a glorious human metal with the polish
necessary to get reflected through it the divine attributes of the
Creator Lord of the Universe. In short, Karbala was a historic, a unique
and the greatest exhibition of the best specimens of the various noble
qualities endowed in the children of Adam, particularly those of the
seed of Abraham through Muhammad, Ali and Fatimah.

Any one desirous of having a view of the glorious manifestation of
divinity in man, and the ideal integration of the Divine attributes in a
human personality may look into the wonderful sacrifice which Husayn,
the King of Martyrs, offered in Karbala, in the way of the Lord.

It is a historic fact that a large crowd followed Husayn from Mecca but
before the great offering he had to make, Husayn started shifting the
human stuff there with him through his repeated sermons prophesying the
torturous sufferings and the gruesome massacre in store for those who
remain with him.

Thus the Holy Imam made the questionable stuff leave his camp after
which remained only the sincere ones who were wholly devoted to the Lord
and who were really anxious of surrendering themselves in His way. While
he wanted those who were then with him to leave him and go away, Husayn
wrote letters and sent messages to the chosen few worthy of inclusion
into his fold informing them of the arrival of the awaited hour. Thus
were collected the gems worthy of presenting to the Lord, shunting out
all the unworthy stuff.

The Companions of Husayn and those of the Holy Prophet
------------------------------------------------------

It is the historic truth that the kind of faithful companions the Holy
Imam Husayn had gathered around him was not given to any of the Apostles
of God including Jesus and even the Holy Prophet Muhammad to claim such
a band of men of spotless character and godly conduct in such a large
number among their companions. While one of the disciples of Jesus
betrayed him and connived to get him in the hands of his enemies, none
of the other disciples offered to get killed with their Master.

In the case of the companions of the Holy Prophet, most of those who
claim prominence in their devotion to him deserted him leaving him in
the Jaws of death, not once or twice but on every occasion when they
felt any danger to their life. But in the case of Husayn, the
faithfulness and the devotion of his comrades in the worst and the most
torturous miseries which culminated in the gruesome massacre of one and
all of them, is nothing but a matchless marvel which has thrown the
human world into wonder and has moved every human heart to sorrow and
grief for them, with tears irresistibly rushing into the eyes of men,
women and even children in sympathy for the great sufferers in the way
of the Lord.

Brief Notes on Some of Those Martyred in Kufa and Karbala
---------------------------------------------------------

1. *Abu-Bakr Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Talib*: He was called *'Muhammad
al-Asghar'* or Abdullah from Laila daughter of Mas'ud son of Hanzala son
of Manath son of Tameem.

2. *Abi Bakr son of the Second Imam Hasan, son of Ali.*

3. *Abdul Hatoof Ansari and his Brother.*

4. *Sa'ad (both sons of Hurr).*

Both from Kufa who joined the Holy Imam at Karbala

5. *Adham son of Umayya-al Abdi.* From Basra son of Abi Obaida, whose
father had been the constant attendant on the Holy Prophet.

6. *Aslam*-the slave who was purchased and liberated by the Holy
Imam-was the scribe engaged to write communications from the Holy Imam.

7. *Anas bin Hars al-Kahili* *son of Baniah son of Kahli* who was one of
the companions of the Holy Prophet.

8. *Borair zibe Khozar al-Hamdani*: A very old, pious, and devoted
companion of Amirul-Momineen, Ali Ibn Abi Talib, one of the prominent
noblemen of Kufa. He was the one who came to the Holy Imam begging most
humbly to permit him to get martyred for he wanted to die in the way of
the Lord and show his face to the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgment.
The details about the faithfulness and the devotion of Borair are many.

9. *Umayyabib Sa'd at Taie*: He was one of the companions of Amirul-
Mominecn.

10. *Bushr bin Amrual Hazrami* from the famous ones among the faithful
devotees to the Holy Prophet.

11. *Bakr bib Hai at Taimi*: Of the Bani Taimi tribe who came to the
Holy Imam and volunteered to be martyred in the way of the Lord.

12. *Jabib Ibn Hajjaj al Taimi*: He was the follower of Muslim-bin-Aqeel
in Kufa. Since Muslim was arrested, he hid himself until Husayn arrived
in Karbala, and reported himself to the Holy Imam and got martyred.

13. *Jibilath Ibn Ali-e Shaibani*: The one who was attending on
Amirul-Momineen in the battle of Siffin.

14. *Ja’far Ibn Aqeel Ibn Abi Talib*: The Third brother of ‘Abbas the
Standard Bearer of the Holy Imam.

15. *Ja’far Ibn Aqeel Ibn Abi Talib*: Brother of Muslim Ibn Aqeel the
Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

16. *Jinadat Ibn Ka'b Ansari Al-Khazraji*: Along with his son-Martyred
at Karbala- one of the greatest devotees of the Holy Imam.

17. *Jundab bin Mujee al Khaulani*: One of the companions of
Ameerul-Momineen came to the Holy Imam and fell down on his feet and
prayed to be permitted to be martyred.

18. *Jaun*-The liberated slave of Abu Dharr who after the death of Abu
Dharr, joined the Second Holy Imam and thereafter he remained with
Husayn and had come to Karbala with Husayn. He was trained under Abu
Dharr and was a very pious devotee of the Holy Imam.

19. *Jaun bin Malike Tameemi*: Of the tribe of Bani Tameem. One who was
in Yazid's army, seeing the Devil's forces decided to attack the Holy
Imam which he never thought that it would ultimately happen, left the
ranks of the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam and was martyred.

20. *Hars*-The liberated slave of Hazrat Hamza the uncle of the Holy
Prophet-had come from Madina along with Husayn to get martyred.

21. *Habshi bin Qais al-Nahmi*: Of a group from the tribe of Hamdan. His
grandfather was one of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet.

22. *Hars bin Amraul Qais al-Kandi*: A very brave nobleman of Arabia. He
went into the armies of the Devil, and found his own uncle there. His
uncle asked him: 'have you come to kill your uncle?' He replied 'Yes!
You are my uncle, no doubt, but God is my Lord and you have come here
against Him.’ He killed his uncle. Along with him three others from the
enemy's ranks joined the Holy Imam. All were martyred.

23. *Habib bin Amir al-Taimi*: One who had already paid allegiance to
the Holy Imam at the hands of Muslim was martyred in Kufa, Habib left
Kufa and joined the Holy Imam on his way to Karbala and got martyred.

24. *Habib bin Muzahir al-Asadi*: He was known as Habib Ibn Mazahir bin
Re'aab bin Al-Ashtar from the lineage of Asad Abdul-Qasim Al-Asadi-aged
70 years. He was one of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet who
after the Holy Prophet always remained with Ameerul-Momineen Ali and
migrated to Kufa when the Capital was shifted from Madina to Kufa, and
accompanied Ali in all the battles he had to fight against the rebels
and traitors. His ideal faithfulness and sincere devotion to the Holy
Imam has many glorious details.

25. *Hajjai bin Masrooq al-Jaufi*: One of the faithful companions of
Ameerul- Mominecn Ali in Kufa.

26. *Hajjaji bin Badr as S'di*: Of Basra from the tribe Bani Sa'd famous
nobleman in Kufa. He was the one who carried the communications of the
Holy Imam to the pious ones of the devotees of the House of the Holy
Prophet in Kufa.

27. *Hurr Ibn Yazid ar Riyahi*: He was the son of Yazid Ibn Najiyah bin
Qa'nab bin Yitab bin Hurr in the lineage of Al-Yarbo'ir Riyahi. A famous
nobleman of Kufa, an experienced warrior specially selected by Ibn Ziad
to command a contingent against Husayn.

He was the one who obstructed Husayn's way near Kufa, but he never
believed that the venture of Ihne Ziad was to end in the martyrdom of
the Holy Imam. When at Karbala he found that the decision was to martyr
the Holy Imarn, Hurr left the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam,
seeking pardon for his previous conduct. The Holy Imam received him with
special grace. Hurr was among the foremost martyrs in the way of God.
Husayn said: *“Hurr, as thy mother has named thee Hurr (a free man) thou
art 'Hurr' in this world and in the hereafter.”*

28. *Hallas bin Amro' ar Rasibi*: He was the son of Amru ar Rasibi who
was one of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momineen Ali.

29. *Hanzala bin As'adus-Shabami*: He was the one who carried the
message of exhortation from the Holy Imam to Ibn Sa'd in Karbala.

30. *Rafe'- the liberated slave of Muslim Azdi*: He came from Kufa and
volunteered to be martyred in the way of the Lord.

31. *Zavir bin Amro al Kandi*: A sincere devotee of the Ahlul Bayt who
was a devoted companion of the Holy Imam. He was a noble personality
very much revered and respected by the people.

32. *Zohair al Qaine Bijilly*: He was a noble chieftain of his tribe, a
man of great influence in Kufa. In the beginning he was attached to the
Third Caliph Uthman. Once returning from Hajj he met the Holy Imam and
became a staunch devotee of Husayn. He is the one who bade goodbye to
his wife Dalham daughter of Amru, liberating her with a divorce to go to
her relatives, and he joined the Holy Imam and got martyred. The details
of Zohair's devotion to the Holy Imam need a lengthy note.

33. *Ziad bin Areeb al Sa'idi*: Son of Areeb one of the faithful
companions of the Holy Prophet and also a traditionist. A very pious and
brave noble personality enjoying the trust and the confidence of the
people.

34. *Salim the liberated slave of Aamire Abdi*: A staunch devotee of
Amirul-Momineen Ali, from Basra.

35. *Salim the liberated slave of Bani Madinatul Kalbi*: Of the tribe
'Kalb' one of the devotees of Amirul-Momineen Ali in Kufa.

36. *Sa'd bin Hars and Abul Hatoof bin Harse Ansari*: These twin
brothers had come from Kufa employed in the forces of the Devil to fight
Husayn. Later they left the ranks of the Devil's forces and joined the
Holy Imam and got martyred.

37. *Sa'd the liberated slave of Amerrul-Momineen Ali*: After the
martyrdom of Amirul-Momineen, he remained attached to Imame Hasan and
later after the martyrdom of Imame Hasan, he remained devoted to Husayn
and got martyred.

38. *Sa'd-the liberated slave of Amro bin Khalid*: He volunteered to be
martyred for the Truth. A noble personality with a high degree of
fidelity and valiance.

39. *Sayeed bin Abdullah Hanafi*: A noble and very influential
personality in Kufa uniquely brave. He was very helpful to Muslim bin
Aqeel in Kufa. He was the gentleman who carried Muslim's letter from
Kufa to Husayn and remained with the Holy Imam until he was mar- tyred.
He was the man who, while the Holy lmam offered his prayers in the field
of action (Karbala) stood in front of the Holy lmam and received the
arrows from the Devil's forces, on his breast, protecting the Imam in
prayers, and got martyred.

40. *Salman bin Mazarib bin Qais al Anmari al Bijilli*: A cousin of
Zohair al Qain. He went to Mecca with Zohair and when on his return from
Mecca Zohair decided to join the Holy Imam, he accompanied him and got
martyred at Karbala. A man of very noble conduct and character endowed
with strong will and prowess. A very pious personality fearing none but
God.

41. *Sulaiman bin Razeen*-A liberated slave of the Holy Imam: A truthful
and a very reliable gentleman. A staunch devotee of the Holy Imam. He
carried Husayn's letters to the devotees of the Ahlul Bayt in Basra. Ibn
Ziad the Devil's governor of Basra caught him and this faithful servant
of the Holy Imam got himself willingly martyred (at Basra).

42. *Sawar bin Manyim al-Nahmi*: A highly respected noble veteran of
Iraq travelled all the way to Karbala to join the Holy Imam to get
martyred with him.

43. *Suwaid bin Amro bin Abil Mataa al Anmari al Khash'mi*: A noble,
highly respected, god-fearing and a brave personality. He fought and
fell seriously wounded, and was lying unconscious, the enemy thinking
him dead had left him, but when he returned to consciousness and heard
the rejoicing of the Devil's forces shouting that the Holy Imam had been
killed, he got up, and fought and got martyred.

44. *Saif bin Hars Al Jabiri and Malik*: These two cousins from Kufa
joined the Holy Imam and got martyred.

45. *Saif bin Malik al Abdi al Basri*: A leading devotee of the Holy
Ahlul-Bait.

46. *Shabeeb a liberated slave of Hars al-Jabiri al-Hamdani*: A very
brave gentleman who got martyred in the very first attack from the
enemy.

47. *Shaueb al-Shakiri*: Well-known in Kufa for his nobility of
character, courage, and a revered noble veteran of the town.

48. *Zarghamah bin Malik al-Taghlabi*: A lion-hearted brave gentleman
who was faithful to Muslim bin Aqeel in Kufa. After Muslim's martyrdom,
he joined the Holy Imam and was martyred along with him.

49. *Aaiz bin Majma'al Aazi*: One of those six who along with Hurr Ibn
Yazid al- Riyahi had joined the Holy Imam.

50. *Aabis Ibn Abi Shabeeb al-Shakiri*: One of the most pious devotees
of Amirul-Momineen, and one of the noblemen of Kufa. He was one of those
who helped Muslim Ibn Aqeel in Kufa.

51. *Amir bin Muslim at Badi Basri*: With his liberated slave Salim,
both the devotees of Amirul-Momineen in Basra, joined the Holy Imam and
got martyred.

52. *Abbas Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Qamare Bani Hashim*: This is the great
son of the First Holy Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib, from the noble lady Hazrat
Ummul-Baneen, who was brought into this world to fulfil the desire of
Amirul-Momineen to have his own representative, on his behalf to be
martyred with Husayn in Karbala. Abbas is so well-known to the Muslim
World for the unique divine qualities he was endowed with, that he in
the first place needs no introduction, secondly, if a proper attempt is
to be made, it wold need a separate volume.

This great lion-hearted son of the Lion of God in his qualities and
position in Karbala is next only to the Holy Imam Husayn.

The unique grace bestowed by God especially on this Great Martyr, is
such that any one who prays for God's immediate help at the time of
danger, invoking the divine grace in the Holy name of ‘ABBAS, is
immediately heard and helped. There are millions and millions of those
who have had their prayers heard by God, and who are still being graced
by the Divine Mercy through the medium of this Great Holy Soul, ‘Abbas
the faithful brother and the Standard Bearer of the Holy Imam at
Karbala. Let any one try his own luck even today by invoking the Mercy
of the All-Merciful Lord in the Holy name of this Saintly son of
Ameerul-Momineen Ali. His holy shrine in Karbala stands today as the
resort for the sure rescue of his sincere devotees to get the help from
God at the times of unavoidable needs, risks and dangers.

In short, all the details about the greatness of Abbas and the unique
divine qualities he was exclusively distinguished with cannot he given
in this brief work.

He was next only to the Holy Imam in Karbala. The 'Alam' or the Banner
which he held on behalf of the Holy Imam, was the Standard of Islam or
the Truth, which is hoisted by the Shias, popularly during the mourning
season of Moharram, and is revered as do the faithful Subjects of a good
King as a token of their loyalty to him. The Banner being the Standard
of Truth is only revered and respected and never worshipped as wrongly
imagined and depicted by some ignorant ones. Worship in Islam is due to
none but the One, the Only True God.

53. *Abdullah Ibn Husayn*, known as Ali al-Asghar: The six-month-old
baby son of the Holy Imam martyred in the very lab of his father whose
martyrdom no human heart can bear without shedding tears.

54. *Abdullah bin Hasan Ibn Ali*: The son of the Second Holy Imam Hasan,
a young boy who ran out of the tent to save Husayn when he was being
martyred, and was martyred before the Holy Imam.

55. *Abdullah bin Bushr Khash'ami*: Of the Anmari al-Khash'ami tribe. A
well-known noble personality in Kufa. He came out of Kufa with Ibn Sa'd
but joined the Holy Imam and got martyred with him.

56. *Abdullah bin Omair Kalbi*: He had come to Kufa from Madina, and
joined the Holy Imam. His wife also accompanied him to serve the Holy
Ladies. When Abdullah was martyred, his wife sitting at the dead body of
her husband said “O’ Abdullah! Thou hath entered Paradise, take me along
with thee.” The good lady had not finished her lamentations when a slave
of Shimr delivered a blow on her head with an axe and she was martyred.

57. *Abdul Rahman and Abdullah sons of Orawah bin Harraq al Ghaffari*:
These two brothers were the noblemen of Kufa. Their grandfather, Harraq,
was one of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momineen. They came to the
Holy Imam and joined the noble cause and were martyred.

58. *Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel*: Son of Muslim bin Aqeel Ibn Abi
Talib. His Mother was Roqiah daughter of Ali through his wife Sahba from
Yamamah was martyred when he went to save the Holy Imam.

59. *Abdullah bin Yaqtar al-Himyari*: He was the son of the good lady
who had served the Holy Imam as his nurse in his babyhood.

60. *Abde Qais Basri al-Abdi*: Alongwith Abdullah bin Zaid al-Abdi
Obaidullah bin Zaide Abdi, Yazid bin Sabeet at Abdi.

These great men, well-known and highly respected ones of their tribe
came and requested the Imam to permit them to drink the cup of martyrdom
along with him, and got martyred.

61*. Abdul A'la bin Yazeed al Kalbi al Aleemi*: The famous and respected
nobleman from Kufa.

62. *Abdul Rahman bin Abdul Rab al-Ansari Khazrjji:* One of the faithful
companions of the Holy Prophet and a Traditionist and a faithful devotee
of Ameerul-Momineen.

63. *Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel Ibn Abi Talib*: Son of Aqeel from his wife
Umm Walad.

64. *Abdul Rahman al-Arhabi:* One of those who carried the letters of
the devotees to the Holy Imam. He came to Husayn and got himself
martyred.

65. *Abdul Rahman bin Mas'ood at Taimi*: Came out of Kufa along with Ibn
Sa'd but later joined the Holy Imam and got martyred.

66. *Uthman bin Ali Ibn Abi Talib*: One of the brothers of Hazrate
‘Abbas, the third son of Ummu Baneen. Joined the Holy Imam on his way to
Karbala and was martyred.

67. *Name not known*

68. *Umar bin Janada al-Ansari*: This is the son of the godly lady who
came to the Holy Imam and implored for his permission for her son Umar
to be martyred and somchow succeeded, in getting it. When her son was
martyred, the Devil's army severed his head and threw it towards
Husayn's camp. The godly lady, his mother, took up the severed head of
her son and threw it back into the ranks of the Devil's army saying:
“That which has been given away in the way of the Lord is not taken
back.”She herself took up a stick from the camp and rushed to attack the
devils. Husayn held her back saying *“Islam allows not 'jehad' by
women.”*

69. *Ali al-Akbar* *son of the Holy Imam*: The eighteen-year son of the
Holy Imam, who resembled the Holy Prophet the most, was martyred by a
lance pierced through his breast. See the brief note about the Holy Imam
offering this beautiful son of his in the way of the Lord.

70. *Umer bin Zabi'ah Az Zabiyee*: Son of Zabiya at Taimi. Came out of
Kufa with Ibn Sa'd but later joined the Holy Imam and was martyred.

71. *Amro bin Khalid al-Saidavi and three others*; When these four
person marched towards the camp of the Holy Imam, Hurr asked the Holy
Imam for permission to stop them from getting near the camp for they
were coming from the enemy's ranks. The Holy Imam miraculously said:
*“Obstruct them not; they are coming to me with a good heart. They are
my devotees.”*They joined the Holy Imam and were martyred.

72. *Amru bin Abdullah al-Jundayi*: Of the tribe of Hamdan. He reported
himself to the Holy Imam and was martyred.

73. *Amru bin Qarta al Ansari*: One of the faithful companions of the
Holy Prophet and also of Amirul-Momineen.

74. *Amru bin Ha'b Abu Thamama al Sa'idi*: One of the faithful devotees
and companions of Amirul-Momineen.

75. *Amru bin Hasan at Talee*: One of the staunch devotees of the Ahlul
Bayt.

76. *Ammara Ibn Salama al Daalaani*: One of the companions of
Amirul-Momineen.

77. *Aun and Muhammad Sons of Ja’far al-Tayyar*: Two sons of Hazrate
Zainab the Sister of the Holy Imam. Aun was her own son and Muhammad was
from the deceased wife (Khausa), of her husband Abdullah bin Jaffar
Tayyar. These two were only young boys of about nine and ten years of
age. The Holy Lady Zainab, the daughter of Amirul-Momineen and Lady
Fatimah, brought these two young boys and implored her brother, the Holy
Imam, to permit them to free the enemy. At the persistent implorings
from his sister the Holy Imam permitted, and these two young souls were
martyred before the very eyes of their mother. This godly daughter of
Ali and Fatimah, the grand- daughter of the Holy Prophet, stood quiet at
the dead bodies of her children and said *“I will not lament for you,
for you have gone in the way of the Lord.”* The whole camp wept but
Zainab prevented them from crying saying *“Let not my Brother feel that
I am sorry for losing them in the way of the Lord. Today I am pleased
with my children.”*

78. *Qarib*: The son of a liberated slave girl of Husayn. This lady
after having been liberated by the Holy Imam was married to a gentleman
and brought her son Qarib and presented him to the Holy Imam and Qarib
was brought up by the Holy Imam. He was martyred along with the other
devotees, offering himself in the way of the Lord.

79. *Qasim bin Hasan bin Ali*: Son of the Second Holy Imam. See the note
on his martyrdom.

80. *Qasim bin Habib al Azdi*: A well-known noble of Kufa.

81. *Qasith, Kardoos, Musqit - Sons of Zohair al Taghlabi*: These three
brothers were the devoted companions of Amirul-Momineen who were with
him in all his expeditions against the infidels and traitors. They came
from Kufa and offered themselves for the noble cause and achieved
martyrdom.

82. *Qan'ab an Namri*: Of the devotees of Amirul-Momineen, came from
Basra and was martyred in the way of God.

83. *Qais bin Mushir as Saidavi*: A very pious personality from a group
of the Asadi Tribe, extra-ordinarily brave, faithful and one of the
sincere and faithful companions of the Holy Prophet. He reported himself
to the Holy Imam, from Kufa, and was martyred.

84. *Kannah at Taghlabi*: A very noble personality known for his piety
in Kufa. A good reciter of the Holy Qur'an, a very brave, God-fearing,
influencial and powerful noble of Kufa.

85. *Majma'ul jahni*: Son of Ziad bin Umar Jahni one of the aged
companions of the Holy Imam. When people began deserting the Holy Imam
on the Night of Ashoora, this old devotee of the Holy Imam remained and
achieved martyrdom.

86. *Muslim bin Aqeel*: The Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa, where he
was martyred.

87. *Muslim Ibn Ausaja al Asadi:* One of the faithful companions of the
Holy Prophet. An aged veteran who had earned a glorious name and fame
for his valour and prowess in the expeditions against the infidels. When
on the Ashoora Night, the Holy Imam told his companions to find their
own ways and save themselves from the wholesale massacre of his
supporters which was in store for them the following day, Muslim
addressing the Holy Imam said: *“O’ son of the Holy Prophet! Where am I
to go before myself getting martyred here?”*

Muslim was one of the most prominent supporters of the Holy Imam in
Karbala, and was martyred there.

88. *Muslim: bin Katheer al A'waj al Azdi*: One of the devotees of
Amirul-Momineen in Kufa.

88. *Mas'ood bin Hajjal Taimy and his son Abdur Rahman bin Mas'ood*: The
devotees of Amirul-Momineen from Kufa.

These two were known for their piety and righteousness.

89. *Muhammad bin Abdullah Ibn Ja’far:* A young son of Abdullah son of
Hazrat Ja’far al- Tayyar, his mother was Khausa, daughter of Hafsa bin
Rabi'a.

90. *Muhammad bin Muslim bin Aqeel*: One of the two young sons of Muslim
bin Aqeel the Deputy of the Holy Imam who was martyred in Kufa.

91. *Muhammad bin Abi Syeed bin Aqeel*: The grandson of Muslim bin Aqeel
the Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

92. *Munjeh*-the liberated slave of the Second Holy Imam Hasan: Who
accompanied Qasim bin Hasan from Madina and got martyred.

93. *Mauq' bin Thamamah Asadi Saidavi Abu Musa*: Of the devotees of the
Ahlul Bayt in Kufa, escaped from the town at night and joined the Holy
Imam at Karbala.

94. *Nafe'bin Hilale Jamali*: A companion of Ameerul-Momineen. Reciter
of the Holy Qur'an and Traditionist. A noble personality known in Kufa
for his piety, escaped from Kufa and joined the Holy Imam in Karbala. A
great devotee of Holy Imam who always remained by the side of ‘ABBAS the
Standard Bearer of Husayn. He could not bear the least disregard for the
Holy Imam, from any one in the Devil's forces.

95. *Nasr bin Naizar*: A liberated slave of Ameerul-Momineen. He was
presented to the Holy Prophet by the King of Persia and the Holy Prophet
presented him to Amirul-Momineen who freed him. He came to Karbala and
got martyred.

96. *Wazeh the Turk*: The Turkish liberated slave of Harse Madhaji. A
pious gentleman, a good reciter of the Holy Qur'an, who came to Karbala,
presented himself to the Holy Imam and was martyred.

97. *Hani bin Urwah*: Martyred at Kufa with Muslim Ibn Aqeel.

98. *Yazid bin Ziad bin Mohasir al-Kandi-Behdile Abush Sha'sa*: One of
the nobles in Kufa. A staunch devotee of Ahlul Bayt. A very pious
personality who joined Husayn from Kufa and was martyred.

99. *Yazid bin Maghfal Ja'fi*: A very pious devotee of Ameerul-Momineen.
A learned poet. His father and grandfather were faithful companions of
the Holy Prophet.

100. *Husayn Ibn Ali the King of Martyrs*: The divinely promised and
prophesied Martyr of the '*Zibhe Azeem*' (The Great Sacrifice) in the
seed of Abraham through his son Ishmae1,in the lineage of Ishmael
through Muhammad the Last Apostle of God, Ali the Ameerul-Momineen, the
First of the Holy Imams and Lady Fatimah the Lady of Light.

Husayn the International Hero
-----------------------------

Today when the leaders of every religion are revered only by their
respective followers, the Holy Imam Husayn is the International Hero who
occupies a special position of love, honour, reverence and holiness in
the hearts of the followers of all the religions in the world. People in
every part of the world, without any distinction of caste, creed, colour
or nationality, love Husayn and hold him in reverence, recognizing and
hailing him as a Great Hero of Truth. Millions of educated men and women
today with ample proof, believe that the Holy Soul of the King of
Martyrs commend their prayers to be heard by God and thus draw great
blessings from the All-Merciful Lord through the mediation of the
Greatest of the Martyrs in His cause.

Husayn, the King of Martyrs
---------------------------

Having gone through the above very brief sketch of the terrible
sufferings of the Holy Imam Husayn along with his family and friends
unequalled in the History of Mankind, and the great unparalleled
sacrifices he has offered in the way of God to save the Truth for the
guidance of the human race as a whole with which the Holy Imam defied
the might of the Devil's forces surrendering his all, any intelligent
person will unhesitatingly declare the Holy Imam to be the King of
Martyrs.

Some people have, even wrongly gone to the extent of worshipping Husayn
as God Himself or His incarnation which is totally wrong. Today Muslims,
Hindus, Christians, Parsis, Jews and people of every religion love
Husayn paying him their sincere homage and revere him in their own ways.
Those who believe in God and godliness take pride in naming their
children after the Holy names of the House of the Holy Prophet, but none
even tolerates his issues to be called by the cursed names of those who
had tortured the Holy Family, although the great tyrants ruled empires
in their respective times. Every justice loving soul today hates the
Arch-Devil Yazid, son of Mu’awiyyah, deeming him the Devil incarnate.

Where is Yazid?
---------------

Thus the Holy Imam established the Truth and won an Ever-lasting Victory
over Falsehood. He has not only proved Yazid, the Drunkard, the
Debauchee, the Gambler to be one worse than a brute and a devil but has
crushed falsehood forever and placed the Truth in the highest pinnacle
of prominence and regard, in its original purity. And now no evil hand
can touch it till the end of the world. Yazid has earned the curse of
God and of the whole of the God-loving humanity in this world and a
permanent abode in hell for himself and his comrades forever.

The Friends and Foes of the Truth, Clear Distinction
----------------------------------------------------

Now, to know who the followers of the Truth are, and who are the
supporters of Falsehood, is very easy. All those who love Husayn will
naturally be found weeping, mourning, or at least feeling sorrowful for
the calamities that befell the Holy Imam in establishing the Truth.
Those who rejoice and make merry must naturally be the enemies of the
Holy Imam, and the supporters of the cause of Falsehood of which the
Devil Yazid was an embodiment.

The King of Martyrs Mourned
---------------------------

Ever since the massacre of the Holy Imam and his faithful devotees at
Karbala, true Muslims during the month of Moharram express their grief
and feelings for the sufferings of the Holy Imam, in their own ways
according to the customs of their own countries.

Some enthusiasts among the people beat their breasts to say that they
who do not care for their own selves and hurt their own bodies in love
for the Holy Imam, in fighting against the forces of the Devil. During
this mourning period, the mourners men, women and children generally
dress in black, and give up every kind of rejoicing. The mourning for
the Holy Imam is observed through organised congregations called
*'Majalis al-Aza'* or the Mourning Congregations.

Husayn's Martyrdom Prophesied in the Old Testament
--------------------------------------------------

**“For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts a day of vengeance, that
he may avenge him of his adversaries and the sword shall devour, and it
shall be satiated and made drunk with their blood for the Lord God of
hosts hath a sacrifice in the North country by the river Euphrates.”
(The Old Testament, Jeremiah, 46:10)**


