Shia'ism or Islam-Original
==========================

People mostly ignorant of what actually Shia'ism is and what in fact the
commitment of a Shia is to his faith what actually it is in practice,
are labouring under a gross misunderstanding of faith and its adherents.

When asked what actually means Shia'ism and the commitment of a Shia to
his faith, the Sixth Holy Imam Ja’far Ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq gave the
whole in a nutshell, after which there remains no room for any question
about the faith or its adherents.

*“Man kaana lillah mutee'an wahowa lana vali.”*

‘He who is obedient to God is our friend (a Shia),'

*“Man kaana lillah ahoo an wahown lana odoo.”*

'He who is hostile to God, i.e., disobedient to Him, he is our enemy (a
non-Shia).

*“Wala yanalo vilayatena illa bil wara'e wal amalis Saleh”*

'And reacheth not our love save through piety and righteousness.’

What is Shia'ism?
-----------------

Shia'ism is no new religion, creed or faith. It is nothing but the
Original Islam in its original purity. It is the, very same faith which
was preached and practised by the Holy Prophet without anything added to
or subtracted of it.

Why then call it Shia'ism and not Islam?
----------------------------------------

It is an undeniably acknowledged and a universally acknowledged fact
that the last exhortation of the Holy Prophet Muhammad to his faithful
adherents the Muslims was:

*“I leave behind me amidst you the Two great things, the BOOK OF GOD
(the Holy Qur'an) and my 'ITRAT my'AHLUL BAYT' (the members of the holy
family, Fatimah, her husband Ali and her issues) Should ye be attached
to these TWO never, never shall ye be misled, after me, for verily these
Two will never be separated from one another until they meet me at the
SPRING (the Spring ef Kauther).”* (TK., DM., SM., and others)

Under the above apostolic instruction from the Holy Prophet every true
Muslim has to abide by the Word of God (the hloly Qur'an) guided only by
the Ahlul Bayt and none else, and this is the one and only basis on
which Shia'ism, i.e., the Islam Original is besed. With the departure of
the Holy Prophet from the world, as the people of Moses and Jesus went
astray so also the Muslim.

The love of pleasures and the glory of this world maddened the masses
and led them astray from the right path, under the evil influence of
those in power. To get the religious authority and the powers to rule
over the destinies of the people, the self-assumed rulers of the states,
the self-made religious heads and the fanciful spiritual leaders,
misinterpreted the Holy Qur'an and added much of falsehood to the
Traditions or the Sayings of the Holy prophet, and many false traditions
were fabricated to assume unwarranted powers end authority. At the same
time, to see that the masses do not get rightly guided by the Holy Ahlul
Bayt, the Ahlul Bayt were thrown into the background.

They were not only totally neglected but also teasad and tortured and
all access to them by the public was strictly banned and if any one was
found to have any friendly contact with these holy ones, he was severely
punished even to the extent of his property being confiscated, his
family being put to all sorts of torturous miseries and himself being
mercilessly killed. But a very few who feared but God and cared not for
any loss of property or the pleasures of this world against the
perpetual gain and the everlasting bliss in the life hereafter, suffered
the tortures and kept themselves faithfully attached in the Holy Ahlul
Bayt, to be on the right path. Some such godly devotees like Meytham
Tammar and others of his group were heartlessly tortured, which they
bore with ideal patience and some were mercilessly put to death, but the
great soul most willingly met even the most painful death with matchless
courage and boldness but never gave up their attachment to the Holy
Ones.

When Islam was being corrupted at the hands of the aspirants for power
and pleasures of this world, and the Holy Ahlul Bayt were ignored, those
who resorted to the right guidance from the right authorities were
tortured and put to miseries and torturous death. It can be imagined how
deep was the Truth buried and how difficult it was for any one to have
it, but Truth was always there with the Ahlul Bayt end none could snatch
it away from them at any cost, but only a very few, the sincere and bold
ones, could have it. This state of affairs went on until the Sixth Holy
Imam Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, when the corrupted form of Islam was also
called Islam, and the genuine or the original form of it which was with
the Holy Ahlul Bayt and practised secretly by the faithful devotees to
them, needed to be distinguished with some particular name to identify
it from the corrupt form.

Those who remained attached to the Holy House of the Holy prophet, were
Known as the Shias of Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and the True or the Original
Islam was identified with the name *Mazhabe-Ja’fari or Shia'ism* (i.e.,
the Original Islam followed by the Shias).Thus Shia'ism is no other than
the Islam-Original, but it is only identified with the name 'Shia'ism'
just to distinguish it against the corrupted form. One can judge the
Truth in this statement from the brief explanation of the Faith and this
Article given in this book.

Thus the Original Islam is identified with the distinguishing token name
*'Tashiyyu'* or Shia'ism and its followers are known as the Shias. It
means the followers of the Islam-Original without the subsequent
adulteration effected in it.

Shia'ism (Islam-Original) strictly follows the Holy Qur'an, and the Holy
Prophet guided by the divinely commissioned Twelve Holy Imams, whose
physical and spiritual purity and personal excellence, the Islamic World
as a whole unanimously acknowledges. Shia'ism, in order to help people
to remain attached only to the Word of God as interpreted by the Holy
Prophet, wants its followers to strictly abide by the following
Declarations of the Holy Prophet.

1. At the start of his apostolic mission he declared that Ali was His
Deputy, his Vicegerent, his Successor or his Caliph, with his orders to
the assembly to listen to Ali and to obey him.

2. Before the huge assembly of pilgrims numbering to several thousands,
after his Last Hajj or the pilgrimage, on the Eighteenth of Zilhaj 10
A.H. at Ghadeer al-Khum:

*“Of whomsoever I am the Maula (or the Lord), this Ali is his Maula (or
the Lord).”*

3. Just before his departure from this world saying:

*“I leave behind me amidst you Two important things. The Book of God
(The Holy Qur'an) and the members of my family. As long as you keep
yourselves attached to these Two, you shall never get astray after me.
These Two shall never be separated from one another until they meet me
at the Spring of Kauther.”*

With the above three main guiding factors, the Islam-Original or
Shia'ism, keeps its faithful followers, the Shias, strictly attached to
the Final Word of God, (the Qur'an), the Holy Prophet Muhammad, and his
holy 'Ahlul Bayt (i.e., the Divinely chosen members) of the apostolic
family.

Shia'ism demands every Shia to cling fast to virtue and to be always
with the virtuous, loving them more than their own lives.

Shia'ism demands every Shia to be always away from every vice and hate
the wicked and be always aloof from them.

Shia'ism-Its Articles of Faith and Its Practice
-----------------------------------------------

A Shia Muslim believes in:

1. The absolute unity of God, with all his divine attributes as
inseparable and essential qualities of His absolute Self.

2. The Perfect and flawless Equity of the Lord. Every word and act of
the Lord being based on nothing but pcrfect justice. Inequity is
imperfection and every imperfection is a defect and the Lord is free
from every defect.

3. The infallibility, sinlessness and truthfulness of all the apostles
of God, from Adam, the First of God's apostles to the Holy Prophet
Muhammad the Last of them. All the apostles were the personalities
purified by the Lord Himself and Himself conditioned for the services
divinely assigned to them, and no apostle or prophet did come after the
Holy Prophet and neither any will come until the end of the world.

4. With the conclusion of the ministry of the Ho1y Prophet Muhammad the
Last one of God's apostles the infinite mercy of the Lord, for the
guidance of man on the right lines of His revealed religion Islam
instituted the series of godly souls His own commissioned Imams, or
Guide or Leaders from the same Lineage of Abraham to continue the divine
guidance and thus started the institution of Imamat in the place of
*'Risalat'*, i.e., apostleship. The Twelve God's commissioned Guides or
Imams are:

(i) Ali son of Abu Talib the Cousin germain, the Son-in-Law of the Holy
prophet and Vicegerent, Brother. Heir and Caliph declared by him at the
outset of his ministry at the Dawate Asheera and at the close of the
aposteship, at Ghadeer al-Khum at the command of the Lord revealed in
verse 5:67

(ii) Hasan son of Ali Ibn Abi Talib and the Holy Lady Fatimah Zahra-the
First grandson of the Holy Prophet martyred by poison.

(iii) Husayn the second son of Ali Abi Talib and the Holy Lady Fatimah
Zahra,'*Zibhe Azeem*'i-e, Great Sacrifice, butchered with the
Seventy-two godly souls of his kith and kin and devotees, in the
wholesale slaughter at Karbala enacted by the Caliph Yazid son of
Mu’awiyyah.

(iv) Ali al-Zainul-abideen As Sajjad the first son of Husayn the King of
Martyrs of Karbala, the Prisoner of Yazid martyred by Caliph Waled bin
Abdul Malik.

(v) Muhammad al-Baqir son of Ali al-Zainul-abideen the Fourth Imam,
martyred by Hisham bin Abdul Malik.

(vi) Ja’far al-Sadiq son of Muhammad A1-Baqir the Fifth Imam, martyred
by Mansoor.

(vii) Moosa A1-Kazim son of Ja’far As-Sadiq the Sixth Imam martyred by
the ‘Abbaside Caliph Haroon ar Rasheed.

(viii) Ali ar-Ridha’ son of Moosa al-Kazim the Seventh Imam, martyred by
the ‘Abbaside Caliph Maamoon ar-Rasheed.

(ix) Muhammad at-Taqi son of Ali ar-Ridha’, the Eighth Imam martyred by
the ‘Abbaside Caliph Mo'tasim.

(x) Ali an-Naqi son of Muhammad at-Taqi the Ninth Imam martyred by the
‘Abbaside Caliph Mo'tasim.

(xi) Hasan al-Askari son of Ali an-Naqi the Tenth Imam martyred by the
‘Abbaside Caliph Mo'tamad.

(xii) Muhammad al-Mahdi son of Hasan Al-Askari, living by the will of
the Lord as is Jesus in the seed of Isaac through his virgin mother
Mary. Both this Holy Imam and the Holy Prophet Jesus will re-appear at
the will of the Lord before the end of the world after which will be the
Last Day of Resurrection and Final Judgment.

The Last Day of the Final Judgment (Qiamat)
-------------------------------------------

It is now for any intelligent one to say that if the above fundamentals
of the faith are those prescribed by the Holy Qur'an or not, or if they
contain anything more or less than what the Holy Prophet preached and
enjoined upon his followers. As regards the practice of the faith a Shia
Muslim shall:

1. Offer regularly the prescribed five times compulsory prayers.

2. Fast the whole of the Holy month of Ramadhan.

3. Perform *'Hajj'* i.e., pilgrimage to the Holy Ka'ba in Mecca at least
once in his life provided he could afford to do it as laid down by the
Holy Prophet.

4. Pay the *'Zakat'* (the prescribed poor-rate) of 2-1/2 per cent of his
assets as prescribed by the Holy Qur'an and explained by the Holy
Prophet.

5. Pay the *'Khums'* (the 1/5th of the nett savings as laid down by the
Holy Qur’an and explained by the Holy Prophet.

6. Endeavour his most, i.e.,*'Jehad'*, as needed for the defence and the
welfare of the faith and the faithful and even fight in the way of the
Lord for the purpose if called to do it by the Apostle of God or any one
of God's commissioned Guides the Imams.

7. Preach or enjoin what is good to his brethren in all peaceful and
desirable ways.

8. Preach abstinence from evil, to his brethren in all peaceful and
desirable ways.

9. Love God, God's chosen men and godliness and be always attached to
the godly ones particularly to the Holy Prophet Muhammad and his Holy
Ahlul Bayt.

10. Always keep himself away from evils and the evil ones, having
nothing to do with the wicked ones with definite aversion to their
wicked conduct and character.

Let any unbiased reader who pursues the above fundamentals and their
practice declare, if there is nothing but good and it is nothing but
godliness pure, in belief and practice, or if there is anything bad or
objectionable in it. As regards the Holy Qur'an, a Shia Muslim believes
that the present Holy Qur'an, is the very same Book of God, complete in
itself without any deduction or addition to it and without any
alteration or misarrangement of its verses This is the Holy Qur'an which
was revealed to the Holy Prophet which was then and there recorded in
writing by Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Abdullah Ibn Mas'ood, and Ma'aaz Ibn Jabal
and which was read out to the Holy Prophet during his very lifetime. As
regards the *'Qiblah'* or the point of turning towards, during prayers,
a Shia Muslim holds the Holy Ka'ba in Mecca as his Qiblah. As regards
the daily prayers a Shia Muslim offers regularly the five times
compulsory daily prayers with the number of the Rak'ats or units as
given below:

Prayer wajib Rak’ats or units Sunnat

Fajr (Morning) 2 2 2

Zohr (Mid-day) 4 4 8

Asr (afternoon) 4 4 8

Maghrib (Evening) 3 3 4

Isha (Night) 4 4 2

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Total Compulsory 17 17 24

The *'Kalema al-Shahadat'* or the verbal declaration of the faith, the
Kalema of a Shia Muslim is the same as that of any other Muslim:

*“La ilaha lilallah Muhammadur Rasoolullah”*

'There is no god save (the One God) Allah Muhammad the Apostle of God.'

A Shia Muslim declares his identity with the Islam-Original to mean that
his Islam is that of the Ahlul Bayt whose head after the Holy Prophet
was Ali, and not the Islam adulterated by unwarranted authorities,
pronouncing his faith in Ali as the Friend of God or the Divinely
commissioned Guardian over the Muslims after the Holy Prophet. To do
this a Shia Muslim declares with in continuation of the above
declaration:

*“Aliyyan waliullah Wasiyyu Rasoolillah”*

'Ali the Friend of God the Successor of the Holy Prophet'

Be it known that the above two clauses are pronounced not as a part of
the Kalema but just as a note of distinction of the faith from the creed
adulterated later.

This is the whole of the Shia'ism or the Islam Original and nothing
else.

Under the Ninth article of the practice of the faith called *'Tawallah'*
a Shia Muslim mourns the martyrdom of each of the holy ones of the Ahlul
Bayt and expresses his sorrow and grief for the miseries and the
calamities the holy ones suffered, individually and also collectively in
congregational services called the *Majlis al-Aza* in which are recited
the Holy Qur'an and the life-readings of the holy ones with the Islamic
philosophy and religious teachings for the information of the fellows in
the Shia faith.

Let the readers themselves judge if the above conduct could be in
agreement or the token of devotion to God and the loyalty to the godly
ones who suffered the calamities and laid their all in the way of the
Lord for the guidance of mankind, or it could in any manner or sense be
in the least objectionable. At the same time it has at last to be judged
that not doing so will be ingratitude and disloyalty to God and the
godly ones or not.

The Commemoration of the Historic ‘Ashoora'
-------------------------------------------

'Ashoora' means the 'tenth', i.e., the Tenth day, of the Lunar month of
Moharram 61 A.H. on which historic day, Husayn surrendered his all in
the way of the Lord to save the truth and thus to save humanity from
getting beguiled by the Brute on the throne and the brutal forces of the
mercinary scholars whom he had enlisted under his command. All those who
love truth and the welfare of mankind at large, will naturally love
Husayn and his holy family, and will naturally be moved to express their
sympathy and sorrow for the Great Godly Hero of Karbala who sacrificed
his all, suffered the worst of miseries and met the most torturous and
brutal death but neither yielded to the blasphemy perpetrated by the
Brute nor the destruction of the Divine Principle of his holy
Grandfather.

Honestly, not to commemorate such a solemn occasion will be
thanklessness and ingratitude to godliness and to God Himself, and to do
it will surely earn the blessings of the Lord. Every one who has the
least appreciation or the admiration for the matchless sacrifices, the
Great Hero and his godly comrades, who suffered martyrdom along with
him, will naturally be moved to express his sorrow on the solemn
occasion, and those who love devilry and the Devil Yazid, will naturally
be festive on that day.

Intercession or Shafa'at
------------------------

The possibility of intercession for the sinners on the Day of Judgment
is quite obvious from the repeated declarations of the Holy Qur'an. The
declarations are so clearly worded that none can misinterpret them
otherwise:

***“Who is anyone to intercede with Him, save with His permission.”
(2:255)***

According to this verse, intercession is possible only with permission
of the Lord. There are the following verses clearer still:

***“They shall not own intercession, save he who has covenanted with the
Beneficent God.” (19:87)***

***“On that Day (of Judgment) no Intercession shall avail except of him
whom the*** ***Beneficent Lord allows and with whose word He (God) is
pleased with.”*** ***(20:109)***

The above verses are too clear to create any doubt against some dear
ones to the Lord having the authority from Him to intercede. Who else
could be more entitled to this divine grace and unique privilege than
the apostles of God, more particularly the Last one, the chief of them,
and those who have surrendered their lives in the way of the Lord like
Husayn and his faithful comrades who were martyred along with him? The
point is that to one who sincerely seeks to know the truth, a straight
answer, with the simplest logic, will certainly suffice, but to one who
wants to go on arguing merely for argument's sake, even the apostles
from God could not satisfy. No amount of arguing will be of any avail
when the understanding is never to come at all from within the enquirer.
One can give an argument but never an understanding.

The Houses of Miracles and response to Prayers
----------------------------------------------

Let the materialist world know from the millions of the devoted Muslims,
who have visited the Shrines in Iraq and other holy places, how brightly
the Glory of God shines in the shrines of Husayn and the members of his
holy family and also of his faithful comrades who sacrificed their lives
along with him in Karbala. One need not wait long to witness any
miraculous event on any of the week days, in the shrines of Husayn and
‘Abbas, particularly the holy shrine of ‘Abbas al-Alamdar (i.e., ‘Abbas
the Standard Bearer of Husayn) is the place where from hundreds of
thousands of the sufferers get their prayers immediately heard, and many
a time this valiant son of Ali, the Lion of God, has rendered miraculous
and timely rescue to those who invoked the mercy of God in his holy
name. It can be most confidently said, let any one try his holy name. It
can be most confidently said, let any one try his luck if he needs any
help from God with the necessary sincerity and devotion to the great
saintly brother of the King of Martyrs.

Even today the holy name '‘Abbas' is a watchword for millions and
millions of his sincere devotees for the immediate and miraculous rescue
needed, in any unavoidable risk or danger. Where is the wonder for one
who surrenders himself to God, God will also surely honour his name when
mentioned in any prayer to Him. God Himself enjoins on man to seek a
medium unto Him:

***“Seek ye a medium unto Him (God).”*** ***(Holy Qur’an5:35)***

It is the disbelievers who get hopeless of their dead. Be it noted that
the *'Kalema'* or the Word of the Declaration of the Faith *'Shia'ism'*,
is only:

*“Lailaha Illallah Muhammadur Rasoolullah.”*

'There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the (Holy) Prophet of God.'

Respect, Regard and Reverence to the Sacred Emblems
---------------------------------------------------

*Alams (the Emblems of Husayn, ‘Abbas and The other A'imma), The Zarees,
Mimbers, Imambadas and the other things dedicated to the sacred memory
of the Holy Ones of the Ahlul Bayt, held with feelings of sanctity by
the Shias (the devotees of the Holy Ahlul Bayt).*


