Some Guiding Clarifications
===========================

Of late, it is frequently preached by some ill-informed people against
paying respect, regard or reverence to Alams, Zarees, Mimbers, Imambadas
or any such things dedicated to the sacred memory of the members of the
Holy Ahlul Bayt, terming it, *'Shirk'* or *'Bid'at* or *'Kufr'.* Since
there is the possibility of some innocent and ignorant Muslims and
Non-Muslims alike, not knowing the difference between *'Mawaddat'*(i.e.,
love or faithfulness), and, *'Oboodiat'* (i.e., Worship), getting
astray, it has become necessary to issue the following clarifications.

Be it known that the move to criticise the expressions of Respect,
Regard and Reverence to the Holy Ahlul Bayt and the things dedicated to
their sacred memory, is nothing new. Such criticisms and accusations
against the devotees of the holy ones, the Shias, have been in vogue
since centuries having their start immediately following the departure
of the Holy Prophet.

*'Mawaddat'* (i.e., love or devotion) practised by those attached to the
Holy Ahlul Bayt has always been misrepresented as 'Oboodiat' (i.e.
worship), just to condemn attachment to the Holy Family, terming the
love and the devotion to the Holy ones, as *'Shirk'* (i.e., Polytheism)
or *'Kufr'* (i.e., infidelity). This was done to stop people’s
attachment to the Ahlul Bayt, and to enlist strength against those who,
inspite of the vicious propaganda against them and even suffering the
miserable persecution, remained devoted to the Holy ones of the
Prophet's family. The first of such a cry, motivated with the vicious
object mentioned above, was raised by some opportunists aspiring for
power and authority, immediately as the Holy Prophet departed from this
world, saying:

*“Man kana Ya'budu Muhammadun faqad maat.”*

‘Let everyone who was worshipping Muhammad now know that he is dead (and
gone).'

This satiric cry was raised against the devotees of the Holy House, to
declare them as *'Kafirs'* Infidels i.e., those who worshipped the Holy
Prophet instead of God, terming their *'Mawaddat'* to the holy ones,
which means only love and devotion, as *'Oboodiat'* i.e., worship, and
thus to declare the attachment to the Ahlul Bayt as *'Shirk'* or
*'Kufr'*, whereas only the devotees to the Ahlul Bayt are Muslims in the
true and the strict sense of the term, as they worship none but the One
and the Only True God, and love the Holy Prophet and his Ahlul Bayt and
remain devoted to them under the divine ordinance:

***“Say unto the people O' Apostle Muhammad!'I seek not of you any 'Ajr'
(compensation) for it (the service of the apostleship) save love of my
relatives.”*** ***(Holy Qur’an 42:23)***

Under the above ordinance from the Lord, none who does not pay the Holy
Prophet the 'Ajr' (i.e., recompense) in the love and devotion to the
Ahlul Bayt, demanded him, can never be a Muslim at all.

In short, 'Mowaddat' i.e., the love towards the Holy Ahlul Bayt, is
purposefully termed as 'Oboodiat', i.e., worship, to blackmail their
devotees, the Shias as 'Musrikeen' (i.e., the Polytheists) and 'Kuffar'
(the infidels), and to dissuade people from attachment to the Holy Ones.

It must first be remembered that *'Shirk'* means associating anything
with God and these things which are held sacred by the Shias are never
at all held as God, or gods, or in place of God, or that of holy ones to
whose memory they are the dedicated. They are mere Emblems and
Memorials, dedicated to their memory. This fact has already been made
clear and it is once again repeated here for the information of the new
uninformed or misinformed critics.

The move against respecting these sacred memorials of the dedicated
tokens is only to dissuade the public from their devotion to the Ahlul
Bayt, in the guise of preaching *'Tauheed',* i.e., the Unity of God, and
warning against *'Shirk'* which is the most abhorred thing in Islam,
particularly in Shia’ism which is the Islam-Original.

Let the misinformed advocates of *'Tauheed'* and the Warners against
*'Shirk'* rest assured that the Shias, in particular when they pray for
any divine boon or mercy in the name of the Holy Imams, they never
imagine for a while that the actual giver or the bestower of the boon or
the giver of the help prayed for, is anyone other than the Almighty Lord
of the Universe, and the prayer in the name of the holy ones is only to
invoke the mercy of the Lord through the medium of these holy souls who
have been declared as God's chosen ones and the nearest and dearest ones
to Him.

The misleading question which the critics raise, in that way should not
one seek the help he needs directly from God? This question has in
itself the answer that when such great devotees of God (i.e., the
critics) get ill, why do they go to the doctor? Who is the actual Curer,
God or the doctor? Why not they depend upon God for the cure and avoid
the means of the doctor, when the doctor is not the actual curer? No,
they do it because they have to seek a means or a medium and they do it
for they cannot avoid it. This is quite in accordance with the divine
guidance from the Lord:

***“Seek ye the means to reach Him***” ***(God)***. ***(Holy Qur’an
5:35)***

None can reach God without the proper means to the end. God Himself has
enjoined the Holy Prophet to seek his *'Ajr'* or recompense in the love
and devotion to his Ahlul Bayt (See 42:23) and the *'Ajr'* in the love
and devotion to the Holy Ahlul Bayt has been made the way to the Lord
(See 25:57).

I ask not any *'Ajr'* (recompense) for it (i.e., apostleship) save ye
take the way to the Lord *(25:57)*.

And what the *'Ajr'* (recompense) is has been mentioned in 42:23.

The reverence and the regard for things dedicated to the sacred memory
of the holy ones, is clearly warned by the verse 2:158 in which the
Muslims have been ordained to run between the hillocks *'Safa'* and
*'Marwa'* while performing the *'Hajj'*. And the following verse of the
Holy Qur'an clearly declares the regard for any signs of God (i.e.,
anything by means of which man remembers God's Glory, His Authority or
His Existence) as the piety of the heart of the individual:

***“And whosoever respects the signs of God, it surely is of the piety
of the heart.”*** ***(Holy Qur’an 22:32)***

Shias go to the *'Imambadas'*, the *'Mahfils'*, the *'Mimbers'* and
recite there *'Fateha'* (i.e., 1st Sura of the Holy Qur'an), and the
masterly edited prayers of the great divines viz., Ameerul-Momineen Ali
ibnul Husayn and the other Imams. Let the advocates of *'Tauheed'* and
the warners against *'Shirk'* go through the *'Dua' al- Mashlool'* or
the *'Dua al-Komail’* or the *'Joshan al-Kabeer'* or the *'Joshan
al-Sagheer'* or any other prayers *'Dua'* prescribed by the Holy Imams
and then say if there can be a greater and a surer source of approaching
God or invoking His mercy, than these mediums. People ignorant of these
great things, are those who speak against the heavenly means to get
nearer to the Lord to be blessed by Him.

It is also necessary to inform the advocates of *'Tauheed'* and the
warner against *'Shirk'* that it is the declared faith and the
conviction of every Shia that nothing without the compulsory Salat or
Salat, duly performed, can ever benefit any one in approaching God or
getting any boon or help from Him or from any one of the holy ones, and
the Mosque is the holiest place with nothing to be compared to it.

Sajdah
------

Who said sajdah or prostration in obeisance to any one besides God is
allowed? Sajdah to *'Ghairallah'* or *'Masiwallah'* (i.e.,other than
God) is *'Haram',* i.e., strictly prohibited, and Shia'ism the
Islam-Original, more than any other school of faith, abhors it, and
guards its adherents against it, both from the pulpit and the press. The
critic should first know that Sajdah to God differs from the act of
merely laying the head on the ground which also is termed as Sajdah.

The Sajdah to God is not only laying the head on the ground, but
submitting one's self wholely to God with the realisation of one's
negation of his finite existence granted to him, before the infinite.
Almighty and the Absolute Existence of the Only Self Existing One, with
the intention of worshipping Him as the only Creator, Sustainer, Lord of
the Universe.

Mere laying of the head on the ground before any one in any ceremonial
way of paying any conventional regard or formal reverence to any one
other than God, can never be the *'Sajdah al-Oboodiat'* (the prostration
of subservience). It will be a *'Sajdah al-Tazeemi'* (i.e., the
prostration or regard) which was demanded of the angels for Adam:

***“(Sajdah) (Prostration) to Adam, they did offer (Sajdah) Prostration
save 'lblees' (the Devil)?”*** ***(Holy Qur’an 2:37 and 7:11)***

This is what God Himself ordered the angels to do:

***“When I have made him (Adam) complete and breathe into him spirit of
Me, fall ye all down (offering Sajdah) Prostration to him.”*** ***(Holy
Qur’an 15:29)***

If Sajdah in any sense whatsoever was prohibited save to God, the stars
would not have been caused to appear to Joseph in his vision, offering
'Sajdah' or prostration to him.

***“When Joseph said to his father, 'O' My father: verily I saw eleven
stars and the sun and the moon, I saw them, offering Sajdah
(prostration) to me.” (Holy Qur’an 12:4)***

And why did Yacoob (Jacob) an apostle of God, offer *'Sajdah'* to his
son Joseph:

***“And he (Joseph) raised his parents to the throne and they offered
Sajdah (Prostration) to him.”*** ***(Holy Qur’an 12:100)***

It is sufficiently clear if one wants only to know the truth that Sajdah
by way of worship to any object besides God, is strictly prohibited as
*'Haram'* and abhorred by Shia'ism which is Islam- Original, whereas the
act of mere laying of head before anybody in any conventional or
ceremonial way of paying the regard, or expressing one's humility to any
greatness, or excellence particularly the case of any divine object,
which was expected of the angels even by God Himself, and was practised
even by a prophet of God like Jacob, is not worship, and hence not
objectionable.

Prayer before Any Object
------------------------

In shia'ism, Salat (or prayer or worship) is due to none but to God and
God alone. If any one prays before any object of His worship, it is not
objected by Islam. One can offer his prayers before anything even a
grave, if the individual does not mean the object as the object of his
worship. It is in this spirit and with this point of the faith in view
that prayers in the Holy Shrines of Najaf, Karbala, Mashhad etc., are
offered, and offering prayers in such sacred places, though they are not
mosques, or in places sanctified by dedication to the memories of the
godly ones, is definitely commendable and has its *'Fazeelat'* or the
Grade of Excellence, is without the least opposition or prejudice to the
excellence of the prayers offered in a mosque.

Dedication of any Place as Memorial with Regard for it
------------------------------------------------------

Erecting a mosque or any such premises in memory of any sacred object or
event, has been allowed by the Holy Qur'an. See about the Mosque
commanded to be raised at the spot where lay the *'Ashaabe-Kahf'* the
Sleepers of the Cave (18:21). Holding such places in sanctity with
regard and reverence for them, is certainly the sign of piety of the
heart, and devotion to God Himself. To preach against offering prayers
before graves or in any shrines quoting the Hadith or the saying of the
Holy Prophet prohibiting making any grave or a shrine a mosque, without
the context in which it was said is nothing short of betraying one's
ignorance of the Islamic History. Umm Salma the virtuous wife of the
Holy Prophet on her return from the Abyssinian Exile, reported to the
Holy Prophet that she had seen in Abyssinia the Christians worshipping
the images of Jesus and Mary and the graves of their saints.

The Holy Prophet issued the ordinance or the Hadith prohibiting prayers
on the graves as the object of worship. The point underlying in the
saying is against a prayer being offered before or around any grave or
graves. This point is clarified in the verse 18:21 which commands
building of mosque on the grave by which the object is not to start
worship of the grave but to consecrate the place by dedicating it to the
worship of the Lord, to Whom the departed soul had been devoted, and had
itself surrendered.

Remembrance of the Righteous Ones
---------------------------------

Remembrance of the holy personalities for their righteousness has been
ordained by God, *vide* 38:48.

Every educated and awakened mind knows that the remembrance of the godly
ones by every possible means is remembering God Himself and such a
remembrance is highly commendable, rather essential to keep the models
of the various aspects of godliness always in view to be imitated or
copied by one, for himself or herself to become godly. The object of the
Holy ones having been sent into this World was only to set up the models
necessary for the guidance of man, for man to copy them and thus get
himself qualified and fit for the higher levels of the life of eternal
bliss.

The secret is that the ill-informed or the misinformed critics have not
at all understood the Most Exalted position of God. They do not know
that God is too Great, too Exalted, too Just, too Gracious, too Merciful
and too Excellent to be only on the watch to catch hold of every one and
chastise him, judging merely the actions or the external appearances,
irrespective of the intention or the real object latent in man. It is
man who cannot probe into the secrets of the heart of another man that
accuses another man basing his accusation merely on his limited and
defective knowledge of the outward appearances or the external outlooks.
It must be remembered that man's actions are judged by God, the
All-Knowing Lord, by his intention.

Let every Muslim remember the well-known declaration of the Holy
Prophet:

*“An act is naught but with its intention and 'Verily the the actions
are judged only by the intentions'.”*

'Seena-Zani' or the Chest-Beating
---------------------------------

The Shia young, in mourning for the great Martyrs of the Holy
Ahlul-Bait, particularly for the First Holy Imam Ameerul-Momineen Ali
and the Holy Imam Husayn, the King of Martyrs, beat their breasts,
sometimes to the extent of bleeding themselves. Hurting of ones self is
of course not allowed in Islam. Shia'ism the Islam- Original knows it
and recognises it fully and has no sanction against it.

But when it is a matter for a godly cause, it contents itself with
exhortations from the pulpit and the press, and if the uncontrolled
emotion of any of its enthusiasts in his extreme love and devotion to
the godly cause, helplessly gives expression to it in beating his
breast, the law has to be considerate and tolerable in view of the
intention of the action not being any defiance of the law, but the
helplessness to the love for the godly ones who suffered the miseries,
tortures and the most cruel death in the way of the Lord. In such cases,
mere common sense will say that the All-Merciful Lord will not only
tolerate the well intentioned excess but love the expression of the
extreme devotion to His cause.

Thus the breast-beating in mourning for the great martyrs in the way of
the Lord, is not condemnable but tolerably commendable, for hurting of
one's self is prohibited if that be for any worldly cause besides God's
and when it is in the cause of the Lord Himself, the Shia Ulema do not
spare exhorting the enthusiasts to control their emotions while
expressing their love and devotion in this regard, and since the action
does not affect any of the fundamentals of Islam and the intention is
not to violate any law which rather in a way strengthens the bias for
devotion to a godly cause, it is not stopped by force.

Such toleration is illustrated in the historic event popularly reported
about the great devotee of the Holy Prophet Uwais al-Qarani, who, with
his own hands pulled out his teeth and this action is praised by the
Ulema from the pulpit while they speak of the love and devotion to the
Holy Prophet. Why should the same and identical action by the Shias for
the Ahlul Bayt be seriously considered and unsparingly criticised
instead of issuing a similar to admiration the one given to Owais.

There is an apt example in the practical and everyday life of man to
know how far such actions are ingrained in the native endowments in man.

What is an Alam?
----------------

The alam wrongly called, the *'Panja'* in Southern India, is an emblem
or the copy of the Holy Banner of the Holy Imam. It is installed in the
houses of the devotees of the Holy Imam and also in separate apartments
called the *'Ashurkhanas'* or the Imambadas and is respected and
honoured as the standard of a king, loyal, respected and honoured by his
faithful subjects. The Brute Yazid lowered the one standard of Truth
which the Holy Imam held in Karbala but today God alone knows how many
millions of such token standards of the Holy Imam are made and honoured
in the world by his devotees.

It should be remembered that the *Alam is not at all an idol it, any
sense of the word*. It is never held either in the place of God or in
the place of even the Holy Imam. It is only a copy of the Holy Standard
of Truth carried by the Holy Imam when he fought against Falsehood. The
*'Alam'* is held in high esteem and honour as stated above and it is
never in any way worshipped. Worship in Islam is due only to God and not
even to the Holy rophet who is next only to God in authority over his
followers. About the Holy Imam Husayn, Khawaja Moinuddin Chisti one of
the great mystics of India has said:

*“Husayn is King, the King of Kings,*

*He is Faith, Defence of Faith from him springs.*

*Beheaded though*

*He never bowed to Yazeed*

*By God, God's unity by him is established”*

*In which grave is his throne and his crown where is it*

*'O' Earth! Show us where the might of Yazid is today.’*

(Josh Malehabadi)

Let Muslim remember the well-known declaration of the Holy Prophet:

*“And act is naught but with its intention” and “Verily the actions are
judged only by the intentions.”*

Take for instance, when a man dies, the nearest of his relatives
particularly his own children, and even among his children, they who
love him the most will naturally feel the separation from the departed
soul, more than anybody else. One of the sons may be violent in the
expression of his grief, hurting himself in an uncontrollable state of
behaviour, while the other son may be quietly shedding tears, and others
who may also be sorrowful remains suppressing their grief. At the same
time such of the relatives and selfish friends, who were only waiting
for the death of the man, to have a share in the property left over by
him, or to occupy the post or position which he may be vacating, will
naturally feel happy though appearing quiet on the occasion.

The same is the case in regard to the degree of expression of the grief
for the *'Ahlul Bayt'* by the Shias, and the rejoicing made at their
martyrdom by others. The fact is that those who are not sorry for the
sufferings of the holy ones, seek an excuse for their hard hearted
inimical attitude towards the family of the Holy Prophet, and take
shelter under the guise of abiding by the law, and since they are not
sorry for calamities inflicted on the holy ones, they do not want others
to express their sorrow for the holy victims, for it discloses the
devilish character and conduct of the assassins whom they regard as
their religious leaders.

Alam or the Emblem
------------------

'The Alam' which is installed in the Imambadas, is another target of
attacks from our ignorant friends who not knowing its actual
significance and criticize it as *'Bid'at’* i.e., an unwarranted
innovation. Be it known to the critics that the Alam is only the Emblem
of the Holy Standard of Islam of which, All the Ever Victorious Lion of
God was the Bearer on behalf of the Holy Prophet, and which was held
also by ‘Abbas the lion hearted son of Ali the Lion of God on behalf of
the Holy Imam Husayn, the grandson of the Holy Prophet Muhammad, against
the devilish forces of Yazid in Karbala, when the Yazidian power and
authority wanted to destroy the original teachings of Islam.

Since the devilish forces disrespected the Holy Standard of Islam and
the Holy Prophet Muhammad, every sincere Muslim today, particularly
those attached to the Holy Ahlul Bayt the Shias, instal an emblem of the
Holy Standard and pay respect and regard to it, as they would have done,
had they been with the Holy Imam in Karbala.

Every lover of Islam and the Holy Prophet would certainly like to do it
with all the sincerity and devotion at his command, for as a Royal
Banner represents the King and respect to Banner is respect to the King
himself. This tokcn or the emblem, the Alam, represents Islam and the
Holy Prophet, respect for the Alam is respect to Islam, and respect to
Islam is respect to the Holy Prophet himself.

Before criticising the respect or regard for the *Alam* or the *Zarees*,
i.e., the models of the shrines of the Holy Ahlul Bayt let the critics
remember the vacant model of the Mahmil of Hazrat Ayesha the wife of the
Holy Prophet, which until yesterday was brought in a Ceremonial way to
Mecca every year on the occasion of Hajj, attended by the Ulema walking
solemnly along with it. Was Hazrat Ayesha actually sitting in it? If any
empty Mahmil without an occupant in it could be respected and solemnly
followed by the Ulema how could the emblem of the Standard of Ali Husayn
or ‘Abbas or any of the Holy ones of the Ahlul Bayt, become a *'Bid at'*
and the respect to it be deemed, objectionable.

Majlis al-Aza or the Mourning Congregations
-------------------------------------------

When the tyrannes and the torturous death inflicted on the Holy Ahlul
Bayt, could not be denied, the other course adopted to hide the most
disgraceful and most brutal and heinous deeds is to declare the Majlis
al-Aza or the mourning congregation for the Martyrs of the Ahlul Bayt
who are the authentic custodians of the Holy Qur'an and its teachings as
*'Bid'at* and *'Kufr'*. The Majlis al-Aza is the 'Sunnat al-Zainabi',
i.e. what was inaugurated in Damascus itself by Hazrate Zainab the
sister of the Holy Imam Husayn, the Great Martyr of Karbala as soon as
she was out of the prison in Damascus.

And what the Shias do today is only In the footsteps of the Holy Sister
of the King of Martyrs, Lady Zainab who was one of the members of the
family of the Holy Prophet, the daughter of Ali and Fatimah, one of the
great sufferers at Karbala, Kufa and Damascus and who herself was
martyred in the way of the Lord was buried in Damascus. This action of
the Holy Lady Martyr Zainab has been regularized by the decree of the
Holy Imam thus it has become a prescribed duty of every true Muslim to
carry out the godly command.

When the *Majlis al-Aza* for the mourning of the Martyrs is criticised,
what about the 'Meelaf' and the 'Gyarwin Sherif' celebrated every year
which had their origin only recently. Can anyone prove from any historic
record of accepted authenticity like Tabari etc., that any such
celebrations were ever held in the ancient days even a century ago
anywhere in the world? Why then this innovation now?

And if such celebrations are commendable for the Holy Prophet or any
other person held as Holy what objection can there be against a similar
commemoration for the Holy Ones of the Ahlul Bayt?

The objection can no doubt be if it is to stop the narration of the
torturous sufferings inflicted on the holy ones, which automatically
disclose as to whom the devils of the tyrants were, who enacted the
heartless massacres of the godly ones of the Ahlul Bayt of the Holy
Prophet.

The fundamental or the basic point underlying the mourning by the Shias
for the great martyrs of the Holy Ahlul Bayt is, not merely for the
death of those holy ones for, death is there for everyone except God.
The Shias know it fully well that those who die in the way of the Lord,
are not dead but alive (2:154, 3:168).

The great martyrs of the Holy Ahlul Bayt have reached the glorious
heavenly destination of the life, of the highest eternal bliss
exclusively reserved for them by their Lord. Any one, be he a Muslim or
a non-Muslim, and a friend or even a foe, if he is only a human being
and not a brute, will naturally feel for the miserable sufferings and
the painful death of another human being, particularly when the
sufferers are godly ones surrendering their selves for the Truth. Only
those who are void of the basic human qualities of feelings will remain
effectless and unmoved under such circumstances.

*The mourning by the Shias is mainly for the heartless and inhuman
treatment inflicted on the Holy ones by those who, professing themselves
to be Muslims, have caused such shameful and disgraceful blots on the
pages of the history of the conduct and character of man on Earth, that
it can never be erased and for which every member of the human family
will certainly be unceasingly grieved, and will be ever cursing the
brutes in the human forms until the end of the world.*

The *Majlis al-Aza* has also been declared *'Bid'at'* i.e., an
unwarranted innovation saying that mourning for the dead is forbidden by
Islam. The hollowness of this allegation against the natural act of
expressing fellow feelings has already been dealt with above. Even
granting for a while that mourning for the dead is forbidden, none can
show any objection from Islam to the oppressed or the aggrieved
protesting against the miseries inflicted on them. The Majlis al-Aza is
a congregational protest against the brutal atrocities inflicted on the
godly members of the family of the Holy Prophet as revenge against Islam
itself. None will object to such protests excepting those responsible
for the brutal actions or those who support the devilish conduct and
character of those who are temperamentally identical with the brutes
possessing the same devilish tendencies.

The actuating factor behind all this mischievous move to mislead the
Muslims and to create dissensions among them, is only Satan who, during
the lifetime of the Holy Ones, instigated his disciples the tyrants, to
inflict the most painful miseries and the torturous death on God's
commissioned guides to humanity, and now the same Devil is busy
beguiling the ignorant ones among the Muslims by inspiring in their
minds all sorts of doubts and false notions against the truth and those
who have been successfully converted by Satan are employed by him as his
missionaries spreading the falsehood.

By God's grace, all the awakened minds in the ranks of Islam be the
Shias or Sunnis or of any other school of thought, are unanimous in
paying the due regard and reverence to the Holy Ahlul-Bait, particularly
in the matter of Husayn all Muslims are united. Each one of the sincere
lovers of Islam today is ready to surrender his all for the Holy Prophet
and the Holy Ahlul Bayt, more particularly for Husayn, the King of
Martyrs.

*'Taqleed.'* The only, the greatest and the best protection afforded in
Shia'ism, against the continuous as well as the occasional raids by
Satan and his disciple missionaries is the ordinance about *'Taqleed'*
(16:43) or to always abide by the '*A'lim'* or the *Most learned one,
called the 'Mujtahid'*. This course guides one always to the right or
the correct way of the practice of the faith and protects him from
committing any excess and from shortcomings, and at the same time the
individual from being exploited by the instigations of the satanic
forces.

*'Taqleed'* has also been misinterpreted into the innovated institution
of the *'Mureeds'* blindly following the *'Pirs’*. Be it known that
being guided by a Mujtahid in matters of doubt about the practice of the
Faith, has nothing in common with it, and can never he compared to any
such unwarranted blind following Taqleed is only being attached to any
one of the greatest scholars who has reached the level of *'Ijtehad'*
(i.e., the ability to derive the required correct inference from the
Holy Qur'an or the genuine traditions of the Holy Prophet) in matters of
doubt about any articles of the practice of the Faith *'Furu al-Deen.'*
Taqleed or any kind of following anyone in the articles of faith i.e.,
*'Usool al-Deen'* is *'Haram'* (i.e., prohibited).

As every one of the adherents of the Faith cannot be expected to know
all the minutest details about the practice of the Faith, or be able to
draw the correct inference about any doubts, from the Word of God, the
Holy Qur'an, and the Hadith or the Sayings of the Holy Prophet, the
divinely prescribed course to keep a Muslim always on the right course
of his practical life, as well as to protect him from getting astray by
the misgivings from the ill-informed or less-informed one is *'Taqleed'*
by which one chooses of his own independent discretion any one of the
accredited scholars who in his considered opinion is the greatest one of
the most learned and the most pious ones of the age, and is always
guided by the directive of such a scholar in all matters of the
individual's doubts regarding any matter of the practice of the Faith.

By this course one is not only assured of the best possible guidance in
the right course, by the highest intellect of the age but also of the
safety against his getting deluded by the unqualified, misqualified or
purposeful misgivings by any one.

Since the practice of the Faith by any adherent, unbounded by this
course of, *'Taqleed'*, it cannot doubtlessly be free from
irregularities; hence it will naturally be unacceptable.

The question of following the highest authority in knowledge and piety
is only in the case of *'Fatawa'* or the opinion of the Scholar about
the law and not about the application of the law for which *'Ijtehad'*
is sufficient. The caution that Shia'ism, the Islam-Original, has
sounded against the ruinous effects of unqualified administration of
justice is worthy of note here for the information of the sincere
adherents of Islam, i.e., the special importance Shia'ism attaches to
Justice being meted out in the proper manner, and to the extraordinary
care taken against any unqualified and defective administration of it.
The following is the decree of the Sixth Holy Imam, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad
al-Sadiq (as) the Regulator of the Shia faith:-

*None shall take this seat save a Prophet of God, the successor to the
prophet or the evil one.*

This declaration clearly warns any unqualified one without any authority
from the Holy Prophet and the Holy Imam, who assumes the seat of
*'Qazaiat'* or (Justice), will be none but the evil one. Hence a
*'Qazi'* (a judge) can be none but a *'Mujtahid'* who gets himself
qualified under the declaration of the Imam reported above.

While condemning the yielding to the rule of *'Taghoot'* i.e., an
authority without the divine sanction, the Sixth Holy Imam Jafar-Ibn
Muhammad As-Sadiq said that 'instead of submitting to such tyrant seek
the greatest of the scholars among you, Who has learnt our traditions
and gained deep insight into our sanctions and prohibitions and who
knows our rulings well and accept him as your Judge (i.e. Qazi) and your
Ruler, as I have appointed him to rule over you. And if he gives a
ruling and if it is not accepted by any one, it will be the contempt of
God's Sovereignty which is almost *'Shirk*' i.e., the recognition of an
authority beside God's.

The definition and the requirements of *'Ijtehad'* and *'Taqleed'* given
below, are those that have been prescribed by the *'Masoom'* i-e., the
Twelfth Holy Imam, as ordained by the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat as a
part and parcel of the whole system of the Divine Sovereignty and the
Absolute Theocracy which is implemented in the very term *'Islam'* which
means acceptance of the Absolute Sovereignty of God and complete
submission to His will. It is on this basis that the institution of
apostleship is established. God communicates His will to mankind through
the chain of the apostles, which was consummated in the apostleship of
the Holy Prophet of Islam through whom was presented the Final Word of
God in the form of the Holy Qur'an, and his own apostolic sayings. And
in the continuation of that sovereignty and the institution of
apostleship, the Holy Prophet declared Ali and the Eleven Imams in his
descent, as the authority joined with the Holy Qur'an representing his
as well as God's will.

When the period of the codification and the consolidation of the
*'Kitab'* and *'Sunnat'* was completed, the age of the Imamat for that
legislative purpose came to its conclusion. Hence the seclusion of the
Twelfth Imam was effected though his hidden existence continues as a
necessity, as a medium factor between God and His Creatures, in the
process of the Creative administration of the universe. The Imams
declared the institution of *'Ijtehad'* as given below, as the sole
directive authority on their behalf, in leading mankind on the right
path of submission to the sovereignty and the will of God, in all the
practical aspects of the covenant which the *'Kitab'* and the *'Sunnat'*
had already dealt with.

In short, *'Ijtehad'* and *'Taqleed'* are the supplementary institutions
to *'Imamat'* which in turn is supplementary to *'Risalat'*
(Apostleship) which as a whole is the manifestation of the Divine
Sovereignty. There is no room left for any individual view or choice
except that the door is left open for every human being irrespective of
any racial or geographical bias or restriction, to qualify one's self in
knowledge and piety to the level of *'Ijtehad.'* The decree of the Holy
Imam about the institution of *'Ijtehad'* is as follows:

*“Amma Hawadisal Waqi' aat, Farijeoo ila ruwate Ahadeesena, fa innahom
hujjati alaikum wa ana Hujjatullah.”*

'In all the events of life, refer ye to those who bear our traditions,
they are the authority over you on my behalf, and I am the authority on
behalf of God.'

The Decree of the Holy Imam
---------------------------

The above decree of the the Masoom (i.e., the Sixth Holy Imam) in this
respect which is about *'Ijtehad,'* is not the only tradition but there
are many undisputed traditions also of the other Imams establishing the
institution of *'Ijtehad'* prescribing the minutest details of its
functioning, only a very brief outline of which is given below: Of the
many declarations of the other Imams in this respect, two of them are
the most outstanding. One from Hazrate- Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq, known as
the *'Maqool-el-Umar bin Hanzala'* (the tradition of Umar Ibn Hanzala)
and the other is from the Eleventh Holy Imam, Hasan Al-Askari.

The Definition of 'Ijtehad'
---------------------------

'Ijtehad' literally means an all-out effort to interpret and explain
explicitly the divine orders, rules and regulations from the
denotations, the connotations and the implications contained in the Holy
Qur'an and the authentic sayings of the Holy Prophet and the apostolic
Imams. *'Ijtehad'* does not mean the use of one's discretion in the
findings, parallel to the Qur'an or the Sunnat, but it means the use of
one's discretion and sound reasoning in understanding the contents of
the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnat.

Anyone who has the capacity of understanding the details of the Divine
Laws, Rules and Regulations from the Qur'an and the Sunnat of a
*'Masoom'* as given above, is a *'Mujtahid'* provided he is of
outstanding learning, knowledge and piety. Any one short of that
standard of knowledge and piety be he a good scholar in certain branches
of the Islamic literature, is termed as a layman in regard to the field
of religion. A man who has not reached the stage to take decisions in
every detailed point of the Laws of Islam, on the authority of the Holy
Qur'an and the Sunnat, is a layman, and he has to follow a person who
has definitely reached that standard, and whoever has reached that
standard has to follow his own decision, and it is forbidden for him to
follow anyone else.

In case there are several men of equal standard, and they differ in
their decision, the layman has the choice to follow any one of them and
in case the *'Mujtahids'* differ in the degree of their accomplishments
the best among them is to be followed. In case one is better in
knowledge and the other in piety, the latter is to be followed.

As to how to find the best one among the *'Mujtahids'* the layman should
refer to the evidence of the competent pious scholars of Islamic
Theology who have no claim to *'Aalamiat'* or to the evidence of the
*'Mujtahids'* of the approximate standing about the best next to them.
By the collection of all these evidences, one can easily consider for
himself as to who is the best. This is the best method followed
throughout the history of the *'Niabat'* of the Imam after the
*'Ghaibat.'*

There is no room for any election or the counting of votes of any class
or group to appoint one as the ecclesiastical head as used in the Papal
system of Christianity, nor is it the *'Peeri'* and the *'Mureedi'*
practised in the mystic system which is an unwarranted innovation among
the Muslims, carried as a counter section or parallel to the institution
of Imamat. Be it known that the qualifications for *'Ijtehad'* are
known, recognised and measurable and the qualifications for a *'Peeri'*
is only fanciful heresy blindly accepted and neither fixed nor
measurable.

It is to be noted that the question of following the opinion of the best
in knowledge and piety is confined to such questions where the
*'Mujtahids'* differ, and the question of following any *'Mujtahid'*
does not arise in matters unanimously accepted by all *'Mujtahids.'* It
is to be noted that for the administration of the theological centres
and the other religious and ecclesiastical services, any pious
*'Mujtahid'* is competent for the undertaking, and if any pious
*'Mujtahid'* offers himself to shoulder the task the other *'Mujtahid'*
should not stand in his way, on the other hand he must help him.

Consolidated View of the Account as a Whole and the Co-relation of the Events
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have gone through a few of the various events of the life of the Holy
lmam and the Great Wholesale Slaughter at Karbala. Now let us take a
consolidated view of the accounts as a whole and co-relate the events
and find out what is the mean or the norm and where the arc or
co-relation ends.

If we take the isolated parts of a monotype printing machine separated
from each other and study each one of the parts for ages together we
wiIl never be able to know the maker or the deviser's mind or wisdom in
it. Nor we will ever be able to know neither the purpose it serves nor
the enormous use of the implement to the human life unless all the parts
are duly put together and see how they work together and what result
they produce.

Similarly, if we take the words of a heavenly scripture separated from
the sentences and isolated from each other, spend ages together on the
various meanings each word gives we will never know those individual
words work together in a sentence to give a sensible meaning and unless
the sentences are duly arranged none can ever know the heavenly guidance
endowed in their proper combinations.

Unless we put together all the events of the life of the Holy ones of
the Ahlul Bayt, particularly Husayn, the personality of our concern in
this brief treatise on him we will never be able to have a proper view
of the divine purpose of the Almerciful Alwise Creator Lord in the
creation of this holy soul and sending him on the earth and the
fulfilment of the purpose for the benefit of man in this world.

Let us recapitulate in brief the whole matter of this brief work into a
consolidated compact whole to have the overall view of it from God's
given heights of intelligence to realise the glorious grandeur of the
heavenly sight of the Great Event in a harmonious whole, with the data
at our disposal vouched by history and illustrated by the words of the
holy scriptures.

1. It is a fact known to one and all of the educated ones in the world
that man is a created being by the Creator who is acknowledgly
EverLiving, Alwise and Omnipotent Absolutely Supreme Authority.

2. Man in the primitive stages of the life of his specie, led a wild
life in the jungles without any morals to control or law to bind his
thought or action with Might as the Right to survive.

3. The Almerciful Lord Creator of the Universe with His gracious will to
educate man and train him for the higher object of his creation and to
qualify him for the glorious heights of the heavenly bliss sent apostle
after apostle from Him.

4. Apostles of God were sent in every part of the earth to the people
inhabiting it. Some were sent as mere preachers and some with
scriptures, some were for a limited zone and some for a wider area -
some superior to the others. Some as law givers as Moses and some as the
renewers of the already given law like Jesus. Most of them prophesying
the advent of the Last or the Final of God's Apostles and prophets.

5. Of the children of Adam God had chosen a particular lineage, and the
Lineage was particularly blessed to be progenitors of the selected
apostles of His. Abraham was given the Imamat to be perpetuated in his
seed but teaching only those free from iniquity.

6. The Divine device was to present a pathetic sight of sacrifice in the
way of the Lord, depicting the sublime submission to the Divine Will,
which is the only source or the only Royal Road to the heavenly bliss in
store for man who earns it.

7. A rehearsal of the divinely destined drama of the sacrifice was made
employing Abraham and his son Ishmael for the trial.

8. Abraham and Ishmael proved true the selection but the event was not
to be as it was temporarily enacted only as a trial. The aim behind its
proper enactment was too high, too great and too grave. There was yet no
demand for them to be presented on a mount unseen by any man and it was
not unknown to the human world. Just to make Abraham pass the knife that
a living body was placed under it.

9. Abraham was told by the Lord that the divinely designed event was a
Great Sacrifice.

10. Abraham was promised that God's Covenant will be establisbed with
him and his seed. Abraham had two Sons Ishmael (through Lady Hagar) and
Isaac (through Lady Sarah) but the promise to Abraham even according to
the Bible of the Christian Church does not mention the name of any of
the two sons, but only it was said that the Covenant will be with
Abraham and his seed.

**“And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and in thy seed
after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant.” (Old
Testament, Genesis 16:7)**

**The divinity of the purity, physical as well as spiritual endowed in
Abraham flew in both the channels of his seed, Ishmael and Isaac and
Twelve Princes (Imams) were promised in the seed of Ishmael** **(Old
Testament, Genesis 18:20)**.

12. The race that sprang of Isaac called the Israelites got corrupt and
rebellious and violated the Covenant of God-the prophets that were
raised among them either they killed them (.....) or they deified them
and worshipped them as the Sons of God and those of the apostles they
did not follow, they blackmailed them with horrible charges to create
hatred against them (.....) The Israelites who hated Jesus charged the
Holy Virgin Mary of adultery for having given birth to Jesus, without a
male partner to her. At last the Kingdom of God was taken away from the
seed of Isaac and given to another nation (the seed of Ishmael). Jesus
informed them of it:

**“Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken front
you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits threreof.”**
***(Matthew 21:43)***

13. The higher truth about the life divine of the process of the
complete submission to the Absolute to attain the glorious heights of
eternal bliss could not be given in its fullness to man in his mental
evolutionary stages. It has to be administered gradually. Jesus clearly
announced that he could give out to the people many things for they
could not bear it then (.......) and prophesied about the advent of the
Spirit of Truth who would fill the world with righteousness and truth
(........)

14. Moses was told by the Lord about the Prophet to come in whose mouth
will the Lord put His words whom everyone would hearken (.........)

15. The great sage of India Buddha had prophesied of the advent of the
Last Buddha called *'Maetrea'* in the Pali language which in Arabic
means *'Rahmat'* the title with which the Holy Prophet Muhammad has been
addressed in the words of God (. . . . .).

16. At last came the Last of the apostles of God-the Prophet prophesied
to Moses- The Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost prophesied by Jesus and
the Maetrea prophesied by Buddha the Holy Prophet Muhammad in the seed
of Abraham through his son Ishmael to give out the truth in its fulness
about the Kingdom of God-preaching the truthfulness and the purity
physical and spiritual of the personalities of all the preceding
prophets who had been blackmailed by the Israelites-Preaching the
Absolute Unity of God and brotherhood of man and the commitment of man
to his Lord-with a final code in the Last Revealed Word of God the Holy
Qur'an as the final code of discipline for human life on earth-Since all
the previous scriptures were either made extinct or corrupted this Final
Word of God came with a challenge that it will be preserved by God
Himself for it had to remain current forever for there was no prophet
had to come after the Holy Prophet.

17. To preserve the purity of the Final Word from God to man and to
maintain the originality of its teachings and its practice, the
institution of the Imamat was started to succeed the Last Apostle of God
for the guidance of man against his getting astray after being guided
aright. The Imams had to be brought forth from the family of the Holy
Prophet himself hence the holy family was sent into this world duly
purified by God Himself ((Holy Qur’an, 33:33).

18. The Holy Prophet had taken all possible steps to introduce the
position of his Ahlul Bayt, particularly of Ali identified with the Holy
Prophet in his purity, physical and spiritual, At the very outset of the
apostolic mission and also at the conclusion of it Ali was declared in
clear cut words as the Caliph Vicegerent, Brother, and the Master or the
Maula, or the Amir, in the place of the Holy Prophet.

19. On the very first day of his advent into this world, Husayn's
mission in this world and the fate in store for him was declared out by
the Holy Prophet.

20. As misfortune would have it, immediately as the Holy Prophet
departed from this world, the Ahlul Bayt were alienated from their
position preached by the Holy Prophet, and the people forgot all that
was said about Ali and Ali’s appointment in the place of the Holy
Prophet.

21. The final word of the Holy Prophet to the people was that he had
left Two important things behind him; the Book of God the Holy Qur’an
and his Ahlul Bayt and the people would be attached to these Two.

22. With alienation of the Holy Ahlul Bayt, the religion got gradually
corrupted and by the time of Yazid son of Mu’awiyyah son of Abu Sufyan,
the disbelief in the Holy Qur’an being the revealed word of God and the
Holy Prophet Muhammad being the Apostle of God was openly pronounced
from the throne and people had become irreligious and the teachings of
Islam were openly defied, the Religion of Islam was on the verge of
being annihilated for ever, and the Holy Qur’an had practically lost its
original value as the Word of God.

The question or rescuing the Holy qur‘an and its faith, Islam, arose
demanded the one like the Holy Prophet to defy the falsehood and even to
offer the greatest sacrifices it may need. None but one from the family
of the Holy Prophet, the one purified by God Himself (Qur’an 33:33)
could do it and from among the divinely purified ones only Husayn was
now left in the world, to face the situation. The sacrifice the task
needed was the Greatest One, i.e., the ‘*Zibhe Azeem*'.


