Conclusion
==========

The historic heart-rending event of Karbala has been presented in the
light of its historic background and the guidance of the Holy
Scriptures. It is for the learned readers to say that if it was or was
not that the devilish forces with the strength at their command had not
done the maximum possible for them to undo what all had been done for
the guidance of man, and if it was or was not that divinity pure and
maximum had not gone into action to have successfully resisted the
satanic moves to re-establish the truth and godliness with the maximum
amount of the sacrifices the Humanity could afford to offer in the way
of the Lord.

It is now left for the historians of the world who never believe in any
effects with their causes and thus always related events with their
causative factors to trace out and declare to the world, what were the
causes of the effects of the tragic events suffered by the godly members
of the House of the Holy Probhet Muhammad. If there is truth in it or
not, if it be said that if the Holy ones of the Ahlul Bayt, particularly
Ali had not been alienated fixed by God and preached to man through His
Apostle the Holy Prophet, and if the Umayyid family of Abu-Sufyan, with
the knowledge of its attitude towards the Holy Prophet and Islam, bad
been brought into power, as it was done, would the calamities that
befell the Holy House, have been ever imaginable?

Could by any stroke of imagination, be ever deemed the object of Husayn
the Holy Imam be anything other than to demonstrate to man to what
extent falsehood should be resisted and at what cost the truth, the
obedience to God and to none else, should be established. Husayn’s
object was to educate man with the absolute submission to God and to
yield only to God and to none else and to establish godliness on earth.
To yield only to right, however much it might have been neglected and
despised and defied by the world, facing might of whatever intensity and
strength it might be, and in doing at no sacrtficc on the part of man is
too great.

It is for the civilised world to pronounce its verdict if any act of
extra gravity of the devotion to God consisting of superb sacrifices and
ideal surrender and submission to the Lord, would be remembered or
forgotten, and if any remembrance of any such act in a fitting way be
righteous or sinful, commendable or condemnable, and at the same time
forgetting it will be gratitude or ingratitude to God and godliness.

Hurting one's self for any worldly gain is undoubtedly condemnable and
also a sin in Islam but the same act if it be in the way of the Lord is
called martyrdom and if it be in the love of any apostle of God has been
commended viz., Owais who broke his teeth with his own hands in his
sympathy for the Holy Prophet’s losing his in a battle in the way of the
Lord, was highly commended by the Holy Prophet and is cited by all
scholars of the Islamic law as an action of devotion.

If a father dies, one of his sons might mourn the loss quietly, the
other might cry aloud and the third might not control his love and
attachment to his departed father and might in the excessive emotion of
his, tear his clothes and strike his head with his own hands. The
sympathizers with the bereaved family will only control the emotional
conduct and not condemn or punish him. If any devotee of the Holy Imam
unable to control his emotion and acts similarly, the godly world will
do its best to control the overactive individual and not punish him, or
condemn him as irreligious. On the other hand while commending control
will only admire the individual's uncontrollable devotion to God and
godliness.

There is one thing which irresistibly comes out a natural and a logical
inference from the events that Umar could have invited the public to the
position of the Ahlul Bayt in relation to the life of the people and had
averted all the miseries they suffered. Umar was a man of fiery
temperament, a fact acknowledged by history and even by Shibli No'mani
in his well-known work 'Alfarooq', and he was the brain that controlled
the affairs at the 'Saqeefa.' It was Umar's word that was carried there
and it was at Umar's command that Abu-Bakr extended his hand to receive
the fealty to him as the Caliph. It is an undeniable fact Umar was a man
of his will. Whatever he willed, he did it and none could resist it.

It was he who overruled the system or the method of any kind of election
in the matter of his succession and handed over the affair to a
committee of his own choice. If Umar had done one thing, which however
was not done, that after controlling the affairs at the 'Saqeefa ' as he
effectively did, and when matters had settled, after the last services
to the Holy Prophet, he could have called for a general assembly of the
people of Madina and had addressed them as follows:

*“O' ye brethren of mine, O' ye Muslims!*

*“It is our misfortune that we have been deprived of the presence of the
Apostle of God from our midst. We have suffered the greatest loss. But
at the same time let us be thankful to God that when He withdrew His
Apostle front our midst he has spared amongst us Ali Ibn Abi Talib who
is of the same Light of which was the Holy! Prophet. You have heard the
Holy Prophet saying: 'I and Ali are of one and the same Light.' You know
the Holy Prophet at the very outset of his ministry had shown Ali to the
world and said: 'This is my Brother, my Vicegerent and my Kalif and you
know the historic event conducted by the Holy Prophet at Ghadeer al-Khum
when he declared 'Of whosoever I am the Maula the Master this Ali is
his* *Master' and took allegiance to him and the first to pay allegiance
to Ali was my own self Besides all the qualities that we need in the one
to rule over us are undoubtedly there in Ali.”*

*“We need the most learned to rule over us. Who else can be a greater
scholar than the one about whom the Holy Prophet has declared: 'I am the
City of knowledge and Ali is its Gate.'*

*“We need the just to manage our affairs. Who else could be more
equitous than the one about whom the Apostle of God has declared: 'The
most just among you is Ali Ibn Abi Talib .'*

*“We need the bravest to lead us. It is Ali and none else who has earned
the exclusive distinction of being called by the Holy Prophet
'Asadullah' (the Lion of God) and the “Tarraran ghare Farrarin' (The
repeated attacker and the one who knows not running away leaving the
field to the enemy). You know that at was Ali who stood with the Holy
Prophet* *when every one of us being unable to stay any longer ran away
from the field.*

*“Besides, you have all heard the Holy Prophet addressing Ali: 'Thou art
to me as Aaron was to Moses save that there is no apostle to come after
me.' Thou art to me as the head is to the body.' 'Thou art to me as the
soul is to the body.' You all know that Ali is the self of the Holy
Prophet which was shown to us on the day of the historic 'Mubahila.'*

*“O' Muslims! the Holy Prophet has left behind Two things the Holy
Qur'an and his Ahlul Bayt and we have been asked to hold these Two fast
for these will not be separated from each other and the Holy Prophet has
declared: 'Qur' aanun Ma'al Ali wa Aliyyun Ma'al Qur'an' i.e., The
Qur'an will be with Ali and Ali will always be with the Qur'an.*

*“Brethren you know that the Holy Prophet had not even breathed his last
people had assembled in the 'Saqeefa' with the problem about the
succession. You know me and Abu-Bakr had also been there. It was just to
avoid any wrong step being against the verdict of the Holy Prophet for
you know that going against the decision of the Holy Prophet is losing
the faith and become infidels for the Lord has clearly declared in the
Holy Qur'an:*

***“But no! Thy Lord! They believe not until they make thee a judge of
what is in dispute, between them, and then find not any straightness in
their hearts as to that which thou decidest and submit with full
submission. ((Holy Qur’an, 4:65)***

*“Now brethren let us not go against the declared will and the decision
of the Holy Prophet which he declared at the very outset of his ministry
in the 'Dawate Asheera' and again reiterated it at the conclusion of it
at Ghadeer al-Khum, for by doing so we, under the above verdict of the
Holy Qur'an, be of those who have not believed at all.*

*“You know brethren what happened at the Saqeefa and my getting Abu Bakr
declared as the Caliph but be it known that it was only an interim
arrangement to avoid the calamity to any violation of the will of the
Holy Prophet and I and Abu Bakr did it at the cost of our absence even
from the last services to the Holy Prophet and his funeral. And now that
matters have been settled let us all request Ali to come forward and
bless us by his lead.”*

At the end of such a speech from Umar, if Abu Bakr had got up and said:

*“Brethren! Think not I accepted the Caliphate to own any power or
authority not bestowed on me by the Holy Prophet. I accepted Umar's
suggestion just as an inerim arrangement to* *avert the disturbance
which I and Umar apprehended immediately at the departure of the Holy
Prophet. Umar and I had rushed to the Saqeefa not minding even the last
services to the Holy Prophet and his funeral to that the decision of the
Holy Prophet about his declared Vicegerent Ali. And now I would request
you to join me and Umar in requesting Ali to come forward and take up
the reigns to rule our destiny as the one nearest to the Holy Prophet
both in his relation to him and also in his personal purity and
excellence declared about the Ahlul Bayt by the Lord in the verse of
'Tatheer'* *((Holy Qur’an 33:33).*

How readily the Muslim public would have accepted such a proposal how
best would have been the result, is given out in the opinion of even a
non-Muslim historian which has been quoted by Justice Amir Ali in his
famous work '*The Spirit of Islam*':

*“Had” says Sédillot: “The principles of hereditary succession in favour
of Ali been* *recognised at the outset, it would have prevented the rise
of those disastrous pretentions which engulfed Islam in the blood of
Muslims. The husband of Fatimah united in his person the right of
succession as the lawful heir of the Prophet as well as the right by
election. It might have been thought that all would submit themselves
before his glory: so pure and so grand.”* (*The Spirit of Islam* by Amir
Ali)

Had Umar and Abu Bakr acted as above none could have doubted the
bonafide of their intentions in their activity at the Saqeefa and today
their act would have been held as a golden deed and their praise would
certainly have decorated the pages of the Islamic History. Neither the
Umayyids had come to power nor any one of the members of the House of
the Holy Prophet had suffered any of the miseries and the calamities,
and the wholesale heart-rending massacre of Karbala would never at all
have taken place, the world today, under the godly rule of the Ahlul
Bayt had enjoyed the heavenly bliss on earth.


