Introduction
============

A small book of about twenty-five pages “The King of Martyrs” was
published in 1925 and since then, it was reproduced four times and every
time in several thousands and yet the demand for it had been on the
increase, and this is the Fifth enlarged edition.

With the increase in the standard of literacy among the masses, the
demand for the Islamic literature in its original purity is growing
steadily. Today, more than ever; the awakened intellect of the human
world is seriously in quest of the invaluable knowledge which Islam
alone can provide. The pity is that most of the great Muslim scholars,
who are the stores of knowledge about the original teachings of Islam,
do not care for the modern western languages, and those who have
mastered these languages have never had the benefit of a serious study
of Islamic literature through the original sources.

Whatever knowledge, about Islam and the Islamic literature, these
scholars of the modern languages possess, they could have it from the
prejudicial translations into those languages mostly by the missionary
class, brought out with the exclusive purpose of spreading prejudice
against Islam, and the Holy personalities of the Faith to secure the
unearned glorification for their own heroes and enlist believers in
their own respective creeds.

Unfortunately some of our own brethren get the information from such
hostile sources and present it as the genuine truth and never care to
scrutinise with reference to the original sources of the knowledge. The
kind or the degree of knowledge about Islam and the Islamic affairs
which some of these men possess is disclosed from their talks and
writings.

Particularly in regard to the great event of Karbala which has been
termed in the very Word of God, i.e., the Holy Qur’an, as “*Zibhe
Azeem*” or the Great Slaughter, most of our Muslim brethren either do
not know it at all or they have been misinformed or have grossly
misunderstood it. One thing very gratifying which has been often noted,
that is when such ill-informed ones are rightly informed, they
immediately acknowledge the Truth, the glory of Husayn, the Holy King of
Martyrs, the divinity endowed in his Holy Personality and the important
part the devotion to the Holy Imam, plays in elevating the human soul to
the heights of heavenly glory.

This book is intended just to give a glimpse of the divine plan
implemented in the enactment of the great heart-rending tragedy and the
unique and the glorious position of its Holy Hero and the Godly Band of
his faithful comrades.

Uninformed or misinformed of the original teachings of Islam and the
actual position of its great Heroes, some of our brethren have
unwarrantedly and unreasonably criticised certain acts of devotion on
the part of the devotees of the Faith and its Great Heroes, terming it
polytheism. A very brief clarification of the matter has also been given
at the end of this brief work for the information of those who would
like to have it.

It is earnestly hoped that the learned readers will mind the matter,
graciously by passing the mistakes, if any, in the printing matter. This
book needs reprinting and it is under contemplation, and God willing the
next issue will be free from such shortcomings. I am indebted to the
following devotees of the Holy King of Martyrs who helped the
publication of this humble work:

1. Muhammad Abdullah Al-Husayni (Our American Brethren in Faith and a
staunch Devotee of the King of Martyrs and the one whose attachment to
the Holy Ahlul Bayt is ideal).

I have to helplessly restrain myself from mentioning the names of the
devotees of the Holy Imam who have helped this publication, for their
expressed desire not to have any publicity of their names.

**S. V. Mir Ahmed Ali**
**Karachi, 11- 6 - 1964**


