Husayn the King of Martyrs
==========================

The Importance of the Context
-----------------------------

It is a fact acknowledged by one and all in the world of intelligence
that things isolated from their natural set up away from the connected
events, without the necessary reference to their original context, can
neither be properly studied nor correctly understood nor duly judged.
The great heart-rending martyrdom of Husayn, the second grandson of the
Holy Prophet Muhammad, was not a casual event of an ordinary sacrifice
of any ordinary saint.

The divinity endowed in the gruesome tragedy, can be correctly viewed
only when it is studied along with the background concerned with its
genetic factors. If anyone has failed to understand the real value of
the great event of universal import to the human race as a whole, it
must be due to the wrong angle from which it would have been viewed.

What a world of difference, the difference in the point of view a reader
creates, can very well be seen from the various opinions which the
readers of one and the same holy scripture form, for the view of one and
the same object, naturally differs a great deal from angle to angle.

Taking for instance the example of the Holy Qur’an which being the
unmistakable and the un-challengeable Final Word of God it is understood
differently by different people who study it from the different points
of view away from the correct one.

Some are rightly guided by the Holy Qur’an but from the very same Holy
Book of God, some draw a different meaning altogether misleading, and
get themselves beguiled to criticise its teachings and to attack the
Holy Prophet Muhammad.

The Holy Qur’an has itself declared this aspect of its study saying:

***“This Book (the Qur'an), no doubt is there (about its being the Word
of God), (but) it is a guidance (only) for the pious.”(2:2)***

***This (The Holy Qur'an) is only a narrative for (the ordinary) people,
and a guidance and an exhortation to the pious.”(3:138)***

Thus to have a correct view of the great sacrifices offered by the Holy
Prophet and the divinely chosen members of his family, more particularly
the invaluable sacrifices offered by the Holy Imam Husayn, the second
grandson of the Holy Prophet, it is essential to view the events in
their proper context connected with their causative factors and the
other important environmental background.

It is only to serve this unavoidable demand for the correct
understanding of the Great Events that some of the important factors
connected with the Great Tragedy, are herewith given with the maximum
possible brevity, leaving the other details for a deeper study of the
subject by those interested in it.

The Whole Human Race- One Family
--------------------------------

Humanity or the human race as a whole, was originally one family,
consisting of the children of one and the same parents, which fact had
long been forgotten and even today, in many parts of the world, it is
totally neglected and has become practically unknown.

Leaving aside the wild tribes of the wilderness of Africa, one cannot
help sorrowfully and disgracefully citing the living instance of the
treatment which the coloured members of the human family, receive from
the white ones of the same lineage, in spite of the latter s lofty claim
to the high standard of civilization and culture. The truth about the
unity of the human race as a whole was declared to the world, most
expressively and repeatedly, for the first time by the Holy Qur'an:

***"All human beings are a single nation.. ". (2:213)***

***“And human beings are naught but a single nation and yet they
disagree...”(10:19)***

***“And verily this your nation (the human beings) is a single
nation...”(21:92)***

***“And verily this your nation (the human beings) is a single
nation."(23:52)***

No other scripture prior to the Qur’an and no leader of any Faith before
the Holy Prophet of Islam had so expressly and emphatically preached
this Truth.

How the Human Family Got Divided
--------------------------------

Groups of the members of the human family moved in various directions,
searching for a better living for themselves and their livestock and
inhabited the various parts of the globe as they found them helpful to
their interest.

According to the kinds of places they occupied, the need of one
settlement naturally differed from the other. The various climates of
the different places, gradually affected the original features and the
complexion of the different groups in the different places of their
respective habitations. The ways and the means of living also, of the
group in one place naturally differed from that of the others in the
other parts of the earth.

Those who settled in the tropical zones got their skins sunburnt and
grew to be black, and those in the cold climates remained white in their
complexion. New things and new situations that each group had to adjust
itself with, needed new words to be coined to name the new objects.

These new names peculiar to each group, put together brought forth a
separate language of each group as its own, according to the needs
peculiar to it, quite different from that of the others. The lack of the
means of conveyance and communication, with the natural barriers of high
mountains, the deep seas, the wide rivers, the vast plains and the dense
forests full of wild beasts, was not helpful for easy and frequent
visits between the different groups settled afar from each other.
Gradually with the passage of time, the groups of the members of one and
the same human family, got permanently separated into different units by
themselves, separating each other by virtue of the differences in their
physical features, complexion, language, dress and the ways of living.

To identify itself, distinguishing and differentiating from the others,
each group got itself known by a particular name like the Aryans, the
Mongolians, the Semites, the Dravidians, the Saxons, and with the
various other names as the different tribes in Africa and elsewhere have
chosen for themselves. As time passed on, each group began priding over
the other and looking down upon them, with its own fanciful
distinctions. Thus gradually the universal family interest got divided
into group interest, and this sectional feeling developed into group
selfishness which generated group quarrels and tribal wars which
separated the various groups from each other further more.

Each group got interested in destroying the other group altogether, to
own their properties and to kill or capture the men, women and even the
children to serve them, or to make money by selling them to the others
as slaves. Thus started the shedding of the blood of the human family by
its own members.

With the dissensions getting more and more intensified, the hatred
between the groups becoming deeper still, the gulf of the differences
separating each other becoming wider and wider, and each group losing
its interest in the other, the feeling of mankind belonging to one and
the same family was altogether lost, and each group treated the other as
the alien one, unknown to it, without any bonds of affinity at all. Thus
man became the enemy of man, and lived a beastly life in the jungles he
occupied, each group preying upon the other.

The Man-Made gods and Deities
-----------------------------

The inherent consciousness of the individual weakness, physical, moral
and spiritual, in each human being, forced him to seek a supreme
protector with superhuman powers to secure his life and his
life-interest, against his antagonists, both human as well as imaginary
demons and devils. Owing to his own enmity and hatred against the
others, man feared man and at the same time believed in all sorts of
evil spirits, and dreaded their haunts. To protect himself against his
enemies, real and imaginary, and for the success in his efforts, in his
interest and against the interest of the others, man coined his own
fanciful gods and imaginary guardian deities and began worshipping them,
offering all sorts of sacrifices to them.

To please his own fancifully coined gods or to appease the wrath of his
own fantastically dreaded imaginary demons and devilish beings, man used
to offer sacrifices of not only animals but also his fellow human
beings. Thus came forth not only tribal gods but also the favourite
family gods and the gods of each member of a family, who were fancied to
be powerful patrons and protectors. A particular form of each such
imaginary deity was fancied and it was idolised, and thus began idolatry
in the world.

Besides the innumerable idolised man-made gods, whatever was found to be
huge or awesome to him, man began worshipping it, thinking that by
paying homage to such things, the harm or the hurt which those objects
were fancied to effect, could be averted. Thus fire, the mountains, the
seas, the huge rivers, the venomous serpents like the cobra and other
similar fantastically dreaded objects, became the objects of worship.

Similarly, whatever was found to be beneficial to him and serving his
purpose, man began worshipping the things, thinking that by his worship
he was pleasing those objects viz., the sun, the moon, the various
planets and the stars, the animals like the cow which gives milk and the
bull which ploughs the field etc.

The Guidance from God
---------------------

Although the All-Merciful Creator, Lord of the Universe has endowed each
living creature with the instincts and senses necessary for its proper
behaviour to exist, yet man having been stationed amidst the temptations
of the various impulses from within his own self and the other objects
of attraction from without needed the extra mercy of the All-Merciful to
be guided through some divinely inspired agencies. The correct guidance
to the creatures, can only come from none but the All-Knowing,
All-Merciful Lord Himself. Man, left to himself without any guidance
from his Creator, could never have any ray of the light of knowledge of
the things and the energies in the midst of which he has been placed.
With the advent of human life on earth, started also the divine guidance
from God, through God s own inspired and divinely conditioned
messengers.

Some of these apostles were adhered to, by man, some suffered the worst
of tortures and miseries at the hands of the people, and some were even
mercilessly killed. Very rarely was any prophet listened to, and rarer
still was any prophet safe among the people, and the rarest is the case
of any of the heavenly messengers having been honoured in this world.

When in this modern age of ours, the age of the wonderful advance of
human intellect, to the extent of the successful flight of man round the
earth several times within a few hours, and when man has hit the moon
and there are the efforts with prospects of success, to reach the other
planets and the stars, we have on our earth, in millions, human beings
still worshipping stone-gods, animals, serpents, mountains, rivers and
even trees and many other similar objects, it can easily be imagined in
what an abyss of ignorance, degradation and barbarity, the souls in
human frames were lying in, and what a beastly and brutal life it would
have been thousands of years ago.

Prophet after prophet, the All-Merciful continued to send to each unit
of the human family in the different parts of the earth, and in spite of
the brutal treatment man meted out to the apostles of God, no people
were deprived of the divine blessing of proper guidance. This fact also
was announced for the first time to the world, by the Holy Qur'an:

***“And every people had a Prophet.”(10:47)***

***“And certainly We raised in every people a Prophet.”(16:36)***

***“And there is not a people but a warner has gone among
them.”(35:24)***

No scripture prior to Qur’an and no religious leader prior to the Holy
Prophet of Islam had ever declared this so impressively and so
repeatedly. And every prophet that was sent to a group of people, was
sent with the respective language of the people and this fact also was
for the first time declared to the world by the Holy Qur’an.

***“And We did not send any apostle but with the language of the people,
so that lie might explain to them.”(14:4)***

Thus, through His infinite Mercy, the All-Merciful Lord did not cease
His guidance to man, although man was not tired of his torturing and
murdering of messengers from God.

Humanity and its Guidance
-------------------------

As already explained above, every creature could have guidance only from
its Creator Lord and man having been created with a decidedly higher
object of life on the earth, needed guidance through higher sources than
mere instincts which are also gifted in the nature of the lower sphere
of creation. Man has been endowed with a unique native endowment called
the *Conscience* which is a common award or gift to the human species as
a whole.

This great guiding factor is called Rasool Batini or the latent apostle
which invariably guides every human being in enabling him to
differentiate between the true and the false, the good and the bad and
that which is profitable and harmful to his being. Since this unique
blessing is liable to be snatched away by the satanic forces which are
ever active against wholesome human life on earth, the All-Merciful
Lord, to further strengthen the human conscience, instituted the
manifest guidance though the external preaching of the truth by His
apostles who were duly inspired with the knowledge to serve the purpose
of putting humanity, which had gone astray, again on the right track.

With the spread of the human family and its inhabiting the different
parts of the earth, apostles of God were also sent to each such
habitation to guide the people of the place, in the various languages
they had developed for their own respective uses, which fact is borne
out by the Holy Qur’an, *vide* 14:4.

And lest his people may fall easy victims to imposters or false
prophets, every apostle of God identified his successor, and even
prophesied about the advent of the other prophets who were to come in
the later generations, if they had to come with any special message of a
higher value for the people.

**“Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.” (New
Testament, Acts 3:24)**

God Himself had declared beforehand about the advent of some of His
apostles, exhorting mankind to follow them, if they wished salvation for
themselves. The Last one of the apostles of God had to come to mankind
as a whole with the Final Code of Discipline for a Universal Control,
and for the elevation of human life in all parts of the earth, for all
times until the end of the world. The prophecies about the Last Apostle
of God were incorporated in all the heavenly scriptures and had earned
great currency among the peoples in the various parts of the globe. The
Holy Qur’an refers to this fact:

***“Those who follow the Apostle, the Ummi, whom they find written down
with them in the Torah and the Evangel…” (Holy Qur'an 7:157)***

The above verse of the Holy Qur’an informs us that the advent of the
Holy Prophet Muhammad, was prophesied by all the preceding apostles of
God, and a covenant was also taken from the respective people that they
should accept him and hearken to whatever he would tell them. Verses 22
to 25 of chap 3 of the Acts of the New Testament bears testimony to this
fact:

**“For Moses truly said unto the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, from your own
people a prophet like me. You must listen to whatever he tells you. And
it will be that everyone who does not listen to that prophet will be
utterly rooted out from the people. And all the prophets, as many as
have spoken, from Samuel and those after him, also predicted these days.
You are the descendants of the prophets and of the covenant that God
gave to your ancestors, saying to Abraham, “And in your descendants all
the families of the earth shall be blessed.”** **(New Testament, Acts,
3:22-25).**

While all the preceding apostles of God conveyed to their respective
people the glad tidings of the advent of the Universal Prophet of God,
whom every human soul on the earth had to compulsorily follow, the
Universal Prophet, the Holy Prophet Muhammad came to lay down as a
cardinal doctrine of his faith that all apostles of God preceding him
should be accepted as equally truthful, infallible and holy:

***“The Apostle Muhammad believeth in what has come down unto him from
his Lord, and so do the believers and His Books (the different Holy
Scriptures) and His apostles. They say: We make no difference between
any of His Apostles...” (Holy Qur'an 2:285)***

The believers in Islam are also described in the Holy Qur'an:

***“And those who believe in that which has been revealed to thee (O'
Our Apostle Muhammad) and that which was revealed before thee...” (Holy
Qur'an 2:4)***

Thus the position of the Holy Prophet Muhammad is unique among all the
apostles of God, that while the predictions about his advent, made by
the preceding apostles, are fulfilled in him, he on the other hand
unlike any one of his predecessors, had enforced a compulsory article of
Faith, to believe in the truthfulness and infallibility of all the
apostles of God gone before him and who had been victims of blasphemies
and blackmailing by the people. This same fact has been borne out in
another place in the Holy Book of the Christian Church:

**“The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee of thy brethren, like unto me: unto him ye shall hearken.”**
**(Deuteronomy 18:15)**

“**I will raise them a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto
them, and will put My words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall command him.”**

**“And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto My
words which he shall speak in My Name, I will require it of him.”**
**(Deuteronomy 18:18, 19)**

A covenant was made with Abraham which is referred to in the Holy
Qur'an:

***“And remember that Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commands, which he fulfilled: He said: "I will make thee an Imam to the
Nations.” He pleaded: “And also (Imams) from my offspring!” He answered:
“But My Promise is not within the reach of evil-doers.”*** ***(Holy
Qur’an 2:124)***

The Old Testament corroborates this statement in relating the divine
promise of God to Abraham about his two sons Isaac and Ishmael:

**“And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and
make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing.” (Genesis 12:2, 3)**

**“And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee; Behold have blessed him and
will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly: Twelve
Princes shall he beget and I will make him a great nation.”** **(Genesis
18:20)**

**“And I will establish my covenant between Me and thee and thy seed
after thee in generations for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto
thee and thy seed after thee.”**

**“And I will give unto thee and thy seed after thee, the land whereat
thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession and I will be their God.” (Genesis 17:7, 8)**

And God fixed circumcision as a token of this covenant:

**“This is My Covenant which ye shall keep between Me and you and thy
seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised”**
**(Genesis 17:10)**

**“And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin and it shall be a
token of the covenant between Me and thee” (Genesis 17:11)**

**“And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his
house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men
of Abraham's house and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the
selfsame day as God had said unto him.”** **(Genesis 17:20)**

Under the same covenant, Jesus who was an Israelite through his mother
Mary (Maryam), did also receive the circumcision after eight days of his
birth and only after that was he named Jesus:

**“And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcision of the
child, his name was called JESUS.”** **(Luke 2:21)**

And every Muslim as a true follower of the tradition of Abraham, whose
direct descendant was the Holy Prophet Muhammad, receives circumcision,
the token of the Great Covenant, fixed by God.

John the Baptist who appeared just before Jesus, clarified the matter
furthermore when he answered the enquirers who asked him, “Who art
thou?”

**“And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him who art thou?**

**And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the
Christ.**

**And they asked him, what then? Art thou Elias? And he said, I am not.
Art thou that Prophet? And he answered No.”** **(John 1:19- 21)**

The questions of the Jews and the answers given by John the Baptist,
make it crystal clear that the expectation of the advent of the Promised
Last Prophet, had gained a household currency among the people. The
advent of Elias and Christ had been fulfilled. Jesus, before his
departure from this world, took special care to announce in his repeated
prophecies about the advent of the Last one of the Apostles of God, who
had to deliver to mankind the Final Word of the Lord, and who, in the
religion which he would preach, would abide with mankind forever, and
who had to give out the whole of the truth to mankind which Jesus could
not do for his people s inability to bear it:-

**“And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you forever.”** **(John 14:16)**

By the above statement of Jesus, it is quite clear that his mission was
only for a time and not for all times and that which was to be permanent
had yet to come:-

Supplement
----------

**“Nevertheless I tell you the truth, that it is expedient for you that
I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you,
but if I depart I will send him unto you, and when he is come he will
reprove the world of sin and of righteousness and of judgment.”**
***(John 14:7-8)***

Jesus made it clear that the Last one of the Apostles of God could not
come to deliver the Final Word of God and the whole of the Truth, until
the one who had come just to serve the timely need of the age, did not
depart, lest the imperfect and the perfect should be confused, and it
would create discord, disorder and confusion instead of unity and
harmony:-

Jesus had further declared:

**“But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send
in my name, he shall teach you all things and bring all things to your
remembrance whatever I have said unto you.”** ***(John 14:26)***

By the above declarations, Jesus has made it perfectly clear that he
that had to come after him was the Holy Ghost, and the same statement of
Jesus also makes it clear that he had not said everything about the
Truth, which duty according to him, had been assigned by the Lord to the
Comforter who was the Holy Ghost:-

Jesus had done his best when he said:-

**“I have yet many things to say unto you but ye cannot bear them
now.”**

**“But when he, the ‘Spirit of Truth’ is come; he will ‘guide you unto
all truth’ for he shall not speak of himself, but ‘whatever he shall
hear that shall he speak’ and he will show you things to come.”**
***(John 16:12-13)***

The above declaration by Jesus makes it clear:

1. That Jesus had to go away, without disclosing the whole truth due to
the inability of the people to bear it then.

2. That the one who had to come after him would guide mankind unto all
truth which he (Jesus) could not do.

3. That the one to come after him ‘would speak’ only that which he will
hear from the Lord which quality Jesus did not claim for himself

4. That the Spirit of Truth to come after him would show mankind things
to come which Jesus did not do, and he will abide forever.

Besides all the above prophecies, there are many similar declarations
made by the other Apostles of God in the various parts of the earth, at
different times, emanating from the Divine Mercy of the Lord, to keep
mankind informed of the Great Guide mankind would be blessed with, who
would consolidate all the goodness preached through the different
Apostles gone before him in the various parts of the world, at different
times, against the clouds of ignorance which were impending to darken
the atmosphere of the earth as a whole. The promised Last Deliverer,
Muhammad, appeared when in spite of the labours of all the preceding
apostles of God, there was darkness everywhere on the earth.


