The Seed of Abraham caused to grow in the wilderness
====================================================

The Holy Prophet Abraham, at the command of God, had brought and left
his wife Hagar with his baby son Ishmael, in the wilderness of the
barren desert land of Arabia, at the spot now called MECCA. The post
where Hagar and the Baby Ishmael were left was not only barren, sandy
and uninhabited, but was also waterless. For miles together around the
place there was no trace of water.

In short, when the poor mother wanted a little water for her Baby dying
of thirst, she ran hither and thither in her agony of maternal love for
her dying Baby. She ran from hillock to hillock, getting on the heights
and throwing glances all around, searching for some trace of water, but
all in vain. At last she sat down totally disappointed, only to witness
the impending death of her child, when suddenly she noticed a miraculous
fountain of fresh drinking water gushing out from under the heels of her
Baby (Ishmael) as it struck its feet on the earth, in its struggle with
the choking thirst. This fact has also been vouched by the Bible:-

**“And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under
one of the shrubs.**

**And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off as it
were a bowshot; for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And
she sat over against him, and lifted up her voice, and wept.**

**And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to
Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear
not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.**

**Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand for I will make him
a great nation.**

**And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water and she went, and
filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink”.** ***(Genesis
21:15-19)***

This miraculous spring, today is called the Zam Zam which is now
surrounded by the great Mosque around the Holy Ka'ba. This divinely
created spring, generated from under the feet of Ishmael began giving
fresh drinking water, not only to the poor mother and her baby son but
also to the travelers and their caravans and through this providential
facility, the spot developed into a habitation with its unique
importance as the halting place for caravans from the various
directions, as a junction of the routes to the various important centres
of trade.

Hagar and Ishmael lived at the place, and when Abraham again visited
them, Ishmael his son whom he had left in babyhood, to the care of God,
was a grown-up young lad. Abraham, aided by his young son Ishmael raised
up the walls of the ancient Prayer House which was founded since time
immemorial, exclusively for worship to the only True God, which is now
called the Holy Ka'ba to which Hajj (the pilgrimage) or a devoted visit
has been enjoined by Islam on all its adherents. The same spring which
gushed out from under the feet of Ishmael even today flows with greater
force, more than sufficient to supply fresh drinking water to millions
of visitors to the House of God raised by Abraham and Ishmael.

Abraham, while raising the walls of the Holy House prayed to God to
accept it, saying:

***“And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House
(Saying) Our Lord! accept from us; surely Thou art the Knowing.***

***"Our Lord! and make us both submissive (Muslims) to Thee and (raise)
from our offsprings a nation submitting to Thee, and show us ways of
devotion and turn to us (Mercjful), surely Thou art the Oft Returning
(to mercy), the Merciful:***

***"Our Lord! and raise up in then: an Apostle from among them who shall
recite to them*** ***Thy communications and purify them; surely Thou art
the Mighty, the Wise. (Holy Qur’an 2:127-129)***

In response to the above prayers, God addressing Abraham said:

***"And when We made the house a resort for men, and a (place of)
security, and: Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing
place of Abraham.***

***And We enjoined Abraham and Ishmael, ‘Purify My House for those who
visit (it) and those who abide (in it) for devotion and those who bow
down (and) those who prostrate themselves. (Holy Qur’an 2:125)***

Abraham tested with a sacrifice
-------------------------------

Abraham repeatedly had visions of slaying his son Ishmael. The Bible of
the Christian Church also mentions this with the change of the name of
the son from Ishmael to Isaac, which change is obviously a Jewish
tampering of the original event to suit their selfish ends, to shift the
great sacrifice to Isaac, the father of the Israelites. A vision to an
apostle of God is deemed to be the Lord's directive to him, to act
according to the directions given therein. Abraham related his vision to
his son Ishmael saying:

***"O'Son! I see in vision that I slay thee.” (Holy Qur'an 37:102)***

Ishmael, the dutiful son who was himself to be an apostle of God,
submitted to his father saying:

***"O'Father! Act as thou hast been bidden (by the Lord) and thou wilt,
if God Willeth, find me of the patient ones.” (Holy Qur'an 37:102)***

Abraham told his wife, Hagar, the mother of Ishmael that he was taking
his son to his friend; and equipping himself with a knife and a rope,
left for an altar on a nearby mountain. Abraham laid down his son
Ishmael and tied his hands and legs lest the boy should struggle while
being slain, and blindfolded himself with a piece of cloth apprehending
his failure due to his paternal love, to bear the sight of his son
rolling in his own blood, and in compliance with the divine directive
received through the dream, Abraham offering his son to God, passed the
knife across, cutting the throat under it.

Abraham declared Truthful, but the Sacrifice, postponed
-------------------------------------------------------

As soon as Abraham was sure that he had slain his son under the knife,
he immediately uncovered his eyes to pray to the Lord to accept his
sacrifice, but to his great surprise, he found Ishmael standing aside
and instead of Ishmael a ram lay slain. Any other father would have only
rejoiced at the miraculous escape of his son, but Abraham with his
wonderful love and devotion to the Lord and with his ideal submission to
His Will, stood sorrowful and disappointed thinking that his offering
was not accepted by the Lord, but a heavenly voice immediately consoled
Abraham saying:

***"O’Abraham! of course thou hast faithfully fulfilled the dream, thou
art of the truthful ones, but verily it is an open test, we have
substituted it with a Greater Sacrifice. We have transferred it to later
generations.” (Holy Qur'an 37:105-108)***

The substitute-sacrifice destined to take place instead of the one
offered by Abraham, has been called by God as an *Open Test* and a
*Great Sacrifice* from which one naturally infers that the one to be
sacrificed would be greater than Ishmael in his position with the Lord,
and such a great sacrifice could naturally be offered by the one who
would be superior to Abraham in his submission to God's Will.

What Abraham was demanded to enact was only a test:

1. To make it known to mankind the degree of Abraham's love of God, and
his submission to God's Will.

2. To make Abraham himself aware that he was still lacking in resistance
to witness the blood of his son when it had to flow in the fulfilment of
the Will of the Lord.

3. To declare the ideal devotion of Abraham and his implicit submission
to God, even to sacrifice his own son, when commanded by the Lord to do
it.

4. To make it known to man that when it is demanded in obedience to
God’s command, man should sacrifice even his own son.

5. To make the children of Adam (Man) know that in obedience to their
parents, they must surrender themselves as Ishmael did.

6. To make it known to mankind that such an event is under the Divine
Will and it is a Great Test which shall be enacted openly and it shall
come to pass in the time to come, in the seed of Abraham.

Besides, the test, if it had to profit mankind, must be an open test?
With its causes and events openly known, to earn the appreciation of its
consequent effects. Abraham enacted the slaughter in obedience to God's
command, but since the nature of the command was shrouded in a dream and
every one could not know that the dream of an apostle of God is a
revelation of God’s Will, and with the ignorance of this mystic factor,
people, instead of appreciating the unique submission of Abraham to the
divine will of the Lord, would have condemned Abraham for having
fanatically slaughtered his son, beguiled by his own fanciful
interpretation of his dream. Thus if Abraham had in those circumstances
been allowed to slaughter Ishmael, the value of the Great Sacrifice
would have practically been wasted and its great purpose would not have
been fully served.

Secondly, the object of the sacrifice was, to associate it with the life
of the great Apostle, so that humanity in its sympathy towards the
tragic event may give due admiration to the Apostle, but there, in this
case, admiration would have gone only to Ishmael as being the victim of
Abraham’s personal interpretation of his dream, which the people could
have mistaken to be fantastic, and Abraham would have been condemned for
his conduct, which in fact was a unique instance of perfect submission
to God’s will.

And over and above the other reasons, the sacrifice, if it had been left
to be enacted by Abraham, would have been a sheer waste, for no
universal religion had yet been regulated and enforced for the human
race as a whole, for mankind as a whole to be drawn to it, through its
sympathy towards the event. Moses had yet to present the Ten
Commandments and Jesus had to revive the teachings of Moses after they
had been corrupted, and yet when the teachings of all the apostles from
God got corrupted, Muhammad the Last Apostle of God, the *Maetrea*
foretold by Buddha, the *‘Comforter,’* the ‘Holy Ghost’ and *‘the Spirit
of Truth’* prophesied by Jesus, to abide with mankind forever, had yet
to come.

And the Great Sacrifice was then to be offered for only then the human
sympathy for the heart rending sufferings of the Great Divine and his
faithful comrades would lead mankind as a whole towards the universal
religion. Islam is the only divinely revealed and perfectly regulated
code for human discipline cumulative of the teachings of all the
apostles of God and which contains the Truth which was exposed piecemeal
by the other prophets in different ages, to different people, in
different languages.

The Greatest of the Sacrifices ever offered by any man would naturally
be for the sake of a religion meant for the human race as a whole, and
it could be offered by the one whose life would be, not for himself but
for the fulfilment of the Mercy of the Lord unto the whole of Mankind.

The Failure of Judaism and Christianity
---------------------------------------

The purely monotheistic faith preached and practised by the great
Israelite prophets Moses and Jesus, had totally failed to exercise any
more of its correct influence on the minds of the Jews and the
Christians who had gradually sunk deep in all sorts of idolatrous
beliefs and pagan practices. The followers of Jesus the most recent of
the apostles of God, preceding the Holy Prophet Muhammad, had become
polytheists in worshipping three gods instead of the One Whom they were
commanded to serve:

**“Unto thee it was shown that thou mightiest know that Lord is God;
there is none else besides Him."**

**"I am the First and I am the Last and besides Me there is no God.”**
**(Isaiah 44:6)**

**“Hear O' Israel, the Lord thy God is One Lord.”** **(Deuteronomy
6:4)**

**"I am God, and there is none else; I am God, there is none like Me.”**
**(Isaiah 46:9)**

**“I am the Lord that is My Name, and glory will not give to another,
neither My praises to graven images...”** **(Isaiah 42:8)**

The New Testament:

**"And Jesus answered him, the First of all Commandments is, O’ Israel,
the Lord our God is One Lord.”** **(Mark 12:29)**

**Then saith Jesus unto him, get thee hence Satan, for it is wrftten
thou shalt worship the Lord thy God and Him only shalt thou serve.
(Matthew 4:10, Luke 4:8)**

**".... .an idol is nothing in the world, and there is none other God
but One.”** **(Corin 8:6)**

**“But to us there is but One God the Father.”** **(Corin 8:6)**

In spite of the definite Commandments from God conveyed to the people by
the holy prophets Moses and Jesus, the Israelites and the Christians had
started deifying their prophets and their saints, worshipping them.
Among the Christians had sprung up schools worshipping the idols of
Mary, Jesus and also the other saints of their own fancy.The Christians
condemned the Israelites as being meaningless, in their faith and the
Israelites criticised the Christians similarly in return, while both of
them were on the wrong track diametrically opposed to what they had been
preached by their respective teachers, Moses and Jesus.


