Husayn takes charge of the Imamat
=================================

Before breathing his last, Hasan handed the charge of the Imamat to his
brother Husayn. Husayn was now the Third Imam, the Vicegerent of God on
earth, in the place of the Holy Prophet Muhammad.

The world was now without the Apostle of God. Fatimah the Holy Lady of
Light had been martyred. Ali and Hasan had also left the world. Husayn
was left alone in an atmosphere totally hostile, for Mu’awiyyah had
successfully purchased the public support to execute his plan of placing
Yazid on the throne of the Caliphate, to perpetuate the rule of the
Muslim Empire in his family and thus to start the Umayyid dynasty of the
Caliphs. All possible efforts to bring the people and keep them under
the complete control of the throne were employed. Corruption and
godlessness ruled the destiny of the people.

As Ali had done during the reigns of the first three Caliphs and Hasan
after Mu’awiyyah's usurping the paramount power, Husayn also following
the footsteps of his father and brother, had retired into seclusion in
Madina. Husayn's main concern was supplication to the Lord and acting as
the heavenly torch of the Divine Light of guidance towards God and
godliness.

Husayn was now the godly commissioned guardian of the Holy Qur'an, its
teachings and its correct practice. He was the Vicegerent of the Lord
holding the Kingdom of God on earth. It is surely ridiculous even to
imagine Husayn's ever thinking of, or aspiring for, any temporal power
or authority, when he already held the *Imamat* divinely assigned to the
House of the Holy Prophet and as such was God's Deputy on earth. He had
nothing to do with the politics of the state or the political affairs of
the people.

Husayn had already been informed of every detail of the divine
assignment to him and he knew every step of the march of his life up to
its end. The Holy Prophet had already informed Husayn of all that was in
store for him to meet, and when and where each event will take place. It
was only with the knowledge of the lot to befall Husayn, his father Ali
had desired to have a son like ‘Abbas. It was only in view of the great
task of re-establishing Islam by Husayn with the great sacrifice, i.e.,
the '*Zibhe Azeem*', the Holy Prophet had said: *'Husayn is of me and I
am of Husayn.'* Now Husayn was acting like Jesus, resigned to the will
of the Lord and waiting for the hour to fulfil his covenant with the
Lord to save His religion Islam and to securc His Final Word to man, the
Holy Qur'an, for ever.

Husayn passed a quiet life of supplication, discharging the duties of
the 1mam in the place of his Grandfather the Holy Prophet.

The Ruling Power and the Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------------------

There is one thing about the holy members of the House of the Holy
Prophet which needs mention here, that no ruling power or any
monarchical pomp, power or glory could ever create the least impression
on the godly minds of these holy ones. No threat or terror could ever
create the least awe in them to subjugate their godly inclinations and
their attitude to this life. Neither Ali could be subjected by the first
three Caliphs nor as Hasan in the least impressed by the awe-striking
threats or the pomp, power and the monarchical glory of Mu’awiyyah.

Husayn, in this regard was bolder still, for whenever Mu’awiyyah's
atrocities affected the human rights or the interest of the safety and
the security of life and the integrity of the people, Husayn never in
the least hcsitated in reprimanding Mu’awiyyah. Whenever Husayn heard of
any godly soul particularly of the devotees of the House of the Holy
Prophet suffering any unprovoked aggression, he was moved to tears for
the helpless souls, and when Hajr bin Adi al-Kandi was mercilessly
killed, Husayn did not spare admonishing and condemning Mu’awiyyah
through open, written communications from him, warning him against the
wrath, of God.

A Wonderful Act of Pure Godliness
---------------------------------

Mu’awiyyah governor of Iraq, Ahdullah's wife Zainab was a pious lady of
noted beauty. The exaggerated accounts of the beauty of the good lady
had reached even Damascus. Yazid the son of Mu’awiyyah heard it and at
once his voluptuous mind naturalised in licentiousness determined to
somehow own the wife of Abdullah for his own. All possible ways and
means of deceit and temptations to induce Abdullah to divorce his wife
went in vain Mu’awiyyah to please his son thought of a very crafty
device. Abdullah was at once summoned to the capital.

When Abdullah came to Damascus, he was received with unusual and
extraordinary honours and regards and was housed in a palatial abode
luxuriously furnished particularly for him. On the third day of his
arrival Ahdullah was offered to wed Mu’awiyyah's daughter, to which
Abdullah resented but the offer was also with the threat of losing his
position as well as his life against any refusal. Poor Abdullah was
forced to accept the offer. The next day of his acceptance, Abdullah was
asked to divorce Zainab, saying that the daughter of the Ruler, a
princess could not have any rival to her bed. Abdullah was forced to
write a letter of divorce to Zainab.when Abdullah had executed the
divorce, the very next day after it; he was not given an interview with
Mu’awiyyah, saying that the offer to wed his daughter was only an offer
and had been withdrawn.

The letter of divorce was sent to Zainab through a special messenger
with Yazid's offer to wed her, Zainab was then at Madina when Abu Darda
the messenger from Mu’awiyyah arrived there.

God is always there to protect the interest of the righteous ones when
they are unjustly aggressed by any tyrant. Abu Darda before going to
Zainab, went first to pay his regard to Husayn the Holy Imam and
intimated to him the object of his visit to Madina.Husayn hearing the
painful story, told Abu Darda to convey his own (Husayn's) offer to
Zainab along with that of Yazid's. Zainab receiving the letter of her
divorce began to sob. When the offers of Yazid and Husayn were conveyed
to her she readily preferred the Holy Imam, and got herself wedded to
him.

When the disappointing story was conveyed to Mu’awiyyah and Yazid, it
enraged both the father and the son. Abdullah was dismissed from the
governorship and all his property in Iraq and elsewhere was confiscated
and he was rendered a destitute. Poor Abdullah having lost his wife, his
post, and all his properties, did not know what to do, and at last he
walked all the way from Iraq to Madina to recover from Zainab the money
he had left with her. Reaching Madina he went to the residence of the
Holy Imam. Now Zainab could talk to Abdullah only from behind the
screen; neither could he see her nor could she look at him. Both stood
quietly shedding tears, when Husayn suddenly appeared and removed the
screen from between them saying:

*“Abdullah! God is my witness, not a glance of mine has fallen on thy
wife. Zainab is still thy wife as was she before, for the divorce under
compulsion was no divorce and my wedding her was no wedding. I wedded
her just to protect her and restore her unto thee. Take her with thee
and go happy.”*

Both, Abdullah and Zainab were stunned with tears of joy in their eyes
and returned home praising the Holy Imam and cursing those who had
wickedly devised to separate them.

The Situation That Demanded another 'Muhammad' To Rescue the Correct Faith
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was the Seventh Century A.D., Europe was still a wilderness. Rome and
Greece were still pagan, the christian creed emanated from the welding
of the monastic christianity with the pagan cult of Rome, effected by
King Constantine of Rome, after about 300 years after the departure of
Jesus was still ignorant of the elementary knowledge about the world.
Its knowledge even about the earth was childish for even centuries later
it had yet to pelt stones on Columbus when he told them that the earth
was round. This was the state of Europe when Islam had already preached
the truth about the Universe as a whole; the truth which even to this
day is the highest and the modern scientists with all their claims of
wonderful advancement and amazing discoveries have yet to arrive at the
Islamic disclosures already made through the Holy Qur'an.

America was yet to be discovered and it was the part of the earth
unknown to man.

Africa was called the Dark Continent. Man there had yet to learn the
necessity to cover its body and was a nude.

India was a country with petty princes ruling small states drowned in
idolatry and rituals extending to human sacrifice.

China was led by the impracticable and emotional creed of Buddhism; of
the total renunciation of the earthly life which even the people
claiming to be Buddhist by creed, could not as a whole practise.

The only hope lay in the most practicable and the most reasonable Faith,
Islam and its practice, but, with the alienation of the Ahlul Bayt from
the paramount authority over the affairs of the people, started the
corruption in the faith and with the Umayyids on the throne, began the
ever progressive adulteration of the Faith and the unwanted innovations
in its practice.

The only hope of the world getting on the right track was in Islam, but
with Yazid on the throne declaring disbelief in the bonafide of the
apostleship of the Holy Prophet and the Holy Qur'an being the revealed
Word of God, all hopes of the redemption of humanity from the abyss of
material degradation and the lack of the truth about the real Creator of
the Universe and the position and the commitment of man in it, were at
stake.

In short, the same atmosphere of darkness was once again, impending to
shroud the world which prevailed half a century ago and which had
demanded the advent of the Holy Prophet. But no apostle was yet to come,
for the final code of the necessary knowledge and discipline for man on
earth had been given in the Holy Qur'an. However, the situation demanded
one Like Muhammad to brave the forces of falsehood and re-establish the
Truth once again so that never may it again be shaken or disturbed.

When no apostle was to come, the only one to play the role of an apostle
was Husayn, the Imam of the age, who was in the place of the Apostle,
the Vicegerent of God on earth. Only in view of the unique position of
his grandson Husayn, and the duty identical with his own, which Husayn
was destined to discharge, that the Holy Prophet had said:

*“Husayn is of me and I am of Husayn.”*

It is for this occasion of the imperative demand for the rescue of the
True Faith that the All-Knowing Lord had reserved the '*Zibhe Azeem*.'

Letters inviting Husayn to handle the situation began to pour in from
all parts of the country, particularly from Kufa, imploring Husayn to
proceed to guide the people. There were promises from the people, saying
that strong armies were waiting to act under his command. But the
invitations contained the taint of political aim and territorial
ambition and Husayn was not for it at all. He knew the Hour was getting
nigh and waited for a call pure and plain exclustvely for God and
godliness.

Husayn was fully conscious of the heavenly object of his very advent in
the world being nothing but to meet this situation and to rescue Islam,
God's revealed faith, to elevate mankind to the glorious heights of the
heavenly bliss. Husayn knew the godly task of the divine assignment to
him. He lived all these days in waiting for the hour to act as per his
commitment to the Lord. He also knew when to respond to the call from
the people.

If Husayn had any desire to gain any temporal power, the hundreds,
rather thousands, of the letters with the strongest promises and
assurances from the people to march under his command, were more than
sufficient to stimulate an ambitious mind. Like his father he hated the
world as a rotten bone of a leper's corpse in the mouth of a dog.

If Husayn had taken any initiative to act of his own accord at the
invitations from the people, with the assurance of the armies ready to
act under his command, the sincerity or the purity of his purpose would
have been marred by his intention of getting misunderstood by the world
and doubted by the general public attributing to it selfishness and
ambition to gain the political power for himself. He waited for a call
from the situation purely in the name of God for the godly cause of
saving the faith one day which he knew, was sure to come from the
people.

Husayn prophesies His Son's Martyrdom
-------------------------------------

Husayn's second son of Ali (who after the tragedy of Karbala became
known as Ali al-Akbar) resembled the Holy Prophet Muhammad so much in
all his physical features that people from distant places, desirous of
having again a view of the departed Apostle of God, the Holy Prophet
Muhammad, visited Madina to have a look at Ali e-Akbar. It is reported
that once a party of such visitors had come to Madina from Egypt and
having seen Ali al-Akbar were amazed at the wonderful beauty of the
young Ali and his remarkable resemblance to the Holy Prophet. Husayn,
the Holy Imam asked them as to how much they would like to have a son
like his Ali, they submitted: *“O’ son of the Holy Prophet, we as the
humble beings and sinners to have such a great blessing from God?”*

Husayn asked as to how much they would value it if they were blessed by
God with such a handsome son.

They submitted: *“O’ son of the Holy Prophet, if we get such a gift from
God, we will not allow the child to walk on the ground. We would prefer
a lance piercing our eyes instead of any thorn pricking his foot.”*

Husayn said:

*“Know ye all that when this very same handsome son of mine will be in
the prime of his youth in the eighteenth year of his age, I will offer
him in the way of the Lord at Karbala, myself witnessing his beautiful
breast pierced with a lance.”*

The people could not control shedding tears.

The Call from the Governor
--------------------------

In 60 A.H., it was night when the news of the death of Mu’awiyyah was
conveyed to Valid the Governor of Madina on behalf of Yazid the son of
Mu’awiyyah who had succeeded as the Caliph at Damascus. Besides the
intimation about the death of Mu’awiyyah, the letter con- tained orders
to Valid to demand Baith, i.e., allegiance particularly from Husayn and
if Husayn refuses to pay it, to cut off his head and send it to Yazid,
at Damascus. On receipt of the letter from Yazid, Valid immediately
called his servant and sent word inviting Husayn, the Holy Imam, to
visit him. It was night and Husayn was in the Mosque when Valid's
servant came to him with the message inviting Husayn to the Government
House. The moment Husayn heard of the call from the Governor, he
suddenly exclaimed that Mu’awiyyah had died.

In reply to the call Husayn sent word to the Governor Valid saying, it
was too late and he was in the Mosque and he will visit him the next
morning.

Husayn returned home with the news to his family about the Invitation he
had from the Governor. The first to get worried were his sisters Zainab
and Umm Kulthoom. Zainab extremely worried immediately asked Husayn: -

*“What has the Governor to do with us, Brother?”*

Husayn replied:

*“The will of the Lord is being done sister dear! But worry not now, for
the day of worry for thee is yet to come!”*

The next day when Husayn prepared to go to the Governor, the Hashimites
youth and particularly ‘Abbas, submitted to the Holy Imam saying:

*“Master! We will accompany thee fully prepared with our swords to meet
any deceitful eventuality; never will we allow thee to go alone to the
crafty servants of the crafty ruler.”*

Husayn said:

*“Brethren! I fully appreciate your offer but the Governor has invited
only me and it behoves not me to take others with me uninvited.”*

The most worried sister of Husayn, Zainab implored saying:

*“Brother dear! I will not allow thee to go alone, take these men with
thee. I will send my sons though young to accompany thee. Take ‘Abbas
with thee Brother.”*

Husayn at last agreed but reaching the entrance of the Governor's house,
he told the Hashimites to stay at the door watchful and if they hear
Husayn talking unusually aloud they may get in to him.

As Husayn entered the court, it was customary in those days that when a
dignitary visited another dianitary, a slave of his visitor always
accompanied him. After entering the court, Husayn remembered that he had
not brought any one with him, turned round and found ‘Abbas standing
behind him with folded hands, like a slave. Husayn said, ‘Abbas! I had
told thee to be out. ‘Abbas immediately replied: 'Master! Leave thou,
thy shoes, ‘Abbas will take them and depart and return when thou needest
them. Valid stood erect in regard for the Holy lmam and with all respect
and regard offered him the seat besides him and read out the letter he
had received from Yazid and when had reached the matter asking him to
send the severed head of Husayn, if Husayn refuses to pay allegiance,
Valid gave the letter to Husayn to himself read the passage. Husayn read
it and smiled and said:

*“O’ Valid invite the Muslims of Madina tomorrow and ask them if they
say that I should pay allegiance to Yazid, let us then decide.”*

Valid readily accepted the Holy Imam's reply but Marwan the old enemy of
Islam who was expelled by the Holy Prophet out of Madina, seated there,
addressing Valid said:

*“Let not Husayn go out of thy grip now, lest the fox is out of the four
walls of thy court thou wilt not approach the dust behind it. Cut off
his head now and here let not this unique opportunity goes for thou wilt
never get it again.”*

When Marwan uttered the above insulting words Husayn stood up to depart
from the Governor and hearing the insulting words of Marwan, Husayn the
son of Ali the Lion of God put his hand on his sword and exclaimed
aloud:

*“O’ enemy of God! Thou or this man (Valid) to touch my head?”*

Marwan immediately got up and ran away and the Hashimite youths who
stood restless and anxious, hearing the voice of the Holy Imam, rushed
into the court with drawn swords and the first of them all was ‘Abbas.
Husayn immediately commanded restraint and had not Husayn controlled the
situation, the matter would have been settled then and there, which knew
no bounds, and brought all of the Hashimites back home.

Husayn decides to leave Madina
------------------------------

Husayn decided to leave Madina. Learning about the decision of the Holy
Imam, people in groups approached him asking the reason for his decision
to leave the holy city. Husayn said that his refusal to pay *'Bait'* to
Yazid, will certainly be defied and Yazid will not spare shedding blood
for it, and he did not like the holy city of his Grandfather, the Holy
Prophet, to become the battlefield and the poor people of the city to
suffer the wholesale massacre the tyrant's forces will enact. Poor
people, old and young, men and women, and even young children will
perish and the city will be ruined. Secondly, if Husayn remained there,
later people would say, why did not Husayn leave the place when he knew
the enemy would not leave him unchased? Hence he had decided to go to
Mecca and after the pilgrimage to decide what to do.

Husayn visited the shrine of his Grandfather and leaning on it said:

*“O’ Grandfather dear! Seest thou my fate after thee at the hands of the
people who profess to follow thee. I leave thy city and thy grave, not
of my own accord but forced by the circumstances.Pardon thou thy
grandson for going away from thee.”*

While saying this drowse dawned on Husayn and Husayn saw in a vision his
Grandfather standing out from his grave and telling him:

*“Husayn my dear! Hasten thou toward Iraq; the Lord willeth to see thee
martyred and thy Grandfather is with thee.”*

Husayn arose from the holy grave and then visited his Mother's grave and
took leave of it and then visited his Brother Hasan's grave and taking
leave of it, returned home and started preparations for the journey.
From every house in Madina, particularly of the Hashimites, was heard
the laments of the people for losing the Holy Imam from the city. Ladies
in groups visited Zainab and in surprise asked her the reason for the
decision of the Holy Imam to leave the place. Zainab could only say that
it is God's will that her Brother Husayn, the Holy Imam, was allowing to
be done and none had any voice in it.

The youth of the city came to meet the children of Husayn with tears in
their eyes and asking when they would return, to which the young souls
said: *If God wills it.None could say when.*

Husayn's sister Umm Kulthoom being a widow resided with Husayn and
Zainab who had been married to Abdullah bin Jaffar, rushed to her
husband and implored for permission to accompany Husayn, saying that she
would not live without Husayn in the city. Abdullah granted the request
and Zainab returned and prepared to leave with Husayn.

Fatimah Sughra, a daughter of Husayn was sick with high fever and Husayn
the Guardian of the Word of God, could not act against it and thus had
decided to leave the young daughter at home with his grandmother Umm
Salema the faithful wife of the Holy Prophet who alone remained attached
to the House of the Holy Prophet. The young soul Fatimah Sughra, anxious
to accompany her parents and not be left alone in the deserted house,
was restlessly implering her father the Holy Imam who was unable to take
her against the Word of God. The poor daughter of Husayn in her sickness
was requesting every member of the family to recommend her case to her
father and none could go against the decision of God. The whole house
was shedding tears for this young, sick and miserable soul.

The implorations from the citizens to Husayn to reconsider his decision
to leave Madina did not cease till the last moment. Muhammad al-Hanafia
one of the sons of Ali came to Husayn and advised him in the same way as
others had done to which Husayn said that he had to go in the fulfilment
of the Divine Will disclosed to him by his Grandfather the Holy Prophet.
Then Muhammad asked why he was taking the women and children with him,
to which Husayn said the Lord has destined that they should suffer
captivity. Zainab who heard this discourse cried to Muhammad saying
*“Why dost thou O’ Muhammad! Endeavour to cause separation between me
and my brother?”*Hearing Zainab, Muhammad kept quiet.

Lady Ummul Baneen whom Ali had married with a definite desire to have of
her a son like ‘Abbas, called her four sons and said:

*“Go ye, all of you in the service of the son of Fatimah. Beware! If
anything untoward happeneth to Husayn or to any of his children, ye
shall not return unto me alive! Let me have the face to show to Fatimah
on the Day of Judgment.”*

Then the lady called ‘Abbas and said:

*“Be thou close to Husayn wherever he is and see that nothing untoward
happens to him or to any of his children. It is for this day thy father
desired thy advent into this world, and see the object of thy father is
realised to his satisfaction. Beware! Abbas! The world has turned
inimical to Husayn. Shed thou thy life-blood but let not Husayn or his
family and children be inconvenienced in the least. Go, God be with
Thee!”*

‘Abbas and his brothers kissed the feet of their mother and ‘Abbas said:

*“Mother dear! I assure thee in the name of God, that until ‘Abbas is
alive, nothing shall happen to my Master Husayn or any of his dear
ones.”*

The Holy Imam's Determination
-----------------------------

People of Madina were fully aware of the dreadful consequences that
would follow the blunt refusal of the Holy Imam to pay *'Baith'* to
Yazid They went to the Holy Imam in large numbers to know his final
decision. Husayn replied to them:

*“Do you imagine for a moment that Husayn, fearing death and destruction
at the hands of the tyrant would ever allow to be undone all that his
Holy Grandfather, the Last Apostle of God, had done after facing untold
dangers and undergoing innumerable difficulties?”*

*“Do you think that Husayn would allow all the sacrifices offered and
the bitterest experiences suffered and the heart rending tortures borne
by his Father, Mother and Brother* *to go in vain?”*

*“Do you imagine Husayn would ever allow the Faith revealed by God for
humnanity as a whole, to perish and to vanish away for ever, when it has
been established by the shedding of the sacred blood of his father in
the Mosque of Kufa?”*

*“Nay! Never! God willing, you all shall see that Husayn, wading through
his own blood, directs the Ark of Islam out of the stormy seas, safe to
the haven of everlasting safety.”*

At last dawned the historic day of Husayn's leaving Madina. All the
ladies mounted the fully veiled litters on the backs of the camels and
when the turn of Zainab came to mount, Ali-.e-Akbar held the screen and
‘Abbas lowered his knee for Zainab to place her foot on it and Husayn
held her hand to help her, and the daughter of Fatimah mounted the
camel. At last Husayn bade goodbye to even one of the huge crowd of
citizens that had assembled, and turning towards the graves of his
Grandfather, Mother and Brother, Husayn gave his last salutation. The
caravan began to move with the people of the city crying aloud behind it
with their lamentations saying:

*“Today died the Holy Prophet. Today died the Holy Lady Fatimah and
today died Hasan.”*

Fatimah Sughra in the high fever and in her disappointment had swooned
and availing of the unconscious state of his daughter, Husayn had asked
the people of the house to make haste and start. When the caravan had
left, Fatimah returned to consciousncss and seeing the whole house
empty, asked Umm Salema about the inmates to which she was told that
they had all gone. Fatimah got up and with the help of a stick in her
hand, began to walk behind the caravan crving out:

*“Baba ! Baba ! Baba! i.e., Father ! Father ! father!”*

The caravan had gone sufficient away but God alone knows how Husayn
could hear the feeble voice of the crying of his ailing daughter coming
at a consideralc distance behind the caravan, inspite of the loud noises
of the moving caravan. Husayn called aloud to ‘Abbas telling him:

*“Stop Abbas! Stop! Fatimah is coming behind.”*

The caravan stopped and Fatimah somehow reached the caravan and began to
implore saying:

*“Father dear! If there be no space for me with my mother and sisters, I
will sit with the servant maid Fizza and will not worry any one with my
sickness.”*

Husayn came down from his horse and tried to console her, explaining his
inability owing to her sickness under which the Word of God does not
allow him to take her on the journey.

This is an occasion for parents among the readers to imaginc the state
of mind of Fatimah's mother and her other relatives. At last Fatimah
made a request to her father whom he could not resist granting:
*“Father! If I have to be left behind, leave with me baby brother Ali
al- Asghar. I will spend my time with him and will see he is duly looked
after by a Hashimite nurse.”*

Husayn said:

*“Yes, beckon thy brother Ali, if he cometh, take him away with thee.”*

Fatimah went near the camel on which was her mother with her baby
brother Ali al-Asghar. The moment she beckoned, the baby rushed into her
lap.

How could the caravan move now, with the mother leaving away the
suckling baby away from her. The mother tried her best to get the baby
back ftom Fatimah, and along with the mother all other relatives tried,
and even Husayn tried his best to see that the baby returns from Fatimah
but every one failed and even time the baby looked at the face of the
one who beckoned it and smiled and turned around and put both its hands
round Fatimah's neck, the caravan had stopped. At last Husayn getting
near the baby's ears, moved his lips saying something in the ears of the
innocent and the baby which did not respond to any one before and even
to its mother, now hearing the words uttered into its ears by the Holy
Imam, at once left Fatimah and got into the lap of the Holy Imam Fatimah
stood disappointed and at last the caravan moved away.

After the Massacre of Karbala, some one asked Ali ibnul Husayn as to
what was it that Husayn said into the cars of the baby which did not
respond to anybody' s beckoning and even to Husayn when he did it
before, at once came away into Husayn's lap. In reply Syyed al-Sajjad
Ali-ibnul-Husayn sighed aloud saying:

*Ah! Ah!What a heart rending event, O’ man! Thou reminded me of!*

*“My Father only told in the ears of my baby brother Ali. Son I need
thee also at Karbala for thy name also is there in the list of the
martyrs and without thee, my darling, my sacrifice will be incomplete!
Hearing this my baby brother at once responded to the call and returned
from my sister Fatimah's lap.”*

The Situation Worsens and the Atmosphere Gets Totally Darkened
--------------------------------------------------------------

The people found infidelity and godlessness spreading all around them,
and its intensity being ever on the increase and getting more and more
aggressive. There was no security for the faith and the faithful.
Religion getting horribly adulterated with counterfeit traditions coined
in favour of the grossly anti-religious elements. The practice of the
faith laid down by the Holy Prophet strictly on the Qur'anic lines, was
recasted into the wrong moulds of infidelity. The situation had become
openly hostile to the House of the Holy Prophet, the love or
faithfulness to the members of which was under the command of the Lord,
decreed incumbent on ever Muslim with a definite ordinance of the Holy
Qur'an on it had become a mercilessly punishable crime:

***“Say thou (O' Our Apostle Muhammad!) I ask ye naught in return for it
(the apostleship) save the love for my relatives.” (42:23)***

Thosc who professed faithfulness to the House of the Holy Prophet
indentifying themselves as the Shias of Ali were persecuted, plundered,
mercilessly crucified and brutally murdered and their properties were
confiscated. People faithful to the Holy House had either to be killed
or to go underground under the cover of *'Taqiah'* (hiding the faith);
they were even then chased, spied and hunted and when found out, were
condemned to death.

The situation actually needed a Muhammad to brave the devilish forces
and deliver the people from the clutches of the satanic sway over the
people and the cruel authority of the crown as was sent Moses to deliver
the Israelites from the clutches of Pharaoh. But the prayer of the
people for another apostle or prophet would be only in vain for the Last
Apostle had come and gone and there was no other prophet or apostle
after him to come .The only way to salvation for the faith and the
people was to appeal to Husayn, the Holy Imam of the age, who was the
Vicegerent of God in the place of the Holy Prophet, to come to their
rescue.

The authority to rule over the destiny of the people in the various
parts of the state was distributed by nepotism. Merits of personal
righteousness and the sense of justice had lost their recognition and
had no worth or value in the eyes of the administrators of the matters
of the state.

Womanhood was once again subjected to a shameful subjugation to satisfy
the brutal lust of the drunkard debauchees with the beastly lust to
devour the chastity of women. Marriage had lost its sanctity and
protection to married women. Deceitful measures were employed to force a
husband to divorce his wife if she was wanted for the sexual lust of the
ruling authority.

Human rights were deliberately denied and the rites of religion were
openly defied and religious ordinances were violated with extreme
impunity. There was no security of life or property. Plunder, pillage
and persecution were freely practised to realise the political ends of
the state.

People at last sent messengers with the written request to Husayn, the
Hoiy Imam, to come to the rescue of the faith and the faithful, with a
note of threat that should Husayn fearing death and destruction not come
out and save the religion of God from getting lost and the faithful
religionists from getting astray? Any longer, on the Day of Judgment the
people would complain to God and His Holy Prophet against him. The
deputation from the people of Kufa signed by a multitude of them
approached Husayn at Mecca.

The call now was without any taint, purely for the rescue of the faith
and the faithful. Husayn now could not but respond. The Holy Imam knew
that it was the destined and the awaited call. He offered prayers and
looked to the heavens and decided to act, to fulfil his covenant with
his Lord.

Husayn at Mecca and the Deputation from Kufa
--------------------------------------------

Husayn arrived in Mecca on 3rd Shahan 60 A.H. for the pilgrimage and
thereafter to decide for his future step. He could not stay in Madina
without paying *'Bait'* to Yazid or getting killed in return for his
refusal to pay the allegiance. Allegiance meant recognising the Devil in
the place of God which Husayn could never do. His murder at Madina would
have caused the clash of the Madinites, particularly the Hashimites with
the Yazidian forces, resulting in the destruction of the poor citizens
and the ruin of the holy city of his Grandfather for which he did not
like to be rcsponsible. Besides, if he had stayed there in Madina with
death facing him, the world would have questioned his stay there and not
taking shelter somewhere out of it. He came to Mecca and here he
received the deputation from Kufa with the persistent implorations to go
and guide them on the right path of the faith against the straying away
from the faith forced on them with the infidelity and godlessness spread
all over the country.

Husayn could neither blindly accept the call from Kufa, for the Kufees
who were known for their unstable character and unsettled conduct, if
later turn treacherous, the world would question. Husayn's ready
response to their call without the necessary caution. Therefore Husayn
decided to send a deputy of his to Kufa to write to him after studying
the sincerity in the invitation.

Muslim the Holy Imam's Deputy to Kufa
-------------------------------------

The holy Imam commanded his cousin Muslim, son of Aqeel, to proceed to
Kufa and to report from there, after studying the bonafide of the call
from the people of the place On 14th Ramadhan 60 A.H. Muslim left Mecca
with two guides of the route. Muslim took two young sons of his, along
with him. The party lost their way and both the guides perished in the
desert. Muslim taking the death of the guides as an inauspicious omen
and reaching a halting place called *'Muzeeq min Batne Jannat'* wrote to
the Holy Imam informing him of the fate of the guides and requesting him
to spare him and depute someone in his stead. The Holy Imam wrote back
to Muslim saying:

*“This is from Husayn son of Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib, to
cousin Muslim son of Aqeel. Verily I have heard my Grandfather, the Holy
Prophet, saying that we Ahlul Bayt take not omens from events
extraordinary. The moment thou receivest this letter, precede thou as I
have commanded thee.*

*Peace and the blessings of God be with thee.”*

Muslim receiving the reply continued his journey and somehow reached
Kufa.

Muslim in Kufa
--------------

The kufees gave Muslim a very warm reception and thousands of them paid
their *'Bait'* to the Holy Imam on the hands of Muslim. Poor Muslim
impressed with and guided by the enthusiasm of the deceitful Kufees and
not knowing what would befall him the very next day, wrote a letter to
Husayn to go over to Kufa. When the letter inviting the Holy Imam had
gone with a favourable report about the situation at Kufa, Muslim learnt
of the treachery, i.e., the turn of the tide of the situation. Yazid,
having learnt of Muslim's arrival at Kufa as the Deputy of the Holy Imam
and the Kufees having paid their homage to the Holy Imam, as their
religious head, sent Ibn Zaid to handle the situation in his favour. In
a day or two, almost all the leaders of the town were bribed and strong
threats from Yazid's deputy the Governor of Kufa, made the people of the
town as a whole, desert poor Muslim.

Under the strict ordinances issued against those who gave even shelter
to him, Muslim was left all alone in Kufa. None in Kufa would now even
speak to Muslim and he was left actually homeless, wandering in the
streets with everyone in town, now hostile to him. None would allow him
even to rest for a while in the shade of his house.

At every door he stood, he was being driven away, not even a cup of
water he could have from anyone in the town. Hungry and thirsty, the
helpless Deputy of the Holy Imam actually wandered in the streets of
Kufa with his two innocent children, in the hope of help from some one,
but none took pity on him, and not even on the innocent young children.
The helpless father and his two young children were being driven away
from place to place, nowhere to rest even for a while.

Hani Ibn Orvah, the good-hearted Kufee who offered hospitality to Muslim
was mercilessly butchered. All those miseries and persecution did never
upset Muslim in the least but the one and only worry he felt, and which
grieved him the most of which he frequently shed tears, was that he had
written to the son of Fatimah, the Holy Imam, in favour of such a
treacherous people and had invited him to go over to a place where only
death and destruction waited for him. He could not leave the town for he
was not allowed to do it, nor could he send any note to the Holy Imam to
intimate the treacherous change in the situation.

Muslim sends out His Children with His Message to the Holy Imam
---------------------------------------------------------------

At last Muslim somehow managed to send his two young children out of
Kufa with his message to the Holy Imam, a counter to his previous
communication to him, requesting Husayn never to think of Kufa anymore.
The two innocents of the House of the Holy Prophet with the divine gift
of bravery and courage against the odds and the miserses in the way of
the Lord, walked through the desert during nights, hiding themselves
from the sight of the people and during day time hid themselves in some
bush or on the top of some date palms, hungry and thirsty as naturally
they would but be in the desert.

But nothing daunted them from their mission. The one and the only only
concern of the two young souls, was to somehow reach the Holy Imam with
the message. The two young innocent fugitives were passing through a
dreadful and mortal atmosphere. They were passing through the Valley of
Death. Whenever they happened to meet anyone they wuld not disclose
their identity and if any one took pity on their age and their plight,
and offered any hospitality, they accepted it, otherwise they contented
themselves with their lot but always mindful of the Lord and prayerful
to Him.

Muslim Arrested and Martyred
----------------------------

Having despatched his sons, Muslim, discarded by one and all in Kufa and
hunted by the men of Ibn Ziad, wandered in Kufa, as a homeless destitute
without any shelter or shade to lay his head or even to rest a while
against the scorching sun. None dared to give him even a cup of water.
Passing through a street Muslim halted at the door of a godly lady Tau'a
who asked him, not recognising him, who actually he was:

*“O' man why dost thou not return home and rest?”*

Muslim replied:*“Where to go? I have no home here!”*

The good lady looked at Muslim and asked: “Who art thou?”

Muslim replied: *“I am Muslim, son of Aqeel, the Deputy of Husayn the
Holy Imam! hunted by the Amir.”*

Tau'a, immediately as she learnt about the identity of Muslim and the
name of the Holy Imam, told him to get into her house No sooner had
Muslim taken shelter in Tau'a s house, the son of the lady, an
incorrigible delinquent, returned home and Tau'a advised the lad
repeatedly not to let any one know about the whereabouts of Muslim.
Early next morning, the lad informed the state authorities. Muslim heard
the approach of the soldiers to Tau'a's house and apprehending that if
he stays any longer in the house, the house of the poor lady will be
ruined, rushed out and after a wonderful resistance, was arrested by the
contingent and carried to the court of the Amir. Muslim entered the
court without the usual salutation to the Amir. When questioned why he
avoided the usual courtesy of the salutation to the Amir, Muslim
replied:

*“Who is the Amir? A drunkard and debanchee? My Amir is Husayn the Holy
Imam!”*

The Amir retorted: *“Dost thou know thy fate? Salutation or no
salutation from thee, thou shalt beheaded.”*

Muslim replied: *“Threaten thou with death and destruction the dogs who
hunt after this world and not any one of the House of the Apostle of
God!”*

Ibn Ziad called his men and commanded Muslim to be taken on the roof of
a building to be beheaded and his body to be thrown down from the top,
to the ground.

Hearing the verdict of the Amir about him, Muslim replied:

*“Ready I am to pass on in the way of the Lord”* and then turning to the
audience in the court asked, if there was any Qurayshite among them
there to hear his last desire in this world and execute it. Umar Ibn
Sa'd, a Qurayshite, replied:

*“Yes! I am here! Say thou what thou hast to say!”*

Muslim said:

*“Look O' son of Sa'd! The first thing I request you to do is to write
to the Holy Imam or send a message at once to him never to think of
coming over to Kufa!”*

*Secondly, I owe seven hundred dirhams to the people here in Kufa. Here
is my horse and my armour. Sell thou these two things and disburse the
dues.*

*Thou art a Qurayshite! Bury thou my body out of my own money raised by
the sale of my belongings without any obligation from any one of the
Kufees”.*

Umar replied we will act as deemed desirable by us. The people seated
around in the court wept but none spoke a word against the brutal
behaviour against Muslim.

Muslim when taken on the top of a building asked respite of the
executioners to offer his last prayer to the Lord. After the prayer he
turned toward Mecca and cried:

*“Pardon me O' Holy Imam, for I was misled. But think thou not of coming
over to Kufa!”*

No sooner Muslim had finished his prayer, and his cry to the Holy Imam,
fell the stroke of the sword from the executioner. His head was taken
and the body was thrown down on the ground.

The heads of Hani Ibn Orwah and Muslim Ibn Aqeel were despatched to
Yazid as a token of the faithful execution of his orders by his Deputy
Ibn Ziad.

The bodies of Muslim and Hani, with a rope tied in the legs, were
dragged into the streets of Kufa, as an active and visual warning to the
people against their loyalty to the House of the Holy Prophet and
particularly to Husayn the Holy Imam. At last the body of Muslim and
Hani were hung at the gateway of the City and remained there hanging for
days together. None of the last desires of Muslim was executed and
immediately orders were issued to comb the city and its surroundings and
find out the children of Muslim. A tempting prize was announced on the
heads of the innocents.

Children of Muslim Martyred
---------------------------

The two young souls in their concealed march from Kufa, travelling
during nights, lost their way in the desert. Once they were arrested and
imprisoned but the pitiful guard of the prison, allowed them to escape
and at last they were found by the goodhearted lady, the wife of Harith,
who was already in search of the innocents to win the rich reward. The
good-hearted lady hid the children in her house and Harith returned late
in the night complaining to his wife saying that day and night, he was
in search of the children of Muslim but could not find them. The lady
asked Harith:

*“What will you gain after shedding the blood of the innocents of the
House of the Holy Prophet?”*

Harith replied: *“What thou askest me, knowest: thou I will get the rich
reward from the Amir?”*

The lady kept quiet and Harith went to bed but at midnight the innocents
saw their father in a dream telling them: *“Worry not my dear ones! very
soon you will meet me!”*

Both the children awoke crying: *“Father dear! where art thou? We are
wandering as helpless fugitives.”*

Hearing the cry of the innocents, Harith awoke and asked his wife as to
whose cry was that, that came from one of the rooms. The good lady could
no longer conceal the fact and the moment Harith came to know of the
presence of the innocents in his very house, he jumped with joy and
getting into the room dragged those two young souls out of their beds
saying:

*“I killed myself in your search the whole day for you and you are here
in my own house.*”

The brute kept the innocents tied to a post the whole night and at dawn
Harith took them to the bank of the Euphrates and the good lady
accompanid them pleading for them. When Harith wanted to behead them,
the children cried to the good lady addressing her as *'Mother dear!'*
The poor lady was already imploring the brute of her husband not to lay
his hands on the helpless innocents. But the heartless brute would not
listen to the implorations from the lady. When he raised his sword, the
lady ran to intervene and strop, the stroke, and got her two hands
severed. It is reported that the two innocents prayed to the brute to
allow them to offer their last prayers to which the brute consented and
no sooner the holy souls had finished their supplication to the Lord,
then Harith wanted to behead them. The elder brother implored saying:

*“O'man ! listen to me, behead not my younger brother before me for my
mother when we* *parted from her last, handed him over to me. Oblige me
thou by beheading me first.”*

With a stroke of the sword the head of the elder one of the two
innocents fell and Harith threw the body into the river, and then
turning to the younger one, he did the same. It is said that when the
first body, i.e., of the elder brother was thrown into the river, the
younger one cried to it saying:

*“Brother dear! Tarry thou a little, I also come with thee.”*

It is said that the body of the first innocent floated stationary in the
waves of the river until the body of the second one joined it and both
floated away together.

No Refuge for the Holy Imam Even in the Holy Ka'ba
--------------------------------------------------

News had reached Damascus that Husayn had left Madina for Mecca. Yazid
hired thirty men to guide themselves as pilgrims *(Hajies)* with daggers
hidden in their pilgrim garbs to murder the Holy Imam even while
performing the pilgrimate rites, be he even in the very precincts of the
Great Sanctuary of the Holy Ka'ba.

Husayn had received the letter from his Deputy Muslim in Kufa to proceed
to the place, the letter which Muslim had written before what befell him
later. Husayn only waited for the pilgrimage to start for Kufa
thereafter. But he got intelligence about the plot to kill him even in
the Holy Sanctuary.

Husayn saves the Sanctity of the Great Sanctuary
------------------------------------------------

The holy Ka'ba, a Sanctuary, the Holiest of the Holy Places of Islam, a
Sanctuary wherein no creature animate or inanimate could be disturbed
wherein even a confirmed convict could not be killed, nor even a plant
be plucked out. If the sanctity of the Holiest Shrine of Islam be
violated by the shedding of the blood of the Holy Imam which was the
very blood of the Holy Prophet himself, no security for any one else
would be left thereafter, the Holy Ka'ba would cease to be a Sanctuary.

The next day was the day of the pilgrimage and Husayn in the interest of
the sanctity of the place could remain there no more. The Holy Imam
decided to leave the place with his whole caravan, performing the
briefer pilgrimage *'Umra'* instead of the full pilgrimage, Hajj, which
could be done only the next day.

People uninformed of the secret plot of Yazid against the life of the
Holy Imam, wondering at the surprising decision of Husayn to move out of
Mecca on the very eve of the Pilgrimage when every Muslim rushes to the
place and covets to be there, thronged to the Holy Imam enquiring about
his mysterious move. Husayn replied:

*“This year's Hajj I have, to perform at Karbala.”*

When the people asked where the animals of sacrifice were, Husayn
replied:

*“In this Hajj I have to offer the sacrifices, not of animals but of my
own kith and kin.”*

Saying this Husayn said:

*“Do ye like to see my sacrifices?”*

Husayn called his brother ‘Abbas, his eighteen-year--old son Ali (Ali
al-Akbar), his nephews Qasim, Aun and Muhammad and others. When all
these had come and stood before him, Husayn said:

*“These are my sacrifices.”*

Husayn left Mecca for Kufa in response to the implorations of the people
of the place.

The Holy Imam Learns of the Fate of His Deputy, Muslim
------------------------------------------------------

Husayn was proceeding to Kufa and a large number of the people thinking
that if Husayn, the Holy Imam, the grandson of the Apostle of God stands
against Yazid, the Muslim World as a whole would support the Holy Imam
of the age and those who support Husayn's cause will certainly get the
share of the booty accompanied him. At every step Husayn warned them
saying their imagination was totally wrong and will never be realised.
However, the crowd accompanied Husayn until when the news of the fate of
Husayn's Deputy, Muslim, reached him on the way, and the crowd began
deserting Husayn in large numbers.

Where should Husayn go?
-----------------------

If after knowing the fate of his Deputy, Muslim, at Kufa, Husayn
proceeds towards the town, the world would know about the atmosphere at
Kufa having turned totally hostile to him, why he threw himself and his
family in the jaws of death. He could not stay any longer in Madina, nor
at Mecca even until the Hajj and now he could not proceed to Kufa. Where
should Husayn go? Husayn now directed his move towards an unknown
destination.

Water stored for the Enemies
----------------------------

As the caravan proceeded, at a certain place the Holy Imam directed his
brother ‘Abbas to see that the caravan carries with it as much water as
possible. People submitted to the Holy Imam that there would not be any
dearth of water in any of the coming stations. The Holy Imam
mysteriously insisted saying *'I tell you, you do it.*' The people were
told that it would be required, but did not disclose for whom, and every
one wondered at this mysterious command. However, the order was carried.

The Hunt for the Holy Imam
--------------------------

Information about the Holy Imam's leaving Mecca and proceeding towards
an unknown destination reached Kufa and Damascus and fearing that Husayn
would escape away out of the Muslim dominion and thus get out of the
grip, military contingents were immediately dispatched in all directions
in the desert to stop the Holy Imam where he may be found and not allow
him to go any further but to get him either to Kufa or to Damascus and
in case of resistance to kill him wherever he is found.

Husayn saves the Enemies from Death
-----------------------------------

As the caravan of the Holy Imam proceeded, suddenly the men in the
forefront in cried aloud *'Allaho Akbar'* (God the Greatest). Husayn
smiled and asked what the matter was and what had made the people
glorify God all of a sudden; what was the occasion for it. People
submitted that a garden is sighted which usually was not found on that
route. Husayn smiled and told the people to look ahead carefully.
Shortly afterwards the men reported to the Holy Imam saying that it was
not a garden but an army coming towards them. It was a contingent of
Yazid's army which had been sent under the command of a famous Commander
*'Hurr'* to arrest the move of Husayn and divert the course to Kufa or
Damascus or to fight and kill the Holy Imam.

When the contingent of the Yazidian forces under *'Hurr'* reached the
caravan of the Holy Imam, both the men and the animals were dying of
thirst. Having exhausted the store of water they had, the whole regiment
was practically trapped in the burning desert with the heat from all
sides roasting their bodies. The whole army was about to perish. They
could not get any trace of water anywhere for miles together. Hurr and
his men, instead of capturing Husayn or attacking the Caravan, shouted
aloud in appealing voices *'Thirst! thirst!'* water, and begged the Holy
Imam to quench their thirst first. The Holy Imam at once ordered the
whole of the stored water to be placed at the disposal of the enemy army
under Hurr, his soldiers and all the animals of the army were fully
served and were rescued from the jaws of death.

When the enemy had quenched their thirst, Husayn asked Hurr, the purpose
of his coming out into such a killing heat in the desert. Whether the
expedition was for him or against him. Hurr related his object and also
said that he was there not to allow the Holy Imam to move from that
place. The Caravan stopped.

Hurr was a good man, noble and a gallant officer, but could not allow
Husayn to have his way, in the presence of his men, for he feared that
they would bring calamity upon him. Without the knowledge of his men,
Hurr begged the Holy Imam to have his own way as if without the
knowledge of his men to some direction and to facilitate this he camped
his regiment a little away from Husayn's camp. Husayn had to accept
Hurr's offer and direct his Caravan to move on, but to none did he
mention the destination. The Holy Imam's Caravan moved on but none knew
to what destination it was bound for. It was a mysterious move divinely
guided by the will of the Lord, to fulfil the Great Sacrifice destined
to take place in the seed of Abraham.


