The Prophesied Desert of Karbala
================================

At a place near the Euphrates, the Holy Imam's steed suddenly stopped
and inspite of the unusual spurrings, the animal did not move; but
raised its head towards heaven, as if to say that it was helpless and
could not step forward any more. Husayn changed six horses one after
another but none of the animals moved from the spot. Gathering the
people in the neighbourhood, the Holy Imam enquired the name of the
place. Some said *'Maria'* some said *'Nainawa’* and some said
*'Shattul-Furat'* but the Holy Imam was not satisfied and continued his
enquiry asking if there was any other name for the place. An old man
stepped forward and said *“O’ Son of the Apostle of God! I have heard
from my ancestors this plain being called also as 'Karbala'*.” The
moment the Holy Imam heard the name of Karbala, he smiled and thanked
God and said:

*“Surely this is the plain I was in quest of. This is the place where my
holy Grandfather had prophesized that I, with all my faithful
companions, will lay slain after suffering three days* *hunger and
thirst. Here will the Garden of Fatimah be cut and destroyed. I cannot
and I will not move an inch from this place-I have reached the destined
destination.”*

Saying this, the Holy Imam ordered the Caravan to be stopped and
declared that the journey had ended as he had arrived at the desired
destination. Tents were ordered to be pitched but Hazrat Zainab,
Husayn's sister, hearing of the Imam's decision to camp there, wept and
sent for Husayn and requested him saying:

*“Brother dear! Do not camp here! Somehow my heart is restless and does
not consent. Brother dear! Since our arrival on this plain, I distinctly
hear the lamenting voice of our dear mother, wailing somewhere nearby in
this desert.”*

Husayn, hearing his mother's name, shed tears and said:

*“Zainab! We need not fear when God is with us. It is immaterial,
Sister, where we camp. This is the place, Sister dear, I was in quest of
and thanks to God I am at it, and now Sister dear, I cannot move from
here.”*

Tents were pitched at the bank of the Euphrates for the Holy Imam's
Caravan.

The Holy Imam points out the destined Spots
-------------------------------------------

While the men were busy pitching the tents, the Holy Imam went into the
surrounding lands stopping at certain spots thoughtfully; and at a
certain spot, he laid himself down on the earth and raised his head to
look towards his camp. When asked what he meant by the action, he said:

*“It is the place where I will at last fall from my horse and will lay
to be slain! I wanted to see if my lying there wounded to be slain by
Shimr who will be seated on my breast, will be visible to the ladies in
my camp, for Zainab, my Sister, and will then be standing at the doorway
of her tent, shouting for me.”*

The Holy Imam took his brother ‘Abbas around and pointed out the various
spots in the plain where each one of his comrades would fall and be
slain.

Husayn Purchases the Site for the Graves of the Martyrs
-------------------------------------------------------

The holy Imam gathered the people of the surrounding places, the owners
of the plain of Karbala, and purchasing the land from them gifted the
same to the people. Addressing the males among them he said:

*“On the Tenth day of this month ye shall see us lying here slain, our
bodies lying on the plain with our heads severed and taken away. I
request you to kindly bury us, and when our devotees come to visit our
graves, hold them in honour as your guests and point out to them the
places of our burial?”*

He then addressed the ladies:

*“O' Virtuous ladies! If your husbands, fearing the wrath of Yazid do
not bury us, you kindly* *encourage them to do it or do it yourselves.”*

The Holy Imam then turned to the young children in the gathering and
addressing them said:

*“O' Innocent ones! If your parents, out of fear of the wrath of the
Ruler, do ito: bury us, you may, by way of playing bring some mud in
your laps and throw it upon our bodies and hide them.”*

The appeal was so touching that the whole gathering wept.

Arrival of Yazid's Forces
-------------------------

The brute Ibn Ziad at Kufa got the information of Husayn's getting out
of the control of Hurr and also learnt that the, helpless Imam had
camped near the River Euphrates. Regiment after regiment began to pour
in on the plain of Karbala from all sides and ultimately the enemy’s
forces compelled Husayn to shift his camp from the bank of the river to
the interior of the burning desert. Husayn's brother, the lion-hearted
‘Abbas, objected to this demand from the enemy, claiming priority of
occupation and the right of the son of the Holy Prophet, the Holy Imam,
to stay where he had first camped. When the enemy wished to march
towards the Holy Imam's camp, the brave ‘Abbas at once drew his sword
and stood firm and shouted to the men:

*“One step forward if ye advance, ye shall lay headless there.”*

Knowing the bravery, valour, and prowess of the valiant son of Ali, the
Lion of God, none cared to step forward. But Husayn ailed his Brother
saying:

*“Brother ‘Abbas! Let not bloodshed be initiated from our side. Let them
occupy any place they like. They call themselves my Grandfather's
followers. Let them enjoy every comfort they want. We shall suffer for
them, being away from the water. When God is with us Brother, what if
the river is far away from us.”*

With these words, the Holy Imam, in order to avoid bloodshed, issued
orders to shift this camp into the interior of the burning desert and it
was immediately done.

Yazid's Army at Karbala
-----------------------

The reported strength of the brutal forces that were sent by Yazid to
martyr the Holy Imam at Karbala.

According to Abu-Mikhnaf the total strength of Yazid's army at Karbala
was 80,000 of Kufees excluding the Syrians and the Hijazi forces. The
first one who left for Karbala with his army on behalf of Yazid was Umar
al-Sa'd, with 6,000 men.

Following Umar went Sinan Ibn Anas with 4,000

Orwath Ibn Qais with 4,000

Shees bin Rub'ee with 4,000

Shimre-zil Jaushan with 4,000

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

22,000 men

Arqam-Ibn Ziad enrolled further 22,000 men

Yazeed Ibn Rikabe Kalbi 2,000

Haseen bin Nameer Ibn Askooni 4,000

Ma'zani 3,000

Nasre Ma'zani 2,000

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

33,000 men

This is according to the unanimous report of the Historians.

Biharaul-Anwar, V. 10 p. 182

Abu Mikhnaf p. 32

Tarique-Asame-Kufee p. 269

No Room for any Criticism left
------------------------------

If the holy Imam had stayed at Madina and got slain there, it would have
been said, why did he not migrate to Mecca to take shelter in the Great
Sanctuary there? He did go to the Ka'ba and if he had stayed there to be
killed by Yazid's agents, it would have been said why did he not leave
the holy place to avoid bloodshed in the Great Sanctuary? Husayn left
Mecca too, even though it was the very eve of the pilgrimage. And if he
had gone to Kufa it would have been said why he went to a place where
his Deputy Muslim had been killed, and when he knew the situation there.
Husayn avoided going to Kufa. Hurr's offer, if Husayn had rejected, it
would have been said why he refused to escape when the enemy's agent
himself offered the opportunity to do it. Husayn availed also of the
opportunity given by Hurr. Now when the enemy became cruel, heartless
and aggressive, he avoided bloodshed by shifting his camp into the
interior of the desert, abandoning the bank of the river to the enemy.

Husayn besieged at Karbala
--------------------------

When the whole plain of Karbala was full with Yazid's regiments and the
Holy Imam's camp was totally surrounded by the enemy's forces, Ibn
i-Sa'd the Commander of the Brute's armies met Husayn on the banks of
the River and demanded *'Bait'* on behalf of the tyrant Yazid and said:

*“If you pay homage to Yazid, everything will go well for you and
whatever worldly comforts and privileges you desire for, will be at your
disposal. Otherwise, it will end in a wholesale massacre of yourself and
all your dear ones here.”*

Husayn firmly refused to pay the *'Bait'* saying:

“Tell Yazid to tempt with the worldly comforts those who are after this
World. I am the Imam, the Representative of the Apostle of God. I shall
never yield to the one who believeth not in God and who defieth the Word
of the Lord, in word and deed, and who spreadeth godlessness on the
earth. Let any calamity befall me and my dear ones, the will of the Lord
shall be done. Husayn will cheerfully meet any catastrophe but never
surrender Truth to falsehood.

Water Supply to Husayn's Camp Cut Off
-------------------------------------

At last on the 7th Muharram 61 A.H. (October 680 A.D.) the Commander of
Yazid's forces received orders to cut off all sources of supply to the
Holy Imam's camp and not to allow even a drop of water to reach any of
the inmates therein. It can better be imagined than described what the
condition of Husayn's camp would have been under the scorching Arabian
sun. The camp was in the midst of the burning desert, with the
heat-waves blowing from all sides. The unavailability of water, with
nothing to feed even the young children, the wriggling of the babies for
milk which the poor mothers, who were themselves suffering from the
killing thirst, could not give, caused distress. What a torturous
situation it must be, and how did those Holy ones suffer all these
unbearable tortures, it is very difficult for any human mind to
conceive, but all these are facts which the Holy Imam and his godly
companions suffered with wonderful fortitude and patience. Over and
above all these tortures, the sight of the enemy's forces preparing all
around for the massacre and whosleale destruction was there, before the
ladies and the children in the besieged camp.

In short, the torture of thirst which actually began from the 7th
Muharram and the sufferings of the Imam with his companions, including
the young children and the babies, could not be described here. The
sufferings of the Holy ones for the sake of Truth can better be imagined
than described.

‘Abbas, the brave, who was next only to the Holy Imam in charge of the
Holy Imam's camp, after a very strenuous fight with the enemy at the
river, got a sack of water but when the sack filled with water was
placed before the thirsty children, the poor innocents not waiting till
it was properly opened, and not knowing how to open the sack, rushed to
it and fell upon it, one over the other, in the haste to at least cool
their burning bodies. But alas! The knot at the mouth of the sack gave
way to the pressure and the whole water flowed away on the sand. It can
be imagined what the feelings of despair and disappointment of the poor
children and the helpless mothers would have been, and how disappointed
the brave son of Ali, who got the water, would have felt at the loss of
the water which he could get for the poor children and the inmates of
the camp after so much of fight with the enemy guarding the banks of the
river. Attempts to dig a well were also made but in vain, for instead of
water, stones came out. The Holy Imam preached patience and fortitude to
every one at each disappointment and torture, saying:

*“Be ye all cheerful and always surrender to the will of the
All-Merciful Lord, for the end of* *all these trials is at hand and the
water of Paradise awaiteth there to quench your thirst.”*

Enemy Decides to Attack
-----------------------

All efforts of the enemy through temptations, promises, persecutions and
tortures, to persuade the Holy Imam, to yield to Yazid were in vain.
Even the killing heat and the thirst of three continuous days suffered
by himself, his faithful companions, the helpless ladies and even the
innocent infants and the babies, could not move the Holy Imain to effect
the least change in the strength of his will to re-establish the Truth
paying any price the task might demand.

On the 9th day of Muharram, the enemy's forces advanced towards the camp
of the helpless Imam to affect a wholesale massacre of all the inmates
therein. Husayn sent word to the enemy s Commander, Ibna-i-Sa'd through
the brave ‘Abbas with the request for a night's time to spend it in his
last prayers to the Lord which was at first refused but ultimately with
much reluctance granted.

The Holy lmam and Ibn Sa'd confer
---------------------------------

The holy imam sent for the enemy's Commander Ibna-i-Sa'd and proposed
three honourable conditions:

*“Leave me, and I shall quit the Muslim Empire with my whole family and
children, and live in some non-Muslim lands. I shall go away to Yemen or
to Iran or to the far off Hind (i.e., India).”*

The tyrant answered: *“It can never be so.”*

Husayn said:

*“Will you at least allow having some water for the helpless ladies and
the innocent babies who are dying of thirst in my camp?”*

The tyrant replied: *“First pay 'Bait' (allegiance) and then take the
waterfront the river.”*

Husayn at last said:

*“Ibna-i-Sa'd, why dost thou destroy the house of the Holy Prophet? If
the whole world were to be given to me to rule over, I shall never yield
to the tyrant.”*

Husayn had done the best possible to avoid bloodshed, but every offer
for a peaceful settlement was rejected and the surrender to Yazid was
insisted upon. Husayn then decided to fight the might of the Devil for
the truth and to surrender his all in the way of the Lord and to
demonstrate to the human race what Bravery, Stead-fastness, Patience and
Fortitude, even in the worst of the painful sufferings, those who really
love God should put up with to defend the Truth and uphold it.

When all efforts through exhortations to the enemy's forces proved
futile and the only alternative left was to fight for the cause of
Truth, the Holy Imam decided first to prove the miraculous strength and
the matchless prowess the godly ones possessed, and how bravely the huge
host of the enemy could be resisted, and then to surrender himselfand
his dear ones to drink the cup of martyrdom and to fulfil the Covenant
of the Lord to save the Truth for all times Husayn asked Ibna-i-Sa'd:
“Will you at least agree to conduct tomorrow's battle in single combats
between one from either side?”Ibna-i-Sa'd consented but the treacherous
Brute did not keep to his promise.

The Night before the 10th Muharram
----------------------------------

The night following the ninth day of Muharram presented a unique
spectacle which has no parallel in the history of the world. A detailed
description of the scene of that night in Karbala requires at least a
separate chapter. However, only a few important events of the dreadful
night are briefly related here.

Since his arrival at Karbala on the 2nd Muharram, the Holy Imam used to
gather all those who had accompanied him from Mecca, and address them
after every night prayer, advising them to leave him to his own fate and
to return to their homes giving them every assurance that the
consequences of his journey would be quite a different one from what had
been imagined by them to be. It is reported that hearing the Holy Imam
announcing the ultimate end of his journey, the people began deserting
him in groups.

The Final Shifting
------------------

Husayn had to offer the sacrifice which had been termed by God Himself
as *'Zibhe- Azeem'* the Great Sacrifice (37:104 108). The purity of his
body and the divinity of his own soul was unquestionable, but those whom
he had to offer along with himself in the way of the Lord, had to be of
some purity worthy to be blessed with the martyrdom. There were the good
and the bad ones, mixed up, in his camp but what he needed was only a
pure and clean stuff to be presented to God along with himself.

Many who had accompanied him with selfish intentions, had deserted him,
and of those still left, the Holy Imam wanted to effect a final shifting
so that only those who desired nothing but the pleasure of the Lord,
might remain to accompany him in his resignation to the Divine will, to
resist against the onslaught of the falsehood of the Devil. At last on
the 9th Muharram, soon after the enemy's consent to wait till the
following morning, the Holy Imam, after the *'Isha'* or the night
prayers summoned the remaining people and addressed them thus:

*“Brothers! You are sadly mistaken if you have hoped that tomorrow's
battle will bear any fruit for you to fulfil any of your worldly
ambitions. I tell you now openly that I will be mercilessly butchered.
My Brother ‘Abbas will lose both his hands and die on the banks of the
river. My eighteen- year son Ali al-Akbar will die by the lance pierced
through his breast. Qasim, my nephew, will he killed and be trample
under the hooves of the enemy's cavalry. And similarly, every one of my
companions who will remains with me here, be he a relative or a friend
of mine, will be rolling in his own blood and ultimately be slain. I
tell you, not even my baby son Ali al-Asgher will be spared; he will
receive an arrow on his tiny neck in my own arms and pass away. Only my
son Ali, who is sick, will survive to suffer the Worst of tortures along
with the people of my family. Friends! You need not worry yourself about
the 'Bait' or the allegiance you have paid me, I release you from the
oath . You leave me to my fate and save yourselves. They are only after
my life. The night is dark and you can easily escape.”*

At the end of his speech, the Holy Imam asked his brother ‘Abbas to put
out the lamp in the tent so that people may walk away in the darkness
without being ashamed of being seen by him.

it is reported that as soon as the lamp was put out, all those who had
accompanied the Ho]y Imam from Mecca in their vain hopes of making their
own fortune, began to desert the Holy Imam in batches and when the lamp
was again lit after a while, there were left only a few here and there,
and those who remained constituted the goldly band of the Holy
Seventy-two who stood fast by the Holy Imam in the battle for Truth to
save the human race against its falling into the abyss of falsehood.

This small band of godly souls pure in their spirit and sincere in their
desire to fight and fall in the way of the Lord spent the night in
prayers reciting audibly the Holy Qur'an and rejoicing in the hope to
drink the fast-approaching cup of martyrdom the following morn- ing.
Everyone anxiously waited for the break of dawn, to lay down his life in
the way of the Lord in supporting the cause of Truth. The ladies were
preparing their young children to be sacrificed along with the Holy Imam
in upholding the cause of the Lord. The noble mothers of the family of
the Holy Prophet were busy advising their young Sons to be steadfast in
facing the might of the Devil in defence of the right, and to lay down
their lives cheerfully and thus to drink the cup of martyrdom in the
cause of the correct guidance of the Human Race.

‘Abbas the Brave, Guards the Camp of the Holy Imam
--------------------------------------------------

The camp of the Holy Imam contained the ladies and the children of the
House of the Holy Prophet. Apprehending a surprise attack from the
enemy's forces which consisted of people who had turned treacherous to
the Holy Imam and his family, a ditch was dug around the camp and fire
was lighted the whole night and ‘Abbas the Brave, guarded the camp in a
vigil the whole night walking around it with his sword in his hand
mindful of the safety of the Holy Imam and the inmates of the camp, with
a vigilant eye on the ranks of the enemy.

The Night in the Yazidian Camp
------------------------------

While the hungry and thirsty devotees of God in the Holy Imam's camp
spent the night in prayers and the devotional supplicative services to
God, the soldiers in the Yazidian ranks in the opposite camp spent the
whole night in drinking, feasting and making merry in the hope of the
promised rewards from Yazid in return for the destruction of the family
of the Holy Prophet. God alone knows how many thousands of bowls of wine
were emptied on that night. The Yazidian forces anxiously awaited the
break of the dawn of the next day to affect the brutal slaughter of the
Holy Imam and the small band of his kith and kin and faithful devotees.

The Holy Imam's Last Prayer with His Devotees on Earth
------------------------------------------------------

At the break of the dawn of the fateful day, 10th Muharram 61 A.H.
(October 680 A.D.), Husayn called his son Ali (Ali al-Akbar) who
resembled the Holy Prophet the most, and said:

*“Ali, my dear! Let me hear thy 'Azan' (the call for prayer) for the
last time in this world!”*

When Ali al-Akbar gave the call *'Azan'* in the Sahara, reporters say
that the voice resembled the voice of the Holy Prophet and Husayn
hearing the last *'Azan'* of his son in the voice of his Grand-father,
remembering the Apostle of God, shed tears, and as the voice of Ali
al-Akbar reached the inmates in the camp, Zainab along with Umm Laila,
the mother of Ali al-Akbar and the other ladies came out of the tents to
hear the call for prayer in the sweet enchanting voice of the beautiful
son of Husayn resembling the voice of the Apostle of God, raising their
hands to heavens prayed for the safety of their dear Caller to prayers.

It was the third day of the thirst inflicted on the whole camp of the
Holy Imam. The Holy Imam and his devotees performed *'Tayammum'* instead
of 'Wuzu' (Ablution) and the Holy Imam offered the last congregational
prayers with his devotees on earth. An Urdu poet has referred to this
historic *'Salat'* (Prayer) and the *'Salaties'*, i.e., the supplicants
in a beautiful couplet:

“Chand shar' maa'ey

Chah'ray mutajalli aisay

Na Imam aisa howa

Phir na musalli aisay.”

“Ashamed would be the Moon,

Faces so bright,

The Imam of the kind, never did appear

Nor the supplicants like these.

Husayn had not even finished his prayers when a rain of arrows from the
Yazidian forces began to shower on the praying Imam and his godly
devotees. It is reported that Umar Ibn Sa'd was the first to take the
bow in the Yazidian camp and shoot an arrow towards Husayn saying:
(addressing the men of his forces):

*“Witness ye all that I am the first to shoot an arrow against Husayn.”*

Reporters of the event relate that along with Umar 4,000 archers in the
Yazidian ranks simultaneously shot towards the Holy Imam's camp, and
before the holy souls could conclude their prayers, thirty (30) of the
godly ones, who were engaged in the prayer, were shot dead.

Soon after the prayer was over, the Holy Imam ordered all his faithful
companions to fall in, and divided his small godly band into three
flanks, i.e., the right and the left wings and the central body. Husayn
called his brave brother, ‘Abbas, the Faithful and presented to him the
Holy Standard of Truth and thus ‘Abbas from that day came to be known as
' *‘Abbas al-Alamdar'* or ‘Abbas the Standard Bearer’.

Sermon of the Holy Imam on the Day of Ashoora
---------------------------------------------

At last when it became sure that the devilish forces were bent upon a
wholesale massacre, Husayn spoke out aloud addressing the men of the
Yazidian forces in an apostolic tune.

*“O' people! Do ye recognise me? By God tell me?”*

The reply from the enemy was:

*“By God, yes, we do recognise thee; Thou art the Son of the Holy
Prophet.”*

Husayn again said:

*“Do ye know me? Am I not the son of the Apostle of God?”*

The reply was:

*“Yes, we do know thee, Thou art the son of the Apostle of God.”*

Husayn said:

*“Do ye know that my father is Ali-al-Murtadha son of Abu Talib, and my
mother is Fatimah Zahra, the daughter of the Apostle of God and my
grandmother is Lady Khadija daughter of Khowailad, who was the first to
embrace Islam?”*

The reply was:

“Yes. It is so.”

Husayn said: -

*“By God, tell me, is not Hamza the Chief of the Martyrs of Islam, one
of my uncles?”*

The reply was:

“Yes.”

Husayn said:

*“O’ people! Do ye recognise this turban on my head, is it not the
turban of the Holy Prophet and this sword at my hand, that of the
Apostle of God?”*

The reply was:

*“Yes we do recognise.”*

Husayn said:

“Do ye know that my father Ali Ibn Abi Talib was the first among men to
join the Holy Prophet in the faith Islam, and he was the most learned,
and the most forbearing of all men and was the *'Maula'* (or the Master,
Lord) of all men and women?”

The reply was:

*“Yes! We know that everything thou sayest is truth.”*

Then Husayn asked aloud:

*“Say ye then, why do ye make lawful the shedding of my blood?”*

The reply from the brutal forces was:

*“Yes! We shall kill thee in thy thirst.”*

The voice of the Holy Imam was heard in the tents in camp. The ladies
and the children hearing the last reply from the enemy began to weep for
Husayn and Zainab and Umm Kulthoom the two sisters of Husayn, the
daughter of Ali and Fatimah were the most effected.
(Zindagani Husayn-Imadzadeh, Tehran)

Hurr joins the Holy Imam
------------------------

Hurr, the commander of Yazid's regiment, who had obstructed Husayn's way
near Kufa, was also present in the enemy's forces in Karbala. He spent
all his time in repenting for having obstructed the way of the son of
the Holy Prophet. The enemy's officers and soldiers were only wondering
at the mysterious sorrowful silence and the serious pensive mood in
which Hurr spent all his time since his arrival on the plain.

While he distributed weapons of defence to his devotees in his camp, the
Holy Imam reserved a lance but did not say for who it was. He only
announced in a mysterious tone that a faithful one in the enemy's ranks
was to join the ranks of the fighters for Truth.

In the meanwhile, there in the ranks of the enemy Hurr called his
brother and his son secretly in his tent and said:

*“We are doomed-driven towards ‘hell.’ There is yet time. I have decided
to dash out of the ranks of Satan and join the side of the Holy Imam and
seek pardon of the son of the Apostle of God. Would you like to
accompany me or stay where you are?”*

The brother and the son of Hurr both readily consented to accompany him
and Hurr's slave who was a faithful and trusted one of his master, was
present in the tent and implored saying 'Master! take me away from this
God's cursed side, along with thee. Pray leave me not for hell' and Hurr
agreed.

Hurr, with his son, brother and a slave, dashed out of the enemy's ranks
and joined the Holy Imam. Hurr appearing before the Holy Imam begged his
pardon for the wrong he had done. The return of Hurr had already been
foretold by Husayn in his camp. Hurr was received very warmly by Husayn
and his companions and when the fight against the Devil began, Hurr was
the first one who went into the field against the enemy and laid down
his life.

The Battle of Truth against Falsehood
-------------------------------------

Thus the battle of Truth against Falsehood began. One after another of
the godly ones from the Holy Imam's side went into the field and laid
down his life after exhibiting wonderful bravery, courage, valour and
prowess. It looked as if the thirst, hunger, heat and the wounds had no
affect whatsoever on the patience, the strength and the determination of
Husayn's devotees. At last when the deceitful Ibna-i-Sa'd saw the
wonderful fight, he was astonished that each one from the Holy Imam's
side easily destroyed dozens before he fell, and who proved
unconquerable, he ordered a sally in contravention of the solemn
agreement entered into, the previous night.

The bravery and the skill displayed by the faithful supporters of the
sacred cause, the matchless resignation to the Divine will, and the
flawless devotion and the ideal attachment of each one of the hungry and
thirsty sufferers of the godly camp, to the Holy Imam and to the sacred
cause of Truth, drowned the Devil's army and their officers in wonder
and astonishment, and they had become so awe-stricken at the miraculous
strength and unparalleled courage of the helpless sufferers that they
began to dread the very countenance of each of the godly devotees of the
Holy Imam who came alone into the field and fought and fell in the way
of God.

Thus, whenever a supporter of the Holy cause went against the Devil's
forces and fell, the Holy Imam rushed out and brought his body and laid
it in a tent pitched particularly for the martyrs. As the battle for
Right against Might proceeded and the supporters of the Truth fell one
after another, the tent containing the bodies of the martyrs was turned
into a *'Ganje Shaheedan'* or the 'Repository of the Martyrs.'

Zainab sends her two Young Sons
-------------------------------

When devotee after devotee fought and fell, in defence of the Holy
Family, Husayn's sister, Zainab, called her two sons, Aun and Muhammad
aged 10 and 9 years respectively, who were with the Holy Imam, and asked
them:

*“What! Death has come to so many of the Holy Imam's devotees and you
are still alive?”*

The children submitted:

*“Mother dear! We are only waiting for the Holy Imam's permission; get
it for us now, our mother dear! And then see what these two slaves of
yours would do.”*

Zainab immediately sent for her brother the Holy Imam and implored that
her two Sons be permitted to go into the field. Husayn could not say no
to his sister. When these two boys went into the field, they got
martyred. Husayn and ‘Abbas brought the two bodies of the young martyrs
and laid them down in the tent of Zainab. Zainab came to the two bodies
of her sons and addressing them said:

*“My dear children! Now I am pleased with you for you have proved your
worth and Laid down your lives for Truth and pleased God and His Holy
Prophet.”*

Qasim, son of Hasan
-------------------

When the young Qasim aged about fourteen years, son of Imam Hasan,
sought permission to go, it is reported that Husayn remembered the wish
of his late brother Hasan that one of his daughtcrs be wedded to his son
Qasim. At the same time Qasim presented to the Holy Imam a closed note,
written and given to him by his father, to be opened only when the worst
calamity befeIl him, in which was written addressing Qasim:

*“My dear Son Qasim when your uncle Husayn is besieged by his enemites
from all sides and when every true lover of God and the Holy Prophet,
lays down his life, defending the cause of Truth, you sacrifice yourself
for the cause on my behalf.”*

The Holy Imam kissed his late brother's writing. It is reported that
Husayn wedded his daughter Fatimah-Kubra to Qasim and immediately after
the wedding, Qasim took his uncle's permission and went into the
battlefield and after killing five famous warriors of the Devil's army
(Azrag and his four sons) fell from his horse. Alas! Before Husayn could
reach Qasim in response to his call for help, the whole cavalry of the
Devil moved trampling over Qasim's body.

‘Abbas the Brave-The Standard Bearer
------------------------------------

When ‘Abbas, the Lion-Hearted son of Ali, went into the field, his fight
very much resembled the fight of his father Ali, the Lion of God.
‘Abbas' fight can never be described in a line or two. Anis and Dabir,
the two famous Urdu Poets, have beautifully given a classical exposition
of the marvellous encounter of ‘Abbas with the Devil's forces. ‘Abbas'
strength, valour, dexterity, prowess, his devotion to the cause of Truth
and his attachment to the Holy Imam, are unique in the history of the
world. Against the wonderful dash which the Lion-Hearted son of the Lion
of God-made, the Devil's men had to give way. After a terrible fight,
‘Abbas reached the bank of the river and filled the sack with water for
the thirsty children in Husayn's camp but never tasted a drop of it
saying:

*“Ah! When My Lord, the Holy Imam and his innocent children are thirsty,
how can ‘Abbas taste this water?”*

Alas! While ‘Abbas was returning from the river with the sack of water
on his shoulder, he was attacked from all sides and at last he fell near
the bank of the river but not until he had lost both his hands which
were severed by a treacherous attack from a hiding.

Ali al-Akbar's Martyrdom
------------------------

After ‘Abbas, came the turn of Ali al- Akbar, to go to the battlefield.
It is reported that this eighteen year old son was so very much loved by
one and all in the camp that the account of his taking leave of his
mother, aunts, sisters, brothers and other relatives is so pathetic that
none can resist shedding at least a few tears over the heart-rending
event. At last when the Holy Imam sent Ali al-Akbar, the
'Ahmad-i-thani', i.e., (Muhammad the Second), to the battlefield, he
raised his head towards Heaven and said:

*“Lord! Here is sent in Thy way, the one who resembles the most with Thy
Prophet Muhammad, whenever we did desire to have a view of the Holy Face
departed away from us, we used to look at the face of this youth.”*

*“Lord! Husayn has one Ali al-Akbar and he is sent to be sacrificed for
Thy cause, had I many more like him, I would have similarly offered them
all in Thy way.”*

Is not this offer more acceptable to God than that of Abraham who
offered with his eyes blindfolded? Is not this a Greater Sacrifice than
that of Ishmael?

When Ali al-Akhar went into the battlefield, it is reported that the
Devil's forces were so much amazed at his resemblance with the Holy
Prophet that such of those who had seen him before, wondered if the Holy
Prophet had reappeared in the world to help his dear grandson Husayn.
People were so anxious to have a look at the enchanting beauty of the
youth that those in the rear of the enemy's ranks, mounted on the horses
and camels, even stood on the backs of the animals to have a look at the
matchless and the wonder- striking beauty of this son of the Holy Imam.
But lo! There was a treacherous onslaught and Ali al-Akbar fell with a
lance pierced through his breast as the Holy Imam had prophesied. God
alone knows what a patient heart the Holy Imam had been endowed with,
which never gave way against any catastrophe even that of the loss of
such a son. The Holy Imam stood looking at his son dying before his eyes
and lifting his head towards Heaven said:

*“Lord! It will he quite sufficient for Thy Husayn if thou accepteth
this sacrifice and if thou art pleased with this humble offer.”*

Husayn stands alone
-------------------

When every one of his devotees was slain and none was left on the Holy
Imam's side, he stood all alone in the field with his head resting on a
lance and his garments drenched not only in his own blood but also of
his martyred son, brothers, nephews and devotees, with the Devil's
forces all around him.

Baby Ali al-Asghar comes into the field
---------------------------------------

When the helpless Imam stood all alone in the field surrounded by the
enemies, he was summoned by a call from his sister Zainab in his camp.
When he went into the tent, he found his baby son Ali al-Asghar, dying
of thirst in his cradle and the poor mother Rubab, whose milk had dried
up by the continuous thirst and hunger for the three consecutive days,
could not help the baby with even a drop of her milk. Telling the mother
that he would show the baby to the enemy and get some water for it if
they give it, Husayn took the baby to the field and getting on a camel
and raising it up in his arms to enable everyone in the enemy's forces
to see it said:

*“O' People! If in your opinion, Husayn is guilty of any sin or crime,
this innocent baby has done nothing to hurt any one of you. It does not
even speak, and has not even uttered anything against you or your Amir
at Damascus. He is dying of thirst. He had neither in milk nor water for
the last three days. Would you quench his thirst by a few drops of
water? If you suspect that I demand water for myself in the name of the
baby, then I will leave it here, if you want, and go away and you may
return it with his thirst quenched.”*

It is reported that the address of the Holy Imam and the scene, with the
thirsty innocent baby in his hands, was so touching, so pathetic and so
heart-rending that even the men in the Devil's army could not help
weeping and cursing the Devil and his Deputy Ibn Ziad, Governor of Kufa,
who had gathered them there against such Holy and helpless ones.
Ibna-i-Sa'd, fearing a revolt of his forces in sympathy for the Holy
Imam, at once ordered a stone- hearted brute named Hurmula to answer
Husayn. The tyrant shot a three-pronged arrow from his bow which after
piercing through the Imam's arm got stuck into the tiny neck of the
innocent baby. Blood flowed from the neck and the baby looking at its
father's face smiled and stopped breathing for ever. Husayn collected
the little blood that came out of the tiny neck of his baby son in his
hand, and it is reported that when he wanted to drop it on the earth,
from the earth the Holy Imam heard a voice saying:

*“O' Holy Imam! I can not bear this innocent blood.”*

And when Husayn wanted to throw the blood towards heaven, he heard a
voice saying:

*“O' Holy Imam! Throw not the innocent blood towards me for I can not
bear it.”*

An Urdu poet has vcrsified the event:

“Inkar aasma ko hai, Razi Zami nahi

Asghar Tumhare Koon ka thikana Kahi nahi.”

i.e. The heaven refuses and the earth does not agree,

O' Ali al-Asghar, thy blood has no place in the world.

It is reported that the Holy Imam smeared his face with the blood of the
innocent baby.

Husayn could not take the dead baby to be returned to its mother who was
waiting anxiously for it, at the door of her tent in the camp. Hence he
sat down to bury his baby son in the burning sand of the desert. Does
not even this one single sacrifice suffice to touch every human heart?
Can we not call this one sacrifice alone greater than the sacrifice
offered by Abraham? God alone knows the degree of the patience and the
fortitude which He had endowed in the Holy Imam to bear the series of
such unbearable calamities.

The Messenger from Madina
-------------------------

It is reported that when the Holy Imam was busy digging a tiny grave for
the martyred baby, in the burning desert with his sword, a camel rider
arrived into the field and wished him. The Holy Imam raised his wounded
head and looked at him with wonder if there was any one still left to
wish him in that hostile land at that very terrible and testing hour.
The Arab was a messenger and had brought a letter from Fatimah Sughra
the sickly daughter of the Holy Imam, whom he had left alone in his
deserted house at Madina.

She had requested him in the letter either to return home soon from his
journey or to send her brother Ali Akbar or her cousin Qasim or her
uncle ‘Abbas, (who were already slain) to take her to him. The most
pathetic was her request to her father to kiss her baby-brother Ali
al-Asghar, whom Husayn was just then burying. The Holy Imarn could not
help shedding tears, and kissed the dead baby on behalf of its sister at
Madina saying:

*“Asghar dear! Your sister sends her kisses to you.”*

and then addressed the messenger saying:

*“Brother! Bear witness that I have complied with the request and have
kissed Asghar before* *thee.”*

Husayn took the letter and read it out to his brothers, his son, and his
nephews who lay martyred for whom it contained a wish and then turning
to the messenger said:

*“Bear thou witness Brother! That I have conveyed the messages also to
one and all concerned.”*

The messenger stood aghast, stunned and struck with sorrow and wonder.
When he demanded a reply to the letter, Husayn was only thinking as to
what should he say in reply to it, when, suddenly an arrow from the
enemy's ranks struck his forehead and blood began to drop down from the
wound. Husayn took a few drops of his blood on the letter and returned
it to the messenger saying:

*“Brother! Return thou to Madina with this reply and if my daughter asks
thee anything more about me, relate what thou hast see; here and tell
her on my behalf to be patient.”*

*“But, Beware, get thou quickly out of the range of thy hearing, away
from this plain, for soon I will be issuing my last call, unto all
around for help in the way of the Lord, whosoever heareth, it shall be
imcumbent on him to respond to it. Lest thou heareth it and get obliged
to respond to the heavenly summon and then thou will not be able to
return to Madina without becoming an infidel. Go away my brother! God be
with thee.”*

The messenger in utmost wonder and sorrow left the fatal plain with
tears in his eyes for the plight of the Holy Soul.

The Final Separation
--------------------

The details OF the final separation of the Holy Imam from the helpless
ladies and children and other inmates of his camp, particularly from his
sisters Zainab and Umm Kulthoom, are very heart rending and it is
impossible for any one to describe the whole sorrowful scene in a
paragraph or two of a brief work like this. The Holy Imam at last bade
good bye to all the helpless inmates of his camp foretelling the
calamities that were awaiting them following his martyrdom, and
preaching patience to one and all. To Zainab, his sister, he exhorted in
particular to bear every hardship and torture with extreme patience and
never to curse the enemy for her curse would surely invoke the wrath of
God upon the people and what he had done with so much of patience and
fortitude would be undone.

Husayn hands over the Charge of the Imamat
------------------------------------------

Ali, the eldest Son of Husayn called Zainul Abideen (i.e., the Grace of
the pious), was lying unconscious on his sick bed. Husayn went to him
and handed over the charge of the sacred office of Imamat to him. He
enumerated the difficulties and the tortures that would befall him
immediately following his martyrdom and advised him (who was to succeed
as the Fourth Holy Imam) to observe the highest degree of patience and
fortitude against every aggression and oppression that would be
inflicted on him and his dear ones, and never to get angry or curse the
people.

The Parting Advice to Zainab and Umm Kulthoom
---------------------------------------------

To Zainab and Umm Kulthoom, his two sisters, Husayn said:

*“Our camp will be plundered and set on fire. After I am slain, the
series of calamities to you all would begin. Your heads will be stripped
of your covering cloths veils. Beware O' My Sisters dear; let not
patience under any suffering be lost. Bear every calamity in the way of
the Lord with patience and fortitude. Sisters dear, let not what I have
done be undone by your impatience.”*

The Holy Imam at last came into the field bidding goodbye, to all, not
to return again to his camp, but to drink the cup of martyrdom to fulfil
the covenant with the Lord to save and secure the Truth for all times
until the Day of Judgment.

Husayn in the Battlefield to Offer the Greatest Sacrifice for the Truth
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Husayn first preached to his enemies, the love of God, the obedience to
the Holy Prophet and abstinence from vice and wickedness, and at last
asked the people:

*“Why do ye kill me?”*

*“Did I commit any sin or crime?”*

*“Did I plunder anybody?”*

*“Did I interfere with any one's affairs?”*

All stood dumb and none answered. Then the Holy Imam continued:

*“Then why do ye kill me? What answer have you to give to God, and to
the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgment?”*

When no answer from the Devil's forces, the Holy Imam said:

*“You have killed all my companions, my children, my brothers and even
my little baby; now I tell you leave me, I will migrate to Yemen, to
Iran or even to the far off Hind (India), stain not your hands with my
blood, which is the blood of the Holy Prophet himself, you will not have
salvation. It is for you; I tell you, shed not my blood and save
yourselves.”*

This last offer of the Holy Imam was superb and matchless and yet the
devils did not avail of it. It was in fact the fulfilment of the
*'Hujjat'* or the argument to give the last chance to the greedy devils
to save themselves from the wrath of God.

The Last Call of the Holy Imam in the Way of the Lord
-----------------------------------------------------

Lest later any one in the surroundings should say that he was neither
called nor given any opportunity to serve the cause of defending the
Truth by helping the Holy Imam who was fighting for it, Husayn now
standing all alone, bleeding from innumerable wounds from head to foot,
having lost one and all of his godly comrades, having offered the last
and the greatest of his offerings in the way of the Lord, the six months
baby Ali al-Asghar, gave his last call to humanity around him, inviting
them to join him in the way of the Lord, saying:

*“Hal min Nasirin Yansorona?”*

'Is there any helper to help us?'

*“Hal min zabbin yazubbo an Harame Rasoolullal?”*

'Is there any defender to repulse the enemy from approaching the tents
of the family of the Holy Prophet?'

When there was no response from any one of the thousands standing around
him, he then said aloud:

*“Alam Tasma'o ? Alaisa fikum Muslimu?”*

Do ye hear me not? Is there not even a single Muslim among you?

Yet there was no responsc.

When Husayn gave his final call to the world around him inviting the
people in the way of the Lord, Husayn's son Ali al-Zainulabideen who was
confined to bed with high fever, and who had just a little before
received the charge of the Imamat from his father, got up and leaning on
a staff, dragged himself out of his tent with his feeble sickly voice,
walking towards the Holy Imam saying:

*“Labbaik Ya Abata, Labbaik!”*

“Yes, Here I am O' Father dear ! Here I am.”

Husayn seeing his ailing Ali coming out tottering in the high fever,
bade him saying:

*“Get thee back O' son! My progeny is to spring from thee.”*

It is rcportcd that in response to the call from the Holy Imam, Some
mysterious voices of *'Labbaik! Labbaik!'* (Yes we are here O'son of the
Holy Prophet) were heard from the spiritual world above, to which the
Holy Imam replied *'Thanks to you all, but my concen here today is only
with the living in the physical world.'* Saying this, the Great Godly
soul the Holy Imam himself to be martyred by the Devil's forces
surrounding him.

The Unique Unparalleled Prayer (Salat)
--------------------------------------

Every awakened mind will surely confess that it is not possible for any
mortal to understand the great heavenly personality which enacted the
absolute submission to the Lord, which he displayed on the field of
Karbala.

Having lost every one of his faithful comrades including his baby son,
himself fully wounded from head, to foot with arrows struck in his holy
body with his blood flowing from the wounds, his clothes drenched with
blood, and that of his comrades, his kith and kin whose dead bodies he
removed from the field of the massacre to a tent in his camp to spare
them from being trampled under the hoofs of the cavalry of the heartless
enemy, hungry with choking thirst for the last three days, Husayn was
seen seated on his horse the Zul-Jinah, looking every now and then
towards Heaven with prayers for the acceptance of his sacrifices. In the
midst of the indeseribable miseries, sorrow and grief, and under the
undefinable agony of the worst torturous and the most painful death, the
Holy Imam ever remained mindful of the Lord and his submission to Him
with the desire not to leave the world defaulting not even a single one
of the prayers *(Salat)* prescribed by him for man in this world.

His condition was such that Husayn now could not of his own efforts get
down from the horse. Husayn hinted to his horse saying:

*“Wilt thou my dear Zul-Jinah kneel down a little to enable me to roll
myself down to the ground? I know thou hast also been hungry and thirsty
along with me. Pardon me my dear Zul-Jinah for Husayn is helpless. May
the Lord bless thee.”*

The faithful animal which was itself hungry, thirsty and wounded, spread
its legs in such a way that the godly soul, one of the most brilliant
stars of the heaven of divinity, slid himself down.

Now lying with his bleeding wounds on the flaming sand of the burning
desert, Husayn, desirous of offering his prayers gathered the sand in
front of him and himself engaged in his last prayer *(Salat)* on earth,
resting his wounded forehead on a heap of the burning sand. Thus
ultimately the wounded Holy Imam lay in communion with the Lord.

Swords and axes began falling on him and Husayn was bying fully wounded
from head to foot, and the sacred blood of the Holy Prophet, Ali and
Fatimah was flowing on the earth.

Several men one after another, were deputed by the Commander of the
Devil s forces to cut off the head of the Holy Imam but every one that
came near the Holy one lying on the burning sand, found his lips moving
and heard to say:

*“O' All-Merciful Lord of the Universe, accept the humble sacrifice of
thy Husayn. Husayn has submitted in Thy way all that thou hast given
him. If this son of Thy Holy Prophet had anything more, he would have
submitted that also to Thee-But O' Lord forgive the sinners among the
faithful, O' All-Merciful One.”*

and at the end of the prayers it was heard:

*“O Lord! Lord O' Lord!* being repeated several times.

Hearing these last prayers of Husayn, none dared to cut off his holy
head, even on an offer of thousands of gold coins with promises of
highly tempting rewards, but Shimr, the stone-hearted brute committed
the heinous crime.

Thus when the head of the Holy Imam was being severed from his body, the
helpless ladies and the innocent children in Husayn's camp stood at
their tents shouting for help and were weeping aloud. And Husayn's
sister, Lady Zainab ran bare-headed out of her tent towards her brother
shouting to Ibna-i-Sa'd for mercy but Ibna-i- Sa'd's heart was devoid of
mercy.

The Severed Head of Husayn Glorifies God
----------------------------------------

The moment the Holy Imam's head was severed from his body and raised on
the point of a lance, the severed head began glorifying God, aloud in
clear words saying:

“*Allaho Akbar'* (i.e., God the Greatest).”

Thus Husayn won an everlasting victory over the Devil who could not
annihilate Truth with the massacre of the Holy Imam, for Husayn
continued the glorification of the Lord even after his head was severed,
from the point of the very lance in the hand of his enemy.

Thus the Holy Imam by his own example has made it openly known how
abhorrent is falsehood and godlessness, how far it should be defied,
what value to humanity has Truth and godliness. How dear it must he to
every faithful one and at what cost it must be defended and upheld. And
how death in the cause of Truth, unfailingly earns the life Real of
Eternal Bliss.

Bodies of the Martyrs Trampled by the Devil's Cavalry
-----------------------------------------------------

With Husayn's martyrdom, only the wielding of the sword by the Devil's
forces had stopped, but immediately after the massacre of the Holy Imam
and his faithful devotees, the brutes of the Devil's forces got busy in
the other horrible deeds. Horses were shod afresh and the enemy's
cavalry was ordered to ride over the holy dead bodies of the martyrs
trampling them under the hoofs of their horses.

Husayn's Camp Plundered and Set on Fire
---------------------------------------

The next move of the brutes was towards the Holy camp which now
contained only the helpless wailing ladies, the crying children, and
Ali-az-Zainulabideen the ailing son of the Holy Imam lying unconscious
with high fever. They plundered the camp, setting the tents on fire. The
gentle and noble ladies, who were the unique models of chaste and modest
womanhood and the innocent children, ran hither and thither between the
burning tents of the camp, and some of the poor children are reported to
have perished in the fire. The brutes took the ladies and the children
as captives, and the weak and the sick Ali-az-Zainulabideen, now the
Fourth Holy Imam, was bound in heavy thorny chains, fettered and was
most heartlessly treated as the sharp, piercing edges were almost
choking him.

The Looted Caravan
------------------

Afterr burning their dead and leaving the bodies of the Holy Imam and
his martyred devotees unburied, lying on the plain of the massacre, the
Devil's forces left the plain of Karbala for Kufa with the virtuous
ladies and the innocent children of Husayn's family as their captives,
on bare backs of camels, snatching away their veils, without any purdah
with their necks tightly tied in ropes.

The sick Holy Imam Ali-son of Husayn, who could not even sit up owing to
his illness, was bound in heavy chains and was made to walk barefooted
on the thorny plains and on the burning sand of the desert, from Karbala
to Kufa and from Kufa to Damascus.

The Tortures of the Journey
---------------------------

The history of the tortures of the journey from Karbala to Kufa and from
Kufa to Damascus which the sick Imam Ali, the helpless ladies and the
young children were put to, is a very pathetic record ofthe worst
brutality ever recorded on earth, the narration of which in detail needs
a separate volume. The captives of the family of the Holy Imam were
first marched on public roads and through the streets of the town of
Kufa, to the open court pf Ibna-i-Ziad the Governor of Kufa, and from
there they were marched to Syria to be presented in the open court of
the brute Yazid who before an audience of hundreds of his courtiers
seated on the throne there, were purchased by his wealth and who had
signed the death warrant of the Holy Imam supporting the claims of the
Brute to be Deputy of the Holy Prophet.

The Divine Light Shines Out
---------------------------

Every soldier who was given the severed head of a martyr; to carry it
raising it on his lance was made responsible for its safe custody.
Khooli a hard-hearted tyrant was put in charge of the holy head of
Husayn. As the Brute's army marched from Karbala after the great
massacre, it halted near Kufa where Khooli lived. Khooli left the camp
in the night to visit his wife in the town and carried with him the holy
head, and to hide it from his wife, he kept it covered under ashes of
the hearth in the kitchen of his house.

When Khooli's wife came out of her room in the middle of the night, she
found a pillar of light rising out from the hearth in the kitchen. She
was stunned and when she saw through a hole in the door, she found some
heavenly figures descending from heaven on a severed head in the hearth.
She rushed back into her room and waking up Khooli reported the matter
to him. Khooli could no more con- ceal the matter and spoke out to her
what he had hidden in the hearth. The good lady cried aloud cursing him
saying:

*“May the wrath of God be on thee O' cursed One! Thou hast brought the
holy head of Husayn the Holy Imam in my house.”*

Crying aloud, shedding tears, the good lady madly rushed out of her
house and out of the town, wandered out into the wilderness and never
again entered the house, and ultimately gave up her life crying for the
Holy Imam.

The Severed Head of Husayn Recites the Word of God
--------------------------------------------------

The devil's army marched with severed heads of the martyrs raised on
their lances. Among the heads, were the head of the baby son of Husayn,
Ali al-Asghar. It is now left to the tender hearts of gentle women to
imagine in their own places, what would have been the feelings of the
mothers, the sisters and the children among the captives who were
marched along with the army, looking all the time at the severed heads
of their dear ones, on the points of the lances raised before their
eyes. Historians, reporting the gruesome events of the great tragedy,
say that people noticed the lips of the severed head of the Holy Imam
moving, and when people applied their ears carefully, they heard the
Holy lips uttering clearly the following verse of the Chapter *'Kahf'*
of the Holy Qur'an:

***Aayaa tina Ajaba. (18:9)***

***'Thinkest thou that the Fellows of the Cave and the Inscription were
of our wonderful*** ***signs.’ (18:9)***

The one who heard the recital of the sacred words, immediately cried out
saying:

*“Nay! O' Son of the Holy Prophet! The event of thy wonderful sufferings
and patience is more astonishing”.*

Since its severance from its body the holy head of Husayn till its
burial after about a year of remaining in the custody of the Brute at
Damascus, it manifested miracles after miracles proving the Unity of
God, the glory of the Lord of the Universe, the bonafide of the
apostleship of his grandfather, the Holy Prophet Muhammad, and the
truthfulness of Islam, as God's prescribed religion for Mankind as a
whole.

The Captives in Damascus
------------------------

Even during the most miserable journey, the severed head of the Holy
Imam manifested several miracles which guided several good hearted
Christians and Jews to embrace Islam, most of whom after embracing the
Truth attacked the brutes and were ultimately martyred by the Devil's
forces.

When the looted Caravan entered Damascus, at the ordcrs of the Devil
Yazid, the whole town was ordered to he full decoratcd and the people to
be engaged in rejoicing and making merry at the success of their
Ruler.To please the Brute the people dressed in festive robes were
extremely jubilant amusing themselves in fanciful plays and merrymaking.
When the looted Caravan of the Holy House of the Prophet passed through
the public streets and the busy bazaars, people in huge numbers thronged
to have a view of the captives whereas the godly ladies of the family of
the Holy Imam who were captives, felt mortally ashamed and insulted and
covered their holy faces under the hair of their heads.

While the sorrow-stricken ladies were seated on the bare hacks of the
camels with the hair of their heads covering their faces, the heads of
the martyrs raised on the point of the lances were marching before them.
The poor ladies sometimes looked at the heads of their martyred
husbands, brothers and children with tears flowing from their eyes. The
children seeing the severed heads of their loved ones cried aloud
innocently calling them to return to them and to relieve them of their
miseries.

After parading through the crowded streets and the busy bazaars thronged
with the rejoicing public the ladies and the children tied in ropes and
the sick Ali in chains with the severed heads of the martyrs were
presented openly in the fully attended court of Yazid surrounded by
hundreds of his courtiers. Yazid sat on the throne and kept the severed
head of the Holy Imam down in front of him, drank wine, and ridiculed
the Holy Iniam and his family standing before him utterly helpless tied
in ropes as captives. What all befell the Holy Family in the Devil’s
court is also a long history of unbearable sorrow and the worst
degradation of the godly ones, which will surely move the coldest heart
to tears.

The captives were imprisoned in a very narrow, dark and roofless cell.
The members of the Holy Family suffered the hardships and the tortures
of imprisonment in the cell for a long time until in the prison expired
Sakina the three year old dearly loved daughter of Husayn. She died of
wounds caused by the whips and slaps of the tyrants, particularly of the
wounds she received from the stone-hearted Shimr.

After a long imprisonment, the sick Imam Ali, with the other captives,
was released. They returned to Karbala and after burying the bodies of
Husayn and the other martyrs which were lying unburied till then, they
returned to Madina. Thus the Holy Imam Husayn offered *the Greatest
Sacrifice to re-establish the Truth firmly never again to be shaken by
any one until the Day of Judgment.*

The Old Testament Prophesies The Martyrdom
------------------------------------------

This is the Sacrifice which has been prophesied also in the Old
Testament in which God promises to avenge the blood of the Holy Imam
Husayn:

**“for this is the day of the Lord God of Hosts, a day of Vengeance,
that he may avenge him of his adversaries and the sword shall devour,
and it shall be satiated and made drunk with their blood for the Lord
God of Hosts hath a Sacrifice in the north country by the river
Euphrates.”** ***(Jeremiah. 46:10)***

This is the *'Zibhe-Azeem'* or the Greatest Sacrifice, the Lord has
foretold to take place instead of Abraham's sacrifice:

*“Most surely this is a manifest trial, And We ransomed with a Great
Sacrifice And We have shifted it among the later generation.”*

This happened on 61 A.H. on the Bank of the Euphrates at Karbala in
(Iraq).


