Question 7: Why To Face The Qibla In Prayers?
=============================================

**Question:** Why it is necessary to stand towards Qibla while praying,
while Allah is everywhere and doesn't have a specific direction?

**Answer:** To pray in a specific direction doesn't mean that Allah is
in a specific direction. The glorious Qur’an says about Qibla and
explains its reality:

***And Allah's is the East and the West, therefore, whither you turn,
thither is Allah's purpose…***[^1]

And in another ayah Allah says:

***The East and the West belong only to Allah***.[^2]

It means east and west belongs to Allah (and all places are similar for
Him).

In fact to pray facing the Qibla is due to that since a person has
physical body, while praying he has to face some direction and Islam
desires that for the perfection of this worship, he should take as much
benefit as possible. The reason to face the holy Ka'ba is, as we all
know, the holy Ka'ba is the oldest center of monotheism. It is the house
built by the hands of the Pillar of Monotheism, Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.)
and was the center of attention of all the Prophets and guides of
Monotheism, which is why turning towards this center of Monotheism means
turning towards Allah.

It is correct that Allah is not confined by space, but when a person
stands towards such a center, because of many reasons he is nearer to
Allah and feels himself in Allah's proximity. The turning of the Muslims
of the world towards this holy center five times a day creates the
inspiration of oneness and unity and this creates the similarity between
the Muslims of the world and connection between them who are spread from
East to West and shows their magnanimity and greatness and after all
represents to the world the purpose and faith of Islamic teachings.

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:115

[^2]: Surah Baqarah 2:142


