Question 96: Why Is There Still Ignorance Despite So Many Efforts For Popularizing Knowledge?
=============================================================================================

**Question:** Though the Holy Prophet (S) has invited people towards
knowledge and wisdom and encouraged them to fight against ignorance and
obtain knowledge, in spite of these we find that today the majority of
the people are ignorant?

**Answer:** Till the time the Muslims had not become aloof from Islamic
teachings knowledge and science were progressing among them very fast.
Our assertion is proved by the presence of great Islamic universities
and libraries that are mentioned in history.

At the time when paper was not manufactured so widely and there were no
printing presses, there were four hundred thousand books in the library
of Muragha and four million books in the library of Baitul Hikmah of
Baghdad.

In the same way the libraries of other countries were also overflowing
with books. Till the time the Muslims were subjugated by dictators and
western powers, there were a large number of intellectuals and educated
people among them. For example, before France occupied Algeria, the
majority of the people there were literate. However, after French
occupation the government went into foreign hands, the situation
changed.

In the near past when some leaders of Islamic countries began to fight
among themselves and outsiders also fanned the flames of hypocrisy, the
Muslims started experiencing a period of ignorance and decline. Their
culture stopped developing and progressing and a majority of the Muslims
remained illiterate. A great part of who were also unable to read and
write.

We hope that Muslims would once again derive the benefits of Islamic
principles and resume their intellectual mission as nowadays we can see
the signs of revival among them.



