Question 8: Why Do We Pray Five Prayers In Three Times?
=======================================================

**Question:** What is the reason that we pray Zuhr-Asr and Maghrib-Isha
prayers together, whereas for every Prayer there is a special time and
the great leaders of Islam used to pray on the particular times. That is
they used to pray five prayers are five different times a day?

**Answer:** There is no scope of argument in this matter that to
establish Prayers five times a day and pray on the special times had
been the practice of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the holy Imam (a.s.)
and the common Muslims at the early period of Islam and they used to
generally pray five prayers at five different times.

Nothing can be said regarding this, but the argument is whether it is
obligatory to keep a distance between two prayers (In the way many
Mujtahids do) or it is a Recommended (mustahab) deed and is like other
Recommended actions where a person has the choice to do it or not. They
are not forced to pray together or separately, whether their praying of
separately may be better?

The Shia scholars follow those traditions from which we come to know the
actions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and keeping those narrations in
mind which have reached us through the Holy Imams (a.s.) and following
the literal meaning of the Holy Qur’an, in all the Islamic times the
time gap between the two prayers is Recommended.

And told the people that to keep the time distance and to recite and
pray every Prayer in its special time is better and recommended, but
then also one can leave the recommended acts and the meaning of
recommended is also this.

Undoubtedly by praying two Prayers together does not mean that we pray
one Prayer in the time of other; for example if we pray Evening and
Night prayers in the beginning of the night, it doesn't mean that we
have prayed Night at the wrong time; we have prayed both the Prayers in
their proper times, because from sunset the time of both the Prayers
begins till the midnight.

(Except that after sunset the time required to pray three rakat (units)
is the time of Evening Prayers and in the end approximately the time
required to pray four rakat is the special time of Night and the
remaining time is similar for both).

And whenever we pray Night with Evening Prayers, meaning at the start of
the night or pray Evening Prayer with Night Prayer at the last time of
midnight, we pray both the Prayers in their specific time, but it is
Recommended to pray Evening Prayer at the start of the night and Night
Prayer after the time of Zawal-e-Shafaq and if a person doesn't do like
this, it means that he has just not performed a recommended act.

Why it is allowed to pray two Prayers together?
-----------------------------------------------

The proof regarding to pray two Prayers together is the traditions from
Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) that Shaykh Hurr Al-Ameli has collected in his
book.

We should also keep in mind that only Shia narrators have not only
narrated traditions, but Ahle Sunnat narrators have also narrated that
it is allowed to pray two Prayers together (and that also if there is no
legal excuse.) They have narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in
their authentic books by Ibn Abbas, Maaz Ibn Jabal, Abdullah Ibn Masood
and Abdullah Ibn Umar approximately ten traditions, all of which cannot
be quoted in full but we just mention some of them:

(1) The famous narrator of Sunni world, Ahmad bin Hanbal writes in his
famous book *Musnad* from Ibn Abbas:

“The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to pray Noon and Afternoon Prayers,
and in the same way Evening and Night Prayers without the fear of enemy
or without the excuse of travel.”

(2) Then again narrates this tradition from Jabir bin Zaid who narrated
from Ibn Abbas that, “I used to pray the Eight rakats of Noon and
Afternoon Prayers or Seven rakats of Evening and Night Prayers together
with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). And this tradition has been narrated
by Ibn Abbas with different words.

(3) Again he narrates from Abdullah Shaqiq: “One day Ibn Abbas was
delivering a sermon to the people and his speech was so long that the
stars in the sky appeared. A man Bani Tamim tribe got up and objected to
him that it was time for Evening Prayers and if the speech continues the
time of Evening Prayers and if the speech continued the time of Evening
Prayers will pass away.

Ibn Abbas told that person: “I know much more about traditions and
practice of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) than you. I have seen that Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) pray Noon and Afternoon Prayers together and Evening
and Night Prayers together.” The narrator says that I doubted about this
and spoke to Abu Huraira who certified the saying of Ibn Abbas.

(4) The famous narrator Muslim ibn Hajjaj al-Qashiri (died in 261 Hijri)
has written in his book *Jama Prayers dar Huzar* (to pray the two
Prayers together in one's own town) in which he has narrated four
traditions from which three are from Ibn Abbas and one from Maaz ibn
Jabal and the gist of the four traditions is the same as above.[^1]

And in these traditions a new point is mentioned that when the narrator
asks the reason for joining two Prayers, he answered: He (the Prophet )
did not want to put his followers into hardship.

This reason has also been narrated in Shia traditions. Traditions
narrated from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a.s.) also mention this point.[^2]

The narrators of praying two Prayers together are not limited to Ibn
Abbas and Maaz ibn Jabal only. Tibrani says Abdullah ibn Masood said
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) allowed praying Noon and Afternoon
Prayers and Evening and Night Prayers together, so that the Ummat may
not have to bear undue hardships.[^3]

The same has been narrated by Abdullah ibn Zubair. He narrates that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) although he was not in traveling, prayed
together so that his Ummat should not face hardship.[^4]

This narration is from one of the many traditions of Ahle Sunnat and
also in the exegesis of Qur’an that says to pray the Prayers separately
is recommended and if we at any time realize that by performing this
recommended itself is going to affect the performance of the worship
itself then according to the guidance of the Holy Prophet we can leave
it and pray two Prayers together.

Life in the present age in many parts of the world has become such that
to perform this Recommended act has become difficult and many times its
result is that some people are unable to perform the Prayers. In such
circumstances one can take the benefit from the guidance of Holy Prophet
and for performing more important work one can pray two prayers
together. The view of many Sunni jurisprudents is the same, but because
of some reasons, they remain away from this view.

[^1]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2. p. 151

[^2]: Wasailush Shia, Kitabus Salaat, Chapter of Time, 32, Tradition
nos. 2,3,4,7.

[^3]: Sharh Muwatta of Zarqani, pg. 263

[^4]: Kanzul Ummal pg. 242


