Question 13: What Is The Difference Between Perspiration And Urine?
===================================================================

**Question:** Urine and perspiration, both are released from the body
which is in excess, then why one of it is najis and the other pure?
Whereas, it is said that both have similar chemical composition?

**Answer:** We should keep in mind that though both urine and
perspiration similar in chemical composition in some aspects, they are
also different in some aspects and it is possible that due to their
difference in some chemicals two different commands are given about
them. Because as we shall see there is a poisonous substance in urine
which is absent in perspiration. We shall explain it as follows:

The following things are present in Urine:

Urea                           Calcium  
 Uric acid                    Potassium  
 Creatinine                Phosphate  
 Ammonia                  Sulphates  
 Sodium Chloride

Whereas the components of perspiration are much less:

Incidentally perspiration that comes out from the pores of the skin soon
evaporates, and this evaporation stops the growth of bacteria on the
skin, whereas it is very much possible that different types of bacteria
remain in urine. On this basis it is understood why Islam has considered
perspiration pure and urine impure. Its reasons are as follows:

(1)    The colored matter which is present in the chemical composition
of urine, in it the poison is much more than in perspiration and such a
substance is not present in perspiration.

(2)    The urea in urine, which has poison in it, is much more than urea
in perspiration.

(3)    As perspiration evaporates from the skin, it doesn't leave any
scope for growth of bacteria.

(4)    From many aspects the density of urine is more than that of
perspiration. It may be ten times denser than perspiration. That is the
reason that one is harmful and the other harmless.

It is very difficult to avoid perspiration and it will create a lot of
difficulties, whereas it is not difficult to control urinating, and this
itself is a difference between them.  
  


