Question 15: Why Illegitimate Children Are Kept Away From Some Posts?
=====================================================================

**Question:** Whereas we know that the children born due to illegal
relations have no role in their illegitimacy and have not committed any
sins, then also according to Islamic traditions they are not treated
fairly. And they are not allowed to take the important posts like that
of a judge, Imam-e-Jamat and Maraja etc.

Why a person who has not committed any sin, just because the fault of
his parents, should be ill-treated and kept away from important posts in
the society?

Some people also say that such children will neither go to Paradise nor
see any goodness. Is it right? Whereas we also know that Allah will not
write one person's sin in another person's account?

***And no soul earns (evil) but against itself, and no bearer of burden
shall bear the burden of another***…[^1]

**Answer:** Before we give the answer it is necessary to discuss the
following points which are the basis of this topic and then we can
conclude from it.

(1)    Due to illegal relationship, the relation between father and son
is finished from the point of view of law and economics and thus it cuts
off the family relationship and sentiments, which is the basis of a
society. Sometimes the female doesn't know that from the sperm of which
man she had become pregnant.

In this way a child does not know his father, grandfather, grandmother
and relatives. And generally many ethical, psychological, social,
training, family, financially and sentimental defects come into
existence because of it. This is the reason that the Holy Prophets
(s.a.w.a.) and laws makers of the society prohibited things, which are
against sanctity; the *Shari’ah* also prohibits the illegal
relationship.

(2) In every community there are rules of marriage; that is why to
establish illegal relationships is against the law. This is the reason
that the person doing this type of deed feels guilty due to this, which
stems from the sinful soul and has bad results, which arise from this
type of deed.

And when a person repeats this deed or due to other factors the guilt of
the person becomes less or if the fornicator does not have the feeling
of guilt, then also there is a thief present in his inner self, and he
become ill mannered, breaks the law, and deviates.

(3) According to the law of inheritance, like the other physical
effects, inner qualities and thinking of the mother and father is also
transferred to the children. In the same way the special traits of the
parents are transferred to children like the color of eyes, hair, shape
of the eyebrows etc.

In reality inheritance is the base for a person's future and makes the
personality of an individual and prepares the ground for them for their
good or bad fortune.

From these points we can derive the following results:

Illegitimate children inherit bad manners, breaking of laws and sins
from their parents. For them the ground for sins and crime is more
feasible. As compared to others they are more prepared for sins and if
they personally get wrong training or if the environment is not good,
then it is enough for them that their polluted soul, like sparks beneath
the ash become fire and burn their good fortune.

As for the question about social posts for illegitimate persons, it is a
logical precaution for the protection of social good on the basis of
whatever is said above about their psychological state.

Islam gives much importance to persons who are supposed to take these
social posts, for acquiring the confidence of the people. Therefore
those families which have some defects or whose past is not praiseworthy
have been deprived of posts that require spiritual purity.

But we should not be that a person of illegitimate birth has the license
to commit all sins and go against the *Shari’ah*, and that he be
deprived of true Islamic teachings and training, and he by following the
right principles cannot be fortunate - No, it is not like that.

Illegitimate children also like natural and lawful children are free to
choose the right or wrong path. They also with their intentions and
powers can choose the path of righteousness and goodness and acquire
salvation and be one of the Heavenly people. It is not that they are
born criminals and at any cost cannot be freed from the web of crimes
and sins, but as Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

When an illegitimate child is prepared to perform his duties and able to
do work of training, if his deeds are good he will get rewards for it
and if he does bad he will be punished.

Although the rebellious nature of illegitimate children (which have more
interest and are more inclined to break the laws and commit sins) makes
it difficult for them to avoid sin, and it is also difficult for them to
perform their duties, but if they go against their desires and follow
the orders of Almighty and right principles they will be given the best
of the rewards.

That is why Islam reproaches illegitimate children. It is so, to make
them aware that they are facing a dangerous situation; they should
fulfill their duties, remain away from sins and take precautions. It
doesn't mean that knowledge and training has no effect on them and they
will certainly go to Hell.

In other words those children who are illegitimately born are like those
children who are born to the parents having diseases (T.B, and sexual
disorders). These children have more chances of contracting these
diseases and if they are not cured as early as possible they are more
likely to get these diseases. This is the reason that to protect the
interest of the people, those children who are possible to contract the
disease of T.B. should not be given whatever food and other things are
available.

Like the ill parents, illegitimate children are also prepared to break
the laws and fall into crime if their training and studies are not
provided in the right environment and healthy intentions. It is possible
they may fall into a great depth and ally with the criminals. For those
reasons, in order to protect the social cause, precautions should be
taken that they remain away from some posts.

Although it is wrong as some people think that illegitimate children
will never be happy, lucky and acquire salvation. They can also be
fortunate and happy like other people, but as we have told earlier their
inner self in comparison to others is not favorable for this; that is
why they should be stricter and take more precautions.

Just as it is not necessary that consumptive person's son should also be
consumptive; maybe he follows the rules of health becomes stronger than
other people and may remain away from the diseases. The result is that
the ground for sins is not necessarily proof for doing them but with
strong intentions and good training it can be avoided.

It is important to mention that such illegitimate children if they
remain staunch on the good path can acquire higher positions and a
better life because they have practiced more self control.

[^1]: Surah Anam 6:164


