Question 21: Why It Is Forbidden To Read The Deviated Books?
============================================================

**Question:** When Islam is the religion of knowledge why does it forbid
reading deviated books?

**Answer:** Without any doubt Islam is the religion of learning and
knowledge and it encourages people to acquire and spread knowledge. The
progress of a person or society depends upon acquisition of knowledge
but side by side Islam pays attention to the basic point that just as
there are dangerous factors of materialism in society e.g. to protect
from it, it is necessary; in the same way to protect the mind and spirit
from factors of going astray is also necessary.

In today's culture people are free, to accept any belief or view with
the only condition that it should not be against the material principles
of the society. This is not so in Islam. Islam wants that such a
society, which comes into existence, should progress spiritually and
ethically. This aim will not be realized unless and until it fights
against the factors against ethics and spirituality, and that it should
not have effects on the lives of the people.

By paying attention to this basic point, we come to know that those
books which are strayed and which spoil right thinking, faith and
healthy ethics have been banned. If all the people are given the freedom
to read these types of books what is the guarantee that their thinking
and ethics would be safe?

We should not underestimate propaganda and the power of propagation.
There are many youths who after reading strayed books, and novels based
on love, sex and crime have fallen in the pit of bad manners and
unethical practices.

That is why Islam has not permitted publishing of strayed books freely
so that all can read them. Although Islam encourages knowledge and its
acquisition, it has not forbidden those people who have the ability to
differentiate between right and wrong with the help of their powerful
intelligence.

Islam has not banned the learned people from reading these books but it
is wajib for the scholarly and learned people so that they can
understand the logic of those people and then refute them. By
acquainting themselves with the ways of propagation and logic of the
enemies and they can find appropriate ways to rebut them.

There were many discussions in the history of Islam between the
religious leaders and followers of other faiths. The author of *Ihtejaj
Tabarsi*[^1] and many other authors have collected such types of
discussions in books. This is itself an example that Islam has not
banned the strayed books for the learned people and has not opposed
knowledge. The religious leaders have always answered this type of faith
not by killing those who follow that faith but by logic and free
discussion.


[^1]: Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib's writing who died approximately in
550 Hijri. This book was published many times and shows one aspect of
knowledge of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).


