Question 22: Why The Holy Qur’an Cannot Be Given To Any Non-Muslim?
===================================================================

**Question:** Our heavenly book, Qur’an is a spiritual guide and mentor
to different kinds of people and human societies. To achieve this
purpose it is essential that it should accessible to all the people of
the world (irrespective of their faith), so that he can benefit from its
teachings and move on the path of truth and sincerity. But we find in
Islamic Jurisprudence that Qur’an cannot be given as a present to
non-Muslims nor it can be given into his custody.

**Answer:** When the purpose of giving the Holy Qur’an in the possession
of the non-Muslim is to guide him and make him aware of Islam and convey
its message to him and make him attached to it, and if this purpose
cannot be achieved by its translations, then in this situation there is
no prohibition in giving the Holy Qur’an to a non-Muslim, but if no
purpose is in view then it is prohibited, because the greatest witness
of righteousness of Islam and everlasting miracle of the Prophet of
Islam is the Holy Qur’an, which is shining on the peak of the times in
the form of a living document and to get benefit from it there is one
way that it should be printed in a nice way and should be distributed in
the whole world, so that people seeking the truth, may acquire knowledge
of Islam in the light of its verses. This itself is witness on the
verses of Qur’an that this is put in front of the people of all times
and everywhere in the world and invites mankind to ponder and study it.

The Holy Qur’an commands the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that in the middle of
war also if a non-Muslim tends to listen to the words of Allah (the Holy
Qur’an) then it is a must for the Prophet that he permits him to come
among the Muslims and listen to the words of Allah and if he tends to go
back, he should be allowed to go to his former position.[^1]

To the extent it is necessary for every Muslim that he protects the
honor of the Holy Qur’an, and whenever there is apprehension that a
non-Muslim may act or do something regarding the Holy Qur’an, which can
be termed as insulting, in such a situation we should not give him the
Book of Allah.

And if he had the Book with him beforehand, then by whatever possible
means it should be recovered from him. When Muslim Jurists say that
Qur’an cannot be entrusted to non-Muslim their opinion is based
apparently on this kind of situation and not in the situation when
guidance of a non-Muslim is intended.

In short the Holy Qur’an should remain away from the reach of polluted
hands, with this exception when there is likelihood of their guidance it
can be presented to them.


[^1]: Surah Tawbahh 9:6


