Question 23: The Reason of Strictness In Proving Certain Sins (Crimes)
======================================================================

**Question:** Why are four witnesses required to prove a sexual crime?
Doesn't this strictness cause increase in such crimes?

Also when a sane person confesses that which is detrimental to him, that
admission with be efficacious that law that kind does not exist here.
And if a person himself confesses to have committed adultery then for
three times his confession is not accepted and is accepted only after he
confesses the fourth time?

**Answer:** In principal, regarding sexual crimes the laws of Islam have
special conditions in which many points are taken into consideration. On
one hand there are very severe punishment prescribed for such kind of
crimes, which start with lashes and exile and at times ends with capital
punishment.

But on the other hand, it had been made difficult the way to prove this
sin. For example to prove this sin, the number of witnesses required are
double than those required in other types of crimes and any person
confessing the crime once is not considered sufficient.

These two views getting reciprocally linked (i.e. the punishment to be
severe and strictness in case of proving the sin) gives a special status
to these penal laws. And in that way these laws prevent people from
perpetrating this type of crime. These laws create psychological barrier
in the followers and they keep away from performing such acts. But then
too for all practical purposes these laws do not include many people in
this punishment.

In other words the real purpose of these types of laws is to prevent
people from perpetrating the sin but not to give them death penalty or
to finish them off. This effect is created because of the punishment
being so severe because the person who commits this sin always every
moment has the scene of severe punishment in front of his eyes.

And thinks that as a result of some unexpected situation his sin would
be proved. On the basis of this he gets frightened and terrified and
this fear and apprehension prevents many people from committing such a
sin.

Mostly it is seen that for committing a greater sin (e.g. to sell
intoxicants and drugs) in special circumstances severe punishments such
as death penalty are prescribed. Though these punishments are prescribed
in some special situations. But the apprehension of has sufficient
effect in the minds of the perpetrators of those sins.

The conclusion of this discussion is that these types of penalties are
prescribed to effectively prevent crimes and sins and along with that it
does not entangle too many people in its grip. As a result death penalty
may be given to only one or a few persons, but it causes great effect in
the minds of other potential criminals and this fear is enough that one
day they might also get caught.  
    
  


