Question 24: Why The Animals Should Be Slaughtered In A Particular Way?
=======================================================================

**Question:** In Islam, some rules and regulations are stipulated for
slaughter of animals. For example, all the four veins in the neck should
be cut and to say *Bismillah* etc. If these conditions are not
fulfilled, meat of that animal is not fit for eating. Though many people
in the world overlook these rules and use the meat of such animals and
there is no harmful effect on them. Explain what is the purpose of these
regulations?

**Answer:** It seems that by these regulations Islam wants to fulfill
three purposes:

First is to get away from the traditions of idol-worshippers, who use to
cut the throat of their animals by taking the name of the idol. That is
why taking the name of Allah was considered to be essential part of this
slaughter.

The main function of which is to destroy the thought of idol-worship and
secondly to drain out blood from the animal so that it does not remain
in the layers of meat, and should not be eaten along with the flesh.

Medical science of today has discovered so many harms in food containing
blood. Other than this, blood is always contaminated with different
kinds of germs. It is also proved by experience that food items having
blood create such mentality and peculiarities in the humans, which are
not preferable. Feebleness of sensitiveness, tyranny and hardheartedness
is included in these.

The third purpose is that the animal should die as soon as possible and
it should not suffer agony for a longer period. As this is against the
spirituality, i.e. soul of humanity. This purpose is possible by cutting
four veins of the throat of the animal.

This is the summary of the three purposes with regard to animal
slaughter prescribed by Islam and that those purposes can be achieved by
implementing these rules.


