 Preface
========

Islam has ordered some things and refrained from others. The basis of
this has some purpose and Islamic laws are not imposed without any
reason. For example foods and drinks, the lawful relations and other
things, all have some benefit or harm hidden in them. Whether the laws
about them are made or not, there is no difference of their effects. If
you ponder on the things, which are forbidden, you will come to know
that the things, which are intoxicating like alcohol etc, are themselves
harmful. Interest is just acquiring wealth of the people and it is like
a trap.

Therefore wine and interest are forbidden because of their innate
harmful effects. On the other side when you look at things, which are
obligatory you will feel that all the worship acts for example, Prayer
and Zakat are obligatory because of the benefits that people acquire
from them. In short that Islamic law is based on benefits or harms or on
their goodness or evil. Many things can be understood from science and
experience. This type of research or to know the logic behind any
Islamic law or to ask any questions regarding it is not disallowed.

The curiosity of a human being leads to finding of truth and his real
spiritual want and also it opens the door for progress. It is a lively
sign for man that he tries to acquire the things, which are unknown and
hidden to him. This is the reason that people who don't question about
things lag behind and do not prosper. In the view of Islam the benefits
of “Questioning” brings progress and perfection. Islam not only gives
its followers the right to question the different topics but also the
true guides of Islam have invited people to ask questions.

The world must have not forgotten the famous sentence of the great
preacher who said, “ask me whatever you want to ask.” The progeny of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has answered the questions of their followers.
Not only those followers got satisfactory answers that increased their
thinking power but also today those in search for truth can use this
valuable treasure of knowledge from the progeny of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

Jamea Taalimat Islami, which is serving Islam and is trying to spread
this knowledge, is presenting a comprehensive philosophy of Islamic Laws
as an independent book.

In this book the exegesis of the Qur’an, jurisprudence and other topics
are discussed. We expect that our presentation will benefit those people
who want to understand the Islamic laws according to reason and
traditions.

**Organization**


