Question 33: What Is The Purpose Of Creating The Heavens And The Earth In Six Days?
===================================================================================

**Question:** The Almighty Allah says in Qur’an:

***He is your Lord, who created the heavens and the earth in six
days***.[^1]

Here what is meant by six days, when at that time day and night did not
exist? And besides why Allah did not create them in one stroke?

**Answer:** This question is based on two parts. First that, what is
meant by six days, whereas in the earlier age there were no day and
night.

The reply is this that basically the word 'Yawma', synonymous in English
to 'a day', which is having special meaning according to the place and
situation at different times. Generally this word is used in the sense
as a day, which is a proof of night. And in the Holy Qur’an also mostly
it is used in the same meaning, but sometimes it comes in the meaning of
a period, then on every period the word 'Yawma' is applied. For example,
an aged person says:

One day I was a child - one day I was a young man also - but for today I
have become old. Although these three periods are connected (linked)
with each other like the links of a chain that is why he interprets
those three different periods of his life with the word 'day'.

Imam Ali (a.s.) says,  
 Age is not more than two days. One day it gives you benefit and the
next day it is piercing loss on you.

It means that there are two periods in the life of man. One day he is on
the highest point of his luck and the next day he is trapped in troubles
and problems.

As per the statement of Bahadur Shah Zafar: “We brought four days, by
asking increase in life. Two were spent in desires, two went in
expectations.”

Without any doubt, by 'day' Zafar also meant 'period' only.

From whatever is stated above six days in which the earth and the
heavens were created are six periods. The earth and the heavens before
coming to the present states have passed through these six ages. Meaning
the present mode of earth and the heavenly bodies is as the result of
these continuous changes, which transpired on them, and in the end after
passing through all those changes they have acquired the present form.
Now it is possible that the duration of one period might have been 10
million years or 10 billion years.

The second part of the question is that why Allah did not create them
all at one time and why their creation happened gradually?

The reply is that the world in which we live is a material world. And
counting of gradual evolution of material existing things is done in
inseparable narratives and material things by nature change from one
shape to another with passing of time and in this way pass through
different stages. As a result it becomes a perfect phenomenon and the
earth and the heavens are not exempted from this law.

You see any materially existing thing; you will find that all of it is
going up by the ladder of gradual evolution. Grass and plants after some
time, take the shape of flowery bush or fruit bearing tree. As time
passes mines and fountains hidden under the earth after a long chain of
actions and reactions turn into material mines. Animals and humans until
they do not finish a certain period in the womb cannot live their life
in this vast world. This law is applicable everywhere and to every
material thing of this world.

[^1]: Surah Aaraf 7:54


