Question 34: What Is Meant By ‘Seven Heavens’?
==============================================

**Question:** What is the purpose of the Qur’an in pointing towards
'seven heavens'?

**Answer:** Islamic scholars and commentators have narrated some
clarifications regarding 'seven heavens' (towards which indication are
made in the Holy Qur’an also).

1. Here by seven is meant to be multiplication (to be more). It means
that He has created many heavens, i.e. He has created a number of times.
And mostly it so happens that, in Arabic, Persian, Urdu or other
languages, the mention of numbers is done in the sense of plenty. It
means that a number is mentioned but no definite quantity is meant. The
purpose of saying is to convey plenty.

For example, generally we say in Urdu that, I said this to you fifty
times, or I have demanded from him ten times. However, it is not
necessary that, the act should have been done for exactly fifty or ten
times. But it is meant that I have said this many times or I have
demanded that thing a number of times. The Holy Qur’an says about the
word of Allah and the things known to Allah in this way:

“***And were every tree that is in the earth (made into) pens and the
sea (to supply it with ink), with seven more seas to increase it, the
words of Allah would not come to an end…***”[^1]

It is obvious, here seven indicates excess, otherwise as we know, if
there is an addition of ten or hundred oceans also, then too the
unfathomed knowledge of Allah cannot be written, because Allah is by all
means beyond words.

In the same way many other numbers 'sabeen' 'seventy', etc. also, are
used in the sense of excess in the Holy Qur’an or other words (either in
speech or writing) in Arabic and other languages. And the meaning of
those numbers is not some definite number, but it is intended to point
towards the excess of something.

2. By seven heavens it was meant to be those planets, which were known
to the people of that period or they are those planets, which the
general public of the present age can see with naked eyes.

3. By seven heavens are meant the multiple layers of different airs and
gases that encircle the earth.

4. Still, according to the views of some great intellectuals, those
small stars, galaxies and Milky Way, which are seen, all are part of the
first heaven and beyond that six still bigger worlds are there. And by
seven heavens the Holy Qur’an means all those seven worlds, which exist
in the Universe.

May be man's present age of scientific knowledge and wisdom has raised
the curtain from only one of it, still it is quite possible that in
future, as a result of gaining more knowledge, on the back of present
perceptible world six great worlds are discovered. Favoring this view we
present the following verse as proof.

“***We have adorned the nearest heaven with an adornment, the
stars,***”[^2]

With this verse it is known that, all the stars are in the first heaven.
(It should be remembered that in Arabic the word 'Duniya' means 'lower'
and near.)

However, it seems necessary to mention that verses and traditions in
which the number of heavens are said to be seven are not a corroboration
of the theory of Ptolemaic astronomy in which he has presented the
heavens as the layers of peels of onion like shape of heavenly spheres.
(Because according to Ptolemaic theory the number of heavenly spheres
and heavens are nine).

As long as seven earths are concerned (the mention of which is there in
the Holy Qur’an is an indication and in some traditions, is given with
specific mention). About them thoughts similar to the aforesaid are
expressed.

For example, that the number seven is in the sense of many or that by
seven earths it is meant seven planets. (Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Earth,
Mars, Jupiter and moon). That is the same number in solar system, which
we can see (no doubt, in solar system, there are other bodies and moon
is also there but they cannot be seen with our naked eyes). And based on
this explanation, by seven heavens is meant to be the same atmosphere,
which exists on each of those seven heavenly bodies.

In other words, these seven bodies are counted as earth; the atmosphere
surrounding them is their heaven. It should be remembered that in Arabic
dictionary 'Samaa' is means all such things, which are placed towards
the upper portion.

This was the summary of those different interpretations, which our
scholars and writers of exegeses have presented about seven heavens and
earths. Especially the last Tafseer, which seems to be more acceptable
compared to all others and the narrations of those exegeses is in need
of further explanation.  
   

[^1]: Surah Luqman 31:27

[^2]: Surah Saffaat 37:6


