Question 35: Where Are Two Easts And Two Wests?
===============================================

**Question:** What does the following verse denote?

***He is the Lord of two Easts and two Wests what is the meaning of
this?***[^1]

**Answer:** In the Holy Qur’an the mention of East and West is done in
the form of dual also. (i.e. two easts and two wests) and in the plural
form of also e.g.

***“But nay! I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests that We are
certainly able.”***[^2]

At one more place it is stated:

***“We gave the earth under the control of those people (i.e.
organization (group) of Israelites), who had become weak and
feeble***.[^3]

On this basis the words of East and West are used in the plural form
also, which points out at numerous tenets. And in the dual form also
which indicate towards two tenets.

The Commentators have given two meanings of those verses.

First is that two Easts and two Wests are two hemispheres (i.e. southern
and northern or eastern and western). Some have considered this verse to
be an indication to existence of one hemisphere (i.e. the great American
continent before it was discovered, which is beyond the subject under
discussion. In the same way by Easts and Wests is meant different points
of the earth, in which every point with reference to one point is East,
whereas the same point with reference to another point is West.

In other words, out of the peculiarities of the sphere, one is that its
every point with reference to that point which is situated on its West
side is counted as East and with reference to the point in front it is
West. Therefore some people think that such verses are indication that
the earth is round.

The other meaning is that Easts and Wests are many, that means the sun
has so many points of its sunrise and sunset, because sun never rises
and sets at the same point on any two days. And because of the Sun's
inclination towards north and south (which is the result of the
inclination of surface in relation to the moving earth around its axis
and around the sun).

Sun rises everyday from one point and sets on the other. Therefore when
we keep in mind the sum total of those Easts and Wests, then we should
interpret them as the plural of easts and west. And when we keep in mind
only the big northern inclination of sun to its last point (beginning of
summer) and the big southern inclination's last point (beginning of
winter), then we should interpret them as dual form of East and West.

This is the miracle of the Holy Qur’an that in a very short passage it
draws the attention of people towards the astonishing mystery of
creation.

Because we know that alterations in sunrise and sunset affect the
nourishment and sustenance of foliage, flowers and fruits and generally
on the common conditions of all living things and it has a deep effect
on the decoration of the created world.

[^1]: Surah Rahman 55:17

[^2]: Surah Maarij 70:40

[^3]: Surah Aaraf 7:13


