Question 38: What Is The Exegesis of  This Verse?
=================================================

**Question:** What is the interpretation of the verse:

> فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ {15}

> الْجَوَارِ الْكُنَّسِ {16}

Falaa uqsemo khunnasil jawaaril kunnase

***But nay! I swear by the stars, that run their course (and) hide
themselves?***[^1]

**Answer:** In the dictionary the meaning of *Khunnas* is one who
returns and one who retreats. The meaning of *Kunnas* is one who gets
concealed and *Jaware* is the plural of *Jari* (to continue, to flow)
its meaning is the one who walks or moves.

As the verses before and after this verse show and the commentators also
say that by these verses it is meant those planets, which can be seen
(mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn), because they are in motion,
they appear sometimes and sometimes they disappear.

In the Holy Qur’an reference of those stars is given with an oath; and
people's attention is drawn towards their special and distinct behavior
and their movement and rotation and it calls attention towards the
greatness of the Creator of the universe. This means, the type of those
returning stars which moving and disappears.

We should also know that experts of astronomy have given those stars the
name of “amaze stars” because, their movements are not on a straight
line, and it seems that, they travel for certain period of time and then
slightly they return, and again they continue their travel.

The reason of this behavior is discussed at length in the books of
astronomy and it is possible that the indication of above-mentioned
verses (which has mentioned about those stars in the style which are
moving and coming back) may be towards these stars' capricious way (no
doubt the way of this capricious travel has some logic which is beyond
our comprehension at present).

Anyhow, these are the same wandering stars, whose special behavior makes
them distinct.  
  

 

[^1]: Surah Takweer 81:15-16


