Question 39: Importance of  Laylat’ul-Qadr
==========================================

**Question:** Many causes are mentioned in Islam regarding the
importance and greatness of Laylat’ul-Qadr. Well-known traditions of
religious leaders indicate it to one of the following nights of the holy
month of Ramadhan: 19th, 21st or 23rd. We are instructed to offer
special prayers on this night.

It seems that Laylat’ul-Qadr is not more than one night every year, but
we know this also that, because of the difference in horizons the
beginning of the month of Ramadan in some countries happens to be one or
two days earlier and in some happens to be one or two days later.

According to this situation in those places, there is difference of one
or two nights of Laylat’ul-Qadr. And for those different places more
than one Laylat’ul-Qadr comes into existence. This situation arises
every year, as Laylat’ul-Qadr being only one night and in that
particular night the angels descend with blessings and bounties, how
harmonious is it?

Is it that Laylat’ul-Qadr was especially in the time of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and in Mecca and that night is no more after that?

**Answer:** According to the religious guides it is absolutely proved
that Laylat’ul-Qadr was not restricted to the time of the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and not only in Hijaz area. But in all the periods of time
and for all different places it existed with all its importance and
greatness and there is no scope for anything contrary to this.

Above mentioned objection has come up because it was imagined that
Laylat’ul-Qadr being one in the whole year meant that every year for all
the places in the world only one common night is fixed as Laylat’ul-Qadr
and this night is fixed in every region of the world and it is liable to
end at a fixed time.

However this concept is wrong, as we know that the earth is spherical
and always one of its hemispheres happens to be in dark and the other in
light. Therefore there can never be night at one fixed and common time
in all the parts of the earth.

By saying that in the whole year there is only one Laylat’ul-Qadr, it
means that for the residents of all the places, according to their own
lunar year only one night is Laylat’ul-Qadr. The explanation to this
statement is that residents of every place start their lunar year
according to the specific horizon of that place from the first of
Muharram.

And after passing some lunar months, the month of Ramadan also of that
place, starts with the specific horizon of that place and in that month,
19th, 21st or 23rd night is Laylat’ul-Qadr for the people residing in
that area.

Residents of every place have to fix their Holy Days and times according
to specific horizon of that place and tot only Laylat’ul-Qadr in
particular.

For example, Eidul Fitr and Eidul Azha are holy days in Islam and
special prayers are prescribed for those days of these Eids not a single
one comes on more than one day in the whole year. In different Muslim
countries fixation of this day, even though there being difference in
their existing horizons, each country fixes the day considering their
specific horizon. This is the reason that for example in Saudi Arabia
Eid-e-Azha is mostly celebrated one or two days before Pakistan and some
other countries.

We should know that this account regarding Laylat’ul-Qadr, is not a
negation for some other purposes (for example, this that in this night
Angels are descending) Because all these situations are witness to the
enlargement of the special blessings of Allah in this night, for the
residents of all the places.


