Question 41: Holy Qur’an And Control Over Planets
=================================================

**Question:** In the present age Russian and American scientists have
succeeded in conquering to a certain extent some of the planets. In the
Holy Qur’an is there any reference to this or not? And will they get
more successes regarding them or not?

**Answer:** There is no doubt that since man came into existence he is
progressing towards perfection and still we see that not a single day
passes when he is not moving forward, and he does not discover some
hidden secret of nature. Therefore there is no doubt that a day may come
when he with his god-given power, may spread his life into the heavenly
spheres.

Maybe the verse, which was revealed in Qur’an, which is about
subjugating the earth and the heaven by man, may not be without
indication to this possibility. Because either sun and moon and whatever
is in the heavens that have become subdued for man right from the very
first day.

But control and to take benefit from this control also has degrees and
among them the absolute degree is that when these heavenly bodies become
cradles of life. In this regard some verses are given below.

(1) ***And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth, all, from Himself; most surely there are
signs in this for a people who reflect***.[^1]

(2) ***Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and
what is in the earth subservient to you, and made complete to you His
favors outwardly and inwardly?***[^2]

(3) “***And He has made subservient to you the sun and the moon pursuing
their courses***”[^3]

And this sentence is revealed in different surahs of the Holy Qur’an.

According to the above-mentioned verses the Holy Qur’an says that:

Whatever is in the earth, right from very first day it was given under
your command, whereas man has acquired power over the resources which
are under the earth not at one place and not only once, but gradually
and in all the periods of time to a certain extent he has acquired
knowledge about those resources and he has dug them out. From this it is
understood that when the Holy Qur’an says that whatever is in the earth
have given in the command control of humans, it does not mean that, all
and every stocks of the earth are given under the command of man.
Because most of the minerals from them have been discovered as the time
passed and in each period of time a particular section of people
succeeded in discovering the stocks under the earth; rather it is meant
to be all the humans that come into existence as time passes. Although
only very few of them are there, who search for minerals.

And it is not far that man would succeed in discovering new resources
from the earth about which he has no knowledge whatsoever in the present
age. On this basis it means that though planets were made subservient to
man from the very first day but with passing of time he may take most of
the benefits from them and bring the heavenly spheres into his reach,
and the words of the Holy Qur’an ***made subservient to you whatsoever
is in the heavens(31:20)***[^4] would then fit him perfectly.

Besides from the 34th verse of Surah Rahman it is known that man will be
able to travel in space with the help of present knowledge, industrial
know-how and potentialities. As it is stated:

***“O assembly of the jinn and the men! If you are able to pass through
the regions of the heavens and the earth, then pass through; you cannot
pass through but with authority.”***[^5]   
    
    
  

[^1]: Surah Jathiyah 45:13

[^2]: Surah Luqman 31:20

[^3]: Surah Ibrahim 15:33

[^4]: Please note that the above answer was printed before man put his
foot on the moon and the scientist had not sent the first space traveler
in the space. At that time the only step, which was taken in that
direction was to send artificial satellites. The actions of man and his
achievements verify what Qur’an has said more than 1400 years ago.

[^5]: Surah Rahman 55:33


