Question 47: Why Would The False Gods Be Put In The Fire?
=========================================================

**Question:** In Surah Anbiya, Ayat no. 98, it is said regarding those
gods whom the polytheist worshipped:

***“Surely you and what you worship besides Allah are the firewood of
hell, to it you shall come”.***

On this basis the false gods will burn in the fire of hell, whereas the
connection of some false gods is with the living things. (For example,
the animals whom the ignorant communities worshipped). What is their sin
that they be burnt in fire?

**Answer:** As the venerable Shia Mufassereen Marhum Tabarsi has said in
his famous *Tafseer Majmaul Bayan*, this Ayat is addressed to the
country of polytheists. And all the Ayats of Surah Anbiya were revealed
in Mecca.

The false gods of the people of Mecca were made of wood, metal and
stone. And those gods which are the firewood of Hell, they are these
idols, etc, who at the time of revelation of Qur’an, people used to
worship, those living gods are not included in this Ayat whom some
people worshipped. It is also interesting that in those days the idol
worshippers of the Arabian Peninsula were not worshipping any living
things.

Here the point worth attention is that Allah will burn those false gods
in hell and they will become firewood for hell, so that the polytheist
may know that those false gods who were sacred in their eyes in the end
became fire for their own lives and they became the cause of their
misfortune and wretchedness. And they get to know that these false gods
whom the foolish man considered to be powerful do not even have a little
power to defend themselves.  
    
  


