Question 50: Is This Ayat Contrary To The Issue of “Abiding Forever”?
=====================================================================

**Question:** Our belief is that those who enter Paradise do not go out
from there and remain there forever. And many Ayats explicitly prove
this. But by Ayat No. 108 of Surah Hud it seems that it is possible that
one day they may go out of Paradise.

***“And as to those who are made happy. They shall be in the garden
abiding in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as
your Lord please, a gift which shall never be cut off.”***

Exception:  
 As it evidently seems that it is possible that one day Allah may wish
to drive them out of this center of blessings, whereas other Ayats prove
that they will never go out of Paradise. In this situation what is the
meaning of this Ayat?

**Answer:** It is true that the Almighty Allah has promised a permanent
stay in Paradise in many Ayats to virtuous people and He will never go
against this promise as He Himself says:

“***Whatever Allah Has promised, He will never go against that.***”[^1]

But it is possible that some may think that after this categorical
promise the reins of power go away from Allah and then He does not have
that power that He may drive them out of Paradise and He may seize His
grace from them. In the scholarly and conversational term this
categorical judgment puts limit to the Power of Allah. And it diminishes
the vastness of strength of Allah.

That is the reason that with these words Allah stresses on this fact
that though He has promised them a permanent stay in Paradise and He
will never go against His promise; nevertheless this does not diminish
His Power in anyway whatsoever and He still has the Power and control on
all the existing things and can do anything whatever He wants and His
Power and control over everything is intact and permanent.

Also the same sentence is revealed in the first Ayat (regarding the
people of Hell and in which they were promised a permanent
chastisement). And the reason for that is also same, which is related in
reference to the first Ayat.

The sentence, which has come in the end of the Ayat, is from the evident
and clear Qur’an, which is corroborating the Tafseer as mentioned above.
This sentence makes it clear that this gift of Allah is going to remain
intact and established forever and is never going to part.

 

[^1]: Surah Rum 30:6


