Question 52: The Qur’an is safe from distortion
===============================================

**Question:** Was the Qur’an revealed to the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.)
in the same form as it is presently? And what is the proof of that there
was no tempering with it?

**Answer:** It should be kept in mind that the song of tempering with
Qur’an was mostly sung by the Christians and the Jews. Since according
to the admitted testimony of history the heavenly books of both those
religions had became prey to change and tempering as the time passed and
have lost their original charm, value and credence. That is why they
make efforts that the Holy Qur’an also be polluted with allegations of
distortion.

History testifies that copies of Taurat were destroyed many a times
during different historical calamities and especially in attack by
Nebuchanezzer on the Jews. Afterwards some Jew scholars rewrote it.[^1]

Testimony is available that all the four Gospels were written many years
after Hazrat Isa (a.s.) by some people. That is why there is no trace of
the Injeel, which was sent down on Hazrat Isa (a.s.).[^2]

Those people who have kept the foundation of all their religious
principle and the field of knowledge on books, which has become so much
unreliable, unauthentic and without any real value, they like that the
Holy Qur’an also should be brought to face this same kind of destiny and
say that with passing time the Holy Qur’an also became prey to
distortion. Though in all the periods of Islamic history the collection
and care of the Holy Qur’an was never worthy of comparison with the
history of Taurat and Injeel in the periods of Judaism and Christianity.

History shows that the style of the Holy Qur’an never in any Islamic
period came face to face with ambiguity and complication. In this regard
we should pay attention to two postulates, which provide answer to many
questions.

(1) The Holy Qur’an is such a book, which had established revolution in
all the spheres of social life of Muslims. It scattered their previous
life and in that place gave existence to a new life, the foundation of
which was secured on the belief of human rights.

On this basis the Holy Qur’an was such a book, which was consistent with
the actual conditions of Muslims and they were getting their political,
worldly life, laws of etiquette to the extent that their homely customs
and compliments were also derived from this heavenly book. They were
contacting with this book during Prayers five times a day. And lastly
they use to turn first towards the Holy Qur’an in all the affairs of
their daily life and then to Holy Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) traditions and
manners.

How then is it possible that distortion can take place in the book,
which is so much engrossed in the life of people and they turn towards
it and take benefit from it to such an extent. And neither common nor
the scholars had noticed this happening? Is there a possibility that
distortion might have taken place in the Holy Qur’an and nobody even
took note of it?

It is something like that we think it to be possible that in some big
community of the world, tempering with their basic laws is done and no
one pays any attention to it? Is it possible that the basic laws of any
community become prey to tempering but people do not understand
anything? And no voice of protest is raised?

The influence of basic laws on the communities of the present world is
less than the influence of the Holy Qur’an on the community life of
Muslims many times more. And that way people used to commit it to the
memory that if there had been a slightest tempering in that it would
have faced too much of protest, rejection and rebuttal. And objection
would have come from all the corners.

(2) Whether in the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) or after that
history is consistent about the collection of the Holy Qur’an and with
great importance which the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the Muslims were
giving to the protection and copying of the Holy Qur’an, it is proved
that in the Holy Qur’an due to any reason also there was no chance of
even a word being reduced at any time.

According to *Tarikhul Qur’an* by Abu Abdillah Zanjani, in the time of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) many learned Muslims whose number is written
to be as much as 43, as per the order of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), every
Ayat and Surah were being written as soon as they were revealed. And
those written texts of the Holy Qur’an were being kept among Muslims
with every possible efforts and arrangement the care was taken.

Out of them those well-known gentlemen, who with regard to the copying
of the Holy Qur’an doing arrangement which was many times more compared
to others. Among them the name of Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) tops the
list. Thus the copies of the Holy Qur’an, which were written by young
people, were present among the Muslims. And they used to come to them
day and night with respect to recitation and getting benefit of the Holy
Qur’an.

Other than that, many of the Muslims had remembered by heart the Ayats
and Surahs of the Holy Qur’an. They were very careful in memorizing the
Holy Qur’an. And they made efforts that not a single word of that
heavenly book be forgotten. Those gentlemen were called Qari (reciter of
Holy Qur’an) and people with regard to the recitation of Qur’an, use to
turn always towards them and get the benefit.

Muslims were so strictly guarding and taking care and were vigilant
against the tempering of Qur’an that in the time of Caliphate of Abu
Bakr many reciters of Holy Qur’an were killed in the battle of Yamama,
so Muslims decided to pay more attention towards guarding and protecting
the Holy Qur’an. And to fulfill this purpose they collected all the
copies of the Holy Qur’an at a place and they ended all the
possibilities of increase or decrease in it.

Once again more vigorous attention was paid towards guarding those
copies of the Holy Qur’an. In the Caliphate of Uthman also four editions
were prepared from the original copies and were sent to all the Islamic
provinces so that they all make the copies which they held before
according to the one sent to them. And while reciting the Holy Qur’an
they follow them.

The gentlemen who were reciters of Holy Qur’an and other Muslims paid
attention towards guarding the Holy Qur’an to such an extent that one
day between Ubayy bin Ka'ab and the Caliph of that period Uthman a
difference arose regarding the Ayat No. 34 of Surah Tawbahh.

***And (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it
in Allah's way…***

Uthman bin Affan said that in the revelation by Allah the word Al-lazina
is there (i.e. without Waw) and this letter should be removed from the
editions of the Holy Qur’an. Whereas Ubayy's stand was that we have
heard this Ayat from the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in this way only. When the
discussion prolonged Ubayy suddenly said in a very harsh tone:

“I will put sword on the shoulder and spill the blood of the person who
wishes to remove this alphabet from Qur’an.”

Due to insistence of Ubayy the caliph took back his words.

When this all took place on the question of removing just one alphabet
can it be said that the Qur’an has become prey to distortion? And some
of it Ayats are omitted?

Other than the two basic things narrated above it should also be
remembered that in many Ayats of the Holy Qur’an specific mention is
there that there will be no tempering and that this heavenly book will
remain protected from any alteration. It is stated that:

“***We have sent Qur’an, and We are its Protector and Caretaker.***”[^3]

Islamic scholars and intellectuals also have in the books of exegesis
and theology specifically mentioned that Islamic experts have consensus
that there has been no change or tempering in the Holy Qur’an and if any
such person who is born from among the wise persons also who has trust
on the subject of the tempering, then the reason of his belief are the
forged traditions which has been added into the books of traditions by
those selfish people. Otherwise in the Holy Qur’an itself there is no
indication whatsoever regarding their claim. It is obvious that such
false traditions are eliminated from the angle of credence.

In other form under the influence of those traditions such belief is
created whose real meaning and sense is not revealed till now. Anyway
many of our intellectuals and research scholars have written books
regarding this and have amply proved that alteration or change in the
Holy Qur’an is not possible at all.

As regards the traditions that Amir al-Mu’mineen Ali (a.s.) had a copy
of Qur’an, which was different from other copies. These traditions are
not contrary to the issue of non-existence of tempering in the Holy
Qur’an. Because as the scholars have said, the Qur’an, which was
collected by Amir al-Mu’mineen Ali (a.s.) consisted of explanation of
circumstances of revelation of Ayats and commentaries and its
elucidation, which he had heard from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). And
its difference with other editions of the Holy Qur’an was not regarding
the original text of the Qur’an, but it was only regarding this.



[^1]: Ref. Qamus-e-Maqaddas and Al-hoda Eladdinil Mustafa

[^2]: Qamoos-e-Muqaddas

[^3]: Surah Hijr 15:9


