Question 53: The Order of Revelation of Surahs of The Holy Qur’an And The Scribes of Revelation
===============================================================================================

**Question:** According to the revelation which is the first and last
surahs of the Holy Qur’an? After the revelation by who was the Holy
Qur’an   written?

**Answer:** Whatever is written by the reliable Islamic historians
according to that, the first Surah which was revealed on the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was:

***Read in the name of your Lord Who created***.[^1]

And the last Surah was Surah Tawbah. The subject matter of these surahs
also support this assertion.

As regards the writing of Qur’an in the period of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) is concerned it can be said that whatever Ayats which were
revealed to him some of his selected comparisons use to regularly and
formally ask him about those Ayats and write them in the style of
Kufaite style which was the current style of writing in those days.

Those gentlemen were called Katibe-Vahi meaning writers of the
revelations of the Holy Qur’an. Historians have written the number of
these persons to be 43. Out of those 43 persons, Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) and some other companions worked very hard work as compared to
the rest in the job of writing the Ayats of Qur’an. They use to always
remain present in the service of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and under his
subtle guidance and supervision wrote all the revealed Ayats.

Keeping in mind that the foundation of Islam is on that heavenly book
and it is the basic law of Muslims in all the spheres of social and the
individual life, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) himself specially arranged
the chapters and verses in the present form.

At the time of demise of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) the whole Qur’an was in
existence in written form with the Muslims. Many people had also
committed it to memory. The Holy Qur’an, which is present with the
Muslims, is the same which existed with the Muslims at the time of
demise of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.).


[^1]: Surah Alaq 96:1


