Question 56: Is The Prohibited Tree The Tree of Knowledge?
==========================================================

**Question:** In the lessons of the history of religions we read as
follows:

What is the forbidden fruit?
----------------------------

As the Old Testament writes in detail and the Holy Qur’an says in
suggestive way. (Forbidden fruit) is insight because on the basis of
Qur’anic verses the Almighty used to call Adam and Eve and without
feeling any kind of shame for their nakedness they used to reply. But
after eating the forbidden fruit they began to feel ashamed of their
nakedness and hid themselves.

In the past they used to see the Lord without any kind of shame. Now
after eating the forbidden fruit they are feeling ashamed of their
nakedness. The proof is that the condition in which they were till
yesterday (nakedness), they were not able to see it and now by eating
the forbidden fruit they have received insight and the forbidden tree is
the tree of insight.

What did the Almighty desire? Should man eat the forbidden fruit or not?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

We should not view this problem like human stories. That the Almighty
did not want that Adam should eat the forbidden fruit. Because if it had
been unacceptable to Allah He would not have allowed Adam (a.s.) to eat
the fruit. (Because the intention of man has no value before the
intention of Allah and only that comes to pass which the Almighty
desires).

Thus the Almighty Allah desired that man should eat this fruit. Because
he could not had come into existence without eating this fruit. And it
is such a plan that was arranged for by the Almighty Himself. So that
man can come into existence and the man who is present now and who with
the passing of times will continue to come.

1. As mentioned in the above-mentioned discussion does the forbidden
fruit only constitute knowledge and insight?

**Answer:** We have been asked many questions regarding the points
mentioned in those lessons. The above-mentioned is an example of the
same. For a satisfactory reply it is necessary for us to mention a few
points.

1. As we have mentioned before one clear proof of the interpolation of
the present Bible is that in the story of the Creation of Adam it states
unequivocally that the forbidden tree was the tree of knowledge and
insight or the tree of good and evil on realization explanatory or
recognition. (In all the translations of the Bible, give only one
meaning.

Thus according to clean words of the Bible the first and the greatest
sin of man was the sin of knowledge and insight. And probably it is the
reason that the church leaders in the middle used to battle against the
intellectuals, scientists and writers of their time and they used to
dread the spread of this sin. They used to believe that on the first day
Adam (a.s.) was ignorant that he was not ashamed of his nakedness but
when he ate of the forbidden fruit (knowledge and intellect) or became
rational being, he became a sinner and he was expelled from Paradise and
the proximity of the Lord.

Without any doubt these concocted stories of the historical age. On the
contrary the Holy Qur’an says that before setting in Paradise, Adam
(a.s.) possessed a vast knowledge and intellect and was to a great
extent needless of the tree of knowledge and insight. So much so that he
had become the teacher and instructor of the angels.

***'We taught Adam all the names***'[^1]

Therefore this Adam is absolutely different from the Adam who is
described by the Bible. The greatest source of this power of Adam (a.s.)
is knowledge and insight. And the greatest sin of that Adam is
knowledge. This Adam is Adam in the proper sense and that Adam is
ignorant from all aspects. This Adam was created for realization and
that Adam is commanded that he should not let knowledge and insight
enter his mind. In such circumstances it is really a strange thing that
the logic of the Qur’an and the altered Bible should be considered at
par.

2. According to Taurat Adam and Hawwa were nude and they did not feel
any shame of their nudity. It is right but where does Qur’an say that
both of them were naked and were not ashamed of their nakedness? Rather,
on the contrary the Holy Qur’an clarifies that they had clothes on their
bodies even before eating the forbidden fruit and this dress fell away
from their bodies after eating the forbidden fruit and they became
naked.

***…he (Shaitan) expelled your parents from the garden, pulling off from
them both their clothing that he might show them their evil
inclinations…***”[^2]

It is also said that:

***…the Shaitan made an evil suggestion to them that he might make
manifest to them what had been hidden from them of their
inclinations…***[^3]

On the basis of this in the 22nd verse of the same Surah it says:

***…their evil inclinations became manifest to them, and they both began
to cover themselves with the leaves of the garden…***”[^4]

This is also in the meaning of the loss of their clothes. It does not
mean that they were naked and were not aware of it.

Thus when Qur’an introduced Adam it says that he was a dressed and
respectable person who became naked due to disobedience. (This point is
worth noting).

On the contrary the Adam introduced by the Bible was naked from the
beginning like animals. So much so that he was not even ashamed of his
nakedness. In spite of this clarification of the Holy Qur’an is it
proper that such a thing should be associated with and it should be
brought on par with Taurat?

3. The most interesting thing is to interpret “Don't eat” to mean “You
should eat.” Can there be greater fraud in logic? That negative should
be taken as position and evil should be considered good? If the fruit
was for eating, why was it named the prohibited tree?

What is this method of interpretation and explanation of meaning? If
this method is correct it would be better to judge in the same all the
things that are prohibited in the Qur’an and it should be said that the
Almighty had desired thus that this prohibited should be acted upon. And
if He had not desired thus He would have prevented the people from
acting upon it. We are helpless regarding our actions?

The Almighty described that we should remain free. He gave free will to
men and left them on their own but side-by-side he has formulated many
rules and regulations for his training.

Thus this comparison is absolutely incorrect that if Allah did not
desire that Adam (a.s.) should eat the prohibited fruit He would have
stopped him. Because in the same way this comparison will come true for
the sinners. Actually here there is a misunderstanding regarding
freewill and compulsion. (Please note).

Respected readers! Whatever has been stated above, in your view is it
not better that before expression such an opinion in the form of a
lesson it should be shown to the experts of Islamic problems and
published later so that such kinds of misunderstandings are not created.

Please ponder upon it. If a person reads this book and concluded that
this tree was the tree of knowledge and wisdom and Adam and Hawwa were
naked the animals and they were not knowing this and after eating the
prohibited fruit of the tree of knowledge they came to know and they hid
from the sight of Allah and later as the punishment acquiring knowledge
of wisdom they were expelled from there, then who would be responsible
for this belief of his?

The facts learnt from the sources of guidance is that the prohibited
tree “tree of jealously and a kind of adversion.” Or there was something
similar to this and Adam was involved in this. (Although it was not the
jealously that could tantamount to jealously or due to it, the hands
should be smeared with sins):

This statement could be explained in the way that Hazrat Adam (a.s.) was
informed of the condition of his descendants and he saw among them such
exalted prophets who were having higher grades than him.

On this juncture he desired that the position of these personalities
would have been achieved by himself even though in spite of his merits
he had not reached to that position. This same desired distanced him
from, the Paradise and that was his tree of prohibition. Though in some
traditions wheat is mentioned as the prohibited tree whose prohibition
had an aspect of trial.  
  

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:31

[^2]: Surah Aaraf 7:27

[^3]: Surah Aaraf 7:20

[^4]: Surah Aaraf 7:22


