Question 61: Is The Following Ayat In Contravention of The Infallibility of The Holy Prophet (S)?
=================================================================================================

**Question:** If the Prophet of Islam (S) and other Prophets (a.s.) are
free from sins what does the following ayat implies when it mentions the
forgiveness of their sins?

***Verily We have granted you a manifest Victory: That Allah may forgive
you your faults of the past and those to follow; fulfill His favor on
you; and guide you on the straight Way***.”[^1]

**Answer:** First of all we must bear in mind that the founders of
movement and revolutionaries who take steps against the prevailing
trends and try reform the society and destroy the evils present in it
they start facing oppositions, allegations, baseless accusations and
false implications. Allegation is one of the attacks that are employed
in the backward societies and its aim is to defame these personalities.

The Holy Prophet (S) was not exempted from this system. He also had to
face the opposition and allegations of Quraysh. The person who was
regarded truthful and trustworthy yesterday began to be called a
magician, a soothsayer and heretic as soon he raised his call for
religion.

The Almighty Allah has quoted the allegations of the infidels of
Quraysh. It is a confirmed fact that if such allegations are not
effective on most people it creates some extent doubts in the minds of
some simple and ignorant persons regarding the truthfulness and claim of
the Holy Prophet (S). And it can be said that a group of people continue
to remain in doubts and denial for a period of time.

In those conditions how is it possible that those allegations should be
explained and justified so that the truth is unveiled for the people?

The only effective method is that the Ulul Azm and progressive people
who are the standard bearers of socialism and the ideal goal. If he
succeeds and achieves his aim and people see the benefits of his mission
with their own eyes, all the allegations and accusations are falsified
before everyone and in place of allegations many good titles take its
place and they are the embodiments of greatness, spirituality and power.
And if the circumstances are opposed to this the allegations remain in
the minds of some people for a long time. And they prove effective on
many people.

The same thing is applicable to the Prophet of Islam (S). He began a
progressive program and with many brilliant laws he stepped into the
field of contest which were beneficial for the common people but were
going against the ruling class.

He used to inform of his future successes in his programs and in the
light of divine help and the steadfastness of his companions he
surmounted his difficulties. At last the capital of polytheism and the
center of false accusations fell into the hands of the Muslims. And
Mecca was conquered in the form of a manifest victory.

This success which became the cause that Quraysh with all their power
should come under the rule and control of Islam. It also had another
great consequence in its fold and it was that when this valiant warrior
earned victory in this battle and the people saw the best result of his
efforts clearly and he took his spiritual mission to completion, in the
light of this success the falsehood mongers and allegation makers were
rendered speechless.

They could not call him mad and insane or magician and soothsayer in
face of his obvious achievements. Because anyone having such spiritual
or mental defects could not create such a revolution.

Therefore in the ayat mentioned above “Zanb” are those same false
allegations which were present in the minds of the simplistic people of
Mecca. And this success had false accusations and these allegations were
removed from the personality of this savior. Obviously if the same
conditions had continued that were before the conquest of Mecca and the
Holy Prophet (S) had not been able to achieve success in the contest,
the allegations would have remained as they were.

This explanation is testified by two things:

1. The ayat clearly says that We have created the conquest of Mecca so
that your sins may be forgiven due to it.

2. If the forgiveness of sins is the invalidation of false allegations
and accusations as we have explained in detail above, that the relation
between the conquest of Mecca and the forgiveness of sins is proved
valid. Because this conquest had sealed the tongues of people regarding
the repetitions of allegations and then no question remained for anyone
to accuse the Holy Prophet (S), and if they had implied legal mistakes
and disobedience then how can they be forgiven by military conquest and
apparent victory, but it is seeking of forgiveness and repenting.

3. The clear meaning of the ayat is that this victory has brought into
existence causes for the forgiveness of the past and future sins and
this sentence could bear these meanings only. That due to this victory
all the allegations and accusations that had been heaped were now
rendered ineffective. But if you take it in the sense of actual sins you
cannot explain how the future sins could be forgiven in advance.


[^1]: Surah Fath 48:1-2


