Question 62: What Is The Meaning of The Words: Everything Will Be Destroyed Except His Face?
============================================================================================

**Question:** Is the human soul annihilated? If you say that it is
incorporeal the ayat says that except for Allah everything can be
annihilated. How can you explain this?

**Answer:** We should remember that the word 'destroy' in the ayat is
not in the meaning of getting completely annihilated because not only
the human soul, the human body is also not destroyed completely. And
after breaking up it remains in the earth in other substances. On the
day of judgment he would be raised from there.

Thus whether we consider soul incorporeal or not it is not absolutely
destroyable and annihilated. And neither is the human body is totally
destroyed. Rather the word 'Halaak' in the ayat denotes the
disintegration of the organs and the destruction of the face. Thus this
destruction is that the connection between the body and soul is severed.
And the previous physical parts are disintegrated. Though soul and body
remain separate and exist in some other forms.

Many ayats that are revered in connection with the destruction of the
past communities prove the above statement. For example the Almighty
Allah destroyed the People of Aad and Thamud and did not spare anyone
and in the same way He destroyed the People of Nuh.

Obviously in those ayats, Aad, Thamud and People of Nuh were destroyed
in the sense that they died and the connection between their bodies and
their souls was severed. Therefore they ayat: “Everything will be
destroyed except His face” means that all the living and non-living
things disintegrate and their style undergoes a change and it is only
the Purified Being of Allah which is beyond every type of change and
transformation.



