 Question 68: Are Greater And Smaller Relative Terms?
=====================================================

**Question:** Some people say that the greater and smaller sins are
comparable (ratio) that is it is possible a sin is greater but in
comparison to another sin it would be considered small. For example,
theft is a greater sin but in comparison to intentional murder it is
considered small. From the aspect of their comparability all the sins
are eligible for forgiveness and remission. Because the Holy Qur’an
says:

“***If you shun the greater sins we shall do away with your small
sins***.”

Thus every sin that is shunned keeping in view a greater one will be
forgiven but there is no sin greater than polytheism that if one shuns
it one could be forgiven his polytheism.
On the basis of this one who has not made a partner to Allah will have
all his in forgiven.

**Answer:** In the reply to the previous the reply to this question has
also become clear. Because as mentioned above the classification of sins
into small and great is an absolute clarification which is divided into
two on the basis that some are those which are promised divine
punishment or prohibited emphatically and some are not.

They have not been classified due to their magnitude or on the basis of
conjecture. And the captioned ayat discusses this point and the
conclusion derived from it is that if a Muslim refrains from one class
of sins that is the greater sins, the Almighty Allah will forgive their
sins of the second class, that are called Sayyat or Saghaer - that is
smaller.

And there are two separate limits of the two different classes of sins
and none of them can overlap. Therefore, shunning the greater sins
cannot cause the other greater sins to be forgiven. It can only help in
forgiveness of smaller sins, (In the background we should also remember
that repeating smaller sins make them into greater sins).





