Question 77: Why Do We Sometimes Recite The Afternoon Prayers Prayers At The Time of Noon Prayers Prayer?
=========================================================================================================

**Question:** Why do we sometimes recite the Noon Prayers prayer at the
earliest hour and then immediately perform the Afternoon Prayers prayer?
While it is not the time of Afternoon Prayers? And in the same way
sometimes we pray the Noon Prayers prayer at the last moments while its
time has already passed?

**Answer:** Basically we should remember that Noon Prayers and Afternoon
Prayers prayer time and in the same way the Evening and Night prayer
time denote that in those times no other prayer is permitted.

For example from the beginning of the time of Noon Prayers till when
time remains only to perform four rakats (units) of prayer is the time
of Noon Prayers prayer and before the sunset the time for four rakats is
restricted for Afternoon Prayers prayer. And the time between the two is
common time for Noon Prayers and Afternoon Prayers.

We shall also remember that of the two prayers each of them has the best
time (Waqt-e-Fazilat) and if they are performed during this time its
reward is more.

For example the best time of Noon Prayers is from the beginning of Noon
Prayers till the shade of a pole is equal to it. At this moment the best
time ends and the time of Afternoon Prayers begins. On the basis of this
the prayers are named Noon Prayers and Afternoon Prayers due to their
best times and not due to the common time when both these prayers could
be performed.

One who prays the Afternoon Prayers prayer at the beginning part of Noon
Prayers, he has performed his prayer in the correct time and when he
makes an intention to perform the Afternoon Prayers prayer he means that
he is praying the prayer which from the point of view of its best time
is the time of Afternoon Prayers.

In any case it is better if one delays the prayer and performs it at the
best time of Afternoon Prayers. And in this way if someone performs the
Noon Prayers prayer at the end of the day then he has prayed in the
common time of prayers and his making an intention for Noon Prayers
means that its best time is Noon Prayers and from the aspect of the
specified time, the common time and the best time the same is true for
Evening and Night prayers.




