Question 78: Does Prayer Have A Role In Acceptance of All Deeds?
================================================================

**Question:** I have seen an objection against Muslims in books that the
Islamic scholars have written in the books of jurisprudence and
traditions that till the Prayer is not accepted the other deeds will not
be accepted.

And then the book mentions the conditions for acceptance of Prayer that
a person cannot fulfill in his whole life. And even if one fulfills it,
such a person must be very exceptional and rare. Therefore according to
their own statement all the deeds and worship acts they have done all
their life will not be accepted. Please explain to me this matter.

**Answer:** The first thing is that studies of books of Islamic
jurisprudence show that the conditions mentioned therein are not so
difficult that no one could fulfill them. Rather some people can pay
more attention to their deeds and worship acts and fully comply with
those conditions. You can find it yourself if you study the Articles of
Islamic Acts. Therefore it is not correct to blame such things on Islam.

Secondly the acceptance of deeds and worship acts by Allah has many
stages and grades. It is possible that they may not achieve the first
grade acceptance but may be eligible for lower grade. Basically correct
worship has a grade of acceptance. In the same way the acceptance of
other deeds too shall depend on the acceptance of Prayer.

This statement could be explained in the way that if the Prayer is
correct and performed according to the apparent Islamic laws, it would
definitely be accepted by Allah. And as much the heart and conscience of
man are clean and as much he refrains from oppression and injustice, the
grade of its acceptance would be proportionate to this. Because the
value of each deed depends on the mentality and condition of the person
who is performing it.  
 Â 


