Question 82: What Is The Decree Regarding The Game of Chess?
============================================================

**Question:** Is there in Islam any problem in playing chess? Indeed you
know that generally there is no betting in chess. It can almost be
claimed that in some cases this game presents gambling. Keeping this in
view, nowadays, chess is considered a mental exercise and it is becoming
popular day by day. I request you to give me a reply supporting by
proofs.

**Answer:** In the view of our scholars it is a decided matter that
playing with the instruments of gambling is not permitted even if there
is no betting. It is possible that in the background of this decree is
the philosophy that contact with those instruments needlessly make man
attracted to gambling and especially regarding chess numerous traditions
of Imam (a.s) have reached us that the use of the instruments of this
game is prohibited in every way and by giving it the title of mental
exercise it does not affect the prohibition of chess.

Because it is possible that other kinds of gambling can be performed by
naming it mental exercise. Because along with playing cards there are
many kinds of gambling that have an aspect of mental exertion. But their
evils cannot be denied.

The detailed discussion is that chess is a form of gambling. It was
invented for this very purpose. Finally it can be said that gambling is
of two kinds.

Deliberation is not needed in some cases and the winning of the game is
based on chance. While in other games deliberation is also needed. Chess
is from the second kind of games.

In addition to this chess is an imagination game because it presents the
sketch of an imaginary battlefield which is a reminder of the historical
periods of man. Therefore one of the defects of chess is its imaginary
nature.

The views of the above statements no doubt remain regarding the
prohibition of chess. Even though there are some people who do not
accept anything unless they get its confirmation from the western world.
Therefore we consider it necessary that those points should be mentioned
that we have found in the writings of western scholars. May be this
would help in the spread of chess, which has unfortunately spread to
every corner of our country and it is played with an excuse that it
helps in the power of deliberation and concentration.

This is the discussion of the famous French chess player, Shantal Shaw
Dossian regarding whom it is said: “No one can achieve the distinction
to be the world champion of chess except Shantal and the international
press and especially the Russian sports writings have praised his
expertise and superiority.

Let us see what Shantal himself says:

“It is sufficient to prove that chess is a tiring game by saying that
after the 40th step if there is no result the game is postponed as
happened in Reg or Veg and it was calculated that after the first four
steps the total possible tricks were 318976584 and in the first ten step
were 169518829100544…

Then he mentions those people are champions of chess Regarding them he
says that it is possible that apart from chess in other matters their
capability might be less than the medium stage. That is what I want to
say is that chess is really a dangerous game, because it makes the other
mental functions useless and weak. It can be said that chess creates
mental disturbance.

After this Shantal quotes the statements of another Champion Kheel who
always said: In order to win you have to hate your opponent. And in
addition to other Leases of chess it is an undesirable ethical harm.

We must remember that chess is a kind of gambling. Here we must
understand that Islam has prohibited gambling even if there is no
winning and losing. Why is it so? It is because actually no gambling is
without the condition of losing and winning. The truth is that when
there is no question of winning or losing money, this win and loss is in
the mind of the contestants.

Moral Harms
-----------

If the remembrance of Allah leaves ones heart and this love and
affection that is there and there is no faith in a person, then what
remains? The only thing that remains is evil thoughts accomplishment by
a restless, fearful, sorrowful man.

The experts of moral science are unanimous on the fact that the true
happiness and success of man is hidden in the balance of his feelings.
This is compared to justice. And this word actually denotes the making
of one's life compatible to the way shown by the Almighty. This is the
straight path or Siraatul Mustaqeem. Because the soul gets peace and
tranquility here alone.

In a tradition quoted from our leaders there is indication towards these
interesting points: The true man is that who has faith.

Gambling is one of those varied actions by which man becomes forgetful
of the remembrance of Allah becomes deprived of faith and good deeds.

Amir al-Mu’mineen (a.s) saw some people who were busy playing chess. He
told them the sentence that idol-breaker Ibrahim (a.s) used to say:

***What are these images to whose worship you cleave***?[^1]

In the Islamic law it is haraam to play chess to make others play it and
buy or sell the instruments of Chess. This is found in a number of
traditions.  
    
  

[^1]: Surah Anbiya 21:52


