Question 6: Why Pray In Arabic?
===============================

**Question:** Why pray in Arabic, whereas we should call Allah in our
own language? Whether this situation is against that Islam is a heavenly
religion?

**Answer:** Incidentally to recite Prayers in Arabic is one of the signs
that the religion of Islam is heavenly, because people who stand in one
row and are busy in the same worship, it is necessary for them that
there should be one language so that they can understand each other, it
means that besides the mother tongue and local language they should have
a common and universal language and without that a united community
cannot be formed.

In the present age many intellectuals think that unless the whole world
becomes one country, it will not be able to achieve happiness. To do
this practically, they have made plans to make a language universal.

In short the praying of all Muslims in one language is the sign of unity
and it points to the oneness of the people, and keeping this in mind the
intellectuals say that Arabic language is the most extensive and
comprehensive language of the world. This reality becomes clearer that
all the sects of Muslims accept it as an international language and can
benefit from it for mutual understanding and similarity.

Apart from this to perform Prayers in a similar way, protects it from
any subtraction or addition, any alterations, or any mixture of
superstitions things and also protects it from baseless meanings (due to
the translation of it in other languages by those incapable people who
interfere in it) and due to this the spirit of this worship remains
intact.

Therefore it is necessary for every Muslim that as much as possible to
be aware of the religious language and He should know what he is saying
to his Lord. Incidentally to learn the translation of Prayers, (which
can be written on a single page) this is so easy that it is possible to
learn it in an hour (for the whole life).

In short as we know that *Tawhid* is the basic root and branches of
religion and turning towards one Qibla in appointed time, in a specific
language is the sign of Unity.

If we are in Mecca at the time of Hajj and observe the congregation
prayer in which hundreds of thousands of people from the whole world, of
different races and tribes participate in it. All of them say: Allaho
Akbar together, that time we can understand its wisdom and depth and if
in Prayers every person recites in their own language, there will be
disparity.


