Question 94: Is Khums The Recompense of Prophethood?
====================================================

**Question:** There is no doubt that the Holy Prophet (S) has not
demanded anything in return of the efforts and hardships he had borne to
guide the humanity. He has sought the recompense of this only from the
Almighty Allah.

But we see that in some Qur’anic verse, like the verse of Mawaddat the
love of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is termed as the recompense of Prophethood due
to the fact that this love is a favor upon the people themselves and a
channel for their guidance because wilayat (Guardianship) of Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) becomes a cause to follow the words and actions of these noble
personages.

This itself is a kind of guidance and righteousness, which is bestowed
on the people through a medium. But what is the reason for making Khums
obligatory (half of which is the share of Sadaat)? Is it not a price for
Prophethood?

**Answer:** As well all know Khums is not for every Sadaat. It is only
for those who are needy. If the amount of Khums exceeds the needs of
Sadaat it has to be deposited in the Islamic treasury (according to the
commands that have reached us) so that it can be spent for common food
of the people. In the same way if the needs of the poor Sadaat is more
than the Khums paid by the people the deficit has to be made up by the
Baitul Maal (Islamic treasury). On the other hand the Sadaat are
prohibited to receive Zakat which is the right of other needy people
(Even if the Zakat is taken from rich Sadaat).

Therefore actually Khums is in place of Zakat which is paid to other
needy people and the requirements are same as for the recipients of
Zakat. But in order to maintain the honor of the Holy Prophet (S) and as
a mark of respect its payment has been given another form and another
title (Khums instead of Zakat). It is a mark of respect for the esteemed
position of the Holy Prophet (S) and it is not in any way a sort of
recompense or price. Obviously, there is a wide difference between
maintaining respect of honor of exalted personalities and paying a
price.  
  


