Chapter 7: How do we Tread the Path to Allah?
=============================================

   
 Be informed that one who seeks the Path of Allah, who aims at achieving
what is with Allah, has to observe certain matters so that he may reach
his destination. The Guides to this Path, who are the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
have guided us to certain matters which will facilitate the achievement
of this goal when one becomes familiar with them; otherwise, he will not
reach his destination; he will go back on his heels and retreat.  
    
***First***: One must be aware of the fact that everything good is with
Allah; so, he must not seek it from anyone else, nor should he seek
anything but such goodness. If you befriend everyone and initiate your
friendly ties with people, let this be out of your desire to seek what
is with Allah, hoping to please Allah by making your concern to be good
to them, to be of benefit to them. People are the dependents of Allah.
The one who is loved the most by Allah is that who is the most
beneficial to His dependents (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 131), as we are told
by Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)[^1].  
    
 If you seek the sublime status [with Allah] by becoming the one who is
loved by Allah the most, according to the sacred hadith, you have first
and foremost to be fully aware of this: Be informed that the benefit
which you derive from people [to whom you have done favors] is much
greater than any favor you have bestowed upon them. It is because of
them that you were able to reach a status of being the most loved by
Allah; so, do not ask them for any benefit other than this, and do not
look at anything else, for there is no other town beyond Abbadan.

If the goal of your befriending them is to be of benefit to them, and
when your favors reach them, set your mind upon accepting their ill
treatment and do not deal with them likewise, for this is the very first
of your favors on them. Furthermore, if you set your mind on abstention
of rewarding an evil doer with a similar measure, do not be satisfied
with just this. You wish to emulate Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their method of
being benevolent even to those who mistreated them.

They forgave those who treated them with injustice, visited those who
severed their ties from them and gave those who deprived them. You,
then, have to set your mind on wishing that one of them would mistreat
you so that you would be benevolent to him, so that through him will you
earn the virtue of being good to those who treat you badly. It is then
that you emulate the Prophet (‘s) and his Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), for such is
their attitude. Our master, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), has
said,  
    
**‘One who is the most loved by Allah is the one who emulates His
Prophet (‘s)**’ (*Nahjul-Balagha*, sermon 160).  
    
 When you reward his mistreatment of you by being benevolent to him, you
first earn such a lofty station. Then, despite your poverty, want and
need, if you reward a wrong-doer with benevolence, Allah, the Praised
and the most Exalted One, through His generosity and plentitude, is more
apt to reward you when you respond to a bad deed with a good one. You
will then, secondly, have won the proof of being worthy of His
generosity.

He, Praise to Him, ordered you to be benevolent to one who is mean to
you. He did so in order to admonish you that since you did that, He is
more worthy than you of benevolence. You are more worthy of being thus
treated; so, He thus ordered you to adopt such a way of treating
others.  
    
 The benefit which you reap from such a treatment is much greater than
the benefit which He ordered you to bestow upon the person with whom you
beautifully dealt. If you discern well, you will see his mistreatment of
yourself. What raised your status is a favor worthy of being
appreciated, in addition to rewarding an evil deed with a good one.[^2]

All of this is based on the assumption that the others have mistreated
you; otherwise, it is assumed that you are the oppressor, or you feign
being oppressed, as can be seen when observing the conditions of most
people, for then the matter is much more clear. We have seen how
everyone complains and charges others of oppressing him, yet we have
never seen two opponents, be they from among the righteous or the
evildoers, admitting oppressing or trespassing on each other.

Rather, we still see men of righteousness and piety disputing, each
claiming as being oppressed by the other, and that he is the one who had
done favors to the other, tolerated him, never lied or dared to
antagonize him. Be informed that this is one of the schemes of the
evil-insinuating ‘*nafs*,’ its way of making wrong look right so that
the matter will be confused.  
    
 For this reason, the Wise Legislator rendered the testimony of justice
to Himself. He did not permit reliance in this regard on His Justice.
Hence, a fair and wise person ought to indict himself with regard to his
own self (nafs) and reject its testimony in his favor, a testimony which
the Legislator rejects. Such is not the one you are accustomed to, the
one friendship with whom you initiate, if the purpose of your friendship
is to be of benefit to him rather than to benefit from him. You have set
your mind at ease when you lost your hope from people, putting an end to
coveting what they have.

This, indeed, is the greatest wealth, the wealth of one’s nafs.
Moreover, the first charity which you bestow upon people is that you
spare them your own harm. The first is that you do not hurt them; you do
not cause them any harm, then you set your mind on tolerating theirs.
Furthermore, let your concern be how to get goodness to reach them. So,
if your soul is determined to do that, and if you receive a reward on
account of a good deed which you did, this is a blessing which is not
expected, something which you enjoy, something that will deeply impress
you. And if you see that they have disregarded it, hoping you would
accept it from them, accept it.

Accepting it is doing them a good deed even when you have no need for
it, for returning it to them will make them unhappy and is a bad deed
while you yourself have decided to do no bad deed to them, and thus you
are ordered[^3]. And if their goodness was a token of appreciation of
getting to know you, and if they expect you to return it to them, accept
it from them then return it to them as a new present according to their
own wish.

But if their intention is that you accept it from them then you reward
them with something else even better, accept it from them and reward
them with something more. Such is goodness to them. Do not make them
aware of you knowing their intention that they gave it to you in order
to get something else in its place; rather, let it look natural, for
such is goodness on your part to them.  
    
 The outcome, my Brother, is that Allah orders you to be fair, to be
benevolent, and just as you treat others, so shall you, too, be treated.
And be informed that the cornerstone of being good to people is not
giving them money, for we have seen many people spending a lot of money,
while such spending is not benevolence at all; rather, it is followed by
harm, by causing people grief.

It fits the category of an act of charity followed by the doer with an
act of harm as an outcome, even if the goal is benevolence. They simply
do not know how to do it properly. All of this is the result of
neglecting the principles laid down by Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and not paying
attention to their methodology.  
    
 If you want to take care of the need of your believing Brother
according to the way of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), be informed that they (‘a)
have said,  
    
**‘Taking care of someone’s need is done through different ways: either
minimizing it so it will get maximized, or hastening it so that it will
bring happiness, or keeping it as a secret so it will come out into the
open.’** (*Tuhaf al-\`Uqul*, p. 403, in almost the same wording).  
    
 If these issues are not combined, taking care of the need cannot be
accomplished; rather, it will be incomplete, tinted with displeasure; it
may even bring harm to the one in need.  
    
 People are such that when they take care of one’s need, they violate
all these issues. Their actions will not take care of anyone’s need as
it should be. This is the main reason why they have to swallow the
bitterness of spending so much of their wealth without earning the
desired outcome which is: bringing happiness to the heart of a believer.
You can see how when they do someone a favor, first they promise to do
it for him, then they take their time, so he starts tasting the
bitterness of waiting which is more harsh than killing.

Then he tastes the bitterness of many times losing hope that his need
will be taken care of. After some time, his need is taken care of, after
having tasted the bitterness of asking for help, the bitterness of
embarrassment, the bitterness of waiting, the bitterness of losing hope,
and the bitterness of feeling embarrassed before the people whom he
promised, relying on the promise with which he was given, a promise
which was not fulfilled... What pleasure, then, remains after all of
this?! Actually, its harm proved to be more than its benefit! Such is
people’s habit when someone needs them. They do not minimize it and
say,  
    
**‘This is nothing compared to the dignity of a believer whose dignity,
according to some traditions, is regarded as greater than that of the
sanctity of the Ka\`ba’**. (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 64, p 71).  
    
 Rather, they demonstrate the attitude that they did such a great favor
to him, expecting him to abandon his worship of Allah, the most Exalted
One and the most Great, and worship them as a slave instead!  
    
 Also, they do not hide it from the public so it may be closer to
sincerity and distant from hypocrisy, becoming a purely intended action
hinted at in the qudsi hadith which says,  
    
**‘Yours is the task of hiding it [from the public], whereas Mine is to
make it manifest.’**  
    
 Instead, they tell the whole world about it. This is one of people’s
contemptible habits, and observing it needs no explanation.  
    
 Be informed, therefore, from what we have already stated, that
benevolence does not depend on spending funds but on observing the
issues which we have mentioned. Benevolence to a person is doing
something according to his own wish while taking precautions against
displeasing him.[^4]

Anyone whose goal is that you accept what he gives you, your own
benevolence is when you do accept it from him. If you wish your hand
should be the uppermost, reward him with something better or with the
same, actions which are not hidden from those who carefully look into
and observe the particulars of the recommendations and norms of conduct
of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).  
    
 When you socialize with people, base your intention on your desire to
be of benefit to them. Have no intention whatsoever to benefit from
them, so much so that if you hope for any benefit from them, you should
desire it from the One with Whom you do not ever feel disappointed, nor
is miserliness near to Him. Do not let people take most of your time,
making them your concern and source of worry, for you are thus ordered
by Ahl al-Bayt (‘a):  
    
**‘Decrease the number of those whom you know, and deny knowledge of
those whom you came to know**.’ (*Al-Mustadrak*, Vol. 11, p. 387).  
    
 The wisdom in all of this is that they should not divert you from
paying your full attention to your Creator. Dedicating one’s self to
worship, keeping the mind concentrated on doing so rather than on
anything else besides it that may distract one from Allah, is a goal
that cannot be achieved by too much socializing, and what heat cures is
different than that cured by grapes. Someone said to one of the Imams
(‘a),  
  

**‘You have sought seclusion at the Aqeeq and rushed to be all by
yourself.’**

   
 The Imam (‘a) answered him by saying,  
    
**‘Had you tasted the sweetness of [such] seclusion, you would have
desired to leave your own self alone**!’ (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 75, p.
254).  
    
 The goal is that although you do need the people with whom you live,
such coexistence should be just as we have described for you.  
    
 The goal is not to let yourself be involved in the affairs of the
people. One has to divide and distribute his time. You need time to
plead to Allah and time to socialize provided such socializing brings
you the Pleasure of Allah and is intended just to seek such a Pleasure.
Let your share of the first be the most, and let it be your primary
concern and objective, for it is required of you in the first place[^5]
and so that you may render the second to the first.

If you do not, you will be inclined to please your own self with it,
thus it becomes a catastrophe on you. You will then fail to earn
anything useful for yourself, be it in the life of this world or in the
Hereafter, and you will have fallen into the same oppression and
complaint about oppression wherein people have fallen. And you will
painfully complain from all those whom you befriended. They, too, will
continue to complain against you, so you will never win their pleasure
at all.  
    
 There is neither goodness nor peace of mind except when one fully sets
his heart on Allah, turning to Him wholeheartedly. It is thus that every
worry about the responsibilities of this life or about those of the
Hereafter becomes easy. Every weariness, distress, hardship and
depression results from one being distracted from Allah and running away
from Him. This is relevant to the ***First*** issue of those which bind
anyone who wishes to tread the path to Allah.  
    
***Second***: He has to observe people’s rights with regard to Allah.
Observing people’s rights with regard to Allah is actually observing
Allah’s rights. Likewise, neglecting them means neglecting the right of
Allah.  
    
 If you seek this, be informed that people have numerous rights with
which you must be familiar so that you may not be ignorant of Allah’s
right in their regard. Once you get to know them, you will seek help
from Allah to carry them out, to undertake them. If you are incapable of
observing them, your own admission of your incapability will stand as
your own observance thereof.  
    
 One such rights is that they say ‘Ali (‘a) is a servant of Allah.’ How
do you discharge your responsibility towards one who says this sacred
statement? Rather, how can you know which rights you are obligated to be
familiar with? Rather, how can you even imagine what his right is?! Far,
far away!

The right of one who believes in this statement is connected to the
right of the one to whom it is attached, namely Ali (‘a), and the right
of Ali (‘a) is connected to the right of the Messenger of Allah (‘a),
and the right of the Messenger of Allah (‘a) is connected to the right
of Allah Almighty; so, how can anyone undertake the right of Allah while
the Messenger of Allah (‘a) has said to Abu Dharr,  
    
**‘The rights of Allah, the most Praised One, are greater than can His
servants carry out, and the blessings of Allah are more numerous than
His servants can count?! But you must welcome the night repentant and
welcome the morning repentant.’** (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 74, p.
76).[^6]  
    
 The Messenger of Allah (‘a) once said to some of his companions as he
(‘a) pointed to Ali (‘a), ‘  
    
**Befriend the friend of this man even if he had killed your father and
offspring, and be the enemy of this man even if he were your father or
son.’** (Was’ail al- Shi\`ah, Vol. 16, p. 178).  
    
 So, if he recognizes his connection with Ali (‘a) and his acceptance of
the Imam’s mastership, you are obligated to forgive him for having
killed your father or offspring. What would you say, then, about
something much less than that?! Rather, it is not enough if you simply
forgive and forget but you have, moreover, to love, to be generous to
and to respect him just as the said mastership requires. Actually, even
if you offer your own life to be sacrificed for his sake, it will still
be little compared to the right of the one to whom he is connected. A
poet has done well when he said,  
  

**Not the love for the houses did occupy my heart,**

**But it is the love for those who lived therein.**

   
 When you demonstrate forgiveness for one who loves the Commander of the
Faithful (‘a), Allah is more apt to forgive all your sins as His way of
appreciating your acceptance of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) as
your master, for Allah more than you loves the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a). When you see that one is falling short in his obedience of the
Commander of the Faithful (‘a), yet you take into account the mere
connection with the Imam, your respect for the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a) will thus weigh even heavier in such a case, for it by itself is
worthy of respect.

Perhaps you respect him on account of his own merits that are worthy of
respect, not for the mere connection (referred to above), your respect
will hence be indicative of the strength of your veneration. Without
such strength and intensity, you would not have been able to overcome
the objections.  
    
 This covers one of the rights, and it by itself suffices, yet you will
not be able to carry it out! So what would you say if you add to it the
fact that he belongs to the progeny of Ali (‘a)?! And what would you say
when you add to this his being one of his guests, or one of his
neighbors, or one of the servants of his shrine, or his name is the same
or is the same as that of one of his offspring, or his name is
indicative of his connection to them, such as Athe servant of Ali (‘a),’
or the Aslave of al-Husain (‘a)’?!  
    
 Besides the above are the rights of kinship, neighborliness,
companionship, supplication, teaching the Qur’an, teaching a branch of
knowledge or a norm of perfection, age, your mujtahid, Imam of the
jama\`ahaha, one who is benevolent to some of your kinsfolk or neighbors
or even inquiring about your well-being, a student, someone who thinks
well of you... up to the end of the list of those included in *Risalat
al-Huqooq* (bill of rights) of our master Ali (‘a) son of al-Husain
(‘a). All are considered as great rights by Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), rights
about which one will be questioned on the Day of Judgment (as we read on
p. 255 of *Tuhaf al-\`Uqul*)[^7].

How can you ever be saved from them or find an excuse about them since
it has been said that three will complain to Allah on the Day of
Judgment: a deserted mosque, a copy of the Qur’an lying down in a house
with dust covering it and nobody reading it, and a scholar in his place
with nobody listening to him?! (\`Iddat al-Da\`i, p. 272). What is the
condition of one who is brought to judgment and against whom three lodge
complaints with the Just Ruler: (1) a house of Allah, (2) the Book of
Allah and (3) a wali of Allah?!

Whose complaint will not be heard? And which of them will deny a right
or a sanctity with Allah? These are all great rights; so, how can you
seek any excuse about them during that momentous situation? It has been
quoted that a person may sneeze but nobody invokes Allah’s mercy for
him, so he comes to complain, and injustice to him on the Day of
Judgment will be redressed.  
    
 So, my Brother who is seeking the right guidance! If you rationally
discern through your intellect, the intellect which Allah granted you so
that you may see things as they are, you will be concerned about nothing
more than admitting your shortcoming and exerting the effort to save
your neck from your responsibilities. You will see that even if they
exaggerate in demanding their rights of you, still, you are questioned
about the rights which they have against you. Your concern will be to
beg for an exemption therefrom. You will apologize to them and go
over-board in being benevolent to them as much as you can, hoping Allah
will overlook your shortcoming and please them on your behalf with
regard to some of their rights.  
    
 If you look at people with such discerning foresight with which Allah
blessed you, it will be easier for you to seek the path leading to
Allah. This covers the ***Second*** issue.  
    
***Third***: One must feel uneasy being with people and find ease and
comfort being with Allah. A wise person looks after his most important
undertaking, safeguarding his tongue, being knowledgeable of the people
of his time, feeling uneasy being with the most trusted of his brethren.
Anyone who has such merits is included in a supplication by Imam Ali
(‘a) who said,  
    
**‘May Allah strengthen him and grant him His security on the Day of
Judgment’**  
    
 as we read in *Al-Kafi*, Vol. 1, p. 49. In the same reference, Jabir
[ibn Abdullah al-Ansari] is quoted as having said,  
    
**‘I visited the father of Ja\`far, Ali (‘a), who said to me, ‘O Jabir!
By Allah! I am grieved, and my heart is upset. ‘I said to him, ‘May I be
sacrificed for your sake! What is the cause of your grief, and why are
you depressed?’ He said, ‘O Jabir! If anyone’s heart is filled with pure
adoration of Allah, such a heart will be distracted from embracing
anyone else besides Him.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 107).  
    
 In a letter to one of his followers, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)
wrote saying,  
    
**‘One who fears Allah is honored and empowered, satisfied and is never
thirsty. He diverts his attention from the people of this world; so, his
body is with them while his heart and mind are looking at the
Hereafter.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 136).  
    
 If a believer, then, feels at ease with the boons granted to him by
Allah, having tasted the sweetness of mentioning Allah, he will surely
feel uneasy when he departs from such a condition, so he refuses to
abandon it. If Allah blesses one of His servants with His support, He
would let his heart conform to this condition, occupying him thereby,
enabling him, nevertheless, to pay attention to other aspects as they
come up.

But if his original concern is paying attention to this condition, so he
feels uneasy with such a treasure, desiring to dedicate himself to what
he is originally required to do, what is for his own sake first and
foremost, such a feeling of uneasiness will not bear an impact on his
senses[^8]. Also, describing a believer, the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a) has said the following:  
    
**‘His grief is hidden inside his heart, while his elation manifests
itself on his countenance’** (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 64, p. 305).  
    
 And he may reveal them if the situation demands it, as has been quoted
in the dialogue between Imam al-Baqir (‘a) and Jabir. Such is the
meaning of a believer feeling uneasy even with the most trusted of his
brethren.  
    
 If you do not encounter such a situation, that is, when you occupy
yourself with worshipping Allah, feeling uncomfortable with being with
anyone but Him, including the closest of your brethren, being unable to
make your social life an excuse for seeking nearness to Allah because
the natural disposition will have overcome you, it is then that you will
have your share of feeling comfortable with the human race [rather than
with Allah].

You will in the latter case become a slave of your own ‘self, i.e.
nafs.’ You will feel pleased when it is pleased and angry when it is
angry. You will exit from the honor of worshipping none but Allah, which
is why Allah created you in the first place. He, the most Exalted and
Great One, has said, ‘**I have created the jinns and mankind only so
that they may worship Me’** (Qur’an, 51:56).  
    
** **

[^1]: Such a meaning may be absent from the minds of many people,
including the elite among them. When they bestow favors upon people,
they undergo an unaware state of feeling that people owe them for such
favors, and this becomes clear when their tongues slip and eyes wander
around. The meaning mentioned by the author is one of the requirements
of a deep comprehension of the right of Allah Almighty and of the right
of those [saints] connection with whom Allah has mandated. It is also
one of the requirements of a precise supervision of what goes on inside
people’s minds. A heart can never be a station for the angelic noors
unless it gets rid of such hidden impurities which are regarded as sins
by those who are close to Allah even if they appear to look good to the
virtuous.

[^2]: This statement is the outcome of one who seeks his Lord and who
changes his attitude towards existence and the movement of life. It is
from here that knowledge and insight serve as the first introduction to
walking towards perfection; so, look into how one who treads the path
changes a dispute, which carries a great measure of oppression, into a
tool of seeking closeness to the Master, the True One. Through it, a
servant of Allah proves to his Master in all his mobility and
immobility, especially when he is angry or when stirred by desire, that
they cause feet to slip, the feet of the commoners as well as those of
the elite. Quite often, both of these bring about a continuous trial and
tribulation, through either the fire or through being distant from the
truth, the latter no less inflammatory than the first if one only has a
heart and listens, and he is a witness.

[^3]: This is another portrait of reality in the methodology of the
author. Kindness and good manners are among the essential attributes of
one who seeks to tread this path [of seeking Allah]. Quite often have we
seen how those who do not have the insight and are seeking the same path
causing others harm with a statement or an action, or weakening them, or
causing them to be worried in the pretext of elevating them above the
life of this world and forsaking people. Thus, they are being unmindful
of the fact that anyone who breaks a Muslim has to mend him (Al-Kafi,
Vol. 2, p. 45). Without such mending, Allah may break something of his
own self, a breaking for which there is no mending neither in the life
of this world nor in that of the Hereafter.

[^4]: The issue of avoiding displeasing others, especially innocent
people, is one of which anyone who seeks this path must be mindful, for
it often is a cause of failure. Whenever a servant of Allah purifies his
intention and gets nearer to his Lord, the seriousness of the offense of
displeasing him gets even greater. Allah Almighty is always with those
who are displeased (according to Da\`awat al-Rawindi, p. 120). And He is
swift in supporting His believing servant. It is narrated once that a
woman was hurled into the fire of hell on account of a pussy-cat which
she confined. She neither fed her, nor did she let her eat of what the
earth produces (Al-Had’aiq, Vol. 7, p. 271); so, what would you say
about someone in whose heart Allah manifests Himself, so He becomes one
of his own concerns?

[^5]: The main responsibility of mankind must not be forgotten. We
notice how some beginners occupy themselves with doing what originally
pleases Allah, then they get occupied with what distracts them from
Allah Almighty. For example, when one enters a mosque in order to
reconcile between two disputants, so he thus gets involved to the extent
that he starts acting as though he had been one of the disputants;
therefore, he starts becoming harsh in making his statements. He may
even permit himself to listen to what he is not supposed to, such as one
of the disputants going too far so as he reveals a hidden injustice
unrelated to the oppressed person. Thus, one starts something for the
sake of getting close to Allah as a first step, not as an ongoing
process. The solution is: continuation is harder to undertake than
initiation, as is well known.

[^6]: Notice this gradual process to which the author attracts our
attention and how one who seeks to tread the path which leads to Allah
does not look at matters lightly or naively. He moves from the
principles till he reaches the objectives, looking at all issues as
related to Allah Almighty. And whenever his connection with Him
intensifies, so does his realization of His right. Doing injustice to
the right of a believer is by no means doing injustice to an individual
whose link from his Master is cut off. Rather, it is injustice towards
an individual regarding whom Allah Almighty undertook a pledge to
defend. And who can confront one whose defender and supporter is Allah
Almighty Himself?!

[^7]: The ‘bill of rights’ [of Imam Zainul-\`Abidin (‘a)] cannot be
ignored by those who seek a path to Allah Almighty. And who is more
capable than Zainul-\`Abidin (‘a) in explaining the rights of Allah and
those of His servants?! It is very necessary for one who seeks this path
to be familiar with the collection of texts and rights cited from the
Imams of Guidance (‘a) in the field of seeking the pleasure of Allah
Almighty, for they are the most knowledgeable of all people of what
brings one closer to Allah. What a disappointment and a loss it is if
one exhausts his life-span in repeating the words of one who make claims
to have had such knowledge, abandoning those who inhabited houses
wherein Allah permitted that He is adored and His Name is lauded?!

[^8]: It is important, as the author has pointed out, to hide such
sacred conditions from people. One may not intend anything but goodness
when he reveals it, but there is no guarantee that he will not be
afflicted with conceit which may impact a person when not being mindful,
something to which everyone other than an infallible person is exposed.
Add to this the possibility of a believer exposing another servant of
Allah, other than himself, to think ill of him, to accuse him of being a
pretender. He will thus be violating the order of his Master not to
expose himself to being the object of suspicion. The dignity of a
believer is one of the issues of righteousness with which Allah, the
most Exalted One, never entrusted His servant.


