Chapter 8: A Believer’s Conviction is Incomplete Without Certain Merits
=======================================================================

   
 Be informed that you are expected to emulate the Sunnah of your Lord,
the most Exalted, the most Great, then the Sunnah of your Prophet (‘s),
then the Sunnah of your Imam. Imam al-Ridha’ (‘a) is quoted on p. 241,
Vol. 2 of *Al-Kafi* as having said,  
    
 ‘**A believer does not reach the degree of conviction (*****iman*****)
until he has acquired three merits: He follows a Sunnah from his Lord, a
Sunnah from his Prophet (‘s), and a Sunnah from his wali (master, Imam).
As for a Sunnah from his Lord, he has to conceal His secret; Allah, the
most Exalted, the most Great, has said, ‘He (alone) knows the unseen,
and He makes no one acquainted with His mysteries, except a messenger
with whom He is pleased...’** (Qur’an, 72:26-27). **As for a Sunnah of
his Prophet (‘s), it is tolerating people. Allah, the most Exalted and
the most Great, ordered His Prophet (‘s) to tolerate people, saying,
‘Hold to forgiveness; command what is right.’** (Qur’an, 7:199). **As
for a Sunnah from his wali, it is taking to patience during trials and
tribulations**.**’**  
    
 One who is expected to emulate an Attribute of his Lord whereby He is
praised, there is no doubt that he is prepared to assume a great status
and a tremendous significance. It is so because Allah thus enables you
to enter His abode which He chose and preferred for His friends, the
elite ones, the loved ones, and it is Paradise. He, therefore, is bound
to guide you to merits which make you look like the residents of such an
abode so that you will be on par with the abode and with those who
reside therein.  
    
 As for the abode itself, it is good and pure in the most perfect purity
and light. Its residents are the prophets, messengers, martyrs and the
truthful; therefore, the wisdom of the Wise One insists that there
should be nobody inside this abode who looks like a stranger. Thus, you
in such an abode will not look out of place[^1]. Through His munificence
and mercy on you, He does not want you to abide except in the good and
pure abode; therefore, His Divine care insists on guiding you to the
most sublime of attributes, the most perfect, the most shiny, the most
precious.

He does not accept that you should emulate any merits except the ones
which, due to their distinction, bring you sublimity and greatness,
merits which He attributes to His own Self, praising thereby Himself.
One whose merits are attributed to Him fits to reside in the abode
related to Him. Since his neighbors in the said abode are friends of
Allah, He has obligated him to adopt their mannerism. It is then that
the Creator, Praise to Him, shall address his soul, which is now good
and pure, having adopted such good and pure merits, saying,  
    
**‘O soul at rest and satisfied! Return to your Lord, well pleased and
well-pleasing to Him! Enter, then, [your abode] among My devotees! Yes,
enter My heaven!’** (Qur’an, 89:27-30).  
    
 These merits are numerous. The Imam (‘a) selected three of them in
particular to be given preference, so much so that he described
conviction as hinging on them:  
    
***First***: One has to keep his secret a secret because most people
have shortcomings and are imperfect. But the attributes of perfection
are so well known in their goodness, beauty and honor that people wish
they have had them to adorn themselves by. Since they run contrarily to
what the nafs wants, and since people’s determination to oppose their
nafs is weak, they feel reluctant to struggle to achieve the above.

But when they find someone with the determination to adorn himself with
them, they worry lest he, indeed, should acquire them and thus become
superior to them. Since the nafs does not wish to lag behind the peers,
actually it by nature wishes to surpass them, these people will try by
all means to stop him from achieving his objective with their actions,
statements and tricks. One person cannot confront countless people.

The One Who decreed the *Shari\`ah* did not make a way for the believer
to save himself from all of this except when one conceals his secret. He
must not demonstrate what he is determined to achieve. It is then that
he will be spared the evil of people. He will then be able to stay
connected with that path.  
    
 Since Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the skilled doctors and the kind men of wisdom,
know that the evil-insinuating nafs is also one of the believer’s
enemies, belonging to the same category like those that stand to block
his way, they (‘a) greatly commended the believer to conceal his secret,
explaining to him that doing so is one of the attributes of the Lord
whereby He praised Himself, and that conviction hinges upon it.  
    
 What is meant here is to suspend self-resisting [when listening to
Satanic insinuations]: the inclination of the nafs to show-off. The
reason is that one to whom such an inclination is manifested will
benefit therefrom, or he may be delighted therewith, or his advice or
supplication may be solicited, perhaps he will convey such knowledge to
those who may benefit from it. There may be other reasons why such a
manifestation is sound[^2].

Such hindering insinuations must be rejected if one is sound of judgment
at all due to Allah’s will that he should hide his secret from them. He
must confide his secrets only to the custodians of the secrets, the
mysteries, of the Almighty. A wise person does not abandon the doing of
what is more wise. He does not do anything except what is most
perfect.  
    
 It is concluded from the above that the revelation [of one’s secrets]
harms people and runs contrarily to wisdom. You, too, must follow the
example of your Lord in dealing with wisdom. You must avoid what
corrupts; otherwise, it is nothing but corruption even if it has the
appearance of righteousness! Our master, Imam Ali son of Imam al-Husain
(‘a), said the following to al-Zuhri:  
    
**‘Beware of saying what the hearts reject even if you have an excuse
for saying it, for you cannot excuse everyone who rejects what you may
say.’** (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 71, p. 156).  
    
 Among the poetry attributed to the Imams (‘a) is the following:  
  

**The jewels of my knowledge shall I from people hide**

**Lest an ignorant person should see knowledge and is therewith tried.**

**Before me, the Father of al-Hasan (‘a) said the same and why**

**To al-Husain (‘a), having admonished al-Hasan (‘a) thereby.**

**Lord! If the jewels of certain knowledge I discharged,**

**I with the sin of adoring idols will be charged.**

**Thus, some Muslims will find it fit to shed my blood,**

**Seeing as good what is most abhorred.**

   
 Such knowledge is very well known. There are many incidents which
condone hiding a secret and condemn going to extremes in propagating
something. The conclusion achieved therefrom is that one who is
dominated by love for secrecy and contempt for its revelation sees
through the eyes of reason. When he sees an occasion to reveal, he
reveals as much as he sees necessary. Thus, he follows the
recommendations of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) who have said,  
    
**‘Do not convey wisdom except to those who are worthy of it; otherwise,
you will then do wisdom injustice. Nor should you hold it back from
those who are worthy of it; otherwise, you will then be unjust to
them.**’ (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 2, p. 78).  
    
 Be admonished that the attribute of keeping a secret to yourself
involves two issues:  
    
 One is that a believer has a secret to keep. The other is that he has
the faculty of concealing and hiding to the extent that his own nafs
will not over-power him so as to reveal and to publicize it. All of this
involves the second. As for the first, suffices it what Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) once said to al-Mufaddal ibn Salih:  
    
**‘O Mufaddal! Allah has servants who deal with Him with the sincerity
of His secret, so He deals with them with the sincerity of His kindness.
These are the ones whose books of reckoning will pass by Him empty, so
when they stand before Him, He shall fill them from the secrets of that
with which they entrusted Him.’**  
    
 Al-Mufaddal asked the Imam,  
  

**‘Master! Why is that?!’**

   
 Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said,  
    
**‘He granted them a respite till the time when the custodians [of His
secrets] become acquainted with what went on between Him and
them**.**’**  
    
 Our mentor, ‘Abul-\`Abbas,’ namely Ahmed ibn Fahad, having cited this
sacred tradition, said the following by way of comment:  
    
**‘Do not be unmindful about such lofty stations which are more precious
than Paradise itself’** (as we read in \`Iddat al-Da\`i).[^3]  
    
 I say that it is to this meaning that a poet refers, having done well
when he said,  
    
**The hearts of those blessed with knowledge have eyes**  
**That see what onlookers do not see,**  
**And the Sunnah with secrets silently speaks**  
**What even the honored scribes do not know,**  
**And hearts fly with no wings**  
**To the domain of the Lord of the World.**  
    
 All this is relevant to the first tradition.  
    
***Second***: One has to tolerate people. It is a Sunnah narrated about
the Prophet (‘s). We have already cited Ali (‘a) as saying that the one
loved by Allah the most is he who emulates His Prophet (‘s). The wisdom
behind it is similar to that about hiding your secret from people.
Actually, the latter is one way to tolerate people.  
    
*Al-Kafi* quotes Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying,  
    
**‘The Messenger of Allah (‘a) has said, ‘My Lord ordered me to tolerate
people just as He ordered me to perform the obligations.’**  
    
 He also cites his grandfather the Prophet (‘s) as saying,  
    
**‘Tolerating people is half the extent of conviction (*****iman*****),
while kindness to them is half the livelihood.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p.
117).  
    
 Then Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) commented saying,  
    
**‘Socialize with the righteous secretly and socialize with the sinners
publicly; do not be harsh with the latter lest they should oppress you.
A period of time will come wherein the only one who safeguards his creed
is one thought to be not very smart at all. He accustoms himself to
being called unintelligent, one lacking the faculty to rationalize.’**
(*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 96).  
    
 The Imam (‘a) also quotes his grandfather (‘a) as saying,  
    
**‘If someone lacks three merits, he cannot accomplish anything: piety
which shields him from violating the sanctities of Allah (‘a), manners
whereby he tolerates people, and clemency whereby he responds to the
ignorance of an ignorant person.** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 95).  
    
 Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has also said,  
    
**‘One who keeps his hand from harming people keeps away only one hand
while they will keep away from him many.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p.
96).  
    
 So, my Brother, what some people, who claim to be on the right track
and are pious, say that they do not care about people, that they do not
need them, and that they take them lightly, up to the end of such
statements which fall in the category of lack of toleration..., all of
this is actually following one’s own desires. It is ignorance about the
way of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)[^4].

Many people confuse tolerating people with pretending to get along very
well with them, imagining that the mandated toleration is pretension.
But the difference between them is quite clear. Contemptible pretension
is agreeing on making what is ugly look as though it were beautiful. Or
it may be abandoning its rejection out of the desire to attain what they
have, so that one may thus acquire some worldly benefits or win their
hearts without avoiding a wrongdoing.  
    
 What proves the beauty of kindness and toleration is that it leads to
everything good. Traditions are very well known about a Syrian man who
spoke inappropriately to Imam Ali son of al-Husain (‘a) when the Imam
was transported to Yazid, the curse of Allah be on him, in Syria. The
Syrian said, ‘Praise be to Allah Who killed you, Who proved your claims
false and Who relieved the people of your mischief.’ When the man
finished his statement, the Imam (‘a) said to him,  
    
**‘O sheikh! Do you read the Qur’an?’ The Syrian answered in the
affirmative. The Imam (‘a) asked him, ‘Have you read this verse: Say: I
ask no reward of you for this except the love of those near in kin?’ The
Syrian again answered in the affirmative. The Imam (‘a) asked him, AHave
you read this verse: Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from
you, you members of the family, and to make you pure and spotless**
(Qur’an, 33:33)?**’ The old man again answered in the affirmative. The
Imam (‘a) asked him again, ‘O sheikh! Have you read this verse: And give
to the near in kin his due right** (Qur’an, 17:26)?**’ The Syrian also
answered in the affirmative. The Imam (‘a) said to him, ‘We are the near
in kin, and we are the family of your Prophet (‘s)!’**  
    
 It was then that the sheikh raised his hand to the heavens, wept and
dissociated himself from Husain’s killer [Yazid]. He wept and repented
(*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 45, p. 129). So, look into how kindness attracts
one to righteousness!  
    
 Toleration means abandoning denial in order to avoid or minimize a
wrongdoing, or it may be a precaution against initiating a wrongdoing;
so, how can this be compared with that?! Toleration may be a measure to
avoid the mischief of the person whom you tolerate, or it may be to
attract him to righteousness. All these objectives cannot be rejected.
Or it may be the outcome of fear, or to render something wrong
ineffective. It is then that kindness, a smile, toleration of harm and
rewarding evil with goodness is nothing but toleration about which Allah
has said,  
    
**‘Repel (evil) with what is better: Then will he whom you once hated
become, as it were, your friend and intimate! And no one will be granted
such goodness except those who exercise patience and self-restraint,
none but persons of the greatest good fortune.’** (Qur’an, 41:34-35).  
    
 And it is similar to this verse:  
    
**‘... Speak gently to him; perhaps he may take warning or fear
(Allah).’** (Qur’an, 20:44).  
    
 And it is like a statement by Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) cited in *Al-Kafi* as
follows:  
    
**‘While the Prophet (‘s) was once with \`Aishah, a man sought
permission to meet with him. The Prophet (‘s) said, ‘How bad the [timing
of the] tribesman is!. \`Aishah, therefore, entered her chamber, and the
Messenger of Allah (‘a) permitted the man to come in. When the man
entered, the Messenger of Allah (‘a) received him with a smile on his
sacred face and kept talking to him. When the man finished his talk and
left, \`A=ishah said, ‘O Messenger of Allah (‘a)! You were not pleased
with this man coming to meet with you [at a very inappropriate time],
yet you welcomed him with your smile and paid him your full attention!
The Prophet (‘s) said, ‘The worst of Allah’s servants is one with whom
you do not wish to sit on account of his sins.** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p.
246).  
    
 This is how one tolerates others. Such toleration is a sort of
taqiyyah. Countless testimonials in favor of taqiyyah exist, so much so
that the scholars of exegesis interpret the following verse as referring
to it:  
    
**‘Truly the most honored of you in Allah's sight is (he who is) the
most righteous [muttaqi] among you.’** (Qur’an, 49:13),  
    
 that is, the most fair in observing taqiyyah. It is even said that nine
out of the ten portions of faith lies in taqiyyah as we read on p. 172,
Vol. 2, of *Al-Kafi*.  
    
 Suffices you a statement in *Al-Kafi* by Hammad ibn Waqid al-Fahham who
said, ‘I once met Abu Abdullah (‘a) face-to-face, but I turned my face
away from him and kept going. After that I visited him and said, ‘May I
be sacrificed for your sake! I meet you face-to-face but I turn my face
away from you out of my fear to trouble you.’ He (‘a) said to me,  
    
**‘May Allah have mercy on you! But a man met me yesterday at
such-and-such a place and said to me, ‘O Abu Abdullah!. Yet there was
nothing good or beautiful about meeting him.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p.
173).  
    
 So, notice how the man earned the Imam’s supplication to Allah to have
mercy on him when he did not greet him upon seeing him face-to-face, and
notice how one did not take note of the Imam’s status, so the Imam was
not pleased with him and said that Athere was nothing good or beautiful
about such a meeting[^5].’  
    
 From this incident and its likes, you come to know that a believer may
abandon being gracious to someone when his action brings the latter envy
and dissension. One may even be gracious to another by speaking ill of
him as some Imams (‘a) did  to some of their closest friends; it is
similar to the incident when al-Khidr (‘a) made a hole in a ship so it
might be spared confiscation by an oppressive king.  
    
***Third***: Patience during the time of trials and tribulations. There
is no doubt that life is a believer’s jail. Any jail producing something
good is by itself good. Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said the following to a man
who complained to him about being needy:  
    
**‘Be patient; Allah will find an outlet for you.’ Then the Imam
remained silent for some time following which he asked the same man,
‘Tell me, how is Kufa’s jail?’ ‘Not roomy at all,’ the man answered,
‘and it stinks. Its inmates are in the very worst of condition.’ The
Imam said to the man, ‘You are already in a jail, and you nevertheless
want to be enjoying ease while still being there! Have you not come to
know that life is a believer’s jail?’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 195).  
    
 A believer may either be eager for the Hereafter, so the basis of his
stay in life is that the latter feels like a prison for him in addition
to the other calamities to which he may be exposed[^6]. Or he may be one
feared as having inclinations for this world, desiring what is in it, so
the munificence of the most Wise One comes to disturb him with all kinds
of problems so that he may find it [life in this world] repugnant and
not feel comfortable therewith; it is the abode of the oppressors. Or he
may be weak in his deeds of righteousness, obeying a little [of Allah’s
commandments]. The munificence of the most Wise One comes not to deprive
him of the garment of trials and tribulations. Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has
said,  
    
**‘Had a believer known how many rewards he would have when afflicted
with problems, he would have wished to be ripped off with scissors.’**
(*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 198).  
    
 Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has said,  
    
**‘If a believer is tried with an affliction, and if he takes to
patience, he will be rewarded with rewards fit for a thousand
martyrs.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 75).  
    
 Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has also said,  
    
**‘A servant of Allah may have a special status with Allah, the most
Great, the most Exalted One, which he earns through one of two merits:
his wealth may disappear, or he may be tried with an affliction in his
own body.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 199).  
    
 Affliction, then, may either bring a believer rewards, thus elevating
his status, or it may be his penalty and atonement, and both are good
and liked by a man of wisdom. As for the rewards, this is quite obvious.
As for the penalty, it is on account of narratives from Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
that Allah is too Gracious to penalize His servant twice [in the life of
this world as well as in the Hereafter]. Anything for which He penalizes
him in the life of this world, he is not going to penalize him for it in
the Hereafter.  
    
 So, if a believer has to be afflicted, he has to be patient. Allah
created patience before affliction; otherwise, a believer’s heart would
have cracked like an egg falling on a solid ground. Imam Ali (‘a) is
quoted in *Al-Kafi* as having cited the Messenger of Allah (‘a) as
saying,  
    
**‘Patience is of** ***three*** **types: at the time of affliction,
during the time of obedience [of Allah’s Commandments] and at the time
of avoiding committing a transgression. One who is patient when
afflicted till he is solaced, Allah will write for him three hundred
degrees between each is like the distance between the heavens and the
earth. One who is patient while obeying [his Maker], Allah will write
for him six hundred degrees, the distance between each is like the
distance between the corners of the earth and the \`Arsh. And when one
is patient in order not to commit a transgression, Allah writes for him
nine hundred degrees the distance between each is like the distance
between the corners of the earth and the end of the \`Arsh.**’
(*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 75).  
    
*Al-Kafi* also cites Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying,  
    
**‘We [Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)] are quite patient, and our Shi\`ah are even
more so.’**  
    
 Someone said to him,  
    
**‘May I be your sacrifice! How can your  Shi\`ah be more patient than
you?!’**  
    
 The Imam  (‘a) said,  
    
**‘It is so because we are patient about what we know, whereas they are
patient about what they do not know.’** (*Al-Kafi*, Vol. 2, p. 76).  
    
 Notice how kind Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are! Notice how they appreciate their 
Shi\`ah, how the latter are rewarded even for the few calamities which
are a fraction of those with which Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are afflicted. They
want their  Shi\`ah to be attached to them so that they would not be
separated from them.

In the latter case, their  Shi\`ah would decrease in number and perish,
for Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) know that their  Shi\`ah cannot receive salvation
except when Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) consider them as part of them, making their
holy souls and those of their  Shi\`ah one in kind. It is then that
there will be no possibility of rejecting the whole; everyone has to be
accepted.  
    
 But if each person is judged individually, their  Shi\`ah will
inevitably perish. Their ultimate concern, their earnest objective with
regard to their  Shi\`ah, is that the latter become like them just as
the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said,  
  

**‘One who emulates a people almost becomes one of them.’**
(*Nahjul-Balagha*h, axiom 207).

   
 Then they perfect all of this with their own intercession and with
supplicating for their  Shi\`ah. For example, the supplication of the
Imam of the Time (‘a), may Allah hasten his reappearance and make me one
of his sacrifices, which was heard by the Sayyid son of al-Tawus. It is
the one in which he, while being inside the vault, supplicates for the 
Shi\`ah of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). Some of its text has slipped my memory. It
includes the following:  
    
**‘Lord! Our  Shi\`ah are of us! They were created of the remnant of our
mold and kneaded with the noor of our** ***wilaya*****; so, place us in
charge of their affairs, forgive the sins which they have committed out
of their reliance on their love for us, and when their scales [of good
deeds] become light, make them heavy with the surplus of our own good
deeds.’** (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 35, p. 303, narrated in various
different wordings)[^7].  
    
 Look at him, may Allah hasten his reappearance, and may He make me his
sacrifice, and how he goes to extremes in mixing the  Shi\`ah with their
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) so that they do not get separated from each other. He
once says that both were created from the same mold, and once he says
that the followers, sins originate from reliance for salvation from them
on love for Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). And once he supplicates to his Lord to
complete their shortcoming with the surplus of the good deeds of their
masters and of those who love them.  
    
 So, brother! They know what we do not. They are the ones who have
said,  
    
**‘Do not look at the act of disobedience; look at the One Whom you
disobey.’** (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 74, p. 77).  
    
 Because of their knowledge of our disobedience, and due to the
intensity of their fear for us lest we should perish, they have guided
us to the path of salvation which leads to safety. This path is:
exerting a real effort to emulate Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) as much as possible,
so much so that one’s main concern should be not to forget about them
for a twinkling of an eye. This is so on account of what Imam al-Ridha’
(‘a) has said, that is, he is satisfied from a believer (*mu’min*) with
his following of his master’s tradition.

He means that such a tradition incorporates all other traditions.
Patience, then, in its three stages: during the time of affliction,
during the time of obedience and during the time avoiding disobedience,
leaves no tradition without including it. It has already been stated in
the transmissions relevant to mut\`ah that:  
    
**‘I hate for any man among you not to adorn himself with a merit done
by the Messenger of Allah (‘a).’**  
    
 The book titled *Al-Faqih* quotes Bakr ibn Muhammad who cites Abu
Abdullah (‘a) saying that he asked the Imam (‘a) about the mut\`ah. The
Imam (‘a) answered,  
    
**‘I hate for a Muslim man to leave this life and there is one merit of
the Messenger of Allah (‘a) which he did not do.’** (*Al-Faqih*, Vol. 3,
p. 463).  
    
 It is also narrated that a believer is not complete till he performs
the mut\`ah (*Al-Faqih*, Vol. 3, p. 466). Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), in an
agreed upon tradition, is quoted as having said,  
** **  
**‘I hate for a man to die leaving one tradition of the Messenger of
Allah (‘a) without practicing it.**’ (*Al-Faqih*, Vol. 3, p. 466)[^8].  
    
 This proves that Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) do not wish their  Shi\`ah to neglect
any of their practiced traditions. And if someone does so, he will be
liable to do something hateful to them [i.e. smear their reputation];
may Allah protect us and our brethren from doing that, and may He enable
us to bring happiness to them.  
    
 There is no harm here in pointing out to some of their traditions which
they very much cared about, so much so that they upheld them and paid
attention to them to the extent of treating them as obligations, perhaps
Allah will enable us to emulate them in upholding these traditions
except when there is a very strong reason not to, and in the presence of
more serious obstacles:  
    
***Fulfilling a Promise***: The way of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is that a
believer must hold himself accountable to fulfilling his promise, out of
his precaution against eventualities because of which he may fall into
breaking his promise which, in their view, is quite serious[^9]. As long
as one cannot control unexpected events, he is not counted as a
violator. If he makes a promise, he must uphold it and not falter. One
who falters in fulfilling his promise goes against the way of Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a). Thus, he excludes himself from their motto, entering in
the motto of others; may Allah protect us against such a situation.  
    
 What brings this notion closer to your comprehension is the will which
the Prophet (‘s) made to Ali (‘a) to pay off his debts on his
behalf[^10] and to likewise fulfill his pledges. Had he not regarded his
pledge just as he regarded a debt, and had he not held his conscience
responsible for fulfilling it, his greatest excuse would have been death
and thus inability to fulfill it; otherwise, he would not have needed to
obligate his wasi [the Commander of the Faithful (‘a)] to pay off his
debts [and fulfill his pledges on his behalf]. Indeed, a poet did well
when he composed the following lines:  
  

**A good man is one who does good without a promise,**

**And one who fulfills a promise is half a man;**

**But if someone did not do either, he is a woman,**

**And half a woman is one who insists on so doing.**

   
 Be advised that what we mean by fulfilling a promise, which is the way
of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), when obstacles arise and excuses become available,
is the situation when one is still able to fulfill his promise. But in
the absence of such obstacles, this goes without saying. Breaking a
promise without an excuse is surely a defect in the individual and an
ugliness even if done by the least of all people. Such a conduct is not
worthy of inclusion among the attributes of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) which we
would like to urge others to emulate.

Other merits are:  
    
***Voluntary Benevolence Beyond and More than a Pledge***: They treat
this as an obligation. The Prophet (‘s) was always gracious in
fulfilling his promise, that is, it was his habit, whenever he borrowed,
to give to the lender more than what he owed him, so much so that he was
very well known for sticking to this habit. As for his Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
generosity is their demeanor and benevolence is their mark as we recite
in the inclusive ziyarah. They were the embodiment of acting upon this
verse:  
    
**‘Allah commands [the doing of] justice and benevolence...’** (Qur’an,
16:90).  
    
 It is said that Ali (‘a) emancipated one thousand slaves from his own
personal toil (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 63, p. 320). He was not satisfied
with just emancipating them, but he provided them with means of earning
a livelihood as well. Also, once he promised a bedouin to give him four
thousand dirhams, so he sold the orchard which had been planted by the
Messenger of Allah (‘a). He, thus, gave him what he had promised him and
a lot more (*Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 41, p. 45).

Voluntary benevolence which exceeds the amount owed, or more than what
was promised, has a way in winning people’s hearts even if its amount is
small. It is understood, from examining the way of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
that they adhered to it.[^11]  
    
***Self Denial Even While in Need***: Allah Almighty has said,  
    
**‘... They give others in preference over their own selves, even though
poverty is their lot.’** (Qur’an, 59:9).  
    
 Be informed that if a believer does not uphold self-denial, making that
a priority, he will sooner or later be overcome by his own ego, by the
desire to oppress, to abandon equity, though it may be for periods of
time. He will then stop being a believer (*mu’min*), for a believer is
one from whose evil people are safe, unlike one who upholds
self-denial.  
 The maximum impetus of the latter’s nafs is that he should abandon such
self-denial. So, if he does abandon self-denial, he will not abandon the
basis of fulfilling his obligations. At any rate, he will be safe from
committing injustice[^12].  
    
 All of this is a drop in the bucket, yet feeling satisfied with this
much is better. Allah’s help do we seek; Allah suffices us, and how
Great the One upon Whom we rely is!  
    
** **

[^1]: These statements, if absorbed, can turn the worship of a servant
of Allah from one resulting from an effort to overcome reluctance to the
world of adoration which is in sync with the nature of the mood. Since
He wishes the residents of this abode to be all in harmony therein, He
loves anything which brings about such harmony. If adoration is a hard
undertaking in its first type, it is clear that the worship of a servant
will then be involuntary, a manifestation of affectation, earning
nothing more than rewards, whereas the true adoration is expected to
lift the worshipper to the state of feeling at ease with the Lord of the
Worlds. Such an ease makes the worshipper forget any hardship resulting
from the effort to earn His Pleasure.

[^2]: These are beautiful portraits of how Satan makes wrong look right.
He resorts to the method of decorating falsehood in order to make it
look like righteousness. Here is the role of one’s insight which unveils
such decoration; it is one of the requirements of treading the path to
Allah Almighty. Such a decoration is possible in every stage of one’s
path. It diverts him from what is more important to what is most
important. It is, hence, obligatory on every servant of Allah, whenever
he goes forward or lags behind, to study the other possible alternatives
so that he may select what is better from among similar options. This is
closer to acting in accordance with one’s actual obligation. This, in
truth, is an act that pleases the Lord.

[^3]: For a believer to have a secret in life is a matter which has been
overlooked by most people. They have contented themselves with building
for the life of this world without having a particular endeavor to do
what brings them eternal happiness. Every believer who believes in
another life wherein the fruit of his deeds will be manifested has to
have one particular concern in the field of bringing about a distinctive
connection with his Lord, which is the axis of all his activities. It is
clear that the nature of this connection varies from one servant of
Allah to another according to what one has been given by the Lord of
Existence of abilities till the matter reaches His loved one, the Chosen
One (‘a) who had with him all certain conditions which neither a close
angel nor a sent Prophet could bear.

[^4]: This is a beautiful portrait of reality and of upholding the way
of Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) from the viewpoint of one who already does so.
Holding others in contempt is one of the well known slippery paths in
this field due to what the person who treads the path leading to Allah
sees of the bright spiritual portraits which may distract him even from
his obligation while dealing with people. Actually, if he looks at
people as being the dependents of Allah Almighty, and that benevolence
to them is one of the manifestations of obedience to the One Who created
them, he will never hold a single one of them in contempt, even if the
latter may be disobedient to his Lord. It is well known that if all the
links of adoring the Lord come to an end, the link of the Creator with
the one whom He creates remains to the very end.

[^5]: From this narrative and its likes do you come to know an important
principle in the rules of dealing with people as required by Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). This principle is: taking everything into consideration when
options abound. A believer opts for the most wise course of action,
ignoring all others. Rationality, something which is advocated by
numerous traditions, requires a believer to look into one matter from
various angles so that, having done his calculations, he may arrive at
the one which in the end pleases Allah Almighty the most, even when
there are other options which please Him, too, but they are no match to
his ultimate objective.

[^6]: What a way this is to bring about a feeling of eagerness to those
who are suffering from trials and tribulations! The compiler has
clarified the effect of tribulation on all kinds of people, starting
from the people of the Hereafter and ending with the custodians of the
creed. But there is a huge difference between the effect of problems on
the people who seek the Hereafter: It increases the latter’s eagerness
to the abode wherein there is neither tribulation nor exhaustion. It
[adversely] affects the people who run after this life. It increases the
rewards of those who inwardly feel closer to Allah. Such closeness is
prompted by the Divine bliss which is relevant only to His friends,
those who follow His Commandments, who are aware of His watchful eyes.
It is from this onset that the Divine blessing descends upon those who
are satisfied with their lots: ‘We belong to Allah, and to Him is our
return.’ It is well known that the implication here is not simply that
we shall be brought before Him [for judgment] without the existence of a
state of link with the Absolute King, with the depth of belonging to
Him.

[^7]: Contemplate upon the depth of the emotional link between this
Infallible Imam (‘a) of the Time and his subjects who shall be gathered
under his banner. This should not make anyone wonder, for the Imam
adopts the manners of Allah Almighty to the extreme degrees humanly
possible. It is well known that the Imam-in-Charge (‘a), during his
occultation, is not indifferent to what happens to the nation of his
grandfather (‘a). It is so because he is the one who is most concerned
about the events of this time in all their cycles, just as his
grandfather the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) used to feel the pain
suffered by hungry people in Yamamah or Hijaz or anywhere else. From
this onset, a person who truly loves someone does not add his own burden
of worries to the burden already suffered by the person whom he loves.
Rather, he tries his best to decrease his worries by doing whatever is
required to remove the grief of his friend. Add to this how he goes far
in supplicating for an ease for his hardship; surely there is no ease
from hardship for all people except through his reappearance.

[^8]: But one must not be unmindful with regard to the law of making the
best option when plenty are available about what is commendable. The
traditions, in their first text, call for good merits, leaving the
evaluation of practicing them to the individual himself who should rely
on his insight and knowledge of the other principles of the Shari\`ah.
For example, the traditions relevant to the mut\`ah, which the compiler
mentions, advocate the revival of this tradition which cures a lingering
problem in everyday life which cannot be solved except through permanent
or temporary marriage, or the alternative is adultery. There is no
comparison between what is haram and what is a Sunnah advocated by the
Prophet (‘s) and by the Imams (‘a) from among his offspring. But, by way
of comparison, we have to take notice of another text which explains the
importance of paying attention to other comparable issues when we
implement the Sunnah. The father of al-Hasan (‘a) is quoted as having
said the following to some of his followers: ‘Do not over-emphasize the
practice of mut\`ah; rather, you should observe the Sunnah. Do not let
it [mut\`ah] distract you from your beds and lawful wives, or else the
latter would disbelieve, dissociate themselves, complain about this
practice and [even] condemn us.’ (Was’ail al- Shi\`ah, Vol. 14, p. 450).

[^9]: Notice the expression of the author, how he emphasizes this point
although there is no proof from the Shari\`ah that breaking a promise,
because of an unexpected event, especially in the presence of the
sincere intention to fulfill it, is haram. A believer who watches his
conduct reaches a point where he avoids doing anything held by the Lord
as ugly and contemptible, though it is not necessarily haram. He does so
out of his apprehension lest he should incur the Wrath of the Master
even in a degree commensurate with the extent of the deed. A lover is
prompted by avoiding doing anything which the one he loves dislikes even
if he is not obligated to do so as we, lovers in this world, do. So,
what would you say about the love for the One loving Whom is the blessed
result of His own munificence and favors?!

[^10]: Historians estimate the debts left by the Messenger of Allah (‘a)
at the time of his demise to be close to 400,000 dirhams which Ali (‘a)
did, indeed, pay off during a number of years. \_\_ Tr.

[^11]: A believer has to absorb the philosophy behind spending in all
its Shari\`a-related and ethical aspects which include taking into
consideration people’s feelings. He should bear in mind that what he
spends is dealing with the wealth of his Master with the latter’s
permission, even as he tackles the demands of this Master. So, there
should be no amazement after that because what is worthy of amazement is
spending from the real wealth, not from the purported wealth. This is
why you find them spending while being fearful because they will return
to their Master Who will ask them about what they had spent, including
spending on commendable causes, because there is a possibility of
something wrong with the way whereby they earned the wealth or how they
spent it. One of the philosophical aspects of spending is that if one
gives someone something by way of charity, he must not follow his giving
with reminding that person of it, nor should he follow it with harming
him. Doing so nullifies the requirements of benevolence, obstructing the
possibility of its being replenished in the future.

[^12]: This observation by the author is beautiful. He sets safe cycles
for the believer further from the dangerous ones. He calls for
self-denial which, were one to obey his own inclination to abandon it,
will still maintain the basis of his spending security against
extravagance. This is the way which has to be followed in all ethical
fields; otherwise, one who seeks a path to Allah will permit himself to
enjoy some permissible facets the legality of which is in doubt, such as
talking nonsense or doing what is haram. His nafs will then entice him
into looking at what is definitely haram.


