Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيْم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْمَالَمِيْنَ وَ الصَّلوةُ وَالسَّلاَمُ عَلى
رَسُوْلِه شَفِيْعِ الْمُذْنِبِيْنَ وَ آلِه الطَّيْبِيْنَ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ : اَمَّا بَعْدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no doubt that intercession forms the basic principle of our
faith and there are so many Qur’anic Ayats, traditions and narrations
supporting it. That is why, people who have little knowledge of Qur’an,
the idea of intercession is as clear as the day. But today, in this
progressive world, people have pushed back the Qur’anic ayats and the
traditions of the prophet. They look at intercession with doubt.

There raise many objections on intercession, for e.g. they think that if
it is in Islam, then it favours the people who are real sinners because
they think that intercession is a political group. They also presume
that intercession is against the judgement of Allah as Allah has made
obligatory for Himself to punish the sinners.

The reality of intercession is this that they are not punished. Many
other objections are also there for intercession. To be free from the
punishment, they have introduced this concept. In fact, the relation of
intercession is not with sinners but with good doers. Intercession is
not to save the sinners from punishment but to raise the position of
good doers in heaven. In other words, intercession is there to increase
in reward and not to decrease in sins.

This is also wrong from Qur’anic verses and traditions. As intercession
is related to sinners and good doers. It does not conclude that the
sinners go on committing as many sins as they like on this basis and
they may obtain salvation on the day of judgement. If they don’t commit
sins, the idea of intercession will not come into picture. And the
Prophets and their successors will be deprived of giving them
intercession.

Looking at this issue, I found it necessary to pen down some words
regarding this topic. Readers are advised to go thoroughly so that they
can get the right concept of intercession.

Sayed Abbas Abedi  
 Alipur


