Meaning and Concept of Intercession
===================================

The word intercession is well-known amongst the people and everybody is
aware of it. It is the recommendation of great personality by which the
errors are forgiven. It is the root of **شفع** which means pair. The
intercessor and his greatness on one hand and the ability and capacity
of the other on other hand. The combination of intercessor and the one
who is being recommended results in intercession. This concludes that on
the day of judgement every sinner will not be forgiven, neither anybody
can do intercession.

In Islam, the conditions of both are well explained. The people think
that on the day of judgement Firaun, Yazeed, Hajjaj ibn Yusuf Saqafi,
Changez, etc. will also be forgiven. But those who are ‘based ones’ who
are astrayed and they are deaf to hear the voice of truth and blind to
see and dump to speak for them there is nothing in the universe to save
them from the fire of hell. In Holy Qur’an it is mentioned in many
places that these people will taste severe punishment. Like this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَتَمَ اللهُ عَلَى قُلُوبِهمْ وَعَلَى سَمْعِهِمْ وَعَلَى أَبْصَارِهِمْ
غِشَاوَةٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and upon their hearing and
there is a covering over their eyes, and there is a great punishment for
them.” (Suratul Baqarah, 2:7)***

As per traditions, if there is no life of faith in their hearts,
paradise is impossible.

To understand intercession, one must understand the importance of
forgiveness. As it enlightens the lamp of guidance of Allah’s Mercy.
There is no doubt that forgiveness and pardon is based on some
conditions, as intercession is also based on some conditions. We will
first shed light on this issue with Qur’anic Ayats, traditions and the
view points of some learned scholars.


