Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

The need of English version of the delivered in extraordinarily
complicated cases, by Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) bin Abi Talib was
being felt by many among the English reading public since long. The
number of these judgements being very large, we have selected some very
important ones for this booklet.

These selections are made from various books on the subject in Arabic
and some other languages, particularly Qazae Amir-ul-Momineen compiled
by the celebrated Scholar, Al-Allama Al-Shaikh Muhammed Taqi Al-Tostari
published, Najaf, 1963, duly acknowledged in this compilation, and they
speak by themselves of the rare wisdom, quick with marvellous power of
judgement and knowledge of Hazrat Ali (A) with regards to Mathemancs,
Ancient History, Geography, Chemistry, Physics, Metaphysics Astronomy,
Medical Science and even some of the modern sciences unknown to mankind
in those days.

If Hazrat Ali (A)'s judgements contained in the following pages are
thoroughly gone through they will be sufficient to convince the readers
of the claim of almost all the great scholars that his unique judgements
although delivered by him long long ago are still indispensable for
those courts of law that desire their judgements to be most righteous in
each case.

Published at the very beginning of this book are some instructions of
Hazrat Ali (A) for the judges appointed by him or by the Chief Justice
(Qazi Shareh) of a particular Province in his jurisdiction.

Although the number of these instructions is small, they are self
sufficient as well as self-contained inasmuch as the duties and the path
to be adopted by the judges while delivering judgements in various cases
even to day is concerned, and will, we believe, be appreciated not only
by those who belong to the sphere of judicature but all others such as
the accused, coplainants, defendants and plaintiffs as well as the
general public till Qiyamat (the day of Judgement).

It is expected that this humble effort will be received with the same
zeal with which it is presented and will also serve the purpose it is
brought out for. It would be ingratitude on my part if I do not thank
the trustees of the Peer Mahomed Ebrahim Trust, Karachi, for without
their moral and material help as well as encouragement this humble
efforts on the part of the writer would not have seen the light of the
day. In fact they are the people under whose patronage and sincere
support such publications, which are most beneficial to the generality
of Allah's creatures are being presented at a definetly below the cost
price (free publications being mostly wasted and lose their value.)

Kaukab Shadani

Karachi 8th July, 1969


