Chapter One: Instructions to Judges
===================================

1. Oath and Evidence

The plaintiff should be first put on oath and should accept personal
responsibility of the proof. This brings the case fully to light and
makes the judgments easy.

2. Presentation of Evidence

Anyone who desires to present evidence in a case before you should be
given opportunity and allowed sufficient time for presenting the
witnesses in due course of time. If he fails to do it during the time
scheduled, you are free to deal with the case according to your own
power of judgement. However, the benefit of doubt and full facilities of
defence should be allowed to the accused.

3. Conditions of Witnesses

May it be known to you that all the Muslims are supposed to be just.
Therefore, they should be accepted as witnesses except those who are
already convicted in a previous case and have not offered penitence or
are accused of mischief-making and plunderism.

4. Anxiety when in the Court of Law

You should not feel pressure of anxiety under any circumstances in
delivering just judgements according to your power of decision-making.
Your judgements should, in all cases be the righteous one, which is a
must in view of your high office and for which there is a good reward
from Allah.

5. How to go to the Court of Law

You should not go to your Court when you are hungry. You must first
satisfy your hunger and then take up the hearing of cases brought to
your Court therefore.

6. Undue Haste in Decisions

Judges should not make haste in delivering the judgement in any case.
When a case is taken up for judgement, it should never be left
incomplete and should not, be delayed as according to a general saying
“Justice delayed is justice denied.” If there is a delay in some case,
it should not be insisted upon and in case it is quite evident, no
weakness should be shown in delivering the judgement according to the
provision of law. Everything should be decided according to the schedule
and should be kept in its proper place.

7. Judgement without emotions

You should keep control over your anger, fury and your tongue. No case
should in any condition be decided under the influence of fury or anger.
When you feel no iota of anger or strong emotion in your heart of
hearts, you are free to decide the case according to the provision of
law. This only is possible when you are sure of your return to Allah.

8. Judgement without bias

When your judgement is righteous, you should not be afraid of delivering
it even against your near relatives. In such a case you should only keep
the pleasure of Allah before you and should exercise your complete will
power. If it goes against your relations or your companions, you shall
have to bear with it. Although it would be heavy on you, but you shall
have to keep only the final result in view, which will certainly be good
after all.

9. Sentence to death and other deterrent punishments

Sentences to death should not be executed and other examplary
punishments should not be awarded until all such sentences are referred
to and are confirmed by me.

10. The Jury

Your jury should not consist of those who are greedy, coward and paupers
because such persons are not expected to arrive at a correct decision in
any case or deliver a righteous judgement without being impartial.

11. Disposal of Work Without Delay

The work of a particular day should be disposed of according to the
schedule at the proper time without any delay, because pressure of daily
work demands it.

12. Watch and Check on the Lower Courts by Chief Justice

To keep a proper watch and checking of the work of the lower courts is
one of your main responsibilities. The Qazis sitting there should be
allowed freedom of decision but should in no case be allowed to remain
needy so that nobody should have the courage to make them accept
unlawful gratification and put any kind of pressure on them.

13. Appointment of Judges

For the propagation and maintaince of justice in the country it is
imperative and essential that due care should be taken with regard to
the appointment of the Judges. For this office only top class people and
who are the best in your eyes should be selected. They should be only
such people who may not be afraid of pressure of work, should not insist
on their wrong decisions and should not stick to them after
manifestation and revelation of facts in a case. They should neither be
greedy and should be in the habit of pondering over all cases without
any exception. They should also stop at doubtful cases and should give
due consideration and attach importance to only clear proof. They should
not as well feel tired of any long examinations of the plaintiffs and
the defendants of going to the depth of each case and should be
courageous enough to deliver the righteous judgements after coming of
the facts to light. They should be only such persons who may not be
swayed with flattery, although such people are rare in the society and
are difficult to be found.

14. Mistakes in Judgements

In case someone is put to death as a result of a mistake in judgement
which is beyond the control of the judge such as on the basis of
witnesses, the compensation money would be paid from the Government
Exchequer (Baitul Mal).

15. Justice and Generosity

Mercy is a good. thing, but justice is, however, better and should never
be given up, that is, justice should not be sacrificed for mercy.

16. The Holy Quran and the Traditions

The Quranic commandments must be followed in each case but where
explanation is required, traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) should
invariably be referred to, because without referring to the traditions
it is at times impossible to arrive at a correct decision. Besides, the
carrying out of religious obligations without referring to traditions
would not be possible

through the Holy Quran only, which lays down only principles for the
Holy Prophet (S). As for example, there is no mention of the number of
Raka'at of the Namaz and the detailed Masails (Rules) of the performance
of Haj etc. in the Holy Quran.

17. In Case of a Zindiq

The case of a Zindiq (one who argues against the Quranic commandments
and the religious law) should be decided on the statements of two male
prosecution witnesses who are pious and of proved good character
notwithstanding a thousand defence witnesses of his class (Zindiq).

18. If a Judge Himself is an Eye-witness

Even if a judge himself is an eye-witness in a case of adultery his
witness is not acceptable, because in such cases at least four witnesses
are required according to the provisions of law.

19. Discretion

In case of the use of discretion (in some case) the path to be adopted
should be the one which is most truthful and most just and satisfying to
the general policy.

20. Orders of Punishment Should not be Executed on the Lands of the
Enemy

Orders of punshment should not be executed within the boundaries of
lands possessed by an enemy, lest the accused should run to the enemy's
camp for shelter and then fight on his behalf against our country in any
way.


