Chapter Two: Rare Justice: Judgements, Decisions and Answers to Difficult Questions
===================================================================================

2. The Case of a Slave Who Claimed to be the Master of His Master

It has been described by Kulaini and Sheikh on the authority of Imam
Jafar Sadiq (A) that during the 'Khilafat' (Caliphate) of Hazrat Ali(A)
two men, a slave and his master, were traveling to Kufa after performing
Haj (Pilgrimage). The slave committed some mistake and the master beat
him for that. The slave said to his master: “You are my slave, but still
you are beating me for nothing.” Some other people wanted to decide
between the two, but the slave did not admit his mistake but went on
repeating that he was the master of the man accompanying him till they
all entered Kufa. The master then said to his slave: “Let us go to
Ameer-ul-Momineen for a judgement.”

To that the slave agreed and they both went to Hazrat Ali (A), but while
giving their statements before him both claimed to be the master of each
other. The one who was actually the master stated weeping that he was
the real master and that his father had sent him on pilgrimage to Mecca.
He had taken a slave with him who had committed a mistake on his way
back home and he therefore beat him. By saying that he was the master he
wanted to take away all his possessions wrongfully. But the slave also
repeated the same story on oath. Hazrat Ali (A) after hearing both,
ordered them to present themselves before him the next day. Meanwhile,
he ordered two holes to be made in a wall, each one large enough for the
head of a man to pass through. When the two men came to him on the
following day, he ordered each of them to put his head into the two
holes. This done, he ordered his personal servant “Cut off the head of
the slave.” No sooner the slave heard this order, he pulled out his head
from the hole while the one who was the master did not move even
slightly. Hazrat Ali (A) then reprimanded the slave, who went away with
his master hanging his head in shame.

3. The Case of Two Women Each of Whom Claimed to be the Mother of One
and the Same Child

*Sarui has described in Irshad that during the caliphate of Hazrat Omar
two women were produced before Hakim, the then Qazi of Medina. Both of
them claimed the same child to be their own. Hakim was puzzled and did
not know what to do. The case was, therefore, taken to Hazrat Omar (RA)
for decision, but he also could not decide it. Hazrat Ali (A) was then
requested to decide the case. Hazrat Ali (A) asked the women as to
whether they had any objection if the child were cut into two and one
part given to each of them. One of the woman agreed to it, but the other
started crying. She said to Hazrat Ali (A): “O' Abul Hasan! I forego my
claim. Give the child to this woman.” Thus the child was restored to its
real mother who started crying*

5. A Strange Cruelty on an Orphan Girl and Hazrat Ali's Judgement
Therein

*It has been stated by Kulaini and Sheikh Suduq as also incorporated in
Sahih Bokhari on the authority of Hazrat Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) that a
slave girl was brought to the court of Hazrat Omar (RA) with the
accusation that she had not proved loyal to her master. Her story is
narrated thus:*

A man had given shelter to an orphan girl. As he often had to goout of
his home town on business trips, he had given the girl in the care of
his wife. When a few years passed like this, the girl became mature and
also looked extremely beautiful. The wife of the man with the aimthat
her husband should not marry the girl, once got her intoxicated, , with
the help of some woman from the neighbourhood and also got removed the
sign of her chastity with the help of the same woman.

When the man returned from his business tour abroad, he asked his wife
about the girl. Thereupon she replied with complete innocence:

*“She has eloped with a young man in the neighbourhood.” Then the man
went out in search of the girl, caught hold of her and dragged her to
the court of Hazrat Omar (RA) , who was then a Caliph.*

Hazrat Omar (RA) finding the case to be considerably difficult, referred
it to Amir ul-Momineen (A), as he had invariably done previously in such
cases.

Hazrat Ali (A) sent for the man, his wife and the girl, together with
the witnesses, if any. The man and his wife related the same story
before Amir-ul-Momineen (A) also, which they had previously related in
the court of Hazrat Omar (RA), and also produced the four women who had
been named by the wife of the appellant as witnesses.

Hazrat Ali (A) called the first witness, unsheathed his sword and
keeping it between the woman and himself, said to her: Do you know, I am
Ali (A) Ibne Abi-Talib? Tell me the truth, the truth and nothing but the
truth.” The woman who was exceedingly clever gave the same false
evidence she had given in the court of Hazrat Omar (RA) and insisted
thereon.

Hazrat Ali (A) seeing this, ordered her to be kept in confinement,
separate from other witness. He then caned the second witness before him
and pointing to his sword, said to her: “Do you see this sword? If you
do not tell the truth, I shall behead you with this sword. And remember
that the woman who has just gone out has told me the truth and,
therefore, I have given her pardon. If you tell me the true story, the
same you shall get.” Hearing this, the second woman related the true
story of the case, out of fear of her life.

Having heard the truth from the second witness Amir-ul- Momenin (A)
said, “After Daniel, the Prophet, I am the first man who has forced
different statements from two witnesses.”

Thereafter, he ordered punishment to be accorded to the wife of the man
in question. He also ordered the man to divorce his wife and marry the
innocent girl. When his orders were carried out, he paid the dowry to
the girl from his own pocket. He also fined the four women who had stood
witnesses in the case, one hundred Dirhams each, and gave the whole
amount of penalty to the girl.

After this strange but righteous judgement Hazrat Omar (RA) besought the
favour of Amir-ul-Momenin (A) of telling him the story of Hazrat Daniel
(A). Hazrat Ali (A) acceding to his request told him the following
story:

“Hazrat Daniel (A) was an orphan, who had lost his father and mother
both. At that time the ruler was one from Bani Israel and had two Qazis
among his courtiers.

Both of these Qazis used to visit the court of the king accompanied by a
very pious and godly man of the day. Once the king wanted to send a
trustworthy person on an urgent official business outside the dominion
of his empire and requested the two Qazis to help him in selecting of
someone worthy for the purpose.

The Qazis advised the king to entrust the work to the same pious and
godly man who used to visit his court every now and then alongwith
themselves. Acting on their advice the king sent the pious man with
necessary instructions on the fateful journey. Now per chance the pious
man had a very pretty and beautiful wife who was also pious and godly
like her husband. However, the man while going out of the country gave
her in the care of the aforesaid Qazis, saying: I give her in your care
with the will that you will treat her with virtue and will take care of
her daily needs. Then he set off at his journey.

Thereafter, once the two Qazis happend to go to the house of the pious
man and by chance saw his pretty wife. Seeing her they both madly felt
in love with her. When they expressed their carnal desire the good woman
flatly refused to fall prey to their desire. Thereupon they threatened
her to complain against her to the king and say that she had committed
adultery with the result that she would be stoned to death.

In reply she said: Say whatever you like, but I would not give my
consent to this act of sin.”

Thereupon both the wicked Qazis went to the king and reported to him
that the wife of the pious man whom he had sent on journey had committed
adultery. The king was very much surprised on the report because the
woman had a reputation for piety. He bent his head for a while and then
lifting his head he said to them:

“I believe you and accept your witness but give me three days time for
issuing orders in the matter.”

The king then consulted his Wazir in the matter and said to him:

“I don't think she is guilty of the act of adultery, what do you say
about it?

The Wazir also on hearing the report, said to the king:

“I am also surprised.”

Then, on the 3rd day the Wazir happened to pass by a lane where some
children were playing, Hazrat Daniel (A) being among them.

Hazrat Daniel (A) said to one of the children:

“Let us stage the drama of the wife of the pious man and the two Qazis,
you play the part of the wife of the pious man and two other of you, the
part of the Qazis.”

He then turned to the two boys and said to them:

“You present the case of this woman to me as the two Qazis have
presented it to the king.”

The king meanwhile had proclaimed with the beating of the drums (as was
the custom those days) that the wife of the pious man had committed

adultery and the two Qazis had reported the matter to the king and,
therefore, the woman was going to be stoned to death. Hazrat Daniel (A)
called one of the boys who was playing the part of one of the Qazis and
asked him:

“What do you say in the matter?” He also pointed to a wooden sword
wrapped in a cloth, if you tell a lie I shall behead you with this
sword.”

The boy replied:

“Sir, the wife of the pious man has committed adultery and I am a
witness to it”

Hazrat Daniel (A) asked him: “Where and when and on which day and what
time”? The boy answered all the questions of Hazrat Daniel (A). Then,
Hazrat Daniel (A) called the other boy and put the same questions to
him, but his answers were quite contrary to the answers of the other
boy.

After hearing the second boy Hazrat Daniel (A) said:

“God is great, you have given false witness in the case.”

He then acquitted the woman honourably and sentenced the boys who were
playing the role of the Qazis to death.

The Wazir who saw this play of the boys and the judgement of Hazrat
Daniel (A) in the play reported the whole thing to the king who decided
the case accordingly (Wafi, vol. 9, p.161; Manaqib, vol. 7, p.193;
Turuq-i-Hikmia, p. 60).

6. The Case of a Man Whose Son Differed in Colour with Him

A Negro once came to Hazrat Omar (RA). His wife was also of black
colour. The Negro complained to Hazrat Omar (RA) that he and his wife
were both of black coloured, but his wife in contrast to their colour
had given birth to a child of red colour. He also said that his wife had
obviously committed adultery with some man who was of the colour of the
child.

Hazrat Omar (RA) could not decide the case and referred the matter to
Hazrat Ali (A) who in turn asked the Negro: “ If I ask you a question,
will you answer it correctly?”

The Negro replied: “ Yes Sir, by all means and quite correctly if I
could.”

Hazrat Ali (A) asked the negro:

“Did you ever go to your wife i.e., had you ever had intercourse with
her during her monthly course”?

The negro replied:

“Yes, Sir, I think I have.”

Hazrat Ali (A) said to him:

“The colour of the child is the result of that very act of yours. You
are, therefore, yourself at fault and not your wife.” The Negro was
ashamed and went away. (Turuq-i-Hikmia by Ibne Qaiyyum: p. 47).

7. The First Case After the Demise of the Holy Prophet (S)

It has been reported by Kulaini on the authority of Hazrat Imam Jafar
Sadiq (A) that a case was decided by Hazrat Ali (A) in such a way that
it was never decided before and that it was the first case after the
demise of the Holy Prophet (S).

“During the caliphate of Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA) a man was found drunk and
brought before the Caliph, Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA). The Caliph asked

him as to whether he had drunk wine. In reply the man admitted to have
drunk.

The Caliph asked him:

“Why did you drink when it has been prohibited in Islam?”

The man replied: “I am residing in the neighbourhood of some pcople who
are habitual drinkers. Although I am a Muslim, I have never heard that
wine has been prohibited in Islam.” Hearing this Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA)
looked at Hazrat Omar (RA) with a question mark in his eyes. Hazrat Omar
(RA) said:

“This is just one of the cases that no one else than Ali could decide.”

When the case was referred to Hazrat Ali (A), he sent the man round in
the city with some persons to ask the people as to whether anyone had
recited to him the verse of the holy Quran whereby wine was totally
prohibited. And when it was proved that none had done so, the man was
rleased with a warning never to drink in future. (also carried by
Nasikhut Tawarikh, vol. 2, p. 731; Buharij, vo1. 9, p. 483; Manaqib,
vol. 2, p.178).

8. A Case Which was Decided Wrongly by Qazi (Judge)

It has been recorded in Ajaibul Ahkam that once when Hazrat Ali (A)
entered the Mosque of Kufa, he saw a young man who was weeping pitiably.
Hazrat Ali (A) asked him about the cause of such weeping.

The man replied:

“Ya Amir ul-Momineen, I have come to you for appeal against the decision
of Qazi in my case.”

Hazrat Ali (A) asked him about the case The young man said: “My father
had gone on journey with some persons. When these persons returned from
the journey, I asked them about my father. They said: He died during the
journey. When I asked them about the money my father had taken with him,
they said he left no money, but I know for certain that he had a good
amount of money with him.”

The young man further said to Hazrat Ali (A): “As I was certain about
the money my father had carried with him, I reported the matter to Qazi
Sharih and be sought a judgement from him in the case.”

The young man continued, “Qazi Sharih called those persons and took oath
from them one by one. They all said unanimously on oath that my father
had no cash at the time of his death. Therefore, Qazi Sharih ordered for
their release.”

Relating the above story to Hazrat Ali (A), the young man said:

“Ya Amir ul-Momineen! I have now come to you for a righteous judgement.”

Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat All (A) said: “I shall deliver judgement in this
case as none has ever before delivered in any case other than Hazrat
Daud (David) (A).”

Hazrat Ali (A) then asked Qanbar, his personal servant, to call some men
of shurtatul Khamees (a contingent of the officers in command of an
Army). When these officers arrived, Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A)
ordered them to ask the young man the names of the persons who had
accompanied his father on the journey and present them before him
immediately. The orders of Hazrat Ali (A) were carried out forthwith.

When all those persons were brought before Hazrat Ali (A), he cast a
glance over them all and ordered each to be tied with the pillars of the
mosque separately and asked the people, present in the mosque to join
him in Takbir (Greatest is God) loudly when he said it, Hazrat Ali (A)
then called one of the persons and asked him as to what he had to say in
the matter.

He said what he had said to Qazi. Qazi Sharih was also present there.

Hazrat Ali (A) said to the man:

“Don't think that I do not know any thing about this case. Go ahead now;
When did you all start on the fateful journey; tell me the year, the
month, the day and the exact time when you all started on your journey
with the father of this yolmg man? And when was he taken ill, where and
what day and at what time? What was his disease? Who treated him and
with which medicine? When did he die? Give me the date and the time. Who
gave him bath after his death? Who wrapped him in the coffin? How many
people attended his funeral? Name any of them, if possible. Who lowered
him in his grave?.”

The man was first baffled by this volley of the most relevant questions,
but he tried to answer them one by one obviously at random. When he had
finished, Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) said the Takbir aloud. All the
other people present in the mosque repeated it as they were ordered
before. Hazrat Ali (A) then sent the man to prison and called the second
man.

The second man being now certain because of the Takbir of the people
following Hazrat Ali (A) and his sending the first man to the prison
that his companion had confessed, told Hazrat Ali (A) that he was from
the very beginning against the murder of their companion, the father of
the young man, and taking away his cash and that none of the others
listened to him.

He then besought forgiveness and mercy at the hands of Amir ul-Momineen
as he was only compelled to become an accomplice in the case.
Thereafter, all the rest also had to confess their crime of murder and
loot. Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) then made them to return the money
of the deceased to his son, together with the penalty for the murder .

Qazi, who was called to attend the hearing of the case was reprimanded
and warned to be careful in serious cases such as murder. Very politely
rather humbly he asked Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) as to what the
case decided by Hazrat Daud (David) (A) referred to by him as, a similar
case was.

Hazrat Ali (A) described the case thus: “Hazrat Daud (A) was once
passing through a lane when he heard some children playing & calling one
of their play- mates by the name of ‘Matat Din'. The boy was also
answered to this name. Hazrat Daud (A) was very much surprised at
hearing this queer name which meant, “religion diedl.” Therefore,
prophet David (A) called the boy and asked him as to who had given him
that name.” The boy said: “My father, Sir.” “Where is your father”?
asked the prophet. “He is dead”, replied the boy Hazrat Daud (A) then
asked the boy to take him to his mother, which he did.

When asked about the name, the mother of the boy told the prophet that
the name was given to the boy under the last will of his father When
asked

about the details, she told him that the father of the boy had gone on a
journey with some persons, but he did not return from that journey which
was his last. When the mother of the boy enquiredabout her husband, his
companions told her that he had died on his way back home.

She asked: “What about the money he had taken with him”,.

“He left no money”, they replied innocently.

Relating this much Amir ul-Momineen, Hazrat Ali (A) said to Qazi Shareh
and the people then present in the mosque, that Hazrat Daud (A) had
decided the case as he himself had decided that day. He also told them
that after delivering the judgement in that identical case Hazrat Daud
(A) asked the woman to call her son by the name “Ashad Din”, which meant
the “religion has survived.” According to Kafi there also started a
dispute between the young man and the murderers of his father regarding
the amount of the money carried by his father from home for the journey.

9. The Case of Three Dinars

It has been reported by Suduq and Sheikh on the authority of Imam Jafir
Sadiq (A) who reported it on the authority of his father and forefathers
that a man had deposited two Dinars with a person and another man had
deposited only one Dinar with the same person. One of the Dinars was
stolen. When the case was brought to Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A), he
ordered one Dinar to be given to the first person and the equal division
of the second between both the depositors.

Explanation:

The first man who had deposited two Dinars had one of his two Dinars
still safe whether or not one of his own Dinar was stolen, while the
other one, in case his only Dinar was stolen, had none. As the theft in
each case affected the second Dinar the second man had to share both the
loss and the gain. (Qaza, p.29)

10. The Case of a Woman Who had Given Birth to a Child Within Six Months
of Her Pregnancy and Hazrat Omar (RA) had Ordered her to be Stoned to
Death

A soldier in the Army returned home. When he had stayed with his wife
for only six months, his wife gave birth to a male child and claimed
that it was his child. The soldier refused to accept her claim and
brought her to Hazrat Omar (RA) who ordered the woman to be stoned to
death. By chance Hazrat Ali (A) also happened to be there and he pointed
out to Hazra Omar (RA) that the Holy Quran had fixed the time of
pregnancy and the time of nursing of a child as thirty months, and at
another place the time of nursing as complete two years. These two years
if deducted from the combined time of pregnancy and nursing, the time of
pregnancy remained only six months, i.e., the minimum. Hearing this
Hazrat Omar (RA) said: “Had not there been Ali, Omar would have gone to
dust” and released the woman. (Qaza, p. 35).

Adultery
--------

1. Adultery and its Seriousness

Hazrat Ali (A) has reported from the Holy Prophet (SA) who said, “When
the crime of adultery in my followers will be appalling, the number of
premature deaths will be on increase.” (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 34)

Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) has said, “A man who indulges in adultery must be
ready for six things, he will face three things in this world and the
other three in the world hereafter.

The three things he will face in this world are:

1. His face will become ugly

2. Will be penniless

3. Will die soon

The three things he will face in the world hereafter are:

1. The rage of Allah

2. Very hard questioning.

3. Will remain in the hell forever

2. Adultery by an Unmarried Person

Hazrat Ali (A) used to punish those unmarried men who committed adultery
by hundred whips and exile. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 39).

3. If a Married Man or Woman Committed Adultery

If a married man or woman committed adultery Hazrat Ali (A) awarded them
the punishment of stoning to death. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 39).

4. Rajm (Stoning to Death) Purifies the One Who Committed Adultery)

When Hazrat Ali (A) went to see Sharaha Hamadania (a woman who committed
adultery) being stoned to death there was such a huge crowd that it was
feared that people would be trampled by one another.

Hazrat Ali (A), therefore, ordered the closure of the City gates. When
the punishment was over and the gates were reopened for the people who
had accompanied Hazrat Ali (A) to the scene to come in, people started
passing remarks on th decased. Hazrat Ali (A) said to them, “Hold your
tongue now, the deceased has been purified by the punishment awarded to
her.”

7. Adultery With a Woman Who Agrees to the Crime Under Adverse
Circumstances

It has been related from Arbaeen Khateeb Baghdadi that a woman was
brought to Hazrat Omar (RA). She was found committing adultery on the
banks of a certain river of Arbistan. After examining the witnesess
Hazrat Omar (RA) awarded her punishment of stoning to death.

Hearing this judgement of Hazrat Omar (RA), she uttered the following
words, “O God! Thou knoweth that I am not guilty.”

These words of her enraged Hazrat Omar (RA) further. He said to her,
“You committed adultery and still you dare belie the witnesses.”

When she was being carried to the place where she was going to be stoned
to death, she met Hazrat Ali (A) who was passing by that way.

Seeing her, he asked the executioners to take her back to Hazrat Omar
(RA) for further investigation. When she was taken back to Hazrat Omar
(RA), Hazrat Ali (A) asked her to relate her story to him (Hazrat Ali
(A)). The woman in question related her story to as follows:

“My family has some camels. Yesterday, I took them out to the desert for
grazing. At about noon I felt thirsty, but I had no water with me to
drink, neither there was any water in the vicinity with which I could
quench my thirst.”

“A little way off from there,” she continued, there was another man, who
had water with him. But when I asked him for a little water to drink, he

refused to give a single drop of it to me unless I agreed to commit
adultery with him, but I refused.”

“When I felt very thirsty and was about to die of thirst,” further
continued the woman, “I agreed, under compulsion though, to allow him to
fulfil his carnal desire.

Having heard the story of the woman Hazrat Ali (A) exclaimed, “The one
who is compelled by circumstances in case he or she is not disobedient
and does not exceed the limits of law and go beyond the restrictions put
on him or her by Allah they are not responsible for any crime committed
under such circumstances.” Hearing this Hazrat Omar (RA) released the
woman.

(Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 190, Biharul Anwar, vol. 9, p. 484, Riaz, vol. 2 p.
259; Zakheeratul Uqba, p. 81, Turuqi Hikmia by Ibne Qaiyum).

11. Different Punishments For One and the Same Crime

Asbagh bin Nabata has reported that five persons who were accused of
adultery were once brought to Hazrat Omar (RA). He ordered for their
punishment by stoning them all to death.

Hazrat Ali (A) when heard of that, said that the judgeent was wrong.

He then heard them separately and awarded them different punishments as
follows:

To the first he awarded the punishment of beheading, stoning to death to
the second, whipping to the third and half of the full punishment to the
fourth. He set free the fifth after awarding him an ordinary punishment.

When Hazrat Omar (RA) asked Hazrat Ali (A) to explain his above
decision, he (Hazrat Ali AS) said to him.

“The first of them is a Zimmi (the one who pays a certain amount to an
Islamic State for the safety of his life) who has committed adultery
with a Muslim woman; the second is a married man whose punishment under
the religious law is stoning to death; the third is an unmarried man,
who stands to be punished under the same law by whipping; the fourth is
a slave whose punishment in case of adultery as fixed by the religious
law is half of the full punishment fixed by the religious law for that
crime; the fifth of them is half-mad and has therefore, been awarded an
ordinary punishment for one and the same crime committed by others as
this punishment has been fixed for such men and women by the religious
law.”

Hazrat Omar (RA) while accepting the above judgement of Hazrat Ali (A)
said, “May I not live in the nation wherein there is no Abul Hasan for
solving such problems.”

(Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 183; Nasikhut Tawarikh, vol. 2, p. 732, Biharul
Anwar vol. 9, p. 478)

2. If Adultery is Committed by a Man Whose Wife is Away From Him

Hazrat Ali (A) was on pilgrimage to Mecca when a man who accused of
adultery was produced before him. The judgement by Hazrat Omar (RA) who
was a caliph then, was to stone the man to death. On hearing of the
above judgement delivered by Hazrat Omar (RA) in the case in question,
Hazrat Ali (A) said to him;

“The total punishment fixed by the religious law in such a case is
whipping and not stoning to death, because the wife of the man involved
in it is away from him.”

Hearing this decision by Hazrat Ali (A), Hazrat Omar (RA) said, “May not
Allah allow me to survive the time when I am in a difficulty and Abul
Hasan is not there to solve it.”

(Manaqib Khawarzami through Bihar vol. 9, p. 478; Manaqib Shehr Aashob
vol. 2, p. 183).

13. Adultery With a Christian or a Jewish Woman

Hazrat Muhammad bin Abubakr once wrote to Hazrat Ali (A) asking him that
if a male Muslim commits adultery with a Christian or a Jewish woman
what punishment should be awarded to them.

Hazrat Ali (A) wrote back to him, “If the Muslim male is a married one,
stone him to death, if unmarried, he should be punished by hundred
whips. The Christian or Jewish woman, if involved in such a case should
be deported to their people to treat her as they liked. (Wafi, vol. 9,
p. 39).

20. If Adultery is Committed by Those Who are Dangerously Ill

A man was once brought to Hazrat Ali (A) who was to be punished under
the religious law for committing a certain crime, but as he had several
wounds on his body, Hazrat Ali (A) said that he should be spared for
some time till he recovered from those wounds. when his wounds healed,
Hazrat Ali(a) ordered for his total punishment. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 45).

It has been reported by Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) that a man was suffering
from dropsy was presented before the Holy Prophet (SA). He was accused
of adultery. The Holy Prophet (SA) asked the woman involved in the case
as to whether she had agreed to the crime to which she replied that she
became aware of the fact when he had attacked her and overpowered her.
Thereafter, the Holy Prophet (SA) asked the man as to whether he
admitted his crime, to which he replied in the affirmative, but he was
not a married man. The Holy Prophet (SA), therefore, sent for a branch
of the palm tree.

Then, He (S) caught hold of a hundred thin straws from that branch and
beat the man therewith. From both the above reports, if taken jointly,
it would be clear that a Muslim judge has the discretion of awarding
either of the two punishments in such cases, i.e., he may award the
punishment there and then as was done by the Holy Prophet (SA) or he may
wait till the person recovers from illness. In case the one and the only
way adopted by the Holy Prophet (SA) is followed by the judges in all
such cases the fear of punishment would vanish from the minds of the
peopleHowever, the judge must decide each case on individual merits and
award the required punishment accordingly. In case there is no hope of
the survival of the person from that disease as was surely in the case
decided by the Holy Prophet (SA), he may follow the Holy Prophet (SA) in
his judgement, but in case there is hope of survival of the accused from
a certain disease or wounds as in the case decided by Hazrat Ali (A)
wherein there was a certainty that the accused would servive his wounds
which were expected to heal sooner or later, the judge may follow the
latter with discretion which is allowed to him in such cases. (Note by
Allama Jazairi; Abu Turab, (Urdu) vol. 2, p.88).

21. If Adultey is Committed With an Insane Woman

A question was put to Hazrat Ali (A) about an insane woman with whom
adultery was committed and she had become pregnant , to which the Holy
Imam (A) replied.

“An insane woman is just like an animal and is out of the control of her
mind. Therefore, there is no punishment for her if she is involved in a
case of adultery i.e., neither stoning to death nor even whipping or
exile.” (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 46).

Allama Jazairi in his collection of judgements of Hazrat Ali (A) titled
'Abu Turab' (Urdu) vol. 2, p. 89) has added the following note to the
above judgement.

“The above judgement is particularly meant for an insane woman. If an
insane man who is either completely mad or his brain is slightly
deranged is involved in such a case he cannot escape the punishment
fixed for adultery for the reason as explained in the following
tradition of Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) who has said .”

“If an insane man or a woman? whose brain is half deranged indulges in
adultery, he would be stoned to death, provided he has a wife, otherwise
he would be whipped.”

The person who has reported the above tradition of the Holy Imam (A)
proceeding further says as under:

“When I asked the Holy Imam (A) as to why there were two different
punishment for an insane man and an insane woman, he replied.”

“It is because the man involved in such a case commits the crime
deliberately and sensibly i.e., with full knowledge of his sensual
feelings and as to how he should do it, whereas the woman with whom the
crime is committed and who is only an object in the case and has no
sense at all as to what is being done with her but at times she is
totally ignorant of it.” (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 46).

23. Adultery In Dream

A man brought another man, holding him by the opening in his shirt, to
the first caliph, Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA), and said to the caliph, “This
man says that he was discharged by dreaming adultery with my mother last
night.”

The caliph wondered as to what he should say in the matter. Hazrat Ali
(A) who was also present in the mosque at the time said to the caliph.
“In such a case the justice is this that the man who has described his
dream to the other man should be made to stand in the sun-shine and the
punishment orders should be carried out on his shadow as he dreamt
adultery only in a dream and the man should also be struck with one or
two whips, so that he should not trouble people with such loose talk in
future.”

(Manaqib Shehr Aashob vol. 2, p. 179).

Confession
----------

1. Confession by a Man of Having Committed Adultery

It has been reported by Sheikh Sudooq (AR) that a man once came to
Hazrat Ali (A) and confessed that he had committed adultery and
requested him to purify him of his sin, but Hazrat Ali (A) turned his
face to another direction. The man stood up again and said: “Ya Ali. ! I
have committed adultery.”

Hazrat Ali (A) again turned his face from his side to another direction
and engaged himself in talking with some other people present there. But
the man once again addressed Hazrat Ali (A) in the same way, confessed
again before him of having committed adultery and requested Hazrat Ali
(A) earnestly to purify him of his sin.

Hazrat Ali (A) asked him:

“Why are you saying this”?

“For purification of my sin”, said the man. At first Hazrat Ali (A) said
without addressing any man in particular:

“Why people dont' hide their own sins as Allah hides them ...from the
eyes of other people?

The second time when the man requested him again to purify him of his
sin, Hazrat Ali (A) remarked:

“What else is there which is better than penitence? When the man
stressed the point for the third time, Hazrat Ali (A) told him that if
he repeated his words of confession once again he would have to punish
him as had been ordered by Allah;

But when the man, despite the warning by Hazrat Ali (A), repeated the
words of confession once again, he asked him as to whether he was
physically sound and if his mind was working all right.

When the man replied in the affirmative, Hazrat Ali (A) said to him.

“All right, let me make an enquiry about the soundness of your brain at
my own as you have told me now. Therefore, you better wait a bit and
come to me after some time when I have completed my enquiry.”

After Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) had made his private enquiry about
the soundness of the man's brain and it proved to be in proper form the
man appeared before him again and insisted on the punishment for his
above mentioned crime and for his purification thereby.

Hazrat Ali (A) then asked the people to gather next day outside Kufa
with the condition that all of them had each a veil on their faces.

On the subsequent day when most of the residents of Kufa had collected
outside the city of Kufa, Hazrat Ali (A) addressed them as follows:-

“O the people of Kufa! You have all collected and come here to witness
this man to be stoned to death, but I bind you in the name of Allah to
do so only if none of you has committed a crime for which punishment was
necessary.”

Hearing the above words of Hazrat Ali (A) most of the spectators left
the scene. But according to the report of Kulaini (may the peace of
Allah be on him) only three persons were left on the scene. They were
Hazrat Ali (A) himself and his two sons, Hazrat Imam Hasan (A) and
Hazrat Imam Husain (A). When all other people had left, Hazrat Ali (A)
hit the man with a big and heavy stone first, sounding the words or
'Takbir' (God is the greatest of all). Thereafter, Hazrat Imam Hasan and
Hazrat Imam Husain (A) hit him with stones turn by turn till the man was
dead and his soul (in all probability) had reached paradise.

Therefore, Hazrat Ali (A) pulled the dead body of the man out of the
ditch which was dug previously for the purpose of stoning him to death,
brought him to the city of Kufa, led his funeral prayer and buried him.

When people asked him as to why he had not given him the last bath,
Hazrat Ali (A) replied as under:

“The patience he manifested while being stoned to death gave him such a
bath of purity that he did not require any bath thereafter “ (Biharul
Anwar, vol. 9 p. 494 through Abu Turab (Urdu) by Allama Jazairi, vol. 2,
pp. 129-l32).

5. Conditions of Confession

Besides mentioning the perfect frame of mind, freedom to confess or not
to confess and maturity as conditions of confession Hazrat Ali (A) has
also said:

“If an accused in some case of theft admits to have committed the crime
in question his hand is not to be cut off” (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 64).

Cases of Theft

Allama Jazairi (need not remove the following explanation as it does not
create fiqhi complications for common man)who has rendered the above
story from Arabic into urdu has added the following explanation to it:-
“In Islam the punishment for committing theft is the cutting

off the hand. This is such a nice commandment of Allah in the 'Holy
Quran' that in almost all the cases the possibility of repetition of the
offence ends  with it. Moreover a thief is always easily recognized
thereafter and wherever this practice is in force people very seldom
dare commit the offence.”

“However”, says the Allama, the question which arises with regard to the
punishment itself is that whether the hand of the thief should be cut
off from the wrist, the elbow or the forearm? Because the 'Holy Quran'
is silent after the main verse in this regard, i.e., “Cut off the hand
of the thief, male or female.” “Those”, explains the Allama, “who argue
in favour of cutting off the hand of the thief upto the wrist only cite
the verse of the 'Holy Quran' wherein the word 'hand' applies upto that
portion only, while some others cite another verse of the Holy Book
regarding ablution the word hand precedes the words

“upto the elbow.”

'Therefore, the second group of theologians have recommended that the
hand of a thief should be cut “upto” the elbow, which in the arabic
language, at times, means “including.”

There seems some major shortfall/mistake in quoting from the Urdu book.
Since, I do not have the original Urdu book with me I cannot cross
check. Please compare and corect.

Proceeding further with his explanation regarding the orders of Hazrat
Ali (A) for cutting off the hand of the thief by which only four fingers
were cut off as in the case of the negro, AlIama Jazairi of Lahore has
reproduced (Abu Turab vol. 2, p. 113) the account of an incident from
Muntahi-ul-Ama1 (vol. 2, p. 234) relating the same question, which once
took place in the court of Motasim Abbasi, the Abbasiad Caliph.

The incident described by the author of Muntahi-al-Amal and reproduced
by Allama Jazairi is as follows:

Once a thief was produced in the court of Motasim Abbasi and the thief
admitted that he had committed theft.

“The Abbasiad Caliph turned to the theologians then present at the time
in his court and asked them as to what portion of the thief's hand
should be cut off according to the religious law.”

“'One of the groups of theologians referred to the first verse of thc
Holy Quran mentioned above and another, to the second also cited above.
Then, the Caliph consulted Imam Muhammad Taqi (A) who also happened to
be present at that time in his court, and asked him as to what he had to
say in the matter.”

The Holy Imam (A) exclaimed:

“You have already heard what the two opposite groups of the theologians
have said about it.” But the caliph said to him: “I want your opinion,
Sir”

“Thereupon, the Holy Imam (A) referred to the order of Hazrat Ali (A) in
that respect i.e., if only four fingers of the culprit are cut off, the
commandment of Allah in the Holy Quran is fulfifled”.

When called upon to explain his claim, the Holy Imam (A) elaborated the
point as follows ;

“In so far as the comments on the two verses of the Holy Quran by the
theologians present here are concerned, they are correct and quite
relevant in their respective places, but the words of the Holy Quran
which were kept in view by Hazrat Ali (A) while awarding punishment to a
thief were neither of the first verse nor of the second but of another
verse which, I submit, has escaped the sight of the honourable
theologians present here.”

“The Holy Imam (A) recited the following verse of the 'Holy Quran':

“The parts (of the body) with which Sajdah (putting of head on the
ground while offering prayers to Allah) is perfonned are all for Allah.”
Explaining the above verse of the Holy Quran, Imam Muhammad Taqi (A)
said to Motasim Abbasi, the then Abbasiad Caliph:

“If besides the forehead, palms of both the hands are not used while
performing 'Sajdah' the 'Sajdah' would be incomplete and consequently
the prayers also. This is what is meant by th verse I have just recited
and followed by Hazrat Ali (A) when awarding punishment to a thief i.e.,
cutting off only four fingers of his or her hand”:

When enlightened by the Holy Imam (A) on the point of punishment to a
thief, Motasim did not only agree with the views presented to him by the
Holy Imam (A) but followed them and the thief concerned was awarded the
punishment accordingly.

4. The One Whose Hand is Amputated as Punishment for Committing Theft

As reported by Imam Ja'far Sadiq (A) some thieves were brought to Hazrat
Ali (A). The thieves admitted their crime and Hazrat Ali (A) ordered for
cutting off their hands and when the order was carried out he said to
them:

“Your hands have gone to Hell. If you offer penitence and abstain from
committing theft in future, you can get them out, otherwise they will
pull you all there.” (Wafi, vol.

9, p. 66).

7. Acquital of an Accused Who Admitted His Crime of Theft.

A person came to Hazrat Ali (A) and admitted before him that he had
committed a theft. Hazrat Ali (A) asked him if he could read the Holy
Quran. The man said that he could read Surah Baqarah of Holy Book of
Allah.

Hazrat Ali (A) said to him: “I acquit you of the crime for the sake of
that part of the Holy Quran.”

Hearing these words of Hazrat Ali (A), Asha's bin Qais who happened to
be present there said to him:

“Ya Ali'. Do you want to suspend the order passed by Allah for this
crime?”

Hazrat Ali (A) replied:

“O'ye ignorant t You do not know that an Imam who is just can acquit the
accused who admit their crime themselves, but if they do not and two
witnesses who are just and of good moral character are produced against
each of them, he cannot.

(Wafi, vol. 9, p. 78 through Abu Turab (Urdu), vol. 2, p. 118)

10. Slave Trade

A trafficker in children i.e., a man who used to pick up  children from
the streets and then sell them as slaves was brought to Hazrat Ali (A).
He punished that criminal by cutting off his hand. (Wafi, vol. 9, p.
67).

12. Punishment for a Pickpocket

(2) A pick-pocket was once brought to Hazrat Ali (A) with the accusation
that he had picked the pocket of another  person. Ali (A) said to the
people present before him,:

“If he has picked the inner pocket of this man his hand should be cut
off but in case he has picked the complainant's outer pocket his hand
should not be cut off. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 64).

Note:-Hazrat Ali (A) would order only beating them and sending them to
prison.

Note by the Compiler

It would be interesting to note in this connection a discourse in Arabic
poetry between Abulula Moarri and Syed Murtaza Ibne Huda, (brother of
Syed Razi, the compiler of Nahjul Balagha,) which we have rendered in
English prose for the benefit of our readers.

Abulula: How is that the hand, the penalty of which is five hundred
Dinars is cut off for half Dinar only.

Syed Murtaza: The penalty has been fixed at a higher rate for the hand
of an honest man, whereas a thief lowers its price by degrading it by
dishonesty.

14. Committing Theft During Famine

It has been reported by Hazrat Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) that Hazrat Ali (A)
did not order for cutting off the hand of thief during a famine. ((Wafi,
vol. 9, p. 64).

Explanation

Allama Jazairi of Lahore has explained the above order as follows:

According to the meaning derived from reports recorded through some
other Imams it has been calculated that such judgements mostly had been
delivered by Hazrat Ali (A) only when somebody would have had stolen

some articles of food only and that too, under compulsion of hunger
during a famine otherwise he always awarded total punishment. (Abu Turab
(Urdu) vol. 2, p. 126-27).

Cheating and Forgery
--------------------

4. Cheating in Marriage

A man had two daughters, one of them was from an Arab wife and the other
from another wife who hailed from some country other than Arabia.

A young man contracted to marry the gjrl who was the daughter of the
man's Arab wife. The marriage performed, he brought her to his house and
paid her the dower.

The day after the night they had passed as husband and wife, he came to
know that he was decieved by the father of his wife, who had married to
him his other daughter instead of the one who was from his Arab wife and
whom he had contracted to give to him (the young man) in wedlock.

When the case regarding this deceitful marriage was taken to Moawiya, he
was unable to decide the case and, therefore referred it to Hazrat Ali
(A) who was then at Kufa.

When the case was presented before Ali (A) he ordered the father of the
gjrl to give his second daughter to the young man in marriage together
with a dower equal to the dower the young man had paid to his first
daughter. He also ordered the young man to divorce his first wife and
live separate from her till the expiry of her probation period and then
remarry her, if he liked. Besides, the father of the two girls was also
ordered to pay the

penalty for cheating the young man.

(Mustadrik, vol. 2, p. 603, Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 197; Nasikhut Tawarikh,
vol. 3, p. 738 through Abu Turab (Urdu) vol. 2, p. 155).

1. A Clear Order Regarding Drinking Alcohol

According to an order of Hazrat Ali (A) if some one drinks once, twice
or thrice he will be punished by eighty whips each time, but if he
repeats the crime for the fourth time he will be beheaded. (Qaza and
Teha, p. 162).

2. Deriving Wrong Meaning From the Verses of The Holy Quran with Regards
to Drinking

During the Caliphate of Hazrat Omar (RA), Qudama bin Mazoon drank wine.
The Caliph (Hazrat Omar (RA) wanted to punish him by whipping, but the
accused Qudama recited the following verse from the Holy Quran:

“There is no harm if the believers and those who do good deeds eat and
drink according to their (own) choice, provided they continue fearing
Allah and doing good deeds.”

Having heard the above verse beautifully pronounced by Qudama as an
argument in his favour Hazrat Omar (RA) forgave him and acquitted him of
the charge of drinking.

When Hazrat Ali (A) heard of it, he said to Hazrat Omar (RA):

“Qudama does not come under the definition of those who have been
mentioned in the verse in question as the very first words of the verse
refers to those who do not lead a prohibited way of life and abstain
from what has been forbidden by Allah. Proceeding further Hazrat Ali (A)
asked Hazrat Omar (RA) as to how a person who does not care for the
commandments of Allah could come under this declaration by Allah in the
Holy Quran. Therefore, Qudama must offer penitence, otherwise he does
not remain a Muslim and has to be beheaded. When Qudama heard of this he
came at once and offered penitence.

Hazrat Omar (RA) hearing this well argued point from Hazrat Ali (A)
wanted to punish Qudama for drinking, as he had already offered
penitence for deriving wrong meaning from a verse of the Holy Quran, but
he did not know the number of blows of whip to be struck on the body of
a person accused of drinking. He therefore, consulted Hazrat Ali (A) in
the matter. Hazrat Ali (A) explained it as under:

*After drinking one becomes intoxicated and under intoxication one is
amiable to slandering. As the punishment for slandering is eighty
strokes of a whip, the punishment for drinking if calculated in this way
amounts to the same number of strokes by a whip i.e., eighty strokes.*

Hazrat Omar (RA) punished Qudama accordingly. (Bihar:Vol, 9, p. 4)

3. Drinking During the Holy Month of Ramazan

It has been reported by Kulaini on the authority of Jabir that once the
poet Najjashi was brought to Hazrat Ali (A) with the accusation that he
was found drunk during the holy month of Ramazan.

The accusation when proved, Hazrat Ali (A) ordered for whipping the poet
by eighty lashes which was carried out.

The next morning the poet was ordered for another twenty lashes. When
Najjashi asked Hazrat Ali (A) the cause of the extra twenty lashes as
the order of the Holy Quran in such

cases was only eighty, the holy Imam Hazrat Ali (A) replied:

“Twenty for disregarding the respect of the Holy month of Ramazan.”
(Qaza, p. 140).

Murders
-------

I. The Murder of Husband

It has been reported by Asbagh bin Nabata that a woman had an illicit
relation with a man but she was married to another man. She, on the very
first night of her marriage induced her lover to come stealthily into
her private room. When her husband wanted to go to bed with her, her
lover attacked him, but her husband did not only repulse the attack but
also killed him in the fight which ensued thereafter. Seeing this the
woman attacked her husband from behind and killed him. When the case was
brought to Hazrat Ali (A), he gave the decision that the blood-money for
the murder of the first man, that is, the lover of the woman should be
paid by herself and she should be stoned to death for the murder of the
second man, that is, her husband.

(Manaqib Shehr Aashob, vol. 2, p 200 Turaq-i-Hikmia p 50).

Allama Jazaeri of Lahore has added the following note to the above
judgement:- “The great scholar Allama Syed Mohsin Aamli has said with
regard to this Judgement that it has been reported in the same words as
quoted above, but according to the religious law the compensation for
the murder of the lover of the woman was not due from her, because he
had come to the house of her husband, who killed him in his defence at
his own will and on his own feet.”

What Allama Syed Mohsin has said may be correct, but the blood money
was, as a matter of fact, due from the woman in question because it was
she who had induced her lover to

enter her bed-room at the dark of night which was otherwise impossible,
hence the above decision by Hazrat Ali (A). (Ref: Abu Turab, vol. 2, p.
54).

3. A Man Killed by his Step-Mother

It has been reported in Ajaaibul Ahkaam that the step-mother of a man
got him murdered with the help of several other men.

When the case of the above mentioned murder was brought to Hazrat Omar
(RA) who was the then Caliph, he wondered whether only one person was to
be punished for that crime or all who were involved in it.

Hazrat Ali (A) who was present at that time in the court of Hazrat Omar
(RA) asked him if several people had stolen a camel how many of them
were to be punished by cutting their hands?

“I shall punish them all.”

“Similar is this case,” said Hazrat Ali (A)

(Kafi -Tehzib -Qaza and Teha, p. 84).

5. One Who is Saved by Allah

A man murdered the son of an Ansari. The father of the murdered boy
caught hold of the murderer and brought him to Hazrat Omar (RA), who
allowed the Ansari to kill the murderer by sword as his son was killed.
The Ansari gave two strokes of his sword on the neck of the murderer and
thinking him to be dead went away from the scene.

The relations of the murderer who wanted to take his corpse for burial
found him still breathing. They took him to some surgeon who succeeded
in saving his life with great efforts.

When the Ansari saw him alive , he caught hold of him again and brought
him to Hazrat Omar (RA).

Hazrat Omar (RA) ordered for his punishment again till he was dead.

Hazrat Ali (A) asked Hazrat Omar, (RA) “ Had you not ordered for his
punishment to death once before?.”

“Yes”, said Hazrat Omar, (RA) “but as he is still alive, he should be
struck with sword again till he is dead.”

Hazrat Ali (A) said to Hazrat Omar (RA): why twice?

The Ansari who struck him before with his sword twice was satisfied with
it and had left him thinking him dead. He was punished as far the
punishment under law was concerned. It would be a crime to punish him
for the same crime again and again:”

Hazrat Omar (RA) was thinking over what Hazrat Ali (A) had said when the
Ansari said to him:

‘Ya Ali! you are allowing the blood of my son to go in vain.

How? enquired Hazrat Ali (A)

“You are allowing the murderer to go away free before I have avenged the
murder of my son.”

“Alright.”, said Hazrat Ali (A) let him strike your neck twice with his
sword as you struck him before as penalty, then you strike him as many
times with your sword as you like till he is dead.”

The Ansari hearing this became afraid of the result, forgave the man
involved in the murder of his son and went away.

Thereafter, Hazrat Omar (RA) said to Hazrat Ali (A), All praise is for
God ‘O Abul Hasan! you are mercy personified from Ahlul Bait. Had not
there been for Al,i Omar would have been ruined.

(Naskihut Tawarikh- Manaqib vol. 00, p I87).

Other Punishments
-----------------

2. Magic

Hazrat Ali (A) has reported from the Holy Prophet (SA ) who said: If two
persons stand witness to the fact that some body has indulged in magic,
a judge who is just and of proved good moral character can punish him by
sentencing him to death. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 69).

3. Arson

A man was brought to Hazrat Ali (A). He had set on fire the house of
another man due to malice. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered the accused to pay a
fine equal to the cost of the house and the effects of the house-hold.
Then he ordered that the man to be beheaded.

(Wafi, vol. 3, p. 122 through Abu Turab (Urdu) vol. 2, p./189)

4. Punishment for Several Crimes in one and the Same Case

A man was once brought to Hazrat Ali (A) who had committed three crimes
successively i.e., murder, theft and drinking. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered
for his punishment in the following order:

1. Eighty strokes of a whip for drinking.

2. Cutting hand for theft.

3. Beheading for murder.

(Qaza & Teha., p. 183 through Abu Turab (urdu) vol. 2, p. 189-190.)

6. Fore-Warning

AccordIng to an order of Hazrat Ali (A) If an accused involved in a case
in which one or more parts of some one's body are damaged or destroyed
or one is even killed, no penalty

is due from him if he has given a caution before accident, such as in
games.

(Wafi, vol. 3, p. 123 through Abu Turab, vol. 2. p. 194).

7. Insanity in Crimes

Muhammad bin Abu Bakr once wrote to Hazrat Ali (AS):

“An insane man has committed murder intentionally. Please write to tell
me as to what punishment should be awarded to that man?

Hazrat Ali (A) wrote back to him:

“The responsibility for paying penalty for the murder rests with the
tribe of the insane man, because the mistake and intention of a mad man
are equal to each other.”

8. Punishment as Reprimand or Warning

According to a report by Asbagh bin Nobata, Hazrat Ali (A) never
suspended punishment even in the cases of minor children and slaves, but
the punishment varied according to the ages of children and the quality
of crime in case of slaves, but that too, was awarded as a warning to
save them of major punishments in future.

(Qaza & Teha, p. 164; Wafi, vol. 9, p. 66 through Abu Turab (Urdu), vol.
2, pp. 195-199).

9. Punishment of Sodomy

Once Khalid bin Valeed wrote to Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA) that there was a
man who was in the habit of getting the act of Sodomy committed on him
(the - man). Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA) who was the caliph then asked for
Hazrat Ali (A)'s advice in the matter saying that the Arabs viewed the
cutting of a person into pieces a very bad thing. Hazrat Ali (A) advised
that the man in question should be burnt to death. The punishment was
carried out accordingly. (Arjahul Matalib, p 126).

Similary during the caliphate of Hazrat Omar (RA) two men were seen
committing the act of sodomy. When apprehended, one of them ran away,
but the other was caught and brought to the court of the caliph.

Hazrat Omar (RA) when sought advice of the people in the matter, All
proposed different punishments to be awarded to the accused. Hazrat Omar
(RA) then turned to Hazrat Ali (A) and asked for his advice in deciding
the case according to the divine  law. Hazrat A1i (A) advised the caliph
to behead the man. When the punishment was carried out according to the
advice of Hazrat Ali (A) and under the orders of Hazrat Omar (RA) and
the body of the accused was being carried away, Hazrat Ali (A) stopped
the people and said that there was another punishment yet which was to
be awarded to the man who had committed such a serious crime. He then
ordered the people to collect fire-wood and burn the dead body of the
man.. The orders of Hazrat Ali (A) were accordingly carried out with the
consent of the then caliph, Hazrat Omar (RA). (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 51).

Hazra Imam Sadiq (A) has said:

“None from among men, who considers sodomy a correct action and having
religious sanction, passes his life on earth without being hit by one of
the stones from Allah by which He hit the nation of Lot, and he dies of
it, but the people do not see it.”

(Qasasul Ambia, p. 162).

2. Punishment of Sahq

(Carnal Copulation between two women).

A group of people came to Hazrat Ali (A) to get an problem solved by
him. As Hazrat Ali (A) was not present at the moment and they were about
to go back when Hazrat Imam Hasan (A) asked them about the
problem,adding that he would try to solve. In case he was correct, it
would be deemed to have been solved by Allah and Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat
Ali (A) and if he went wrong the responsibility would be only his. He
also said that Hazrat Ali (A) was about to reach the place, but if they
narrated the problem to him, he was sure to solve it (by the Grace of
Allah) correctly. The people there- upon narrated the problem to him as
follows:-

“A man copulated with his wife after which she copulated with a virgin
whereby the virgin girl became pregnant obviously with the creative
germs of the man which were still in the womb of the wife.”

Hazrat Imam Hasan (A) said: the dower of the virgin should be exhorted
from the wife of the man, because no child is born unless the curtain of
virginity in the uterus of a woman is already removed.Thereafter, he
advised

them to wait till after the birth of the baby when her mother could be
punished according to provisions of the religious law. The baby after
she is born, he said, was to be handed over to her father, the husband
of the woman concerned, who (the woman) would be stoned to death as
provided in the religious law,

After this decision by Hazrat Imam Hasan (A) the people in question
returned to their respective places, but while going back they met
Hazrat Ali (A) and apprised him of the decision of Hazrat Imam Hasan (A)
in their case. When Hazrat Ali (A) heard of the decision of Hazrat Imam
Hasan (A) in such a difficult case he exclaimed: “ By God, had you met
Abul Hasan ,(meaning himself), he would have nothing to say in the case
except

what Hasan has said,” (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 52, Wasael, vol.3 p. 438, also
Mustadrik, vol. 3, p. 254).

An explanation Regarding Sahq And Sodomy

Hazrat Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) has narrated that whenever two men or two
women were presented before Hazrat Ali (A) with the accusation that they
were found under a sheet in objectionable state, he issued orders for a
part of the full punishment provided by law in such cases, if there was
a doubt. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 47).

The part of the full punishment in such cases as will appear from the
following report is thirty whips to ninety-nine whips provided the crime
is not actually committed and the case remains doubtful, otherwise full
punishment will have to be awarded as provided in the religious law.

13. A Further Explanation

“A man requested Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) to kindly explain if there was any
harm in two men sleeping together under one and the same sheet. Imam
Jafar Sadiq (A) asked him to clarify as to whether they were related to
each other. Getting the reply from the questioner in the negative he
asked if they had slept together under the pressure of any necessity,
i.e., there being only one sheet available with them and when he got the
reply from the man again in the negative, he said that both of them
would be punished by thirty whips each. The man then asked as to what
the religious law said in the matter had they committed the crime in
question. In that case,” replied Imam Jafar Sadiq (A), both of them
would be struck with a sword cut on the neck to the extent it goes into
the neck in one blow.” Thereupon the man exclaimed that that could
result in the murder of the men in question. To that the Imam (A)
replied that that was the law.

The man then asked as to what was the law if two women were involved in
such a case. Hazrat Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) repeated the above two answers
in this  case also and when he was asked regarding the law had the women
committed carnal copulation with each other, he exclaimed, “Oh! In that
case both of the accused women would be stoned to death.”.

(Wafi, vol. 9, p. 48).)

Explanation

It should be realised that Sahq and sodomy are such grave and serious
crimes against humanity that the Mulim law has provided equally
deterrent punishment for these and has totally prohibited sleeping of
two men or two

women together except in, very special cases as mentioned above
(compiler).

I. Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) once ordered that two women should not sleep
together unless there was a certain relation between them. If they do it
they should initially be warned, but in case they insist upon it they
should be punished And if they repeat the same action for the fourth
time they should be stoned to death. (Abu Turab, vol. 2,p176).

2. Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) was once asked by some women about the
punishment of carnal copulation between two women. He replied that the
punishment for such a crime was just the same as has been ordained by
Allah in the Holy Quran for adultery i.e. one hundred whips for an
unmarried woman and stoning to death for a married one. And when those
women said objected that there was no mention of such a case in the Holy
Quran, he exclaimed: “Why not?” 'The people of Ras' occuring in the Holy
Quran indicated the persons were indulged in this very crime.

(Wafi, vol. 9, p. 52).

Note:-'Ras' was the name of a channel near which ‘Ashab-e- Ras’
mentioned in the Holy Quran were residing before their complete
destruction for committing the crime

mentioned above. (Compiler.)

Compensation And Penalties
--------------------------

1. If a Woman Aborts After She is Beaten

A certain person beat a woman, who aborted in the shape of ‘Alqa’,
Hazrat Ali (A) fixed its compensation at forty Dinar.

(Qaza p.l63).

Explaining he said that the penalty for abortion in various forms
according to the command of Allah in the Holy Quran is:

Penalty for Nutfa (time of Contact of the worms of production

20 Dinars

Penalty for Alqa 40

Penalty when it is in the shape of flesh and blood 60 “

Penalty for full structure before taking shape 80 “

Penalty after the structure takes human shape 100 “

(Qaza p. 43; Abuturab Voll p. 220-223).

2. The Loss of An Eye

A man who had lost an eye was presented before Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat
Ali (A). He had lost his second eye on being hit by another person.. The
penalty for this fixed by Hazrat Ali (A) was that either the person
concerned should be ready to lose one eye and pay half penalty of 500
Dinars or he should pay full penalty and save his eye, the choice being
his. (Qaza P/43).

3. Penalty for a Single Part of The Human Body and Life

(1 Dinar = I £ sterling)

Life 10,000 Dinars

Sight 1000 ,.

Power of Hearing 1000 “

Nose 1000 “

Power of Talking 1000 “

Both Lips 1000 “

Both Hands 1000 “

Feet. 1000 “

Backbone 1000 “

Testicles 1000 “

Male Organ 1000 “

Hips, if urine or stool become 1000 “

uncontrollable.

The penalty for parts which are in pair is 1000 Dinars and for one part
of the pair is 500 Dinars, but testicles and lips are exempted from this
because the penalty for the upper lip is 500 Dinar, but the penalty for
the lower one is 600 Dinars. Similarly the penalty for the right
testicle is 2/3 of the full penalty and for the left it is 1/3 thereof.

Explanation

1. The lower lip helps prevent the food or any liquid coming out of the
mouth.

2. The right testicle helps the birth of a male child.

(Wasael -Kitab Diyyat).

4. Compensation For Wounds On The Head

If it only bleeds 10 Dinars.

If some bone becomes visible 50 “

If bone comes out 150 “

If the attack reaches the brain. .333-1/3 “

(Wafi, and Wasael -Kitab Diyyat).

5. Penalties For The Face

If mouth becomes visible. .200 Dinars.

If the wound defaces any part of the face

after healing50 Dinars.

If the wound reaches the jaw,150 “

If both the cheeks are pierced. .100 “

For an iriftllable hole in one of the cheeks. 100 “

If a bone is cracked or fractured 80 “

If some bone becomes visible by a wound. 150 “

If flesh above one Dirham or more is

removed 30 “

If the wound becomes a mark. 12.5 “

For an ordinary wound 10 “

6. Penalty For a Slap

If the cheek goes black 6 Dinars.

If it goes blue3 “

If it becomes red1.5 “

7. Penalty For Teeth

If a tooth is completely uprooted50 Dinars.

If it goes black and the same condition continues for one year50 “

For shaking of a tooth 50 “

For a black (Worm-eaten)???? tooth12.5 “

(Wasael & Wafi)

8. Lobes And Nostrils

For cutting the lobe666-2/3Dinars

For burst in the nostril 333-1/3 “

9. Collar-Bone

For fracture 40 Dinars

For burst 32 “

If the bone becomes visible 25 “

If bone comes out by fracture  20 “

For a hole10 “

10. Beard

If the beard could not grow again  1000 Dinars.

If it grows again 333-1/3 “

11. Shoulder

If correctly fitted after fracture100 Dinars.

For a burst  80 “

If the bone becomes visible 25 “

If the bone is removed50 “

For a hole25 “

If not fitted after fracture 333-1/3 “

For dislocation  30 “

12. Arm

For fracture 100 Dinars.

If the bone becomes visible by a wound25 “

If the bone is removed50 “

For a hole25 “

13. Elbow

If fitted after fracture loo Dinars.

For a burst 32

If bone becomes visible 25

If bone is removed 50

For a hole 25

If not fitted after fracture 1/3 Dinars

For dislocatiop only 30 Dinars.

14. Wrist

If fitted after fracturel00 Dinars.

For a burst  80 ”

If bone becomes visible 25 “

If the bone is removed 100 “

For a hole25 “

If the wound reaches the bone 50 “

If the fore-arm is fractured50 “

For fracture of the wrist 100 “

15. Hand

For fracture 100 Dinars.

For visibility of bone25 “

If the bone is removed 50 “

For a hole 25 “

If the wound reaches the bone 100 “

For dislocation.166-2/3 Dinars.

16. Thumb

The thumb has two parts, the upper and the lower and

for each part there is a different penalty:-

If the upper part is fractured and fitted again16-2/3 Dinars

For a burst  13-1/3 “

If the bone becomes visible 4-1/6 “

If the bone is removed5 “

For a hole4-1/6 “

If the lower part is fractured and fitted again33-1/3 “

For a burst  26-2/3 “

For a hole8-1/3 “

If the bone becomes visible 8 “

If the bone is removed16-2/3 “

For dislocation  10 “

For cutting of the whole thumb the penalty

will be 1/3 of the hand i.e. 166-1/3 “

If only a portion of the thumb is cut the

penalty will have to be awarded proportionately

11. Fingers And The Nails

Every finger has three different parts and the penalty is

also different for each of them:-

1. The lower part which is joined to the palm if fractured 16-2/3
Dinars.

For a burst13-1/3 “

For visibility of the bone 4-1/6 “

If the bone is removed 8-1/3 “

For a hole 4-1/6 “

For dislocation 5 “

If the whole finger is cut, the penalty will be 1/6 of the hand, i.e.
83-2/3 “

2. The middle part if fractured. 11-1/3 Dinars.

If the bone becomes visible 2-2/3 “

If the bone is removed5-1/3 “

For a hole2-2/3 “

For dislocation  3-2/3 “

If the whole is cut55-1/3 “

3. The upper part if fractured5-4/5 Dinars.

For a burst  4-1/5 “

If the bone becomes visible 2-1/3 “

If the bone is removed5-1/3 “

For a hole2-2/3 “

For dislocation  3-2/3 “

If wholly cut 27 “

4. If the nails grow again the penalty for each nail will be 5 Dinars,
but in case it does not grow at all or grows black the penalty will be
10 Dinars for each nail.

18. The Chest and the Back

If chest is fractured and bent both side 500 Dinars.

If fractured and bent only one side 250 “

If the ribs are also fractured together with the chest on both sides
1000 “

For one side only 500 “

For inability in morving on any side500 “

For fracture of the back bone if refitted 500 “

For male breast 125 “

For female breast 500 “

For both 1000 “

For each of the ribs in the sphere of the heart 25 “

For burst 12.5

For visibility of the bone6.5

If the bone is removed7.5

For a hole6.5

For each rib in the sphere of the arms if fractured10

For a burst 2.5

If the bone is removed5 Dinars.

For a hole2.5 “

If the weapon goes deep into the chest or the belly 333-1/3 Dinars.

If it pierces through 432-1/3 “

19. Hips

If bone of the hip is fractured 200 Dinars.

For a burst  160 “

For visibility of the bone 50 “

If the bone is removed175 “

For dislocation30 “

If bent after refitting333-1/3 “

20. Thighs

If the thigh is fractured 200 Dinars.

For a burst  160 “

If the bone becomes visible 50 “

If the bone is removed100 “

For only a hole50 “

If the bone is bent after fracture333-1/3 Dinars.

21. The Knees

If the bone is fractured 200 Dinars.

For a burst  160 “

If the bone becomes visible by a wound 50 “

If the cap is removed 50 “

For dislocation30 “

For a hole 50 “

If fractured and could not be refitted. 333-1/3 Dinars.

22. The Legs

If the leg is fractured 200 Dinars.

If the bone is burst 160 “

If the bone becomes visible 50 “

If the bone is removed50 “

For a hole25 “

If could not be refitted after fracture. 333-1/3 “

23. The Feet

If broken.200 Dinars.

If the bone becomes visible 50 “

If the bone is removedl00 “

For a hole50 “

24. Foot Fingers

For the whole of thumb 333-1/3 Dinars.

The part of the thumb which is joined to the foot if broken 66-2/3 “

If burst 26-2/3 “

If the bone becomes visible. 8-1/3 “

If the bone is removed26-2/3 “

For a hole4-1/6 “

For dislocation10 “ The upper part of the thumb having the nail if
broken 16-2/3 “

For a burst 13-1/3 “

If the bone becomes visible4-1/6 “

Fora hole  4-1/6 “

If the bone is removed  8-1/3 “

For dislocation 5 “

If wholly cut the penalty will be half of what is for the whole foot.

For nail of the thumb 30 “

For the part of each finger which is joined to the foot if broken 16-1/3
“

For a burst 13-1/3 “

If the bone becomes visible4-1/6 “

If the bone is removed  8-1/3 “

For a hole 4-1/6 “

Penalty for the whole finger 83-1/8 “

For lower part of each finger if brken 16-2/3 “

For a burst 13-1/3 “

1f the bone becomes visible  4-1/6 “

If the bone is removed 8-1/3 “

For a hole 4-1/6

For dislocation 5 “

The middle part of the finger if broken 11-2/3 “

For a burst 8-4/5 “

If the bone becomes visible 2 “

If the bone is removed 5-2/3 “

For a hole 2-2/3 “

For dislocation 8 “

If the whole finger is cut down55-2/3 “

The upper part which has the nail if broken 5-4/5 “

For a burst of the same 4-1/5 “

If the bone becomes visible11/3 “

If the bone is removed  2-1/5 “

For a hole I-I/3 “

For dislocation 2-4/5 “

In case it is cut down 27-4/5 “

Penalty for each nail10 “

(Wafi, & Wasael -Kitab-i-Diyyat).

25. The Tongue:

Compensation of a part of the Tongue:

It has been described in the “Majmua” by Ibn-i-Maizaban that a man came
to Hazrat Omar, (RA) and complained to him that a man had cut a part of
his tongue with the result that he could not speak properly.

Hazrat Omar (RA) found it difficult to fix the penalty for that crime.
He, therefore, turned to Hazrat Ali (A) who was present at that time for
a solution as to whether penalty for the whole tongue should be fixed or
for the part which was cut and as to what should be the amount of the
penalty?

Hazrat Ali.(A) advised him to let the man pronounce all the alphabets.
The number of the alphabets he could not pronounce or pronounced with
difficulty should be deducted from the total number of the alphabets of
the Arabic language and the penalty should be fixed accordingly.

26. Penalty to the Inheritors of a Murdered Man whose one Hand was
already Cut

It has been reported by Kulaini who reported it from Imam Jafar Sadiq
(A) and the latter reported it from 'Kitab-i-Ali' that a man murdered
another man intentionally, but one hand of the murdered man was already
cut either for penalty or by some one out of enmity.

Hazrat Ali (A) said that if the hand of the murdered man was cut for
penalty he still stood responsible for it, but if it was cut down by
some one out of enmity and as a mark of cruelty the inheritors of the
murdered man should return the amount of penalty, if already received by
him as penalty, to the inheritors of the murderer before murdering him.
In the former case they may not pay any thing and murder the murderer
for murdering their legator or alternatively they can receive full
penalty in cash from the murderer for the murder .

27. A Case of Penalty with Regard to Drunkards

Four persons drank wine, quarrelled among themselves and stabbed one
another with the result that two of them died on the spot and the two
other who survived were wounded in the brawl. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered for
eighty whips each to the wounded and also ordered them to pay the
penalty to the inheritors of the deceased after deducting the penalty
for their wounds. He also added that in case any of the wounded persons
or both of them died then inheritors had nothing to pay to the
inheritors of the murdered.

According to another report he said that the penalty was due from all
the four tribes of the persons concerned. The amount of penalty which
had to be paid to the wounded would however, be deducted from the total
amount of penalty to be paid to the inheritors of the murdered because
it was quite possible that they might have murdered each other, (Manaqib
Sher Aashob: vol. 2,p.200 through Abu Turab: p. 227).

29. The Compensation with Regard to a Drowned Man

Six persons were once swimming in the Euphrates. One of them was
drowned. Two of them came to Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A), and
complained to him that the three other had drowned him, while they
complained the two who had complained to him previously had themselves
drowned him and were simply accusing them to save their own skin. Hazrat
Ali (A) ordered that the total amount of the penalty should be shared
equally

by all the five of them and paid to the inheritors of the sixth man, who
was drowned (Manaqib hehr Aashob: vol. 2, p. 200).

30. Four Persons who Fell Pray Prey to the Paws and Jaws of a Lion.

It has been reported by Ali bin Ibrahim Qurni on the authority of Imam
Jafar Sadiq (AS) that when the Holy Prophet (SA) sent Hazrat Ali (AS) to
Yeman a very extraordinary case was brought to him there which he
decided wonderfully.

The residents of Yeman had dug a deep hole like a well in the ground in
the vicinity of the town to corner a lion, who had become a danger for
them and the herds of their cattle and the lion fell therein one night
as was intended by them.The next morning a huge crowd gathered together
near the deep hole to , see the lion caught therein. The crowd was
willing to have a glance of the lion before everyone else with the
result that the first man who was ahead fell in the hole. He caught
another man behind him to save himself from falling in the hole and
escape the jaws of the lion caught therein. The second man in turn
caught hold of another one behind him and similarly the 3rd one also
caught hold of another for the same purpose resulting in the fall of all
the four in the deep and big hole and a prey to the angry lion.

Consequently the relations of the first man demanded penalty from the
relations of the second man and those of the second from those of the
third and similarly those of the third man from the relations of the
fourth man and all of them put the blame on the other turn by turn.

As the matter could not be decided by argument they were about to decide
it by swords. Then some one among them said:

“Let us go to Hazrat Ali (A) and get the case decided by him.” So they
all came to Hazrat Ali (A), who decided the case as follows:-

The relations of the first man should be paid 1/4 of the penalty from
the crowd, the second 1/2, the third 3/4 and the crowd should pay full
penalty to the relations of the fourth one.

A part of the crowd agreed to the decision of Hazrat Ali (A), whereas
others did not. Therefore, Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) said to them:

If you do not accept my decision unanimously let the Holy Prophet (SA)
decide the case at the time of the next pilgrimage at Mecca. To this
they unanimously agreed. But when the case was presented before the Holy
Prophet (SA) at Mecca, and he was about to give his judgement, one of,
the parties told him that it had already been decided by Hazrat Ali (A).
On asking as to what decision was previously given by Hazrat Ali (A),
the party informed the Holy Prophet (SA) of the decision given by Hazrat
Ali (A) to which the Holy Prophet (SA) said that it was the only
righteous decision which could be given in the case.

According to some other report the Holy Prophet (SA) had said that the
decision given by Hazrat Ali (A) was the one commanded by Allah.
(Zakhair-ul-Uqba: p. 84; Manaqib Shehr Ashob: vol. 2, p. 176).

Kulaini has also reported this with some difference.

Explanation

There were four causes of the death of the first man: The push of the
pressure of the crowd and the fall of the three other persons on him,
But had

he not pulled the second man, he and the other two would not have fallen
on him. Thus he was himself responsible for ¾ cause of his death, hence
¼ of the penalty. Similarly the causes of the second man were three: the
push of the crowd and the fall of two persons on him, hence ¾ of the
penalty. The causes of the death of the third person being two, i.e. the
push or pressure by the crowd and the pull by the second man, hence the
amount of penalty ordered to be paid to him was fixed at ½ .

The cause of the death of the fourth and the last man was only the push
or the pressure of the crowd and in view of the fact that he did not
pull any body, the crowd and only the crowd was , responsible for his
death. He therefore, deserved full penalty.

It may, however, be argued that the crowd was responsible for the death
of all the four persons why then a part of the penalty should be
deducted proportionately from the full amount of penalty due to each of
them. The answer is that the first and the two other persons had on
their parts created a cause for their deaths while the fourth had not.
Therefore, the amount of responsibility for the cause of death rested
proportionately on

their own shoulders, hence the proportionate deduction. The fourth has
no such cause except the push or the pressure of the.v crowd. Therefore,
his relations were duly ordered to be paid full amount of the penalty of
his death.

31. The Three Acrobat Girls

Ali bin Ibrahim Qurni has reported in Ajaebul Ahkam that a young girl
was playing with some of her play-mates. She ascended the shoulders of
one of her play-mates during the play. Another girl among them pinched
the girl on whose shoulders the first girl has ascended. She jumped up
and threw the girl on her shoulders on the ground. Unfortunately, the
girl who fell on the ground could not survive the hurt.

When the case was brought to Hazrat Ali (A), he ordered:

“The penalty should be divided into three equal parts. The first part
should be paid by the one who threw the girl and the second part should
be paid by the girl who pinched the girl who had the deceased on her
shoulders and threw her on account of her pinch.

As for the third part none owed it to the parents of the girl, because
she had herself ascended on the shoulder of her play-mate out of
fondness of the acrobatic feats.”

(Irshad Mufid; Manaqib Shehr Ashob: vol. 2, p. l77; Nasikhut Tawarikh:
vol. 2 p. 730).

32. Compensation for Hurt or Death by Quadrupads

Hazrat Ali (A) also declared: If some one is hurt and dies by the fore
legs of a quadrupad the owner is responsible to pay the penalty, if by
the hind he is not. In case the animal is teased or hit by anyone, the
one who teases or hits him is responsible for the penalty.

33. Orders in Case of Dog -Bite:

Amir-ul-Momineen Ali (A) decided the cases of dog-bites as follows:-

I. The owner is responsible for paying the penalty to the person
concerned if his dog bites some one during day time, if at night he is
not,

because he has the right for the safety of self and the safe-guard of
his property by keeping a dog and unchaining him at night. (Wafi vol.3
p. 126).

2. He (A) also declared that if anyone enters the house of the owner of
the dog with his permission he is responsible for the bite and the
penalty, therefore, is due from him. (Wasael: Wafi, vol. 2I, p. 125).

34. Compensation for Loss by Grazing or Trampling by the Quadrupeds

If some farmer sustained a loss by grazing or trampling of his crops by
the quadrupeds of another at day he (A.S) did not hold the owner of the
quadruped responsible for it and get the farmer compensated therefor.
But if such a case occurred at night, he held the owner of the quadruped
responsible for it, his plea being that the night is meant for rest and
the owner of the crop is not responsible for keeping watch over his
farms then.

He, therefore, ordered the owners of the quadruped to take care of them
at night and compensate the one who had sustained any loss by his
carelessness. (Wasael: vol. 3,

p. 493).

35. Cases of Trampling under the Feet of a Crowd and Loss of Life
Thereby

Hazrat Ali (A) declared that in case some person is trampled and killed
and the one who trampled and killed him is not traceable the relations
of the deceased should be compensated by the Government Treasury. (Wafi,
vol. 3. p. 124).

36. Mistake in Judgement

If some one was sentenced to death by mistake and under the
circumstances beyond the control of a Qazi (Judge) and it was later
proved that the sentence awarded was wrong, the amount of penalty for
the death of the deceased was paid to his inheritors from Govt. treasury
under the orders of Hazrat Ali (A).

(Wafi, vol. 2I, p. 127).

37. Penalty for the Eye of a Horse

Some one hit the eye of a horse. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered the accused to
pay 1/4 of the price of the horse to the owner. The price was calculated
at the prevailing rates on the day

when the horse had lost its eye. (Wafi, vol. 2I, p. 130).

38. Compensation for a Pig

A Muslim killed the pig owned by some Christian. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered
the Muslim to pay the penalty therefor to the owner of the pig.

Witnesses
---------

1. Eye Witness of a Judge is not Sufficient for Punishing an Accused in
a Case of Adultery

It has been reported by Umme Kulthoom, daughter of Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA)
on the authority of Hazrat Omar (RA) who said that he was once
petrolling at night in Medina when he saw a couple in a half demolished
house engaged in the act of adultery. Next morning, he asked the people
if the Caliph sees some body committing adultery, could he punish the
culprit at his own accord, i.e., would that one eye witness of the
Caliph himself be sufficient for framing the charge of adultery fgainst
the culprit and punish on that account.

All the people present in the court of the Caliph including his advisers
and some of the senior companions of the Holy Prophet (SA) said with one
voice:

“What more witness than the eyewitness of the Caliph himself is required
for punishing the culprit in a case of adultery.”

Hazrat Ali (A) when heard the above unanimous advice of all the people
present in the court of Hazrat Omar, (RA) he said to him Hazrat Omar
(RA) In that case you would yourself be punished for false imputation,
for a full evidence required in each case of adultery under the
religious law is equal to four witnesses without any exemption
whatsoever.

The report adds that the same question was put to people by Hazrat Omar
(RA) and they replied in the affirmative except Hazrat Ali (A) who
replied in the negative (Qaza & Teha) p. 43, through Abu Turab (Urdu),
vol. 2 p. 201).

2. When Witnesses Find no Way Out

Three persons once came to Hazrat Ali (A) to record their witnesses in a
case of adultery. Their statements recorded, Hazrat Ali (A) asked them
as to where was the fourth witness. They replied:

“He would come just now.”

Hazrat Ali (A) ordered them to be punished for false imputation saying
that four witnesses were required in a case of adultery as commanded by
Allah in the Holy Quran and that the punishment in a case cannot be
suspended for a moment for want of a witness which is said to appear in
the court later. (Qaza) p. 55, through Abu Turab vol. 2, p. 202).

3. Four Unjust Witnesses

Four persons once came to Hazrat Ali (A) to stand as witnesses and
record evidence in a case of adultery. Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A)
when made a private enquiry about them, they were found to be unjust and
also not of good moral character. Hazrat Ali (A) ordered for their
punishment for false accusation. (Qaza and Teha, p. 166, also Qaza, p.
55, and Abu Turab, vol. 2, page 202).

4. Cases Wherein Only One Witness is Acceptable

It has been reported by Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) that Hazrat Ali (A) used to
decide the cases of loan against only one witness also as well as on
taking oath by the appellant (Wafi, vol. 3, p. 148).

Explanation

About cases as the one above Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (A) says as
follows:

If the administration of a state is in our hands i.e., the Muslims we
can decide a case even on the production of one good witness only
provided the case belonged to rights of the masses, but if the case
concerned the rights of Allah or the visibility of Moon, one witness
would not suffice. (Wafi, vol. 3, p. 148).

5. Witness by Women

According to what Hazrat Ali (A) has said witnesses of women are
acceptable in cases of marriage but not in cases of divorce.

Also said Hazrat Ali (A):

“If three men and two women are produced as witnesses they are
acceptable in a case wherein the culprit has to be sentenced to death by
stoning, but if the number of men in such cases is only two and that of
women four they are not acceptable.”

(Wafi,, vol. 3, p. 142).

6. Witnesses of Women in Cases Particular to Females

A virgin girl who was accused of having committed adultery was once
brought to Hazrat Ali (A). He ordered a few women to examine her in
private and say as to whether she was still virgin or the sign of her
chastity was removed.

The women appointed by Hazrat Ali (A) for examination of the accused
girl reported to him that the girl was still virgin. Hazrat Ali (A) then
exclaimed:

“How can I punish a girl accused of adultery when she has been found
still virgin according to the report of her own sex.” (Wafi vol. 3, p.
143).

7. Witness of a Women in Case of Will

In a case of a will left by some deceased person a woman was produced as
witness. Hazrat Ali (A) decided that in such a case if only one woman is
produced as witness, her witness will be acceptable only with regard to
t part of the will concerned. (Wafi, vol. 3, p. 144).

8. Witness of Children

According to what Hazrat Ali (A) said witness of minor children is
acceptable in cases concerning themselves provided they come direct to
report the matter to the authorities concerned before they see their
elders who are their guardian. (Wafi, vol.3, p. 145).

9. Witness of Enemy

According to what Hazrat Ali (A) said the witness of an enemy of the one
accused in a case is not acceptable. (Wafi, vol.3, p. 148).

10. Witness of a Spy, Face Reader or a Thief

Said Hazrat Ali (A) “I would not accept the witness of spy, face-reader
or a thief unless they stand witnesses in their own cases wherein they
do admit their crimes.” (Wafi, vol. 3, p. 148).

11. Contradictory Witnesses

If two or more witnesses appeared in one and the same case and their
evidences were recorded by Hazrat Ali (A) and all the witnesses appeared
to be of good moral character and following justice by experience in
public, but their statements were found to be contradictory to one
another Hazrat Ali (A) decided the case by ballot, and also took oath
from the one in whose favour the ballot was drawn (Qaza, p. 133).

12. Contradiction in Evidence

It has been reported on the authority of Imam Baqir (A) that when
Qudarabin Mazoon was brought before Hazrat Omar (RA) with the accusation
that the poet named above was found drunk in public and two witnesses
were produced against him as evidence to his crime, one of the witnesses
happened to be a castrate. Besides the statements of the two witnesses
in so far as the evidence with regard to drinking of wine by the famous
poet Qudama was concerned happened to be contradictory to each other.

Hazrat Omar (RA) finding it difficult to decide the case called the
companions of the Holy Prophet (A) including Hazrat Ali (A) for
consultation, particularly the last named person i.e. Hazrat Ali (A) and
said to him.

“Ya Abul Hasan! What do you say in this case, because what you will say
in the matter will be most welcome and acceptable as according to a
tradition of the Holy Prophet (SA) you are the most learned among us all
and your decisions are all the righteous ones I, therefore, implore you
kindly to decide this case for me.”

“Hazrat Ali (A) advised Hazrat Omar (RA) as follows:

“Although apparently there is contradiction in the statement of the two
witnesses with regard to the evidence to drinking by Qudama bin Mazoon
i.e., according to the one he was.found drinking whereas according to
the other he was found vomitting Wine, but if the two things are put in
proper perspective they would appear to be equal to each other because
as far as the religious law about drinking is concerned, drinking of
wine and vomiting it is just one and the same.”

When Hazrat Omar (RA) further asked him Hazrat Ali (A) if the witness of
a castrate was acceptable under the religious and ecclesiastical law,
Hazrat Ali (A) replied as follows:

“Why not? The penis (male organ) is just equal to any other part of the
body. Therefore, if a man is castrated it is just as if any other part
of his body was cut off. Hence the witness of a castrate is as well
acceptable as that of any other man without a limb.” (Qaza p. 42, also
see Kafi).

13. Punishment for a False Witness

If a person accused of standing as a false witness in a case when
brought to Hazrat Ali (A), he punished him by parading him as a public
example through the streets of Kufa if he belonged to it otherwise in
case of his being a traveller through the streets of the city to which
he belonged. (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 73 through Abu Turab (Urdu) by Allama
Jazaeri of Lahore, vol. 1, p. 208).

### Psychological Points

###

1. How to Recognize the Status of a Person

It has been reported by Imam Jafar Sadiq (A) that during the caliphate
of Hazrat Ali (A) a man went on pilgrimage to Mecca accompanied by his
slave. During the journey the master punished his slave for Some mistake
on the latter's part. The slave took it so ill that he became deadly
against his master so much so that he refused to be his slave. He
instead claimed to be the master of his own master and the quarrel
continued throughout the journey till they both reached Kufa on their
way back home. On their arrival at Kufa the master said to his slave:

“O ye! the enemy of Allah. Let us go to Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A)
and let him decide the case between the two of us.”

When Hazrat Ali (A) granted them audience the master said to
Amir-ul-Momineen:

“Ya, Amir-ul-Momineen, This is my slave. I had punished him for some
mistake on his part while going to Mecca on pilgrimage. Ever since he
refused to be my slave and instead saysthat I am his slave.”

When ordered by Hazrat Ali (A) the slave took an oath to the effect that
he was the master and not the slave and his father had sent him on
pilgrimage to Mecca with him as a guide for performing 'Haj'.

“Now, further proceeded the slave, this man claims to be my master
instead of being my slave with the intention to taking possession of my
property.”

The master when ordered by Hazrat Ali (A) to tell thetruth, he also said
on oath that he was the master and that his companion was telling a lie.

Hearing them both, Hazrat Ali (A) ordered them to attend his court the
subsequent day for a decision in the case. Meanwhile, Amir-ul-Momineen
Hazrat Ali (A) ordered his orderly Qambar to make two holes in a wall of
his court. People who had heard the two persons pleading their cases
before Hazrat Ali (A) become very much interested to see as to what
decision Hazrat Ali (A) would give the next day in such a complicated
case. So, they and many others who heard of that strange case assembled
and went to the court of Hazrat Ali (A) to see as to what judgement he
would deliver therein.

The next day when the master and the slave went to Hazrat Ali (A) for a
decision in their case as promised by him the previous day, he ordered
them to put their heads accrossthe holes in a wall Qamber had already
made under his orders.

When both of them had put their heads accross the holes in the wall as
had been ordered by Hazrat Ali (A), he ordered Qamber dramatically as he
had brought home the him to previous day.

“Qamber! cut off the head of the slave with one stroke of your sword.”

No sooner heared, the man who actually was the slave pulled back his
head from the hole in the wall.

Seeing this Hazrat Ali (A) said to him: “Were you not saying yesterday
that you were the master and not the slave and had you not even taken an
oath to that effect?”

The slave replied. apologizingly:

“Ya Amir-ul- M omineen, I am no doubt the slave of this man, but as he
had beaten me red and blue for a very slight mistake I refused to be his
slave.”

(Kafi, Nasikhut Tawarikh, vol. 3, p. 738, Manaqib, vol. 2, p. 200).

3. The Refusal of a Mother to Own Her Son

Asim bin Zaura has been quoted by the author of Hadaiqi Abu Turab as
follows:-

“I saw a young man at Madina making a hue and cry and saying aloud, ‘O
God! You are the one who can decide between me and my mother .”
According to Asim bin Zaura Hazrat Omar (RA) was passing by the place
where the above mentioned young man was addressing Allah as quoted
above.

“When Hazrat Omar (RA) asked him as to why he was cursing his mother,
the young man said as follows: “O the Caliph of the Muslims: My mother
bore me in her womb for nine months. Then she gave me birth and nursed
me for two years. But now when I have grown up a man she refuses

to be my mother. Not only that she has turned me out of her house and
says tha, I am not her son.”

“On enquiry by Hazrat Omar (RA) as to where his mother lived the young
man gave him the address of her house.”

“When Hazrat Omar (RA) sent.for the woman in question she came to him
accompanied by her four brothers and forty other persons of her tribe.”

“When she was asked by Hazrat Omar (RA) as to why she had turned out her
son, she told him that the young man was a lier and that she did not
even know as to who he was.”

“Proceeding further the woman told Hazrat Omar (RA) that she was a
virgin haling from a tribe of Quresh and that the young man most
probably desired to defame her.”

When asked by Hazrat Omar (RA) her four brothers and the forty men of
her tribe who had accompanied her also confirmed on oath what she had
told him. Although the young man said repeatedly and also took oath
before Hazrat Omar (RA) that the woman in question was his real mother
yet she denied it also on oath, that she was not. Moreover, the youngman
had no evidence to prove and support his claim while the woman had not
only her four brother but also the forty men who confirmed unanimously
what she had said. Therefore Hazrat Omar (RA) could not but order for
punishing the youngman by whipping him for false imputation against a
virgin.”

When the young man was being carried for punishment under the orders of
Hazrat Omar, (RA) he saw Hazrat Ali (A) who happened to pass by that way
only by chance and yelled

“O the cousion of the Holy Prophet (SA) ! I am an oppressed man. Kindly
help me.”

Hazrat Ali (A) asked him as to what had happened to hit and when the
young man related his story to Amir-ul-Momineen. Hazrat Ali (A) he
ordered the people who were taking him for whipping to take him back to
Hazrat Omar (RA) and he himself also accompanied them.”

When the people took the youngman back to Hazrat Omar (RA) he asked as
to why they had come back. They told him that the had done that under
the orders of Hazrat Ali (A).

Hazrat Ali (A) said to Hazrat Omar (RA):-

“Could you allow me to reopen and decide the case on your behalf?”

“With pleasure, said Hazrat Omar (RA) and also added: “How could I deny
you that right when I have heard the Holy Prophet (SA) saying that you
were the most learned man among us all.”

“Then, Hazrat Ali (A) sent for the woman in question who came
accompanied again as before by her four brothers and the same forty men
of her tribe. And when ordered by Amir-ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A) she
repeated the same statement which she had given before Hazrat Omer. (RA)
Her four brothers and the forty men of her tribe also confirmed her
statement, again on Oath.”

“Finding her adamant Hazrat Ali (A) said to her “Do you know who am I?
and do you also know that nothing remains hidden from me when I turn to
Allah to let me know it?”

“In turn the woman flthough affirmed that she knew Hazrat Ali (A) well
and also his qualities as an Imam, yet she remained adamant in her
previous statement i.e., she was a virgin and that the young man simply
wanted to share her property fraudulently.

Seeing no other way out Hazrat Ali (A) asked the young man if he
objected to his adopting him as his son, so that he could become and
treated as his two other sons, Hasan & Husain (A). The young man did not
only agree to the Proposal of Hazrat Ali (A) but also thanked him a
great many times therefor. Hazrat Ali (A) then asked the four brothers
of the woman, who were also her guardians as to whether they agreed to
his marrying the woman whom they had stated to be a virgin to the
youngman to which they agreed. Hazrat Ali (A) had already asked the
woman as to who her guardians were and she had

pointed to her brothers. This done, Hazrat Ali (A) said to the people
present there at that time, including Hazrat Oamar (RA):

“With the witness of Allah and all of you present here I marry this
girl, with the permission of her guardians to this young man and fix
four hundred Dirhams as her lower which I shall pay from my own pocket.”

“Saying this Hazrat Ali (A) ordered Qamber, his personal servant, to
bring four hundred Dirhams from his (Hazrat Ali (A) house and give to
the young man.”

“He then asked the young man.” to put those four hundred Dirhams in the
skirt of the garment of the woman in question and take her home and pass
the night with her as her husband.”

“Hazrat Ali (A) also ordered the young man to report to him the next
morning that he had complied with his orders.”

Hearing all this the woman yelled:

“Fie! Ya' Ali ! fie! Do you want me to go to Hell? This young man is my
real son! Allah will not forgive me ! I go with him as his wife and how
on earth could I?”

“Thereafter she told Hazrat Ali (A) that her husband was a man of very
ordinary means to whom her brothers had married her in order to usurp
the share she had inherited from her father and then they wanted to
deprive her son of whatever little property her husband who had died in
some other country while on journey had left.”

“Therefore, she proceeded further,” they had forced me to state before
Hazrat Omar (RA) as well as before you.”

“However” she said, I offer penitence to all for what I have wrongly
stated and hope that you would also forgive me therefor.”

“Having said that she held the hand of the young man and went away”,
concludes Asim bin Zaura as quoted in Hadaeqi-

Abu- Turab.

Note: Allama Majlisi has also incorporated in his records regarding the
judgements of Hazrat Ali (A) a similar story on another authority with
the only difference that the witnesses produced by the woman mentioned
in that story were seven women and they were all bribed by that man as
well as the woman examined her under the orders of Hazrat Ali (A).
However, both the

above records which are most authentic ones bear a clear proof of the
rare psychological wisdom possessed by Hazrat Ali (A).

### Mathematical Problems

###

1. The Equal Division of Seventeen Camels Without Friction

Three persons had a dispute about the division of seventeen camels. The
ratio of their share was 1/2, 1/3 & 1/9 and they could not divide the
figure of seventeen proportionately without friction.

Finding no way out they wanted to cut one camel into pieces for the
purpose of the correct division, but before acting upon this last
alternative, they took their problem to Hazrat Ali (A), for they were
sure it was he who was capable of solving their problem.

Hearing their problem Hazrat Ali (A) asked them if it was agreeable to
them to add one of his own camels to their seventeen camels and make the
total eighteen. As they agreed to it, he gave half of the total number
of the camels i.e., nine to the first man (1/2 of the total) , and six
to the second man making 1/3 of the total, and two camels to the third
man which is 1/9 of the total. Thus all the three men got the camels
divided according to respective shares, the total amounting to seventeen
only. Thereafter he took back his own camel. Thus he solved the problem
of dividing the seventeen camels proportionately according to their
respective shares to their satisfaction and displeasing none of them and
without cutting one of the camels into pieces. (Nasikhut Tawarikh vol.
3, p. 757).

2. The Problem of Eight Breads

Two persons while travelling on a road sat under the shade of a tree for
lunch. One of them took out of his big five breads and the other took
out three breads out of his bag and put them near the five breads of his
companion making the total number of the breads to eight. They had not
yet started eating when a third person happened to pass by them.

Invited by the first two, the third man also sat with them and shared
their lunch and while departing after meal, he gave them eight Dirhams
against the share of the food he had taken with them.

After he had gone, the first two travellers started quarrelling about
their portions in the eight Dirhams. One of them who had five breads
claimed to have five Dirhams reasoning

that it was his due, but his companion who had three breads did not
agree to such a division also reasoning that the stranger who had shared
their food had not given them the eight Dirhams to them to share
proportionately according to the number of breads they had. Moreover, he
argued that the share of the stranger was equa1 to each of their own.
Therefore, he claimed that what the stranger had given them had to be
divided equally. Finally they decided to approach Hazrat Ali (A) for a
decision between the two. Having heard the case Hazrat Ali (A) first
advised them for a compromise and when they did not agree, particularly
the one who had three breads, he solved the problem as under:

He said to the one who had three breads and had taken the case to him
with the claim that half of the eight Dirhams, i.e., Four Dirhams was
his due share:

“If you want a righteous decision in the case you should have only one
Dirham which is your due actually. When requested to explain he
enlightened him as follows:

He asked him; “Had you not had only three breads and your companion five
of them?” When he replied in the affirmative he said; “The total of the
breads you both had i.e., eight divided into three bits comes to twenty
four. And as you say the stranger shared your food equally he should
have eaten eight bits, i.e., only one of the nine bits of your breads,
seven of them eaten from other's, that is why you should have only one
Dirham for only one bit of the eight bits of breads which the stranger
ate.

Feeling uneasy at the above decision of Hazrat Ali (A) the claimant who
had taken the case to him agreed to the compromise he had advised for
and to the offer of three Dirhams made by his companion. (Zakhaerul
Uqba, p. 84, also Kafi)

### Physics

###

Following are a few cases relating to physics decided by Hazrat Ali (A):

1. Compensation Judgement in Case of the Loss of an Eye

Once a slave of Hazrat Othman (RA) hit the eye of a bedouin resulting in
the loss of his eye. The bedouine took the matter to Hazrat Othman, (AR)
who tried to patch up the matter by offering full penalty of the eye of
the complainant, but he would not agree.

Hazrat Otman (RA) then offered him the double of the amount fixed as
penalty for an eye by the religious law, but the bedouine would still
not agree to the offer but insisted on taking th eye of the slave out as
an exchange of his eye which was lost by the hit of the slave.

HazratOthman (RA) was confused as what to do thereafter and referred the
case to Hazrat Ali (A) who first tried to make the bedouine to accept
the offer, but when he would not agree despite all the possible efforts
of even the Holy Imam (A), he sent for a patch of cotton put in the
water and placed it in the eye of the slave, leaving the pupil open.
Then, he sent for a mirror and put it in the sun and ordered the slave
to see the sun therein with that eye till the sight thereof was lost,
but the eye ball remained intact (Wafi, vol. 9, p. 99)

2. Medical Examination of an Eye

A man's head was hit by some body also whereafter the man who was hit
claimed that his eye sight had become weak thereby.

Hazrat Ali (A) examined his eye in the following way: He held an egg in
his hand and asked the man to stand at some distance and say as to
whether he could se the egg. When

the man in question replied in the affirmative he made the man to get
back to a certain further distance and again to a little more. Hazrat
Ali (A) repeated this action till after the man said he could not see
the egg. He also repeated this action keeping the egg in the
circumferance of a horizontal line and marking the target in each case.
He then measured the various distances in each case and found all the
distances 1.e., right and left and up and down and announced that the
claim of the man was correct otherwise, he said, there must have been a
difference in the various distances measured by him.

He then repeated this action in respect of another man, who had hit the
first man in question whose eye sight had become deffective as a result
of his hit, to pay him penalty according to the difference of his eye
sight as compared with the man whose eye sight was normal. (Wasael, vol.
3, p. 405, Mustadrik, vol. 3, p. 285 through Abu Turab (Urdu) by Allama
Jazaeri vol. 2, p. 308).

3. Examination of Eye Sight, the Power of Talking and that of Smelling

It has been reported in the book Ajaibul Ahkam that a man was struck on
the head of by another person with something hard. The man who was
struck claimed that he had lost his eye sight as well as his power of
talking and that of smelling as a result of that stroke.

Hazrat Ali (A) said if the man was correct, he deserved to receive
penalty on all the three counts. When asked as to how was it possible to
check that the claim of the man in question was correct, Hazrat Ali (A)
said as follows:-

(i) “As regards his eye sight the man will be made to stand in the open
and cast his eyes on the sun. In case he could and did not shut his eyes
his claim of losing his eye sight would be correct.”

(ii) In the case of the power of smelling he would be made to inhale the
smoke of a patch of burning cotton. If he does not make signs of feeling
sensation in his nose and also does not shed tears by the effect thereof
his claim of losing his power of smell would be deemed as intact.

(iii) In the case of power of talking the tip of his tongue would be
pricked with a small needle. If the drop of blood which would come out
of his tongue is red he would be deemed to possess power of talking and
only as malingering there about. But if the drop of blood is black he
would be deemed as correct in his claim. He also advised to examine all
the dumbs in the same manner. (Wafi, Kafi and Turaqi Hakmia, p.49).

4. Counting of the Beats of Breathing

A man struck the chest of another man who claimed that it had affected
the regularity of his breathing. Hazrat Ali (A) decided the case by
counting the beats of his breath in the following manner.

According to Hazrat Ali (A), the breath of a person remains for some
time in ones right nostril and sometimes in the left. In the early
morning till sunrises he said it remains in the right nostril. Therefore
he counted the breath of the man in question while it was in the right
nostril and then the next morning that of another man supposed to be
possessing regularly breathing and then made the man who had struck the
complainant pay the latter a penalty therefor according to the
difference between normality and irregularity of the latters breathing.
(Qaza p. 150)

5. The Sign of Chastity in a Virgin

A man filed a suit against his wife in the court of Hazrat Ali (A)
accusing her that she did not possess the sign of virginity.

Hazrat Ali (A) told the man that thin skin in the womb of a virgin,
which is usually supposed to be the sign of her virginity some time
bursts automatically in jumping and also during a play wherein jumpings
is freely required and dismissed the case he had taken to his court
against his wife. (Qaza-wa-Teeha, p. 165).

### Cases Wherein His Knowledge of Geometry was Displayed

###

1. The Weight of a Fetter

Two men saw a slave walking through a street with a fetter on one of his
feet. One of the men said:

“The weight of the fetter on the foot of the slave is so much and if it
was not my wife stands divorced.”

The other man suggested that the weight of the fetter was different one
and he also made a bet that if the weight thereof was that which was
suggested by his companion his wife would stand divorced.

Agreeing to the bet they both went to the master of the slave and
requested him to take out the chain from the foot of his slave so that
it could be weighed. They also mentioned

to him the bet they had made.

The master of the slaves when heard of the bet he told the two men that
he had taken an oath that the fetter would be removed from the foot of
the slave after completion of a certain period of time and that if he
removed it before the expiry of that period of time his wife would also
stand divorced. Therefore, he said, he could not remove the fetter from
the foot of his slave before the expiry of that period of time.

When the case was taken to HazratOmar (RA) he ordered the two men who
had made the bet to divorce their wives, because he could not order the
master of slave to remove the fetter from the foot of his slave before
the expiry of the period of time in question under any rule or practice
of human society or under any clause of the religious law.

When Hazrat Ali (A) heard of this decision of Hazrat Omar (RA) in the
case in question by the two men who had gone to him with an appeal, he
said to them that it was quite easy to take the weight of the fetter
without removing it from the foot of the slave.

He then sent for a big pot open on all sides and deep enough to contain
sufficient water for drowning the foot and the fetter of the slave
therein.

When the slave put his foot with the fetter thereon in the pot
containing the fixed quantity of water, the water rose to a certain
point in the pot which was marked.

When the fetter of the slave was raised towards the knee of the slave
with the help of thread tied to it, the level of water fell down to a
certain point in the pot, which was also

duly marked under the orders of Hazrat Ali (A).

Then he ordered for putting iron dust in the pot slowly and gradually so
that the water could rise to the first mark. There after, he ordered the
slave to take out his foot from the pot to let the water fall down to
its original level in the pot where after he ordered the weighing of the
iron-dust saying that that was the weight of the fetter. (Tehzibul
Ahkam; Biharul Anwar, vol. 9, p. 465).

2. How He Weighed An Iron Gate

Once a dispute arose between some persons who had ordered for an iron
gate and the blacksmith who had made it about the weight of the iron
used therein. The man who had ordered for it said it was not the weight
he had ordered for whereas the blacksmith said that it was. They could
not

obviously weigh such a huge gate there being no means available then to
weigh such big things as there are today When the case was taken to
Hazrat Ali (A) for a decision between the two opposite parties, he
ordered them to place the gate on a boat and mark the point to which the
water of tpe river rose on either side of the boat. The gate was then
removed from the boat and some bags full ordates were loaded on the boat
allowing the water to rise upto the point of her sides to which it had
risen under the weight of the gate. He (A) then ordered them to weigh
the bags of the dates in an ordinary scale and find out the weight of
the gate thereby, because, he (A) said the weight of the gate would be
the same as that of the weight of the total number of bags of the dates.

Finance
-------

1. A Camel Shared by Three

Three men shared a camel equally. One of them tied his forelegs and went
away for some work. In the meantime, the other two returned to their
place of stay and untied one leg aru

they also went away together. The camel in their absence, walked with
one untied leg off the place where the first man had tied him and fell
in a well and wounded himself by the fall. The two men returned again,
saw the camel fallen in the well, got him out some-how or other, and
butchered him and sold the meat for collecting some money in view of a
little compensation for the loss.

When the first partner returned, he saw the skin of the camel. On
enquiry, the two other partners told him what had happened. He took an
objection to it, and rather complained against their untying the camel
which resulted in the heavy loss to him.

He then took the case to Hazrat Ali (A), who ordered for payment of 1/3
of the actual price of the camel to him. When the cash which was
collected by selling the meat of the camel was counted it was one third
of the cost price of the camel.

This amount was paid in full to the first partner of the camel and the
other two went away empty handed.

While they were about to leave, Hazrat Ali (A) told them that as they
had not taken proper care for the safety of the camel and the safe-guard
of their shares, whereas their first partner had by tying his two legs,
hence their loss. (Manaqib, vol. 11, p. 201).

2. Decision in the Case of a Cow and a Camel

A man catching hold of the opening of the shirt of another man came to
Hazrat Omar, (RA) and told him that the other man's cow had torn off the
belly of the camel of the appellant which resulted in its death. Saying
this he requested Hat Omar (RA) for ordering the accused to pay 'full
penalty of his camel to him. Hazrat Omar (RA) said:

“No penalty on the quadrupeds.”

Hearing this order Hazrat Ali (A) said to Hazrat Omar(RA): “I have heard
the Holy Prophet saying:

“No man can put another man to loss.” He then added:

“If the accused person had tied his cow on the way of the camel, he has
to pay the penalty, otherwise not.”

On enquiry it was revealed that the owner of the cow had actually tied
his cow on the way of the camel.

Hazrat Omar (RA) then ordered the accused to pay full penalty of the
camel to his owner. (Qazaand Tehas: p. 80; Qaza p. 158; , Abu Turab'
(Urdu translation) vol. 2. by Allama Jazaeri, p. 244).

3. Decision About a Donkey and a Cow

Once a man came to the Holy Prophet (SA) with the complaint that the cow
of another man, who had also accompanied him, had killed his donkey. The
Holy Prophet (SA) sent both of them to Hazrat Abu Bakr. (RA)

Hazrat Abu Bakr(RA) asked them as to why they had not gone to the Holy
Prophet (SA). They replied that the Holy Prophet (SA) had himself sent
them to him and that th case was in the first instance was duly taken to
the Prophet of Allah (SA).

Having heard the initial reportHazrat Abu Bakr (RA) said:

“If an animal kills another animal there is no penalty on the animal or
his owner.”

Saying thiso Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA) told the parties to go to the Holy
Prophet (SA) again and inform him of his decision. In compliance of the
orders of Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA)

both the men went back to the Holy Prophet (SA) and informed him of
Hazrat Abu Bakr's (RA) decision in their case.

The Holy Prophet (A) then sent them to Hazrat Omar (RA). He also gave
the same decision as was previously given by Hazrat Abu Bakr (RA ). When
they appraised the Holy Prophet (SA) of the decision by Hazrat Omar,
(RA) the Holy Prophet (SA) finall)

sent them to Hazrat Ali (A) for a decision.

When the two men went to Hazrat Ali (A), he put a few questions to them.

The first question was: “Were both the animals united at the time of
occurrence of the incident?

“No”, said both of them.

Hazrat Ali (A) then put a second question to them: “Were both of them
tied”?

“No”, replied they.

Then Hazrat Ali (A) put a third question to them: “Was the cow tied and
the donkey untied”? “No”, replied the twb men again.

The fourth and the last question of Hazrat Ali (A) was: “Was the donkey
tied and the cow untied”?

“Yes”, came the reply from both the parties.

“Then”, Hazrat Ali (A) said, “the owner of the cow has to pay the
penalty to the owner of the donkey whom the cow has killed.”

When the report of the decision by Hazrat Ali (A) in the above case
reached, the Holy Prophet (SA), he exclaimed: “Lo!

Ali has given the same decision as Allah Himself would have given in
this case.” (Matalibus Soul: p. 85; Irshad Mufid, Manaqib, vol. 2, p.
177; Nasikhut Tawarikh: vol. 2, p.731).

4. A Game Bird

A man saw some g'dme bird and followed her till she flew from the ground
and sat on a tree. Meanwhile, another hunter came on the scene and
hunted the bird.

The first man protesting to his action said: As I had seen the bird
first, I must get it.

the case was taken to Amir ul-Momineen Hazrat Ali (A), he said to the
first man.

“It was your luck only to see the bird and you have been successful
the1ein in seeing. The man who has hunted it has the right to possess
it. Therefore, your claim to the hunted

bird is quite invalid.”

The first man accepted this decision of Hazrat Ali (A), and went away
without any grumble and even murmur. (Qaza and Teha: p. 181).

One Day a person came to Ali (A.S.), thinking that since Ali thinks he
is too smart, I'll ask him such a tough question that he won't be able
to answer it and I'll have the chance to embarrass him in front of all
the Arabs.

He asked "Ali, tell me a number, that if we divide it by any number from
1-10 the answer will always come in the form of a whole number and not
as a fraction."

Hazrat Ali Looked back at him and said, "Take the number of days in a
year and multiply it with the number of days in a week and you will have
your answer."

The person got astonished but as he was a Mushrik he still didn't
believe Ali (A.S.). He calculated the answer Ali (AS) gave him. To his
amazement he came across the following results:

The number of Days in a Year = 360 (in Arabic Calendar)

The Number of Days in a Week = 7

The product of the two numbers = 2520

Now 2520 ÷ 1 = 2520

2520 ÷ 2 = 1260

2520 ÷ 3 = 840

2520 ÷ 4 = 630

2520 ÷ 5 = 504

2520 ÷ 6 = 420

2520 ÷ 7 = 360

2520 ÷ 8 = 315

2520 ÷ 9 = 280

2520 ÷ 10= 252

One day a person came to Ali (A.S.). He was planning to ask Ali (A.S.)
such a question which would take Ali (A.S.) a long time to answer and
because of that his Maghrib Prayers would be

delayed. He asked, "Ali you say you know everything in the world, then
tell me which animals

lay eggs and which animals give birth to their young ones"

Hazrat Ali (A.S.) looked back at him smiled and said, "The animals who
have their 'EARS' outside their body give birth to their young ones and
the animals who have their 'EARS' inside their body lay eggs."

A person was about to die, and before dying he wrote his Will which went
as follows:

"I have 17 Camels, and I have three sons. Divide my Camels in such a way
that My eldest son gets half of them, the second one gets 1/3rd of the
total and my youngest son gets 1/9th of the total number of Camels"

After his death when the relatives read his will they got extremely
perplexed and said to each other that how can we divide 17 camels like
this?

So after a long hard thought they decided that there was only one man in
Arabia who could help them: "Ali Ibne Abi Taalib." So they all came to
the door of Ali (A.S.) and put forward their problem.

Hazrat Ali (A.S.) said, "Ok. I will divide the camels as per the man's
will."

He said, "I will lend one of my camels to the total which makes it 18
(17+1=18), now lets divide as per his will"

The Eldest gets 1/2 of 18 = 9

The second one gets 1/3 of 18 = 6

and The Youngest gets 1/9 of 18 = 2

Now the total number of camels = 17

Then Hazrat Ali (A.S.) said, "Now I will take my Camel back."

This was the genius that Hazrat Ali was in his time.

Inheritance
-----------

1. The Son of an Old Man

An old man married a woman and died on the very first night of his
marriage with her. The woman who had become pregnant, gave birth to a
male child. The sons and daughters of the old man from his first wife
accused their step mother of adultery and dragged her to the court of
Hazrat Omar (RA). He heard the case and ordered that the woman should be
punished for the crime of adultery and stoned to death.

By chance Hazrat Ali (A) happened to pass by the place where she was
being stoned. When he heard of the case, he went to Hazrat Omar (RA) and
desired that the case should be reopened and heard again in his
presence. Hazrat Omar (RA) gave permission therefore Hazrat Ali (A) then
asked Hazrat Omar (RA) as to whether he had taken the statement of the
woman regarding the date of the marriage, the time of their remaining
together as man and wife and the date and time of her husband's death.

Hazrat Omar (RA)informed Hazrat Ali (A) that he had put all these
questions to the woman and recorded her statement in all respects.

Thereafter, Hazrat Ali (A) sought permission of Hazrat Omar, (RA) who
was the Caliph then, to order the woman to present in the court of the

Caliph, the child whom she claimed to be the old man's son born by her.
Hazrat Omar (RA) ordered therefor and the child was brought before him
Hazrat Ali (A) sent the child to go and play with some other children
who were playing nearby. Then he said to Hazrat Omar (RA):

“Let us also go and see him play.”

Hazrat Omar (RA) followed Hazrat Ali (A) to the place with other people
present in the court. When all of them had arrived, Hazrat Ali (A) asked
all the children to sit down. The children sat down, the child in
question also being among them. Then, Hazrat Ali (A) asked them to stand
up. The children did accordingly and all of them stood up all at once,
except the child in question who also stood up, but not before the
support of his hands by putting them on the ground. Seeing this Hazrat
Ali (A) said to Hazrat Omar (RA): “Did you observe how the child stood
up? Is it not the clear proof of the fact that the child is not an
illegitimate one. His weakness is sufficient proof that he is son of the
dead old man.” Hazrat Omar (RA) appreciated the wisdom of Hazrat Ali(A)
and acquitted the woman honourably. He also ordered for the punishment
of the sons and daughters of the old man from his first wife for false
accusation as was advised by Hazrat Ali (A).

(Kafi ; Ajaibul Ahkam ; Manaqib: vol. 2, p. 90)

Allama Jazairi in his Urdu translation (Abu Turab vol. II, p. 252) adds:

I” Apparently Hazrat Ali (A) had decided the case with the help of his
natural instinct and his particular innersight which guided him to reach
the conclusion that the child was the old man's son. Therefore, this
case should not be cited as an in- stance in similar cases now.”

2. The Effect of Blood

Once a lad appeared in the court of Hazrat Omar (RA) and preferred a
claim that his father had died in another city and his movable and
immovable property may be transferred in his name.

As the lad had no evidence to support his claim Hazrat Omar (RA) turned
him out.

While going back he met Hazrat Ali (A), and related his story to him.

Hazrat Ali (A) asked te lad to accompany him to the court of Hazrat
Omar, (RA) who was the Caliph then.

Reaching there Hazrat Ali (A) advised Hazrat Omar (RA) to reopen the
case which the latter did. Satisfied with this, Hazrat Ali (A) asked the
lad to inform him of the place where his father was burried.

When he was informed of the place, he requested Hazrat Omar (RA) to
accompany him to that place together with the lad and a group of people.
Reaching there Hazrat Ali (A) got the corpse of the lad's father
exhumed, took out one rib and asked the boy to smell it. No sooner the
boy smelt the bone his nose started bleeding.

Hazrat Ali (A) told Hazrat Omar (RA) that the statement of the boy was
correct and that the property of the deceased should be transferred in
his name.

Hazrat Omar (RA) asked him with some surprise: “Should I do it in view
of the mere fact that the boy's nose started bleeding by smelling the
dead man's bone”?

Hazrat Ali (A) said: “Wait a bit.” He then asked several other persons
to smell the bone, but no one's nose bled at all.

He then asked the boy again to smell the bone. When he did this his nose
started bleeding again.

Hazrat Ali (A) then turned to Hazrat Omar(RA) and said:

“Do you see? This boy is actually the son of the dead man. Otherwise his
nose also would not bleed as others' did not. By God I never told a lie
as Allah who gave me this knowledge did not.”

(Manaqib Shehr Ashob vol. 2, p. 182 through Abu Turab: vol. 2, p. 253).

3. Hashmia And Ansaria

A man had two wives, a Hashmia and an Ansaria. He divorced the Ansaria
and died thereafter.

After some time the Ansaria came to Hazrat Osman (RA) and preferring her
claim said:

“I have complied with all the restrictions placed on me by religion for
the duration of probation time. I, therefore have every right to claim
my share in the property of the deceased.”

Hazrat Osman (RA) was at a loss to understand as to how he should decide
the case to the satisfaction of all the people involved therein.
Therefore, he referred the case to Hazrat Ali (A) for a righteous
judgement.

Hazrat Ali called the Ansaria and asked her to tell him on oath that the
time of her three menses had not till then elapsed after the death of
her deceased husband and get her claim satisfled.

At this Ha zratOsman(RA) asked the Hashmia ifsheagreed to the decision
of .Hazrat Ali (A) who happened to be her cousin by blood.

The Hashimite said:

“Let the Ansaria say on oath what Hazrat Ali (A) has asked her to say
and then inherit her share in the property of the deceased as his widow
.”

As the Ansari women did not take the oath and the Hashmia inherited the
whole property of the deceased as her only widow.

(Boharij: vol. IX, p. 483; Manaqib Shehr A'shob: vol.II, p. 193;
Nasikhut-Tawarikh: vol. 2I, p. 737; Arjahul Matalib, p. 126, also Urdu
Translation (Abu Turab, vol. 2, p. 255 55 by Allama Jazaeri).

4. A Child with Two Heads

I. Once a question was put to Hazrat Ali (A) about the inheritance of a
child having two heads, two chests but only one back. Hazart Ali (A)
replied:

Let him go to sleep and then call him by name his parents have given
him. If one of them wakes up, take him to be only one, otherwise two and
let him inherit accordingly.

(Biharul Anwar, vol. 9, p. 486; Turuq-i-Hikamiah by Ibn-iQaiyyim, p. 53;
also Abu Turab vol. 2, by AllamaJazaeri).

2. Once a lad was brought to Hazrat Omar. (RA) The lad has had two
heads, two mouths, four eyes, four hands, four feet and two separate
organs for passing urine and stool. Hazrat Omar (RA) was requested to
solve the problem of his inheritance. Being puzzled he called Hazrat Ali
(A) and sought for his advice in the matter.

Hazrat Ali (A) said:

Let him go to sleep. If the two heads snore simultaneously, the
inheritance would be equal to one man's share, otherwise equal to two
(two joined together) men's share (\*). He proved to be two joined
together .

After some time when the twins grew up they wanted to marry.

Hazrat Ali (A) was called again by Hazrat Omar (RA) to solve the
problem. He said:

“The Cohabitation of man and wife before a human eye other than of
themselves is unnatural and against the will of God.”

Proceeding further he said: As they have now come of age and possess
sexual feelings, they would soon die. And after a while it happened what
was prophesied by the Holy Imam.

5. The Inheritance of a Mother and Her Child

After Jang-i-Jamal (the war of the Camel) Hazrat Ali (A) was passing by
a place where he saw the corpse of a woman whose new born child, also
dead, was lying near her. When asked about them he was told that the
woman had aborted after seeing the

Army in action.

Hazrat Ali (A) asked the people of the vicinity as to Who died first the
mother or the child. He was told that the child died first.

Hazrat Ali (A) ordered for penalty for both as follows ;-

(1) He divided the penalty for the child into three equal parts, kept
one part for the mother and gave two of them to the father of the child.

(2) He again divided the share of the mother of the child by two and
handed over the dividend equally to her husband and her near relations.

(3) He then divided the amount of penalty for the Woman also by two and
handed over the dividend again equally to the husband of the Woman and
her near relatives as

before.

Thus they were all compensated as commanded by Allah in the Holy Quran.
The penalty was paid from Bait-ul-Mal (Public Exchequer)

(Manaqib Shehr A'shob V 01. II, p. 194; Nasikhut Tawarikh V0l. III, p.
738).

The Problems of Slaves and The Slave Girls

4. Full Punishment For a Slave

A slave falsely accused a free man. Hazrat Ali (A) awarded him full
punishment fixed for the crime. When requested to explain as to why he
was awarded full punishment in that case while in other cases such as
drinking stealing and adultery a slave is awarded only half of the
punishment fixed for those crimes?

The case was explained by Hazrat Ali (A) as follows:-

“The other crimes you have just enumerated are the rights of Allah
wherein He has given the rebate in question to the slaves and the
slave-girls, but this case is the one wherein the rights of people are
directly concerned. In such cases Allah does not want to interfere”

(Wasael;) vol. 2I, chapter Qasaf (false accusation); Wafi, vol. II, p.
57).

Kulaini (may peace be on him) has reported that a house had collapsed in
Yeman and two children were picked up alive from the debris thereof. One
of those children was free while the other one was a slave. When the
case

was brought to Hazrat Ali (A) for a decision, he decided that case, too,
by ballot. The child who was free succeeded in the balloting and the
whole property was given to him. The child who was a slave was set free
(Qaza, p. 133).

Rare Cases of Insight Regarding Ecclesiastical Law
--------------------------------------------------

1. A Rare Example of Insight Regarding Ecclesiastical Law

A man brought his slave to Hazrat Ali (A) and said: “Ya Amir ul-Momineen
! This slave of mine has married a woman without my permission.”

Hazrat Ali (A) said to him.

“Why don't you separate them.” Thereupon, the man ordered his slave:

“O you bad man! Divorce your wife.” When Hazrat Ali (A) heard these
words, he said to the slave that he was free either to divorce or not to
divorce his wife.

The master of the slave was taken aback when he heard these words of
Hazrat Ali (A) and said to him.

“Ya Amir ul-Momineen! You just said to me that I can separate the two.
But now you are saying to the slave that was at liberty to divorce or
not divorce his wife.”

Saying this he solicited favour of the holy Imam (A) to explain to him
his two different order:s in one and the same case.

Hazrat Ali (A) enlightened the man thus:-

“When you ordered your slave you admitted interalia that you had
permitted him to marry otherwise the marriage would have been unlawful
and in that case you need not have to order him to divorce his wife,
because divorce was necessary after only a lawful marriage. The result:
The marriage was lawful as you have indirectly admitted. Therefore, your
slave is now at liberty to divorce his wife or not.” (Bihar, vol. 9, p.
492).

2. The Case of a Marriage Wherein a Woman had Married a Man With the
Condition That the Matter of Divorce Would Remain in her Hands

It has been reported by Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (A) that once a man
during the period of Hazrat Ali (A) married a woman who had placed the
condition of the marriage that the matter of divorce would remain in her
hands in case he lived separately or married another woman.

The man when sought adviceofHazrat Ali (A) in the matter he told him
that the conditions of Allah in the case of a marriage were superior
over all other conditions and all other conditions become null and void
in comparison with the conditions of Allah. “ Allah, he said, has put
the condition on a marriage i.e., has commanded that the matter of
divorce in case of each and every marriage would remain in the hands of
man and not

the woman.” (Wafi, vol. 2I, p. 70).

Allama Jazaeri while translating the above into urdu from Arabic vide
page 272 of his book Abu Turab, vol. 2, has added a note thereto as
follows:-

“The above decision of Hazrat Ali (A) throws light on the question as to
whether the matter of divorce could religiously be the right of a woman
or not.”

Allama Jazaeri has discussed the point at length in his book referred to
above, but we leave it for want of space in this small book. (Kaukab
Shadani).

3. Second Marriage During the Probation Time (Iddah) of a Woman

Qarezi Abu Yusuf and Imam Ahmad Hambal reported that a woman who had
married during probation was brought to Hazrat Omar. (RA)

Hazrat Omar (RA) ordered that she should be separated from her husband
and her dower be deposited in the Bait-ulmal (Public Exchequer). He
added that he did not think that the dower was correctly connected with
the marriage in question. “Therefore”, he said, “the man and the woman
have both been deprived of each other in this case.”

When Haziat Ali (A) heard of the decision of Hazrat Omar (RA) in the
above case, he said:

“If these people were ignorant of the religion law in this connection,
none could deprive the woman of her right to the dower, because the man
has already utilized his matrimonia

rights.”

He said further, “let them separate for the duration of th probation
period, but he has the right to marry her again if he likes like others,
and the marriage would then be lawful

religiously.”

When Hazrat Omar (RA) heard of this, he went to the pulpit and addressed
the audience as follows:-

“If any of you have contracted such a marriage out of ignorance of
Sunnah (religious law) he should correct it under the light of the
decision of Ali.”

Hazrat Omar (RA) then decided the case in question himself accordingly.
(Manaqib Shehr A'shob: vol. 2, p. 183; Zakhair- ul-Uqba: p. 81; Arjhul
Matalib, p. 124).

4. Coition Before and after ahe End of the Probation Period (Iddah)

If a man is charged of coition with his divorced wife after the end of
the probation period he will be awarded punishment as fixed by
Ecclesiastical law according to a decision of Hazrat Ali (A), but if he
is charged of the same act before the end of the probation period after
divorce it would be deemed to be return to the original position and no
punishment will have to be awarded therefor. (Mustadrik: vol. 2I, p.
126).

5. No Pardon after an Accusation is Proved to be False

A woman accused her husband to have committed adultery. When the man was
going to be punished therefor under the orders of Hazrat Ali (A). She
said that she had pardoned him. Hazrat Ali (A) remarked.

“Now there is no use of your pardoning him, because the charge has been
proved. He must, therefore, be punished for the crime.” (Qaza and Teha:
p. 165).

6. Accusing a Group of People

Said Hazrat Ali (A):

“If some one accuses a group of people and the accusation is on
investigation proved to be false the number of punishment would be
according to the number of persons in the group so accused, provided the

accuser has named all the persons in the group otherwise the number of
the punishment would be according to the number of the people the person
concerned has name .

(Qaza and Teha: p. 165).

8. A Gift for Hazrat Othman

Once, Hazrat Osman was on his way to pilgrimage to Mecca and attired in
the restricted costum (Ehram) of Haj (pilgrimage to Mecca). Meanwhile a
man happened to bring a roasted bird to him as a gift for him and for
his friends.

Hazrat Osman did not seem to feel any restriction connect therewith, but
his companions did not touch the meat. Thereupon, Hazrat Osman (RA)
exclaimed: “Brothers! This meat of the bird is not prohibited for us,
because we did not hunt the bird nor anyone else who is dressed in the
restricted clothes of the pilgrimage. Therefore, I don't see any harm in
eating this meat.” But the people present in his tent said, “You may

not, but Hazrat Ali (A) does not like it despite all the explanation you
have given in this connection.

Then, Hazrat Osman called Hazrat Ali (A) through some one. Hazrat Ali
(A) who was marking the camels there seemed a bit annoyed but still he
accompanied the man to the tent of Hazrat Osman. (RA)

Hazrat Osman (RA) said to him: “Ya Ali (A) ! You always seem to go
against me in all the religious matters.”

On this Hazrat Ali (A) said to the people present there. I ask you to
tell on oath whether the Holy Prophet (SA) had not once refused the meat
of a roasted wild donkey with the excuse that he and his companions were
dressed in the restricted clothes of Haj and if the meat was not given
to those who were not?”

About twelve persons present there said on oath that it had actually
happened what had been described by Hazrat Ali (A).

Then, Hazrat Ali (A) asked the people present there again to say on oath
as to whether five eggs of the camelbird were not once brought to the
Holy Prophet (SA) as a gift when he was on his way to Mecca for Haj and
as to whether had he not refused to eat them on the same place.

About a dozen of people again said on oath that it had happened the same
way as was described by Hazrat Ali (A). Thereupon, Hazrat Osman went
inside his tent, leaving the gift with (hose who had brought it.

(Musnad Ahmad bin Hambal vol. 1, p. l00-l04; Manaqib vol. 2, p. l94;
Nasikhut Tawarikh vol. 3, p. 738, Kitabul Um lil Shafai Voi. 7, p. 257;
Sunan-i-Baihaqi vol. V, p. 194; Kanzul Ummal Voi. Ill, p. 53, also Abu
Turab (Urdu) by Allama Jazairi Voi. II, p. 280-281).

9. How to Put a Dumb on Oath

Hazrat Ali (A) was once requested to describe how to a dumb on Oath.

He said; “Praise is for Allah that He did not make me depart from this
world before I had solved all the religious problems of the Muslim
nation wherein they needed my help.”

Thereafter, he described the way of putting a dumb on oath in a case
wherein he or she is a defendent in the following manner.

He said: “If a dumb person is accused of borrowing any thing from
somebody and when he or she is called to a court of law and required to
say on oath as to whether he or she had or had not borrowed in kind or
cash from the complainant in the case in question he or she shown the
Holy Quran and asked as to what it was. He would certainly raise his or
her finger towards the sky, there is to say, that it was the Book of
Allah.”

He then asked Qambar to bring a pen and an inkpot and wrote on a piece
of paper the following words:-

“I take oath of the one and only Allah there is no God except Himself;
Who knows all the visible and the hidden things; He desires His creature
to be true and virtuous and is the most powerful; He who has the power
to benefit and harm all. He who is kind and merciful; He Who has the
power to ruin and catch any body. He likes to; He Who is

aware of what is said and what is not said; I do not owe (such a such
man or woman) here the person concerned has to be named any thing and he
or she (name of the person concerned) has no right to ask me to refund
(name the thing or the amount of cash whatever the case may be).”

He then asked Qambar to wash the words from the piece of the paper and
take the water to the last drop in a tumbular. Then he said to the
people who had requested him to describe the manner in which a dumb was
to be put on oath to “let the dumb involved in such a case to swallow
the liquid prepared like this and the oath would be over.”

Proceeding further, he said: “If the dumb person refuses to drink that
water the charge is proved,” (Qaza p. 147).

10. The Funeral Prayer for a Deserter or a Fugitive From War not Allowed

When Hazrat Ali (A) reached the dead of his side in the wars of Jamal,
Siffeen and Nehrawan, he did not allow the funeral prayers for those who
were wounded on the back, but he allowed the prayer for those who were
wounded on the front side of their bodies and got them burried like the
dead Muslims.

(Qaza p. 179).

11. No Ransom Money for the Fugitives

It has been reported by Asbagh bin Banatah that Hazrat Ali (A) used to
pay ransom money only for those prisoners of war who were wounded on the
front side of their bodies and get them freed thereby, but not those who
were wounded in their backs. (Qaza p. 179).

14. Punishment for the Denial of Prophethood

Kulaini has reported in 'Kafi' on the authority of Imam Jafar-e-Sadiq
(A) that Hazrat Ali (A) was once sitting in the Juma Mosque of Kufa when
four persons were presented to him as prisoners with the crime that they
were taking food during day time although they knew it that that was the
Holy month of Ramzan.

Hazrat Ali (A) talked to them as follows:

“Did you take your food during day knowing that it was the month of
Ramzan?”

“Yes, Sir.”

”Are You Jews?”

“No Sir”

“Christians?”

“No, Sir.”

“What religion do you, then, belong to?”

“We are Muslims, Sir.”

“Then you must be travellers?”

“No, Sir, we are the residents of this very city.”

“Then you must be suffering from certain diseases of which others might
not be aware, but you might be knowing them well? as the Holy Quran
says:

“A man knows about himself and when a disease befalls him he knows it.”

“Thank God, we are not suffering from any disease what.soever,” replied
the prisoners.

Hearing this Hazrat Ali (A) smiled and asked the prisoners.

“Do you believe in the Unity of God and the Prophethood of Muhammad
(SA)”?

The prisoners replied “We believe in the Unity of God, but we do not
believe in Muhammad (SA) as a Prophet of God; we rather believe that
Muhammad (SA) was only an Arab, who had invited people to gather round
him.”

Hazrat Ali (A) then said to them “If you denied the Prophethood of
Muhammad (SA) after calling yourselves Muslims, I shall kill you all.”

To this they replied: “You may do whatever you like.” Thereafter, no way
out was left for Hazrat Ali (A) except killing them for the crime of
apostasy. But he killed them by smoke gradually i.e., putting them in a
covered ditch blocked on all the four corners except a hole to a similar
ditch wherein they were put and through which smoke was passing to their
ditch from the adjacent one where a fire was buring and putting the
question to them as to whether they agreed for penitence for their crime
of apostasy. But the prisoners were adamant enough not to agree to
penitence with the result that all died without a word till they
breathed their last.

When the news of the above incident spread to other cities a group of
Jews came from Medina to Kufa and requested for audience with Hazrat Ali
(A) and it was duly granted.

When they were presented to Hazrat Ali (A), they said to him:

“Sir, we have heard that have invented a punishment for killing people
which is against all the tents of Islam as well as those of Christianity
and the religion of the Jews. We have, therefore, came to ask you, Sir,
whether it is true or not.”

Thereafter, they waited for an answer from Hazrat Ali (A) and it came as
follows:-

“It put you on oath by the signs which were shown to Hazrat Musa (A)
(Moses) and by the one who does not need any thing but is the whole and
sole monarch of the Day of Judgement i.e., Allah to say as to after
departure of Moses (A) a group of people was no brought to Yoosha bin
Noon with the accusation that they believed in the Unity of God, but
they had denied the Prophethood of Moses (A), although they had accepted
him as a Prophet

earlier and to whether the latter had not awarded the same punishment to
them as have awarded to these so called Muslims now?”

All the Jews then said with one voice: “We now believe that you know the
Secrets of Moses (A).” Thereafter their leader took out a document from
under his cloak and showed to Hazrat Ali (A).

After Hazrat Ali (A) had gone through the document he began weeping
bitterly. The leader of the Jews asked him as to whether he could read
Hebrew being an Arab, Hazrat Ali (A) replied in the affirmative and told
his (Hazrat Ali AS) own name was written in the document and that was
the reason of his shedding tears.

The Grand Jew requested Hazrat Ali (A) to show where his name was
written in the document. Hazrat Ali (A) showed him his name and told him
Elia stood for Ali in Hebrew language.

Thereafter, the Grand Jew together with his folks recited the Kalma and
became Muslims. (Biharul Anwar, vol. 9. p. 492).

5. Decision That Penitence Purifies a Sin

It has been described by Suduq on the authority of Saad binTarif who has
carried it from Asbagh that a man came to Hazrat Ali (A) and submitted
to him that he had committed a crime and asked him to purify him. Hazrat
Ali asked whether he was suffering from any major disease. When he
replied in the affirmative, Hazrat Ali (A) asked him to go get the
disease treated and then come back to him. When he came back, Hazrat Ali
(A) asked him whether he repented what he had done. The man said, “Yes
and wept bitterly.

Then Hazrat Ali (A) told him that repentence had purified him as sincere
repentenee and penitence was sufficient for purification. But it has
been unanimously accepted that nobody else than an Imam can grant
forgiveness like this. (Abu Turab, vol. 2, p. 118).

Hazrat Ali (A)

Ali! Thou art the rarest gem

That the world has ever seen ;

Thou art the embodiment great

of godliness, beauty and love ;

Thy spotless life so pure and good

Inspires men to tread their upward path

To the horis land of calm and bliss.

First in battle and first in truth

Thou stood's stately, sure and firm

By Muhammad's dark and sunny days,

Dined with him that Meraj night,

And slept on his hallowed bed that perilous night

From whence the Islamic age began.

Full of wisdom and full of lore art thou

As truly said the Holy Prophet great-

For at thy feet the two worlds sat

Praising thee for thy talents rare ;

Ali ! Thou shouldst be the first Caliph !

Immortal Ka'aba thy place of birth

Immortal Koofa-Mosque thy place of death ;

Ali Thou art a blessed God's own being !

Thou wert to thine murderer extremely kind

Who clapped in chains was before thee brought !

Even as the sandal tree its fragrance yields

To the wood-cutter that strikes it hard

Thou set him free with a glorious grace

And offered him thy bread and milk

These eternal charity deeds of thine

The living world remembers and reveres sure !

Cursed be the men that envied thee

And those that thought and spoke low of thee,

Despite the virtuous birth and heritage divine ;

Aided thus by false and impure men

Did jarring sect into Islam creep

But thou shinest above these all

O Lord Like a steadfast star of the skies !

These numbers are but a frail tribute to thee

My Lord, I implore thee--cast once thy gracious smile on tr

One and one only, I implore thee, I am blessed.

By the Courtesy of Mirza Ghulam Raza (Masolipatam)

*You may need to use the karbala font attached to see the arabic
letters*

A Sermon without Dots
---------------------

The knowledge, wisdom and eloquence of Imam ‘Ali b. Abi Talib (a) is
well known among Muslims of all schools of thought. One such example of
his mastery over the Arabic language manifested itself in this extempore
sermon which, in its written form, is devoid of any dots !!

All praise be to Allah: the praised King, the affectionate Owner, the
Fashioner of all who are born, the Recourse for every downtrodden, the
Outstretcher of lands, the Establisher of firm mountains, the Sender of
rain, the Alleviator of difficulties, the Knower and Perceiver of
secrets, the Destroyer of kingdoms and Perisher of possessions, the
Renewer of eras and their Repetitor, the Source of all things and their
Destination. Widespread is His generosity and sufficient are the layered
clouds and the supply of rain. He responds to the one who asks or hopes,
giving wide and with abundance.

*I praise Him endlessly. I consider Him one as He is considered one by
those who turn to Him. Lo ! He is Allah, there is no god for the nations
except Him. No one can distort what He set upright and established. He
sent Muhammad as the standard-bearer of submission ( Islam), the leader
for the rulers and preventer of their oppression, The crippler of the
authorities of Wuddand Sawa\`(two idols). He informed and educated,
appointed and perfected. He founded the fundamentals and eased them in.
He emphasized the appointed promise (Day of Judgment) and forewarned.
Allah has linked him with honor and granted his soul the peace, and may
Allah have mercy on his progeny and his venerated family; as long as the
guiding stars shine, the crescent continues to rise, and the chant of
the oneness ( La ilaha illa Allah) is made to be heard around.*

May God protect ye! Work towards the best of deeds. So tread the path
seeking the lawful, and give up the forbidden and abandon it. Listen to
the command of Allah and be aware of it. Maintain the ties with
relations and nurture them. Disobey desires and repel them. Bond as kins
with the righteous and pious, and discontinue the company of amusement
and greed.

Your groom is the most impeccable of free men by birth, most generous
and honorable with glories, and of the sweetest of descent. Here he came
to you, took your kin with permission, in marriage, the gracious bride.
Offered a dowry, just as the Messenger of Allah did to Umm Salamah.
Certainly, he [s] was the most gracious son-in-law. Kind to his progeny.
He gave them in marriage to whom he wanted. He was neither confused in
his choice of wife nor had an oversight.

I ask Allah, on your behalf, for the lasting graciousness of His
connection. And the continuation of His pleasures, and that He may
inspire all: the reform of their own condition, and the preparation for
their individual destiny and the hereafter. Gratitude is for Him forever
and the praise for His Messenger Ahmad [s].

***This sermon appears to have been delivered by Imam ‘Ali (a) on the
occasion of someone’s marriage (** nikah**), and may well have been his
own marriage. It has been quoted by several scholars such as:***
