Introduction
============

In the Modern Age, certainty became the highest and most sought-after
espistemic value, even more valued than truth, and the so-called
scientific method was seen as the surest path to certainty. Indeed,
human reason became identified with the application of a supposed
scientific method of Cartesian or Baconian inspiration. The domain of
the practice became considered either one more area for the mere
application of the scientific method, an application which would lead to
human progress, or as an area beyond reason. One of the stereotyped
convictions attributed to the enlightened mentality is this: insofar as
human life in all its extremes becomes more rational, that is, more
scientific, practical problems will begin to be solved. Indeed,
Rousseau, in his*Discourse on the Sciences and the Arts* (1750), pointed
out that human progress did not always go hand in hand with scientific
and technical progress, which today is a self-evident truth that is not
discussed. On the other hand, dual accounting, that is the consideration
that science is fully rational and the other areas of human activity are
not, as well as an insult to common sense, has rebounded against science
itself, for its practical aspects cannot be hidden, and it is hardly
possible to parcel off a purely logical context, as that of
justification set out to be.

It is obvious that not even the application of a supposed scientific
method can guarantee the progressive character of our practical
decisions. To this evidence there has been added the recognition of
science’s own practical aspects. This evolution has convinced many of
the impossibility of obtaining certainty even in the domain of science,
which has given rise to diverse forms of desperation regarding the
abilities of human reasoning. This oscillation between the obsession for
certainty and desperation with regard to reason has been the tune most
frequently danced to in modern times.

Yet today we do not want environmental problems to be left entirely up
to the expert’s decision or the irrational imposition of power or
arbitrariness, but to be tackled in reasoned dialogue, on a footing of
equality, by scientists, technicians, lawyers, politicians, businessmen,
private individuals, representatives of social movements - and indeed
philosophers! We are recognizing, at least implicitly, the possibility
of being reasonable in an area where we do not expect absolute
certainty, and we accept that human reason goes beyond the limits of
science and technology, that reason is more deeply rooted in human life
than a mere method could ever be. To reach this point we have had to
come a long way as far as our concept of reason and science is
concerned, and have also needed a great deal of experience - bittersweet
experience - regarding the practical consequences of science. Everything
would seem to show, then, that the most typical extreme positions of
modern times are being abandoned, and that we have entered the
post-modern period[^1] .

My intention in these pages is to explore the possibilities of a project
of basically Aristotelian inspiration for the integration of the
theoretical and practical aspects of reason, for the search for a happy
medium between the extremes of logicism and irrationalism. In my
opinion, this outlook has much to contribute to the on-going debate on
the rationality of science and on the environmental questions that its
application brings up. This is, indeed, a particular aspect of the
relationship between reason and practice, but not just any aspect:
traditional philosophical problems are arising now, and they will
continue to come up in the future, in direct connection with
environmental matters - this will be an area and a way for the classical
topics of philosophy to reappear. Rationality, good and evil, justice,
the relationship between being and value, the objectivity or
subjectivity of knowledge, etc., are venerable philosophical topics that
we shall have to reconsider in the light of environmental problems, as
they were once tackled in connection with questions of politics,
theology, society, science and economy.

I shall now outline the steps that my exposition will follow, together
with other considerations necessary for it to fall within the limits of
a short piece. In the first place, we need a correct characterization of
Modern Age which makes it possible to explain the causes of a bad
relationship between theory and practice. This is an extremely complex
and multi-faceted task. Here we can hardly even approach a full idea of
modernity. What we can do, however, is point out one of its most
essential characteristics[^2] , in some wise the cause of many others
and especially near to the interests of this paper. I mean the
predilection for certainty, which is a constant of the modern spirit,
just like the energetic and cyclic irrationalist reactions. Obsession
with certainty and sceptical desperation are mutual causes of each other
like pre-Socratic opposites. We shall speak of this in**section 2
(‘Modern Age and Actual Age: from the search for certainty to
fallibilism’)** .

Secondly, we must go through the Aristotelian concepts which may, in my
opinion, take us out of this thankless to-ing and fro-ing. What I mean
basically is the Aristotelian notions of prudence (*phronesis* ) and
practical truth (*aletheia praktike* ). In**section 3 (Prudence in
Aristotle)** , I shall set out the contents of Aristotelian prudence and
the contribution that it can make to the present debate. An analogous
study of the notion of practical truth will be set out in the second
part of this paper[^3] .

The concept of prudence is one that has been taken from the area of
Aristotelian practical philosophy, where absolute certainty is not
expected, but neither are decisions left to mere arbitrariness or
imposition. The novelty consists in that, when we recognize, as we do
today, that science itself is a human action, the notion taken from
practical philosophy may be used for understanding and integrating
scientific rationality. When science is characterized as an activity
governed by prudence, it moves away from both the logicist and the
irrationalist poles, from the obsession with certainty and from the
‘anything goes’, from algorithm and anarchism. Furthermore, if science
is made a prudential activity, it will be much easier for us to connect
its particular way of rationality with that of discussions, decisions
and environmental actions.

Although it is true that Aristotelian notions can be suggestive, it is
not true that they do no more than answer contemporary questions. For
them to be active in the on-going debate on the relationship between
theoretical reason and practical reason, they must be
developed,*updated* through contemporary texts. The profit from this
manœuvre is double: it makes Aristotle’s concepts available for the
present debate and gives some contemporary ideas a very comprehensive
and fertile philosophical framework, the Aristotelian framework. In the
remaining sections. I shall try*to bring* to the current debate the
Aristotelian notion of prudence through the fallibilism of Peirce and
Popper and through Hans Jonas’ imperative of responsibility. The
fallibilist attitude is, to my mind, the most suitable post-modern
characterization of scientific rationality and of human rationality, and
applied to environmental problems it would give rise to the so-called
principle of responsibility.

In**section 4 (Prudence and scientific rationality:** ***Do not block
the way of inquiry*** **)** , I maintain that in science a fallibilistic
attitude alone opens the doors to prudential reason, and that the
ontological and anthropological bases of prudence are also suitable for
fallibilism, founding it and encouraging it. In Aristotle, there are
certain fallibilistic attitudes but they are ambiguous and combine with
other statements in which science is characterized as universal and
necessary knowledge. In this regard, Peirce’s texts are most useful and
clearest, and, of course, nearest to the present problems of science.
Fallibilism is for him an attitude, that is something practical - rather
than a concept or a rule it is the scientific attitude*par excellence* .
On the basis of the fallibilist attitude there stands what may be the
ultimate and most universal rule of scientific rationality:*Do not block
the way of inquiry* .

In**section 5 (Prudence and environmental responsibility:** ***May human
life remain possible*** ), I set out to bring the Aristotelian idea of
prudence to the on-going debate on the environment. I shall proceed as
in the previous case, showing its proximity to and continuity with the
present notion of responsibility as treated by Hans Jonas. Again we have
an Aristotelian concept that can be developed or, as Jonas himself would
say, improved on, by a notion of today. In return, this present notion
is supported by a very articulate and coherent ontology. Jonas sets out
the so-called principle of responsibility as the ultimate element of the
moral control of our relationship with the environment:*Proceed in such
a way that you do not endanger the conditions for humanity’s indefinite
continuity on Earth* .

I consider that Peirce’s and Jonas’s formulations - each in its own
area, respectively that of science and that of ethics - the expression
of one and the same attitude, of one and the same*actual* - and
therefore post-modern - way of understanding rationality, and that both
fit perfectly into a metaphysical framework of Aristotelian inspiration.
Essentially, these ideas are convergent, and respond to one attitude and
may be based on one Aristotelian conception of reality, and together
they offer a good answer to questions for their scientific rationality
and their environmental responsibility.

The principles of Peirce and Jonas can, however, be taken as inadequate
as a characterization of human action, for they do not take into account
its creative aspects. The truth is that both, though they do not
guarantee it, are directed towards*creative discovery* : they set out to
ensure that it will be possible at any moment, while nurturing and
fomenting the conditions for it and removing obstacles. They uphold the
openness of human action so that it can adjust to the future course of
events, always open and never completely determined. The present article
will therefore require a later development in which the notion of
creative discovery is tackled along with its connection with the
Aristotelian concept of*practical truth* .


