Modern Age and Actual Age: from the search for certainty to fallibilism
=======================================================================

Among the characteristics of modern thought is the predilection for
certainty[^4] . The search for certainty has been one of the signs of
identity of a whole intellectual tradition, of what Husserl[^5] calls
‘European science’. According to Husserl, the abandonment of this search
steeps us in crisis, in scepticism or in any type of naturalism.
However, as Kolakowski[^6] rightly observes, neither Descartes nor
Husserl managed to distinguish between the subjective feeling of
evidence and the objective evidence of truth. Consequently, in many of
the modern philosophical traditions, the pursuit of certainty has become
a threat to the pursuit of truth, an impulse towards different types of
idealism and a cause of crisis (by inference and by reaction) rather
than an antidote to it.

The pursuit of certainty -*infallibilism* , in the words of Laudan - is
one of the legacies of Cartesian philosophy. One could state, as Clarke
does, that Cartesian science is defined in terms of certainty rather
than in terms of the truth of the explanations proposed.[^7] A text in
which Decartes himself sets this point out clearly is:

‘What can it matter to us for something to be absolutely false if anyway
we believe it and we do not have the slightest suspicion that it is
false?’[^8]

Or, if a negative formulation is required, ‘any knowledge that can be
rendered doubtful must not be called scientific’[^9] and ‘I treat [...]
as false everything which is merely likely’[^10] These words give the
tone of what would from then on be the object of the quest for the
scientific method.

It is, in any event, a question of establishing methods whose results
will be certain knowledge, methods which we can only trust, whether or
not subjective certainty is accompanied by objective truth.

Francis Bacon initiated another route of access to certainty, this time
with an empirical and inductive character. According to Bacon, the
inductive method is the*art of invention* and*machine* , as well
as*formula* ,*clear and radiant light* [^11] , and other similar boons.
Those of Bacon’s ideas with the greatest influence on subsequent
scientific thought are those which he expressed in his second book of
the*Novum Organum* , that is his inductive logic, the so-called Baconian
method. In general, and as Rossi states, many have seen in Bacon the
constructor of a gigantic ‘logic machine’ doomed to not being used. With
the Baconian method, according to Spedding, we cannot do anything. We
consider it a subtle, elaborate and ingenious mechanism, but one which
can produce nothing[^12] . In spite of everything, Bacon’s image as the
founder of the new science thanks to his discovery of the inductive
method was greatly appreciated by the founders of the*Royal Society* and
the authors of the great illustrated*Encyclopædia* .

In what situation do we place the practical with regard to rationality
when the first value is certainty?

Many modern thinkers begin their writings with the observation of the
disappointing state of the philosophy of human things in comparison with
natural philosophy, that is the natural science. Dissension and lack of
certainty, both in metaphysics and in moral philosophy, are the points
causing the greatest unrest. Both Descartes and Hume, to mention two of
the most noteworthy, feel that the model that inquiry into mankind
should follow is that of natural and formal sciences, which have already
opened up a path, a method to certainty and consensus. So, Descartes set
out to find ‘the highest and most perfect moral science, which,
presupposing a knowledge of other sciences, is the ultimate degree of
wisdom’[^13] . Naturally, Descartes had to settle indefinitely for what
he called  ‘provisional morals’. Hume stated with his empiricist
approach base on the inductive method, ‘Where experiments of this kind
are judiciously collected and compared, we may hope to establish on them
a science which will not be inferior in certainty, and will be much
superior in utility to any other of human comprehension’[^14] . This
science will imply the extension of the principles of Newtonian natural
philosophy to the study of human nature, and within it to the study of
morals. Regarding politics, Hume has still fewer doubts, and states
categorically that it can be reduced to a science endowed with a degree
of certainty almost as perfect as that of mathematics[^15] .

But this naturalist approach to the study of man, which in principle
promises the so longed-for certainty, leads to further disappointments
and carries with it the germ of its own destruction, in the long term
threatening natural science itself, which will always be an activity and
product of human freedom and reason. Today we know from experience how
these tendencies implicit in the naturalist position itself have been
developed, but in Hume, the whole trajectory is already indicated.
Naturalization of moral studies seems to demand a methodological
reduction of the normative and the evaluative, which will end up being
established as a definitive ontological reduction of human reason and
freedom, which are mutually inseparable and inaccessible to the
empirical method and never totally explained from strictly naturalist
bases. Thence are derived an emotivism and an irrationalism which
threaten science itself insofar as its practical aspects are recognized
along with its inability to produce absolutely certain knowledge. Hume
assures that ‘We speak not strictly and philosophically when we talk of
the combat of passion and of reason. Reason is, and ought only to be the
slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to
serve and obey them’[^16] . Paradoxical though this may seem, this
resignation that the practical should be the place for feelings derives
from a reduced notion of reason, excessively bound up with a given idea
of science and method and an extreme valuation of certainty.

In Hume there is no renunciation of certainty, the basis of which is
confided to habit, but one of reason. Predilection for certainty leads
Hume to irrationalism, not to scepticism[^17] . Karl Popper sums up the
situation as follows, saying that, according to Hume, the scientific
method is inductive, but:

‘... induction is completely invalid as an inference. There is not a
shadow of a logical argument that would support the inference to a
generalization from statements about the past (such as past repetitions
of some 'evidence'). He [Hume] said that in spite of its lack of logical
validity, induction plays an indispensable part in practical life [...]
Thus there is a paradox.*Even our intellect does not work rationally* '.
[p.94] [...] This led Hume, one of the most reasonable thinkers of all
time, to give up rationalism and look at man not as endowed with reason
but as a product of blind habit. Acording to Russell**this paradox of
Hume's is responsible for the schizophrenia of modern man** ’.
[p.95][^18]

If anything can be learnt for the present it is that we lack a notion of
practical reason that is well structured and free of traditional errors.
Practical criteria cannot depend on a supposed scientific method and
cannot aspire to confer absolute certainty on our decisions, but we do
not have to go without reason in practical situations, as there is no
need to identify reason with a supposed scientific method or with the
sure way to certainty. In part, the obstacles encountered by Hume and
Descartes in the development of an idea of practical reason have been
abolished, for today we are aware that sciences are not governed
strictly by the Cartesian method or by the inductive method, and that
they are far from reaching complete certainty, which does not make them
directly irrational. Above everything else it is the renunciation of the
obsession with certainty that enables us today to imagine a suitable
notion of practical reason.

It will be said that a notion of practical reason already existed in
Kant. And this is so. But two observations must be made in this regard.
In Kant, unlike in Hume, there is a radical denaturalization of
practical reason, which today seems unacceptable. Such is the case that
for Kant, prudence mainly has nothing to do with practical reason, but
with theoretical reason, paradoxical though this may seem. This means
that he excludes it from the nucleus of morals and considers it a mere
technical ability for the pursuit of happiness[^19] . In the Modern
period, from Descartes to Bacon, any technique was considered to be no
more than applied science, and that if any problem arose in practice, it
was due to deficiencies in theory. This view of science as immediately
applicable soon spread, as we have seen in Hume, to morals, so the
application of a science of man, which would not present genuinely
technical problems, but only theoretical ones, would solve the problems
of human happiness. Philosophers of the Enlightenment felt attracted by
this new way of approaching human affairs. Kant shared the technological
optimism of his day although he was the first to resist the concept of
morals as a technique, that is, as the application of a science of man
to the pursuit of happiness (happiness, by the way, previously defined
by that very science). Kant, on the other hand, sought to protect morals
from influences external to the very freedom of the subject. He did this
by excluding the traditional contents from the nucleus of practical
philosophy. According to Kant, prudence lies rather in theoretical
reason, as it could become a mere applied science[^20] . In the
interests of autonomy of reason, Kant separates morals radically from
nature, setting it in the sphere of the freedom of the subject. The
attempt to protect morals from naturalism leads to the new excess of
putting it in the hands of logicism. The categorical imperative is, at
root, of a logical character:*Behave in such a way that you might also
want your maxim to become universal law* . The ‘might also want’ invoked
here is, as Jonas[^21] states, that of reason an its concord with
itself, an ability which would only be negated by self-contradiction.

In Aristotle, on the other hand, happiness is man’s natural and
legitimate aim, whereby it was possible, according to Aubenque, ‘to
integrate the*technical* moment of the correct choice of means in the
definition of morality’[^22] *.*

The second observation concerns the certainty of what Kant takes to be
really practical. No comparison can be made between the splendid
certainty which Kant attributes to Newtonian science and the*practical
faith* in postulates necessary to give consistence to the practical use
of reason. In an atmosphere of extreme valuation of certainty and of the
scientific method, the Kantian foundation for practical reason, which,
in short, leads to the postulates of human freedom, the immortality of
the soul and the existence of God, was not believed or taken seriously.
Kant expressed his admiration and  respect for two areas of reality,*the
starry sky above me and the moral law inside me* . But to keep them
separate is not sustainable, for indeed he who looks at the stars and
grasps moral law is a human being who takes part in the two areas of
reality, as a system subject to physical laws and as a free being. The
integration of the two spheres seems necessary without the negation of
either of them. But if we separate to such an extent the degree of
certainty that we attribute to the knowledge of each of them, and if we
set such a high value on certainty, then the so-called practical use of
reason runs the risk of immediately being seen as one more mask of the
irrational, as a concession of Kant’s to his beliefs, affections,
desires or interests. The historical proof that this two sets of
accounts cannot be tenable for long is what happened to Kantian
tradition. Either it tended towards an idealism that suppressed the
peculiarity of the practical and made it depend for everything on theory
by identifying the rational with the real, or it drifted towards an
irrationalism in which the pure use of reason had the same fate as the
practical use, until it was seen as one more mask of the will to
power[^23] . The pure and practical uses of reason must be integrated
and must support each other, for today we know that they either stand or
fall together[^24] . But this requires a reconsideration of the ideal of
certainty and of the nature of science which has only come about in the
twentieth century.

Since Hegel and since Nietzsche, several campaigns have been launched in
the pursuit of certainty. One of the last ones in favour of certainty,
automatism and the segregation of the practical, based on the
identification of reason with science, was called Neo-positivism (and it
was pursued as the so-called*received view* ). Its internal decadence
apart, it was Popper’s philosophy and Kuhn’s criticisms that put an end
to this venture, and with it to a way of making philosophy of science.
Kuhn laid forth the practical aspects of scientific rationality. As he
states - in my opinion, rightly - ‘Recognizing that criteria of choice
can function as values when incomplete as rules has, I think, a number
of striking advantages [p. 331] .’[^25] . In Popper, a clear
renunciation of the ideal of certainty and a re-instatement of truth are
to be notice.

The recognition of the practical implication of science, both in its
genesis and applications and in its justification, and the renunciation
of the idea of certainty no doubt mark the end of the epoch in which the
supposedly scientific method was shown as the zenith and model of human
reason, where all philosophy aspired to ideal of certainty or took its
failure as the failure of reason, first in the practical terrain and
then, as an inexorable consequence, in the theoretical. Today there is
an abandonment of the logico-linguistic conception of theories in favour
of a pragmatic conception of science. Science, it is said, is action.
But, as previously the possibility of a practical reason was not clear,
nor was its articulation with theory, the rationality of science itself
has been questioned. Kuhn has been accused of being relativist and
irrationalist, an accusation which he has rejected, but without going so
far as to construct a philosophical basis on which to base this
rejection. For their parts, Peirce and Popper, each in his own way, have
tackled this subject but both have recoiled, paradoxically, to
quasi-Hegelian positions.

Science taken as action, as the art of research, of teaching, diffusion
of knowledge and application, etc., can and must be judged with criteria
that cannot in themselves be exclusively scientific or merely arbitrary,
but a part of the general rationality of human life. The birth, then, of
new disciplines, of new ways of making philosophy of science, such
as*bioethics* ,*environmental ethics* and*STS studies* , is not just a
collateral phenomenon, a momentary collision point between science and
practical thought, but an indication of a new way of conceiving
rationality itself, or at least an indication of the need for this new
reason.

I believe that the time has come to perfect concepts and attitudes that
have always had a vocation to integrate the theoretical and practical
planes without ruling out either of them, concepts and attitudes which
were born to avoid the swing of the pendulum between the logicist and
irrationalist extremes (between Permenides and Heracleitus, between
Charybdis and Scylla).


