Prudence and Scientific Rationality: ‘Do not block the way of inquiry.’
=======================================================================

For some of today’s thinkers, like Peirce and Popper, it is clear that
in empirical science we cannot reach certainty, that no method
exists[^49] that in any way guarantees the results of research, either
in the context of discovery or in that of justification, or in any
other. Popper sums up the situation thus:

‘As a rule, I begin my lectures on Scientific Method by telling my
students that [the] scientific method does not exist. [p.5] [...] I
assert that no scientific method exists in any of these three senses. To
put it in a more direct way: (1) There is no method of discovering a
scientific theory. (2) There is no method of ascertaining the truth of a
scientific hypothesis, i.e., no method of verification. (3) There is no
method of ascertaining whether a hypothesis is 'probable', or probably
true. [p.6] ’[^50]

If anything characterizes reason in critical rationalism, that something
is more of an attitude than the observance of a supposed scientific
method, and that attitude is not exclusive to the scientist, but
advisable for any person who in any walk of life wishes to act in a
reasonable way. It is, of course, the fallibilist attitude.

Charles Sanders Peirce once wrote of himself that he was a thinker about
whom critics never found anything good to say. One of his critics went
as far as to say that Peirce did not even seem to be absolutely sure of
his own conclusions. The sentence, naturally enough, was not conceived
as praise, but Peirce used it, ironically, as grounds for pride, for
‘infallibility in scientific matters,’ he said, ‘seems to me
irresistibly comical’. He even thought of adopting the term
‘fallibilism’ as a name for his ideas. Fallibilism, together with a
great confidence in the reality of knowledge and an intense desire to
learn, made up, in  his sight, the core of his thought[^51] . Peirce
insists that the fallibilist attitude is the one to be desired in a
scientist and that indeed arises from experience: ‘Persons who know
science chiefly by its results -that is to say, have not acquaintance
with it at all as a*living inquiry* - are apt to acquire the notion that
the universe is now entirely explained in all its leading features’[^52]
. What has been growing since Newton, together with scientific
knowledge, is the awareness of its limits. In other words, the
fallibilist attitude is the fruit both of the scientist’s personal
experience and of several centuries of experience of the scientific
community, as is the prudence in general of human experience. The
fallibilist attitude arises from our proven inability to predict with
certainty what future science will be like[^53] , which is a consequence
of the lack of a regular method. The method is formed with research[^54]
, and its future alterations are as unforeseeable as the very content of
future science.

It is true that sceptical tendencies are not new, but the fallibilism of
the twentieth century has some distinctive aspects. In the first place,
it is relative to a very specific undertaking of human knowledge, modern
science, and as such, closes a circle of confidence in the possibility
of human knowledge of reality and the command of it to become complete
and certain by the application of the scientific method: it closes,
therefore, modern times and depends on the experience acquired during
them, it is not just another edition of Pre-modern or Modern scepticism.
On the other hand, this fallibilism is not exactly sceptic, rather by
distinguishing truth from certainty, it can continue to trust in the
truth of most of our knowledge, although it maintains that we shall
never be definitely and perfectly sure of knowing what part is indeed
true. Present fallibilism has not lost hope in the possibility of true
knowledge, but of certain knowledge. Moreover, present-day fallibilism
rests on what Popper has called critical common sense, that is, there is
no question - far from it - of doubting everything out of frivolity, out
of pure play or out of method. Nothing could be farther from the
fallibilist spirit than frivolity or methodical doubt. Never should
criticism be taken as a destructive intellectual game. In other words,
all our knowledge is subjected to a potential revision, for in any part
of it errors may exist, but one must only really doubt when there are
reasons for doubt. There are very clear statements by Peirce and also by
Popper in this regard. Popper says: ‘There is a certain triteness and
staleness about it that reminds me a little of a habit which I dislike:
that of philosophizing without a real problem.’[^55] Fallibilism is in
connection with a serious idea of research and its aims: ‘Rational
discussion must not be practised, however, as a mere game to while away
our time. It cannot exist without real problems, without the search for
objective truth.’[^56]

Peirce’s criticism of methodical doubt is even more relevant in this
context, for it is set clearly and consciously in the surpassing of
modernity. Peirce accepts the common statement that ‘Descartes is the
father of modern philosophy’. He tries to sum up the spirit of
Cartesianism in four essential points, the first of which he formulates
thus: ‘It teaches that philosophy must begin with universal doubt’.
Peirce makes the following commentary on it:

‘It seems to me that modern science and modern logic require us to stand
upon a very different platform from this [...] We cannot begin with
complete doubt. [...] A person may, it is true, in the course of his
studies, find reason to doubt what he began by believing; but in that
case he doubts because he has a positive reason for it, and not on
account of the Cartesian maxim.*Let us not pretend to doubt in
philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts* ’.[^57]

[p.157]

Present-day fallibilism, rather than a thesis is an attitude. It is thus
characterized by Peirce[^58] and Popper[^59] . An attitude, according to
the dictionary, may be taken to be a disposition[^60] . Prudence is just
that, a disposition (*héxis* ). Prudence and fallibilism are both
attitudes, but are they the same attitude? Let us remember that prudence
is intellectual and practical, and that fallibilism undoubtedly is, too.
Both are intellectual insofar as they consist in a certain knowledge
obtained from past experience. Both are practical inasmuch as they
prepare us in some way for future action. Prudence is the virtue that
produces practical truth. From my point of view, fallibilism as a guide
for scientific action tends to the same end.

However, there is a difference: Aristotle did not clearly conceive
prudence as a guide for scientific procedure. Something similar may be
inferred if we put together two of his statements on this point: in the
first place, he states that prudence seeks after the way of producing
wisdom[^61] , while in the second he says that science is part of
wisdom[^62] In any event, however, he was not very explicit on this
point.

A second difference is concerned with the fact that today’s fallibilism
depends on a concept of science that Aristotle could not have. Aristotle
thought that science was knowledge of the universal and necessary[^63] .
Of prudence he says that it is quite obvious that it is not science,
‘for it is, as has been said, concerned with the ultimate particular
fact, since the thing to be done is of this nature’[^64] . It is a fact
that nowhere in this text does Aristotle recognize the possibility of a
scientific knowledge of the particular, nor does he directly accord
prudence the category of guide of science, although he always considers
it an intellectual and practical disposition according to reason and
truth. Judging from this text, Aristotle does not seem to be a
fallibilist as far as scientific knowledge is concerned. He goes as far
as to say explicitly that when one is somehow sure of something and one
knows its principles, one has scientific knowledge[^65] .

Thirdly, fallibilism today depends on a historical experience that
Aristotle could not have had, the experience of the development of
modern science, of the hopes deposited in it, of the memory of its
successes and of the gradual recognition of its limits.

We could take as another difference the fact that prudence is not at the
service of a partial end but of generally living well, that is,
happiness, while fallibilism seems only to affect science. But
fallibilism soon becomes critical rationalism and, in this form, shows
an unstoppable tendency to be applied to more and more areas of human
action. Popper’s use of critical rationalism in the terrain of political
thought is a good example.

For all that has been said, I consider that fallibilism would be today’s
version of prudence, or perhaps prudence*brought* into today’s debate,
shaped by the experience that we have today. The fallibilist attitude
consists, in short, in assuming that, however much one trusts the truth
of what one knows, an error may always be present and that this
conviction must guide our actions. This disposition may doubtless be
called prudence, it is prudence in today’s form, born from our
historical experience. It is also the genuinely present form or reason
(the reason of*Actual Age* ). This attitude, which in itself is
practical, has in turn may practical implications. The practical
consequences of fallibilism may be expressed succinctly in the following
maxim formulated by Peirce:

*Do not block the way of inquiry* [^66] .

According to Peirce, inquiry cannot be blocked, not because it is an end
in itself[^67] , which would make it a futile game, but because each and
every one of us may be wrong, and to block the way out of the error
would be rather irrational. That is, although we honestly believe in the
truth of our ideas and have done our utmost to submit them to criticism,
we cannot avoid thinking that even so they may be wrong, and we cannot
avoid acting accordingly, that is, avoiding the block to search. But
this implies that research must go on*for the very reason* that its
object is the development of true knowledge (may the tautology stand)
and well-being.

Consequently, any action that tends to hinder or block the course of
research must be considered both irrational and immoral. There are many
attitudes of this type: dogmatic pedagogy, deficient information,
forgetting or despising different traditions, subtle or brutal
censorship of criticism, out-of-control and threatening applications of
technology, hypocrisy and academic corruption, secrecy in research, and
others.

On the other hand, Aristotelian prudence is a disposition which takes on
full sense in conjunction with a given idea of the world and of mankind.
Pierre Aubenque has researched into what this ontology and this
anthropology of prudence are.  Prudence has no sense amid chaos or in a
world of which it can be said that ‘what is rational is real and what is
real is rational’. Well, fallibilism takes on full sense together with
the same ontology and anthropology as Aristotelian prudence, whence the
connection between the two also affording a benefit to fallibilism,
which becomes much more lucid and fertile in connection with a
metaphysics like Aristotle’s. Fallibilism today, as much as Aristotelian
prudence, harmonizes well with an ontology and anthropology built on a
basis of the notions of potency and act; they both harmonize with a
pluralist ontology that contemplates a reality formed by many
substances, like persons, animals, plants and elements, a reality with
its own dynamic, not subjected to concept, but open to human
intellection.


