Prudence and Environmental Responsibility: ‘May human life remain possible.’
============================================================================

Hans Jonas’ environmental ethics are clearly set in a post-modern
attitude as he rejects some clear dogmas of Modern Age, for example that
which says that there are no metaphysical truths or that which states
that there is no way from the ‘is’ to the ‘ought’. But he is not
postmodern, rather he is*actual* , combining intellectual modesty and
mistrust in certainty with the quest for an objective basis; he
explicitly renounces the utopian outlook, he does not identify science
with reason but develops criteria of judgement independent of
techno-science precisely in order to judge its applications.

Many of these features bring the environmental ethics of Jonas nearer to
the ideas we have been setting out. Their principle of responsibility
corresponds clearly to Peirce’s maxim of not blocking the way of
inquiry, and both suggest the same concept of rationality. Furthermore,
Jonas explicitly recognizes his Aristotelian leanings in his writing, so
his concepts may fairly easily be linked with those of Aristotle.

In what follows I shall attempt to relate Jonas’ responsibility
principle with the Aristotelian notion of prudence and with Peirce’s
maxim. At the same time I shall highlight the link between scientific
rationality as Peirce understands it and environmental responsibility as
Jonas sets it out[^68] . The ideas of both men, and with them the new
rationality that they suggest, are reinforced when seen against a
background of ontology and anthropology of Aristotelian inspiration.

Hans Jonas’ responsibility principle, in one of its formulations,
states: ‘Behave in such a way that you do not endanger the conditions
for mankind’s indefinite stay on Earth.’ It is a principle of respect
and care for life in general and of human life in particular, is born
from an attitude of intellectual modesty and of the recognition that
while our capacity for foresight has grown, it has grown much less than
our scope for acting on the environment. Furthermore, the information we
obtain ends up being released to the general public and constitutes in
itself a causal factor. This feedback loop makes the future dynamics of
society and nature even more unpredictable. Nature, too, for it has
fallen under mankind’s power and depends to a great extent on our
knowledge, on our decisions, and in general on the progress of human
society.

The ethics of responsibility is an uncertain one, one which has given up
certainty in favour of respect for reality, which accepts the
inescapable risk of action, so much so that the fear of that risk is in
part what serves it as a prudential guide (*heuristic of fear* ). It is
indeed this fallibilistic attitude that will lead to a demand for a
constant openness to the future. Jonas’ texts in this regard are
perfectly clear:

‘The one paradoxical certainty here is that of uncertainty.’[^69]

‘We know, if nothing else, that most of these will be changed. It is the
difference between a static and a dynamic situation. Dynamism is the
signature of modernity. It is not an accident, but an immanent property
of the epoch, and until further notice it is our fate. It bespeaks the
fact that we must always figure on novelty without ever being able to
figure it out; that change is certain, but not what the changed
condition will be ‘[^70] .

Of the politician he says:

‘For no general rule of ethics can make it a duty, on the mere criterion
of subjective certainty, to risk committing possibly fatal mistakes at
others’ expense. Rather must he who wagers on his own certainty take the
never excludable possibility of being in error upon his own conscience.
For this, there exists no general law, only the free deed, which in the
unassuredness of its eventual justification (even in the mere
presumption of its self-confidence, which surely cannot be part of any
moral prescription) is entirely its own venture.’[^71] .

‘*All Statesmanship Is Responsible for the Possibility of Future
Statesmanship* * * [...] Nonetheless – remembering what we have said
before – even the most skeptical estimate of historical prognosis leaves
at least one basic certainty, itself a prognosis, that political
spontaneity will remain necessary at all times, precisely because the
excessively intricate web of events will, in principle, never conform to
plan[^72] .

‘We contend that to build upon this certainty [...] is at least as
irresponsible as was [...] to rely on the uncertain. [...] From all of
this it follows that, while today there is as little a recipe for
statecraft as there ever was, the time spans of responsibility as well
as of informed planning have widened unprecedentedly’.[^73]

Jonas does not believe for a minute that his ethics alone can bring
about complete good, but, aware of his limits, he merely seeks to
protects the conditions of freedom, of happiness and the future assuming
of responsibilities, in the same way as prudence, rather than squarely
producing practical truth, protects and cultivates the conditions for
its appearance, in the same way that Peirce recommends as the ultimate
maxim of reason, as a more universal and peremptory norm of the method,
to look after the conditions of free research and not to block the way
of inquiry. The ethics of responsibility is then far from any utopian
idea:

‘But no less should one distrust those who pretend to know about a
future destination of their own or every society, about a goal of
history, for which all of the past was but a preparation and the present
is only a transitional stage. ‘[^74]

‘But in believing to know the direction and the goal, Marxism is still
heir to the Kantian regulative idea, which is stripped of its infinitude
and wholly transposed into the finite [...] We post-Marxists (a word
still sounding audacious[^75] and certainly mistaken to many) must see
things differently.’[^76]

In short, the rational attitude consists above all in a protection and
stimulus of creative capacities which will allow future adjustment to
conditions that we cannot foresee:

‘[...] the spontaneity or*freedom* of the life in question – the
greatest of all unknowns, which yet must be included in the total
responsibility. [...] It can be so in one way only: respecting this
transcendent horizon, the intent of the responsibility must be not so
much to determine as to enable, that is, to prepare and keep the
capacity for itself in those to come intact, never foreclosing the
future exercise of responsibility by them. The object’s self-owned
futurity is the truest futural aspect of the responsibility, [...] In
the light of such self-transcending width, it becomes apparent that
responsibility as such is nothing else but the moral complement to the
ontological constitution our*temporality* .’[^77]

‘We omit here what lies beyond these duties of guarding and preserving:
obligations to ends which none other than he first*creates* as it were
out of nothing. For creativity lies outside the tasks of responsibility,
which extends no further than to making it possible, that is, to keeping
intact its ontological premise, the being of man is such. This is its
more modest, but more stringent duty.’[^78]

On the other hand, Hans Jonas’ responsibility ethic is totally
realistic, seeking its basis in the object, which will be the object of
responsibility, in the good that resides in being (‘an*ontic*
paradigm’[^79] ). It seeks an objective basis in the demands for care
and respect, an objective basis even for the subjective feeling of
responsibility. We feel responsibility towards living things and this
feeling is correct insofar as such living things have a value in
themselves, inasmuch as they are objectively valuable and would be even
without our recognition of that value and without our feeling of
responsibility. ‘What matters,’ he states, ‘are things rather than
states of my will.’[^80] Which is tantamount to saying that what has
value is truth, and not so much subjective states (like certainty). To
sum up: ‘ The objectivity must really stem from the object.’[^81]

But objective good is basically a possibility which requires
realization, actualizing, for which the contribution of the responsible
subject is required. The paradigm of this situation is the child, a
fragile existence which requires care to continue existing, which is
like demanding to be more, and that demand is directed to the
responsible subject, who has to protect and provide for the full
realization of his possibilities.

‘Not duty itself is the object: not the moral law motivates moral
action, but the appeal of a possible good-in-itself in the world, which
confronts my will and demands to be heard –*in accordance with* the
moral law. To grant that appeal a hearing*is* precisely what the moral
law commands: this law is nothing but the general enjoinder of the call
of all action-dependent ‘goods’ and of their situation-determined*right*
to just*my* action’[^82] .

The ethics of responsibility eschews the universal norm, formal duty, as
it does action for action’s sake, full subjectivity. In this regard, it
is again close to the Aristotelian balances between abstract formalism
and pure arbitrariness. Its realist foundation makes it insecure, not
subject to strict formal norms, but it also makes it objective, not
subjected to whim, in the same way that prudence too is neither law nor
whim, but a norm incarnate, responsibility culminates not in a rule for
the conservation of the environment but in the responsible being who
recognizes the otherness of the object of his responsibility and at the
same time his openness to possibilities that will come into existence
with his help. In this Jonas differs from the most typical extremes of
modernity, whose paradigmatic exponents could have been Kant and
Nietzsche. the concrete character of responsibility permits - or rather
demands - the integration of intellect and sentiment (‘hence choice is
either desiderative reason or ratiocinative desire, and such an origin
of action is a man’[^83] ):

‘A theory of responsibility, as any ethical theory, must deal both with
the rational ground of obligation, that is, the validating principle
behind the claim to a binding ‘ought,’ and with the*psychological*
ground of its moving the will, that is, of an agent’s letting it
determine his course of action. This is to say that ethics has an
objective side and a subjective side, the one having to do with reason,
the other with emotion.’[^84]

‘Existentialism is the modern extreme of this ethics of subjective
intention (cf. Nietzsche’s ‘wil to will,’ Sartre’s ‘authentic decision,’
Heidegger’s ‘resoluteness,’ etc.), where the worldly issue is not by
itself endowed with a claim on us but receives its significance from the
choice of our passionate concern. Here the self-committing freedom of
the self reigns supreme.’[^85]

In opposition to Kantian ethics, Jonas confirms that ‘[But] the good is
the ‘cause’ at issue out there in the world [...] Morality can never
have itself for its goal’[^86] . Jonas recognizes that Kantian morals
also appeal to sentiment, but ‘What is unique is that this feeling is
directed not at a material object but at the law itself[^87] .’

Still other features of responsibility may be added to confer continuity
with Aristotelian prudence, for example, the temporary and contingent
character of its object and the global nature of its perspective which
covers the object of its care completely:

‘[...]the object of*responsibility* is emphatically the perishable*qua*
perishable’[^88] .

‘The child as a whole and in all its possibilities, not only in its
immediate needs, is its [parental responsibility’s] object.’[^89] .

The paradigmatic examples of responsibility, that of parents and
children, that of the politician and the public weal, tell us just how
far this is so. The parent cannot, and must not, make his son his own
creation, he cannot bring him happiness in his hands, but he must
protect and ensure the conditions for it, among which are the child’s
freedom and spontaneity. Nor can society and each of its members expect
everything from the politician, but they can expect him to stimulate and
protect the conditions in which everything is possible, those in which
active members of society can work for the public weal and individual
happiness. Jonas’s responsibility and Aristotle’s prudence, look to the
common good, but they are not methods for its effective production, for
there is no method for it, for it is produced in an ever-new world, in
an ever-new subject, and they are rather generators and protectors of
the conditions for global good, in an uncertain but habitable world.


