Conclusion
==========

During the Modern Age, reason was identified with the scientific method,
the principal objective of which consisted in the quest for certain
knowledge. From there, the practical became considered an area for the
mere application of science, whereby it lost its own character and its
touch of uncertainty, risk and responsibility. Practical certainty
through the application of science was never achieved, so a second
possibility became available: renouncing the rational characteristic of
action; human action would be guided only by forces of an irrational
nature. But there soon appear the practical aspects of science itself,
which is thereby also subject to the forces of the irrational. Human
reason, and with it science, is now no more than a slave of passions or
a mask over the will to power.

This unsatisfactory result can only be avoided by having available a
concept of practical reason independent from a supposed scientific
method and free from the obsession with certainty, which is not
compatible with practice. We find notions of this type in texts of
Aristotle’s practical philosophy. Indeed, the notion of prudence, as an
intellectual virtue, and that of practical truth, bring together reason
and praxis sufficiently.

However, these concepts may be beyond the present debate. They should be
brought into it through genuinely present-day notions, which already
incorporate the experience  that humanity has acquired over time, and
especially the experience accumulated during the Modern period. We need
to develop Aristotle’s ideas from a post-modern perspective.

Today, then, Aristotelian prudence is correctly expressed in the
attitude of intellectual modesty and respect for reality that we find in
thinkers like Pierce, Popper and Jonas, enshrined in the Peircian maxim
of not blocking the way of inquiry and in Jonas’s responsibility
principle, which insists on the protection of the conditions for the
continuity of life. These positions of contemporary authors are
strengthened when understood against the background of Aristotelian
ontology (there is a plurality of substances; being may be actual or
potential, there is a path from*is* to*ought* . Man is desiring
intelligence or intelligent desire; reality is not a copy of the
concept, but is intelligible).

Furthermore, things being thus, we realize that a rational attitude is
fundamentally the same in the different contexts of science and in other
areas of human life. It is a question basically of protecting openness
of human action in the future, for we know that it will have to tackle a
(socio-natural) world whose future is also open. This attitude of
protecting openness does not guarantee anything, but it is the best bet
we can place in order for creative discoveries to continue to be made,
so that man’s and nature’s creativity may survive.


