The Formation of the Caliphal Order At the Saqifah
==================================================

**( 83 )**

Lesson Nine
-----------

The blessed and fruitful life of the Most Noble Messenger peace and
blessings be upon him and his family each moment of which had been
filled with resplendent deeds had come to an end. The great founder of
Islam the soul of the world the savior of mankind had bid farewell to
life and departed for the eternal realm. With his departure the link of
revelation with this world was severed and the heavenly manifestations
of that blessed being to describe which is beyond human power faded away
for ever. May God's peace and blessings be upon him and his family.

His immaculate body had not yet been interred. 'Ali peace be upon him
some members of the Bani Hashim and a few Companions were busy washing
and enshrouding the body in preparation for burial; they and they alone
were fully preoccupied with the great blow that had descended and the
urgent duty they had to perform. ' [( 1 )](#p1)

At the very same time a group of the Helpers had  
 convened a meeting at a pavilion nearby known as the Saqifah  
 of the Bani Sa'idah in order to settle the matter of succession to  
 the Prophet in conformity with their own wishes. 'Umar  
 immediately sent a message to Abu Bakr who at that time was  
 in the house of the Prophet telling him to join him  
 immediately. Abu Bakr realized that something significant was  
 about to happen so he left the house and hurried together  
 with 'Umar to the meeting place where the Helpers were  

**( 84 )**

meeting being joined on the way by Abu 'Ubaydah b.

al-Jarrah. [( 2 )](#p2)

Ahmad Amin a well-known Sunni and Egyptian writer whose stance toward
the Shi'ah is negative to the point of fanaticism writes as follows:

"The Companions of the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his
family were at odds over the question of the succession. It was a sign
of their unworthiness that they began arguing over it before the Prophet
had even been buried. It was only 'Ali b. Abi Talib peace be upon him
who did not behave in this fashion busying himself instead with the
washing enshrouding and burial of the Prophet. The foremost among the
Companions were all intriguing over the succession; they had abandoned
the body of the Prophet and no one was present at the burial save 'Ali
and his family or showed any respect for the one who had guided them and
brought them forth from the darkness of ignorance. They did not even
wait for the burial to take place before they started fighting with each
over his legacy." [( 3 )](#p3)

Different groups were advancing arguments on their own behalf at the
Saqifah. The Helpers claimed to be exceptionally privileged in that they
had preceded others in Islam had enjoyed the respect of the Messenger of
God peace and blessings be upon him and his family and had struggled
hard for the sake of Islam; this they claimed entitled them to the
leadership. They suggested that the reins of power be entrusted to Sa'd
b. 'Ubadah and had him brought to the Saqifah even though he was ill.

Similarly the Migrants claimed that they were the most deserving of the
leadership given the fact that they were from the same city as the
Prophet and had abandoned everything for the sake of Islam and the
Prophet.

The logic of both groups derived from an essentially tribal spirit for
they were determined to obtain a monopoly on power for themselves
excluding their rivals and condemning them as less deserving. [( 4
)](#p4)

The discussions wore on and turned into a bitter dispute.

**( 85 )**

The group headed by 'Urn ar supported the claims of Abu Bakr urging
everyone to grant him allegiance and threatening anyone who opposed him.

Abu Bakr then rose and began to expound the virtues of the Migrants and
the services they had performed:

"The Migrants were the first group to embrace Islam. They despite the
arduous circumstances they persevered and refused to abandon monotheism
despite the pressures exerted on them by the polytheists. Naturally it
should not be forgotten that you O Helpers also have rendered great
service to Islam and that after the Companions you have primacy over all
others." He then added: "We must be the rulers (umara') and you our
deputies (wuzara')."

Hubab b. al-Mundhir then rose and said: "O Helpers you must seize the
reins of power so firmly that none dare oppose you. If you permit
disagreement among yourselves you will be defeated with the result that
if we choose a leader for ourselves they will also choose a leader for
themselves." To this 'Umar responded: "There can never be two rulers in
one realm. I swear by God that the Arabs will never agree to be ruled by
you for their Prophet was not from among you.

Our argument is strong and clear: we are the Companions of the Messenger
of God so who can oppose us other than those who choose the wrong path
or wish to cast themselves into the whirlpool of perdition?"

Hubab b. al-Mundhir stood up again and said: "Pay no heed to what this
man says. They want to usurp your rights and to deny you your claims.
Take the reins of power into your own hands and banish your opponents
for you are the most worthy to rule. If anyone opposes my proposal I
will rub his nose in the dirt with my sword." Thereupon 'Umar began to
tussle with him and kicked him hard in the stomach.' [( 5 )](#p5)

Bashir b. Sa'd the cousin of Sa'd b. 'Ubadah rose to  
 support what 'Umar had said. Addressing the Helpers he  
 proclaimed: "It is true that our record of fighting in God's way and
spreading Islam is superior. However we never had any  
 aim other than God's pleasure and the satisfaction of His  

**( 86 )**

Messenger peace and blessings be upon him and his family and it is
therefore unfitting that we should boast of precedence over others for
we have no worldly goal. The Prophet was from among the Quraysh and it
is therefore appropriate that his heirs should also be from among them.
Fear God and do not oppose or argue with them." After a further series
of discussions and arguments Abu Bakr addressed the people as follows:

"Shun dispute and disunity. I desire nothing but your good and your
welfare. It is best that you give your allegiance either to 'Umar or to
Abu 'Ubaydah."

To this however 'Umar countered: "You are more worthy of ruling than
either of us for you preceded us all in following the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family.

In addition to this your financial resources are greater than those of
the rest of us. You were at the side of the Prophet in the cave of Thawr
and you led the prayers in his stead. Given all this who could imagine
himself more fitted than you to rule over us?" As for 'Abd al-Rahman b.
'Awf he expressed himself as follows: "O Helpers you have indeed many
virtuous qualities which none can deny. We must nonetheless admit that
there is none among you comparable to Abu Bakr 'Umar and 'Ali." Mundhir
b. al-Arqam supported his view: "No one can deny the virtues of those
three and there is in particular one among them whom none will oppose if
he assumes the leadership of the Islamic community." By this he meant
'Ali b. Abi Talib peace be upon him and a group of the Helpers
accordingly began exclaiming in unison: "We will give our allegiance
(bay'ah) to none but 'Ali " [( 6 )](#p6)

'Umar recalls that this outcry caused him to fear the emergence of
serious dissension. "So I told Abu Bakr to give me his hand for me to
swear him allegiance."' [( 7 )](#p7)

Without delay Abu Bakr extended his hand. First Bashir b. Sa'd came
forward and grasped his hand as a token of allegiance and he was
followed in this by 'Umar. Then the others rushed forward and gave Abu
Bakr their allegiance. [( 8 )](#p8) While this was proceeding an  

**( 87 )**

argument broke out between 'Umar and Sa'd b. 'Ubadah with the result
that Abu Bakr found it necessary to instruct 'Umar to calm himself. Sa'd
told his friends to remove him from the scene so they carried him home
on their shoulders. [( 9 )](#p9)

The crowd that had given allegiance to Abu Bakr accompanied him to the
mosque so that others might also pledge him their allegiance. 'Ali peace
be upon him and 'Abbas were still engaged in washing the body of the
Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family when they heard
cries of Allahu akbar coming from the mosque. 'Ali asked:

"What is this uproar?" 'Abbas replied: "Something quite unprecedented "
and then added looking at 'Ali "Did I not tell you that this would
happen?" [(10)](#p10)

Abu Bakr mounted the Prophet's pulpit and continued receiving the
allegiance of the people until nightfall without paying any attention to
the task of preparing the body of the Prophet for burial. This process
continued the following day and it was not until Tuesday one day after
the death of the Prophet and the pledging of allegiance to Abu Bakr that
the people went to the house of the Prophet to perform the funerary
prayers. [(11)](#p11)

"Neither Abu Bakr nor 'Umar participated in the burial of the Prophet."
[(12)](#p12)

Zubayr b. Bakkar writes: "After the pledging of allegiance to Abu Bakr
was all over a large number of the Helpers regretted what they had done
and began blaming each other and mentioning the claims of 'Ali."
[(13)](#p13)

The celebrated historian al-Mas'udi writes: "After the events at the
Saqifah 'Ali told Abu Bakr "You have trampled on my rights refused to
consult with me and ignored my claims." Abu Bakr's only answer was to
say "Yes but I was fearful of chaos and disorder."[(14)](#p14)

The meeting that took place at the Saqifah was NOT attended by such
prominent personalities as 'Ali peace be upon him Abu Dharr Miqdad
Salman Talhah al-Zubayr 'Ubayy b. Ka'b and Hudhayfah and only three of
the Migrants were present.

Should not all the principal Muslims have been invited to  

**( 88 )**

express their views on what was to be done? Was a brief and disorderly
meeting attended by only three of the Migrants enough to decide on a
question on which the future destinies of Islam depended? Did not the
gravity of the issue necessitate that it be put before a gathering of
the leading Muslims for a final decision to be reached in accordance
with their freely expressed views?

What right had those who considered themselves entitled to make a
decision have to deprive others of the same opportunity and to disregard
them completely? If a certain group citing public opinion as its
justification choose a leader or ruler for their society but does so out
of the sight of thoughtful and respected individuals does their choice
truly reflect the wishes of the people? When Sa'd b. 'Ubadah refused to
pledge his allegiance was it necessary to issue an order for his
execution? [(15)](#p15)

Historians record that when some of the Bani Ha shim as well as the
Migrants and the Helpers refused to pledge allegiance to Abu Bakr they
took refuge in the house of Fatimah in order to swear allegiance to
'Ali. [(16)](#p16)

A crowd then attacked the house and even entered it in order to disperse
the dissidents and if possible compel their allegiance to Abu Bakr.
[(17)](#p17)

The election of Abu Bakr was so unexpected hasty and careless that 'Umar
remarked later: "It was an accident that Abu Bakr became leader. No
consultation or exchange of views took place. If anyone in future
invites you to do the same again kill him." [(18)](#p18)

In addition to this the fact that the first caliph designated  
 his own successor itself demonstrates that the notion of a  
 consultative government having come into being after the  
 death of the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his  
 family1 is entirely baseless. The Prophet issued no directive for  
 such a government to be established; if he had different  
 groups of people would not have proposed to the first caliph  
 that he designate his own successor to prevent the chaos and  
 disorder that would have engulfed Muslim society because of  

**( 89 )**

the lack of a leader. [(19)](#p19)

The caliph responded to this request of the people by saying that if Abu
'Ubaydah were alive he would have appointed him for the Prophet had
called him "the trustee of the ummah." Likewise if Salim the client of
Abu Hudhayfah had been alive he too would have been worthy of the
leadership because he had heard the Prophet describing him as "the
friend of God." [(20)](#p20)

Considering the measures taken by Abu Bakrhow can anyone say that the
Messenger of God did not choose a successor before he died?

Likewise the selection of a successor to 'Umar by a committee he himself
appointed was in conformity neither with divine precept nor with the
principle of consulting public opinion. If the caliph is meant to
appoint his own successor why turn the matter over to a six-man
committee? If on the other hand the choice of leader is a prerogative of
the people why did 'Umar deprive people of this right and assign it
exclusively to a committee of his own choosing? He also acted
restrictively in that he spoke of certain members of the committee in
terms that completely disqualified them for the caliphate.

When the Qur'an expounds the principle of consultation it orders the
Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family to consult the
people in matters affecting them. (3:159) It proclaims on another
occasion: "Tire affairs of tire believers are to be settled by means of
consultation." (42:38) What is at issue is consultation concerning
social matters matters that affect the people not the Imamate which is a
divine covenant. Something that is a divine covenant and pertains to the
guidance of mankind cannot be a subject for consultation.

The adoption of the caliphal system in the fashion we have described led
necessarily to the exclusion of the Imams from the realm of rule and
leadership.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) Ibn Kathir al-Bidayah Vol. V p.260; al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh
Vol. II p.94; Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. IV p. 104; al-Tabari Tarikh
Vol. II p.451; Ibn al-Athir Usd al-Ghabah Vol. I p. M; Ibn 'Abd Rabbih
al-'lqd al-Farid Vol. III p.61. [( 2 )](#m2) al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. II
p.456. [( 3 )](#m3) Yawm al-Islam quoted in al-Amin's A'yan al-Shi'ah
(Persian translation) Vol. I p.262. [( 4 )](#m4) al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. V
p.31; Ibn al-Athir al-Kamil Vol. III p.3. [( 5 )](#m5) Ibn Abi '1-Hadid
Sharh Vol. VI p.391. [( 6 )](#m6) al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh Vol. II p.103;
al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. III p. 108. [( 7 )](#m7) Ibn Hisham al-Sirah Vol.
IV p.336; Ibn Kathir al-Bidayah Vol. V p.246. [( 8 )](#m8) Ibn Qutaybah
al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah Vol. II p.9. [( 9 )](#m9) al-Tabari Tarikh Vol.
II pp. 455-59. [(10)](#m10) Ibn Abi '1-Hadid Sharh Vol. I p.133; Ibn
'Abd Rabbih al-Iqd al-Farid Vol. III p.63. [(11)](#m11) Ibn Hisham
al-Sirah Vol. IV p. 343; al-Muhibb al-Tabari Riyad al-Nadirah Vol. I
P.164. [(12)](#m12) al-Muttaqi al-Hindi Kanz al-'Ummal Vol. III p.140.
[(13)](#m13) Ibn Bakkar al-Muwaffaqiyat p. 583. [(14)](#m14) al-Mas'udi
Muruj al-Dhahab Vol. I p.441; Ibn Qutaybah al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah Vol.
I pp.12-14. [(15)](#m15) al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh Vol. II p. 124; al-Tabari
Tarikh Vol. IV p. 843. [(16)](#m16) Abu al-Fida' al-Tarikh Vol. I p.
156; al-Diyar Bakri Tarikh al-Khamis Vol. I p.188; Ibn 'Abd Rabbih
al-'Iqd al-Farid Vol. III p.63; al-Muhibb al-Tabari Riyad al-Nadirah
Vol. I p.167; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sharh Vol. I pp. 130-34; [(17)](#m17)
al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh Vol. II p.105; al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. II pp.443-46;
al-Muhibb al-Tabari Riyad al-Nadirah p. 167; al-Diyar Bakri Tarikh
al-Khamis Vol. I p.188; al-Muttaqi al-Hindi Kanz al-'Ummal Vol. III
p.128; Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sharh Vol. I pp.122 132-34. [(18)](#m18) Ibn
Hisham al-Sirah Vol. IV p.308. [(19)](#m19) Ibn Qutaybah al-Imamah wa
al-Siyasah p.19. [(20)](#m20) al-Tabari Tarikh; Ibn al-Athir al-Kamil.
