Lesson 11: Answer to an Objection
=================================

There are people who think that if government were to originate with the
people themselves, with the members of society choosing their own leader
from among qualified persons, relying in their choice on their own
desires, perceptive capacities and relative knowledge of the strong and
weak points of various individuals, this would be more in accord with
freedom and democracy and thus enable mankind to attain its highest
ideal.

They imagine further that if the people are not permitted to have any
share in the choice and designation of their leader and if the office of
Imam or caliph is not a fully elected one, the people will see in him
simply a ruler who has been imposed on them.

The error underlying this view is the identification of the appointed
office of the Imam with tyranny. However, we see that in world politics
tyranny comes to prevail as the result of a coup d'etat, a revolution,
or a military intervention, and all that counts in a tyranny is the
personal views and decisions of the ruler.

However, from the point of view of Shi'ism, there are certain inviolable
criteria for the post of Islamic leadership. If someone lacks those
criteria, it is impossible for him to lead Islamic society or to be
recognized as its legitimate ruler. The rationale for the appointed
nature of the post of Imam is that the Lord of the Worlds knows His
creation perfectly; He knows the nature of man and his interaction with
the world better than any scholar, and is better aware than people are
themselves of their own interests.

Hence it is that He chooses as the leader and guardian of the Muslims
the best and worthiest individual, one who has unique attributes such as
complete immunity from sin and a life utterly free from the pull of
instinctual desire. The one so chosen by God has himself no right to
legislate, and since the Islamic concept of law is based on God's
exclusive legislative prerogative, his sole point of reference is God's
laws and commands, as they descended by way of revelation into the pure
heart of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family. In
all his programs and plans, the divinely chosen leader draws inspiration
exclusively from religion, striving always to implement God's commands
as a matter of duty.

When God is the source of all legislation, His laws necessarily embrace
all the true interests of man. They are in full accord with his
primordial and immutable nature; ensure the fulfillment of justice in
public life; and make it possible for man to ascend through the degrees
of perfection. It is, of course, true at the same time that these laws
may be opposed to man's personal inclinations and his self-interest, and
that some may experience God's commands as arduous and in conflict with
their temperament When the ruler is selected by God, Who is Himself the
sole possessor of sovereignty, he will necessarily be free of all taint
of sinfulness, disobedience, and oppression, and the only goal he
pursues will be the welfare and benefit of society, the guidance of the
*ummah*, and the construction of a pure and exalted community based on
justice. A government of this type will be utterly incompatible with
arbitrariness, oppression, and the usurpation of rights.

If religion lays down certain conditions for rulership and restricts
people's right to choose, this in no way contradicts their possession of
sovereignty. For society has already given its free consent to a system
of rule based on its beliefs and is in fact inwardly devoted to such a
system. The principle of popular sovereignty is thus limited by certain
conditions that are deemed necessary by the religious beliefs accepted
by the people.

Furthermore, in democratic governments, which are elected by majority
vote, the ruler is always concerned with either winning the support of
popular opinion or with following popular wishes, with no criterion
available for measuring the legitimacy of those wishes. For that which
determines those desires and inclinations are the circumstances in which
a person grows up and which influence his attitudes towards the
individual and society, towards history and the laws which he supposes
to be the best for his particular society.

What is important for a politician in this system of government is to
align himself with the views of the majority of his constituents,
irrespective of whether or not his performance in social and
administrative matters conforms to the principles of justice. His sole
concern is to keep the social and political privileges he has obtained,
and he may sometimes trample on the truth in order to avoid endangering
his position. Rare are those who have no fear of public opinion and base
their decisions solely on the welfare of the society.

A celebrated writer on politics by the name of Frank Cont remarks: "The
necessity of obtaining a majority of the votes represents a very serious
and grave problem, for in striving after that goal no consideration can
be given to ethical matters or to right and wrong."[^1]

Nonetheless, this is the mode of government favored by the adherents of
liberty in today's world, a system in which truth, justice and
conscience are treated as mere playthings. If this indeed be the nature
of the system, is it all permissible that the successors to the Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, should be chosen and
exercise their functions in accordance with it? Can, for example, a
group of Muslims come together, select a certain individual according to
their own criteria, and then trust to him rule over the Muslims?

Can someone who is unacquainted with the culture and the principles of
religion and the detailed injunctions of divine law build a fully
Islamic society if he is appointed ruler? Can he implement God's laws in
society with the necessary care, precision, and trustworthiness? If new,
unprecedented circumstances arise, what knowledge or divinely bestowed
insight can he draw on in order to derive a specific ruling for those
circumstances from the general principles of the *shari'ah* and then to
implement it in the public interest? Furthermore, in systems where the
government is chosen by the majority, the views of the minority are
ignored, so that, for example, a minority consisting of 49% of the
people is obliged to submit to the views and preferences of persons who
have come to power against their wishes.

For the opinions of such a large group of people to be ignored is in no
way compatible with the principles of justice. Is there any reason for
them to regard themselves as accountable to a government elected by the
majority? Why should they be deprived of their freedom and their desires
be crushed? The argument that the choice of the majority reflects the
overall interests of society is unconvincing and fails to establish a
duty of obedience and accountability on the part of the minority. The
question therefore remains: on what basis is the minority obliged to
submit to majority decision and to obey the views and wishes of others?

The laws approved by the majority and imposed on the entirety of the
people may sometimes be harmful to society and damaging to its true
progress and development.

If truth is indeed truth, it does not become falsehood merely because
its followers are few in number or in the minority; and if falsehood is
indeed falsehood, it does not become transformed into truth through the
support of the majority. It may be that majority opinion is regularly
taken as the principle on which to operate because it is allegedly less
prone to error, but no proof exists for the proposition that the wishes
of the majority are inherently better or more valuable than the
inclinations of the minority, nor for the claim that those wishes
possess an intrinsic legitimacy making them the proper source of all
legislation and the basis for human life.

Communist countries which claim to implement democracy within the
framework of Marxism belong in the final analysis to the category of
despotism, since in them the Communist party possesses absolute
sovereignty and imposes its will on the masses.

By contrast, when the selection of the leader is a matter of divine
prerogative, acceptance of that leader is equivalent to submission to
God's sovereignty, a submission eagerly undertaken, for reason confirms
the necessity of obedience to the Creator and man discerns in adherence
to divine command the source of happiness and well being in this world
and the hereafter. There is no longer any question of minority or
majority, because the government is the government of God, before Whom
all are supremely responsible as the source of all existence, the origin
of man's being and perfection, and the fount of infinite bounty.

It is He alone Who is deserving of obedience and Whose ordinances and
laws command compliance. His laws are promulgated in accordance with the
norms of nature and inspired by a comprehensive awareness of the essence
of social relations with the result that they are intrinsically just and
bound to secure the benefit, well being and happiness of man. The
suspicion can never arise that personal motivation or self-interest on
the part of the lawgiver is at work.

A society believing in God has no reason to follow the majority, a
majority which might well choose an incorrect path in various matters
and the judgement of which might prove erroneous. Many people in whom
great hopes were placed and who came to power by overwhelming majority
vote swiftly came to inspire despair rather than hope, and anger and
enmity rather than love and affection.

It can thus be concluded that the views and inclinations of the
majority, the result of experiences that are necessarily fallible,
cannot form a basis for solving the problems of humanity or instilling
justice into the life of the individual and society, nor can they
guarantee the happiness and welfare of man.

[^1]: Frank Cont, Sima-ye Shuja'an, p. 35.


