The True Nature of the Holders of Authority
===========================================

**( 119 )**

Lesson Thirteen
---------------

After the death of the founder of Islam and the emergence of a whole
series of verbal disputes concerning the caliphate and succession to the
Prophet the question of the 'holders of authority" (ulu 'l-amr) came to
the fore as a controversial topic bound up with the various intellectual
and political currents of the day. Naturally the expression had not been
foreign to the vocabulary and thoughts of the Muslims in the past;
people had been acquainted with it since the very dawn of Islam and used
it in their discourse.

We find in fact that when the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him
and his family began proclaiming his mission messages would pass back
and forth between him and the Meccan polytheists in which the word amr
(authority) was used. Thus the polytheists and unbelievers who were
enraged by the appearance of the new religion sent the following message
to the Messenger of God:

"O Muhammad do not attack our idols and desist from affronting our
objects of worship for we are ready to submit to you in all you desire."
When Abu Talib conveyed this message of the Quraysh to the Prophet he
replied: "If you were to place the sun in my right hand and the moon in
my left I will not abandon this amr. I cannot possibly agree; either God
will make His religion triumph or I will die engaged in this struggle."
[( 1 )](#p1)

After the people had finished swearing allegiance to Abu Bakr Abu
'Ubaydah made this request to 'Ali peace be upon  

**( 120 )**

him: "Now abandon this amr to Abu Bakr." [( 2 )](#p2) What is meant by
amr in both these instances is nothing other than governance and rule.

The Noble Qur'an issues the following command to the Muslims summoning
them to obey the orders and instructions of God the Messenger and the
"holders of authority":

"O believers obey the commands of God tire Messenger and tire Holders of
Authority. When you tall into disagreement concerning your affairs refer
to tire commands of the Lord and His Messenger if you believe in God and
tire Day of Judgement. This will be better for you than anything else
you might imagine and conducive to a far better outcome" (4:58).

This verse makes plain the true sources of authority in the various
religious and social concerns confronting the Muslims.

It first commands the believers to submit unreservedly and
unconditionally to the commands of the Creator of the universe and all
who inhabit it for He bestows being on all phenomena and is their master
and owner. All forms of leadership must necessarily derive from His
sacred being and all forms of obedience must issue in obedience to Him.

Obedience is necessitated and required by the Lord's attributes of ruler
and creator and since God is the origin of all legislation the source of
all commands and prohibitions the role of the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family is in the first place the receipt
of divine revelation and conveying to mankind what he is entrusted with
conveying.

Next comes obedience to the Prophet who is God's  
 representative among men a prophet who is divinely protected  
 against error and sin and who never speaks arbitrarily or out of  
 mere fancy. In addition to the divine message and commands  
 that he conveys he has a specific set of plans and strategies for  
 implementing the ordinances of God's religion. The exercise of  
 government requires the choice of a certain policy that will  
 respond to the needs of society a policy that in Islam was  
 determined by the great leader of religion who perceived  
 wherein lay the welfare of the ummah and issued commands  
 that addressed themselves to current circumstances and were  

**( 121 )**

informed by an awareness of what leads to social equilibrium.

This type of legislation was delegated to the Prophet by God and derived
its efficacy and legitimacy from God the ultimate master of all.

It is clear from the preceding that obedience to the Prophet being the
result of God's command may also be regarded as a form of obedience to
God in just the same way that disobedience to him is in reality
disobedience to God. This is set forth clearly in the following verse:
"Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed God." (4:80) The conveyance of
any decision taken by the Prophet is therefore equivalent to the
promulgation of an order from God.

The third aspect of the Qur'anic injuction concerning obedience relates
to the Holders of Authority obedience to whom God has conjoined with
obedience to Himself and Messenger. What is meant by the Holders of
Authority are those persons to whom the ruling and governmental
functions peculiar to the Prophet have been transferred to whom the
leadership of Islamic society has been entrusted by God and His
Messenger and who are the guardians of the religious and worldly affairs
of the people. They are empowered to issue in the light of God's laws
commands and ordinances for the administration of society and to oblige
people to obey them.

The necessity of obeying the wishes of the Holders of Authority is then
categorical and beyond all doubt; it is only in establishing the
criteria for identifying the Holders of Authority that there can be any
room for discussion or disagreement.

Now let us see what the Qur'an means by the Holders of  
 Authority (ulu 'l-amr). Can the one who happens to head an  
 Islamic government having seized power over society be  
 regarded as one of the Holders of Authority in the sense that  
 people are obliged to obey anyone who assigns himself the  
 right to rule even if he spends his whole life sunken in the  
 darkness of sin and the oblivion of ignorance; is utterly devoid  
 of all spiritual brilliance; is utterly unaware of God's laws and  
 commandments; sacrifices the rights of the people to his own  

**( 122 )**

tyranny and lusts; and promotes oppressors and the workers of corruption
to positions of power so that the cries of the oppressed are stifled and
the overwhelming majority of Islamic society is imprisoned in the chains
of humiliation? If the expression Holders of Authority be interpreted in
Such a sense it would be iii stark contradiction with the parts of the
verse that precede and follow it. For if the ruler issues a command at
variance with God's laws the first part of the verse affirms that those
laws must necessarily be implemented and have priority over all else.
Yet the verse proclaims too that the commands of the Holders of
Authority are to be obeyed! It is obvious that the Qur'an cannot enjoin
at the same two contradictory things or both command and forbid the same
thing simultaneously.

In addition wisdom and intelligence cannot accept the notion that it is
incumbent to submit to absolutely any ruler even if lie violates God's
laws and attempts to banish them from society.

How can one believe that on the one hand God should have mobilized His
prophets to implement divine law establish justice and propagate the
essence of religion even at the cost of their lives and that on the
other hand He should impose upon people the duty of obeying the wishes
of rulers who not only do nothing to protect the ummali and advance its
religious awareness but even wish to nullify all the strivings of the
prophets trample God's law under foot and enthrone tyranny and
oppression in society? Can the happiness and salvation of society be
attained by following such rulers? Can such a government enable the
Muslims to attain power and dignity? Can one ascribe to God the
illegitimate and foolish view that such rulers deserve obedience? Of
course it might be possible to restrict obedience to the Holder of
Authority to those cases where his edicts conform to the criteria of
divine law making it obligatory for Muslims to oppose him whenever he
acts in a sense contrary to it.

However there are certain difficulties connected with this  

**( 123 )**

view of things that cannot be overlooked or ignored. It is plain that
not all of the people can be acquainted in detail with God's laws so
that as soon as they encounter some ruling contrary to religion they
begin to oppose it. Even if they do protest and take up an oppositional
stance to what degree can they count on success? When the masses are not
equipped with the requisite religious knowledge how can they adopt the
appropriate attitude to the decrees of the ruler obeying them when they
conform to the criteria of religion and opposing them whenever they
clash with God's ordinances? Furthermore if we accept such a hypothesis
when obeying the decrees of the ruler that conform to divine law we are
in reality obeying God's commands not those of the ruler so that
obedience to the Holder of Authority ceases to be a distinct category of
obedience.

Another consideration is that whenever a group or class perceives a law
to be contrary to its own interests it will find an opening permitting
it to violate or subvert the law in question or openly rebel against it.
The sense of obedience will then be noticeably weakened in the people in
the absence of any regulatory instance. As a result the very pillars of
society will begin to tremble and order and discipline will ultimately
vanish. Our interpretation of the verse cannot therefore be made to rest
on this hypothesis either.

A further possibility is that the Holders of Authority referred to in
the verse are leaders chosen by the people rulers whose exercise of
power is based on public opinion. The text of the verse does not
indicate this in any way for the verse specifies only that obedience to
the Holders of Authority is necessary while remaining silent on how
those Holders of Authority are to emerge and take power. The objections
that we have raised to the preceding interpretations also apply to this
interpretation. Bearing in mind all the different problems to which we
have drawn attention we must lay aside all the interpretations reviewed
thus far in our attempt to understand the expression Holders of
Authority.

**( 124 )**

Only one way out of this dilemma remains a single solution that places
us on the straight path to attaining our goal. It consists of
recognizing that it is God's prerogative to designate the ruler; He
alone selects the one deserving of rule over the Islamic ummah a person
in whose exalted character the virtues of the Most Noble Messenger peace
and blessings be upon him and his family and a profound connection to
God are manifest so that obedience to him becomes a natural corollary to
obedience to God and the Messenger.

It is true of course that the Prophet of Islam set forth in the course
of his finite lifetime the general principles of belief and of religious
law so that in this sense he perfected the religion of God. Those
general principles are to serve as the foundation and basis for deriving
the specific divine ordinances of which mankind will stand in need until
the Day of Resurrection. However what was to be done after the death of
the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family? Did the
people no longer need a religious authority to whom they might turn for
solutions to their problems in order to deal effectively in the light of
the Qur'an and the Sunnah with newly occurring situations and
circumstances that had not existed during the lifetime of the Prophet?
Thirteen years in the life of the Messenger of God were spent in
struggle against the idolaters of Makkah who were loath that men
desirous of truth should hear the liberating message of Islam. He did
whatever he could to establish the truth of monotheism and refute
idolatry and he prepared men's minds to receive the rich culture of
Islam. No opportunity remained for him to expound God's ordinances in
detail to set forth the norms and obligations of religion. That was left
to be accomplished at another time.

Even while in Madinah the Prophet was still not free of  
 anxiety concerning Makkah. During the ten brief years of his  
 life there he was confronted with a mass of problems and  
 difficulties. Much of his time was absorbed in dealing with the  
 plots of the Hypocrites and fighting battles against the  
 Polytheists and the Jews battles in which lie participated no  

**( 125 )**

fewer than twenty two times. He had therefore little time left over to
pursue his true mission to prepare people for entry into Islamic
society.

Was it not therefore necessary that after the death of the Prophet an
outstanding personality should assume the task of preserving God's
ordinances from distortion and change and of further disseminating
Islamic culture in all its branches in a form suited to the conditions
of the age? Was there not a need for one whom God had preserved from all
error and sin and whose very spirit and soul had been formed by the
inhalation of divine light? The Holders of Authority obedience to whom
was categorically mandated by God as conjoint with obedience to Himself
and the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family must in
the very nature of things be free of all pollution by error and sin
since this lofty attribute also characterized the Prophet himself.

In other words the rulers obedience to whom is of the same order as
obedience to God and the Prophet are to be found exclusively in that
house which God Himself had purified of all sin and to whom the Prophet
had clearly referred in a number of utterances proclaiming them superior
to all others and enjoining the Muslims to love them to follow them and
to be tied to them.

The deduction of the approprate rulings for the countless situations
that were to occur in later times taking into account the verses of the
Qur'an and the relatively few traditions that were transmitted from the
Most Noble Messenger was by no means an easy task something that
ordinary people could successfully undertake. Verses of the Qur'an that
contain legal rulings and traditions of the Prophet concerning the
permitted and the forbidden do not amount together to a total of more
than seven hundred.

Taking this into consideration who had the necessary qualifications of
learning to deduce from this relatively small number of texts rulings
for the constantly increasing problems of Islamic society? Could it be
anyone other than someone  

**( 126 )**

directly instructed by God acquit himself of this grave responsibility?
Likewise the elaboration of laws to address matters that change in
accordance with temporally and spatially determined circumstances is
also part of the responsibility of the Holders of Authority for they
have been given the power to promulgate the necessary ordinances at
their own discretion. The fact that no explicit ruling for such matters
is to be found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah should not be taken as a
sign of deficiency in the shari'ah but on the contrary as an indication
of the legislative potential and expansive logic that are to be found in
religion.

In objection to all this the verse proclaiming religion to have been
perfected might be cited. However it does not disprove our argument for
according to well known scholars of tradition it was revealed on the Day
of Ghadir after the appointment of the Commander of the Faithful 'Ali
peace be upon him as successor to the Prophet. If we examine carefully
the situation prevailing at the time we will see that the newly
established religion of Islam was being threatended with attack by
various enemies and the infliction of blows from various quarters For
this reason the aims of Islam could not be advanced without the presence
of a divinely appointed authority designated by the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family nor could its structure have been
maintained in the fashion the Prophet himself desired. The need was met
by the appointment of 'Ali as the leader and ruler of the Muslims.

Moreover the verse concerning the perfection of religion  
 does not imply that detailed divine ordinances dealing with all  
 conceivable concerns have now attained a state of perfection. It  
 is true that on the one hand the revelation of divine command  
 came to an end with the death of God's Messenger who had  
 been instructed by the Creator in the essential and unchanging  
 needs of man so that in this sense legislation had been  
 completed. However we see at the same time that many  
 general ordinances are to be found neither in the Qur'an nor in  

**( 127 )**

the Sunnah and the legal sources and juristic mechanism available at the
time were inadequate to provide an answer for all the new situations
that were bound to occur the reason for this being the temporally finite
nature of the Prophet's mission.

In addition the successive difficulties with which the Prophet had to
deal prevented him from fulfilling some of his basic tasks so that he
was unable to teach men everything he had learned. Many of the
Companions and contemporaries of the Prophet were in a state of constant
dependence on him and as long as they lived in his shade they paid no
attention to the need of mastering directly the ordinances and concepts
of religion. Although they came to occupy important positions after the
death of the Prophet they were ignorant of many matters pertaining to
worship social transactions and juridical procedure1 in addition to
which their grasp of political concerns and the problems of the age was
weak. Numerous traditions are to be found in Sunni books which show that
the Companions lacked clear ideas concerning questions of inheritance
judgeship and penalties.

The very logic of the prophetic message necessitated that the ummali
should gradually become acquainted with religious guidance over a period
longer than that which had elapsed before the death of the Prophet. He
therefore entrusted the accumulation of laws and ordinances that he had
received by way of revelation to his successor and legatee the very
depths of whose being had been permeated by Islam and in a short time he
inculcated in his spirit and heart knowledge of all the truths and
teaching of Islam thus preparing him for leadership.

He assigned to him the task of preserving the authentic culture and
knowledge of Islam for him to convey to the Muslim ummah after his death
in a manner dictated by the circumstances of the age and instructing
society in its duties based on his own extensive learning.

What we know of the life of the Prophet and of 'Ali  
 informs us that the Prophet spent many hours alone with 'Ali  
 instructing him in what needed to be done and the difficulties  
 that lay ahead. Whenever 'Ali asked him a question he would  

**( 128 )**

help him and explain the teachings of religion to him.

So after the death of the great founder of Islam 'Ali was the only
direct channel for gaining access to truth freeing the ummah of the need
to act in accordance with supposition doubt analogy or arbitrary
judgement.

Were these last two to have any place in the judicial and penal system
of Islam it would mean that the shari'ah itself is based on speculation
and supposition and any religion the ordinances of which are subject to
doubt and hesitation cannot fail to be weak unsound and unconvincing.

The ummah then is in no situation to assume itself the task of selecting
a successor to the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his
family rather it is incumbent on him to convey the trust that he has
received from God to one who is like him protected from sin and who does
not fail for a single moment to protect the religion of God. Were it to
be otherwise personal opinions would take the place of divine
commandments and the purpose of the Prophet's mission would be
undermined and God's ordinances would be laid aside.

History itself bears witness that the religious learning and culture of
those who assumed the leadership after the death of the Prophet were not
at a level that permitted them to answer the question of the day. The
events that occurred proved that they were incapable of dealing with
serious problems or issuing the requisite instructions. Their lack of
religious knowledge caused the laws of God to be diverted from their
true course and ordinances alien to Islam to be implemented.

Historians record that five men were once brought before the caliph
accused of sexual transgressions. The caliph ordered them to be punished
each with a hundred lashes. The Imam 'Ali who was present objected as
follows:

"A different penalty must be applied to each of the five.

One is an unbeliever in tributary relation to the Islamic  
 government; since he has violated the conditions of this  
 relation he must be put to death. The second is a married man;  
 he must be stoned. The third is an unmarried youth; his  

**( 129 )**

punishment is to be whipped. The fourth is an unmarried slave whose
punishment is half that of a free man. The fifth man is a lunatic and he
is not subject to any punishment." A married woman pregnant with an
illegitimate child was brought before 'Umar and he commanded that she
should be stoned. The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him
remarked: "Although the woman is a criminal from the point of view of
the law the child she is bearing is innocent and it cannot be punished
together with its mother." Thanks to this intervention on the part of
'Ali the implementation of a verdict contrary to justice and religion
was avoided. [( 3 )](#p3)

On another occasion the caliph gave orders for a madwoman who had
committed an unchaste act to be punished. However Imam 'Ali considered
this verdict also to run counter to the criteria of Islam and he
proclaimed her innocent basing himself on a tradition from the Prophet
peace and blessings be upon him and his family to the effect that three
groups of people are free of legal accountability one of them being the
insane. This brought the matter to a close. [( 4 )](#p4)

Many Sunni authorities record that whenever 'Umar was unable to solve a
problem until he consulted 'Ali he would repeat to himself: "Were it not
for 'Ali 'Umar would be lost."

Sometimes he would also say: "I seek protection against the accurrence
of a problematic event without 'Ali being present." [( 5 )](#p5) What we
have cited here are but a few examples of the issuance of verdicts and
judgements that had no connection to God's revelation. [( 6 )](#p6)

Can we assume that God permitted His laws to be violated  
 on numerous occasions after the death of the Prophet and  
 invalid judgements to supplant them? Or was it rather that in  
 order to protect religion the reins of the ummah were intended  
 to be placed in the hands of persons who were throughly  
 acquainted with all the details of revealed law and had the  
 duty of implementing it in Islamic society? Once the duty of  
 obeying the leader or ruler is made contingent on his  
 possessing all the necessary attributes no contradiction  
 between the desires of the ruler and the commands of God and  

**( 130 )**

the Messenger on the other will occur. To interpret the verse on
obedience in this fashion will solve all the problems we have reviewed
above and free us from the need to resort to all kinds of improbable and
untrustworthy notions.

The Qur'an in fact does not permit the grant of obedience to those who
prefer their own arbitrary wishes to the commands of God for it clearly
proclaims: "Do not follow those who have forgotten mention of Me and
pursue their own fancies." (18:27)

It is self-evident that any command issued in contravention of what God
has willed will lack all validity and that no one has the right to
legislate in a sense running contrary to God's law. Both intelligence
and conscience dictate as well as the numerous verses and traditions
that relate to the matter that people must submit only to the law of God
and obey His commands exclusively.

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him said: "The only
obedience incumbent on people is to the laws of God and the commandments
of the Prophet of God peace and blessings be upon him and his family! As
for obedience to the Holders of Authority this has been made incumbent
because they are immune from sin and in the very nature of things they
cannot issue an order that violates or runs counter to God's commands."
[( 7 )](#p7)

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir peace be upon him said: "The Holders of Authority
are the leaders of the ummah from the progeny of 'Ali and Fatimah who
shall remain in existence until the Day of Resurrection." [( 8 )](#p8)

One of the companions of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him asked
him: "Who are the Holders of Authority obedience to whom has been made
obligatory by God?" He answered: "They are 'Ali b. Abi Talib Hasan
Husayn 'Ali b. Husayn Muhammad b. 'Ali and Ja'far (i.e. himself).

Give thanks then to God that He has made your leaders known to you at a
time when many people are engaged in denial." [( 9 )](#p9)

A Companion of the Messenger of God by the name of Jabir once asked him
about the meaning of the verse dealing  

**( 131 )**

with obedience enquiring "who are the Holders of Authority obedience to
whom has been made obligatory on us by God?" He answered: "The first of
them will be 'Ali b. Abi Talib.

He will be followed by his sons Hasan and Husayn; then by 'Ali b.
Husayn; and then by Muhammad al-Baqir whom you will live to see. When
you go to meet him give him my greetings. He will be followed in turn by
Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim 'Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad 'Ali
al-Hadi Hasan al-'Askari and finally the Expected One the Promised
Mahdi. These will be the leaders after me." [(10)](#p10)

One of the companions of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him
addressed him as follows: "Inform me of those pillars of Islam on the
observance of which depends the acceptability of my deeds and tell me
too of those things ignorance of which will not harm me." He replied:
"Bearing witness to the oneness of God; testifying to the prophethood
and messengerhood of Muhammad peace and blessings be upon him and his
family and belief in that which he conveyed from God; adherence to
financial obligations such as the payment of zakat; and allegiance to
those to whom God has commanded it that is to the Family of the Prophet.
For the Prophet himself said 'Whoever leaves this world without knowing
the Imam of his age will have died as people died during the Jahiliyyah
' and God commanded obedience to Himself the Messenger and the Holders
of Authority." "The first of the Holders of Authority was 'Ali peace be
upon him followed in order by Hasan Husayn 'Ali b.

Husayn Muhammad b. 'Ali and this line of authority still continue.

"A world that is devoid of an Imam cannot be set right and to die
without knowing the Imam is equivalent to dying the death of one who
lived in the Jahiliyyah. More than at any other time man needs to know
his Imam during the last moments of his life; he will be guaranteed high
station if he openly acknowledges his Imam at that time." [(11)](#p11)

The atrocities inflicted by the Umayyad and 'Abbasid  

**( 132 )**

caliphs on the Muslims in general and even on their leaders in religion
were not few in number. They perverted the caliphate into an instrument
of voice and immorality and plunged their hands into the blood of the
innocent simply to shore up their unjust rule. Despite this they called
themselves Commanders of the Believers! If God were to recognize the
rule of these shameless criminals as legitimate and to impose obedience
to them on the Muslims as a duty what would become of justice equity and
equality of the rights of the individual and society? Would this not
make a mockery of the divine commandments that ensure the happiness of
mankind in this world and the hereafter and promote its true
advancement? In addition to all the foregoing it may be remarked that
traditions reported by many great Sunni scholars also interpret the
expression Holders of Authority as referring to the Imams from the House
of the Prophet.' [(12)](#p12)

The Noble Qur'an restricts authority over the Muslims to God the
Messenger and to those who pay zakat while bowing down. Thus it says:
"Authority over you belongs to God and the Prophet and those believers
who establish regular prayer and pay their zakat while bowing down "
(5:55). This verse refers to an occurrence that happened only once for
there is no general injunction in Islam that zakat must be paid while
one is bowing; this is neither obligatory nor recommended and we cannot
assume that some people used to do it as a matter of practice.

The event in question is the following. A certain poor man entered the
Prophet's Mosque while 'Ali peace be upon him was bowing in prayer. The
beggar asked him for his help and 'Ali stretched out his finger toward
him meaning that he should remove the ring and take it. The beggar
complied and left the mosque.

At this point the angel of revelation came to the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family and revealed to him the verse we
have just cited.

Sunnis and Shi'is agree unanimously that the verse was  

**( 133 )**

revealed with reference to 'Ali and that he manifested tile action that
is mentioned in it[(13)](#p13) The verse then is a concise allusion to
'Ali. Although the verse uses a plural ("those believers who ... pay
their zakat while bowing down") it refers to a single individual. While
the reverse - the use of a singular with the intention of a plural - is
not permissible in the Arabic language the use of a plural with singular
meaning is quite common and by no means restricted to this instance. For
example the Qur'an uses a plural to refer to Na'im b. Mas'ud al-Ashja'i
in 3:172 and to refer to 'Abdullah b. Ubayy in Surah al-Munafiqun apart
from other instances that might be cited. [(14)](#p14) Considering the
admission of Sunni scholars that this verse refers to 'Ali no doubt can
remain that the leader and ruler of the Muslims after the Prophet peace
and blessings be upon him and his family was 'Ali peace be upon him for
here his authority is conjoined with that of God and the Messenger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. II p. 67. [( 2 )](#m2) Ibn Qutaybah
al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah Vol. I p.12. [( 3 )](#m3) al-Qunduzi Yanabi'
al-Mawaddah p.211. [( 4 )](#m4) al-Aminl al-Ghadir Vol. VI pp.110-11. [(
5 )](#m5) Ibn Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. II p. 103. [( 6 )](#m6) For further
cases of this type see al-Ghadir Vol. VI-VIII. [( 7 )](#m7) al-Majlisi
Bihar al-Anwar Vol. XXV p. 200. [( 8 )](#m8) Hurr al-'Amili Ithbat
al-Hudat Vol. III p. 131. [( 9 )](#m9) al-'Ayyashi al-Tafsir Vol. I
p.252. [(10)](#m10) Hurr al-'Amili Ithbat al-Hudat Vol. III p.123.
[(11)](#m11) al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p.137. [(12)](#m12) See the
creed of Abu Bakr al-Mu'min as cited in al-Mar'ashi Ihqaq al-Haqq Vol.
III p.425; Abu Hayyan al-Andalusi al-Bahr al-Muhit Vol. III p.276;
al-Qunduzi Yanabi al-Mawaddah pp.114-16. [(13)](#m13) al-Suyuti al-Durr
al-Manthur Vol. II p.293; Ibn Hajar al-Kafi al-shafi p.53; 'Abduh Tafsir
al-Manar Vol. VI p.442; al-Zamakhshari Tafsir al-Kashshaf under the said
verse; Jami' al-Usul Vol. IX p.487; al-Tabari al-Tafsir p. 165;
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi Kanz al-'Ummal Vol. VI p.391; Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
al-Tafsir al-Kabir Vol. III p.431; al-Wahidi Asbab al-Nuzul p.148.
[(14)](#m14) al-Tabari al-Tafsir Vol. XXVIII p.270; al-Suyuti al-Durr
al-Manthur Vol. VI p.223.
