The Guardians of the Frontiers of the Shari 'ah and the Realm of Islam
======================================================================

**( 135 )**

Lesson Fourteen
---------------

In contrast to present-day Christianity the credal system of which is
based on a purely spiritual and ethical summons to man and the scope of
which does not extend beyond the propagation of religion and the attempt
to guide mankind Islam is a system that refuses to confine itself to
mere religious rituals.

The summons to purposive activity and struggle the need to expand and
disseminate the message of monotheism the elaboration of laws and
ordinances for both the material and spiritual life of man as well as
the direct participation of the Most Noble Messenger peace and blessings
be upon him and his family in various battles; - all this indicates that
the ideational system of Islam aims at the establishment of a government
that with its liberating ideals will permit men to rediscover themselves
and choose a truly human form of existence. Further the government that
Islam intends to establish will defend the religion of monotheism with
the necessary decisiveness ward off any aggression against the lands of
Islam and implement Cod's laws with care and precision.

Such a government on account of its answerability before  
 God's laws will never be ready to compromise those laws  
 however slightly in the face of pressure and hostility from the  
 enemies of Islam whatever form that hostility may take; it will  
 never ignore God's commandments nor abandon their  

**( 136 )**

implementation.

In general once religious leadership is separated from the ruling
institution and religion remains indifferent to the question of
political rule contenting itself with preaching and admonishing the
masses religion will have no guarantor in society. Even if people are
made aware of the teachings of religion by the efforts of scholars and
thinkers and try to implement those teachings in their lives the ruling
classes will attempt by various means to prevent the implementation of
measures that secure human happiness and especially of the divine
commandments that might threaten their hegemony.

They will even go beyond that implementing their own carefully
calculated plans to shore up their rule and protect their interests both
in the short term and in the long term.

If therefore religion regards its teachings as the source of salvation
and happiness of society it must give thought to the system of rule
propose a specific system of governance equipped with all the necessary
laws and ordinances. Only then will it be able to establish religion in
society and clear the way for God's religion to advance.

Both in Islam and in the monotheistic religions that preceded it
particular attention was paid to the establishment of a suitable system
of government an entirely logical concern for the founders of different
schools of religious thought were unwilling to abandon the fruits of
their efforts to the vicissitudes of history.

Islamic government - i.e. the administration of the ummah on the basis
of Islamic law - began with the migration of the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family and his arrival in Madinah; it was
then that the system of Islamic government began to take shape.

From the very first day that the Messenger of God laid the foundations
of Islamic monotheism despite the hostility of the corrupt and misguided
polytheists whom lie had left behind in Makkah and began expanding the
power of Islam in Madinah in all its aspects political economic
geographical and cultural he entrusted the administration of certain
matters to  

**( 137 )**

responsible and capable elements so that they might contribute to the
advancement of the community.

Throughout the battles and wars that took place in order to remove the
obstacles that stood in the way of spreading the truth and to establish
justice new lands would come under the control of the Muslims. The
Prophet would immediately appoint in each of these lands a governor and
a judge as well as a teacher whose task it was to teach religion to the
people.

Protection was also extended to the non-Muslims inhabiting these
territories and whatever humane cultural values they cherished.

The Qur'an recognizes the Prophet to have had the functions of ruler
(Hakim) and judge (Qadi) for it addresses him as follows: "Judge among
them according to what your Lord has sent down to you and follow not
their vain desires." (5:48) The prophets were indeed the founders of
divine government on earth and they constituted the principal resource
for the establishment of a righteous government that would serve the
broad masses of the people.

The Qur'an assigns rulership not only to the Prophet of Islam but also
to Yusuf (Joseph): When Yusuf reached maturity We bestowed on him rulers
hip and knowledge; thus do We reward the doers of good." (12:22) The
Qur'an addresses Dawud (David) as follows: "O Dawud We bestowed upon you
Our viceregency upon earth so that you might rule justly among God's
creation not following your vain desires for they would lead you astray
from God's path." (38:25) The Islamic laws concerning fixed penalties
and the payment of blood money as well as many other topics in
jurisprudence count as the executive pillars of the Islamic system of
government that was founded by the Prophet.

The governmental function of the Prophet had another important dimension
that of creating a suitable environment for the strengthening of the
Islamic summons expounding the divine laws and ordinances for mankind
and inculcating in men the concepts of God's Book so that they might
attain the lofty goals that Islam had prescribed.

**( 138 )**

The Qur'an says the following with respect to this aspect of the
Prophet's task: "God it is Who raised a great Prophet from among the
unlettered Arabs in order that he might recite to them the verses of
God's revelation and cleanse them from tire pollution of ignorance and
evil morals and teach them tire shari'ah of God's Book and divine wisdom
even though they were previously in tire pit of ignorance and
misguidance." (62:2)

The Prophet was thus the ruler of Islamic society in addition to being a
guide and a promulgator of God's ordinances. Whoever wished to be his
successor ought then to have combined in himself these same two
dimensions - rulership of society and the spiritual guidance of the
ummah. In addition he had to be the guardian of the credal based of
Islam and its ordinances protecting them from change or distortion and
resisting decisively the assaults of unbelief scepticism and
misguidance; one able to solve problems arising from any kind of
deviation and to confront any agggression of the Islamic lands by
outsiders. Only thus could the continuity and preservation of Islam be
assured amid the myriad dangers it faced.

The best method of preserving the rights of the individual and society
is to have a government of the righteous and the most righteous form of
government is without doubt the government of the inerrant (ma'sum)
which alone makes it possible to hope for the preservation of the rights
of all man. A government headed by one chosen by God is in reality the
government of God and it is only this type of government that makes it
possible for man to preserve his true personality nobility and dignity
and to attain all his rights. Respect for the dignity of man and the
establishment of justice are among the fundamental principles of such a
government. Impious and arbitrary rulers may often pay lip service to
human rights and claim to be the defenders of the dignity of the
individual and society but in practice they drag man's honor in the mud
and their only accomplishment is the enthronement of discrimination and
injustice.

There can then be no doubt as to the importance of a just  

**( 139 )**

and virtuous government and the efforts of the prophets to establish
such nor conversely of the damage caused by impious rulers who are
unconcerned with the ultimate destiny of society and with enabling men
to obtain their rights.

The one who wishes to assume religious leadership and undertake the
guidance of the masses as the successor of the Prophet must bear
affinity to him with respect to knowledge deeds and manner of thought.
He must also have special moral qualities and spiritual attributes be
divinely protected from sin and be fully cognizant of the truths of
religion; only then will he be able to solve whatever problem arises on
the basis of truth justice and the shari'ah. Islam cannot accept that
rule over society and the protection of human dignity should be
entrusted to the first person who chances along.

The Noble Qur'an cites the superior strength and capacity of Talut
(Saul) as a reason for his being chosen as a fit leader of his people:
"He is more fitted to rule because God has chosen him and bestowed on
him a surfeit of knowledge and power." (2:247) In just the same way that
the Most Noble Messenger peace and blessings be upon him and his family
exercised two offices the one who wishes to succeed him must also have
his two essential qualities: an inner dimension of connectedness with
God which is bestowed by God Himself in His grace and an outer dimension
of leadership and rule. These two are inseparable and leadership of the
ummah cannot be based on one of them alone; political and social
leadership must go together with spiritual guidance. The Imam has both
spiritual and legislative authority and is thus able to perpetuate the
correct mode of administering human affairs that was established by the
prophets.

When the fifth Imam was commenting on the belief  
 prevalent at the Saqifah that the two aspects of the matter can  
 be separated from each other he cited this verse in which God  
 bestowed on the progeny of Ibrahim both spiritual guidance  
 and leadership and the administration of society: "Are they  
 envious of what We in our generosity have bestowed  
 on tire progeny of Ibrahim? We sent tire Book and wisdom to the  

**( 140 )**

family of Ibrahim and gave them too kingship and rule." (4:52) then the
Imam added: "How is it that they accept the combination of the two
aspects in the case of the children of Ibrahim but reject it for the
Household of the Prophet?" [( 1 )](#p1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-'Ayyash i al-Tafsir Vol. I p.247.
