Who Are Those Capable of Interpreting Divine Law?
=================================================

**( 149 )**

Lesson Sixteen
--------------

The laws that scholars have laboriously elaborated and compiled over the
ages to meet the needs of different societies have always stood in need
of intelligent and alert interpreters when it came to implementation.
The laws of Islam although they rest on revealed norms and divine
guidance are no exception to this rule.

Certain verses of the Qur'an which is the fundamental and primary source
for deducing anything related to Islam are not entirely clear in their
purport and signification for they do not yield a single categorical
sense. Recourse to exegesis in order to clarify points of ambiguity is
therefore necessary.

Furthermore the Noble Qur'an sets forth the main lines and general
principles of the programs of action Islam proposes in various spheres;
it does not go into the details of every law and prescript. If therefore
someone wishes to obtain comprehensive knowledge of those programs in
their entirety he cannot content himself simply with the text of the
Qur'an.

The differences of opinion and approach that have arisen with respect to
the meaning of certain verses as well as traditions of the Prophet peace
and blessings be upon him and his family have played a large part in the
distortion and transformation of some of the original concepts of Islam.

Interested parties and people tied to the ruling establishment  
 have succeeded in putting forward interpretations that  
 correspond to the interests of the rulers a phenomenon that  

**( 150 )**

happened repeatedly during the Umayyad and 'Abbasid caliphates. In such
a whirlpool of confusion what needs to be done to prevent the truth from
remaining unknown? Does it not appear necessary that recourse should be
had to a single learned authority on jurisprudence one divinely
protected against sin a man of independent opinion having a
comprehensive knowledge of the Book the heir to the knowledge of the
Prophet in order for him to acquaint us with the original meaning and
purpose of the Qur'an? An authority who implements the various commands
of the Qur'an in a practical and visible way and who serves as an
indisputable marker of the right and the wrong? The clarifications he
makes and the deductions he draws being based on the principles of the
Qur'an and inspired by revealed law will be decisive for all followers
of Islam and capable of ending all differences of opinion; he will be
like a compass in the hand of a distraught captain.

If we do not have recourse to such qualified interpreters of the Qur'an
we will fall prey to doubt and confusion or by following incorrect
interpretations stray far from the true teachings of the Qur'an.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him established the greatest center
for the teaching of Islam training a multitude of scholars whose task it
was to instruct the people and draw their attention to the dangers posed
by the fabricators of hadith. His scientific and intellectual activity
served to offset the waves of corruption that were unfurling at the time
as well as the erroneous concepts and biased theories the ground for
which had been prepared by the political situation of the day.

One day a group of the companions and students of the Imam men who
bequeathed to the ummah a great legacy of knowledge that they derived
from him were gathered in his presence. The Imam addressed Hisham b.
Hakam who was present among them: "Will you not tell us something about
the conversation you had with 'Amr b. 'Ubayd?" He replied: "I would be
embarrassed to say anything in your presence." But the Imam insisted and
so Hisham b. Hakam spoke as follows:

**( 151 )**

"I learned that 'Amr b. 'Ubayd had begun to assume some religious
responsibilities establishing a teaching circle in the mosque at Basrah.
This news disturbed me and so I set out for the mosque where I found him
sitting answering people's questions. I approached him and said: 'O
scholar I am a stranger here; will you permit me to ask a question?' He
replied that I might so I asked him: 'Do you have eyes?' 'Amr responded:
'Young man what kind of a question is this? Why ask about something you
can see to be true?' But I persisted asking him to answer my question.
He consented so I repeated the question. When he answered in the
affirmative I next asked him; 'What do you do with eyes?' 'I see colors
and people.' Then I asked; 'Do you have a nose?' 'Yes.' 'What do you do
with your nose?' 'I smell things.' 'Do you have a mouth?' 'Yes.' 'What
do you do with it?' 'I taste the food that I eat.' 'Do you have ears?'
'Yes.' 'What do you with them?' 'I hear sounds.'

"'Now do you have a heart?' 'Yes.' 'What do you do with it?' 'My heart
is an instrument of weighing and measuring; by means of it I assess the
truth or falsehood of whatever knowledge conies to my senses and limbs.'
"Then I asked: 'Can any limb or member dispense with the heart (qalb)?'

"'Even if all limbs and members are completely healthy?' "'Young man
whenever any bodily sense is mistaken in its perceptions or doubts their
accuracy it has recourse to the heart in order to resolve its doubts and
gain some measure of confidence and certainty.'

"'So the role of the heart with respect to the members  
 and limbs is in accordance with divine command to remove  
 error confusion and bewilderment?' "'Yes.' "'So the  
 existence of the heart in man is a necessity without which  
 his members and limbs lose their sense of direction?' "'Yes.'  

**( 152 )**

"'O Abu Marwan God has not left your senses and limbs without a guide to
rectify their errors and doubts. Is it then possible that He should
leave human society despite all the dissension and ignorance that beset
it to its own devices without any leader to guide it? A fitting leader
who will remove all confusion and error?' "'Amr remained silent for a
while and then he said:

"'Are you not Hisham b. Hakam?' "'No.' "'Are you one of his companions?'
"'No.' "'Where do you come from?' "'I come from Kufah.' "Then he said
'Indeed you are Hisham ' stood up caused me to sit where lie had been
sitting and remained silent until I got up to leave." The Imam smiled
and said: "From whom did you learn this mode of argumentation?" Hisham
replied: "From you." Then the Imam said: "I swear by God that this same
argument is to be found in the pages revealed to Ibrahim and Musa." [( 1
)](#p1)

Men may therefore gain access to the commands and prescriptions of God
only when after the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his
family the leadership of the Islamic ummah is in the hands of a person
who is enabled by his proven erudition and spiritual qualities to
expound those detailed injunctions which have not been explicitly
included in revelation but are nonetheless a matter of practical
necessity for human society. In the absence of such leadership the ummah
will tend to deviate from the principles of Islam and fail to reach the
goal of happiness and the purposes for which it has been created.

After the Prophet the Immaculate Imams committed as  
 they were to leadership and guidance did everything possible  
 to disseminate the teachings of the Qur'an for years on end  
 and in the midst of swiftly changing circumstances and to  
 show the Muslims how to apply those teachings; they guided  
 and instructed the people in word and in deed. As a result the  

**( 153 )**

aggregate of their teachings came of form a precious treasure of
learning that was bequeathed to the ummah. Because of its evidential
force this treasure was uniquely authoritative and because of its scope
it offered the means for solving every new problem that might occur.

Everyone knows that the caliphs who succeeded the Messenger of God peace
and blessings be upon him and his family knew very little concerning the
ordinances of Islam and the religious needs of the people. Abu Bakr the
first caliph is known for example to have transmitted only eighty hadith
[( 2 )](#p2) al-Nawawi says the following in his Tahdhib: "Abu Bakr
transmitted 142 hadith from the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him
and his family 104 of which are cited by al-Suyuti in his Tarikh
al-Khulafa' and 22 of which are included by al-Bukhari in his
collection."[( 3 )](#p3)

The religious leader of the ummah who is meant in every respect to aid
and assist his community and to solve their complex religious problems
has so little Islamic consciousness that he finds himself consulting
al-Mughirah b. Shu'bah an extremely corrupt individual in order to learn
God's ruling concerning the portion of an estate that goes to his
grandmother![( 4 )](#p4)

He even confesses himself with the utmost frankness that his religious
knowledge is not superior to that of anyone else and declares to the
people that if they see him committing an error they should correct him
and instruct him in the proper course of action. For this is what he
says:

"I hold in my hands the reins of your affairs even though I am not the
best among you. If you see that I am treading the right path then
support me and if you see me embarking on the wrong course then guide me
back to the right path."[( 5 )](#p5)

As for 'Umar he transmitted no more than fifty authentic hadith from the
Prophet.[( 6 )](#p6)

In connection with the religious knowledge of the second  
 caliph it is reported that someone once went to consult him on  
 a problem that he faced. He said: "I need to make a total  
 ablution (ghusl) but I have no access to water; what is my  

**( 154 )**

religious duty under these circumstances?" The caliph answered: "You are
relieved of your duty to pray."[( 7 )](#p7)

The real duty of such a person is however spelled out in the Qur'an.
(4:43 and 5:6) Five hadith are narrated on the authority of 'Uthman in
the Sahih of Muslim and nine in the Sahih of al-Bukhari.[( 8 )](#p8)

Facts such as these serve to demonstrate the degree of religious
learning possessed by those persons who assumed the leadership of
Islamic society. How then could it be expected that the framework of
divine law should remain immune to change and distortion and that
Islamic society should advance toward its lofty goals? Whoever carries
the burden of leading the ummali must possess extensive religious
awareness and knowledge in order to answer whatever questions and
problems arise whereas the knowledge that the caliphs had of the
authentic law of Islam was extremely limited.

One day while preaching from the pulpit the second caliph was
criticizing a rise in the amount of dowries customarily given and
declared that this increase ought to be prevented. When he descended
from the pulpit a woman objected to what lie had said: "Why is it
necessary to restrict the amount of dowries? Does God not say in the
Qur'an 'If you have given one of your wives great wealth by way of a
dowry you must not take back any of it'?" (4:20) The caliph realized his
mistake and begged God to forgive him. Then he remarked:

"Everyone is better acquainted with God's commands than is 'Umar." Then
lie mounted the pulpit again and retracted what he had said.[( 9 )](#p9)

As for the religious knowledge of the third caliph it is enough that we
should refer to the following event.

"During the time of his caliphate an unbeliever was killed  
 by a Muslim. The caliph ordered the murderer to be put to  
 death. But a group of the Companions of the Prophet peace  
 and blessings be upon him and his family who were present at  
 the time informed the caliph of his mistake and reminded him  
 that in such cases the murderer should be condemned to the  
 payment of blood money as a result of which the caliph  

**( 155 )**

rescinded his order."[( 10 )](#p10)

Is it fitting that the leadership of Islamic society should be in the
hands of people who by their own admission are so ignorant of the laws
of God's religion a religion the ordinances of which they are supposed
to expound and to implement? Is it at all conceivable that God should
entrust all the affairs -- in fact the destiny -- of a community that
had been nurtured on revelation and established by the most noble of
creation to people who were not only unable to propel the Islamic ummali
forward and to remove the veil of ambiguity from complex and difficult
questions but could not even expound the most elementary concerns of
religion or implement the shari'ah? We leave it those whose
intelligences are not fettered by fanaticism or prejudice to judge the
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. I p.170. [( 2 )](#m2) Ahmad b.
Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. I pp.2 14. [( 3 )](#m3) Cited in al-Nawawi Adwa'
'ala al-Sunnat al-Muhammadiyyah p.224. [( 4 )](#m4) Malik al-Muwatta'
p.335. [( 5 )](#m5) Ibn Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. III p.151. [( 6 )](#m6)
al-Nawawi Adwa' p.204. [( 7 )](#m7) Ibn Majah al-Sunan Vol. I p.200. [(
8 )](#m8) al-Nawawi Adwa' p.204. [( 9 )](#m9) al-Amini al-Ghadir Vol. VI
p.87. [( 10 )](#m10) al-Bayhaqi al-Sunan (al-Kubra) Vol. VIII p.33.
