The Imamate and Inner Guidance of Man
=====================================

**( 157 )**

Lesson Seventeen
----------------

One of the functions and attributes of the Imamate (imamah) is to extend
inner guidance to man. this is something different from outer guidance
in matters of law and the shari'ah; it is a distinct and lofty station
bestowed by God on a select and precious few among His creation men who
themselves strongly drawn and attracted to God and fully aware of all
the variations of human behavior and the various degrees of faith and
knowledge people possess can influence their thoughts and inner beings.
They illumine the hearts of the ummah with inner knowledge and aid them
in the refinement of their souls and their inward journeying always
bearing in mind the great multiplicity to which they are subject. It
then becomes incumbent on men to follow them and to align themselves
with the guidance they provide thus guarding themselves against falling
into the pit of instinctual desires and corrupt longings.

Some of the great prophets after their determination and steadfastness
had been duly tested and their spiritual strength had been fully proven
and they had attained the stage of total certainty gained this station
of inner guidance with which we are concerned.

Likewise it can be deduced from numerous verses  
 of the Qur'an that the Inerrant Imam (Iman al-ma'sum) who is situated
at the highest rank of spiritual life is also entrusted with the task of
inner guidance for he is a channel of divine grace which comes to him
inwardly from the suprasensible  

**( 158 )**

realm.

The Glorious Qur'an specifies certain conditions for the office of
Imamate: "We have chosen from among them Imams who at Our command shall
guide men to the right path for they are patient and steadfast and have
certain knowledge of Our signs." (32:24)

What is meant here by guidance is inner guidance not legal guidance for
to guide others in an outward sense by exhorting them to follow the
truth is a duty for everyone according to the command of the shari'ah
and fulfilling it is not contingent on being an Imam patient and
steadfast or having certain knowledge of God's signs nor is it necessary
to traverse different stages and degrees in order to perform it. However
guidance in accordance with divine command is a station that can be
attained only through divine appointment and is possible only for the
one who when confronted with irksome events and occurrences passes the
divine test implicit in them by displaying exemplary powers of
endurance; who consistently resists the pollution of sin and struggles
against all forms of lowliness and triviality. Equipped with such
virtues he attains the lofty rank of the certain knowledge of God's
signs and the station of Imamate which is also the station of inner
guidance. The Qur'an says: "We have appointed them Imams in order that
they might guide in accordance with Our command" (21:73) and in another
verse "A day on which We shall call forth each group with its Imam."
(17:71) When Ibrahim had completed all the tasks with which God had
tested him God addressed him as follows: "I appoint you to the station
of Imamate and the leadership of man. Ibrahim then asked: 'Will you also
grant this station to my progeny?' God said:

'The covenant of My Imamate will not be granted to wrongdoers."' (2:123)

Several points can be derived from this verse.

First the Imamate of Ibrahim was connected directly to  
 the manner in which he had confronted the tests and trials of  
 prophethood. After he had displayed his strength by passing  
 through all those stages God revealed to him that he was to be  
 further honored with the lofty office of Imamate with  

**( 159 )**

responsibility for the inner guidance of mankind, the refinement of
their souls, the maturing of their spiritual capacities, and, in
general, the preservation of the truth.

Second, Ibrahim was addressed by God in this manner when he was
approaching the final part of his life and at a time when he was fully
established in the rank of prophet and already had responsibilty for the
guidance of his ummah in matters of belief and conduct. God nonetheless
promised him an additional station, which proves that the office of
Imamate, with the abillity to exercise inner influence on the ummah in
order to advance on the inner path, was a higher and more exalted office
than his prophethood.

Third, immunity from the pollution of sin (ismah) is one of the
conditions of Imamate. For the verse proclaims that wrongdoers who
transgress the bounds of piety and inerrancy, whether they wrong others
or their own selves, will be denied the rank of imamate.

Fourth, the Imamate is divine covenant, bestowed only on the just the
pious, and the utterly pure; it is only they who aid and guide the
ummah. The imamate is not then a station which is at the disposal of men
to be awarded to whomever they see fit.

Fifth, prophethood and Imamate can be combined in a single person, as
was the case with Ibrahim for he had already received revelation in his
capacity of prophet correctiong men's erroneous beliefs by means of
decisive arguments and proofs, and in the very process of doing this, he
had acquired the strength and capacity needed for inner guidance, so
that the gate of Imamate was opened before him.

Finally, the verse indicates that members of Ibrahim's progeny who are
not wrongdoers (zalimin) will be granted the station of Imamate. There
can be no doubt that the most righteous of God's servants from among
that progeny were the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, and the Inerrant Imams, so they must count as Imams from
Ibrahim's line who were entrusted with inner guidance and the knowledge
of the unseen.

  

**( 160 )**

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him is reported in al- Kafi to have
said:

"Before appointing Ibrahim as prophet God Almighty appointed him His
servant. Before ennobling him with His friendship He bestowed on him the
rank of messengerhood.

Before granting him the rank of Imamate He made him His sincere and
devoted friend. It was therefore after Ibrahim had attained a whole
series of high ranks that he was given the station of Imimate."[( 1
)](#p1)

Numerous traditions exist affirming and emphasizing the need for an Imam
to be present among the people in order to guide them. These traditions
indicate that as long as the human species exist in this world a proof
of God and the truth must also exist to provide and protect the
intellectual social and credal framework for the ummah. This proof is
none other than the Imam the Friend of God who in his very person is a
living exponent and exemplar of true Islam.

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him said: "The Family
of Muhammad peace and blessings be upon him and his family are like the
stars; as soon as one of them sets another rises."[( 2 )](#p2)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him said in the course of a sermon:

"God has illumined His religion with the Imams from the Household of the
Prophet and made them the abundant spring from which knowledge of
religion gushes forth. Whoever recognizes the claims of the Imams based
on sound knowledge and insight will taste the sweetness of faith and
come to know the luminous and beautiful visage of Islam. For God has
appointed the Imams to be His proof among men and their guide; has
placed on their heads the crown of sublimity and leadership; caused the
light of His own splendor to shine on their beings; and sustained and
supported them with inexhaustible heavenly power. It is only by means of
causes that God's grace reaches His servants and God does not accept
men's knowledge of Himself except by means of their recognition of the
Imam.

**( 161 )**

"The Imam is versed in all the complexities problems and metaphoric
aspects of revelation and he is chosen by God from among the descendants
of Husayn peace be upon him.

Whenever an Imam departs for the realm of eternity to meet God he
appoints another Imam from among his own offspring in order to illumine
the path men should travel. God has chosen all of them to lead the ummah
in order that they should guide the people and judge justly among them.

"They are among the choice descendants of Adam Nuh Ibrahim and Isma'il.
The jewel of their being shone in the world even before their bodies
were fashioned of clay. God made their existence the substance of life
for all men and the firm pillars of Islam." [( 3 )](#p3)

He said in another tradition:

"Even if there were only two people left on earth one of them would be
an Imam. The last person to close his eyes on the world will be the Imam
so that no one will be to argue before God that he was left without an
Imam." [( 4 )](#p4)

al-A'mash asked Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq: "How will people benefit from the
existence of an absent (gha'ib) Imam?" He answered: "In the same way
that they benefit from the sun when it is hidden behind a cloud." [( 5
)](#p5)

Ishaq b. Ghalib relates the Imam to have said:

"The Imam is designated by God and the Messenger to be God's proof
before men. Through the blessed existence of the Imam a link is
established between God's servants and the suprasensible realm and God's
grace flows down upon them.

God will not accept the deeds of His servants unless they are loyal to
the Imam. God does not abandon His servants to their own devices after
creating them; instead by means of the Imam he lays out the path of
piety before them and thus establishes His proof."[( 6 )](#p6)

Imam al-Baqir peace be upon him said:

"I swear by God that from the time God took Adam's spirit  
 and conveyed him to the realm of eternity He has never left  
 the earth empty of an Imam. Hereafter too the world will  
 never be without the existence of an Imam so that God's proof  

**( 162 )**

will always be present among His servants."[( 7 )](#p7)

Abu Khalid al-Kabuli says that he once asked the fifth Imam to interpret
the verse "So believe in God and His Messenger and the light He has sent
you." (64:8) The Imam replied: "I swear by God that that light (al-nur)
is the Imam. The brilliance of the light of the Imam in the heart of the
believer is greater than that of the sun. It is the Imam who illumines
the hearts of the believers. God prevents the brilliance of that light
from reaching the hearts of whomsoever He wills this being the
explanation for the darkness of their hearts."[( 8 )](#p8)

al-Saduq writes in his 'llal al-Shara'i':

"Jabir once asked Imam al-Baqir peace be upon him why men need prophets
and Imams. He replied that the existence of prophets and Imams is
indispensable for the continuance and welfare of the world. For it is by
means of them that God wards off His punishment from men. God says in
the Qur'an: '(O Muhammad) as long as you are among them punishment shall
not descend on them."' (8:33) The Most Noble Prophet himself peace and
blessings be upon him and his family said:

"Just as the stars bestow safety on the inhabitants of the heavens the
People of my House grant security to the inhabitants of the earth. If
the stars in the heaven are destroyed it will be a catastrophe for the
inhabitants of the heavens and if the People of my House are no longer
to be found among men the whole earth will be overtaken by disaster.

"What is meant by the People of the House are those leaders obedience to
whom God has conjoined with obedience to Himself in the verse 'O you Who
believe obey God the Messenger and the Holders of Authority' (4:59).

The Holders of Authority from the People of the Prophet's House are
adorned with inerrancy and utter purity; they never disobey any of God's
commands and are always guided and supported by Him. Their deeds are
beyond the reach of crookedness and deviation and their feet are firmly
planted on His straight path. It is through the blessed existence of
these great ones that  

**( 163 )**

God's servants receive their sustenance cities become prosperous and the
rainfall descends. The Holy Spirit always accompanies them and there is
never any separation between them and the Qur'an." [( 9 )](#p9)

Muhammad b. Fudayl asked Imam al-Rida peace be upon him whether the
earth could subsist without an Imam. He answered that it could not.
Muhammad b. Fudayl continued:

"It has been related to us from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq that the world will
never remain without a proof (hujjah) and an Imam for were it to do so
the people of the world would instantly be caught up in God's wrath."
The Imam then said: "The earth will never be without an Imam. Were there
to be no Imam destruction and collapse would be the ineluctable fate of
the world." [(10)](#p10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. I p.175. [( 2 )](#m2) al-Radi Nahj
al-Balaghah p.146. [( 3 )](#m3) al-Qunduzl Yanabi' al-Mawaddah pp.23
524. [( 4 )](#m4) al-Kulaynl al-Kafi Vol. I p.180. [( 5 )](#m5)
al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p.21. [( 6 )](#m6) Hurr al-'Amili Ithbat
al-Hudat Vol. I p.247. [( 7 )](#m7) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. I p.179. [(
8 )](#m8) Ibid Vol. I p. 195. [( 9 )](#m9) al-Majusi Bihar al-Anwar Vol.
XXIII p.19. [(10)](#m10) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. II p.179.
