Lesson 19: Confirmation from the Qur'an and the Sunnah
======================================================

One of the scriptural proofs for the inerrancy of the People of the
Prophet's House is the "purification verse" (*ayah al-tathir*), a verse
which depicts their utter purity and their unique character as follow.

"***God wishes to remove all filth and impurity from you, O People of
House of the Prophet, and to render you utterly free of all pollution."
(33:33)***

*Rijs'* translated by us as "filth", has the meaning in Arabic of dirt
and impurity, whether it be outer or inner, the latter being essentially
synonymous with sin. The word has been used in both senses in the
Qur'an. Outer impurity is what is at issue in the following verse:

**"*****Carrion, blood that has been shed, and the flesh of the pig all
these are filth.*****" (6:145)**

By contrast, inner impurity is what is meant in this verse:

"***Those whose hearts are afflicted with sickness will find their filth
increased by God so that they ultimately die in a state of unbelief."
(9:125)***

In the verse which speaks of the removal of filth and impurity from the
Prophet's House, the word rijs cannot be interpreted as referring to
outer impurity, insofar as all Muslims are required to shun outer
impurity as a matter of religious obligation; this is not something that
pertains exclusively to the Prophet's House, whereas the verse clearly
implies the grant of a particular distinction.

Moreover, the avoidance of filth and impurity does not count as a virtue
that in the view of the Qur'an characterizes a particular group of
people. Given all of this, in order for the verse to be comprehensible.
the word rijs must be taken in the sense of inward pollution of the
spirit.

God's will and desire to remove all impurity from the People of the
Prophet's House is a desire related to the whole scheme of creation, in
that God wished that within His created order the members of that house
be free of all impurity and adorned with all purity. If we related God's
wish to matters of law and legislation, the meaning would simply be that
in the sphere of law they should not sin or pollute themselves.

This meaning would be clearly unacceptable, for the avoidance of sin and
the shunning of impurity is a universal religious duty, the imposition
of which does not confer honor or special status on anyone. It would
certainly not cause the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, to engage in the unprecedented act of gathering together the
members of his House behind closed doors and casting a piece of cloth or
a cloak (kisa') over them.

The revelation of the "purification verse" aroused a great deal of
attention in the time of the Prophet among his Companions, and the
select group to whom the verse was addressed and whose sanctity and
purity now became a matter of common acceptance were known as the
Companions of the Cloak (*ahl al-kisa'*). Whenever the People of the
Prophet's House found it necessary to draw attention to their unique
spiritual rank, they would proudly refer to this verse.

At the gathering that was convened after the death of 'Umar to select a
caliph, the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, peace be upon him, made the
following argument:

"Is there any among us apart from myself concerning whom the
'purification verse' was revealed?"

When they answered "no," he proceeded: "The People of the House are
overflowing with abundant virtue, for the Qur'an says, **'*****God
wishes to remove all filth and impurity from you, O House of the
Prophet, and to render you utterly free of pollution.*****' (33:33)**
God has therefore removed from us all evil, outer and inner, and placed
us firmly on the path of truth and righteousness."[^1]

Ibn 'Abbas reports the following important tradition from the Prophet:

"God Almighty has divided all men into two groups, and placed me among
the best of all men. For He said. ***'The Companions of the Right Hand
how pleasant will be their state!' (56:27),*** ***and 'The Companions of
the Left Hand, how evil will be their state!' (56:41)***

"I am among the Companions of the Right Hand, and I am in fact the best
of them.

"Then God divided men into three groups, and again placed me in the
purest of them, For He said, ***'The Companions of the Right Hand, how
pleasant will be their state! The Companions of the Left Hand, the
wretched, how miserable will be their state! The third group are those
foremost in faith, those who are in truth nigh unto Me.' (56:8-11).***
And I am the best of the foremost.

"Then He divided men into peoples and tribes, and placed me among the
best of them. For He said, ***'O mankind, We have created you from a
single man and woman, and made of you different peoples and tribes in
order that you might recognize one another, and the greatest of you in
the sight of God is the most pious.' (49:13).*** And I am the most pious
and the greatest of mankind, and yet I take no pride in this.

"Then God divided people into families and households, and placed me in
the most virtuous of all households. For He said, **'*****God wishes to
remove all filth and impurity from you, O House of the Prophet, and to
render you utterly free of pollution.*****' (33:33)** I and my House
are, then, utterly free of all impurity and immune to sin."[^2]

In this tradition we see that the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, has unambiguously interpreted the "purification
verse" as referring to inerrancy.

The events that constituted the occasion for the revelation of the verse
were the following, as related by Umm Salamah, a wife of the Prophet
renowned for her piety and nobility, in whose the events took place:

"One day, Fatimah, peace be upon her, the daughter of the Prophet,
brought a dish of food to her father. He told her to summon her husband
'Ali, peace be upon him, and their children, Hasan and Husayn, peace be
upon them, which she did. When they were all gathered and engaged in
eating, the 'purification verse' was revealed. Thereupon the Prophet
took a piece of cloth that he had on his shoulders and cast it over
their heads, saying three times, 'O Lord, these are the People of my
House; remove filth and impurity from them and render them utterly
pure.'"[^3]

Many Sunni scholars remark that the "purification verse" was revealed
concerning five people: The Prophet, 'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and
Husayn.[^4]

'Umar b. Abi Salamah who was a witness to the incident described it as
follows:

"The 'purification verse' was revealed in the house of Umm Salamah. Then
the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, told 'Ali,
Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn to approach him and threw over their heads a
piece of cloth that was covering his shoulders, and said, 'These are the
People of my House; remove from them all filth, and render them utterly
pure.' Umm Salamah then asked, 'O Messenger of God, am I also one of
them?' He replied, 'Be content with your. Own place, for you are one of
the virtuous."'[^5]

A'ishah relates: "One day the Prophet left the house, with a piece of
cloth slung over his shoulders. Hasan, Husayn, Fatimah, and 'Ali came to
see him, and he threw the cloth over their heads, reciting the,
purification verse.'[^6]

Abu 'l-Hamra', one of the Companions, relates: "I stayed in Madinah for
eight months, watching the Prophet constantly. He would never leave his
house to perform the prayers without first passing by 'Ali's house. He
would place his hands on each side of the door and cry out, *'Prayer
Prayer'! God wishes to remove all filth from you, People of the House,
and to make you utterly pure!'"*[^7]

Only a few people witnessed the Prophet, peace and blessings be Upon him
and his family, casting his cloak over the People of the House, so in
order to disseminate news of it as broadly as possible among the people
and convey make them aware of the standing of his progeny, for them in
turn to convey it others, he repeated this procedure for an extended
period. Ibn Abbas relates that for a period of nine months, whenever the
Prophet passed by the house of 'Ali, peace be upon him, he would call
out*: "Peace be upon you, O People of the House!" and then he would
recite the: "purification verse."*[^8]

Anas b. Malik similarly relates: "For a period of six months, whenever
the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
passed by the house of Fatimah, peace be upon her, at the time of the
dawn prayer, he would say, 'Rise for prayer, O People of my House!' Then
he would recite the 'purification verse'."[^9]

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali, peace be upon him, relates: *"Every
morning when the Most Noble Messenger passed in front of our house, he
would say, 'God's mercy be upon you, rise for prayer!' Then he would
recite the 'purification verse'."*[^10]

Some people maintain that the "purification verse" cannot refer to the
inerrancy of the Imams because the context in which it occurs relates to
the wives of the Prophet and necessitates that it, too, should refer to
them, or that at the very least they cannot be excluded from the
category it addresses; if it were to imply inerrancy, then the wives of
the Prophet would also have to be inerrant, a belief that no one holds.
We must therefore interpret the verse as referring to the wives of the
Prophet, not to their putative inerrancy or that of the other members of
the Prophet's house.

This objection is groundless, and incompatible with the wording of the
verse. For if it had been intended to address the wives of the Prophet,
the second person feminine plural would have been used, not the second
person masculine plural ('*ankunna* instead of *'ankum*, *yutahirakunna*
instead of *yutahirakum*).

In addition, the traditions that we have cited clearly demonstrate that
only four people are meant by the expression People of the House, for
the Messenger of God says: "O God, these are the People of my House." In
the lifetime of the Prophet, membership in his house was restricted to
the four named individuals. As for his wives and other relatives,
including even Ja'far b. Abi Talib and his uncle al-'Abbas, none of them
belong to the category of his house.

Furthermore, many other traditions mention clearly the occasion for the
revelation of the verse.

When Umm Salamah, Zaynab, and 'A'ishah asked the Most Noble Messenger,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, whether they too were
part of the People of the House (*Ahl al-Bayt*), he told them to be
content with their station and not to attempt to draw close.

There is no problem in regarding the "purification verse" as a
parenthetic statement inserted in the verses dealing with the wives of
the Prophet, for such recourse to parenthesis is by no means contrary to
good usage and is also found elsewhere in the Qur'an.

Finally, purification (*tathir*) is synonymous here with inerrancy
(*'ismah*), and according to the unanimous opinion of all traditionists
and historians the wives of the Prophet did not possess the lofty
attribute of inerrancy. They frequently vexed the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, during his lifetime, and matters
once reached such a pitch that the Prophet shunned some of them for a
whole month and threatened them with divorce.

Worse than all of this, the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, was standing one day with a group of his
Companions near the door to the house of one of his wives, and pointing
in its direction he said: "This is where trouble starts."[^11]

Taking all this into consideration, how can the wives of the Prophet be
regarded as covered by the "purification verse"?

In addition, there are numerous traditions specifically proclaiming the
inerrancy of the Imams.

Thus Ibn Abbas reports the Prophet to have said:

"I, 'Ali, Hasan, Husayn, and nine descendants of Husayn, are inerrant
and pure."[^12]

Salim b. Qays records the Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, peace be upon
him, to have said:

*"Obedience is incumbent only to God, the Messenger and the Holders of
Authority (ulu'l-amr). It is obligatory to follow the Holders of
Authority because they are inerrant, far removed from all sin, and they
issue no command contravening God's law."*[^13]

He also said: *"Why are you bewildered and confused in your attempts to
find the right path? The Prophet's progeny is among you; they are guides
to the truth, the banners of religion, and the tongues of honesty and
veracity. Place them on the same level as the Qur'an, and hasten to them
as the thirsty rush toward water."*[^14]

Imam ar-Ridha’, peace be upon him, said: *"The Imam is a personage who
is free of all sin, major and minor, devoid of all faults, and replete
with knowledge."*[^15]

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said: *"The prophets and their
successors are sinless and pure, for they all possess inerrancy."*[^16]

He expressed the same matter in the following more detailed form: "The
Imam is a unique figure, elected by God. He is men's guide to God
Almighty; the one who arises in order to plant hope in men's hearts; the
one chosen by God who nurtured by Him arises first ill the world of the
particle and then in the created universe. He was situated to the right
of the divine throne in phantasmal form before the creation of all
animate life, and learned knowledge and wisdom from the world of the
unseen, on account of which he was appointed Imam and selected as one of
the pure.

"The Imam is the choice off spring of Adam and Nuh, the select
descendant of Ibrahim, the quintessence of the progeny of Isma'il, the
foremost of the line of Muhammad. God Almighty shows him particular
concern, for He guards and protects him with His most sacred essence.
The wiles of Satan are warded off from him; the tenebrous temptations of
the evildoers have no effect on him. He is immune to all reprehensible
conduct, devoid of all faults and defects, and protected against the
commission of error. He is never polluted by evil, and is celebrated for
his steadfastness, virtue, knowledge and chastity from the very
beginning of his maturity".[^17]

Abu Sa'id al-Khudri reports the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, as saying:

*"O people, I am leaving among you two great and precious trusts; if you
hold fast to them, you will never go astray. One of the two is greater
than the other, and that is the Book of God, for that is the link
between the earth and the heavens. The second is my progeny the People
of my House; know that my progeny and the Qur'an shall never be
separated from each other until the Day of Resurrection."*[^18]

This is the well-known *hadith* of the two precious trusts
(*thaqalayn*), which has been cited by both Shi'i and Sunni scholars in
their books of tradition, with numerous chains of transmission. A number
of points can be deduced from this tradition of indubitable
authenticity.

First, the deeds and conduct of the Inerrant Imams must be regarded as
exemplary and demanding of imitation; failure to do so will lead to
misguidance. This can be true only if their steps never deviate in the
direction of error or sin and they are in an unvarying state of
inerrancy. Were it to be otherwise, the *ummah* would fall into the
whirlpool of perdition by following them, whereas the Prophet
categorically declares that whoever follows his progeny will not go
astray. They are Islam personified, and their conduct is the example the
whole *ummah* must follow and implement in their everyday lives.

Second, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
declares that the Qur'an and his progeny (*'itrah*) shall never be
separated until the Day of Resurrection, so that just as the survival of
the Qur'an is guaranteed until the Day of Resurrection, the earth will
never be without an Imam.

Third, the People of the House constitute, from the point of view of the
Prophet, an authority and a source of learning for all Muslims,
irrespective of the historical circumstances under which they live;
reference should therefore be made to them in order to learn the
ordinances of God's religion.

The eighth Imam, ar-Ridha’, peace be upon him, says:

*"Whenever God chooses someone to administer the affairs of His
servants, He expands his breast for him and makes of his heart a
repository of wisdom. Incessantly He inspires him with knowledge, and
there is no question he is unable to answer. He is never uncertain of
the correct path, and through his inerrancy he is pure of all sin and
rebellion. He is sustained always by God, and succeeds always in
traversing His path. Error and sin cannot touch him. God it is Who has
bestowed this exalted station on him, so that he might be a proof to His
servants and a witness to His creation. This is generosity that God
bestows on whomsoever He wills from among His servants, and God's
generosity is great."*[^19]

Finally, let us draw attention to a possibility that Allamah Sharaf
al-Din has raised:

"Although we are convinced that no distortion has taken place in the
verses of the Noble Qur'an and that our heavenly Book has not been
tampered with in any way, it is by no means clear that the arrangement
and recension of the verses is precisely that in which they were
revealed. For it is quite possible that the 'purification verse'
concerning the People of the House was revealed separately and then,
when the verses of the Qur'an were being assembled, was placed in the
middle of the verses relating to the wives of the Prophet, either in
error or deliberately."[^20]

[^1]: al-Bahrani, Ghayat al-Maram, p. 295.

[^2]: al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. V, p. 199.

[^3]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 125.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 126; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. V, p. 199;
Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. I, p. 331; Fakhr al-Din al-Razi,
al-Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol. I, p. 783; al-Suyuti, al-Khasa'is al-Kubra,
Vol. II, p. 264; Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p.85.

[^5]: Ibn al-Athir, Jami' al-Usul, Vol. I, p. 101; al-Muhibb al-Tabari,
Riyad al-Nadirah, Vol. II, p. 269; al-Haythami, Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol.
IX, pp. 119, 207.

[^6]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 124.

[^7]: al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. V, p. 198; Ibn al-Athir, Usud
al-Ghabah, Vol. V, p. 174; al-Haythami, Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol. IX, p.
168.

[^8]: al-Ganji, Kifayat al-Talib, p. 232; Asad Haydar, al-Imam Ahmad b.
al-Sadiq wa al-Madhahib al-Arba'ah, Vol. I, p. 89. Hanbal, al-Musnad,
Vol. I, p. 330; al-Nasa'i, al-Khasa'is, p. 11; al-Muhibb al-Tabari,
Riyad al-Nadirah, Vol. II, p. 269,. al-Haythami, Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol.
IX, pp. 119, 207.

[^9]: al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih, Vol. 11, p. 308; al-Hakim,
al-Mustadrak, Vol. 111, p. 158; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. III, p.
438; Ibn al-Sabbagh, Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 8; al-Tabari, al-Tafsir, Vol.
XXII, p. 5; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. V, p. 199; al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. VII, p. 102; Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad,
Vol. III, p.286.

[^10]: al-Bahrani, Ghayat al-Maram, p. 295.

[^11]: al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, Vol. II, p. 189.

[^12]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 534.

[^13]: Hurr al-'Amili, Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. I, p. 232.

[^14]: al-Radi, Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 83.

[^15]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I, p.200.

[^16]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-anwar, Vol. XXV, p. 199.

[^17]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I, p.204.

[^18]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p.36; al-Tirmidhi, Jami'
al-Sahih, Vol. V, p.329.

[^19]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I.

[^20]: Sharaf al-Din, Kalimat al-Ghurra', p.213.


