Lesson 21: The Sources of the Imam's Knowledge
==============================================

The exceedingly precise and profound knowledge possessed by the Imams is
derived from their communication with the world of the unseen and from
inspiration (*ilham*).

The Noble Qur'an was also a rich source on which the Immaculate Imams
drew for their knowledge. Given the breadth of their religious vision
and perception, they were able to derive various ordinances from
revelation and to extract all manner of truths from its innermost layers
of meaning.

The third source on which they drew consisted of the books and pages
which they inherited from the Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings
be upon him and his family, these permitted them to advance still
further their level of knowledge and to broaden its scope.

There are numerous traditions relating to these three sources, some of
which we will now cite.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said:

*"The Prophet Dawud inherited the knowledge of the preceding prophets,
and he then bequeathed it to Sulayman. From Sulayman it was transmitted
to the Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
and we in turn have inherited it from him."*

*Abu Basir who was present then saw fit to remark: "There are all kinds
of knowledge!" The Imam responded! "The knowledge you have in mind is
not particularly valuable. The knowledge of which I speak is truly
precious; it is inspired in us night and day, from one hour to the
next."*[^1]

Imam Ali b. Musa ar-Ridha’, peace be upon him, said:

*"When someone is chosen by God to administer the affairs of men, God
expands his breast for him, places the well springs of wisdom in his
heart, and inspires him with knowledge, so that he will be able to solve
any problem that arises. He with know well the straight path of the
truth. Such a one is none other than the Inerrant Imam, who enjoys the
aid and support of his Lord and who lies beyond the reach of all error
and sin."*[^2]

Hasan b. Abbas once asked Imam ar-Ridha’, peace be upon him, in a
letter. "What is the difference between a messenger, a prophet, and an
Imam?" The Imam answered as follows:

*"The messenger (rasul) is a person to whom Jibril descends and who both
sees him and hears the words that he speaks. He is thus in communication
with divine revelation (wahy), which he sometimes receives in the form
of a dream, as was the case with Ibrahim, peace be upon him. The prophet
(nabiyy) sometimes hears the words spoken by Jibril and at other times
sees him without hearing anything from him. The Imam hears the words
that Jibril utters without seeing him."*[^3]

The seventh Imam, Musa b. Ja'far, peace be upon him, said:

*"Our knowledge is of three kinds: relating to the past; relating to the
future; and relating to newly emergent situations. Knowledge relating to
the past is interpreted for us; knowledge relating to the future is
written down for us; and knowledge relating to newly emergent situations
is infused in our hearts and our ears. This last category is the most
noble part of our knowledge. However, no prophet will come after the
Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family
"*[^4]

God's effusions of grace thus continue throughout time by means of the
Inerrant Imam, in such a way that the link between man and the Creator
is not severed with the passing of the Prophet.

As for the inexhaustible source that the Qur'an represented for the
Immaculate Imams, let us hear what they themselves have to say on the
subject:

Imam al-Baqir, peace be upon him, says:

*"One of the forms of knowledge we possess pertains to the
interpretation of the Qur'an and its ordinances, while another form
relates to the developments and occurrences that take place in time.
Whenever God desires a certain group of men to attain virtue and purity,
He bestows on them the capacity to hear. However, one whose ear is
incapable of hearing will encounter God's word in a way that suggests he
has no awareness of it."*

He then fell silent for a moment before continuing: *"If we were to find
anyone with the requisite spiritual capacity, we would transmit our
knowledge to him. God is our protector and refuge."*[^5]

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, says:

*"The Noble Qur'an contains knowledge of the past and the future, as
well as the precepts for judging; we have all of that knowledge."*[^6]

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon him, says:

*"Try to make the Qur'an speak; it will not speak to you. I declare to
you that the Qur'an contains knowledge of the past and the future, as
well as all the ordinances of which you stand in need and the
interpretation of matters concerning which you disagree among
yourselves. If you but ask me, I will instruct you in all of
this.'"*[^7]

One of the companions of Imam Musa b. Ja'far, peace be upon him, asked
him:

*"Is all that you say to be found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah of the
Prophet, or do you also speak on your own authority?"*

*He replied: "It is impossible that we should say anything on our
authority. Whatever we say is to be found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah
of the Prophet."*[^8]

The interpretation of the inner meaning of the Qur'an is a science that
derives from the world of the unseen; in other words, it is not a
science that can be acquired by conventional means. Such interpretation,
which is the uncovering of the true nature of things, words, and needs,
can be attained only through bestowal by God.

The Qur'an says:

***"He it is who brought the Book down to you. Part of it consists of
verses firm and categorical in meaning, these being the foundation of
the Book, and part of others allegorical in meaning. Those in whose
hearts is perversion and deviance follow only the metaphorical verses in
order to create confusion and disorder while claiming to be interpreting
those verses. Their interpretation is known, however, only to God and
those firmly rooted in knowledge." (3:7)***

"Those firmly rooted in knowledge" (*al-rasikhuna fi 'l-'ilm*) are then
those who like God know the interpretation of the metaphorical verses,
and there are numerous traditions testifying to the Imams' command of
Qur'anic interpretation.

One of the companions of Imam al-Baqir, peace be upon him, asked him to
explain the tradition that, "There is no part of the Qur'an that does
not have an outer and an inner aspect, and there is no letter contained
in it that does not have a defining limit, and that limit is knowable."

He replied: *"The outer aspect of the Qur'an is the totality of that
which has been revealed. Its inner aspect is the interpretation thereof.
Part of this has already been accomplished, and part remains* *to be
accomplished in the future. For the interpretation of the Qur'an
traverses its course, like the sun and the moon, and whenever the time
is apposite, a further portion of it is accomplished. God said: 'Its
interpretation is known only to God and those firmly routed in
knowledge.' We it is who are throughly acquainted with the
interpretation of the Qur'an."* [^9]

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, is reported to have said: *"The most
exalted of those firmly rooted in knowledge was the Messenger of God.
Whatever God Almighty Sent to him, He taught him also its
interpretation. Indeed God has revealed nothing in the interpretation of
which He has not instructed the Prophet and his successors, When one of
those who has no share in the science of interpretation expresses an
opinion on the subject, God responds to him, All they can say is, "We
believe it all to be from God."' The Qur'an contains verses that are
specific in their application and others that are general; verses that
are categorical and others that are metaphorical; and verses that are
abrogating and others that are abrogated. It is those firmly rooted in
knowledge who have the knowledge of all this."*[^10]

Another source on which the Imams, the successors to the Prophet, drew,
consists of the books and scrolls that they inherited from him.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said:

*"We have at our disposal a book which frees us of the need to rely on
anyone else; it is, on the contrary, others that need us. This book was
dictated by the Prophet to Ali and it deals with everything relating to
the forbidden and the permitted. Whenever you ask us concerning a given
course of action, we know what consequences will result if you follow
it, and what will happen if you do not,"*[^11]

One of the close companions of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him,
says:

"I asked the Imam whether the legacy of knowledge he had at his disposal
related simply to the general principles of knowledge or contained
detailed instructions on matters such as divorce and bequests."

He replied:

*"Ali, peace be upon him, wrote down all of the sciences of judgeship
and bequests. Were our cause to triumph, no problem would arise that we
could not solve by means of the knowledge we have."*[^12]

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon him, relates*: "The
Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
told me to write down and record what he was about to tell me. I replied
that I was afraid of forgetting it. He then told me: 'This will not
happen, for I have beseeched God to make you a memorizer of the Qur'an.
However, you should record what I am about to tell you for the sake of
your partners, that is the Imams from your progeny. It is because of
those blessed beings that the rain falls on my ummah, that their prayers
are answered, that divine punishment is withheld, and God's mercy
descends.' Then he pointed to Imam Hasan and said, 'This is the first of
them,' and to Imam Husayn said, 'This is the second of them, and all the
other Imams will be from among his descendants!'"*[^13]

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said:

*"The books were kept by Ali. When he decided to make a journey to Iraq,
he entrusted them to Umm Salamah. When he died, they were passed on to
Imam Hasan, and from him to Imam Husayn. When he was martyred, they came
into the possession of Ali b. Husayn, after which they were passed on to
my father."*[^14]

Imam al-Baqir, peace be upon him, told Jabir:

*"If we were to narrate traditions based on our own views, we would
surely perish. Know that we narrate only traditions that we have stored
up from the Messenger of God just as people store up silver and
gold."*[^15]

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be Upon him, said:

*"There is not a single verse in the Qur'an the time and place of the
revelation of which are unknown to me. Abundant knowledge is stored in
my breast, so ask me whatever you will before you lose me. Whenever a
verse was revealed to the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and
his family, and I happened not to be in his presence, he would wait
until I arrived and then tell me,' Ali, some verses were revealed while
you were gone,' and explain their interpretation to me."*[^16]

He also said:

*"There are numerous sciences hidden in my breast, taught to me by the
Messenger of God. If people were to be found with the capacity to learn
and retain them, to transmit them accurately and faithfully, I would
entrust some of those sciences to them, and open for them a door leading
to one thousand other doors."*[^17]

Malik b. Anas says: "The Messenger of God told Ali, After I am gone,
clarify whatever causes disagreement among people!'"[^18]

There can be no doubt that this process of instruction did not take
place by conventional or usual means, through the Messenger of God,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, opening up myriad gates
of knowledge before Ali on the limited occasions that were available to
him, thus making the treasury of his heart overflow with knowledge. The
instruction was accomplished in a special way deriving from the power of
prophethood and inner guidance inherent in prophethood; it was in this
way that the heart of Ali, peace be upon him, became replete with the
profound truths that his deep faith, wide-ranging intellect, and exalted
vision fitted him to receive.

Salim b. Qays reports the Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon
him, to have said:

*"Not all the Companions of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, had the intellectual capacity to ask him concerning
certain things, or to understand the answer he might give. Those who
found it difficult to put their questions before the Prophet often
preferred that someone else should do it on their behalf and obtain the
necessary answers.*

*"I, however, was constantly in the company of the Prophet, day and
night, and often I was alone with him. Whenever he went, I would
accompany him. The Companions knew that no one had this relation with
him except me. Sometimes he would come to our house, and sometimes I
would meet him in one of his residences. Whenever I entered his
presence, he would dismiss everyone else, even ordering his wives to
leave the room.*

*But when he came to our house, Fatimah, peace be upon her, and our
children would remain in the room. I would pose my questions to him, and
he would answer, and sometimes when I was silent, he would begin
speaking. He recited for me all the verses of the Qur'an that were
revealed to him, and I would write them down and record them in my own
hand. He expounded for me the interpretation of the Qur'an, its
abrogating and abrogated verses, its categorical and metaphorical
verses, its specific and general verses.*

*He would beseech God to grant me the power to retain and understand
whatever he told me, and indeed I have not forgotten any part of the
knowledge he conveyed to me. He instructed me in the permitted and the
forbidden, God's commands and prohibitions, and the scriptures that had
been revealed to preceding prophets, and I committed all of it to
memory, not forgetting so much as a letter. Then he placed his blessed
hand on my breast and besought God to fill my heart with knowledge,
wisdom, understanding, and light.*

*"I then said to him, 'O Messenger of God, ever since you prayed for me,
nothing has been effaced from my memory; do you fear that forgetfulness
might overtake me?' He answered, 'I have no fear of ignorance or
forgetfulness on your part, and my confidence in you is
complete.'"*[^19]

It was the presence of such qualities in Ali, who attained the same
loftiness of thought as the Prophet, that caused the Prophet to declare
of him: *"I am the city of knowledge, and Ali is its gate; whoever is
desirous of knowledge must enter by that gate."*[^20]

In this utterance the Prophet is informing the ummah that whoever wishes
to attain any part of his knowledge must seek the aid of Ali.

The Prophet also said in this connection: *"O Ali, I am the city of
knowledge, and you are the gate to that city. Anyone who imagines he can
enter by other than that gate is in error."*[^21]

And again: *"I am the house of wisdom and Ali is its door."*[^22]

Insofar as correct action depends on knowledge, it is incumbent on all
Muslims to seek the knowledge and guidance of Ali in order for their
deeds to be in conformity with the teachings of the Prophet.

The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
being fully aware of the future needs of the Muslims, decided to entrust
his knowledge to one who would be able to satisfy the religious needs of
society after his death, and present God's commands and ordinances in
uncorrupted form to all those who had recently become Muslim. He was
therefore commanded by God to exert himself in the training and
education of Ali, that enlightened one whose being concealed precious
treasure of learning, who had the necessary qualities for guarding and
preserving God's laws, and who had all the attributes requisite in a
leader.

Ibn Abbas reports: "The Messenger of God used to say, 'When I readied
myself to engage in intimate discourse with God, He would speak to me in
turn. Whatever I learned from God Almighty, I taught to Ali, so Ali is
the gate to my learning and knowledge.'"[^23]

Imam Husayn b. Ali, peace be upon him, said: *"When the verse,* ***'And
We have everything plain for you in a clear book (imam)' (10:12)*** *was
revealed, the Companions asked the Prophet whether the book in question
was the Torah or the Gospels. He answered, 'Neither.' And then, looking
in the direction of my father he declared, 'This is an Imam the treasury
of whose being God has caused to overflow with knowledge and
learning.'"*[^24]

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon him, said:

*"The Most Noble Messenger used to spend part of his time every year in
the cave on Mount al-Hira', and no one would see him go there except me.
At that time the only household that had accepted Islam was that of the
Prophet himself, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, and
Khadijah, with myself counting as the third member of their family. I
could see in him the light of revelation and messengerhood and smell the
scent of prophethood. When revelation came to the Prophet, I would hear
the sound of Satan in my ear, and I would ask him, 'O Messenger of God,
what is this sound?' He said, 'It is Satan, despairing of ever being
worshipped. Ali, whatever I hear, you hear, and whatever I witness, you
witness, the difference between us being that you are not a prophet but
my support and a virtuous man.'"*[^25]

al-Tirmidhi reports the Messenger of God to have said regarding Ali.

*"My God extend His favor to Ali and make him the pivot around which
truth turns."*[^26]

[^1]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I, p.225.

[^2]: Ibid., p.202.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 176. 

[^4]: Ibid., p. 264. 

[^5]: Ibid., p. 229. 

[^6]: Ibid.., p. 61.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 61

[^8]: Ibid., p. 63.

[^9]: al-Tabataba'i, al-Mizan, Vol. III, p.74.

[^10]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I, p. 213.

[^11]: Ibid., p.241

[^12]: al-Burujardi, Jami' ahadith al-Shi'ah, Vol. I, p. 138.

[^13]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p.22.

[^14]: al-Burujardi, Jami' ahadith al-Shi'ah, Vol. I, p. 141.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 130.

[^16]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p.83.

[^17]: al-Bahrani, Ghayat al-Maram, p.518.

[^18]: al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. VI, p. 516; al-Hakim,
al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 122.

[^19]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi , Vol. I, p.64.

[^20]: al-Khwarazmi, al-Manaqib, p. 40; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol.
III, p. 126; al-Khat.ib al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. IV, p.348; Ibn
Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 73; Ibn al-Athir, Usud al-Ghabah, Vol. IV, p.22.

[^21]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah" p. 74.

[^22]: al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih, Vol. XIII, p. 171; al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. VI, p. 156; al-Isbahani, Hilyat
al-Awliya', Vol. I, p.64.

[^23]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p.69.

[^24]: Ibid., p.77.

[^25]: al-Radi, Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 187.

[^26]: al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih, Vol. V, p.297.


