The Sources of the Imam's Knowledge
===================================

**( 193 )**

Lesson Twenty-One
-----------------

The exceedingly precise and profound knowledge possessed by the Imams is
derived from their communication with the world of the unseen and from
inspiration (ilham).

The Noble Qur'an was also a rich source on which the Immaculate Imams
drew for their knowledge Given the breadth of their religious vision and
perception they were able to derive various ordinances from revelation
and to extract all manner of truths from its innermost layers of
meaning.

The third source on which they drew consisted of the books and pages
which they inherited from the Most Noble Messenger peace and blessings
be upon him and his family these permitted them to advance still further
their level of knowledge and to broaden its scope.

There are numerous traditions relating to these three sources some of
which we will now cite.

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him said:

"The Prophet Dawud inherited the knowledge of the preceding prophets and
he then bequeathed it to Sulayman.

From Sulayman it was transmitted to the Prophet Muhammad peace and
blessings be upon him and his family and we in turn have inherited it
from him." Abu Basir who was present then saw fit to remark: "There are
all kinds of knowledge!" The Imam responded: "The knowledge you have in
mind is not particularly valuable. The knowledge of which I speak is
truly precious; it is inspired in  

**( 194 )**

us night and day from one hour to the next." [( 1 )](#p1)

Imam 'Ali b. Musa al-Rida peace be upon him said:

When someone is chosen by God to administer the affairs of men God
expands his breast for him places the wellsprings of wisdom in his heart
and inspires him with knowledge so that he will be able to solve any
problem that arises. He will know well the straight path of the truth.
Such a one is none other than the Inerrant Imam who enjoys the aid and
support of his Lord and who lies beyond the reach of all error and sin."
[( 2 )](#p2)

Hasan b. 'Abbas once asked Imam al-Rida peace be upon him in a letter:
"What is the difference between a messenger a prophet and an Imam?" The
Imam answered as follows:

"The messenger (Rasul) is a person to whom Jibril descends and who both
sees him and hears the words that he speaks. He is thus in communication
with divine revelation (wahy) which he sometimes receives in the form of
a dream as was the case with Ibrahim peace be upon him. The prophet
(nabiyy) sometimes hears the words spoken by Jibril and at other times
sees him without hearing anything from him. The Imam hears the words
that Jibril utters without seeing him."[( 3 )](#p3)

The seventh Imam Musa b. Ja'far peace be upon him said:

"Our knowledge is of three kinds: relating to the past; relating to the
future; and relating to newly emergent situations. Knowledge relating to
the past is interpreted for us; knowledge relating to the future is
written down for us; and knowledge relating to newly emergent situations
is infused in our hearts and our ears. This last category is the most
noble part of our knowledge. However no prophet will come after the Most
Noble Messenger peace and blessings be upon him and his family." [( 4
)](#p4)

God's effusions of grace thus continue throughout time by means of the
Inerrant Imam in such a way that the link between man and the Creator is
not severed with the passing of the Prophet.

As for the inexhaustible source that the Qur'an  

**( 195 )**

represented for the Immaculate Imams let us hear what they themselves
have to say on the subject:

Imam al-Baqir peace be upon him says:

"One of the forms of knowledge we possess pertains to the interpretation
of the Qur'an and its ordinances while another form relates to the
developments and occurrences that take place in time. Whenever God
desires a certain group of men to attain virtue and purity He bestows on
them the capacity to hear. However one whose ear is incapable of hearing
will encounter God's word in a way that suggests he has no awareness of
it." He then fell silent for a moment before continuing: "If we were to
find anyone with the requisite spiritual capacity we would transmit our
knowledge to him. God is our protector and refuge." [( 5 )](#p5)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him says:

"The Noble Qur'an contains knowledge of the past and the future as well
as the precepts for judging; we have all of that knowledge."[( 6 )](#p6)

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him says:

"Try to make the Qur'an speak; it will not speak to you. I declare to
you that the Qur'an contains knowledge of the past and the future as
well as all the ordinances of which you stand in need and the
interpretation of matters concerning which you disagree among
yourselves. If you but ask me I will instruct you in all of this. " [( 7
)](#p7)

One of the companions of Imam Musa b. Ja'far peace be upon him asked
him:

"Is all that you say to be found in the Qur'an and the Sun nah of the
Prophet or do you also speak on your own authority?" He replied: "It is
impossible that we should say anything on our authority. Whatever we say
is to be found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Prophet." [( 8
)](#p8)

The interpretation of the inner meaning of the Qur'an is a science that
derives from the world of the unseen; in other  

**( 196 )**

words it is not a science that can be acquired by conventional means.
Such interpretation which is the uncovering of the true nature of things
words and needs can be attained only through bestowal by God.

The Qur'an says: "He it is who brought tire Book down to you.

Part of it consists of verses firm and categorical in meaning these
being the foundation of tire Book and part of others allegorical in
meaning. Those in whose hearts is perversion and deviance follow only
tire metaphorical verses in order to create confusion and disorder while
claiming to be interpreting those verses. Their interpretation is known
however only to God and those firmly rooted in knowledge." (3:7)

"Those firmly rooted in knowledge" (al-rasikhuna fi 'l-'ilm) are then
those who like God know the interpretation of the metaphorical verses
and there are numerous traditions testifying to the Imams' command of
Qur'anic interpretation.

One of the companions of Imam al-Baqir peace be upon him asked him to
explain the tradition that "There is no part of the Qur'an that does not
have an outer and an inner aspect and there is no letter contained in it
that does not have a defining limit and that limit is knowable."

He replied: "The outer aspect of the Qur'an is the totality of that
which has been revealed. Its inner aspect is the interpretation thereof.
Part of this has already been accomplished and part remains to be
accomplished in the future. For the interpretation of the Qur'an
traverses its course like the sun and the moon and whenever the time is
apposite a further portion of it is accomplished. God said: 'Its
interpretation is known only to God and those firmly rooted in
knowledge.' We it is who are throughly acquainted with the
interpretation of the Qur'an." [( 9 )](#p9)

Imam al-Sadiq peace be upon him is reported to have  
 said: "The most exalted of those firmly rooted in knowledge  
 was the Messenger of God. Whatever God Almighty sent to  
 him He taught him also its interpretation. Indeed God has  
 revealed nothing in the interpretation of which He has not  
 instructed the Prophet and his successors. When one of those  

**( 197 )**

who has no share in the science of interpretation expresses an opinion
on the subject God responds to him 'Ali they can say is 11We believe it
all to be from God."' The Qur'an contains verses that are specific in
their application and others that are general; verses that are
categorical and others that are metaphorical; and verses that are
abrogating and others that are abrogated. It Is those firmly rooted in
knowledge who have the knowledge of all this. " [(10)](#p10)

Another source on which the Imams the successors to the Prophet drew
consists of the books and scrolls that they inherited from him.

Imam al-Sadiq peace be upon him said:

"We have at our disposal a book which frees us of the need to rely on
anyone else; it is on the contrary others that need us. This book was
dictated by the Prophet to 'Ali and it deals with everything relating to
the forbidden and the permitted. Whenever you ask us concerning a given
course of action we know what consequences will result if you follow it
and what will happen if you do not." [(11)](#p11)

One of the close companions of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him
says:

"I asked the Imam whether the legacy of knowledge he had at his disposal
related simply to the general principles of knowledge or contained
detailed instructions on matters such as divorce and bequests." He
replied:

"'Al! peace be upon him wrote down all of the sciences of judgeship and
bequests. Were our cause to triumph no problem would arise that we could
not solve by means of the knowledge we have." [(12)](#p12)

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him relates: "The Most
Noble Messenger peace and blessings be upon him and his family told me
to write down and record what he was about to tell me. I replied that I
was afraid of forgetting it. He then told me: 'This will not happen for
I have beseeched God to make you a memorizer of the Qur'an.

However you should record what I am about to tell you for the  

**( 198 )**

sake of your partners that is the Imams from your progeny. It is because
of those blessed beings that the rain falls on my ummah that their
prayers are answered that divine punishment is withheld and God's mercy
descends.' Then he pointed to Imam Hasan and said 'This is the first of
them ' and to Imam Husayn said 'This is the second of them and all the
other Imams will be from among his descendants!"' [(13)](#p13)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq peace be upon him said:

"The books were kept by 'Ali. When he decided to make a journey to Iraq
he entrusted them to Umm Salamah. When he died they were passed on to
Imam Hasan and from him to Imam Husayn. When he was martyred they came
into the possession of 'Ali b. Husayn after which they were passed on to
my father." [(14)](#p14)

Imam al-Baqir peace be upon him told Jabir:

"If we were to narrate traditions based on our own views we would surely
perish. Know that we narrate only traditions that we have stored up from
the Messenger of God just as people store up silver and gold."
[(15)](#p15)

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him said:

There is not a single verse in the Qur'an the time and place of the
revelation of which are unknown to me. Abundant knowledge is stored in
my breast so ask me whatever you will before you lose me. Whenever a
verse was revealed to the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and
his family and I happened not to be in his presence he would wait until
I arrived and then tell me 'Ali some verses were revealed while you were
gone ' and explain their interpretation to me." [(16)](#p16)

He also said:

"There are numerous sciences hidden in my breast taught to me by the
Messenger of God. If people were to be found with the capacity to learn
and retain them to transmit them accurately and faithfully I would
entrust some of those sciences to them and open for them a door leading
to one thousand other doors. "[(17)](#p17)

Malik b. Anas says: "The Messenger of God told 'Ali  

**( 199 )**

'After I am gone clarify whatever causes disagreement among people!'"
[(18)](#p18)

There can be no doubt that this process of instruction did not take
place by conventional or usual means through the Messenger of God peace
and blessings be upon him and his family opening up myriad gates of
knowledge before 'Ali on the limited occasions that were available to
him thus making the treasury of his heart overflow with knowledge. The
instruction was accomplished in a special way deriving from the power of
prophethood and inner guidance inherent in prophethood; it was in this
way that the heart of 'Ali peace be upon him became replete with the
profound truths that his deep faith wide-ranging intellect and exalted
vision fitted him to receive.

Salim b. Qays reports the Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon
him to have said:

"Not all the Companions of the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him
and his family had the intellectual capacity to ask him concerning
certain things or to understand the answer he might give. Those who
found it difficult to put their questions before the Prophet often
preferred that someone else should do it on their behalf and obtain the
necessary answers.

"I however was constantly in the company of the Prophet day and night
and often I was alone with him.

Whenever he went I would accompany him. The Companions knew that no one
had this relation with him except me.

Sometimes he would come to our house and sometimes I would meet him in
one of his residences. Whenever I entered his presence he would dismiss
everyone else even ordering his wives to leave the room. But when he
came to our house Fatimah peace be upon her and our children would
remain in the room. I would pose my questions to him and he would answer
and sometimes when I was silent he would begin speaking. He recited for
me all the verses of the Qur'an that were revealed to him and I would
write them down and record them in my own hand. He expounded for me
the  

**( 200 )**

interpretation of the Qur'an its abrogating and abrogated verses1 its
categorical and metaphorical verses its specific and general verses. He
would beseech God to grant me the power to retain and understand
whatever he told me and indeed I have not forgotten any part of the
knowledge he conveyed to me. He instructed me in the permitted and the
forbidden God's commands and prohibitions and the scriptures that had
been revealed to preceding prophets and I committed all of it to memory
not forgetting so much as a letter. Then he placed his blessed hand on
my breast and besought God to fill my heart with knowledge wisdom
understanding and light.

WI then said to him 'O Messenger of God ever since you prayed for me
nothing has been effaced from my memory; do you fear that forgetful ness
might overtake me?' He answered 'I have no fear of ignorance or
forgetfulness on your part and my confidence in you is complete.'"
[(19)](#p19)

It was the presence of such qualities in 'Ali who attained the same
loftiness of thought as the Prophet that caused the Prophet to declare
of him: "I am the city of knowledge and 'Ali is its gate; whoever is
desirous of knowledge must enter by that gate." [(20)](#p20)

In this utterance the Prophet is informing the ummah that whoever wishes
to attain any part of his knowledge must seek the aid of 'Ali.

The Prophet also said in this connection: "O 'Ali I am the city of
knowledge and you are the gate to that city. Anyone who imagines lie can
enter by other than that gate is in error. "[(21)](#p21)

And again: WI am the house of wisdom and 'All is its door." [(22)](#p22)

Insofar as correct action depends on knowledge it is incumbent on all
Muslims to seek the knowledge and guidance of 'Ali in order for their
deeds to be in conformity with the teachings of the Prophet.

The Messenger of God peace and blessings be upon him and his family
being fully aware of the future needs of the Muslims decided to entrust
his knowledge to one who would be able to satisfy the religious needs of
society after his death  

**( 201 )**

and present God's commands and ordinances in uncorrupted form to all
those who had recently become Muslim. He was therefore commanded by God
to exert himself in the training and education of 'Ali that enlightened
one whose being concealed precious treasure of learning who had the
necessary qualities for guarding and preserving God's laws and who had
all the attributes requisite in a leader.

Ibn 'Abbas reports: "The Messenger of God used to say 'When I readied
myself to engage in intimate discourse with God He would speak to me in
turn. Whatever I learned from God Almighty I taught to 'Ali so 'Ali is
the gate to my learning and knowledge.'" [(23)](#p23)

Imam Husayn b. 'Ali peace be upon him said: "When the verse 'And We have
everything plain for you in a clear book (imam)' (10:12) was revealed
the Companions asked the Prophet whether the book in question was the
Torah or the Gospels. He answered 'Neither.' And then looking in the
direction of my father he declared 'This is an Imam the treasury of
whose being God has caused to overflow with knowledge and
learning.'"[(24)](#p24)

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him said:

"The Most Noble Messenger used to spend part of his time every year in
the cave on Mount al-Hira' and no one would see him go there except me.
At that time the only household that had accepted Islam was that of the
Prophet himself peace and blessings be upon him and his family and
Khadijah with myself counting as the third member of their family. I
could see in him the light of revelation and messengerhood and smell the
scent of prophethood. When revelation came to the Prophet I would hear
the sound of Satan in my ear and I would ask him 'O Messenger of God
what is this sound?' He said 'It is Satan despairing of ever being
worshipped. 'Ali whatever I hear you hear and whatever I witness you
witness the difference between us being that you are not a prophet but
my support and a virtuous man.'" [(25)](#p25)

al-Tirmidhi reports the Messenger of God to have said regarding 'Ali:

**( 202 )**

"May God extend His favor to 'Ali and make him the pivot around which
truth turns."[(26)](#p26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. I p.225. [( 2 )](#m2) lbid. p.202.
[( 3 )](#m3) Ibid. p.176. [( 4 )](#m4) Ibid. p.264. [( 5 )](#m5) Ibid.
p.229. [( 6 )](#m6) Ibid. p.61. [( 7 )](#m7) Ibid. p.61. [( 8 )](#m8)
Ibid. p.63. [( 9 )](#m9) al-Tabataba'i al-Mizan Vol. III p.74.
[(10)](#m10) al-Kulayni al-Kafi Vol. I p.213. [(11)](#m11) Ibid. p.241.
[(12)](#m12) al-Burujardi Jami' Ahadith al-Shi'ah Vol. I p.138.
[(13)](#m13) al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p.22. [(14)](#m14)
al-Buru-jardi Jami' Ahadith al-Shi'ah Vol. I p.141. [(15)](#m15) Ibid.
p.130. [(16)](#m16) al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p. 83. [(17)](#m17)
al-Bahrani Ghayat al-Maram p. 518. [(18)](#m18) al-Muttaqi al-Hindi Kanz
al-Ummal al-Hakim al-Mustadrak Vol. III p. 122. [(19)](#m19) al-Kulayni
al-Kafi Vol. I p.64. [(20)](#m20) al-Khwarazmi al-Manaqib p. 40;
al-Hakim al-Mustadrak Vol. III p.126; al-Khatib al-Baghdadi Tarikh
Baghdad Vol. IV p.348; Ibn Hajar al-Sawa'iq p.73; Ibn al-Athir Usd
al-Ghabah Vol. IV p.22. [(21)](#m21) al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah
p.74. [(22)](#m22) al-Tirmidhi Jami' al-Sahih Vol. XIII p.171;
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi Kanz al-'Ummal Vol. VI p. 156; al-Isbahani Hilyat
al-Awliya Vol. I p.64. [(23)](#m23) al-Qunduzi Yanabi' al-Mawaddah p.69.
[(24)](#m24) Ibid. p.77. [(25)](#m25) al-Radi Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon
187. [(26)](#m26) al-Tirmidhi Jami' al-Sahih Vol. V p.297.
