A Word Concerning the Unseen and the Manifest
=============================================

**( 203 )**

Lesson Twenty-Two
-----------------

The world of the unseen is the counterpart of the manifest realm
consisting of whatever lies beyond the scope of the senses and cannot be
externally perceived. We have for example no direct knowledge of the
circumstances of resurrection or the nature of reward and punishment nor
do we know anything of the composition of the angels or the attributes
and essence of God not because all of these are minute or subtle
entities but because they transcend our limited horizons of thought and
lie outside time and space.

The unseen may be divided into two parts absolute and relative. There
are certain entities that are unseen in an absolute sense for they will
always be unseen by everyone and at all times being intrinsically beyond
the external senses of man God's essence being an example of this. As
for the relative unseen this comprises entities that are manifest to
some but unseen by others.

Everything that can be perceived by one of the five senses and thereby
falls within the scope of man's sense perception counts as part of the
manifest realm. This applies to matter and all of its effects even if it
be a question of items such as atoms microbes and viruses which are
invisible to the naked eye because of their minuteness. Our senses
cannot perceive them unassisted but once they are magnified several
million times by means of special instruments they come within range of
our perception.

**( 204 )**

Similarly scientific discoveries of certain facts relating to this world
full of secrets and mysteries such as laser beams x-rays and gravity do
not relate to the world of the unseen even though they appear to be
imperceptible for they are attained through the observation of natural
causes.

This serves to demonstrate the limitations of our senses; even within
the natural world they do not suffice for the perception of everything.

It sometimes happens that the sensory power of certain animals is much
greater than our own. They can see things that are hidden from us or
perceive them by non-visual means whereas we can infer their existence
only from the effects they produce.

As for the world of the unseen and what it contains it stands in
contrast to all the phenomena that are perceptible to our senses in one
way or other and to some degree or other.

Unable to perceive it with our senses we can conceive of it only by
means of rational proofs or the reports of those persons who do have
awareness of it and the hidden matters it contains. Such persons guide
us with their pronouncements to truths of which we would otherwise be
unaware. This is a part of our creed and our faith.

Our deficient and limited beings are then imprisoned within the four
walls of matter and we are deprived of perceiving many mysteries. In
fact even our ability to perceive the phenomena of the sensory world is
limited and conditional.

Thus it is that for us being is divided into the two categories of the
manifest and the unseen.

However the hidden non-sensory phenomena that are concealed from our
perception are utterly clear and manifest to the Lord of the Worlds the
Creator Whose dominion and power embrace every atom in the universe and
Who comprehends the totality of time and space. No obstacle hinders His
infinite knowledge and unbounded power.

Past events that have been effaced from our memories and not even
recorded in history are present to God's view and observable by Him.

**( 205 )**

Paradise hellfire and resurrection all of which are from our vantage
point due to occur at some distant and unknown point in the future and
the nature of which is utterly inconceivable are present realities for
God the Creator Whose essence escapes all limitation and Whose sacred
presence informs every part of the universe; He is aware of everything
without exception.

Phenomena that occurred billions of years ago or will occur billions of
years from now are fully known to God. For us however the ability to
conceive of past and future events is strictly limited by the fact that
we exist within the confines of time and space for we are material
beings and according to the law of relativity matter needs time and
space for the process of constant change in which it' is engaged.

God's knowledge is unmediated immediate in the fullest sense of the word
although somewhat comparable to our own awareness of our selves. While
His essence is utterly other than the phenomena He creates neither is it
separate from them; all things past and present are immediately present
before Him.

Thus the Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him said: I' Every
mystery is manifest to You and every hidden thing present before You."
[( 1 )](#p1)

He is aware of the totality of the atoms that make up the earth and the
oceans of the movements of all creatures great and small throughout the
universe and of the manifest and hidden aspects of all things. His
knowledge is not restricted to that which has already occurred nor to
creatures and phenomena presently existing; it also embraces the future.

If we were present everywhere instead of occupying a particular point in
time and space we too would be aware of all the truths and details of
existence; nothing great or small would escape our expansive vision.

God's knowledge bears no similarity to human knowledge and is utterly
incomparable with it; we cannot understand His knowledge by drawing an
analogy with our own. Man's  
 knowledge is dependent on the thing known having an  

**( 206 )**

external existence; the thing known must first exist appear in tile
manifest realm for man's knowledge to attach itself to it.

Such is not the case with God's knowledge; there is nothing that is
unseen for Him and everything is manifest for Him.

Whenever we attain knowledge of something by means of our outer senses
it does not count as knowledge of the unseen.

Conversely knowledge the attainment of which does not depend on the five
senses is the knowledge of the unseen.

Ali the phenomena of the material world can be said to have descended
from a more perfect non-sensory world where they exist in a more
elevated form. Now if we perceive the external aspects of things by
means of our senses thereby obtaining some portion of the truth such
perceptions do not count as knowledge of the unseen. If on the other
hand we observe the hidden essences of things by means of our inner eye
discern their existential evolution and thereby find the inner aspects
of things divulged to us without any involvement by our senses the
resulting knowledge will count as knowledge of the unseen.

The Qur'an says the following concerning God's knowledge:

"He knows tire hidden and the manifest and He is the Compassionate and
Merciful" (59:22) "He it is Who knows tire unseen and tire manifest the
Great the Sublime." (13:9)

"O Knower of tire manifest and tire hidden judge among Your servants in
that concerning which they dispute." (39:46)

"I know tire hidden aspects of the heavens and tire earth and that which
you make manifest and that which you conceal." (2:33)

"Return then to God Who knows tire manifest and the hidden; He shall
make apparent to you all you have done." (62:8)

"He it is that knows tire hidden and manifest dimensions of His
creation; He is wise and well acquainted with all things." (6:73)

The Commander of the Faithful 'Ali peace be upon him  
 says: "He knows all things but not by means of instruments  
 and faculties the absence of which would negate His  
 knowledge. His knowledge is not something superadded to  

**( 207 )**

His existence interposed between Him and the objects of His knowledge;
it is identical with His essence."[( 2 )](#p2)

A crucial issue arises at this point: is knowledge of the unseen
exclusively God's and confined to His essence? Is it only for the
Creator Whose absolute being embraces the whole of the universe that the
unseen and the manifest are as one? Or can a human being also possess
the ability to communicate with the world of the unseen? Certain
thinkers insist that knowledge of the unseen and awareness of hidden
truths is restricted to God's essence. They maintain that even the
prophets had no access to these matters and they cite in support of
their view a number of verses in which God the principle of absolute
perfection1 mentions knowledge of the unseen as one of His
distinguishing attributes or the prophets reject categorically the
possession of such knowledge.

For example:

"God holds tire keys to tire treasuries of tire unseen; none is aware of
tire unseen except Him." (6:59)

"Say: 'I have no control over that which benefits me and that would
harms me; it all results from God's will. Were I to be aware of tire
unseen I would constantly augment that which benefits me and I would
never suffer pain or loss. I am naught but a bearer of warnings and glad
tidings to a people that believe.'" (7:188)

"I do not say that I have the treasuries of God nor do I lay claim to
His knowledge of tire unseen or that lam an angel." (11:31)

"Say: 'There is none in the heavens and earth but God Who knows tire
unseen and they know not wizen they shall be brought back to life.'"
(27:9)

"Say: 'I am a prophet newly appeared not different from the prophets who
preceded me; I do not know what will befall me and you.'" (46:9)

"Among tire people of Madinah are those who make a habit of hypocrisy
and you do not know who they are." (9:101)

From these verses it is concluded then that not even the prophets had
access to knowledge of the unseen.

It Is of course true that no one has absolute and complete  

**( 208 )**

knowledge of the unseen apart from God Whose infinite existence embraces
the whole scheme of creation; such knowledge is indeed confined to Him.
Even though the prophets are in other respects superior to the rest of
mankind they too are limited in their beings and are inherently unable
to have comprehensive knowledge of the world of the unseen.

However this limitation does not mean that the gates of the unseen are
always closed to them and that God through the exercise of His will may
not make it accessible to them for He is after all the Owner of both the
unseen and the manifest.

Access to that realm is a gift that God may bestow on whomsoever He
wills from among His messengers and other appropriate individuals. The
knowledge that then results is a ray of God's own knowledge pertaining
to His essence; it is not autonomously acquired knowledge distinct from
His.

The verses cited above show that the people of the Jahiliyyah used to
imagine that a prophet must have total control over the world and all it
contains and have the power of attracting to himself whatever is
beneficial and repelling whatever is harmful.

God therefore instructs the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and
his family to refute these notions by categorically proclaiming that he
had no such powers; that whatever powers he did have came from God; that
whatever knowledge he had was derived from revelation and divine
instruction; and that were it to be otherwise he would be able to
uncover vast subterranean wealth for himself and equipped with suitable
foreknowledge to ward off any evil.

Quite apart from these instructions we find the Prophet himself denying
the possession of such far reaching knowledge and power and attempting
to convince men of the fact.

However at the very same time we also find the Prophet being  
 made aware by revelation of the evil plans of those conspiring against
him and saved thereby from certain danger. The verses  
 in question cannot therefore be taken to exclude totally the  
 possession of any form of knowledge of the unseen on the part of other
than God nor can one overlook the existence of other  

**( 209 )**

verses which deal explicitly with the conveyance of knowledge of the
unseen to the prophets.

The verse "Say: 'I am not a newly appeared (prophet) among the prophets
(who preceded me)'" (46:9)

Is intended to establish the principle that knowledge in all of its
various forms does not spring up automatically from the Prophet without
his being dependent on the infinite source that is God's knowledge any
more than the knowledge of the preceding prophets was intrinsic to their
own persons; for they too denied knowing what the future might hold in
store for them without divine instruction and revelation.

As for the verse concerning the Hypocrites it is obvious that their
habitual practise of hypocrisy could bar the way to their identification
by conventional means but it does not exclude the possibility of being
uncovered by other means; what the verse negates is the possibility of
gaining knowledge of the unseen by the normal channels of cognition.

History in fact teaches us that the Prophet peace and blessings be upon
him and his family not only knew who the Hypocrites were but revealed
their identity at the appropriate times to his confidants among the
Companions.

Thus it is written that the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and
his family identified the Hypocrites to Hudhayfah one of his close
Companions and confidants. One day the second caliph asked him: "Is
there any Hypocrite among those I have appointed to various offices?" He
answered that there was but refused to name the person in question until
the caliph insisted that he did with the result that the Hypocrite was
dismissed.

It was also the habit of 'Umar never to participate in the funeral
prayers for anyone unless Hudhayfah was present. [( 3 )](#p3)

Apart from this it is obvious that no duty can be imposed on anyone
unless he has the knowledge requisite for  
 performing that duty and we know that God entrusted the  
 Prophet with the duty of doing battle with the Unbelievers and  
 the Hypocrites and shunning their views in the verse: "O  
 Messenger do battle with the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites and be  

**( 210 )**

harsh with them." (9:73) Or again: "Do not obey tire Unbelievers and
tire Hypocrites; assign their punishment to Us and place your trust in
God." (33:48) Is it possible that God should order the Prophet peace and
blessings be upon him and his family to fight the Hypocrites and be
harsh with them and not to obey their wishes while making it impossible
for him to recognize them throughout the entirety of his life? Clearly
we must conclude that the verse concerning their unknowability must have
been temporary in its force not permanent. [( 4 )](#p4)

In the following verses the Qur'an establishes the principle that by
God's command the prophets may gain access to the knowledge of the
unseen:

"God does not make you aware of tire mysteries of tire unseen but
selects for this is station whomsoever He wills from among His prophets;
believe then in God and His prophets." (3:179)

"Tins is knowledge of tire unseen winch We reveal to you." (3:44) "He
knows tire unseen dimensions of tire world and informs none thereof
unless it be one with whom He is well pleased such as one of the
prophets whom He sends angels to protect from in front and behind."
(72:26)

This verse stresses that God alone is in His essence the true possessor
of all knowledge concerning the unseen and He will impart this knowledge
only to those with whom He is pleased.

To this category belongs the prophets for whom He appoints angelic
guardians.

Elsewhere in the Qur'an God says:

"This Qur'an is tire word of God conveyed by His (angelic) messenger
(=Jibril) an angel most powerful who enjoys high rank in the sight of
tire Lord of tire Throne. He is tire commander of the angels and the
trustee of revelation. The messenger sent unto you (=Muhammad) whom you
call possessed is not possessed for he did indeed witness Jibril the
trustee of revelation at the highest point on the eastern horizon and
Ire does not begrudge you that which ire has learned of the unseen (and
if ire were to judge fit ire would convey to you what he has learned of
the unseen)." (81:19-23)

Here the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and  

**( 211 )**

his family is declared innocent of begrudging others his knowledge of
the unseen1 and he is therefore implicity declared to possess such
knowledge.

"God does not inform you of the unseen but He chooses whomsoever He
wills from among His messengers." (3:179)

What is at issue in this verse is God's choosing certain of His
messengers for the bestowal upon them of knowledge of the unseen.

When we correlate and compare the two groups of verses the indications
contained in the verses themselves show that there is no contradiction.
The first group of verses declare the impossibility of independent
knowledge of the unseen on the part of any but God while the second
group points to God's conveyance of such knowledge to certain select and
qualified people.

Revelation is in itself an unknowable mode of communication between
God's messengers and the world of the unseen; it may be described as a
ray of divine knowledge that He causes to shine on the hearts of His
chosen servants.

It should also be pointed out that the prophets' knowledge of the unseen
is limited and proportional to their capacity and degree of spiritual
growth. Those who assert that the prophets not to mention the Imams have
knowledge of the unseen do not claim that their knowledge is intrinsic
to them or autonomous.

The sense of the two groups of verses is thus entirely clear: the first
group negates the possibility of any but God having independent and
total knowledge of the unseen and the second group establishes that God
may by an exercise of His will bestow a portion of that knowledge on
some of His servants.

Apart from all this any claim to messengerhood and  
 prophethood is necessarily accompanied by a claim to  
 communication with the world of the unseen by way of  
 revelation. It would be utterly meaningless for someone to  
 claim prophethood for himself but to renounce all claim to  
 knowledge of the unseen. If the Qur'an stresses that the  

**( 212 )**

prophets have no independent access to that knowledge it is in order to
refute erroneous notions held in the Jahiliyyah concerning the
extraordinary powers and attributes of prophets; it was thought that
they utterly transcended all the characteristics of ordinary men and had
superhuman knowledge of the whole of creation1 enabling them to do
whatever they wanted.

There can be no doubt that this Jahili view of the prophets would have
prepared the way for them to be worshipped as superhuman beings. In
order to prepare those infected by this mentality to accept the truth
the Qur'an therefore declares that like other men the prophets engage in
such activities as eating walking and resting and that their most
important distinguishing feature is their receipt of revelation for
conveying it to others.

The aim of the Qur'an is on the one hand to vindicate to men the truth
of the messengerhood of the prophets in the communities from which they
have arisen and on the other hand to refute erroneous notions concerning
them and prevent them becoming the objects of idolatrous worship. Thus
the Qur'an says:

"They say: 'We will never believe in you unless you cause a spring of
water to gush forth or produce a garden full of dates and grapes with
streams flowing through it; or cause the heavens to fall on our heads;
or present us with God and His angels in visible form; or have a house
built of gold; or ascend to the heavens. Nor will we believe that you
went up to the heavens unless you bring back a book for us to read.'
Say: 'God is exalted beyond my being able to bring Him or His angels
before you in visible form; I am but a man whom God has appointed as a
messenger. " (17:90-94)

"Again they said: 'Why does this messenger eat food and walk in the
markets? Why does no angel come to him in visible and sensory form as
witness to his veracity? Why does no treasure descend upon him and why
does he have no garden to eat of its fruits?"' (25:7-8)

This was the mentality of the Jahiliyyah the Qur'an had to combat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) al-Radi Nahj al-Balaghah Sermon 105. [( 2 )](#m2) al-Saduq
Kitab al-Tawhid p.73. [( 3 )](#m3) Ibn al-Athir Usd al-Ghabah Vol. I p.
391. [( 4 )](#m4) Ja'far Subhani Agahi-yi Sevvom p. 184.
