Lesson 24: The Method of Choosing the Imam or Leader
====================================================

One of the topics which have been constantly under discussion among
Muslims since the very rise of Islam is the question of selecting the
Imam or the Leader; it is in fact this question that brought about the
division of the ummah into Shi'ah and Sunni.

The Shi'ah are committed to the principle that the right to designate
the Imam belongs exclusively to God, and that the people have no role to
play in this respect. It is the Creator alone Who selects the Imam and
identifies him to the people by means of the Prophet.

The attachment of the Shi'ah to this understanding of the Imamate, and
the attention they have Lavished on the belief that God and the Prophet
alone may choose the Imam who serves as God's proof in each age, spring,
however, from a profound respect for the rights and dignity of man.

In just the same way that prophethood implies a whole series of
attributes and conditions, so too the office of the Imam, coming after
the Prophet, must similarly be accompanied by certain qualities. This
necessity arises from the fact that the Shi'ah refuse to accept as
Leader of the community anyone lacking in the key qualities of justice,
inerrancy, and perspicacity. A proper command of the religious sciences,
an ability to proclaim God's Laws and ordinances and to implement them
in society in the appropriate way, and, in general, to guard and protect
God's religion none of this is possible in the absence of those
qualities.

God is aware of the spiritual capacities, religious rank, and piety of
the Imam, and in accordance with this awareness He knows, too, to whom
the custodianship of religious knowledge should be entrusted: who it is
that can carry this burden and not neglect for a minute the duties of
summoning men to God and implementing divine justice. But quite apart
from this aspect of the matter, the Shi'i understanding of the Imamate
also reflects a lofty human ideal.

If we say that people have no right to interfere in the matter of
choosing the Imam, it is because they cannot be adequately informed of
the inner purity and piety of individuals, of the degree to which they
adhere to the values of Islam and the Qur'an; above all, they cannot
perceive the presence or absence of the divine principle of inerrancy.

It was therefore the prerogative of the Prophet to designate his
successor, and of the Imam in each age to select and appoint Leaders.

If, however, a claimant to the Imamate was able to demonstrate ability
to communicate with the unseen and to display inerrancy in his exercise
of leadership, in a fashion akin to the miraculous powers of the
prophets, then his claim might legitimately be accepted.

There are the methods proposed by the Shi'ah for recognizing and gaining
access to the Imam; they form a set of criteria that prevented the true
header of the Muslims in each age from remaining unrecognized.

The other approach to the matter is in stark contrast to that of the
Shi'ah. Because there was a certain vagueness and ambiguity surrounding
the consultative principle in its application to the question of
leadership from the very beginning, the Sunni community resorted to a
variety of methods for selecting and designating the caliph, so that in
practice the following elements came to play an important role.

***1:*** Consensus (*ijma'*). The Sunnis say that the choice of caliph
rests first and foremost on selection by the community, so that if the
ummah elects a given individual as its leader, he must be accepted as
such and his commands must be obeyed.

As proof of this they cite the method followed by the Companions of the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, after his
death. Gathered together at the Saqifah to select a caliph, a majority
decided upon Abu Bakr and swore allegiance to him; so that thereby he
was recognized by consensus as successor to the Prophet without any
objection being raised. This constitutes one method for designating a
caliph.

***2:*** The second method consists of Consultation and the exchange of
views among the prominent members of the Muslim community. Once they
agree among themselves on the choice of a leader for the community, his
caliphate becomes legitimate and it is incumbent on everyone to obey
him.

This is the method that was adopted by the second caliph. When 'Umar was
about to die, he nominated six people as candidates for the caliphate
and told them to select one of their own number as leader of the Muslim
community by discussing the matter among themselves for not more than
six days; if four or five people were able to reach an agreement, the
opponent were to be disregarded. A six-man assembly was accordingly
convened, and after the necessary deliberations the caliphate was
awarded to 'Uthman. This, too, is said to Constitute a legitimate means
of selecting the caliph.

***3:*** The third method consists of the caliph nominating his own
successor. This happened in the case of 'Umar, who was appointed caliph
by Abu Bakr without any objection being raised by the Muslims.

Such, in essence, is the position of the Sunnis on this matter.

Let us now review the objections to which each of these proceedings is
subject.

The necessity of the inerrancy of the Imam, of his possessing a firm
grasp and a comprehensive command of all religious matters, in both
principle and detail, is rooted in the Qur'an and the *Sunnah*, as well
as being vindicated by historical experience. All the oppression,
wrongdoing, corruption and error that we see in Islamic history arose
from the fact that the leaders did not have the necessary qualities of
an Imam. Even if all the members of the Islamic ummah choose a given
individual as Imam and successor to the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, this cannot ill and of itself bestow legitimacy
and validity On his caliphate.

As for the caliphate of Abu Bakr, all the Muslims, in any event, did not
swear allegiance to him, so there was no question of any true consensus
being formed. It is also an undeniable historical fact that no real
election took place, in the sense of all the Muslims who were scattered
in various places converging on Madinah to take part in an electoral
process. Indeed, not all the people of Madinah participated in the
meeting where the decision was made, and some of the Prophet's Family
and Companions, as well as some of those present at the Saqifah, refused
to proclaim their loyalty to Abu Bakr.

Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be upon him, al-Miqdad, Salman, al-Zubayr,
'Ammar b. Yasir, 'Abdullah b. Mas'ud, Sa'd b. 'Ubadah, Abbas b. Abd
al-Muttalib, Usamah b. Zayd, Ibn Abi Ka'b, 'Uthman b. Hunayf, as well as
a number of other leading Companions, objected vocally to the caliphate
of Abu Bakr and by no means concealed their opposition. How then can the
caliphate of Abu Bakr be regarded as having rested on consensus?

It might be said that the participation of everyone in the selection of
the successor to the Prophet is not necessary, and that if a number of
leading and well-informed people reach a certain decision this is enough
and entitles the caliph to acceptance and obedience.

However, why should their decision be binding on everyone else? Why
should other reputable and outstanding figures, whose commitment and
devotion were beyond all doubt, have been excluded from making a
decision that was to have such far-reaching consequences for the fate of
the Islamic ummah? Why should they submit unconditionally to a decision
reached by others?

What proof is there for the legitimacy of such a procedure? Why should a
historical event of this type constitute a legitimate or binding
precedent?

A procedure of this type can be regarded as legitimate only if it is
explicitly designated as such in the Qur'an or the *Sunnah*, in the
sense of the verse in which God declares:

***"Take and accept that which the Messenger ordains, and abandon that
which he forbids." (59:7)***

As for the Companions, there is no proof that they necessarily acted
correctly, apart from which some of them disagreed with others, and
there is no reason in principle to prefer the views of one group of the
Companions over those of another.

It is true that a majority of the people of Madinah gave their
allegiance to Abu Bakr and thus ratified his selection as caliph, but
those who refused to do so did not commit any sin, for freedom to choose
is the natural right of every Muslim, and the minority is not obliged to
follow the views of the majority. No one can be compelled to swear
allegiance to someone whom he does not wish to see at the helm of Muslim
affairs or to join a compact he rejects.

When a majority does force a minority to conform to its own views, it
violates the rights of the minority.

Now those Companions who were gathered around Ali, peace be upon him,
were compelled to follow the majority that had given allegiance to Abu
Bakr, even though neither God nor the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, had ordained any such act; it was therefore a
clear violation of their rights and their freedom.

Worse than this was the fact that Ali b. Abi Talib was forced to
participate in the swearing of allegiance and to change his position,
even though he was the one whom the Messenger of God had named an
authority for every believing man and woman. No one with a sense of
justice can approve such a denial of freedom.

It must also be said that Muslims of later generations who adopt a
negative attitude to a granting of allegiance made by their ancestors
cannot be condemned for this or regarded as sinners.

During the caliphate of Ali, people such as Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas and
'Abdullah b. 'Umar refused him their allegiance, but in his magnanimity
the Imam left them free to do so and did not compel them to pledge him
their obedience.

In addition to all this, if the caliph is not designated by the Prophet,
no one can be forced to follow the mode of conduct prescribed by a
caliph whose only claim to legitimacy is popular election. Such election
does not bestow on him immunity from error and sin, nor does it enhance
his religious knowledge and awareness. The ordinary believer retains the
right of following someone other than the caliph, and this applies still
more forcefully to the one whose level of religious learning is higher
than of the caliph.

However, when allegiance is sworn in obedience to a command of the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, this indeed
counts as a swearing of allegiance to the Messenger of God himself; then
no disobedience may be countenanced, and obedience to the one to whom
allegiance is given is incumbent not only on the Muslims of that time
but on those of all succeeding generations. In addition, the Qur'an
regards allegiance given to the Prophet as equivalent to allegiance
given to God. Thus the Qur'an says:

***"O Messenger, the believers who swear allegiance to you have in
reality pledged their allegiance to God; God's hand is placed on their
hands. Whoever thereafter violates his oath of allegiance works towards
his own perdition, and whoever remains faithful to the covenant he has
concluded with God will soon receive from Him an abundant reward."
(48:10)***

It is self-evident that the successor chosen by the Prophet will be the
most perceptive of men and the most knowledgeable concerning the
ordinances of the Qur'an and the religion of God; in fact he will
possess all the qualities of the Prophet with the exception of receiving
revelation, and whatever command he gives will be based on justice and
the implementation of God's laws.

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, is related
to have said: "My community will never agree upon an error." However,
this tradition cannot be adduced with respect to the question of
successorship for it would then contradict the commands of the Prophet
and effectively cause people to disregard his words; it would permit
them to prefer their own views to his. Whatever applicability it may
have must be confined to cases where there is no clear or authoritative
ruling from the Qur'an or the *Sunnah*.

What was intended by the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and
his family, was that the community would not agree upon an error in
cases where the ummah is permitted by God to solve its affairs by mutual
consultation, where such consultation takes place in an atmosphere free
from intimidation, and where a given choice of action is unanimously
approved. If, however, a certain group of people incline in a certain
direction and then try to impose their views on others and compel their
agreement, there is no reason to regard the outcome as representing a
valid consensus.

As for the swearing of allegiance (*bay'ah*) that took place at the
Saqifah even if God and the Messenger had given permission for the
matter to be decided on the basis of consultation, no true consultation
took place. A certain group of individuals set the agenda in advance and
then expended great effort to attain the result they themselves wanted.
This is the reality of the matter, as was even the second caliph himself
came to acknowledge:

"The selection of Abu Bakr as leader came about by accident; it did not
happen through consultation and the exchange of views. If someone
invites you to follow the same procedure again, kill him."[^1]

In the course of a sermon he delivered at the beginning of his
caliphate, the first caliph apologized to the people in these words:

"The swearing of allegiance to me was a mistake; may God protect us from
its evil consequences. I myself am fearful of the harm it may
cause."[^2]

During his event-filled life, the Prophet of Islam, peace and blessings
be upon him and his family, showed great concern for the welfare of the
Muslims and paid great attention to the preservation of religion and the
unity and security of the Muslim community. He feared greatly the
emergence of division and disunity, and wherever the Muslims went and
established their control, the first thing he did was to appoint a
governor or commander for the region. Similarly, commanders were always
appointed in advance whenever a battle was being planned, and even
deputy commanders were appointed to take over the leadership of the army
if necessary.

Whenever he set out on a journey, he appointed someone as governor to
administer the affairs of Madinah.

Given all this, how is it possible that he should not have given any
thought to the fate of the community after his death, to its need for a
guide and a leader, a need on which the destiny of the community in this
world and the hereafter depended?

Is it possible that God should send a messenger to guide men and to
found a religion; that the messenger should endure all kinds of hardship
and difficulty in order to convey God's commands to mankind, and that he
should then quit this world without making any further provision? Would
this at all be a wise or logical course of action?

Would any leader be content to entrust the fruit of his efforts and
struggles to blind chance?

Messengerhood was a divine trust given to the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, and he was far too exalted a
personality to neglect that trust in any way, particularly by leaving
its preservation to chance. Making the designation of his successor
dependent on election would have been tantamount to precisely that, for
the outcome of any election is always a matter of chance.

If the purpose of religion is to educate humans in their humanity and if
the laws of religion are to promote the development and refinement of
humanity, a leader must always exist together with the religion in order
to secure the material and spiritual needs of the individual and the
community and guide men in their upward progress.

There can be no doubt that governmental power is needed in order to
obtain the implementation of God's laws and the preservation of His
commands, and this need implies in turn the necessity for a leader and
guide who will assist men in their strivings and counteract their lack
of full awareness and their vulnerability to satanic suggestion. In the
absence of such a leader, religion will become muddied and distorted by
superstition and arbitrary opinion, and the divine trust that is
religion and revelation will be betrayed.

Furthermore, if the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, had left it to the Muslims to select the caliph, he would have
done so with the utmost clarity and in the most categorical way
possible, also specifying the procedures they were to follow in choosing
and appointing him.

Are the affairs of the ummah after the death of the Prophet of no
concern to God and His Messenger? Are the people more farsighted than
God and His Messenger, or better able to discern who the leader should
be?

If the Prophet did not appoint a successor (*khalifah*) to himself, why
did Abu Bakr do so? And if the Prophet did do so, why was the one he
selected pushed aside?

Another problem that arises with respect to the choice of caliph on the
basis of mutual consultation is that the Imam must be the guide of the
ummah in all matters of religious knowledge. No one can doubt that he
must have in addition to faith and commitment comprehensive knowledge of
God's laws, because in confronting the numerous and complex problems
that arise the Muslims need a suitable authority to whom to turn for
sure and reliable guidance. The successor to the Prophet must therefore
be the heir to his knowledge, which makes the identification and
recognition of the successor a matter of particular importance.

We have already explained the fundamental role of inerrancy (*'ismah*)
in both the Prophet and in the leader (*imam*) designated by the
Prophet. Now how can the Companions, who themselves lack inerrancy, take
it on themselves to recognize one who is inerrant?

Furthermore, if it is the right of the Muslims that they should choose
the successor to the Prophet, how can this right be restricted by 'Umar
to a mere six people? All six were from among the Migrants, and not even
a single one of the Helpers was assigned to advise them.

The verse:

***"The Muslims are to organize their affairs on the basis of mutual
consultation" (42:38)***

serves only to indicate that one of the characteristics of the believers
is to consult each other in their undertakings; it does not indicate in
any way that leadership of the Muslims is to be based on majority vote,
nor does it make incumbent obedience to the decisions taken by a caliph
so elected. The verse does not even say anything about the way in which
consultation is to be organized and whether or not the presence of all
the Muslims is required.

Even if the consultative (*shura*) principle were to be applicable to
the question of leadership, the decision would have to be made by means
of a general exchange of views, not one restricted to a mere six people,
in the selection of whom 'Umar did not see fit himself to consult with
any of the Companions. He even awarded a veto to Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf,
who was well known for his wealth, something that cannot be justified by
reference to Islamic principles. The deliberations of those six were,
moreover, overshadowed by threats and intimidation, in that orders had
been given for those who failed to agree with the majority to be put to
death.

When appointing 'Umar to be caliph, Abu Bakr did not consult with
anyone, nor obviously enough did he leave the question of his successor
to the people for them to decide; it was entirely a personal decision on
his part.

In any event, the consultative principle becomes operative only when the
leader himself convenes a consultative assembly for an exchange of views
on various questions, notably current topics touching on social
relations and policies adopted by the leader in response to social need.

Consultation with relevant specialists takes place, but after their
opinions have been heard, it is the leader himself who takes the final
decision. For his religious knowledge is superior to that of everyone
else, and it is his pronouncements that enjoying public support are
worthy of being put into effect. Unity of direction and leadership must
at all times be preserved, because a divergence of opinion, in the
absence of a leader making the final decision, will paralyze the
government. Thus the Qur'an says:

***"Obey God and the Messenger, and never be drawn into dispute and
disagreement, lest you be defeated and your power be scattered to the
winds." (8:49)***

It should also be borne in mind that *Surah al-Shura* was revealed in
Makkah, at a time when the Islamic system of government had not yet
taken shape, and that at no time was the government of the Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, based upon consultation.

The verse concerning consultation is, then, a general encouragement of
the believers to consult with each other, and it has nothing to do with
matters of governance and leadership. It relates to practical concerns
of the Muslims, to the various problems that confront the Muslims. There
is absolutely no justification for interpreting the verse as sanctioning
the designation of the caliph by means of mutual consultation, for
during the age of revelation government was exclusively in the hands of
the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family.

Furthermore, the part of the verse recommending consultation treats of
the desirability of spending one's property in God's path, which is also
something desirable but not mandatory.

Yet another consideration is that the verse occurs in a context dealing
with the wars of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family. Some of the verses are addressed to the Muslims in general and
the warriors among them in particular, and others to the Prophet
individually. It is plain that in this context the encouragement to
consult is inspired by compassion for the believers, by concern for
their morale; it is not that the Prophet is obliged to act in accordance
with the opinions of those he consults. For the Qur'an clearly
proclaims:

***"Whenever you take a decision, place your trust in God and act in
accordance with your own opinion and wish." (3:159)***

This context also suggests that consultation applies to military
matters, particularly to the concerns that arose during the Battle of
Badr, for the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
consulted his Companions about the advisability of attacking the Quraysh
trade caravan led by Abu Sufyan that w as returning from Syria. First
Abu Bakr expressed his opinion, which was rejected by the Prophet; then
'Umar expressed his, which was likewise rejected; and finally al-Miqdad
gave his opinion, and the Prophet accepted it.[^3]

If the Prophet consulted with others, it was not in order to learn from
them an opinion superior to his own as a prelude to acting in accordance
with it His aim was rather to train them in the methods of consultation
and the discovery of correct views. In contrast to worldly rulers who
refused ever to consult ordinary people, because of their pride and
arrogance, the Prophet was instructed by God to show the believers his
concern and compassion for them by consulting with them, at the same
time increasing their self-esteem and learning what they thought
However, the final decision was always his, and in the case of the
Battle of Badr, God informed him in advance of what the result would be,
and he in turn conveyed this to his Companions after consulting with
them.

The command to consult and to exchange views is also for the sake of
finding the best way of fulfilling a given duty, not for identifying
what is a duty and what is not; this is an important difference.

Once a clear and authoritative prescription exists in the Qur'an or the
*Sunnah*, there is no ground for consultation to take place. Society has
no right to discuss commands that are grounded in revelation, for in
principle such discussion might result in the annulment of God's laws.
In just the same way, consultation is meaningless in any human society
once the legal duties of its members have been determined.

The successorship of Ali, peace be upon him, was clearly established by
the Prophet in accordance with divine command at Ghadir Khumm, at the
beginning of the Prophet's mission, and again when he was on his
deathbed. There was therefore no issue needing to be settled by
consultation.

The Qur'an does not permit individuals to entertain their own views on
any subject where divine legislation exists, for it says:

***"When God and His Messenger determine a matter, no choice remains
therein for any believing woman or man. Whoever turns away from the
command of God and His Messenger has openly chosen misguidance."
(33:36)***

Or again:

***"God creates and chooses whatever He wishes, and men have no right to
choose in opposition to His choice." (28:67)***

Since the choice and selection of a leader is exclusively God's
prerogative, and since in fact He designated a leader, it is meaningless
to seek out others as possible leaders.

The task of the Imam is guiding men and demonstrating to them the path
that will lead them to happiness. That being the case, the correct
method for the selection of an Imam is the same as that which the Qur'an
spells out for the prophets:

***"It is indeed incumbent on Us to guide mankind, for the kingdom of
this world and the hereafter is Ours." (92:11-12)***

It is then the responsibility of God alone to provide for the guidance
of mankind and to make available to it whatever it needs at the various
stages of existence. Part of what it needs is assuredly guidance, and
only the one whom God has appointed may present himself as a guide.
Numerous verses of the Qur'an bear witness that God bestowed the status
of guide on the Prophet.

The appointment of an Imam as successor to the Messenger of God takes
place for exactly the same purpose as the mission of the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, which is serving mankind as a
guide and exemplar to whom obedience is due. This being the case, no one
has the right to lay claim to this function or to demand obedience
without a proof of having been appointed by God. If someone nonetheless
does do so, he will be usurping God's right.

The Sunni theory that sees in Abu Bakr's designation of his successor a
justification for such a procedure is open to another objection. If the
designation is made by an inerrant Imam, it is valid and authoritative,
for one possessor of inerrancy can recognize another and safely entrust
the affairs of the ummah to him. If this not be the case, one lacking
the quality of inerrancy has no right to designate a caliph whom people
are obliged to obey. If it be said that this is what Abu Bakr did and no
one objected, it must be answered that severe objections were indeed
raised, but no attention was paid to them.

Such are the views of the Sunni scholars concerning the legitimacy of
three different methods of choosing the caliph, and the objections that
need to be made to those views.

[^1]: Ibn Hisham, Sirah, Vol. IV, p. 308; al-Tabari, Tarikh; Ibn
al-Athir, al-Kamil; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah.

[^2]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid, Sharh, Vol. I, p.132.

[^3]: Muslim, al-Sahih, "Kitab al-Jihad wa Sayr" Bab: Ghuzwah Badr, Vol.
III, p.1403.


