Lesson 25: The Imamate of the Most Excellent
============================================

One of the questions that has been the subject of much discussion
between Shi'i and Sunni scholars is the Imamate of the Most Excellent.
The Sunni position is that if someone can be found to exist in the ranks
of the *ummah* who is unequalled with respect to virtue, knowledge, and
piety, someone less excellent than he may still legitimately become
leader of the community and exercise the functions of successor to the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family.

In order to prove their point, they cite the caliphate of Abu Bakr and
'Umar, and they maintain that although 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be upon
him, was present at the time and his worthiness and perfection were far
more apparent than those of anyone else, the Companions nonetheless
selected Abu Bakr as successor to the Prophet.

The Shi'ah believe that the Imamate constitutes an extension of
prophethood in its spiritual dimension. The one who after the death of
the Prophet is to serve as an authority for the Muslims in their
learning the ordinances and principles of religion, who is to settle
newly occurring problems for which no precedent can be found in the
Qur'an and the *Sunnah*, whose words are to be a decisive criterion such
a one must indubitably be more excellent than all others in his virtues
and perfections.

When God selects someone as the teacher of humanity and the guide of the
*ummah*, to expound His laws, to interpret the complexities of the
Qur'an, and to defend the truth and develop the personality of the
*ummah*, He entrusts this position to an exceptional and inerrant person
who is utterly unique in his spiritual qualities, his outer and inner
attributes, his communication with the world of the unseen. Such a
person perceives the inner truth of things with his inner eye and is
always oriented to the truth in such a way that his faith is never
corrupted and his deeds never deviate from the right path.

The Imam is therefore the most excellent being of his time, the foremost
of all his contemporaries. Imam ar-Ridhaâ€™, peace be upon him, says the
following concerning the distinctive qualities of the Imam:

*"The Imam is utterly free of sin and pure of all fault. He is
celebrated for his knowledge and his forebearance. His existence is a
source of pride to the Muslims, of anger to the hypocrites, of*
*perdition to the unbelievers. The Imam is unique in his age, in the
sense that no one can attain his rank. No scholar can come within range
of his knowledge, and he is unequalled in all his qualities. He
possesses all virtues and worthy attributes without any striving on his
part, and he is adorned with all lofty characteristics. This is a great
gift bestowed on him by God in His generosity."*[^1]

[^1]: al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, Vol. I, p.200.


