Lesson 3: The Proclamation of 'Ali's Leadership by the Prophet
==============================================================

After the death of the Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, and the departure of that great leader from the
midst of society, the interests of Islam and the *ummah* made it
imperative that a distinguished and worthy leader, a being overflowing
with knowledge and piety, should assume the governance of the newly
emergent Islamic movement which needed continued instruction. This was
necessary in order to guarantee the continuity of Islam, to safeguard it
from deviation, to prevent the *ummah* from falling back into its former
reprehensible social and moral habits, and to reinforce as much as
possible the Islamic socio-political order.

To leave the question of leadership to a community that had only
recently escaped the fetters of *Jahiliyyah* and from whose spirit and
soul the traces of *Jahili* beliefs had not yet disappeared, would not
have sufficed to secure the lofty aims of the Prophet or to protect the
religion from the danger of negative forces.

The only path was then for a worthy personality, erudite in all matters
concerning the message, equipped with intelligence and extensive
religious knowledge, possessed of a luminous faith and exempt from error
just like the founder of Islam, should gather the reins of affairs in
his hands in order to pursue with care and subtlety the task of training
and educating men and solve the problems and questions concerning the
*shari'ah* that might arise during the period of his governance.

Historical evidence shows that the Messenger of God, on his return from
the Farewell Pilgrimage, fulfilled this need on the eighteenth day of
Dhu 'l-Hijjah by designating his legatee and successor in accordance
with divine command, thus showing the people the path to be followed for
the *ummah* to gain felicity.

In the tenth year of the Hijrah, which was also the last year in the
life of the Beloved Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, he decided to participate in the great Islamic gathering that
was to be held in Makkah. Once it became known that the Prophet was
setting out for the Ka'bah, throngs of Muslims from near and far set out
in the direction of Madinah in order to have the honor of travelling
with him, to learn the pilgrimage rites from him, and to perform that
great ritual of Islam directly in his presence.

Finally the great caravan set out, composed of the Migrants
(*muhajirun*), the Helpers (*ansar*), and the other Muslims who were
leaving Madinah in the company of their leader, and they advanced
towards Makkah. After entering the city, they began their acts of
worship at the Ka'bah. During those days the city of Makkah witnessed
one of the most glorious of Islamic ceremonies, performed by thousands
of Muslims who were gathered around their leader like the thunderous
waves of an ocean. The Prophet too was proud in front of his Lord that
on such a day he was able to see the results of his unremitting efforts
and toil.

After that year's pilgrimage had been completed - the pilgrimage known
as the Farewell Pilgrimage - the Prophet left the House of God together
with the great crowd of pilgrims (*hujjaj*), estimated by historians to
have numbered between ninety and one hundred and twenty thousand, and
prepared to return to Madinah. The caravan traversed several valleys and
arrived at a waterless plain known as Ghadir Khumm.[^1] It was then that
the messenger of revelation came to the Prophet and ordered him to halt.
The Prophet stopped the caravan and waited for the stragglers to catch
up with the main body.

This sudden halt in that torrid landscape beneath the burning midday sun
astonished the weary travellers, but it was not long before Jibril
(Gabriel) the trustworthy angel of revelation conveyed to the pure soul
of the Prophet a heavenly message the categorical and clear command of
the Creator that he should appoint and announce his legatee and
successor:

***O Messenger of God, convey to mankind the command that God has sent
you. If you do not do so, you will not have conveyed the prophetic
message. God will protect you from the harm men might cause you.
(5:67)***

Close attention to the content of this verse demonstrates to us the
important truth that the proclamation of this particular divine message
was of such importance and gravity that if the Prophet were to shrink
from conveying it, it would be equivalent to his refraining from
fulfilling his entire prophetic mission, while conveying it to the
*ummah* was tantamount to the completion of that mission.

In the verse, the Most Noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, is reminded of the extraordinary significance of the
task that has been assigned to him, and he is guaranteed protection from
any dangers that might result from proclaiming the message.

At the same time, not more than a few days were left in the glorious
life of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, for
he died seventy days after the event of Ghadir Khumm. All that he had
achieved in the course of twenty three years since the beginning of
revelation, all that man needed for his guidance and felicity, was now
at the disposal of mankind. Only one particular matter remained, the
proclamation of which would complete his prophetic mission and bring his
task to complete fruition.

It was in addition probable that while fulfilling the instructions he
had received the Prophet would be attacked or harmed by evil wishers,
and in order to reinforce his determination God informed him that He
would protect him and guard him against being harmed.

The content of those instructions must have been particularly sensitive
in order for their fulfillment to have been coterminous with the
entirety of the Prophet's mission and for the failure to proclaim them
to have damaged and diminish prophethood itself. Moreover, the Arab
mentality prevailing at the time tended to regard the aged persons of
each tribe as best suited for positions of leadership and not to
consider younger persons as qualified; this feature hardly constituted a
favorable climate for the proclamation of God's command.

The spirit of the Prophet was also troubled and surely pained by certain
bitter memories. He had not yet forgotten the negative attitude of
certain narrow minded people to the appointment of Usamah and Attab b.
Usayb as commanders, for when he appointed the former as commander of
the army and the latter as commander of Makkah, some of the Companions
raised their voices in protest.

All of these constituted factors that made the declaration of 'Ali b.
Abi Talib, peace be upon him, someone as young as thirty three years of
age, a formidable and even intimidating task for the Prophet.

In addition, many of those who had now joined the ranks of the Muslims
and entered the circle of the Prophet's Companions, had earlier fought
against 'Ali, peace be upon him, which further increased the delicacy of
the situation; their hearts were troubled by the memory of those events
and fanned the flames of hatred within them.

Despite all those unfavorable circumstances, the divine will decreed
that the best and most exalted personage who through the grace of God
had attained the highest spiritual station next to the Prophet should be
appointed as his successor, so that by the designation of this great man
to lead the *ummah*, the universal message of the Prophet should be
completed.

According not only to Shi'i scholars of *hadith* but also certain Sunni
scholars as well,[^2] the Qur'anic verse in question was revealed on the
day of Ghadir Khumm, the day on which the Prophet, the veracity of whose
speech is guaranteed by God Himself, received the divine command, by way
of revelation and in accordance with wisdom, to expound the last and
most essential foundation of Islam by presenting 'Ali, peace be upon
him, to the people as his successor.

Yes, that personage whose being had never been polluted by polytheism or
sin, whose entire life had been devoted to disseminating the teachings
of religion and promoting Islam, who was a complete reflection of the
Messenger of God he was the one fitted to preserve the laws and norms of
religion, to assume the leadership of humanity as it advanced toward
perfection and salvation. It was his form alone that was worthy of
putting on the garb of Imamate and leadership.

The time for the noon prayer arrived, and the great throng that had
descended at Ghadir Khumm performed the prayer behind the Prophet.[^3]
Then the Prophet advanced to the middle of the crowd that filled the
whole plain in anticipation of an historic event, in order to implement
the categorical command of God. He mounted a pulpit that had been
improvised from camel litters, in order for everyone to be able to see
and to hear him.

He then began to deliver his address, in powerful, clear and compelling
tones, so that everyone was able to hear him or at least be aware of
what was transpiring.

After praising and thanking God, to whom alone belong absolute power,
wisdom and vision, and whose governance, knowledge and perception are
immune to defect and decline, he said:

*"O people, I will soon be responding to the call of my Lord and
departing from your midst. I will be held to account, as you too will
be. Will you not bear witness that there is none worthy of worship other
than God, the One and Unique? Do you not testify that Muhammad is His
servant and messenger? Are not paradise, hellfire and death all
realities? Is it not true the day of requital and resurrection will
definitely come, and that God will restore to life those who lie buried
in the ground?"*

The voice of the multitude arose in response: "Indeed we bear witness to
all of that."

Then he continued: *"Now that the Day of Requital lies before us, and
you believe in the raising of the dead on the Plain of Resurrection and
that you will enter the presence of your prophet on that day, pay heed
to the manner in which you treat the two weighty (thaqalayn) and
precious legacies I leave you as I depart for the hereafter.*[^4]

"That which is the greater of the two is the Book of God. It is in your
hands as well as His, so lay hold of it firmly lest you fall into
misguidance. The lesser of the two legacies is my progeny and the people
of my household. God has informed me that my two legacies shall never be
separated from each other until the Day of Resurrection.

*"O people, do not turn away from these two legacies. As long as you
have recourse to them, you will never go astray the Book of God and my
family."*[^5]

At this point, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, called 'Ali, peace be upon him, to his side. He took hold of his
hand and raised it up high, thereby presenting him with all his
qualities and attributes to the gathered throng. Then the Messenger of
God asked: "O people, who is more deserving of the believers than their
own persons?" They answered: "God and His Messenger know better." He
continued: *"For whomsoever I was his master 'Ali is now his
master."*[^6]

*God, love whomsoever loves 'Ali and be the enemy of whoever is 'Ali's
enemy*.[^7] *O God, aid whoever aids him and humble his enemies.*[^8] *O
God, make him the pivot of truth*."[^9]

After completing his speech, the Prophet requested the people to convey
what he had said to those who were absent.

The one who was thus installed in the seat of Islamic leadership on that
day, in accordance with divine command and by virtue of the Prophet's
declaration, who was entrusted with the guidance of the *ummah*, was
'Ali. The most worthy and renowned man in the Islamic community, he who
was a treasury of knowledge and an incarnation of virtue, had been
selected as the leader of the Muslims, and by proclaiming the important
matter of Imamate and caliphate the Prophet had given a decisive and
binding command to the *ummah*.

The assembled multitude had not begun to disperse when the agent of
revelation revealed this verse to the Prophet:

***Today I have perfected for you your religion, completed for you My
bounty, and chosen Islam for you as religion. (5:3)***[^10]

According to al-Ya'qubi, "This verse, revealed at Ghadir Khumm, was the
last verse to be revealed to the Most Noble Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family."[^11]

The Prophet left the place where he was standing, while all around the
sound of *takbir* was to be heard as the pilgrims expressed their warm
and enthusiastic feelings towards 'Ali, peace be upon him. People came
up to him in groups and congratulated him on his appointment as leader,
addressing him as their master and the master of every believer, man and
woman.

The well known poet Hassan b. Thabit who was present on that occasion,
composed and recited to the people, with the permission of the Prophet,
an eloquent ode in honor of the auspicious event.

The verse just cited, which declares how God has on this day perfected
His religion and completed His blessing, permits us to understand the
full significance of what had transpired. A momentous happening must
have occurred for the Qur'an to qualify it in such terms, for the Islam
that God has chosen and approved was the Islam of that day. the religion
of truth had attained its perfection through the appointment of 'Ali,
peace be upon him, and God's blessing to mankind had been completed
through his selection as the legatee (*wasiyy*) of the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family.

Both universally accepted *hadith* and reliable books of history to
which Shi'is and Sunnis alike refer emphasize that this verse was
revealed at Ghadir Khumm on the day that the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, had entrusted 'Ali, peace be upon
him, with the responsibility of governing and leading the *ummah* after
himself. *Surah al-Ma'idah*, to the early part of which this verse
belongs, is the last *surah* to have been revealed to the Most Noble
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, in the
unanimous view of the exegetes. This means that its revelation took
during the last days of his blessed life, and no further command was
revealed to him thereafter by his Lord.

The view held by some that the verse refers to the beginning of his
prophetic mission, meaning that it was on that day that God's religion
was perfected and His blessing completed, is baseless, and utterly
incompatible both with the historical facts and the correct
interpretation of the verse. The day on which the mission of the Prophet
began was the beginning of the divine blessing, not its culmination, an
extremely important difference. What is at issue in the verse is the
completion of the blessing and the perfection of religion; now that this
matter has been accomplished, Islam is chosen and approved as religion
for mankind. Neither history nor *hadith* can support the opposing view.

The momentous scene that Ghadir Khumm witnessed and the task that the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, fulfilled on
that day had long lasting consequences for the history of Islam. Apart
from those who are prisoners to fanaticism and mental stagnation, no
historian who is concerned with the recording of events and the
preservation of historical fact can ignore what took place on that day
or conceal the matters that are connected with it. During the early
centuries of Islamic history, the day of Ghadir Khumm was well known and
accepted as an auspicious occasion, and there are many indications that
all Muslims participated in celebrating it.

Thus the well known historian Ibn Khallikan describes the eighteenth of
Dhu 'l-Hijjah as the Day of Ghadir Khumm,[^12] and al-Mas'udi mentions
the night of the same day as the night of the festival of Ghadir
Khumm.[^13] Abu Rayhan al-Biruni, the famous Iranian scholar of the
fifth century, includes the festival of Ghadir Khumm among the festivals
that the Muslims celebrated in his time.[^14] In his *Matalib al-Su'ul*,
the Shafi'i scholar Ibn Talhah writes: "The day of Ghadir Khumm is a
festive day and an historic occasion, for it was then that the Messenger
of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, clearly and
explicitly nominated 'Ali, peace be upon him, as Imam and leader of the
Muslims after him."[^15]

Now let us see what the Messenger of God meant by the word "master"
(*mawla*) when he said: "For whomsoever I was his master, 'Ali is now
his master." Does it mean one who has prior rights of disposition, as
the concomitant of the absolute governance of one person over another,
or simply a helper and friend?

By referring to the Qur'an we can see that the first meaning is the
correct one, for God says of the Prophet:

***The Prophet has a greater claim to the souls of the believers than
the believers themselves.(33:6)***

In addition, there are many places in the Qur'an where the word *mawla*
occurs with the meaning of *wali* or ruler.[^16]

The one who has a greater claim on the souls of others than they do
themselves must have a priori a similar claim to their property, and
will therefore necessarily have the right of absolute governance over
them, a governance that permits no disobedience to his orders and
commands.

The rank that this implies was first granted by God to His Prophet; it
was God who endowed him with authority over the lives and property of
the believers and gave him prior rights of disposition in every respect.

There are numerous indications and proofs that the meaning of *wali* in
the traditions relating to Ghadir Khumm is identical to *awla* ("has a
greater claim") in the verse we have just cited. Just as the Messenger
of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, enjoyed absolute
governance based on the Qur'an, so too did the Commander of the
Faithful, 'Ali, peace be upon him, have the same rank and attribute, the
only difference being that with the sealing of prophethood with the
termination of the Prophet's mission, the gate of prophethood was
closed. With this single exception, all the offices of the Prophet were
transferred to 'Ali.

The first citation that clarifies the meaning of *wali* in the *hadith*
is a sentence uttered by the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, before he proclaimed 'Ali, peace be upon him, to be his
successor. He asked: "Do I not have greater claims on you than your own
selves?"

Here, while proclaiming his own authority over the Muslims, after
obtaining their assent to the fact that he had greater claims on them
than their own selves, he added: "For whomsoever I was his master, 'Ali
is his master." The meaning of 'Ali, peace be upon him, being master
must necessarily include the sense of *awla* ("having greater claims"),
the same station that the Prophet himself had with respect to the
believers. If the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, had intended something else, there would have been no reason for
him first to gain assent to his own possession of "greater claims".
Could the meaning of *mawla* possibly be a simple friendship that exists
among Muslims?

At the beginning of his address to the people, the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, said: "Do you bear witness that
there is none worthy of worship other than God, the One and unique, and
do you believe that Muhammad is His servant and messenger and that
paradise and hellfire are both realities?"

Could the reason for posing these questions have anything other than
preparing the people to accept a principle comparable to those contained
in the questions? Was it not the purpose of the Messenger of God, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, to make the people understand
that acceptance of the caliphate and successorship of 'Ali, peace be
upon him, which he was about to announce was on the same level as those
three principles divine unity, prophethood, and resurrection?

If what the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
meant by *mawla* nothing more than friend and protector, friendship with
'Ali would have been exactly the same as any other friendship prevailing
among the believers since the very beginning of Islam as part of Islamic
brotherhood. would have been no need to proclaim it in such a vast
gathering, preceded by all kinds of detailed prefatory remarks and
gaining the assent of the people to the three basic principles.

Furthermore, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and mentioned
his own death before presenting 'Ali, peace be upon him, to that great
assembly he informed those present that he would soon be quitting this
transitory realm. By making this statement, he wished in reality to fill
the vacuum of leadership that would arise after him by appointing 'Ali,
peace be upon him, as his successor. Mere friendship and love for 'Ali
be upon him, could not alone have played a crucial role in Islamic
society. Would it have been in any way necessary for the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, to deliver a lengthy speech
under the burning sun to an assembly of one hundred thousand people
simply to expound love for 'Ali, peace be upon him? Had not the Qur'an
already proclaimed the believers to be friends and brothers to each
other?

In view of all these consideration, it is not rationally acceptable that
the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, should on
that occasion have been speaking of love for 'Ali, peace be upon him.

Moreover, after the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, had finished speaking, a large number of the Companions came up
to 'Ali, peace be upon him, and offered him their felicitations in a
stream that continued until it was time for the sunset prayer. Abu Bakr,
'Uthman, Talhah and al-Zubayr were among those who offered 'Ali, peace
be upon him, their on being appointed successor. 'Umar was among the
first to address 'Ali, saying: "Well done, son of Abu Talib!
Congratulation on this appointment; you have become the master of every
believer, man and woman alike."[^17]

Had 'Ali, peace be upon him, gained any other appointment at that time
which might have qualified him for these congratulations? Was not 'Ali,
peace be upon him, known until that point as an ordinary Muslim
deserving of friendship like any other?

Hassan b. Thabit, the celebrated poet of the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, was present among the pilgrims,
and he understood the word *mawla* to imply the Imamate and leadership,
He said in one of his poems: "The Prophet turned to the people and said
to 'Ali 'Arise! I make you henceforth the leader and guide of the
people.'"

If one studies the whole of the Prophet's speech with an open mind, free
of prejudice and preconceived notions, and examines the evidence and
indications it contains, he cannot fail to derive but a single meaning
from the word *mawla* as applied to 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be upon
him: the one who has prior rights of disposition and the right of
absolute governance.

If the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, did not
use the word "ruler" at Ghadir Khumm when referring to 'Ali, peace be
upon him, saying, for example, "after me 'Ali will be your ruler," it is
because he generally used the word *amir* (commander) in the context of
military affairs and the organization of the pilgrimage, whereas the
word *wilayah* (authority or governance) was used in connection with the
affairs of the *ummah* and indeed he referred to himself as the *wali*
of the believers.

Not even God referred to the prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, as a ruler in the Qur'an, nor did the Prophet ever call
himself a ruler or commander in any *hadith*. In fact the Qur'an says
explicitly.

"***It is God and His*** ***Messenger alone who are your wali, and those
who establish prayers and regular charity and bow down humbly in
worship."(5:56)***[^18]

In reality, the link between the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, to whom is entrusted the supervision of the Muslims,
and the Islamic *ummah* is like the relationship of a father with his
offspring, for he is responsible for administering their affairs and
protecting their interest; it is not a relationship of ruler and ruled.

Likewise, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
did not use the word caliph or successor with respect to 'Ali, peace be
upon him, because obedience to a successor becomes incumbent only after
the death of the one to whose authority he succeeds, whereas the
intention of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, was the obedience to 'Ali, peace be upon him, was obligatory for
the Muslims even before he died. He therefore called him the master of
the believers, implying his possession of authority both before and
after the death of the Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family. Based on the *hadith* of Ghadir Khumm, he was the
master of the Muslims, lust like the Prophet, and had "greater claims on
them than their own selves."

al-Tirmidhi in his *al-Sahih* first relates this *hadith*, describing it
as exalted and remarkable, and then further relates the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, to have said: "'Ali is from me
and I am from 'Ali; no one other than 'Ali has the right to do anything
on my behalf,"[^19]

al-Hakim in his *al-Mustadrak* similarly relates the Messenger of God,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, to have said: "Whoever
follows me has obeyed God, and whoever disobeys me has disobeyed God.
Whoever obeys , 'Ali has obeyed me, and whoever disobeys , 'Ali has
disobeyed me."[^20]

When therefore the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and
his family, proclaims to the Muslims that, 'Ali, peace be upon him, has
the same authority over the Muslims as himself, so that obedience to him
is equivalent to obedience to the Messenger of God, he is in reality
proclaiming 'Ali, peace be upon him, to the Muslim community as its
overall leader and as the successor to his authority, calling on them to
render him obedience.

One of the Shi'i scholars writes:  
 "I say in all sincerity that if the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, had stood before the people on the day of
Ghadir and said: 'For whomsoever I am his master, Abu Bakr is his
master; O God, love those who love him and be hostile to those who are
hostile to him,' I would be absolutely certain that the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, had appointed Abu Bakr as his
successor. Equally I cannot imagine that the vest mass of Muslims would
have had any doubt that Abu Bakr had been appointed to the succession.
If the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
had said that Abu Bakr had greater claims on the believers than they did
themselves and that adherence to the Qur'an was a sure protection
against misguidance, there would be no room for hesitation.

"I wish to point out that the hesitancy of Muslims in agreeing that the
*hadith* of Ghadir Khumm indicates the appointment of 'Ali, peace be
upon him, by the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, as his successor does not rest on obstinacy and fanaticism. It
derives rather from the fact that they have grown up in a society where
it is believed that the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, did not appoint any successor. It is difficult for them to
reconcile this belief with the clear meaning indicated by the
*hadith*."[^21]

Of course, one cannot reject the possibility that some of the Companions
did not deliberately disobey the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, when choosing his successor; they were simply
mistaken in their calculations.

They imagined leadership and the rule of the *ummah* to be simply a
worldly affair, so that it was permissible for them to overlook the one
whom the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, had
selected and choose someone else to administer the public affairs of the
*ummah*.

Such a group among the Companions may have imagined that the selection
of 'Ali, peace be upon him, by the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, was simply one of those matters of social concern on
which the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, would
sometimes consult his Companions. If this is the case, they failed to
grasp all the purposes that the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him
and his family, had in mind and the consequences he intended for his
choice. Likewise they were incapable of reflecting on the disastrous
consequences their own choice and decision would ultimately entail.

[^1]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. V, pp. 209-13; al-Haythami, Majma'
al-zawa'id, Vol. IX, pp. 163-5.

[^2]: al-Wahidi, asbab al-Nuzul, p. 150; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur,
Vol. III, p. 298; al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 130; al-Alusi,
al-Tafsir, Vol. II, p. 172; al-Shawkani, Fath al-Qadir, Vol. III, p. 57.
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol. III, p. 636; Badr al-Din
al-Hanafi, 'Umdah al-Qari, Vol. VIII, p. 584; Abduh, Tafsir al-Manar.

[^3]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. IV, p. 281; Ibn Kathir,
al-Bidayah, Vol. V, p.212.

[^4]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. V, p. 181.

[^5]: al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih, Vol. V, p. 328.

[^6]: al-Muttaqial-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. XV, p. 123.

[^7]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. I, p. 118-19; al-Hakim,
al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 109; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, v, pp. 209, 213.

[^8]: al-Haythami, Majma' al-zawa'id, Vol. IX, pp. 104-5; al-Hasakani,
Shawahid al-tanzil, Vol. I, p. 193; Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. I,
p. 119. Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. v, p. 212.

[^9]: The hadith concerning Ghadir Khumm is to be found with various
chains of transmission in the Sunni sources. See al-Ghadir, Vol. I, pp.
14-72, where the hadith is reported from 110 Companions of the Prophet,
including Abu Bakr, 'Umar b. al-Khattab, Ubayy b. Ka'b, Usamah b. Zayd,
Anas b. Malik, Jabir b. 'Abdullah, Zayd b. Arqam, Talhah, al-Zubayr, and
Ibn Mas'ud. See too al-Tirmidhi, Jami al-Sahih, Vol. II, p. 297.
al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 109; Fakhr al-Din al-Razi,
al-Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol. XII, p. 50; al-Wahidi, asbab al-Nuzul, p. 150;
al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. II, p. 298; al-Ya'qubi, al-Tarikh,
Vol. II, p. 95; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. V. al-Khatib al-Baghdadi,
Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. VII, p.377. al-Tha'labi, al-Tafsir, p. 120; Ibn
Hajar, Sawa'iq, Chapter 5.

[^10]: al-Suyut.i, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. II, p. 256; Ibn Kathir,
al-Bidayah, Vol. II, p. 14; al-Hamawini, Fara'id al-simtayn, Chapter 12;
al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. VIII, p. 290; al-Suyuti,
al-Itqan, Vol. II, p. 31; al-Khwarazmi, al-Tarikh.

[^11]: al-Ya'qubi, al-Tarikh, Vol. II, p.36.

[^12]: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-a'yan, Vol. I, p.60.

[^13]: al-Mas'udi, al-Tanbih wa al-ishraf, p. 32.

[^14]: al-Biruni, al-Athar al-Baqiyah, (Persian translation), p. 334.

[^15]: Cited in al-Ghadir, Vol. I, p. 267.

[^16]: For example, Qur'an, 57:15 and 22:13.

[^17]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. 1V, p. 281; Ibn Hajar,
al-Sawa'iq, p. 26; al-Tabari, al-Tafsir, Vol. III, p. 428; al-Ghazali,
Sirr al-'alamin, p. 9. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol.
III, p. 636; al-Hamawini, Fara'id al-simtayn, Chapter XIII; Ibn Kathir,
al-Bidayah, Vol. V, p. 209; Ibn Sabbagh, Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 25;
al-Muhibb al-Tabari, Riyad al-Nadirah, Vol. II, p. 169.

[^18]: Sunni and Shi'i commentators alike are agreed that this verse
alludes to 'Ali.

[^19]: al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih, Vol. V, p. 300. See also Ibn Majah,
al-Sunan, Vol. I, p. 44, and Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. IV, pp.
164-5.

[^20]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 131.

[^21]: Amir al-Mu'minin.


