Lesson 5: The Rank of 'Ali as Indicated in Other Sayings of the Prophet
=======================================================================

It was not only at Ghadir Khumm that the Messenger of God, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, proclaimed 'Ali, peace be upon
him, to be the leader of the Muslims and his successor, officially and
in the presence of the people. In the third year of his mission, when he
was commanded to proclaim his prophethood openly, he appointed 'Ali,
peace be upon him, as his successor. It is known that for the first
three years of his prophetic mission, the Most Noble Messenger, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, did not make his summons
public, instead calling people to Islam in secret. It was in the third
year of his mission that he was instructed to invite his relatives to
Islam openly.[^1]

He thereupon instructed 'Ali, peace be upon him, to invite forty of the
leading personages of Quraysh to a banquet, and forty of the Prophet's
relatives accepted.

At their very first session, the nonsensical ravings of Abu Lahab, his
raging anger and unbridled arrogance, caused the meeting to break up in
confusion. The following day, when again everyone was gathered in
accordance with the instructions of the Most Noble Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, first food was served to the
guests, and then it was time for spiritual nourishment. The Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, stood up among his
relatives, praised and supplicated the Creator, and said:

"I swear that there is none worthy of worship other than the One God,
and that I am His envoy to you and the entirety of mankind. I have
brought you the means of felicity in both worlds. My Lord has commanded
me to summon you to the religion of Islam, and I give you glad tidings
that whoever among you accepts my summons the soonest and aids me in my
mission will be my brother (*akhi*), my legatee (*wasiyyi*) and my
successor (*khalifati*)."

Those words greatly disturbed those present at the gathering, for their
pride was offended, and it almost seemed that the voice of truth and the
summons of prophethood would remain unheeded. Suddenly 'Ali b. Abi
Talib, peace be upon him, arose and cried out: "O Muhammad, I believe in
the oneness of God and your messengerhood and I distance myself from the
idol worshippers."

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, ordered
'Ali, peace be upon him, to sit down. He then repeated twice more his
earlier proclamation, but those words of truth made no impact on the
hearts of those gathered in that assembly. No one apart from 'Ali, peace
be upon him, responded to the call of the Prophet, peace and blessings
be upon him and his family. ''Ali's acceptance of that summons and his
declaration of agreement with the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, came at a time when he was just entering manhood.
While everyone else sat voiceless and silent, he arose courageously and
affirmed his acceptance of the Prophet's call a second time. Thereupon
the Prophet turned to the assembly and said:

*"'Ali is my brother and legatee and my successor among you. Obey him,
follow him, and pay heed to his words."*[^2]

The reaction of the assembled guests was extremely hostile, for they
wished to strip this declaration by the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, of its effect, and they therefore stood up and
quit the meeting in the most unworthy and discourteous fashion. This
event constitutes one of the plainest and most significant chapters in
history, and none of the well known historians has ever seen fit to deny
its occurrence, Not even the most narrow-minded among them have been
able to excise this historic occurrence from their writings.

At that delicate and dangerous juncture, when the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, found himself alone in pursuing
his great and glorious goal, he needed a helper and ally capable of
supporting him powerfully and historically.

Such a person could only be one who was prepared to devote himself fully
to the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, and who
had attained the highest degree of sincerity, courage, and obedience to
God, so that once he came to exercise the office of successor, he would
be a mirror reflecting all the knowledge, wisdom and moral purity of the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family.

The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, knew that
although some of his relatives might accept his call and come to embrace
Islam, none among them would be prepared to commit himself to active
collaboration or to confront the various forces arrayed against him, the
idolators of Arabia and the People of the Book.

Such a commitment would necessarily involve a protracted and merciless
struggle against all sectors of Arab society, for none of them was
prepared to tolerate the summons to change their beliefs and abandon
their idols. The suggestion that they should do so could not fall to
arouse their intense hostility, so that a conflict was completely
inevitable, a conflict that would lead to the destruction of the
possessions of anyone who allied himself with the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family.

Someone who was ready to make himself a protective shield for the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, under those
unfavorable conditions and even to risk him own life had to be an
extraordinary individual. Without doubt there was none among the
relatives of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, who possessed the necessary qualities apart from 'Ali, peace be
upon him, who was indeed destined to demonstrate in the bitter and
punishing events that were to occur extraordinary and even unique
qualities of heroism and devotion.

The significance of the proclamation made by the Messenger of God, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, on that day is thus clear. It
permits us to understand why he undertook to name as his successor and
legatee the one and only person who promised him full collaboration.

Taking into consideration the Qur'anic verse, "*The Prophet says nothing
out of mere fancy, and whatever he utters is the fruit of revelation
from his Lord*,"(53:3-4) we must conclude that on that very day, during
the earliest part of his mission the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, clearly and unmistakably appointed 'Ali, peace
be upon him, to be leader and guide of the people after his death.

The traditions in which this occurrence is recorded furthermore indicate
that the question of succession was the direct prerogative of God and
the Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, and that
the people cannot resolve so momentous a matter in accordance with their
own wishes. Indeed, the question was of such significance that the
Imamate was proclaimed together with prophethood on one and the same
occasion, in a gathering attended by the foremost relatives of the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family.

Ibn Hisham, the well known historian, writes:

"'Ali b. Abi Talib was the first man to believe in the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, to pray together with him, and
to affirm the veracity of that which God gave him, although on that day
he was a ten year old child."[^3]

Anas b. Malik remarks: "The Prophet began his mission on Monday, and
'Ali embraced Islam on Tuesday."[^4]

Ibn Majah in his *al-Sunan* and al-Hakim in his *al-Mustadrak* record
'Ali, peace be upon him, to have said:

*"I am the servant of God and the brother of His Messenger. I am the
supremely veracious one, and none but a liar shall say the same after
me. I made the prayer seven years before anyone else did."*[^5]

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, emphasized on various occasions that the question of leadership
of the *ummah* pertained to God alone, and that he played no role in
this respect.

al-Tabari records the following in his history:

"A tribal chief by the name of al-Akhnas made his allegiance and
obedience to the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, conditional on the leadership of the *ummah* being assigned to
him after the death of the Prophet The Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, responded: 'This is a matter that belongs to
God; He will appoint to this office whomever He deems fit' The chief in
question was disappointed and he sent a message to the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, saying that it was
unacceptable that he should toil and exert himself only to see the
leadership go elsewhere."[^6]

Can it then be permissible to prefer a leader chosen by the people to
the one selected by God and His Messenger, or to place that lofty
personage under the authority of someone else, obliging him to obey him
and follow his command? The Qur'an clearly proclaims:

***None has free choice when confronted with the command of God and His
Messenger. Whosoever disobeys the command of God and His Messenger falls
prey to obvious misguidance. (33:34)***

When, therefore, God selects a certain person to be the guide and leader
of the people, that person is the caliph." even if the Muslim community
does not make it possible for him to exercise governmental authority. It
is the same as in., the case of prophethood: if God appoints a person as
prophet, that person is a prophet, even if people do not believe in him
and refuse to obey him.

Another precious utterance in which the Messenger of God, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, emphasizes to the Islamic *ummah*
that 'Ali, peace be upon him, is their leader and ruler is the *hadith*
known as the "*hadith* of the Rank" (*hadith* *al-manzilah*). The
circumstances under which it arose are the following:

One day the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
learned that the armies of Byzantium were mobilizing for an attack on
Madinah in the hope of gaining a swift victory. Upon hearing this, he
ordered precautions to be taken and with a single order he was able to
assemble a large force of Muslims to confront the enemy.

At the same time, a report reached the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, that the Hypocrites were also gathering their
forces with the aim of causing disorder in the city during the
anticipated absence of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and
his family, by killing and inciting people to violence.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, appointed 'Ali, peace be upon him, to guard the city on his
behalf, and he ordered that he should remain in Madinah until he
returned, administering the affairs of the Muslims. When the Hypocrites
realized that their treacherous plans had been divulged, they began
spreading idle rumors in the hope of weakening 'Ali's position. They
hinted that the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
was angry with 'Ali, peace be upon him, and that it was for this reason
that he had not been permitted to accompany him on a major military
expedition.

'Ali, peace be upon him, was greatly troubled and saddened by the
circulation of these rumors, and he hastened to the presence of the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, who had already
left Madinah. He told him what had happened, and with a single historic
sentence he clarified the special position of 'Ali, peace be upon him,
once and for all:

"Are you not content that your relation to me shall be like the relation
of Harun to Musa, excepting only that there shall be no prophet after
me?"[^7]

At the end of this *hadith* there is a sentence that many Sunni scholars
have recorded in their books:

"It is not fitting that I should depart without your being my deputy and
successor."[^8]

Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, who was an obstinate enemy of 'Ali peace be upon
him, mentions the same *hadith* in order to demonstrate his high
standing.

When Mu'awiyah wanted to have the people of Makkah swear allegiance to
Yazid, he convened an assembly of some of the Companions at the place
known as al-Nadwah. He began by condemning and criticizing 'Ali, peace
be upon him, expecting Sa'd to agree with him at least on this point.
But contrary to his expectations, Sa'd turned to Mu'awiyah and said:
"Whenever I recall three luminous moments in the life of 'Ali, peace be
upon him, I wish from the bottom of my heart that they had been mine.
The first of the three came on that day when the Messenger of God, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, said to 'Ali, peace be upon
him, 'Your relation to me shall be like the relation of Harun to Musa,
excepting only that there shall be no prophet after me.'

"The second came on the plain of Khaybar when the Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, said: 'Tomorrow I will entrust the
banner to one who loves God and His Prophet and whom God and His Prophet
love. He will be the conqueror of Khaybar, for he never turns his back
on the enemy.'

"The third was on the day when the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, disputed with the Christians of Najran. He gathered
'Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, peace be upon them all, around him, and
presented them to the divine presence, saying, 'O Lord, these are the
people of my house.'"[^9]

In the *hadith* comparing his relation with 'Ali to that of Musa (Moses)
with Harun (Aaron), the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, had implicitly designated 'Ali as his brother, assistant and
general deputy as well as leader of the *ummah*, and the fact that he
excepted only prophethood indicates the comprehensive nature of the
station he awarded to 'Ali, peace be upon him.

If we refer to the Qur'an, we will see that God Almighty granted all the
requests Musa made on him, and it was in accordance with one such
request that He appointed Harun the helper, assistant, deputy and
successor of Musa among his people, and even made him a prophet.[^10]
Since Harun was the leader of all the Bani Isra'il, the situation of
'Ali, peace be upon him, was analogous. Just like the Most Noble
Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, he was the
ruler of all the Muslims, and his acting on his behalf as his deputy
when he was not present was therefore entirely natural, a consequence of
his comprehensive deputyship. Likewise, the deputyship exercized by
Harun when Musa went to the place of assignation was not temporary in
nature.

Someone might be of the view that 'Ali's deputyship was restricted to
the period that the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, was absent from Madinah, so that the *hadith* under discussion
cannot be taken as having general significance or as evidence that he
was the Prophet's successor.

To this we answer that whenever the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, left the Islamic capital, he would always appoint
someone to act as his deputy. If by comparing 'Ali, peace be upon him,
to Harun, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
had intended nothing more than the usual appointment of a deputy,
restricted in his authority to Madinah for the period of the Prophet's
absence, why did he not use a similar expression for those other favored
Companions he would appoint as deputy? Why did he not use the same or
similar words to describe the services they rendered?

History provides no evidence that the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, uttered these words with respect to anyone but
'Ali, peace be upon him. The simple truth of the matter is that the
Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, made use of the
occasion to proclaim the virtues of 'Ali, to appoint him as his
successor, and to make plain that he was his sole legatee.

If the Prophet had intended to appoint him only as his deputy for a
limited time, it would have made no sense for prophethood to be excluded
from the prerogatives of his office. The meaning then would have been
something improbable like the following: "'Ali, stand ill as my deputy
for a while until I return, but you will not be a prophet after me." The
exception made of prophethood makes sense only if the various powers and
attributes of Harun should continue to pertain to 'Ali after the death
of the Prophet.

Moreover, this expression was used by the Prophet in appointing 'Ali as
his successor on other occasions as well, not simply when assigning him
deputyship in Madinah, as history bears witness. For example, in the
earliest days of the Hijrah, when the Prophet caused every Muslim to
conclude a pact of brotherhood with another Muslim, 'Ali hastened
sorrowfully to the presence of the Prophet and said: "How is it that you
have assigned every Muslim a brother, but have not chosen anyone to be
my brother?" In the presence of a group of Companions, the Prophet then
replied: "I swear by the Lord Who sent me with the message of truth, I
delayed the matter only in order to make you my brother. You are to me
as Harun was to Musa, excepting only that there shall be no prophet
after me. You are my heir and my brother. "[^11]

This *hadith* demonstrates among other things that the barring of 'Ali
from prophethood was not because of any unfitness on his part, but only
to the fact that Muhnammad, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, was the Seal of the Prophets. Had prophethood not been sealed
with him, 'Ali would doubtless have been a prophet.

The Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
called 'Ali, peace be upon him, his brother on a number of occasions.

Thus we read in the Sirah of al-Halabi:

"After the Prophet concluded pacts of brotherhood among the Companions
(for example between Abu Bakr and 'Umar, Usayd b. Hudayr and Zayd b.
al-Harithah, Abd al-Rahman bn 'Awf and Sa'd b. al-Rabi', and Abu
'Ubaydah and Sa'd b. Mu'adh), he took 'Ali by the hand and proclaimed,
'This is my brother.' Thereafter 'Ali and the Messenger of God were
brothers."[^12]

On another occasion, when discussing a matter that concerned 'Ali, his
brother Ja'far, and Zayd b. al-Harithah, the Prophet addressed ''Ali as
follows: *"As for you, O 'Ali, you are my brother and comrade."*[^13]

On yet another occasion he said: *"You will be my brother and companion
in Paradise."*[^14]

Let us now see what is meant by brotherhood in this context.

In order to abolish and obliterate all forms of tribal distinction and
privilege which were contrary to the norms of divine justice, the
Prophet undertook a number of necessary measures, above all by
establishing a special type of brotherhood among the Muslims after the
migration to Madinah. It was his wish to bring a comprehensive
brotherhood into being in the Islamic *ummah*, not as an abstract idea
but as a palpable and objective reality. By the coming together of two
adoptive brothers, who were not linked by any ties of blood or kinship
but only by closeness to God and belief in the truths of His religion,
the new brotherhood of Islam began to blossom in a practical form.
Spiritual brotherhood became the equivalent of genealogical kinship. The
links between two adoptive brothers, each hailing from a different tribe
and town, contributed moreover to a general expansion of friendship and
affection between all the members of the two different tribes, so that a
network of deep spiritual and emotional links came into being.

The brotherhood of the Most Noble Prophet, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family, and 'Ali, peace be upon him, had come into being no
less than ten years before the Hijrah, when the Prophet convened a
gathering of his relatives at his house in order to request their aid.
The Prophet's purpose in establishing this fraternal link with 'Ali was
without any doubt different from the goal of creating closeness between
two tribes or the people of two cities that he pursued in Madinah, not
least because no such gap or difference separated him from 'Ali. They
were already related to each other as cousins and firm, strong ties
already existed between them.

The reason for the brotherhood between the Prophet and 'Ali must
therefore have been spiritual and intellectual affinity, a mutual inward
attraction. It was 'Ali who more than anyone else resembled the great
founder of Islam with respect to his spiritual qualities and knowledge,
his devotion and insight. The brotherhood of the Prophet with 'Ali had
therefore a special significance that extended beyond this world to the
plain of resurrection and the realm of the hereafter. Thus al-Hakim
records in his *al-Mustadrak* the following remark addressed to 'Ali by
the Messenger of God, handed down by two separate authentic chains of
transmission: "You are my brother in this world and the hereafter."[^15]

One day when Abu Bakr, 'Umar and Abu 'Ubaydah were present, the Prophet
placed his hand on the shoulder of 'Ali and said: "O 'Ali, you are the
first person who accepted Islam and believed in me; you are to me as
Harun was to Musa."[^16]

Once 'Umar saw a man insulting 'Ali b. Abi Talib. 'Umar told him: "You
are a hypocrite, for I heard the Messenger of God say to 'Ali, 'Only
'Ali is to me as Harun was to Musa, excepting only that there shall be
no prophet after me."'[^17]

A point to be noted in this tradition is that since the Arabic particle
*innama* (only) implies exclusivity, the Prophet cannot have meant
'Ali's deputyship to be temporary, for he also appointed others as his
deputies from time to time. 'Umar's words also imply that he understood
the Prophet's declaration to make 'Ali his equal in all respects except
prophethood, for he told the man who insulted 'Ali, "You are a
hypocrite." His hypocrisy was indeed worse than open unbelief.

However high be the rank of a believer, to insult him entails neither
unbelief nor hypocrisy. 'Umar and many of the Companions used to insult
each other, but no one ever interpreted this kind of behavior as
entailing unbelief or hypocrisy. However, insulting the Prophet, peace
and blessings be upon him and his family, does indeed entail unbelief,
and it can therefore be said that 'Umar b. al-Khattab understood the
words of the Prophet to mean that 'Ali, peace be upon him, had the same
rank as the Prophet himself.

The *hadith* of the Ark (*hadith* *al-safinah*) is one more of the
well-known and universally accepted traditions found in the books of
celebrated Sunni scholars that establish the worthiness of the Prophet's
family for assuming the leadership and direction of the Islamic *ummah*,
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari relates the Prophet to have said: *"The People of
my Household are for you like the Ark of Nuh (Noah). Whoever embarks on
it will be saved and whoever turns away from it will be drowned."*[^18]

With these words the Prophet depicts clearly the rank of his family and
their fundamental role in guiding mankind and giving direction to the
Islamic *ummah*. He warns against the perilous consequences of
abondoning the lofty and salvific persons of his house, a course that
will lead whoever chooses it to darkness and misguidance.

The sense of comparing the People of the House (*Ahl al-Bayt*) to the
Ark of Nuh is that whoever follows their guidelines in fulfilling his
religious duties and whose acts conforms to their commands is guaranteed
salvation from the awesome punishment that awaits on the Day of
Judgement Whoever rebels and disobeys, who distances himself from that
axis of orientation, is like the one who sought refuge from the dreadful
tempest on the mountaintops instead of in the Ark of Nuh. The only
difference is that the latter met his death by drowning, while the
former will be submerged in the torment of hellfire and eternal
perdition.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, said in description of the People of his House:

*"The People of my House are like the stars that help men find their way
on sea and dry land and deliver them from misguidance and
errance."*[^19]

He said further. *"Whoever seeks refuge with the People of my House will
be safe from misguidance and ruin, and whoever opposes them will fall
prey to discord and divergence and join the party of Satan."*[^20]

From the traditions just cited can be deduced also the dimensions of the
House, for whoever is exposed to the possibility of committing error and
sin, of deviating from the clear guidelines laid down by the Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, will never be able to
save others from falling into the pit of misery and misguidance or to
bring about that radical change in modes of thought, feeling and social
organization that is needed to ensure eternal felicity.

It would be possible to object against the Shi'ah or to condemn them for
the path they have elected only if their obedience to the People of the
Prophet's House were inspired by something other than his instructions
and recommendations. Such, however, is not the case.

When the first caliph appointed the second caliph as his successor, what
word or sentence did he use? Did he use more than one sentence to
indicate that the office of caliphate and leadership of the Muslims that
he had exercised now fell to the lot of 'Umar? By contrast, there are
numerous expressions and sentences from the Prophet, clear and explicit
in meaning, concerning 'Ali; do they not suffice to prove his leadership
and succession? The words of the Prophet are far clearer and more
explicit than those used by the first caliph; are they not enough to
prove at least the claim of 'Ali to religious leadership? Fair-minded
and intelligent people can judge for themselves.

The scholars and leading figures of the Sunni community have regarded it
as necessary to follow the views and teachings of the founders of the
four schools of Sunni law, even though there is no *hadith* from the
Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
enjoining such obedience. We can therefore discern no adequate reason
for these same scholars to ignore the teachings of the People of the
Prophet's House, in the face of his clear declaration that the Our'an
and the People of the House will remain inextricably linked until the
Day of Judgement.[^21]

What is even more remarkable is that some of the founders of the four
legal schools were themselves students of the People of the House and
benefited from their erudition. A leading Sunni scholar remarks:

"All Islamic scholars, irrespective of the school to which they belong,
are unanimously agreed on the accomplishments and learning of Imam
al-Sadiq, peace be upon him. Sunni Imams who were his contemporaries
studied with him and derived knowledge from him. Malik learned from him,
as did some of the contemporaries of Malik such as Sufyan b.'Uyaynah,
Sufyan al-Thawri, and many others. Abu Hanifah, whose lifetime more or
less corresponded to that of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, studied
religious knowledge with him and regarded him as the most learned man of
the age."[^22]

Ibn Hajar, another Sunni scholar, relates Imam al-Shafi'i to have said:
"The Household of the Prophet is my means of salvation, and they are my
means of drawing near to the Prophet. It is my hope that for their sake
the record of my deeds will be given into my right hand on the Day of
Judgement."[^23]

Again al-Shafi'i said: "O People of the Prophet's House, love for you
has been made obligatory by God through mention in the Qur'an.
Sufficient cause of pride it is for you that whoever fails to invoke
blessings on you in his prayer will fail to have his devotions (*salat*)
accepted."[^24]

Unlike the views of the *mujtahids* who founded the four Sunni schools,
there is no contradiction or divergence among the teachings of the
People of the House, for they were not engaged in independent reasoning
on the ordinances of religion. Their teachings are identical with those
of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, of which
the Imams of the People of the House were infallibly aware. The
utterances of the Imams cannot therefore be placed on the same level as
the views of the founders of the four Sunni schools.

In view of all this, how can it be justified to ignore and neglect the
teachings of the People of the House?

[^1]: See Qur'an, 26:214.

[^2]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. I, pp. 111, 159. Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil, Vol. II, p.22; al-Tabari, al-Tafsir, Vol. II, p. 216; Abu
al-Fida', al-Tarikh, Vol. I, p. 119; al-Ganji, Kifayatal-Talib, p.89.
al-Nasa'i, al-Khasa'is, p. 18; al-Halabi, al-Sirah, Vol. I, p.304; Ibn
Abi 'l-Hadid, Sharh, Vol. III, p. 255; al-Suyuti, Jam' al-Jawami', Vol.
VI, p. 408; al-Khifaji, Sharh al-Shifa', Vol. III, p. 37.

[^3]: Ibn Hisham, al-Sirah, Vol. I, p.245.

[^4]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 312.

[^5]: Ibn Majah, al-Sunan, Vol. I, p. 44; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol.
III, p. 112.

[^6]: al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. II, p. 172.

[^7]: al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, Vol. III, p.58; Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. II,
p. 323; Ibn M'ajah, al-Sunan, Vol. I, p. 28; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak,
Vol. III, p. 190; Ibn Hajar, Sawa'iq, p. 30; al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz
al-'Ummal, Vol. VI, p. 152; al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 240;
al-Nasa'i, al-Khasa'is ., p.7; Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqat, Vol. III, p.24.

[^8]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 63; al-Nasa'i, al-Khasa'is .,
p. 63; al-Hamawini, Fara'id al-simtayn, Vol. I, p. 328 al-Dhahabi,
Talkhis al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 132; Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol.
I, p. 331; al-Khwarazmi, al-Manaqib, p. 72; al-Ganji, Kifayat al-Talib,
p. 116; Ibn Asakir, al-Tarikh al-Kabir, Vol. I, p. 203; al-Biladhuri,
Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. II, p. 106; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. VII, p.
338; al-'Asqalani, al-Isabah, Vol. II, p.509.

[^9]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. VII, p. 120; Ibn 'Asakir, al-Tarikh
al-Kabir, Vol. I, p. 334; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. VII, p. 341;
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. XIII, p. 163; Ibn Majah,
al-Sunan, Vol. I, p.58; al-Nasa'i, al-Khasa'is, p.50; al-Qunduzi,
Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 51.

[^10]: See Qur'an, 20:29-32.

[^11]: al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. V, p.31.

[^12]: al-Halabi, al-Sirah, Vol. II, p. 97. Ibn Hisham, al-Sirah, Vol.
I, p.505.

[^13]: Ibn Sa'd, al-Tabaqat, Vol. VIII, p. 114.

[^14]: Ibn 'Abd al-Barr, al-Isti'ab, Vol. II, p. 460; al-Khatib
al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdadi, Vol. XII, p. 268; al-Firuzabadi, Fada'il
al-Khhamsah, Vol. I, p.114.

[^15]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 414; al-Tirmidhi, Jami'
al-Sahih, Vol. V 

[^16]: al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. VI, p. 395.

[^17]: Ibn , Asakir, al-Tarikh al-Kabir, Vol. I, pp. 360-61; al-Khatib
al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. VII, p.453.

[^18]: al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-'Ummal, Vol. I, p. 250; Ibn Hajar,
al-Sawa'iq, p. 75; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 343; al-Qunduzi,
Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 257. Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p.
10; al-Sabban, Is'af al-Raghibin, p. 111; al-Shiblanji, Nur al-Absar, p.
114.

[^19]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 140; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III,
p. 149.

[^20]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 140; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III,
p. 149.

[^21]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. V, p. 181.

[^22]: Shaykh Muhammad Abu Zahrah, al-Imam al-Sadiq, p.66.

[^23]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 108. See too al-Firuzabadi, Fada'il
al-Khamsah, Vol. II, p.81.

[^24]: al-Shiblanji, Nur al-Absar, p. 104.


