Lesson 6: The Relationship between the Qur'an and the Progeny of the Prophet
============================================================================

The *hadith* concerning the "two weighty trusts" known as *hadith*
*al-thaqalayn* is one of the most widely accepted and authoritative of
all the traditions narrated from the Prophet, peace and blessings be
upon him and his family, and it has also been recorded in the principal
Sunni books of tradition. It possesses the highest degree of
authenticity and acceptance. The text is as follows:

*"I leave among you two precious and weighty trusts, on being the Book
of God and the other my Progeny. These two legacies will never be
separated from each other, and if you lay firm hold of them you will
never go astray."*[^1]

Certain Sunni scholars even add the following sentence at the end of the
*hadith*: "'Ali is always with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with 'Ali;
they too will not be separated from each other."[^2]

*Hadith* scholars attribute the transmission of this tradition to
roughly thirty Companions of the Prophet.[^3]

According to numerous *hadith* scholars and historians, Shi'i and Sunni
alike, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
never failed at different times in this life, including its difficult
last moments, to draw people's attention to the profound link between
these two great and authoritative sources of Islam, the Qur'an and his
Progeny (*Ahl al-Bayt*), tracing out thereby an entire program for the
future of Islam in a single instructive sentence.

Small differences are to be seen in the form of the relevant traditions,
some being detailed and others concise depending on the occasion, but
the content and meaning are always the same: the profound and
indissoluble link between the Qur'an and the Progeny of the Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family, the absolute
interrelatedness of the two.

Ibn Hajar, a Sunni scholar, writes:

"We have mentioned earlier different versions of this *hadith*. Some of
them relate to the utterances made by the Prophet at Arafah in the
course of his Farewell Pilgrimage; others to pronouncements made while
he was on his deathbed in Madinah, surrounded by the Companions; another
to his address at Ghadir Khumm; and yet another to statements made while
returning from Ta'if."

He then adds:

"None of these versions contradict each other, for there is no reason
why he should not have repeated the same truth on all these occasions,
and on others as well, given the great significance that both the Qur'an
and his Progeny possess.[^4]

In another tradition known as the *hadith* of the Truth (*hadith*
*al-haqq*), the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family,
says: *"'Ali is with the truth and the truth is with 'Ali; wherever the
truth is, 'Ali will incline to it."*[^5]

We know that the verses of the Noble Qur'an form a compendium of the
divine commands and laws of Islam; the teaching contained in them are a
guarantee for man's happiness and salvation. However, the interpretation
and exegesis of the Qur'an have to be undertaken by persons who are
acquainted with the language of revelation and who fully possess the
necessary competence, in terms of both knowledge and conduct.

The Shi'ah therefore believe that those who possess this competence must
be identified by the Prophet himself and appointed by him to administer
the affairs of the people and guide them. It is they who understand the
language of revelation and can properly acquit themselves of the task of
interpreting and explicating God's verses. The juxtaposition of the
Progeny of the Prophet with the Qur'an is thus due to the need of the
Qur'an for an exegesis that will set forth its purposes and regulations.

If we look carefully at the content of the *hadith*, we will see that to
separate the Qur'an from the Progeny of the Prophet and to follow the
utterances and views of persons unacquainted with its symbols and truths
is bound to lead to error and misguidance. The tradition therefore
implies that only the Progeny of the Prophet can establish the firm and
categorical meaning of the verses in God's Book that are allegorical.

The fact that the Prophet places the Qur'an and his Progeny side by side
indicates that both are advancing in the same direction and toward the
same goal: the Qur'an is a divine law and book, and the Progeny are its
interpreters, executors and guardians. To separate and distance oneself
from the Progeny is therefore to invite destruction.

The decline and deviance of the Muslims began when such a separation
started to occur and men attempted to hold on to each one separately.
The thesis, "God's Book alone is enough for us" came to prevail in their
religious thinking, leading to the emergence of such schools as the
Ash'ari and the Mu'tazilite. It was as if they knew the value of God's
Book better than the Prophet himself and better comprehended its
significance!

It is possible to understand the Qur'an and explain the knowledge it
contains only by referring to the utterances of those persons upon whom
knowledge has been directly bestowed by God, or at least whose knowledge
is derived from instruction by a particular source. Such persons can be
only the Inerrant (*ma'sum*) Imams of the Prophet's Progeny.

Ibn Hajar also cites the following sentence uttered by the Prophet,
peace and blessings be upon him and his family:

*"Do not attempt to go beyond these twin trusts (the Book and the
Progeny of the Prophet), for that will lead you into perdition, and do
not fall short in adhering to them, for that too will encompass your
ruin. Do not imagine the People of the Prophet's House to be ignorant,
for they are infinitely more knowledgeable than you and understand well
the language of revelation."*[^6]

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali, peace be upon him, said:

*"You will never remain faithful to your covenant with the Qur'an unless
you recognize who it is that has betrayed his covenant, and you will
never lay firm hold of the Qur'an unless you recognize who it is that
has abandoned it. Seek the straight path of fidelity and the means of
adhering to the Qur'an from the people of the Qur'an, for it is they who
keep alive knowledge and learning and uproot ignorance. They it is by
means of obedience to whom you become aware of the knowledge they hold.
You comprehend their silence from their speech and their outer
appearance from their inner state. They never rebel against the command
of religion and never fall into dispute. Religion is a silent and
veracious witness dwelling in their midst."*[^7]

What is meant here is that the Progeny of the Prophet are free from sin
and pollution and even minor errors, for it is obvious that whatever is
indissolubly linked to the Qur'an until both trusts are brought together
before the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, on
the Day of Resurrection must be followed and obeyed by mankind together
with the Qur'an itself. God cannot command men to obey one who is
polluted by error and sin, nor can He create an indissoluble link
between the Qur'an and such a person Only those who are utterly beyond
the reach of impurity can be juxtaposed with the Qur'an, for those
obedience to whose commands God has made incumbent on all Muslims must
be free of all defect.

Not content with his other utterances on the subject, the Prophet
declared the number of successors (*khulafa*') who would come after him:

*"This religion will endure until the Day of Judgement, for as long as
twelve persons from Quraysh rule over you as my successors."*[^8]

*"My successors will be twelve in number, just like the chieftains of
the Bani Isra'il, all of them from Quraysh and (according to one version
of this hadith) from Bani Hashim,"*[^9]

Abdullah relates the Prophet to have said: *"As long as there are two
men left on the earth, leadership will remain among the Quraysh."*[^10]

This mention of the twelve successors can refer only to the Inerrant
Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet, peace be upon them, for neither
were the first caliphs twelve in number, nor were the Umayyad and
Abbasid rulers. More importantly, the crimes those rulers committed, far
from assuring the welfare and happiness of the *ummah*, brought about
the destruction of religion, so that it is impossible in any way to
consider them the successors of the Prophet.

Those who could not deny the authenticity of the *hadith* concerning
twelve successors but wished nonetheless to avoid recognizing the Twelve
Imams of the Prophet's Progeny were obliged to offer tortuous
explanations that were utterly irreconcilable with the text and content
of the tradition, for the first caliphs and the Umayyad and Abbasid
rulers when added together come to a total of some thirty people, so
that the total number of claimants to the caliphate from among the
Quraysh exceeds the number specified in the *hadith*. If we refuse to
interpret the *hadith* as referring to the Imams of the Shi'ah, we are
left with no clear or reliable meaning for it whatsoever.

Shaykh Sulayman al-Qunduzi, a Hanafi scholar, writes the following, in a
vein free of all fanaticism:

"According to scholars, the traditions that specify the successors to
the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him and his family, to be
twelve in number are well known and they have been narrated by different
chains of transmission. It became clear with the passage of time that
what the Messenger of God was referring to in this *hadith* were the
twelve Imams from his Progeny. It is impossible to refer it to the first
caliphs, for they were only four in number, nor can it be applied to the
Umayyads, for they were more than twelve in number, apart from which
with the exception of 'Umar b. Abd al-'Aziz they were all tyrants and
oppressors, and they did not belong to the Bani Hashim, whereas the
Prophet had specified that his twelve successors would be from the Bani
Hashim. Jabir b. Samarah mentions that the Prophet spoke this last part
of the tradition softly, because not everyone was happy that the
caliphate would go to the Bani Hashim.

"Equally, this *hadith* cannot apply to the 'Abbasids, because their
number, too, is more than twelve; they did not act in accordance with
the verse enjoining love for the family of the Prophet;[^11] and they
ignored the *hadith* of the Cloak (*hadith* *al-kisa'*). The *hadith*
must, then, refer exclusively to the Twelve Imams from the Progeny of
the Prophet, for they were superior to all others with respect to
knowledge, moral virtues, piety and lineage. They were a line who
inherited their knowledge from the Messenger of God, peace and blessings
be upon him and his family, their great ancestor. This is confirmed by
the *hadith* concerning the two weighty trusts and numerous traditions
that have reached us from the Prophet."[^12]

[^1]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. VII, p. 122; al-Tirmidhi, Jami' al-Sahih,
Vol. II, p. 308; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. III, p. 109. Ahmad b.
Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. III, pp. 14-17. Ibn al-Sabbagh, Fusul
al-Muhimmah, p. 24; al-Ganji, Kifayat al-Talib, p. 130; al-Qunduzi,
Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, pp. 17-18; al-Ya'qubi, al-Tarikh, Vol. II, p. 92;
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol. III, p. 18; al-Naysaburi,
Ghara'ib al-Qur'an, Vol. I, p. 349.

[^2]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, pp. 32-40; Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq,
p. 57; al-Irbidi, Kashf al-Ghummah, p.43.

[^3]: al-Halabi, al-Sirah, Vol. III, p. 308.

[^4]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 89.

[^5]: Ibn Qutaybah, al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, Vol. I, p. 68; al-Hamawini,
Fara'id al-simtayn, Chapter 37. al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad,
Vol. IV, p. 21; Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Fusul al-Muhimmah.

[^6]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa'iq, p. 153.

[^7]: al-Radi, Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 145.

[^8]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. XIII, p. 202.

[^9]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. VI, p. 2; al-Bukhari, al-Sahih ., Chapter
XV of "Kita'b al-Ahkam". Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-Musnad, Vol. I, p. 397,
Vol. V, p.86; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah, Vol. VI, p.245; al-Qunduzi,
Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p. 373.

[^10]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. XIII, p. 202.

[^11]: Qur'an, 42:23.

[^12]: al-Qunduzi, Yanabi' al-Mawaddah, p.446.


