Irresponsible Attitudes of the Companions
=========================================

**( 67 )**

Lesson Seven
------------

Here the following question arises. Given the fact that the Prophet
peace and blessings be upon him and his family proclaimed 'Ali to be his
legatee (wasiyy) and successor (khalifah) emphatically designation him
as the leader of the Muslims both at Ghadir Khumm and on other
appropriate occasions how did it happen that after the death of the Most
Noble Messenger his Companions (Sahabah) ignored God's command and
abandoned 'Ali that noble and precious personage decided not to obey him
chose someone else to be leader in his place and entrusted the reins of
rule to him? Was there any ambiguity in the words of the Prophet or were
all those different phrases and expressions establishing 'Ali's rank and
designating him leader not enough? A clear answer to this question can
be found by examining the events that took place in the age of the
Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family. We see that
there existed among his Companions elements who whenever his commands
ran contrary to their wishes and inclinations pressed him to change his
mind in the hope of preventing him by whatever means possible from
carrying out his plans. When they despaired of reaching their goal they
would start complaining.

The Qur'an warns these people not to oppose the commands of the Prophet
in the verse that reads: "Let those who oppose the commands of tire
Prophet fear disaster and a painful  

**( 68 )**

torment." (24:63) During the last days of his blessed life1 the
Messenger of God prepared an army to do battle with the Byzantines and
he appointed Usamah b. Zayd to be its commander. This appointment of a
young man despite the availability of older and more experienced men
proved displeasing to some of the Companions and led to an argument
among them. Those who were strongly oppossed to Usamah b. Zayd asked the
Prophet to dismiss him but he paid no attention to their request and
commanded Abu Bakr 'Umar and 'Uthman to join the ranks of the Muslim
army as it departed from Madinah. However they not only disregarded
military discipline but also disobeyed the categorical command of the
Prophet. Instead of proceeding to the front with the army they split off
and returned to Madinah. [( 1 )](#p1)

The disrespectful mumblings of some of the Companions greatly vexed the
Messenger of God peace and blessings be upon him and his family and with
a heart full of pain and concern for his people he came forth from his
house and addressed the people as follows:

"O people what are these words of yours concerning the appointment of
Usamah that have come to my ears? Just as you are criticizing him now
you once objected to the appointment of his father Zayd b. al-Harithah
as commander. I answer by God that just as he was worthy of command so
too is his son." [( 2 )](#p2)

Even after the death of the Prophet 'Umar came to Abu Bakr and demanded
that he should dismiss Usamah. The caliph replied: "The Messenger of God
appointed him and you wish me to dismiss him?" [( 3 )](#p3)

The Prophet's wish and desire during the final days of his  
 life was to empty Madinah of the leaders of both the Emigrants  
 and the Helpers. He therefore has Usamah's army prepared for  
 battle and gave the command for jihad ordering the army to  
 advance in the direction of the Syrian border. Insistently he  
 asked the foremost of the Companions to leave Madinah and  
 fight under the banner of Usamah retaining only 'Ali to stay  
 at his bedside. This remarkable act on the part of the Prophet  

**( 69 )**

was very significant. However those Companions failed to comply with his
instructions and they withdrew from the army commanded by Usamah.

Throughout his life the Prophet never appointed anyone as commander over
the head of 'Ali peace be upon him; it was always he who was the
standard bearer and commander. [( 4 )](#p4) By contrast Abu Bakr and
'Umar were to be simple soldiers in the army of Usamah and the Prophet
personally ordered them to serve under him when he appointed him
commander at the battle of Mu'ta. Historians are unanimously agreed on
this point. Likewise at the Battle of Dhat al-Salasil when the army was
commanded by Ibn al-'As Abu Bakr and 'Umar again served as simple
soldiers. This contrasts with the case of 'Ali b.

Abi Talib whom the Prophet from the beginning of his mission until his
death never made subordinate to anyone an extremely significant point.

History will never forget the time when the Most Noble Messenger peace
and blessings be upon him and his family was on his deathbed his state
becoming progressively more grave. He felt that the last strands of his
life were being plucked apart. He therefore decided without further
delay to put his final plan into effect and said: "Bring me paper so
that I can write for you a document to prevent you from ever going
astray.[( 5 )](#p5)

Just as he had clarified the question of leadership in numerous speeches
and utterances he wished now one final time to address this weighty
matter described by the Qur'an as the completion of religion by
enshrining it in an authoritative written document to remain among the
Muslims after his death. Thereby the door would be closed on any future
deviations from his orders. But those same people who in defiance of his
orders had refrained from going to the front were now watching the
situation carefully with the intention of implementing their plans at
the first possible opportunity.

They therefore refused to permit writing utensils to be brought to the
Prophet. [( 6 )](#p6)

Jabir b. 'Abdullah says:

**( 70 )**

"When the Messenger of God fell sick with the illness that was to end in
his death he asked for paper in order to write down for his ummah
instructions that would prevent them from ever going astray or accusing
each other of having gone astray. Words were exchanged among those
present in the Prophet's house and an argument ensued in the course of
which 'Umar uttered words that caused the Prophet to order him to leave
the house." [( 7 )](#p7)

'Ubaydullah b. 'Abdullah b. 'Utbah relates Ibn 'Abbas to have said:

"During the final moments of the life of the Messenger of God peace and
blessings be upon him and his family a number of people were present in
this house including 'Umar b. al-Khattab. The Prophet said: 'Come let me
write for you a document that will prevent you from ever going astray
after me.' 'Umar said: 'Sickness has overcome the Prophet; we have the
Qur'an which is enough for us.' "Then disagreement arose among those
present. They began to argue with each other some saying 'Quick have the
Prophet write a document for you so that you will never go astray after
him ' and others repeating the words of 'U mar.

"When the arguing and nonsensical talk reached its pitch the Prophet
peace and blessings be upon him and his family told them all to leave."

Thus it was that as Ibn 'Abbas says: "The great misfortune arose when
their noisy disputing prevented the Messenger of God from writing his
testamentary document." [( 8 )](#p8)

He then adds sorrowfully: "The tribulations of the Muslims began on that
very day." [( 9 )](#p9)

In the discussion that took place between Ibn 'Abbas and the second
caliph concerning the caliphate of 'Ali the caliph said: "The Prophet
wanted to declare 'Ali as his successor but I did not allow it to
happen." [(10)](#p10)

Some Sunni historians and hadith scholars have written  
 that when the Prophet decided to write a document that would  
 prevent the Muslims from going astray 'Umar said: "The  
 Messenger of God has become delirious." Others however in  

**( 71 )**

order to soften the offensiveness of his words maintain that he said:
"Sickness has overcome the Prophet; you have the Book of God at your
disposal which is enough for us." [(11)](#p11)

It seems that the Most Noble Messenger peace and blessings be upon him
and his family was unaware of the importance of the Book of God and they
were better in formed than him on this point! Was it necessary to accuse
him of mental derangement if he wished to draw up a written document
specifying who was to lead the ummah after his death? If indeed the
Prophet's decision could be attributed to the failing of his mental
powers as a result of illness why did the second caliph not prevent Abu
Bakr from drawing up a comparable document during the last moments of
his life or accuse him of being deranged? 'Umar was present at the side
of Abu Bakr and he knew that Abu Bakr intended to designate him as ruler
in his testament so naturally he wanted the document to be signed.

If 'Umar truly thought the Book of God to suffice for the solution of
all problems why did he immediately hasten to the Saqifah after the
death of the Prophet together with Abu Bakr to ensure that the question
of the caliphate should be resolved in accordance with their ideas? Why
did they not at that point refer exclusively to the Book of God and make
no mention of the Qur'an even though the Qur'an had already settled the
matter? al-Tabari writes the following in his history:

"When Shadid the emancipated slave of Abu Bakr took into his hand the
command Abu Bakr had written for 'Umar to become his successor 'Umar
said to the people "People pay heed and obey the command of the caliph.
The caliph says 'I have not failed you in providing for your welfare.'"
[(12)](#p12)

The expression of personal opinions running counter to the orders of the
Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family continued after
his death culminating in the changing of certain divine decrees in the
time of the second caliph and on his orders. Instances of this are to be
found in reputable books by Sunni authors. [(13)](#p13)

**( 72 )**

For example the second caliph said: "Let them never bring before me a
man who has married a woman for a set period for it they do I will stone
him."[(14)](#p14)

The fact that he prohibited temporary marriage (mut'ah) proves that this
type of union was common among the Companions and other Muslims at the
time for otherwise it would not have been necessary for him to order
them to desist. Now if the Messenger of God peace and blessings be upon
him and his family had forbidden this form of marriage the Companions
would never have had recourse to it and there would have no need for
'Umar to threaten people with stoning.

The second caliph himself admitted: "There were three things that were
permissible in the time of the Prophet which I have forbidden and for
which I exact punishment: temporary marriage the mut'ah pilgrimage and
reciting 'Hasten to the best of deeds' (hayya 'ala khayri 'l-'amal) in
the call to prayer. " [(15)](#p15)

It was also he ordered that in the call to prayer (adhan) at dawn the
phrase "prayer is better than sleep" (as 'Salatu khayrun mina 'n-nawm)
should be recited. [(16)](#p16)

According to the Sunan of al-Tirmidhi! someone from Syria once asked
'Abdullah b. 'Umar about the mut'ah pilgrimage. He replied that it was
permissible. When the man remarked that 'Abdullah's father had
prohibited it he answered "If my father has forbidden something which
the Prophet peace and blessings be upon him and his family permitted
should we abondon the Sunnah of the Prophet and follow my father?'
[(17)](#p17)

Ibn Kathir similarly records in his history: "'Abdullah b.

'Umar was told that his father had prohibited the mut'ah pilgrimage. He
said in reply: 'I fear that a stone will fall on you from the heavens.
Are we to follow the Sunnah of the Prophet or the sunnah of 'Umar b.
al-Khattab?'" [(18)](#p18)

During the time of the Prophet1 peace and blessings be upon him and his
family as well as the caliphate of Abu Bakr and the first three years of
the caliphate of 'Umar if anyone were to divorce his wife three times on
a single occasion it counted as a single repudiation and was not
therefore final.

**( 73 )**

However 'Umar said: "If such a repudiation is made I will count it as a
threefold (and therefore final) repudiation." [(19)](#p19)

The Shi'ah believe that such a repudiation (talaq) counts only as a
single repudiation and Shaykh Mahmud al-Shaltut erstwhile rector of the
Azhar regarded Shi'i jurisprudence (fiqh) superior in this respect as
well as many others. [(20)](#p20)

No one has the right to tamper with revealed ordinances for they are
divine and immutable not even the Prophet himself. The Qur'an says:
"Were Muhammad to attribute lies to Us with Our powerful hand We would
seize him and cut Iris jugular vein." (69:44)

However we see that unfortunately some of the Companions awarded
themselves the right of exercising independent judgement (ijtihad) with
respect to certain ordinances changing and modifying divine law in
accordance with their own notions.

The second caliph introduced class differences into Islamic society
during the time of his rule increasing racial tensions between the Arabs
and the Persians. [(21)](#p21)

He established a discriminatory system of distributing public monies
awarding more to those who accepted Islam early on than to those who
embraced it later; more to Qurayshite Migrants than to non-Qurayshite
Migrants; more to the Migrants than to the Helpers; more to the Arabs
than to the non-Arabs; and more to masters than to their clients.
[(22)](#p22)

Toward the end of his life 'Umar himself came to recognize the negative
effects of his policy and he said: "If I remain alive this year I will
establish equality in Islamic society and abolish discrimination. I will
act in the way the Messenger of God peace and blessings be upon him and
his family and Abu Bakr both acted. [(23)](#p23)

The foregoing indicates the arbitrary attitude that some of  
 the Companions assumed with respect to the commands of the  
 Prophet. In certain cases where those commands did not  
 correspond to their personal inclinations they tried either to  
 avoid implementing them or to change them completely. The  

**( 74 )**

fact that they ignored the unmistakably authoritative utterances of the
Prophet on the day of Ghadir Khumm or that they behaved similarly with
respect to other matters after his death should not be regarded as
either surprising or unprecedented for they had already given an
indication of their attitudes during his lifetime.

In addition it should not be forgotten that in every society most people
tend to remain indifferent to political and social matters choosing to
follow their leaders and those who seize the initiative. This is a clear
and undeniable fact.

However there were respectable and independent minded people who did not
change their position after the death of the Prophet. They did not
approve of the election that took place at the Saqifah and they
separated themselves from the majority in protest against the
introduction of the consultative concept into Islamic government
Although they were more or less compelled to remain silent they remained
loyal to 'Ali b. Abi Talib peace be upon him as leader. Among the
outstanding personalities belonging to this group were Salman al-Farisi
Abu Dharr al-Ghifari Abu Ayyub al-Ansari Khuzaymah b. Thabit Miqdad b.
al-Aswad al-Kindi 'Ammar b. Yasir Ubayy b. Ka'b Khalid b. Sa'id Bilal
Qays b. Sa'd Aban Buraydah al-Aslami Abu '1-Haytham b. al-Tayyihan as
well as many others whose names are recorded in Islamic history. Some
scholars have listed two hundred and fifty Companions of the Prophet
complete with names and descriptions as belonging to this
class.[(24)](#p24)

al-Ya'qubi mentions in his history Abu Dharr al-Ghifari Salman al-Farisi
Miqdad b. al-Aswad Khalid b. Sa'id Zubayr 'Abbas Bara' b. 'Azib Ubayy b.
Ka'b and Fadl b. al-'Abbas as being among those who remained loyal to
the cause of 'Ali peace be upon him. [(25)](#p25)

Qays b. Sa'd even went so far as to argue with his father over the
question of the caliphate and he swore never to speak to him again
because of this views. [(26)](#p26)

These are some of the earliest Shi'is; they supported  
 'Ali's right to the leadership because of the clear injunctions in  
 the Qur'an and the Sunnah. They remained unswerving in their  

**( 75 )**

views until the end. During the period of the first three caliphs the
number of Shi'is in fact rose all of them being outstanding and virtuous
personalities their names being linked to piety and purity in the books
of history and biography where they are mentioned. Among them were men
such as Muhammad b.

Abi Bakr Sa'sa'ah b. Suhan Zayd b. Suhan Hashim b. 'Utbah 'Abdullah b.
Budayl al-Khuza'i Maytham al-Tammar 'Adiyy b. Hatim Hujr b. 'Adiyy
Asbagh b. Nubatah al-Harith al-A'war al-Hamdani 'Amr b. al-Humq
al-Khaza'i Malik al-Ashtar and 'Abdullah b. Hashim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[( 1 )](#m1) Ibn Hisham al-Sirah Vol. IV p. 338; al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh
Vol. II p. 92; Ibn al-Athir al-Kamil Vol. II pp.120-21. [( 2 )](#m2) Ibn
Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol.II p.249. [( 3 )](#m3) al-Halabi al-Sirah Vol. III
p.336. [( 4 )](#m4) Ibn Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. III p.25; al-Hakim
al-Mustadrak Vol. III p.1. [( 5 )](#m5) Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. I
p.346; Muslim al-Sahih Vol. V p.76; al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. II p.436; Ibn
Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. II p.242. [( 6 )](#m6) al-Bukhari al-Sahih Vol. I
p.22; al-Tabari al-Tarikh Vol. II p.436; Muslim al-Sahih Vol. V p.76;
Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. III p.346. [( 7 )](#m7) Ibn Sa'd
al-Tabaqat Vol. II p.243. [( 8 )](#m8) Ibn Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. II
p.242; Muslim al-Sahih Vol. XI p.95; Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. I
p.336. [( 9 )](#m9) Ibn Kathir al-Bidayah Vol. V pp.227-28; al-Dhahabi
Tarikh al-Islam Vol. I p.311; al-Diyar Bakri Tarikh al-Khamis Vol. I
p.182; al-Bid' wa al-Tarikh Vol. V p.95; Taysir al-Wusul Vol. IV p.194.
[(10)](#m10) Ibn Abi '1-Hadid Sharh Vol. III p. 97. [(11)](#m11) Muslim
al-Sahih Vol. III p.1259; al-Bukhari al-Sahih Vol. IV p.5; Ahmad b.
Hanbal al-Musnad hadith no.2992. [(12)](#m12) al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. IV
p.51. [(13)](#m13) Ibn Hisham al-Sahih Vol. IV p. 237; Muslim al-Sahih
Vol. IV pp.37-8 46; al-Tabari Tarikh Vol. II p. 401; Ahmad b.Hanbal
al-Musnad Vol. III pp.304 380. [(14)](#m14) Muslim al-Sahih Vol. VIII
p.169. [(15)](#m15) al-Amini al-Ghadir Vol. VI p.23. [(16)](#m16) Ahmad
b. Hanbal al-Musnad Vol. III p.408; Muslim al-Sahih Vol. III p.183;
al-Halabi al-Sirah Vol. II p.105; Ibn Kathir Vol. III p.23. [(17)](#m17)
al-Tirmidhi Jami' al-Sahih Vol. IV p.38. [(18)](#m18) Ibn Kathir
al-Bidayah Vol. V p.141. [(19)](#m19) Muslim al-Sahih Vol. IV pp.183-4.
[(20)](#m20) Risalat al-Islam Vol. XI no 1. [(21)](#m21) al-Ya'qubI
al-Tarikh Vol. II p.107. [(22)](#m22) Ibn Abi '1-Hadid Sharh Vol. VIII
p.11; Ibn Sa'd al-Tabaqat Vol. III pp.296-7. [(23)](#m23) Taha Husayn
al-Fitnat al-Kubra Vol. I p. 108. [(24)](#m24) al-Sayyid Sharaf al-Din
Fusul-Muhimmah pp. 177-92. [(25)](#m25) al-Ya'qubi al-Tarikh Vol. II p.
103. [(26)](#m26) Ibn Abi'1-kiadid Sharh Vol. II p.18.
