Lesson 8: Does the Qur'an Provide an Unconditional Guarantee for the Companions?
================================================================================

The praise to be found in the Qur'an for acts of the Companions that had
already taken place can in no way be taken as proof for the justice of
their conduct or their freedom from corruption and deviation throughout
the entirety of their lives, It cannot be imagined that their deeds
would always and under all circumstances be synonymous with justice and
truth, for the pleasure of God Almighty and man's resulting attainment
of eternal bliss are contingent on the maintenance of faith and
consistently righteous behavior for the whole of one's life. If these
two attributes are forfeited, the inevitable result will be deviation
and corruption, with regard to both belief and action, and however
brilliant be one's past, it will be utterly unable to secure one's
eternal felicity.

The Most Noble Messenger, peace and blessings be upon him and his
family, who instructed the whole of mankind in piety and the qualities
of true humanity, who was the supreme monotheist and exemplar of moral
virtues, who was never polluted with polytheism or sin even he was
addressed thus in the Qur'an:

***"If you assign partners to Almighty God, all your deeds will count
for nothing and you will be among the losers" (39:65)***

It is obvious that the Beloved Messenger, possessing as he did the
quality of inerrancy, was not separated from God for even an instant.
The purpose of this Qur'anic warning must then be to prevent the Muslims
from falling prey to arrogance and their intentions from being polluted
by hypocrisy. Every individual must exert himself to the utmost, drawing
on all his powers and capacities, to the very last moment of his life,
in order to earn the pleasure of his Lord, remaining firm and steadfast
in his commitment.

The Qur'an says concerning that great prophet Ibrahim and his progeny:

***"If they tended to polytheism, their deeds would lose all validity."
(6:88)***

Likewise, the Qur'an also says:

***"God does not love the oppressors" (3:57) and "God is displeased with
the wrongdoers." (9:96)***

History makes it plain that by no means all of those who are known as
Companions were in fact pious and righteous people. This can be deduced,
for example, from a tradition of the Most Noble Messenger, peace and
blessings be upon him and his family, recorded in the *Sahih* of
al-Bukhari:

*"On the Day of Resurrection I will be standing beside the pool of
Kawthar, waiting for those who will come to me. I will see some of them
separating and moving away from me, and I will ask, Are they not from
among my Companions?' I will be told, 'Yes, but you do not know how they
turned back to their previous ways after your death.'*[^1]

There is a comparable *hadith* in the *Sahih* of Muslim:

*"People will come up to me beside the pool, in a manner visible to me.
When they are brought before me, they will be ashamed. I will then say,
'O God, are these my Companions?' I will be told, 'You do not know what
they did after your death.*'"[^2]

al-Taftazani, the well-known Shafi'i scholar, writes:

"The clashes, disagreements and battles that took place among the
Companions have been recorded in books of history, and narrated by
trustworthy authorities. It can therefore be deduced that some of the
Companions must have deviated from the path of justice and truth and
become polluted with oppression and wrongdoing. The reason for their
deviation, wrongdoing, and oppression, was the feelings of hatred,
obstinacy, and envy they nurtured, their hunger for leadership and rule,
their addiction to pleasure and lust. It cannot be assumed that all the
Companions were free of sin and impurity."[^3]

If the followers of certain schools of thought in Islam do not have high
regard for some of the Companions (*ashab*) or the followers (*tabi'in*)
and criticize them in a number of respects, this cannot justify cursing
them or calling their Islam into doubt. Competing views on this subject
must not be allowed to degenerate into mutual hostile wrangling, and
there is no justification for condemning as unbelievers any of the
followers of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and
his family, for even some of the Companions themselves did argue with
each other most vehemently.

Thus at the Saqifah some called out for Sa'd b. 'Ubadah to be killed;
Qays b. Sa' d b. 'Ubadah came to blows with 'Umar; and Zubayr declared
that he would not return his sword to his sheath until everyone had
sworn allegiance to 'Ali, whereupon 'Umar insulted him and called out
for him to be seized, resulting in Zubayr's beating.

'Umar's behavior to Miqdad at the Saqifah, the way in which 'Uthman
dealt with Ibn Mas'ud, Ammar b. Yasir and Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, as well
as many other incidents, are all examples of the strife and disputation
that took place. Differing views concerning certain of the Prophet's
Companions cannot therefore serve as justification for cursing any
Muslim or declaring him an unbeliever, nor can they be allowed to damage
the unity of all Muslims.

In any event, the Sunnis themselves do not in practice regard all the
Companions and Followers as worthy of respect. After all, those who
killed 'Uthman were either from the Companions or from the Followers,
and Khalid b. al-Walid killed Malik b. Nuwayrah, who was a Companion.

Among the Companions there were exalted personages who attained the
utmost degree of faith, piety, and devotion, over whose hearts and souls
God Almighty ruled; their whole beings resonated with purity and
truthfulness. However, there were others in the corners of whose spirit
still lurked the traces of *Jahili* customs and modes of thought; they
remained attached to the customs of the past. There were even elements
whose acceptance of Islam after the conquest of Makkah was based on the
calculation of personal interest. However, the powerful influence and
awe inspiring presence of the Prophet forced them to conceal their inner
desires and inclinations, and it was only after his death that they were
able to return to the habits and customs of the *Jahiliyyah*.

To approve undiscriminatingly the mode of conduct of all the Companions,
to deny that any of them was guilty of evil deeds, and to assert that
they were without exception persons of righteousness, is incompatible
with the *Sunnah* of the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon
him and his family.

One cannot therefore seek salvation among the Migrants and the Helpers
or claim that he may gain eternal felicity by means of attachment to
either of these groups. The attainment of that goal depends on the
maintenance of certain conditions until one departs through death's
gate.

Sunni scholars nonetheless maintain that all the Companions of the
Prophet were entitled to exercize independent judgement (*ijtihad*) and
are thus to be excused for whatever errors they may have committed, or
even rewarded for them. Whatever offense they may have committed is thus
justified. The triumph of this mode of thought made it impossible for
any objection to be raised and emboldened certain egoistic and ambitious
people to commit any crime they desired people like Mu'awiyah Amr b.
al-'As, Khalid b. al-Walid, al-Mughirah, Sa'id al-'As, and Busr b. Abi
Artat. Matters reached a point that Mu'awiyah had the temerity to
proclaim: "All property belongs to God, and I am the representative of
God; I will therefore dispose of it in whatever way I see fit." No one
spoke out against him with the exception of Sa'sa'ah b. Suhan, one of
the great figures of the Shi'ah; he refuted his claim.[^4]

If to be numbered among the Companions of the Messenger of God was a
guarantee of righteousness and salvation why did some of them even in
his lifetime abandon their beliefs and join the ranks of the misguided,
thereby earning condemnation and punishment by the Prophet?

Harqus. b. Zuhayr, the leader of the Kharijites at the battle of
Nahrawan, was one of the Companions of the Messenger of God, and no one
could imagine that toward the end of his life he would suddenly turn and
fall prey to misguidance. Yet that is precisely what he did, a miserable
ending that had been foreseen by the Prophet in these words: "He will
abandon his religion just like an arrow drawn forth from the quiver."
Not only did he join the Kharijites; at the battle of Nahrawan he was
the standard bearer in rebellion against 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be
upon him, by whose hand he was ultimately killed.

Abdullah b. Jahsh was another Companion who left behind the light of
Islam. When he migrated to Abyssinia, it might have been expected that
like the other Muslims who sought refuge in that land he would remain
firm and steadfast in his beliefs and the defense of God's religion.
Soon, however, darkness overtook his heart; he abandoned Islam and
converted to Christianity.

We conclude then that God's expression of satisfaction with the
Companions was conditional on their remaining within the bounds of faith
and piety and maintaining their link with God to the very end of their
life. If they changed direction and went astray, all of their good deeds
were voided, and God Almighty's satisfaction became transformed into
anger and wrath. Not only was no unconditional guarantee of God's
permanent pleasure not given to the Companions or the common believers
of later generations; it was not given even to the Prophets or the
Imams, despite their whole beings overflowing with virtue and blessings
for mankind.

[^1]: al-Bukhari, al-Sahih, "Kitab al-Fitan".

[^2]: Muslim, al-Sahih, Vol. XV, p. 64.

[^3]: al-Taftazani, Sharh al-Maqasid, p.46.

[^4]: al-Mas'udi, Muruj al-Dhahab.


