The Marriage of Fatima With Imam Ali
====================================

When Fatima (a.s.) grew youth, the great companions hurried to the
Prophet (a.s.) one after the other so that he might honor them by
marrying his pure daughter to them but the Prophet (a.s.) responded to
none of them. From those who had asked the Prophet (a.s.) for his
daughter’s hand was Abu Bakr whom the Prophet (a.s.) refused his request
and said to him, ‘I am waiting, regarding her, for the Fate (of Allah).’
After him came Umar and the Prophet (a.s.) replied to him as he had
replied to his former friend.**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) announced that the marriage of Fatima (a.s.) was in
the hand of Allah and he himself had nothing to do concerning the
matter. When Muslims knew that, they refrained from asking the Prophet
(a.s.) for his daughter’s hand any more.   

Sometime later, some companions met Imam Ali (a.s.) and mentioned to him
his close kinship to the Prophet (a.s.), his great jihad for Islam, and
his support to the Prophet (a.s.) in all his battles and situations.
They asked him to propose to Fatima (a.s.) and win the honor of the
Prophet’s affinity. Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the Prophet (a.s.)
hesitatingly because of shyness. He came to the Prophet (a.s.) lowering
his sight to the ground. The Prophet (a.s.) asked him,

‘What do you want, my brother?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) was silent for a while out of shyness and then said, ‘O
messenger of Allah, I remembered Fatima.’

The Prophet (a.s.) answered smilingly while delight appeared on his
face, ‘Welcome! Allah has ordered to marry my daughter to you.’**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol.8 p.11, Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.1 p.407,
Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.29.   
 **[2]** Noor Al-Absar, p.42, Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.318, Mustadrak
al-Hakim, vol.3

Imam Ali’s heart was filled with delight for the honor that Allah
granted him. He was the Prophet’s cousin and then he was going to be his
son-in-law. It has been mentioned in some tafsirs that this verse *(And
He it is Who has created man from the water, then He has made for him
blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is powerful.
25:54)* concerned Imam Ali (a.s.).**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) told his companions that Allah had ordered him to
marry his daughter to Imam Ali (a.s.). He said to them, ‘An angel came
and said to me: O messenger of Allah, Allah sends you greeting and says
to you: I have married Fatima to Ali in the high Heaven, so you marry
her to him in the earth.’**[2]**

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) went to Fatima (a.s.) and said to her, ‘I marry
you to the best one of my umma. He is the most knowledgeable, the most
prudent, and the first Muslim.’**[3]**

On another occasion, he said to her, ‘O Fatima, do you not know that
Allah observed the people of the earth, and then He chose your father
from among them and sent him a messenger, and once another He observed
and then He chose your husband and revealed to me so that I married him
(to my daughter) and took him my guardian?’**[4]**

On a third occasion he said to her, ‘He (Imam Ali) is the first of my
companions in being Muslim, the most of them in knowledge, and the
greatest of them in prudence.’**[5]**

All high qualities, ideals, and values were available in Imam Ali (a.s.)
and therefore, Allah had chosen him a husband for the daughter of the
Prophet (a.s.). In traditions it is mentioned that: “If Ali was not
created, there would be no equal for Fatima.’**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p.153.  
 **[1]** Majma’ al-Bayan, vol.9 p.175.  
 **[2]** Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.32.  
 **[3]** Jam’ al-Jawami’, vol.6 p.398.  
 **[4]** Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.32.  
 **[5]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.153.  
 **[6]** Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.5 p.36, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, 6
p.101, Ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.194.

### The dowry of Fatima

The dowry of Fatima (a.s.) was very simple. The Prophet (a.s.) had
assigned it so to be an example for all the women of his nation so that
no man and no woman might remain unmarried because of high dowries.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali, do you have
something (to pay as dowry)?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘I have a sword, an armor, and a horse.’

The Prophet (a.s.) said to him, ‘As for your horse, you need it, and as
for your sword, you cannot do without it, but as for your armor, you can
sell it.’**[1]**

Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the market and sold his armor for four hundred
and eighty dirhams and came back with the amount knotted in the end of
his shirt,**[2]** and put it before the Prophet (a.s.). It was a very
simple dowry and it was less than what the poor might pay for their
wives.  

### Her furniture

The Prophet (a.s.) took a handful of dirhams and gave them to Bilal to
buy with them some perfumes for Fatima (a.s.), and other handfuls to
Salman and Umm Salamah to buy some furniture. It was no long until all
requirements of the wedding were prepared. The furniture of Fatima
(a.s.) and Ali (a.s.) was the following:

1. A sheepskin to sleep on  
 2. A pillow of leather stuffed with palm-tree fibers  
 3. A bed made of palm-tree branches  
 4. A quern  
 5. A water skin  
 6. Two jars  
 7. Some pottery vessels

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kifayat at-Talib, p.166, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.120.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.14.

This furniture was very simple and cheap in people’s consideration, but
it was too valuable in the Islam’s view. It was more precious than
jewels and expensive things that kings and wealthy people give to their
wives.

The furniture was put before the Prophet (a.s.). He looked at the
pottery and said, ‘Blessed are the people of a house whose most vessels
are of pottery.’

Allama al-Fartoosi described this house of Imam Ali and Fatima in the
following poem by saying,

“And your house that is too simple with what its four corners contained.

In a corner a mat beside it a jar was put,

And in another a bed of palm-tree branches there was,

And clay vessels that were the cups which were made by their owners
hands,

And a quern was there that blistered the hand that milled barley,

As if humbleness with what it contained was a sign that everything
worshipped.”**[1]**

Lomnice concluded from the simplicity of Fatima’s wedding that the
Prophet (a.s.) hated Fatima because he married her to a poor man and
that the furniture of her house was too simple. The ignorance of Lomnice
regarding Islam led him to this conclusion. His mind was built by the
Western life that did not understand Islam.

Islam hates excessive dowries so that to make marriage easy for all. The
Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘The best women of my community are those of less
dowries.’**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘A man, during the time of the messenger of
Allah, got married to a woman for a sura from the Qur’an,**[3]** a
dirham, or some wheat.’**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Malhamat (epic of) Ahlul Bayt by al-Fartoosi, vol.1 p.35.  
 **[2]** Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqeeh, vol.3 p.243.  
 **[3]** To teach his wife a sura from the Qur’an as her dowry.  
 **[4]** Tahthib al-Ahkam, vol.7 p.366.

Once, the Prophet (a.s.) married some man from his companions who
possessed nothing to a woman for a dowry of that he should teach his
wife one sura from the Qur’an.**[1]** That dowry was called “the dowry
of the sura”.

The Islamic Sharia encourages marriage with little dowries and cancels
superiority between spouses. It makes a Muslim man equal to a Muslim
woman, but these values were ignored by Lomnice who looked at things
only from the material angle.

### The sermon of marriage

On concluding the agreement of marriage, the Prophet (a.s.) made this
speech before a crowd of his companions. He said,

“Praise be to Allah Who is praised for His blessing, worshipped by His
power, obeyed by His sovereignty, Who it is feared from His torment and
affliction, Whose command is executed in His heaven and in His earth,
Who has created the creation (people) by His power, distinguished them
with His commandments, glorified them by His religion, and honored them
by His prophet Muhammad, Allah’s blessing be on him and on his progeny.

Allah, Whose name has been blessed and Whose greatness has been exalted,
has made affinity (through marriage) as subsequent kinship and imposed
matter that He interlaces relatives and binds people by it. Allah the
Almighty says, *(And He it is Who has created man from water, then He
has made for him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your
Lord is powerful. 25:54).* The command of Allah comes to His judgment
and His judgment comes to His fate. Every judgment has a fate, and every
fate has a term, and every term has a prescription. (*Allah makes to
pass away what He wills and establishes what He wills, and with Him is
the basis of the Book. 13:39).*

Allah the Almighty has ordered me to marry Fatima to Ali. Now, I make
you witness that I marry Fatima to Ali for four hundred weights of
silver (as dowry), if he agrees, due to the authentic Sunna and the
obligatory duty. May Allah gather

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sahih Muslim, vol.1 p.545.

them together, bless them, make their offspring good, and make their
progeny the keys to mercy, the source of wisdom, and safety to the
nation. I say this and ask Allah to forgive me and forgive you.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) was not present when the Prophet (a.s.) was delivering
the sermon of marriage for he was away to carry out something for the
Prophet (a.s.). After the end of the sermon, he came. When the Prophet
(a.s.) saw him, he smiled and said,

“O Ali, Allah has ordered me to marry Fatima to you, and I have done for
four hundred weights of silver.”**[1]**

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to speak, and Imam Ali
(a.s.) said,

“Praise be to Allah Who has been near to His praisers, approached His
askers, promised the Paradise for whoever fears Him, and warned with
Fire whoever disobeys Him. We praise Him for His eternal favor, ask Him
for assistance and to guide us, believe in Him, ask Him to suffice all
our needs, and bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone with no
partner with Him a witness that fits and pleases Him, and that Muhammad
is His servant and messenger, may Allah have blessing on him a blessing
that takes him closer to Allah, favors, exalts, and chooses him.
Marriage is from that which Allah has ordered and from that which
pleases Him. This is the messenger of Allah. He has married his daughter
Fatima to me for a dowry of five hundred dirhams, and I have agreed. Ask
him and witness on that.”

Then the Prophet said, “I marry my daughter to you as the Beneficent One
has willed for you. I have accepted what Allah has accepted for her. The
best son-in-law, and the best companion you are, and Allah’s pleasure
with you suffices you.”**[2]**

Then, Imam Ali (a.s.) prostrated himself before Allah as gratefulness
for this great blessing that Allah had endowed him with. After that, the
Prophet (a.s.) prayed Allah for Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatima (a.s.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kashful Ghummah, p.358-359, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.132.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 43 p.132.

saying, “May Allah bless you, prosper you, unite between you, and
produce much good from you.”**[1]**

The conclusion of marriage was held in the mosque of the Prophet
(a.s.).**[2]** The Prophet (a.s.) ordered a vessel of unripe dates to be
offered to the attendants to eat from it.

### The banquet of marriage

On the night of wedding, the Prophet said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘ O Ali,
there must be a banquet for the bride.’**[3]**

Imam Ali (a.s.) had nothing in order to prepare the banquet. Sa’d bin
Ubadah offered a sheep and some men from the Ansar offered some corn.
Food was prepared and Muslims were invited for dinner. The Prophet
(a.s.) gave some dirhams to Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him to buy some
oil, dates, and cheese. When Imam Ali (a.s.) bought those things, the
Prophet (a.s.) uncovered his arms and began splitting the dates and
mixing them with the oil and cheese and so he made “heiss”**[4]** and
offered it to the invitees.**[5]** After having dinner, the invitees
congratulated Imam Ali (a.s.) and prayed Allah to bless his marriage.

The Prophet (a.s.) said to his daughter Fatima (a.s.), “Do you know
Ali’s position to me? He supported me while he was twelve years old,
stroke with the sword before me when he was sixteen, killed heroes when
he was nineteen, relieved my grieves when he was twenty, and plucked up
the gate of Khaybar when he was twenty-two years old.”**[6]**

### The house

The house in which Imam Ali and Fatima (peace be on them) had got
married was one of Haritha bin an-Nu’man’s houses. First, the Prophet
(a.s.) was shy to take the house, but when Harithah understood that, he
hurried to the Prophet (a.s.) saying, ‘O

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Noor al-Absar, p.42, ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.183,
Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.29.  
 **[2]** Khashf al-Ghummah, vol.358.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.14.  
 **[4]** The name of such food.  
 **[5]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.132  
 **[6]** Amali as-Saduq, p.483.

messenger of Allah, I and my properties are for Allah and for His
messenger. By Allah, nothing is more beloved to me than what you take
from me, and what you take (from me) is more beloved to me than what you
leave (to me).’ The Prophet (a.s.) thanked and prayed Allah for him.
Then, Fatima (a.s.) moved to live in this house.**[1]**

### The wedding

The Prophet asked his wife Umm Salamah to take his daughter Fatima
(a.s.) to the house of Imam Ali (a.s.) that was next to the mosque of
the Prophet (a.s.). So Umm Salamah and some women from the Muhajireen
and the Ansar carried Fatima (a.s.) home in a procession while chanting
some songs and poetry. After having offered the Isha’ Prayer, the
Prophet (a.s.) went to Imam Ali’s house and Umm Ayman received him
there. He asked her, ‘Is my brother here?’

She said, ‘O messenger of Allah, may my father and mother die for you!
Who is your brother?’

He said, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib.’

How is he your brother whereas you have married your daughter to him?’

He said, ‘It is so, Umm Aymen.’

The Prophet (a.s.) came in and the two spouses got up out of respect and
reverence. The Prophet (a.s.) asked Fatima (a.s.) to bring him some
water and she did. He drank a sip and then ejected it back into the cup.
He asked Fatima (a.s.) to get up and he sprinkled some of that water on
her chest and head. Then, he raised his head towards the heaven saying,
‘O Allah, I ask You to protect her and her progeny from cursed Satan.’

Then the Prophet (a.s.) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to bring another cup of
water and he did. The Prophet drank a sip and ejected it back into the
cup. Then he poured some of the water of the cup on Imam Ali’s head and
prayed Allah for him saying, ‘O Allah, I ask You to protect him and his
progeny from cursed Satan.’ He asked him to turn back and when Imam Ali
(a.s.) turned back, the Prophet poured the rest of the water, prayed for
Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him to go in to his wife.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.40 p.6.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.52-53.

By getting married to Fatima (a.s.), Imam Ali (a.s.) got further honor
and importance before people. It has been mentioned in traditions that,
“Ali had a high rank before people during the life of Fatima
(a.s.).”**[1]**

Once, the Prophet said to Fatima (a.s.), “I have married you to a master
in this life and a master in the afterlife. No one hates him except a
polytheist.”**[2]**

On the night of her wedding, Fatima (a.s.) took off her wedding dress
and gave it to a poor young woman. The following day, the Prophet (a.s.)
visited her and found that she was not wearing her wedding dress. He
asked why and she said, ‘O father, a poor young woman knocked the door
asking for a dress. I wanted to give her my old dress but then I
remembered this saying of Allah *(You will not attain unto piety until
you spend of that which you love. 3:92).* Therefore, I gave her my new
dress that I loved.’**[3]**

This blessed house (of Imam Ali and Fatima) was established in the
second year of Hijra.**[4]** And it was said other than this. It was
said that Fatima (a.s.) was ten years old when she got married**[5]**
while Imam Ali (a.s.) was twenty-one years and five months.**[6]**

### The house that Fatima lived in

The Prophet (a.s.) built his daughter a house adjacent to the Great
Mosque and made a door in it that was opened to the mosque. When the
Prophet (a.s.) ordered all the doors that were opened to the mosque to
be closed and he excluded the door of Fatima(and Ali)’s house as a kind
of honoring and glorifying.**[7]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghareeb al-Hadith by ibn al-Jawzi, vol.2 p.455, an-Nihayah fee
Ghareeb al-Hadith, 5 p.158.  
 **[2]** Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.43.  
 **[3]** Know that I am Fatima, vol.2 p.665.  
 **[4]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.187.  
 **[5]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10 p.4.  
 **[6]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.187.  
 **[7]** Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.2 p.26, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol.2
p.246, 

Ibn Umar considered the Prophet’s closing all the doors of the
companions’ houses that were opened to the mosque except the door of
Imam Ali (a.s.) as one of the merits that Imam Ali (a.s.) had
got.**[1]**

### The house affairs

Fatima bint Asad, Imam Ali’s mother, lived with the Imam in the same
house. So he divided the house affairs between his mother and his wife
Fatima bint Muhammad (a.s.). The internal house affairs such as serving
food and the like were his wife’s duty whereas the external affairs were
his mother’s.**[2]**

Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter, served food for her husband and
children. She milled mostly barley in the quern and sometimes wheat.
Then she kneaded and baked it. Fatima (a.s.) lived as the prophets and
their guardians lived. She was ascetic and very simple in all sides of
her life.

She swept and cleaned the house with her bare hands. She wove clothes
for her husband and children. The shirt that Imam Ali (a.s.) put on in
wars had been woven by her.**[3]**  

Imam Ali (a.s.) often helped Fatima (a.s.) in the house affairs. He
said, “Once, the messenger of Allah (a.s.) visited us while Fatima was
near the cooking pot and I was picking out lentils. He said, ‘O Abul
Hasan, listen to what I say, and I do not say except from my Lord. Every
man, who helps his wife in her house, Allah will write for him as much
as the hairs on his body (the reward of) worship of a year; fasting in
the day and worshipping all the night, and Allah will give him like the
reward of the patient and the righteous.’”**[4]**

In some sources, it has been mentioned that the Prophet (a.s.) had
determined for Fatima (a.s.) the work inside the house and for Imam Ali
(a.s.) the work outside the house.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** An-Nafahaat al-Qudsiyyah fee al-Anwar al-Fatimiyyah, p.135
quoted from Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.2 p.26, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.3
p.214, Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.319.   
 **[2]** Al-Istee’ab (printed on the margins of al-Isabah), vol.4 p.363,
Tahthib al-Kamal, vol.3 p.248.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.39 p.54.  
 **[4]** Ibid., vol.101 p.132.  
 **[5]** Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.6 p.104.

The life of Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatima (a.s.) was full of love and
friendliness. About that Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, I did never
anger her or force her to do something (unwillingly) until Allah took
her to the better world. She also did never anger me nor did she disobey
me in anything at all. When I looked at her, my griefs and sorrows were
relieved.’**[1]**

Besides the tire and hardship she faced in milling the food for her
family, she milled food for her weak and old neighbors just for the sake
of Allah.

Salman al-Farisi narrated, “One day, I passed by Fatima’s house and
heard al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who were young children, crying. I pity
them and said to Fatima from behind the door, ‘I want to carry al-Hasan
and al-Husayn.’

She said to me, ‘O Salman, I have no veil on my head.’

I threw my aba to her. She veiled herself with it and went to al-Hasan
and al-Husayn. I sat near the quern that she was milling with it and I
began running it. I found some blood on the shaft of the quern and
became astonished. I asked Fatima about it and she said that she milled
barley and wheat for the poor people of Medina who had no querns. She
received them kindly and milled their food for them.’**[2]**

One day, the Prophet came to her and found her milling while wearing a
garment of camel hair. He cried and said to her, ‘Be patient with the
bitterness of this life for the sake of the bliss of the afterlife
tomorrow.’**[3]**

While she was milling she was reciting this saying of Allah, *(and
whatever is with Allah is better and more lasting. 28:60).*

The Prophet (a.s.) recommended Fatima (a.s.) not to insist on Imam Ali
(a.s.) to buy her anything from the pleasures of the worldly life. She
said to Imam Ali (a.s.), “The messenger of Allah (a.s.) had forbidden me
from asking you for anything. He said to me, ‘Do not ask your cousin for
anything. If he himself brings you something (accept it); otherwise, do
not ask him for anything.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.133 quoted from Amali at-Toosi.  
 **[2]** Know that I am Fatima, vol.4 p.547.  
 **[3]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.295.

Fatima (a.s.) often carried water for her weak neighbors. She filled the
skin from wells and carried it to them until her back was
affected.**[1]**

### Fatima’s children are the Prophet’s children

Many true traditions have been transmitted from the Prophet (a.s.)
showing that he had considered Fatima’s children as his. All the
Prophet’s children died in their early childhood, and so the polytheists
rejoiced at that and said that the Prophet had no offspring; therefore,
Allah revealed to the Prophet these verses, *(Surely We have given you
(al-Kawthar) the Fount (of abundance). Therefore pray to your Lord and
make a sacrifice. Surely your enemy is the one who shall be without
posterity. 108:1-3).*

Exegetes say that al-Kawthar was Fatima (a.s.) the principal of all the
women of the world and that the Prophet’s posterity was from her. The
Prophet (a.s.) loved his grandchildren from the deep of his heart and he
saw that they would be the continuity of his life. Once, in their early
childhood, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be on them) walked and
stumbled. The Prophet (a.s.) descended from the minbar, carried them,
and said, ‘Allah the Great is true when He says, *(your possessions and
children are but a trial. 8:28).’*

When he heard one of them crying, he said to his daughter Fatima (a.s.),
‘Why are they crying? Do you not know that their crying distresses me?’

The Prophet (a.s.) himself took care of them and managed their affairs.
One night, he heard that al-Hasan (a.s.) wanted some water. He brought
some water. Al-Husayn (a.s.) wanted to drink water but the Prophet
(a.s.) gave water to al-Hasan (a.s.) first. Fatima (a.s.) said to her
father, ‘As if al-Hasan is more beloved to you!.’

The Prophet said, ‘No! But al-Hasan asked for water first.’ Then he
wrapped them with one wrap and said to them, ‘I and you will be in one
place on the Day of Resurrection.’**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.82.  
 **[2]** Fatima az-Zahra’ and the Fatimids, p.43.

The following are some traditions declaring that Fatima’s children were
the Prophet’s offspring.

1. Fatima bint Imam al-Husayn narrated from her grandmother Fatima
az-Zahra’ (a.s.) that the Prophet had said, ‘All the children of Adam
belong to their agnation except Fatima’s children that I am their father
and I am their agnation.’**[1]**

2. The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘For all children of a father there is an
agnation that they belong to except Fatima’s children that I am their
guardian and I am their agnation. They have been created from my clay.
Woe unto whoever denies their preference. Whoever loves them Allah loves
him, and whoever hates them Allah hates him.’**[2]**

3. The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘The agnation of every children belongs to
their father except Fatima’s children. I am their father and I am their
agnation.’**[3]**

4. The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘Every children of a mother belong to an
agnation, except Fatima’s children that I am their guardian and I am
their agnation.’**[4]**

Nevertheless, the Umayyads denied the Prophet’s fatherhood to Fatima’s
children and claimed that one’s daughter’s child was not considered as
one’s child. Their poet said,

“Our children are the children of our sons,

but as for our daughters,

their children are the children of strange men.”

Islam has refuted this notion of the pre-Islamic age and not
differentiated between one’s daughter’s children and son’s children.

It is worth mentioning that we mention this story here. Aamir ash-Sha’bi
narrated,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh Baghdad, vol.11 p.285.  
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.216.  
 **[3]** Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.221.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.220.

“One day, I was with al-Hajjaj.**[1]** It was the day of Eid ul-Adha. He
turned towards me and said, ‘O Aamir, by what do people approach Allah
on this day?’

I said, ‘People approach Allah through sacrifices.’

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘How about you if I shall sacrifice a man from the
adherents of al-Hasan and al-Husayn?’

Al-Hajjaj ordered his men to bring that man, and they did before no
long. He was an old man tied with heavy ties. Al-Hajjaj shouted at this
old man who was Yahya bin Ya’mur, ‘Are you still in your deviation from
the truth?’

The old man asked why and al-Hajjaj said to him, ‘You claim that
al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the children of the messenger of Allah
(a.s.).’

Yahya confirmed that al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, were the
Prophet’s children and he gave proofs on that. He recited this verse
(*say: Come let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your
women, and ourselves and yourselves. 3:61)* and said that it was
al-Hasan and al-Husayn who were meant by *(our sons).*

Al-Hajjaj cried out harshly, ‘Do you have other than this verse or
otherwise I shall behead you?’

Yahya recited this other verse *(and of his descendants, Dawood and
Sulaiman and Ayyub… and Isa (Jesus)… 6:84-85)* and said that the Holy
Qur’an declared that Jesus (a.s.) was from the posterity of Prophet
Abraham (a.s.) though Prophet Jesus (a.s.) had been born with no father.

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘Jesus was from Abraham’s children because of his mother
Mary.’

Yahya asked how long it was between Mary and Abraham and al-Hajjaj said
it was some generations.

Then Yahya said, ‘Between al-Hasan and al-Husayn and the messenger of
Allah (a.s.) there was no one save Fatima. So are they not the Prophet’s
children?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf ath-Thaqafi was the cruelest wali of the
Umayyads.

Al-Hajjaj looked at the ground and pondered for a while after being
refuted by Yahya. Then, he said to his men, ‘Untie his ties and chains
and give him ten thousand dinars in spite of me.’

I (Aamir) followed after Yahya to see what he would do with the ten
thousand dinars. I saw him standing in a square called Rahbat al-Kufa
while distributing the money among the poor and saying, ‘This is from
the blessings of al-Hasan and al-Husayn.’**[1]**

The Abbasids were not better than the Umayyads in this concern. In fact,
they were much worse. They hated the Alawids bitterly, chased them
everywhere, threw many of them into dark prisons, and killed too many
others. The Abbasid kings donated great gifts to the poets who
dispraised the Alawids in their presence. Anyhow, we do not want to
mention their shameful conducts in this concern in order not to
expatiate.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Know that I am Fatima, vol.3 p.193-195, and mentioned briefer in
Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol.7 p.31 and al-Mustadrak ala as-Sahihayn, vol.3
p.180. 
