The Pure Progeny
================

Here, we talk about the blessed children of Fatima (a.s.) who and whose
posterity were the infallible deputies of Allah in the earth.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)
--------------------

He was the first child of Fatima (a.s.). He was born in Ramadan, in the
second or the third year of hijra.**[1]**

When the Prophet (a.s.) was informed about this blessed newborn child,
he was very pleased and delighted. He hurried to Fatima’s house to
congratulate her. Arriving in the house, the Prophet said to Asma’,
‘Bring me my son!’

Asma’ brought Imam al-Hasan wrapped in a yellow piece of cloth. The
Prophet took him, joined him to his chest, kissed him in the mouth, fed
him with his saliva, raised his (the Prophet) hands towards the heaven
and said, ‘O Allah, I ask You to protect him and his posterity from
cursed Satan.’**[2]**

Then, the Prophet (a.s.) recited the azan in the right ear of his
blessed newborn child and the eqama in his left ear.**[3]** This child
of prophethood received the world of existence with the highest psalm;
it was “Allahu Akbar; Allah is Great, and la illaha illallah; there is
no god but Allah.”

The Prophet (a.s.) asked Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘Have you named this blessed
child?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, ‘I would not precede you, O messenger of
Allah.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isabah, vol.1 p.328, al-Istee’ab, vol.1 p.368, Tareekh
al-Khulafa’, p.72.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7 p.38.  
 **[3]** Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.6 p.391, Sahih at-Tarmithi, vol.1
p.386, Sunan Abu Dawud, vol.3 p.214. 

The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘And I would not precede my Lord.’

It was no long when Gabriel came down to the Prophet carrying with him
the name from Allah. The angel said to the Prophet (a.s.), ‘Name him
Hasan!’**[1]**

Seven days after the birth of the Prophet’s grandchild, the Prophet came
to his daughter’s house to endow his grandson with some honor. He
slaughtered a ram as a sacrifice for him. It was the aqiqah**[2]** that
has become a traditional since then until now. Then, he cut the hair of
his grandson with his holy hands and gave silver, inasmuch as the weight
of the hair, to the poor.**[3]** Then, he surnamed him (gave him a
kunyah)**[4]** as Abu Muhammad.**[5]** Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had no
kunyah other than this one.

The Prophet (a.s.) declared his love to Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and praised
him in many traditions. The following are some of them:

1. Aa’ishah narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, this is my
son. I love him and love whoever loves him.’**[6]**

2. Al-Bara’ bin Aazib narrated, ‘Once, I saw the Prophet (a.s.) carrying
al-Hasan on his shoulder and saying, ‘O Allah, I love him, so love
him!’**[7]**

3. Abdullah bin Abbas said, ‘One day, the Prophet (a.s.) came carrying
al-Hasan on his neck. Some man met him and said, ‘O boy, it is the best
back you have ridden on.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.62.  
 **[2]** Aqiqa is the name of the sacrifice that is offered on the seven
day after the birth of a child.  
 **[3]** Sahih at-Tarmithi, vol.1 p.286, Noor al-Absar, p.107.  
 **[4]** Kunyah is a surname given to a male or a female beginning with
Abu (father of) and Umm (mother of).  
 **[5]** Usd al-Ghabah, vol.2 p.9.  
 **[6]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.104, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.176.  
 **[7]** Sahih al-Bukhari, vol.4 p.217, Sahih at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.307,
al-Bidayah wen-Nihayah, vol.8 p.34. 

The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘And the best rider he is.’**[1]**

4. The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘Let him, who likes to look at the sire of
the youth of the Paradise, look at al-Hasan.’**[2]**

5. The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘Al-Hasan is my pleasure in this
world.’**[3]**

6. Anas bin Malik narrated, ‘One day, al-Hasan came in to the Prophet
(a.s.). I wanted to take him away from him, but the Prophet (a.s.) said,
‘Stop that! Let alone my son and the fruit of my heart! Whoever harms
this one will harm me, and whoever harms me will harm Allah.’**[4]**

7. Once, the Prophet (a.s.) offered the Maghrib (or Isha’) Prayer and
prolonged the prostration. After finishing the prayer, People asked him
why he did so and he said, ‘My son (al-Hasan) rod on me and I hated to
send him down soon.’**[5]**

8. Abdullah bin Abdurrahman bin az-Zubayr said, ‘The most similar and
most beloved one to the Prophet was al-Hasan. I saw the Prophet
prostrating (in prayer) and al-Hasan got up over his neck (or back). The
Prophet did not send him down until he himself got down. Once, I saw
him, while bowing (in prayer), open his legs for him (al-Hasan) so that
he could pass to the other side.’**[6]**

There are many other traditions that have been transmitted from the
Prophet (a.s.) about the preference of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) besides many
others that are common between Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.). We have mentioned those traditions in the first volume of our
book “the Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, p.282, Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.2 p.35.  
 **[2]** al-Istee’ab, vol.2 p.369.  
 **[3]** Al-Bidayah wen Nihayah, vol.8 p.35, Fadha’il al-As~hab,
p.165.  
 **[4]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.222.  
 **[5]** Al-Bidayah wen Nihayah, vol. 8 p.33.  
 **[6]** Al-Isabah, vol.2 p.12.

### His education

The Prophet (a.s.) brought up and educated his grandson Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) and fed him with his own ideals. The other educator of Imam
al-Hasan (a.s.) was his father Imam Ali (a.s.) who was the best educator
in the world of Islam after the Prophet (a.s.). He also fed in his son
his high ideals and morals. His mother Fatima (a.s.), too, educated him
with the loyal faith and the deep love to Allah the Almighty. Therefore,
he was a copy to these three great, infallible persons.

Fatima (a.s.) often sent al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, to
the meeting of their grandfather the messenger of Allah (a.s.) to learn
his traditions and moralities. When they came back home, she asked them
about what knowledge and wisdom they got in the meeting of their
grandfather (a.s.). Al-Hasan, who was seven years old, listened to the
revelation in his grandfather’s meeting and memorized it. Then, he came
to his mother Fatima (a.s.) to recite it before her. When Imam Ali
(a.s.) came to her, he found that she had known about the revelation
that had at once been revealed to the Prophet (a.s.). When he asked her
about it, she replied that it was from her son al-Hasan (a.s.).

Once, Imam Ali (a.s.) hid himself in his room. Al-Hasan came to his
mother to recite before her the revelation he had heard in his
grandfather’s meeting. For a moment, he was tongue-tied, and his mother
asked kindly, ‘What is the matter with you?’

He said, ‘Do not be astonished at what has happened to me, for there is
a Great One that takes care of me.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) came out and began kissing his son al-Hasan.**[1]**  

### His moralities

All high qualities were available in Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s.),
and this naturally was because he had been fed with his grandfather the
Prophet (a.s.) and his father Imam Ali’s virtues. The following stories
show the high morals Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.74.

1. One day, an old man from Sham trespassed against Imam al-Hasan (a.s.)
and began abusing him. Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) remained silent until the
man finished his revilement, and then said to him kindly and smilingly,
‘O sheikh (old man), I think you are a stranger. If you ask us for
something, we will give you, if you ask us for guidance, we will guide
you, if you ask us to carry you (to prepare for your travel), we will
do, if you are hungry, we will give you food, if you are in need, we
will satisfy you, and if you are chased, we will shelter you.’

The man was astonished and could answer with nothing. He was confused
before these high morals of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.). Then he said, ‘Allah
knows best with whom to place His message.’**[1]**

2. One day, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was sitting in some place and when he
wanted to leave, a poor man came to him. He welcomed the poor man,
humored him, and said, ‘You sat just when we got up. Do you permit me to
go?’

The poor man was astonished at such morality, and permitted the imam to
leave.**[2]**

3. Once, he passed by some poor men who had put some pieces of bread on
the earth and were eating from them. They invited him to participate in
their food, and he responded. He sat down and began eating with them. He
said, ‘Surely Allah does not love the proud.’ Then, he invited them to
his house. He gave them food, clothes, and other things.**[3]**

### His patience

Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s.) was too patient. He met whoever
wronged him with pardon and kindness. Historians have mentioned many
stories on this matter.

Once, he found that the leg of one of his sheep was broken. He asked his
servant who did that and the servant said it was he. Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) asked him why and he replied, ‘To grieve you.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol.2 p.149, al-Kamil by al-Mubarrid,
vol.1 p.190.  
 **[2]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayooti, p.73.  
 **[3]** As-Sabban, printed in the margins of Noor al-Absar, p.176.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) smiled at him and said, ‘I will please you in
return.’

He set the servant free and gifted him generously.**[1]**

Marwan, who was one of the bitterest enemies to Imam al-Hasan,
acknowledged the great patience of the imam. When the imam died, Marwan
came and carried the imam’s coffin. Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) was astonished
and said to Marwan, ‘Today you carry his coffin, while yesterday you
depressed him bitterly!’

Marwan said, ‘I did that to one whose patience was like
mountains.’**[2]**

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was a true copy of his grandfather the Prophet
(a.s.) in patience and morals.

### His generosity

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was one of the most generous people, the kindest,
and most charitable to the poor and the wretched. He did never reject a
beggar at all. He was asked about that and he said,

“I always beg Allah and look forward to His gift. Therefore, I feel shy
to be a beggar and at the same time I reject a beggar. Allah has
accustomed me to a habit that He pours on me His blessings, and I have
accustomed Him that I pour His blessings on people. I fear that if I
stop my habit, He will stop His habit.’ Then he recited the following
verses of poetry:

“When an asker comes to me,

I say: welcome to the One Whose favor is urgently obligatory on me.

And from His favor there is a favor on every favorer.

And the best of one’s days is when he is asked (by a needy one).”**[3]**

Needy people often crowded at the door of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), and he
always gave them generously. One day, a nomad came to him asking for
help. The imam asked his servant to give the nomad all that there was in
the bursary. It was ten thousand dinars. The nomad said to the Imam
al-Hasan (a.s.), ‘Would you let me reveal my need and declare my
praise?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maqtal al-Husayn by al-Khawarizmi, vol.1 p.147.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.315.  
 **[3]** Noor al-Absar, p.611.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) said to him,

“We are people whose donation is fresh,

in which hope and expectation revel.

Our selves give before being asked,

To save the face of one who asks.

If the sea knows the abundance of our donation,

It shall, because of shyness, flow over after its flooding.”**[1]**

In our book “The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali” we have mentioned many
stories on his generosity and bounty.

### His asceticism

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) turned his back to the pleasures of this worldly
life and turned devotedly towards Allah the Almighty. It is related that
he had said:

“A bit of poor bread sates me,

and a sip of water suffices me,

and a piece of thin clothe covers me when alive,

and when I die, it is enough as a shroud.”

Muhammad bin Babwayh has written a book called “The Asceticism of Imam
al-Hasan” in which he has mentioned many stories on Imam al-Hasan’s
asceticism.

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) offered all that he had just to please Allah the
Almighty. He gave all his possessions two times, and divided his
properties with Allah three times…**[2]**

### His worship

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was the most worshipping one in his time.
Historians say, ‘He was not seen at any time unless he was mentioning
Allah the Almighty’**[3]** and that when he recalled the Paradise and
Hell, he became confused and upset as if he was ill, and so he prayed
Allah to take him to the Paradise and protect him from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafahat min Seerat Ahlul Bayt, p.86.  
 **[2]** Usd al-Ghabah, vol.2 p.13, Alf Ba’, vol.1 p.417.  
 **[3]** Amali as-Saduq, p.108.

the Hell. When he recalled death and what would come after it, he cried
a crying of an afraid repentant.**[1]** When he recalled the standing
before Allah on the Day of Resurrection, he sighed so deeply until he
fainted.**[2]**

When he wanted to perform wudu’ (ablution), he changed color and he
trembled. He was asked about this and he said, ‘He, who stands before
Allah the Lord of the Throne, must tremble and his color fade.’

When he finished his wudu’ and set towards the mosque, he prayed Allah
by saying, ‘O my Lord, your guest is at Your door. O Beneficent, the
wrong doer has come to You, so forgive the badness we have with the
goodness You have.’**[3]**

When he stood to offer the prayer, fear overcame him until all his
organs trembled.**[4]** After offering the Fajr (dawn) Prayer, he did
not utter save the mention of Allah until the sun shone.**[5]**

He had performed the hajj to the Inviolable House of Allah (the Kaaba)
twenty-five times on foot though he had best camels.**[6]** He was asked
about his going too much on foot to the Kaaba and he said, ‘I feel shy
of my Lord not to go to His House on my feet.’**[7]**

### His caliphate

He assumed the Islamic caliphate after the martyrdom of his father Imam
Ali (a.s.) the pioneer of Justice in Islam. Some of his army rebelled
against him and some other leant to rest and gave up fighting. Many of
his soldiers were affected by the Kharijites who had accused Imam Ali
(a.s.) of reneging his religion. They invited the army to rebel against
Imam al-Hasan (a.s.), besides that the commanders of the divisions
corresponded with Mo’awiya and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafahat min Seerat Ahlul Bayt, p.88.  
 **[2]** Amali as-Saduq, p.108.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.339.  
 **[4]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.327.  
 **[5]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.339.  
 **[6]** Ibid.  
 **[7]** A’yan ash-Shia, vol.4 p.11.

agreed with him that they would assassinate Imam al-Hasan or capture
him. Unfortunately, Ubaydillah bin al-Abbas, Imam al-Hasan’s cousin, who
was the general leader of the army, was bribed by Mo’awiya, and so he
took with him a part of the army and joined Mo’awiya under the darkness
of night. Therefore, the army of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) was left in
confusion and seditions.

Before this severe ordeal, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had but two choices;
either to fight with his wrecked army and sacrifice himself, his family,
and his followers without offering to Islam and the nation any good,
because Mo’awiya with his trick and cunning would deceive the public and
show them that Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) and his followers had deviated from
Islam, and if the imam was taken a captive, Mo’awiya would set him free
and thus he would purify himself and his Umayyad family from the
disgrace that the Prophet (a.s.) had stained them with when he set them
free after the conquest of Mecca.

Or he would make peace with Mo’awiya unwillingly and in spite of him,
and then Mo’awiya would be free in his oppression and consequently he
would be exposed before the public that he was too far from the reality
of Islam. And this came true immediately after the truce. Mo’awiya made
a speech before the people of Iraq saying, ‘I have not fought you to
offer prayers, to fast, pay zakat, or to perform the hajj, but I have
fought you to have power over you, and Allah has given me this although
you are unwilling. I have put everything, which I have agreed on with
al-Hasan (in the truce), under my feet. I will fulfill nothing of it.’

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) had chosen peace, and otherwise the nation would
suffer calamities and bloodsheds that only Allah knew how disastrous
they would be.

In the truce of peace, Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) made conditions on Mo’awiya
that deprived him of the legal authority and showed him to people that
he was just a boss of a gang. The imam stipulated on Mo’awiya that he
(the imam) would not call him as Ameerul Mo'minin (the commander of the
believers), and that Mo’awiya should not violate the Book of Allah and
the Sunna of His prophet in all of his conducts. Anyhow, Mo’awiya did
not fulfill any of the conditions of the truce.

After the truce, the policy of Mo’awiya violated the Book of Allah and
the Sunna of His prophet. He governed the nation with a dark policy that
had no kindness and mercy. He killed innocent people and spread terror
everywhere. He plundered the wealth of the nation and gave power to evil
men like Ziyad bin Abeeh, Bisr bin Arta’ah, Amr bin al-Aas, Marwan bin
al-Hakam and their like over the Muslims.

From the great offenses of Mo’awiya was the assassination of the
Prophet’s grandson Imam al-Hasan (a.s.). Mo’awiya asked Ja’da bint
al-Ash’ath to insert poison into the food of her husband Imam al-Hasan
(a.s.) after he (Mo’awiya) had tempted her that he would marry her to
his son Yazid. She gave the poisonous food to the imam, who was fasting,
in the Iftar, and after no long the imam left to the better world.

Imam al-Husayn
--------------

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) was the reviver of Islam and the savior of the
nation after it had been a prey in the hands of the Umayyads who
subjected it to severe torment, killed its men, and spared its women.
They seized the wealth of Allah and took His people as slaves to them.
Therefore, Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) revolted against them in his great
revolution by which Allah had revived Islam after it was about to be
destroyed by those tyrants who distorted the Book, faith, morals, and
everything. This revolution of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) shook the forts of
the Umayyads, did away with their pride and arrogance, and caused them a
bitter defeat and disgrace. It paved the way for other successive
revolts by Muslims until the Umayyad rule was overthrown forever.

We shall talk here in brief about Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).

### His birth

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) was born on the third of Sha’ban in the fourth
year of hijra. He was the second child to Fatima (a.s.). When the news
of this blessed birth spread, the Prophet’s wives and other ladies of
Muslims hurried to Fatima’s house to congratulate her on this newborn
child and participate in her joy and delight.

When the Prophet (a.s.) was informed of the birth of his second
grandson, he came to his daughter’s house but sorrow and distress

had overcome him. He said to Asma’ with faint, sorrowful sound, ‘O
Asma’, bring me my son.’

Asma’ brought him his newborn grandson, and he began kissing him and
crying. Asma’ was astonished and she asked him, ‘May my father and
mother die for you! What for are you crying?’

He replied while crying, ‘For my this son.’

Asma’ became more astonished and said, ‘He has been born just now!’

The Prophet said, ‘The oppressive party will kill him. May Allah not
grant them my intercession.’

Then the Prophet (a.s.) said to Asma’, ‘Do not tell Fatima about this.
She has just now given birth to her child.’**[1]**

From behind the unseen, the Prophet (a.s.) perceived what disasters his
grandson would face.

The Prophet embraced his blessed, newborn grandson, and recited the azan
in his right ear and the eqama in his left ear. It is related in
traditions that “The azan and the eqama are protection to a newborn
child from cursed Satan.’**[2]**

The first voice that penetrated Imam al-Husayn’s ears was the voice of
his grandfather the great propagandist of Allah in the earth. The
Prophet planted in the deep of his son the sacred psalms of “Allah is
Great” and “there is no god but Allah”, and the son fed on them and by
them he set out later on in the fields of jihad to raise the Word of
Allah high in the earth and to make the power of goodness prevail
everywhere.

The Prophet (a.s.) named his second grandson Husayn as he had named his
first grandson Hasan before.**[3]** He named him with this name after a
revelation from the Heaven.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Imam Zayd, p.468.  
 **[2]** Da’a’im al-Islam, vol.1 p.178.  
 **[3]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.30.  
 **[4]** Usd al-Ghabah, vol.2 p.61.

After seven days of al-Husayn’s birth, the Prophet (a.s.) ordered a ram
to be slaughtered as the aqeeqa whose meat was to be distributed among
the poor and that a leg was to be given to the midwife.**[1]** This has
become one of the Islam’s traditional practices in the field of charity
to the poor. On the same day, the Prophet (a.s.) ordered his grandson’s
hair to be cut and to pay silver to the poor as much as the weight of
the cut hair.**[2]** Then Imam al-Husayn’s head was painted with a
perfumed substance.

### The Prophet’s love to al-Husayn

We mention here some traditions showing the great love the Prophet
(a.s.) had towards his grandson Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).

1. Jabir bin Abdullah narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) had said, ‘Let
him, who wants to look at the master of the youth of the Paradise, look
at al-Husayn bin Ali.’**[3]**

2. Ya’la bin Murrah said, ‘Once, we went with the Prophet (a.s.) to a
banquet we had been invited to. We saw Husayn playing in the road. The
Prophet (a.s.) opened his hands and the child began jumping here and
there. The Prophet began joking with him. Then he lifted him and put one
of his hands under his chin and the other on his head. He kissed him and
said, ‘Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn. Allah loves whoever loves
Husayn. Husayn is a nation from the nations.’**[4]**

3. Salman al-Farisi related, “One day, I went to the Prophet (a.s.) and
found al-Husayn bin Ali sitting on his (the Prophet) thigh while the
Prophet was kissing him on his mouth and saying to him, ‘You are a
master and son of a master. You are an imam, a son of an imam, a brother
of an imam, and the father of the imams. You are the authority of Allah,
the son of His authority, and the father of nine authorities who will be
from your posterity, the ninth of whom will be al-Qa’im
(al-Mahdi).’**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Musnad of Imam Zayd, p.468.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.33.  
 **[3]** Tareekh ibn Asakir, vol.13 p.50, Siyer A’lam an-Nubala’, vol.3
p.190.  
 **[4]** Sunan ibn Maja, vol.1 p.56, Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.4
p.172, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.2 p.19, Tayseer al-Wusool, vol.3 p.276.    
 **[5]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.95.

4. Ibn Abbas said, ‘One day, the Prophet (a.s.) was carrying al-Husayn
on his shoulder. Some man said to al-Husayn (a.s.), ‘O boy, it is the
best back you have ridden on.’

The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘And the best rider he is.’**[1]**

5. Burayd bin Abu Ziyad said, ‘Once, the Prophet went out of Aa’isha’s
house and passed by Fatima’s house. He heard al-Husayn crying. He became
discomforted and said to Fatima, ‘Do you not know that his crying
discomforts me?’

### The Prophet tells about Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom

The Prophet (a.s.) had foretold about the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) and Muslims were certain of that. Ibn Abbas narrated,

“We and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) did not doubt that al-Husayn bin Ali shall
be killed in at-Taff (Kerbala).”**[2]**

The Prophet (a.s.) perceived from the Heaven that his darling grandson
Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) would be martyred at the hand of the worst people;
therefore, he cried bitterly.

1. Umm al-Fadhl bint al-Harith related, ‘Al-Husayn was under my care.
Once, I went to the messenger of Allah (a.s.) and I noticed his eyes
shedding tears. I said to him, ‘O the Prophet of Allah, may my father
and mother die for you! What is the matter with you?’

He said, ‘Gabriel, peace and blessing be on him, has come and told me
that my nation will kill my this son.’ He pointed at al-Husayn. I was
terrified and said, ‘Will this be killed?’

The messenger of Allah said painfully, ‘Yes! Gabriel has brought me some
red earth from his (al-Husayn) earth (in which he will be buried).’ Umm
al-Fadh began crying with the Prophet (a.s.).**[3]**

2. Umm Salamah, the Prophet’s wife, narrated, “One night, the messenger
of Allah (a.s.) lay down to sleep, and then he waked up confusedly.
Then, he lay down and waked up confusedly unlike the first time. Then,
he slept and waked up and there was some red earth

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Taj al-Jami’ lil-Usool, vol.3 p.218.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.3 p.179.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.176.

in his hand and he was kissing it. I said to him, ‘O messenger of Allah,
‘What is this red earth?’

He said, ‘Gabriel told me that this one (al-Husayn) will be killed in
the land of Iraq. I asked him, ‘Show me the land where he will be
killed.’ And so this is his (al-Husayn) earth.”**[1]**

3. Umm Salamah said, “One day, the Prophet (a.s.) was sitting in my
house. He said to me, ‘Let no one come to me.’ After some moments,
al-Husayn came in to him. I heard the Prophet (a.s.) sobbing. Al-Husayn
was in his lap. He was rubbing on his (al-Husayn) head and crying. I
said to him, ‘By Allah, I did not notice him until he came in to you.’

He said to me, ‘Gabriel was with us in the house. He asked me: Do you
love him? I said: Yes. He said: Your nation will kill him in a land
called Kerbala.’ Then Gabriel took some of its (Kerbala) earth and
showed it to the Prophet (a.s.).”**[2]**

4. Aa’isha said, ‘Once, al-Husayn bin Ali came to the messenger of Allah
(a.s.) while Gabriel was revealing to him. Al-Husayn jumped on the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) while he was devoted (to the revelation).
Gabriel asked, ‘O Muhammad, do you love him?’

The messenger of Allah (a.s.) said, ‘How do I not love my son?’

Gabriel said, ‘Your nation will kill him after you.’

Then, Gabriel stretched his hand and brought to the Prophet (a.s.) some
white earth and said, ‘In this land, your son will be killed. It is
called at-Taff.’

When Gabriel left, the earth was in the hand of the messenger of Allah
(a.s.) who was crying. He said to me, ‘O Aa’isha, Gabriel told me that
my son Husayn will be killed in the land of at-Taff, and that my nation
will be tried after me.’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.4 p.398, Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.106, Sier
A’lam an-Nubala’, vol.3 p.15.   
 **[2]** Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.106, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer by at-Tabarani,
vol.3 p.106.

Then the Prophet (a.s.), who was still crying, went out to his
companions, among whom there were Ali, Abu Bakr, Umar, Huthayfah, Ammar,
and Abu Tharr. They asked, ‘O messenger of Allah, why are you crying?’

He said, ‘Gabriel told me that my son al-Husayn will be killed after me
in the land of at-Taff. He brought me this earth and said he would be
buried in it.’**[1]**

5. Zaynab bint Jahsh, the Prophet’s wife, said, ‘one day, the Prophet
(a.s.) was sleeping in my house and Husayn was crawling in the house. I
took no notice of him (al-Husayn) for a while until he came to the
Prophet (a.s.) and got over his abdomen. Then, the Prophet (a.s.) began
offering the prayer and he embraced al-Husayn. When he bowed and
prostrated, he put him down, and when he stood up, he carried him. When
he sat, he raised his hands and began supplicating. After finishing his
prayer, I said to him, ‘O messenger of Allah, I saw you do something
today that I had not seen you do it before.’

 He said, ‘Gabriel came and told me that my son would be killed. I said:
show me then. He brought me some red earth.’**[2]**

6. Ibn Abbas said, “Once, al-Husayn was in the Prophet’s lap. Gabriel
asked him, ‘Do you love him?’

The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘How could I not love him? He is the fruit of
my heart.’

Gabriel said, ‘Your nation will kill him. Shall I show you the place of
his tomb?’ He grasped something and it was a handful of red
earth.’**[3]**

7. Abu Umamah narrated, “The messenger of Allah (a.s.) said to his
wives: ‘Do not make this boy (al-Husayn) cry.’ It was the day of Umm
Salamah.**[4]** Gabriel came down, and the Prophet (a.s.) went into his
room and said to Umm Salamah, ‘Do not let anyone come in to me.’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.187.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.189.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.191.  
 **[4]** The day that the Prophet (a.s.) would spend with Umm Salamah
his wife, because he had divided his time equally among his wives.

Then, al-Husayn came. When he knew that the Prophet (a.s.) was in the
house, he wanted to come in to him, but Umm Salama embraced him and
began playing with him in order to calm him down. When he cried loudly,
she let him alone and he entered and sat in the Prophet’s lap. Gabriel
said to the Prophet (a.s.), ‘Your nation will kill your this son.’

The Prophet (a.s.) asked, ‘Do they kill him while they believe in me?’

Gabriel said, ‘Yes, they kill him.’ He took some earth and told the
Prophet (a.s.) that al-Husayn would be killed in the so-and-so place.

The Prophet (a.s.) came out embracing al-Husayn but he was distressed
and sad. Umm Salamah thought that the Prophet (a.s.) was distressed
because she had let the boy come in to him. She said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, may I die for you! You have said not to make this boy cry and
ordered me not to let anyone come in to you. Al-Husayn came and cried,
and I let him alone.’

The Prophet (a.s.) did not answer her and he went out to his companions
while being too sad. He said to them, ‘My nation will kill this one.’ He
pointed to al-Husayn.

Abu Bakr and Umar said, ‘O messenger of Allah, even though they are
believers?!’

He said, ‘Yes, and this is his earth.’**[1]**

8. Anas bin al-Harith narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) had said, ‘My
this son- he pointed to al-Husayn- will be killed in a land called
Kerbala’. Let whoever witness that support him!’

When Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) marched to Kerbala, Anas went with him and
was martyred before him.**[2]**

9. Umm Salamah related, “One day, al-Hasan and al-Husayn were playing
before the Prophet (a.s.) in my house. Gabriel came down and said, ‘O
Muhammad, your nation will kill your this son after you.’ He pointed to
al-Husayn.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.189.  
 **[2]** Tareekh ibn al-Wardi, vol.1 p.173-174.

The Prophet (a.s.) began crying and he joined al-Husayn to his chest.
There was some earth in his hand. He smelt it and said, ‘Woe unto “kerb”
and “bala”.’**[1]**

He gave this earth to me and said, ‘When this earth changes into blood,
know that my son will have been killed.’

Umm Salama put this earth into a flask, took care of and noticed it
everyday while saying: the day when you will change into blood will be a
great day.”**[2]**

10. Once, the Prophet (a.s.) saw in sleep that a spotted dog was licking
his blood. He interpreted the dream that some man would kill his son
al-Husayn (a.s.). It came true and Shimr bin Thil Jawshan, who was
leprous, killed Imam al-Husayn (a.s.).**[3]**

11. Ibn Abbas narrated, “When al-Husayn was two years old, the Prophet
(a.s.) went on a journey. After passing some of the way, he stopped,
sighed, and his eyes shed tears. He was asked what for and he said,
‘Gabriel has just told me about a land near the Euphrates called
Kerbala’ in which my son al-Husayn bin Fatima will be killed.’ Some of
his companions asked who would kill him and he replied sadly, ‘A man
called Yazid (will kill him), may Allah not bless his soul. As if I see
his murder and tomb, and his head will be carried as a present. By
Allah, whoever looks at the head of my son al-Husayn and become pleased
Allah will contradict between his heart and tongue.’

When the Prophet (a.s.) came back from his travel, he was distressed. He
ascended the minbar and took with him his two grandsons al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, peace be on them. He preached to Muslims and then he raised
his head towards the heaven and said, ‘O Allah, I am Muhammad; Your
servant and prophet and these two (boys) are the best of my family, the
best of my progeny and root, and it is they whom I will leave among my
nation. O Allah, Gabriel has told me that my this son-he pointed to
al-Husayn-will be betrayed and killed.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kerb in Arabic means “anguish” and bala means “calamity or
misfortune” that form the name of Kerbala.  
 **[2]** Al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer by at-Tabarani, vol.3 p.108.  
 **[3]** Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.2 p.334.

O Allah, bless his killing and make him from the masters of martyrs, You
are powerful over every thing, and do not bless his killer and
betrayer.’

The attendants burst into crying. The Prophet (a.s.) said to them, ‘You
cry but you will not support him. O Allah, be a guardian and supporter
to him.’

Ibn Abbas said, ‘The Prophet (a.s.) was still unhappy. He ascended the
minbar and made an eloquent speech while his eyes were shedding tears.
He said, ‘O people, I will leave among you the two weighty things; the
Book of Allah and my family and posterity, the mixture of my
water**[1]** and my fruit (production). They (the Book of Allah and the
progeny) will not separate until they will come to me at the pond (in
Paradise). Surely I will not ask you for anything except for that which
my Lord has ordered me of. I ask you for love to my relatives. Be
careful that you shall not meet me at the pond while you have hated my
progeny.’

In another tradition it has been mentioned, ‘Gabriel has told me that my
nation will kill my son al-Husayn in the land of Kerb and Bala’
(kerbala). The curse of Allah may be on his killer and betrayer until
the end of time.’

Then the Prophet (a.s.) descended from the minbar, and there was no one
from the Muhajireen and the Ansar except that he was certain that
al-Husayn will be killed.”**[2]**

### Imam Ali foretells Imam Husayn’s martyrdom

Some traditions were transmitted from Imam Ali (a.s.) in which he
predicted the martyrdom of his son Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). The following
are some of them:

1. Abdullah bin Yahya narrated that his father had accompanied Imam Ali
(a.s.) to Siffin, and when they reached Nineveh, Imam Ali (a.s.) said
sadly and sorrowfully, ‘O Abu Abdullah,**[3]** be patient, be patient…at
the river of the Euphrates!’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The substance of procreation.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.103-105 quoted from
al-Futooh, vol.4 p.216-219  
 **[3]** Abu Abdullah is Imam Husayn’s surname.

Yahya said to him, ‘Who is Abu Abdullah?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied to him painfully, “One day, I went to the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) and found his eyes full of tears. I said, ‘O
prophet of Allah, has anyone made you angry? Why are your eyes full of
tears?’ He said, ‘Gabriel has just left me now. He told me that
al-Husayn will be killed at the river of the Euphrates. He said to me:
shall I make you smell his earth? I said: Yes. He gave me a handful (of
that earth). I could not help myself, and so my eyes began shedding
tears.’”**[1]**

2. Harthamah bin Sulaym said, ‘We went with Ali bin Abi Talib to the
battle of Siffeen, and when we arrived in Kerbala, he led us in offering
the prayer congregationally. When he finished the prayer, he took some
of its (Kerbala) earth, smelt it, and said, ‘O earth, some people will
be resurrected from you and will enter into the Paradise without
reckoning.’

Harthama was astonished at Imam Ali’s saying. When he came back to his
family, he told his wife Jarda’ bint Sameer, who was an adherent to Imam
Ali, of what Imam Ali (a.s.) had said, and she said to him, ‘What
Ameerul Mo'minin says is the truth.’

Time passed and a day came when Ubaydillah bin Ziyad sent his armies,
among which was Harthamah, to fight Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). When they
arrived in Kerbala, Harthamah remembered the saying of Imam Ali (a.s.)
about the martyrdom of his son Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). Harthamah came to
Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and told him of Imam Ali’s saying. Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) asked Harthama, ‘Are you with or against us?’

He said, ‘Neither with nor against you. I have left my family and
children and I fear for them from ibn Ziyad.’

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) said to him, ‘Run away so that you do not see our
murders. By Allah, any man who sees our murder today and does not
support us Allah will throw him into Fire.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh ibn Asakir, vol.13 p.57-58, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer by
at-Tabarani, vol.3 p.105-106.

Harthamah followed Imam Husayn’s advice and he escaped from
Kerbala.**[1]**

3. Thabit narrated from Suwayd bin Ghaflah that one day Imam Ali (a.s.)
made a speech, and then some man came and said to him, ‘O Ameerul
Mo'minin, I passed by Wadi al-Qura and found Khalid bin Arfatah dead.
Ask Allah to forgive him.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) denied that and said, ‘By Allah, he has not died. And he
shall not die until he will lead an army of deviants whose bannerman
shall be Habeeb bin Hammar…’

Some man got up and said, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, I am Habeeb bin Hammar,
and I am from your followers and adherents.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked the man several times if he was Habeeb bin Hammar
(just to make it certain before people) and the man answered that he was
himself.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said to him, ‘Yes, by Allah! You will carry it (the
banner) and will enter through this gate-he pointed to Bab al-Feel (the
gate of elephant) in the mosque of Kufa.’

Thabit said, ‘By Allah, I remained alive until I saw ibn Ziyad sending
Umar bin Sa’d to fight Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and appointing Khalid bin
Arfatah the leader of the front of his army and Habeeb bin Hammar as the
bannerman who entered with the banner through Bab al-Feel.’**[2]**

4. Imam Ali (a.s.) said to al-Bara’ bin Aazib, ‘Will al-Husayn be killed
while you will be alive but will not support him?’

Al-Bara’ said, ‘Let that not be, O Ameerul Mo'minin!’

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), al-Bara’ often remembered
that and said, ‘How great regret it is! I neither witnessed him nor was
I killed before him.’**[3]**   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.426.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abil Hadeed, vol. 2 p.287.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 40 p.192, Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.10
p.15.

5. Abu Juhayfah narrated, “One day, Urwah al-Bariqi came to Sa’eed bin
Wahab and asked him while I was listening, ‘There is a tradition you
have narrated to me from Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.). He said, ‘Yes! Once,
Mikhnaf bin Sulaym sent me to Ali. I went to him while he was in
Kerbala. I found him pointing with his hand and saying, ‘It is here, it
is here!’

Some man asked him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, what is it?

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘A weightiness from the progeny of Muhammad (Imam
Husayn and his family) will stop here. Alas for them from you, and woe
unto you from them.’

The man did not understand and asked, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, what do you
mean?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘Alas for them from you is that you will kill
them, and woe unto you from them is that Allah will throw you into Fire
because of killing them.’”**[1]**

6. Al-Hasan bin Katheer narrated from his father that one day Imam Ali
(a.s.) stopped at Kerbala, and it was said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin,
this is Kerbala.’

He said sadly and painfully, ‘It is of “kerb” and “bala’ ”’.**[2]**

Then he pointed with his hand to some place and said, ‘Here is the place
of their baggage and camels’, and pointed again to another place and
said, ‘Here their bloods will be shed.’**[3]**

7. Abu Khayrah said, ‘Once, I accompanied Ali until he arrived in Kufa.
He ascended the minbar, praised Allah, and then said, ‘What will you do
if the progeny of your prophet will come to be among you?’

They (the attendants) all said, ‘We will do for them all that which
pleases Allah.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Waq’at Siffeen, p.158.  
 **[2]** Kerb in Arabic means “grief” and bala’ means “calamity”.  
 **[3]** Waq’at Siffeen, p.158, Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.169.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘I swear by Him in Whose hand my soul is, they
will come to you, and you will rise against and kill them.’**[1]**

There are many other traditions like these ones transmitted from Imam
Ali (a.s.) about the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) in the land of
Kerbala.

### Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and Umar

When Umar bin al-Khattab assumed the Islamic caliphate, Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) was in his early years. However, his heart was full of sorrow and
pain because he believed that Umar had occupied the position of his
father who was the pioneer of the social justice in Islam.

One day, Umar was making a speech from on the minbar and he was
surprised by al-Husayn (a.s.) who shouted at him,

“Get down! Get down of my father’s minbar and go to your father’s
minbar!”

Umar was astonished and confused. He said to al-Husayn (a.s.), ‘You are
right. My father had no minbar.’

Umar seated al-Husayn (a.s.) beside him and asked him who had instructed
him with this speech. Al-Husayn (a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, no one has
instructed me.’**[2]**

Though he was in his early childhood yet, al-Husayn (a.s.) saw that no
one would deserve to ascend the minbar of his grandfather except his
father (Imam Ali).

### Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) with Mo’awiya

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) felt great hatred and rage towards Mo’awiya, the
man of evils and vices in Islam. It was Mo’awiya who spared no effort to
remove all the political, educational, and moral values that Islam had
achieved. Mo’awiya’s destructive decisions brought the nation many
misfortunes and calamities. First, he did away with the famous learned
and aware personalities like Hijr bin Adiy, who was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.191, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer by
at-Tabarani, vol.3 p. 110.  
 **[2]** Al-Isabah, vol.1 p. 332.

one of the close companions of the Prophet (a.s.), Maytham at-Tammar,
who was Imam Ali’s disciple, Rasheed al-Hijri, Amr bin al-Hamq
al-Khuza’iy, and the like from the great Muslims who were openly killed
by Mo’awiya.

Second, he tried his best to degrade and defame the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
who were the essence of faith and the center of the religious and social
awareness in Islam, and the sensitive nerve in the body of the nation.
He employed all means of education and preaching to defame the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) in any possible way, and he imposed on the speechers to
abuse them (the Ahlul Bayt) on the minbars in the Friday Prayer,
congregational prayers, Eid Prayer, and on other occasions.

Third, he assigned committees to fabricate traditions and change the
system of rule in Islam. Unfortunately and regretfully, those fabricated
traditions had been recorded in the Sihah and Sunan (books of Hadith).
This plan, as I think, was the most terrible plot that Muslims had ever
been afflicted with. A great number of Muslims have believed in these
fabricated traditions and thought they are a part from their religion
whereas the pure religion is free from them all.

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) sent Mo’awiyah an indictment in which he had
criticized, in a very sharp language, all disgraceful policies of
Mo’awiya that contradicted the Book of Allah and the Sunna of His
prophet, his killing of the great, eminent Muslims, and other vices and
sins. This indictment is the most important political document that
discloses the crimes and vices of Mo’awiya.

### The political conference in Mecca

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) held a political conference in Mecca attended by
great masses of Muslims of the Muhajireen and the Ansar who had attended
the season of hajj. In this conference, Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) talked
about the calamities that afflicted Islam and the Muslims and the
misfortunes that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) suffered because of the rule of
Mo’awiya. This is a passage from the speech that Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)
had made in this conference;

“This tyrant (Mo’awiya) had committed against us and against our
adherents what you have seen, known, and witnessed. I want to ask you
about something, and if I say the truth, you say that I am truthful and
if I tell lies, you say that I am a liar. Listen to my speech and write
down my saying, and then go back to your countries and tribes. Whoever
you trust in and feel safe with, invite him to our right that you know,
for I fear that this matter (Islam) may be removed and defeated (and
Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse.
61:8).”

Then Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) mentioned Mo’awiya’s plots that aimed at
doing away with Islam. At the end of the conference, Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) mentioned the virtues of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that Mo’awiya
tried to hide. This was the first political conference held in the
history of Islam.

### Mo’awiya’s perishment

Mo’awiya received his death while he was not certain and safe from the
torment of Allah for the crimes and the bloodsheds he had committed
against the faithful of Muslims. He died but he left after him terrible
sedition and disagreement that threw great evils among Muslims.

Before his death, Mo’awiya entrusted his son Yazid with the rule after
him. Yazid was corrupted, dissolute, and mutinous against the Islamic
values. He believed neither in Allah nor in the afterlife. Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.) described him as: “a man of drinking and hunting. He
obeyed Satan and disobeyed the Beneficent One. He spread corruption,
cancelled the laws (of Allah), extorted the revenue for himself, made
unlawful things of Allah as lawful, and prohibited His lawful
things.”**[1]**

When Mo’awiya died, his son Yazid assumed the rule and committed all
kinds of crimes, sins, corruption, and oppression.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.2 p.209.

### Imam al-Husayn’s revolt

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) rose against the tyrant Yazid and announced
publicly his refusing to Yazid’s homage. He announced before people the
goals of his eternal revolution saying,

“I have not risen rashly, ungratefully, oppressively, or corruptively,
but I have risen to seek reform for the nation of my grandfather. I want
to enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and do as my grandfather and
father did.”

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) revolted to establish the pillars of reform in the
nation, achieve justice among people, and to do away with all the bad
and false practices that the Umayyad rule had established on the stage
of the Islamic life.

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) made a speech in Mecca saying,

“Praise be to Allah, what Allah wills (shall come true), there is no
power save in Allah, and blessing and peace of Allah be on His
messenger.

Death has been written on man as a necklace (is hung) on a girl’s neck.
I have longed to my ancestors as Jacob’s longing to Joseph. A death that
I shall meet is better to me. As if I see my parts being cut by the
wolves of deserts between an-Nawawees and Kerbala. They will fill, from
me, empty rumens and hungry pouches. There is no escape from a day that
has been written by the Pen (determined by the Heaven).

The consent of Allah is our consent the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). We are
patient with His trials, and He will give us the reward of the patient.

The family of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) will not deviate from him.
They will be gathered in the court of holiness. His (the Prophet) eye
will be delighted with them, and his promise will be fulfilled by them.
Whoever sacrifices his life for us, and has prepared himself to meet
Allah, let him set out with us, for I will set out in the morning if
Allah the Almighty wills.”**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hada’iq al-Wardiyyah (the rosy gardens), vol.1 p.117, Miftah
al-Afikar (the key of thoughts), p. 148, Kashful Ghummah, vol.2 p.241.

I think I do not know a political address more eloquent and more
wonderful than this address, in which Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) had
announced his determination on martyrdom and the making little of life
for the sake of Allah the Almighty. He welcomed death and considered it
as an order of honor and a decoration like a necklace that a girl adorns
herself with. He announced the pure place where his pure blood would be
shed on its earth that was between an-Nawawees and Kerbala. There,
swords and spears would loot his pure body. We have analyzed this
address and mentioned its important points in our book “The Life of Imam
al-Hasan bin Ali”.

### Martyrdom

When the many letters of the people of Kufa came to Imam al-Husayn
(a.s.) begging him to save them from the bad life they led under the
oppression of the Umayyad rule, and charging him with the responsibility
before Allah and the nation if he would delay to respond to them, he,
peace be on him, went determinedly to them but surrounded along the way
by a battalion (of the Umayyads) under the leadership of al-Hurr
ar-Riyahi who forced Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) to go to Kerbala. He resided
there and felt that the inevitable end was near to him, to his family,
and to his companions. However, he did not care for the danger that
would attack him. Armies from Kufa began arriving one after the other
until they surrounded him from every side, controlled the banks of the
Euphrates, and prevented the imam and his fellows from reaching water.
On the tenth of Muharram (Ashura), the eternal day in the world of
sorrows, the armies of deviation and oppression attacked the imam and
his followers and exterminated them all, and a good group of shining
stars from the Prophet’s progeny were extinguished.

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) announced his firm determination by saying, “I do
not see death but happiness, and life with the unjust but boredom.”

He also said, “By Allah, I do not surrender to you like the low, nor do
I submit to you like slaves.”

The beasts attacked him with their swords and spears until he was
martyred. He offered his soul as a sacrifice to the Qur'an and all human
values and ideals.

The banners of the Umayyads were folded, their castles, palaces, and
great armies were destroyed, but the banner of Imam al-Husayn, the
example of the free in the world, waved everywhere carrying with it
honor, dignity, and jihad. There is no conqueror, neither in the world
of Islam nor in other than the world of Islam, greater than Imam
al-Husayn, the master of martyrs who has occupied the hearts and
feelings of people through his revolution by which Allah has honored
Islam and made (the revolution) a lesson for the people of
understanding.

Lady Zaynab
-----------

She was the Prophet’s granddaughter and the principal of women after her
mother Fatima (a.s.). She had all noble and high qualities that she had
inherited from her grandfather Prophet Muhammad, her father Imam Ali,
and her mother Fatima (peace be on them). Therefore, she was the highest
example of honor, chastity, dignity, and jihad. She established the
edifice of the intellectual rise, and spread political and religious
awareness through her soul-stirring sermons and speeches she had made
before the people of Kufa and in the royal palaces of the Umayyads. She
exposed the reality of the Umayyads that was polluted with all kinds of
crimes, sins, and transgression of human rights. She proved the
Umayyads’ treason against Muslims and their seizing of the rule from its
actual people.

Her birth
---------

 Zaynab (a.s.) was the first female from the progeny of the Prophet
(a.s.). The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) received this blessed neonate with great
joy and delight. Imam Ali (a.s.) carried out the rituals of birth; he
recited the azan in her right ear and the eqama in her left ear.

When the Prophet (a.s.) was told about the birth of this blessed baby,
he harried to Fatima’s house while he was distressed. He took the
blessed baby and embraced her while his tears were flowing on his holy
face.

Fatima (a.s.) asked him, ‘What makes you cry? May Allah not make your
eye cry!’

He said to her gently, ‘O Fatima, Know that, after me and after you,
misfortunes and calamities will be poured on this girl.’**[1]**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Lady Zaynab, the Pioneer of Jihad in Islam, p.41.

The Prophet (a.s.) detected from behind the unseen what calamities would
happen to his granddaughter and that she would be tried with what no
woman had ever been tried with. Imam Ali (a.s.) shared the Prophet
(a.s.) in his pains and sorrows, and so did Fatima (a.s.). Salman
al-Farisi, the loyal friend of the Prophet’s family, came to
congratulate Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.) on the blessed birth of his newborn
daughter but he found him sad and grieved talking about the calamities
that this daughter would face, and so he shared with the family in their
sorrow.

Fatima (a.s.) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to name the newborn baby and he said
politely, ‘I would not precede the messenger of Allah (in that).’

Then, Imam Ali (a.s.) asked the Prophet (a.s.) to name the child, and
the Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘I would not precede my Lord.’

Gabriel came down to the Prophet (a.s.) and said to him, ‘Name her
Zaynab! Allah the Almighty has chosen this name for her.’

Gabriel (a.s.) revealed to the Prophet (a.s.) the calamities that would
face his granddaughter, and then the all burst in crying.**[1]**

Zaynab was surnamed as Umm Kulthum.**[2]** Some historians say that Umm
Kulthum was another daughter of Imam Ali and Fatima (a.s.), but we doubt
this saying.

### Her epithets

The following are some of Lady Zaynab’s epithets that inform of her high
qualities:

1. **Aqeelat Bani Hashim**

Aqeelah means a noble, respectable lady among her tribe and honored in
her family. Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was the most honored lady in Islam and
the best Alawid woman. Her progeny prided on her and were called “the
children of al-Aqeelah” or the “Zaynabites”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Zaynab al-Kubra, p.16-17.  
 **[2]** Lady Zaynab, the Pioneer of Jihad in Islam, p.42.

2. **Al-Aalimah** (learned)

 Zaynab (a.s.) was the most learned woman (after Fatima) in the
Prophetic family. She was an authority for Muslim women concerning
religious affairs, besides that some (male) companions referred to her
in jurisprudential matters.

3. **Aabidat Aal Ali** (the worshipper of Ali’s family)

She was the most worshipping (after her mother) among all Muslim women.
She left no recommendatory worship even in the most critical times. Even
in the eleventh night of Muharram after the terrible event of Kerbala
she offered all recommendatory worships including the Night Nafilah.

4. **Al-Kamilah** (perfect)

She was perfect in morals, honor, virtue, chastity, and purity.

5. **Al-Fadhilah** (worthful)

She was preferred to all Muslim women in her jihad, services to Islam,
and devotedness in the way of Allah.

### Her birth date

Historians disagreed on the year of Zaynab’s birth. Some said she was
born in the fifth year of hijra and some others said she was born in the
sixth year. Some others said she was born in the ninth year which was
refuted by Sheikh Ja’far an-Naqdi who thought that the most correct date
of her birth was in the fifth year of hijra.

### Her Upbringing

Zaynab, the pure, veracious lady, grew up in the house of prophethood
and the oracle of Gabriel and revelation. It was the purest and most
honored house in the earth. Fatima (a.s.), the principal of all women of
the worlds, fed Zaynab with chastity, dignity, high moral standards, and
nobilities of character. She taught her the Holy Qur’an and made her
memorize it. She taught her the verdicts of Islam, and shed over her
rays from her own ideals until she became a true copy of her.

Zaynab (a.s.) spent her childhood in the house of honor, glory, and
mercy. She saw her father Imam Ali (a.s.) participate her mother in

the house affairs and help her in her tasks. No harsh or bad word was
ever heard in this house. She also saw her grandfather the messenger of
Allah (a.s.) flow over her from his love and kindness and show her
reverence and respect.

Zaynab, the Prophet’s granddaughter, got the best kind of the Islamic
education. She saw her brother al-Husayn (a.s.) highly revere and
respect his brother al-Hasan (a.s.) and use no any harsh or impolite
word with him. Zaynab (a.s.), in particular, received great respect from
her parents and brothers. When she came, her brother al-Husayn (a.s.)
rose as a kind of respect, and when she wanted to visit the tomb of her
grandfather the Prophet (a.s.), her father and two brothers went with
her. Her father Imam Ali (a.s.) put out the lamps on the tomb lest
someone might see the figure of Zaynab.**[1]** Thus, Zaynab was treated
in her family with great respect and reverence.

Zaynab had all virtues and high characteristics and was the best of all
women after her mother Fatima (a.s.). Here we talk about some of her
characteristics:

### True faith in Allah

Zaynab was brought up in the house of faith, and the love of Allah was
impressed inside her mind and heart. It was one of her inseparable
elements. She tolerated the severest of calamities in the way of Allah
and in order to raise high the banner of Islam.

The true faith in Allah, and the perfect devotedness to Him was a part
of her personality. From her great faith was that when she attended the
martyrdom of her brother Imam al-Husayn, she said at his headless body
while looking at the Heaven,

‘O Allah, accept from us this sacrifice!’

On the night of the eleventh of Muharram after the martyrdom of her
brother Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), his household, and supporters, she
offered the prayer of gratefulness to Allah for that. Indeed, humanity
may bow in reverence before this infinite faith.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Zaynab al-Kubra, p.22.

### Patience

Lady Zaynab had great patience and unequalled endurance before the
calamities she faced especially on the day of Ashura’ when she saw her
brother, who was the dearest one to her at all, surrounded by ten
thousands of enemy forces that were the continuity of Abu Sufyan’s
forces which had fought against the Prophet (a.s.). However, her brother
found no supporters on that day except the very few men of his loyal
companions and family who all were martyred to leave him alone in the
field before that huge fierce army. It was no long when those beasts
attacked him with all kinds of weapons; swords, spears, arrows, and
stones. In that unbearable situation, she was very patient with true
faith in Allah’s fate. No doubt, if anyone other than her faced those
horrible situations, he\\she would faint and collapse at once, but she
(a.s.) stood before that calamity, which no reformer in history had been
ever afflicted with, with bold heart and faithful soul submitting to the
fate of Allah with all her feelings. Thus, she was one of those about
whom Allah had said, *(…and give good news to the patient. Who, when a
misfortune befalls them, say: Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall
surely return. Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their
Lord, and those are the followers of the right course. 2:155-157), and
(Verily the patient will be paid back their reward in full without
measure. 39:10), and (and We will most certainly give to those who are
patient their reward for the best of what they did. 16:96).*

The Prophet’s granddaughter showed patience and bold-heartedness that
history has never mentioned a woman like her before calamities and
misfortunes.

### Dignity and honor

From the prominent characteristics of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was her dignity
and honor. After the martyrdom of her brother Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), she
was taken as captive, with the rest of the household, from Kerbala to
Kufa. All the luggage and jewels that they had were plundered. Hunger
violently attacked the children of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), but Lady
Zaynab (a.s.) disdained, out of dignity, from asking anyone of the vile
policemen of ibn Ziyad for any food. When the caravan of the captives
arrived in Kufa and the women of Kufa knew that the captives were from
the Prophet’s progeny, they

hurried to offer food for the children. Lady Zaynab said to the women of
Kufa, ‘Charity is unlawful for us, we the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’

When the children heard what their aunt said, they threw away the food
from their hands and mouths saying to each other: my aunt says that
charity is unlawful for us the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’ Yes, it was the
education of prophets that takes one to the highest degree of
perfection. When the captives of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were taken from
Kufa to Sham, Lady Zaynab (a.s.) did not ask the villain guards, who
accompanied the caravan, for anything for the children or for the women.
She had inherited glory, dignity, honor, and disdain from her
grandfather (the Prophet) and her father (Imam Ali).**[1]**

### Courage

Throughout history, no woman had been found braver, firmer, and more
determined than Lady Zaynab (a.s.). She stood steadfastly and bravely
before the criminal Ubaydillah bin Ziyad, and she scolded and disdained
him though she was captive. He said to her, rejoicing the killing of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), ‘Praise be to Allah Who has exposed and killed you,
and refuted your notion.’

She said to him, ‘Praise be to Allah Who has honored us with His
Prophet, and purified us from uncleanness (abomination) a thorough
purification. It is a disbeliever that is exposed, and a dissolute that
is refuted, and surely he is other than us, O ibn Marjanah.’

These fierce arrows threw this tyrant down from his throne to his grave
and showed him before his slaves and rascal followers that he was the
loser and Zaynab’s brother was the winner. However, he had nothing to
say except to show his schadenfreude towards the Prophet’s progeny by
saying, ‘How did you see the doing of Allah with your brother?’

She said, ‘I did not see except good. These are people whom Allah has
determined the killing on, and so they went to their fates. Allah will
gather between you and them, and you shall be argued and disputed. Then,
look for whom success shall be! May your mother lose you, O son of
Marjanah!’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Lady Zaynab, the Pioneer of Jihad in Islam, p.61.

As for her situation in the palace of Yazeed and her revolutionary
speech that shook the Umayyad throne and uncovered the vicious reality
of the Umayyads and their previous and following supporters, we have
talked about it in details in our book “Lady Zaynab, the Pioneer of
Jihad in Islam”.

### With the immortal tragedy

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) had accompanied her brother Imam al-Husayn (the
father of the free) in his immortal revolution that had supplied the
Islamic world with the means of renaissance and development. She had a
positive role in this blessed revolution that had changed the course of
history and wakened Muslims from their torpor, and consequently, the
Muslim peoples rose calling for a new dawn and a good rule. Revolts
broke out everywhere against the Umayyad state until its pillars were
destroyed, its roots were plucked out, and it perished forever.

Anyhow, she witnessed all the scenes of her brother’s revolution, and
she spread its values, and made eternal its goals through her wonderful
sermons in Kufa, in the Umayyad palace in Damascus, and in Medina. She
aroused the public feelings and emotions, and made the martyrdom of Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.) not as an incidental talk, but as an important part in
the essence of the Islamic life.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) lived moment by moment the horrible events that
surrounded her brother in the desert of Kerbala when the armies of the
Umayyads bit with their swords and spears her brother’s pure body and
the other pure bodies of the Prophet’s progeny. They were not satisfied
with that, but they maimed those pure bodies severely, and then they
burnt the tents of the women and children who ran away in the desert
here and there. She faced all these calamities, and nevertheless, the
Umayyads were not satisfied until they took the women and the children
of the Prophet’s household as captives driven from a country to another
before the looks of the good and the bad. Was this the due reward that
the Prophet (a.s.), who had saved the Arabs from the abysses of
ignorance, crimes, and vices, deserved to be rewarded with?

All these terrible events, undoubtedly, resulted from those, who cried
out after the death of the Prophet (a.s.), ‘The Prophethood and the
caliphate should not gather in one house.’ Hence, all the calamities
that afflicted the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were the consequences of those evil
situations that those ill-willers had taken to separate the caliphate
from the Prophet’s progeny whom the Prophet (a.s.) had compared to the
Qur'an, and who were the source of wisdom and honor in the world of
Islam.

### To the Better World

When Lady Zaynab (a.s.) was set free from the capture, and she went back
to Medina, she resorted to weeping and crying. Day and night, she was
attacked by the terrible memories of what her brother had faced in the
desert of Kerbala, and she and her fellow women and children suffered of
difficulties and misfortunes. Her tears were always flowing for her
brother and family whose heads were harvested by the Umayyad swords, and
whose bodies were maimed severely.

Those painful scenes often and always attacked her until she was too
weak that she could tolerate those distresses no more. She often said
with regrets, ‘O my brother!’

‘O my Husayn!’

‘O my Abbas!’      

‘O my family!’

and then she fell to the ground faintly. The most beloved thing to her
was to leave this world and join her grandfather (a.s.) to complain to
him about the disasters, the capture, the killing, and the maiming that
she and her family faced.

After the disaster of Kerbala, she lived no long until diseases attacked
her and made her even unable to speak. She received death eagerly to
meet Allah, her grandfather, and the rest of her family. Her pure soul
was taken high to the Heavens surrounded by the angels to be received by
the prophets of Allah, and there she would complain to her Lord about
the calamities and disasters that no man had ever been tried with since
the creation of the earth.

Lady Zaynab (a.s.) left to the Better World on Sunday, the fifth of
Rajab, in 62 AH.**[1]** It was said that she had been buried in
al-Baqee’ Graveyard (in Medina), and it was said in Sham because the
Umayyad government had imposed on her house arrest. It was also said
that she had been buried in Egypt. We have mentioned all that in details
in our book “Lady Zaynab, the Pioneer of Jihad in Islam”.

Umm Kulthum
-----------

Some genealogists say that Umm Kulthum was daughter of Fatima az-Zahra’
(a.s.), and that Umar bin al-Khattab had got married to her, and she
bore him two children; one was Oun and the other Mu’een who both were
with their mother in Kufa but they all died when a wall fell over them.

We have refuted this news by clear proofs and said that Fatima (a.s.)
had no daughter except Lady Zaynab (a.s.). Some other researches have
confirmed this fact as well. I found in some sources that Asma’ bint
Umays had born from her husband Abu Bakr a son, who was Muhammad, the
immortal martyr, and a daughter called Umm Kulthum who grew up in the
house of Imam Ali (a.s.) after he had married her mother Asma’. Thus,
Umm Kulthom, whom Umar had got married to, was Imam Ali’s stepdaughter.

Anyhow, I think, with no any doubt, that Fatima az-Zahra’ (a.s.) had had
no daughter called Umm Kulthum.

Al-Muhsin
---------

The messenger of Allah (a.s.) had named him al-Muhsin while he was yet
in his mother’s womb. When the people (Umar and his companions) attacked
Fatima’s house to set fire to it, Fatima (a.s.) was terrified and she
resisted them. They attacked her severely while she was behind the door,
and consequently, she miscarried her child al-Muhsin between the door
and the wall. This is one of the completely certain facts. Whoever
thinks deeply of the events of that age, these facts shall be clear to
him. People competed and pounced on authority and they seized it from
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) who were the center of the revelation and the
Qur’an. No limit or obstacle,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Sayyidah Zaynab wa Akhbar az-Zaynabiyyaat (Lady Zaynab and
the News of the Zaynabite Ladies), by al-Ubaydali, p.9.

whatever great it was, prevented them from that, for their pre-Islamic
feud had come back to them as Prof. Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsud says in
his book “Imam Ali”.

However, the attack of people against Fatima’s house and making her
miscarry her child al-Muhsin, had paved the way and opened the door for
the Umayyads to seize the rule, and then they spared no effort and
followed every horrible way to persecute and kill the pure progeny of
the Prophet (a.s.). We shall explain in details in a following chapter
what Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter, (a.s.) suffered.
