The Immortal, Historic Sermon of Fatima
=======================================

Fatima (a.s.) could bear no more, for the severe procedures of Abu Bakr
against her were very hard and painful. Therefore, she decided to
announce her proofs and block any way that Abu Bakr might follow to
justify his policy. She made a striking speech in the Mosque of the
Prophet where she dotted the i’s and crossed the t’s. She proved herself
to be the greatest woman that Allah had ever created in the earth with
the unique talents, geniuses, wisdom, and eloquence she had.

Due to the great importance of this sermon, the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) forced
their children to memorize it as they forced them to memorize the Holy
Qur’an.

I think I do not know a lady in this age (nineteen years) that could
make such a speech which any expert orator in the world cannot make
like. But this is not strange for the remainder of prophethood and the
essence of knowledge and wisdom that her father had fed her with his
knowledge and injected with his mental and psychological characteristics
until she became as a true copy of him. Many traditions have confirmed
this fact.

Fatima’s sermon was an overwhelming revolt against the government of Abu
Bakr where she tried to overthrow the thrones of his state and blow up
the pillars of his rule. However, Abu Bakr could, through his diplomatic
abilities, quell this revolt, as we shall detail later on.

Historians described the going of Fatima (a.s.) to the mosque of her
father that…she became very angry…she put on her veil and gown and came,
with her maids and some of her fellow-women walking exactly like her
father’s gait, to Abu Bakr, who was in the mosque among a crowd of the
Muhajireen, the Ansar and others. A curtain was put between her and the
people. She moaned in a way that all the

people began to cry and the meeting shook. She waited until they stopped
crying and became quiet. She began her speech with praising Allah and
then her eloquence streamed…She said,

“Praise be to Allah for that which He bestowed (upon us), and thanks be
to Him for all that which He inspired, and tribute be to Him for that
which He provided; from prevalent favors which He created, and abundant
benefactions which He offered and perfect grants which He presented;
that their number is much too plentiful to compute, and too vast to
measure; their limit was too distant to realize. He recommended to them
(His creatures) to gain more (of His bounties) by being grateful for
their continuity. He ordained Himself praiseworthy by giving generously
to His creatures, and promised, through supplicating Him, to give more
like them.

 I bear witness that there is no God but Allah Who is One without
partner; a statement which sincere devotion is made to be its
interpretation, put into hearts its continuation, and illuminated in the
minds its sensibility. He Who can not be perceived with vision, neither
be described with tongues, nor can imagination surround His form.

He originated things but not from anything that existed before them, and
created them without examples to follow. He created them with His might
and dispersed them according to His will; not for a need did He create
them, nor for a benefit for Him did He shape them, but to establish His
wisdom, bring attention to His obedience, manifest His might, lead His
creatures to humbly venerate Him, and to exalt His decrees. He then made
the reward for His obedience, and punishment for his disobedience, so as
to protect His creatures from His wrath and amass them into His
Paradise.

I too bear witness that my father, Muhammad, is His slave and messenger,
whom He chose before sending him, named him before creating him, and
preferred him by missioning him; when creatures were still concealed in
the unseen, guarded from that which was appalling, and associated with
the termination and nonexistence. For Allah the Exalted knew that which
was to follow, comprehended that which will come to

pass, and realized the place of every event. Allah has sent him
(Muhammad) as perfection for His commands, a resolution to accomplish
His rule, and an implementation of His decrees. So he found the nations
to vary in their faiths, obsessed by their fires, worshipping their
idols, and denying Allah despite their knowledge of Him. Therefore,
Allah illuminated their darkness with my father, Muhammad, uncovered
obscurity from their hearts, and cleared the clouds from their insights.
He revealed guidance among the people; So he delivered them from being
led astray, led them away from misguidance, guided them to the proper
religion, and called them to the straight path.

Allah then chose to recall him back in mercy, love and preference. So,
Muhammad is in comfort from the burden of this world, he is surrounded
with devoted angels, the satisfaction of the Merciful Lord, and the
nearness of the Powerful King.

May the blessing of Allah be upon my father, His Prophet, trusted one
with the revelation, the choice from among His creatures, and His
sincere friend, and may the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.”

Fatima (a.s.) kept on her speech saying,

“You are Allah's slaves at His command and prohibition. You are the
bearers of His religion and revelation. You are Allah's trusted ones
with yourselves, and His messengers to the nations. Among you He has a
right; a covenant He brought unto you, and an heir He left over you.
That is the eloquent Book of Allah, the truthful Qur’an, the brilliant
light, and the shining beam; its insights are clear, its secrets are
revealed, its indications are manifest, and its followers are blessed by
it. It leads its adherents to bliss, and listening to it leads to
salvation. With it are the bright divine authorities achieved, His
manifest determination acquired, His prohibited decrees avoided, His
manifest evidence recognized, His satisfying proofs made apparent, His
permissions granted, and His written laws are achieved.

So Allah made faith to be purification for you from polytheism.

He made Prayer an exaltation for you from conceit, zakat a purification
for the soul and a (cause of) growth in subsistence, fasting an
implantation of devotion, pilgrimage a construction of religion, justice
a harmony of the hearts, obeying us (Ahlul-Bayt) management of the
nation, our leadership safeguard from disunity, jihad (struggle) a
strengthening of Islam, patience a helping course for deserving divine
reward, enjoining the good welfare for the public, kindness to the
parents a safeguard from wrath, maintaining kinship a cause for a longer
life and multiplying the number of descendants, retaliation for sparing
blood, fulfillment of vows deserving of forgiveness, completion of
weights and measures preventing from ignoring others’ rights,
forbiddance of drinking wines an exaltation from atrocity, avoiding
slander a veil from curse, abandoning theft a reason for deserving
chastity.

Allah has also prohibited polytheism so that one can devote himself to
His Lordship. Therefore; Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not
except that you are Muslims.

Obey Allah in that which He has commanded you to do and that which He
has forbidden you from, for surely who fear Allah among His servants,
are those who have knowledge.”

Fatima (a.s.) then added:

“O People! Be informed that I am Fatima, and my father is Muhammad. I
say that repeatedly and initiate it continually. I say not what I say
mistakenly, nor do I do what I do aimlessly.

*Now hath come unto you an Apostle from amongst yourselves. It grieves
him that you should perish; ardently anxious is he over you, to the
believers he is most kind and merciful.* Thus, if you identify and
recognize him, you shall realize that he is my father and not the father
of any of your women; the brother of my cousin (Ali) rather than any of
your men. What an excellent assistant to him he was, may the peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny. Thus, he propagated the
Message, by announcing openly with the warning, and inclining away from
the path of the polytheists, striking their middles and seizing their
throats, inviting to the way of his Lord with

wisdom and good preaching. He destroyed the idols, and broke the heads
until their gathering fled and turned their backs, until the night
revealed its morning, the truth appeared with its genuineness, the
leader of the religion spoke out, and the discords of devils were
silenced, the stuff of hypocrisy was perished, the knots of infidelity
and desertion were untied. So you spoke the word of devotion among a
group of the white starving ones (the Ahlul Bayt).

You were on the brink of a pit of fire, (you were) the drink of the
thirsty one, the opportunity of the desiring one, the firebrand of a
hasty passer, the foothold,**[1]** you used to drink from the rainwater
(gathered on roads and in which animals urinate), eat animal skin. You
were low and despised and always in fear lest men around should
extirpate you, but, Allah the Almighty rescued you through my father,
Muhammad (peace be on him and on his progeny) after the much suffering
he faced, and after he was confronted by mighty men, the Arab beasts,
and the insolent, mutinous men of the people of the Book (the
Jews).Whenever they ignited the fire of war, Allah extinguished it, and
whenever the thorn of the devil appeared (the Satan’s followers
revolted), or a mouth of the polytheists opened wide in defiance, he
would send his brother (Ali) into its flames, who did not come back
until he trod its head with the sole of his foot, and extinguished its
flames with his sword. He (Ali) tired himself for the sake of Allah, and
overworked to fulfill the command of Allah, near to the Messenger of
Allah, a master among Allah’s devotees, sincere in his advice, earnest
and exerting himself (for Islam), paying no attention, in the way of
Allah, to any blame, while you were at ease, luxury, and feeling safe in
your comfortable lives, waiting for us to meet disasters, awaiting the
spread of our news, and you fell back during battles, and ran away at
times of fighting. And when Allah chose for His Prophet the abode of His
prophets, and the residence of His choices, the rage of hypocrisy
appeared on  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** She wanted to say that they were so low and subservient and that
they were as a ready bite for the Romans, the Persians and some of the
Arab tribes.  

you, the garment of faith became worn out, the silent one of the
deviants spoke out, the sluggish ignorant came to the top and brayed,
the camel of the falsifiers wiggled his tail in your courtyards, and the
Satan put his head out of his socket crying out to, and he found you
responsive to his invitation, and observing his deceits, then he aroused
you and found you quick (in responding to him), and invited you to anger
and found you angry (to his anger); therefore, you branded other than
your camels and proceeded to other than your drinking places. You did so
and the age (of the Prophet) was still recent, the wound was still wide
and not yet healed, and the Prophet was not yet buried. Did you so
quickly claim the fear of sedition? Surely into sedition have they
already tumbled down, and most surely hell encompasses the unbelievers.

How far to You, what is the matter with you, and what a falsehood!
Allah’s Book is still among you, its affairs are clear, its rules are
manifest, its signs are bright, its restrictions are visible, and its
commands are evident. Yet, indeed you have thrown it behind your backs!
Do you want to turn away from it? Or according to something else you
want to rule? Evil would be the exchange for the wrongdoers! And if
anyone desires a religion other than Islam, it will never be accepted
from him, and in the hereafter, he will be in the ranks of those who
have lost. Then you have not waited until its rush would calm down, and
it became obedient. You then began arousing its flames, instigating its
brand, responding to the call of the misguiding Satan, putting out the
lights of the manifest religion, and annulling the Sunna of the sincere
Prophet. You conceal sips on foam and march towards his (the Prophet)
family and children in thickets and forests, but we are patient with you
as if we are being nicked with daggers and stung by spearheads in our
abdomens, and now you claim that there is no inheritance for us! *Is it
then the judgment of (the times of) ignorance that they desire? And who
is better than Allah to judge for a people who are sure?* Do you not
know? Yes, indeed it is obvious to you like the sun of the forenoon that
I am his daughter.

O Muslims! Is my inheritance usurped? O son of Abu Quhafa, is it in the
Book of Allah that you inherit your father and I do not inherit my
father? Surely you have done a strange thing! Did you intendedly desert
the Book of Allah and turned your back on it? Allah said: *(And Sulaiman
was Dawood's heir. 27:16)* and said about Yahya bin Zachariah: *(Grant
me from Thyself an heir, who should inherit me and inherit from the
children of Yaqoub. 19:5-6)* and said: *(And the possessors of
relationships are nearer to each other in the ordinance of Allah.
8:75),* and He said: *(Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The
male shall have the equal of the portion of two females. 4:11),* and He
said: *(Bequest is prescribed for you when death approaches one of you,
if he leaves behind wealth for parents and near relatives. 2:180).*

You claimed that I have no position, and no inheritance from my father,
and there is no kinship between us. So did Allah distinguish you with a
verse, from which He excluded my father? Or do you say: people of two
religions do not inherit each other? Am I and my father not of one
religion? Or are you more aware of the Qur’an than my father and my
cousin?

So, here it is before you! Take it (ready with) with its noseband and
saddle! It shall dispute with you on the Day of Punishment; what a fair
judge Allah is, the master is Muhammad, and the appointment is the Day
of Resurrection. At the time of the Hour the wrongdoers shall lose, and
it shall not benefit you to regret then! For every Message, there is a
time limit, and ye shall know to whom a punishment that will confound
him comes, and upon whom a lasting doom will fall.

Fatima (a.s.) then turned towards the Ansar and said,

“O you people of magnanimity, the supporters of the nation, and the
defenders of Islam, what is this short-coming in defending my right? And
what is this slumber before the wrong done to me? Did not the Messenger
of Allah, my father, say: ‘A man is observed through his children’? How
quick have you violated (his orders), and how soon have you let down?
Though you still are able to help me in my attempt, and powerful to
assist what I request.

Do you say: ‘Muhammad has died’? Surely, this is a great calamity that
its damage is great, its injury is wide, and its wound is much torn. The
earth became dark with his departure, the sun and the moon eclipsed, the
stars scattered for his calamity, hopes were skimped, mountains
submitted, sanctity was violated, and holiness was encroached after his
death. This, by Allah, is the great affliction, and the impressive
calamity that there is no an affliction, nor is there a sudden
misfortune like it. The Book of Allah, the Most Praised, announced in
your courtyards, in your evenings and mornings in calling, crying,
recitation, and intonation; and before him what had happened to the
prophets and messengers of Allah; a final decree, and a determined
predestination: *(Muhammad is not but an Apostle; many were the apostles
that passed away before him. If he died or was killed, will you then
turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the
least harm will he do to Allah; but Allah will reward those who are
grateful. 3:144).*

Ah people of Qaylah (the tribes of Ouss and Khazraj), is the inheritance
of my father usurped while you hear and see me?! And you are in your
meetings and gatherings around me? You hear my call, and the affair
includes you though you are numerous and well equipped with power and
good shield?! The call reaches you but you do not respond and the cry
comes to you but you do not help? You do this while you are qualified by
struggle, known for goodness and welfare, and are the choice that were
chosen, and the best selection that were selected for us, Ahlul-Bayt.

You fought the Arabs, bore tire and exhaustion, struggled against the
nations, and resisted their mutinous ones. We were still…we ordered you
and you obeyed, until when Islam became triumphant, the accomplishment
of the days was at hand, the nose of polytheism was subjected, the
outburst of falsehood was calmed, the fires of infidelity were put out,
the call of commotion was quelled, and the system of religion was
well-ordered, then why have you become confused after lucidity,
concealed after the openness, receded after daring, became polytheists
after faith? *Will you not fight a people who broke*

*their oaths and aimed at expelling the Messenger, and they attacked you
first; do you fear them? But Allah is most deserving that you should
fear Him, if you are believers. (9:13)*

Surely, I see that you have inclined to ease, dismissed one who is
worthier of giving and preventing, secluded yourselves with easiness,
escaped from narrowness to abundance, so you spat out what you had
contained, and vomited what you had drunk; *If you are ungrateful, you
and those on earth all together, most surely Allah is Self-sufficient,
Praised.*

Surely, I have said all that which I said with knowing of the
disappointment that preoccupied you, and the betrayal that your hearts
felt, but it is the inners of the soul, the emitting of rage, the
weakness of spears, the diffusion of (what is in) the chest, and the
awarding of the proof. And so, here it is! Carry it on a pussy back (of
a camel), which has a thin slipper, with everlasting disgrace, marked
with the wrath of Allah, and eternal dishonor, attached to the burning
Fire of Allah, which rises above the hearts. It is in the eye of Allah
that which you do *(and those who do wrong will come to know by what a
(great) reverse they will be overturned!)* And I am the daughter of a
warner (the Prophet) to you against a severe punishment. So, act and we
are acting, and wait and we are waiting.**[1]**

In this immortal sermon, Fatima (a.s.) called for revolt to overthrow
Abu Bakr’s government and return the right to its people. This striking
sermon made hearts feel fear, sights submit, and souls yield. Straying
fancies were about to go back to reason, and the right to its people,
but Abu Bakr could, through his tactics and diplomatic abilities,
control the situation and save his government from being overthrown. He
welcomed Fatima (a.s.) and received her with great respect and
reverence. He showed her that he regarded her more than his own daughter
Aa’isha. He also showed her his great sorrow  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Ihtijaj, vol. 1 p. 132-141, Sharh Nahjol Balagha by Ibn Abil
Hadeed, vol. 16 p. 210, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 29 p.216. Some other
Historians and scholars mentioned parts from this sermon such as:
al-Mas’udi in Murooj ath-Thahab vol. 2 p.311, Ibn Mandhur in Lisan
al-Arab vol. 12 p.,331, Kahhalah in A’lam an-Nisa’ vol. 4 p. 116-119,
Ibn Tayfur in Balaghat an-Nisa’ p. 414, Ibn Tawus in Kitab at-Tara’if p.
263, Ibn al-Atheer in Ghareeb al-Hadith vol. 4 p. 273.

for the death of her father and said he wished he had died before her
father’s dearth…and other such sweet statements.

He said to her that he had not assumed the rule due to his own desire,
but he had been elected by the Muslims, and the severe procedures too
were not out of his own opinion but they were out the Muslims’ opinion.
By that, he attracted the Muslims’ feelings to him and put out the fire
of the revolution and did away with all its tokens.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen al-Aamily says, ‘Would he have avoided the fail of
Fatima (s) in her situations as possible as he could with all wisdom he
had! Had he done so, it would have been much better for him and it would
have kept him away from regretting and being blamed and it would have
been better to unite the umma!

He could have protected the trust of the Prophet (s) and the only
daughter of him, Fatima (s), from being disappointed and then to go back
upset stumbling with her garment. What would he have lost, where he had
occupied the position of her father, if he had given Fadak to Fatima (s)
without a trial? An imam could do that due to his general guardianship;
and what the value of Fadak was before the general advantage of the
Muslims and before avoiding evils!’**[1]**

Fatima (a.s.), disappointedly, went to her father’s tomb complaining to
him at the misfortunes she met from the people. She recited these verses
of poetry:

“There were after you conflicting news and misfortunes,

If you were here, no misfortune would happen.

We have lost you as the earth loses its rain,

And your people turned upside down; come to witness them and do not keep
away!

Some men showed us what there was hidden in their hearts,

When you left and the grave kept you away from us.

Some men frowned at us and we were disparaged,

When you were lost, and the inheritance was plundered.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** An-Nass wel-Ijtihad (text and interpretation), p. 37.

These verses of poetry show that she suffered bitter pains because of
the terrible events she faced after the death of her father. The people
did not regard her high position and importance, and they treated her in
a way that harmed her too much.

Her speech to the women
-----------------------

When Fatima (a.s.) became ill, Muslim women came to visit her. They
asked her, ‘How are you doing, daughter of the messenger of Allah?’ She
said,

“By Allah, I have become resenting your world, and detesting your men. I
have cast them away after testing them and hated them after examining
them. Thus, away with the men of playing after seriousness, striking the
soft rocks, slackening the spears, the foolishness of judgments, and
deviation of fancies! *(Certainly evil is that which their souls have
sent before for them, that Allah became displeased with them and in
chastisement shall they abide. 5:80).* Certainly, I have girt them with
its noose, burdened them with its load, and waged its raid on them. So,
may the unjust people be killed, cursed, and damned.

Woe unto them! Whereto did they move it from the position of the
mission, the bases of the prophethood and the place of descent of
Gabriel, who is aware of life and religion’s affairs? That was the great
loss. What did they deny from Abul Hassan (Ali)? Yes, they denied the
beating of his sword, his carelessness about his death, his deadly
assaults, and his anger for the sake of Allah. By Allah, if they turned
away from the rein, which the Prophet had handed over to him (to Imam
Ali), he would catch it tenderly and he would move without harm or
worry. He would lead them to a fresh flowing fount and would return them
with satiety while he himself would not profit of anything but a little
just to break his acute thirst and hunger. If they did so, they would be
granted blessings from the Heaven and the earth**[1]** and they would be
rewarded by Allah according  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Her speech means: (If they let Imam Ali be the caliph, as the
Prophet had ordered, he would rule with justice and fairness. He would
never burden them with more than their abilities. He would make them
live in luxury and ease while he himself would live in asceticism).

to their deeds. Come on to see! As long as you live, time shall show you
wonders! I wish I knew on what proof they have relied, to what refuge
they resorted and to what tie they clung, and on whose progeny have they
encroached and spoke against! Evil indeed is the patron, and evil indeed
is the associate, and evil indeed is this change for the unjust! By
Allah, they exchanged the good with the bad and the daring with
impotent. Disgrace be for a people, who think they do well. Surely they
themselves are the mischief makers, but they do not perceive. Woe to
them! *(Is he then who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed,
or he who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What then is
the matter with you; how do you judge? (10:35).*

By Allah, it**[1]** was impregnated so wait until it bears then milk
pure blood and fatal venom to the full of the bucket! Then they will
perish who say false things and the successors will know what bad the
earlier ones have established. Then, be at ease and wait relaxedly for
the sedition. Rejoice at a sharp sword, an assault of a tyrant enemy,
general commotion, and despotism, which will make your victuals so
insignificant and your gathering separate. Alas, what a pity! How will
you be while it has been obscured to your sights? Shall we then force
you to accept it when you are averse to it?

And praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and blessings be on
Muhammad, the last of the prophets and the master of the
messengers.”**[2]**

The women were overcome with terrible silence, and bitter distress, and
their eyes were full of tears. They went back home and informed their
husbands about Fatima’s distress and what she said. Then, they (the
husbands) knew how much they had betrayed Fatima (a.s.) and shortened in
supporting her.

In this speech, Fatima (a.s.) denied the offensive attack against the
house of the Prophet (a.s.) and the center of the revelation and
knowledge in Islam, and denied the plundering of the caliphate and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** She referred to the situation of the rulers and the public.  
 **[2]** A’lam an-Nisa’, vol.4 p. 128-129. 

putting it in other than its actual place. She mentioned the reasons
that made the people turn their backs to Imam Ali (a.s.) and treat him
badly. It was the assaults of his (Imam Ali) sword that harvested the
heads of the polytheists and the unbelievers of Quraysh. That caused the
people of Quraysh bear grudge and enmity against Imam Ali (a.s.) who did
not flatter anyone in the way of Allah. He said, ‘By Allah, I will take
back the right of the oppressed from their oppressors, and I will drive
the unjust with their noses until I will bring them to the way of the
truth even if they are unwilling.’**[1]**

She said that what made the people of Quraysh try their best to avenge
on Imam Ali (a.s.) was his utmost courage and carelessness about his
death in the fields of jihad against the polytheists and atheists. He
devoted himself to keep alive the religion of Allah and spread
monotheism. These reasons besides the unique virtues and talents that
Allah had granted him with and his infinite devotedness and loyalty to
the Prophet (a.s.) made the people bear grudge and envy against him.

She also said that if the nation entrusted Imam Ali (a.s.) with the
affairs, he would rule them with pure justice that no one in his state
would be wronged at all, would be loyal and truthful to the nation
secretly and publicly, and that he would take the nation to the bliss of
safety, ease, and peace. If Imam Ali (a.s.) undertook the reigns of the
rule, he would not enjoy even a bit of the wealth of the state and
people, and would participate with the poor and the deprived in their
pains and sufferings. And that came true when he assumed the caliphate
after the killing of Uthman bin Affan the third caliph. He was satisfied
with a coarse garment and two loaves of barley bread. He did not build
himself a house when being a caliph. He participated with the poor and
the deprived in their clothes and food. He said, ‘Would I be satisfied
with myself to be said: “Ameerul Mo'minin” while I do not participate
with them in the calamities of time and be an example to them in the
difficulties of living?’**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 32 p. 49.  
 **[2]** Ibid., vol. 33 p. 474.

The history of the East, or even of the entire world, has never seen a
ruler like Imam Ali (a.s.) in his asceticism, piety, justice, and
disdaining from the subjects’ properties.

Fatima (a.s.) stated that if Imam Ali (a.s.) was entrusted with the
affairs of Muslims, bounties and blessings would spread everywhere and
people would eat from above their heads and from under their feet, but
Muslims prevented themselves from this great blessing and they exchanged
the good with the bad and the just with the unjust and they turned away
from the one who would guide them to the right path.

She thought deeply on that which the nation would suffer because of
turning the caliphate away from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and saw that
sedition would afflict the Muslims, separate their unity, and notch
their bonds. She too saw that Muslims would be overwhelmed by unjust and
oppressive ones, and this soon came true. The Umayyads and the Abbasids
seized the reigns of the nation and subjugated the Muslims. They
oppressed the people and spread terror and violence throughout the
Muslim world. Hence and due to these reasons, Fatima (a.s.) resisted the
government of Abu Bakr and asked the Muslims to overthrow it.

### Unacceptable excuse

<span style="letter-spacing:.3pt"> Abu Bakr and his friend Umar tried to
appease Fatima (a.s.) to give their caliphate a kind of legality. They
asked permission to visit her but she refused to receive them. Then for
another time they tried and she refused again. They went to Imam Ali
(a.s.) and asked him to intercede for them with her, and she responded
to Imam Ali (a.s.). When they came to her, she turned her face away from
them. They begged her to pardon them. She said to them, “I adjure you by
Allah, did you not hear the messenger of Allah say:‘the pleasure of
Fatima is from my pleasure and the displeasure of Fatima is from my
displeasure? Whoever loves Fatima my daughter loves me, whoever pleases
Fatima pleases me, and whoever displeases Fatima displeases me’?”</span>

They both said that they did hear the Prophet (a.s.) say that.

She raised her hands towards the heaven and said, ‘I make Allah and His
angels bear witness that you both displeased me and did not

please me. When I meet the messenger of Allah, I shall complain to him
against you.’ She turned towards Abu Bakr and said to him, ‘By Allah, I
will pray Allah against you in every prayer that I offer.’**[1]**

How heavy words they were! They were heavier than the strikes of swords.
The ground shook under the feet of these two sheikhs. They left Fatima’s
house with a great disappointment. They understood how much the wrath
that they had burdened themselves with was.

### Deep sorrow

The sorrow at the loss of her father tore Fatima’s heart. Every moment
she remembered him with regret and distress. She longed for the voice of
Bilal, her father’s caller, who stopped calling the azan after the
Prophet’s death. He responded to her and began calling the azan. When
she heard him say “Allahu Akbar”, she remembered her father and could
not control her tears. She began weeping. When Bilal recited “Ashhadu
anna Muhammadan Rasoolullah; I bear witness that Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah”, she sighed and fell to the ground unconscious.
People shouted, ‘O Bilal, give up! The daughter of the messenger of
Allah has left this life.’ Then, Fatima (a.s.) recovered consciousness
and asked Bilal to keep on reciting the azan, but he did not do.**[2]**

Disasters and calamities attacked Fatima (a.s.) one after the other, the
worst of which was the people’s denying of her right and their
excessiveness in harming her. They ignored her position and the
Prophet’s recommendation about her. That left deep sorrow and distress
in her self. She resorted to crying for she found relief in it until she
was considered as one of the Five Criers**[3]** who kept on sadness and
crying.

Anas bin Malik, who was one of the men who put the Prophet (a.s.) in his
last abode, visited Fatima (a.s.) to console her on her father’s death.
She said to him, ‘How were your souls pleased to pour earth on the
messenger of Allah?’  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Imama wes-Siyasa, vol. 1 p. 14, A’lam an-Nisa’, vol. 3 p.
(1214), Imam Ali bin Abi Talib by Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsud, vol. 1 p.
218.  
 **[2]** Fatima az-Zahra’ Bahjatu Qalb al-Mustafa, p. 113.  
 **[3]** The Five Criers were Adam, Jacob, Joseph, Ali bin al-Husayn
(Imam as-Sajjad), and Fatima (a.s.). Refer to Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 11 p.
204.

Anas stopped talking. He sank into deep sorrow and left shedding
tears.**[1]**

Fatima (a.s.) insisted on her cousin and husband Imam Ali (a.s.) to show
her the shirt in which he had washed her father (the ritual wash of the
dead). He brought her the shirt. She began eagerly kissing and smelling
it. It was the shirt that touched her father’s body before being in his
last abode. She felt great pain and sorrow until she lost
consciousness.**[2]**

The image of her father appeared to her in every moment of her short
life that she lived after him. She cried most of her time. Historians
say that people could not bear her continuous crying, for her house was
next to the mosque of the Prophet (a.s.) where people always held
meetings. They complained of her to Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him that
she should assign a certain time for her weeping and mourning for her
father because they found rest neither at day nor at night. Imam Ali
(a.s.) asked her for that and she responded. In the day, she, with her
children al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and Zaynab, went to a big tree outside
Medina and sat under its shadow. She spent all the day weeping for her
father there, and a little before the sunset, she came back home with
her children. People purposely cut that tree. After that, she wept under
the heat of the sun. Imam Ali (a.s.) built her a house there and called
it “the House of Sorrows”. This house remained (until now) as a symbol
of the pains and sufferings she met from her father’s companions.

It is said that Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.) said this verse of poetry,

“By her highness, I will not take

after “the House of Sorrows” a house of joy.”

Fatima (a.s.) spent the day in that sad house soliloquizing and weeping
for her father bitterly. When the night came, Imam Ali (a.s.) went to
bring her with the children back to their house.**[3]** Sorrow, weeping,
and mourning tore Fatima’s tender heart, and diseases attacked and
weakened her body… And thus was the reward of the people to their
Prophet’s household!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sunan Ibn Maja, 18, al-Mawahib al-Laduniyya, vol. 2 p. 381.  
 **[2]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 168.  
 **[3]** The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 286. It is said
that it is the mosque of Fatima (a.s.) that lies in al-Baqee’.
