Foreword
========

This is a study on the highest lady in the history of Islam at all. She
is Fatima az-Zahra’ (peace be on her), the daughter of the Prophet
(a.s.), the part of him, and his trust to his nation. He was utmost
loyal in his love to her. He fed her with his talents, geniuses, and
mentality.

The messenger of Allah (a.s.) put Fatima (a.s.) in the highest place,
and most honorable position in Islam to be the highest example for the
women of his nation, not in chastity and abstinence only, but to play
her role in the inclusive reformation if his umma (nation) would go
astray. And indeed, the principal of women (a.s.) undertook her positive
role when the umma deviated from its spiritual and worldly leadership
that the Prophet (a.s.) had assigned to be in the people of his house
who were the centers of knowledge and intellect in the world of Islam.
She, peace be on her, set stably, bravely, and loftily against the
rulers and invited them to straightness and to the very principles of
Islam. She asked them to return the caliphate to the master of the pure
progeny Ameerul Mo'minin, Imam Ali (a.s.) whom the messenger of Allah
(a.s.) had appointed as his successor, the caliph, and the leader over
the umma.

\*\*\*

The Prophet (a.s.) did not leave any kind of honoring, reverence, and
glorification, but he showed to his daughter. He announced that in the
yard of his mosque, from on his minbar, and in all his meetings. This
veneration was strange to that society that disregarded, despised, and
disdained woman. A man was grieved when his wife gave birth to a female.
The Holy Qur'an says, (*When one of them receives tidings of the birth
of a female, his face remains darkened, and he is wroth inwardly.
16:58)* The people of that society buried their daughters alive, and it
was famous among them their saying “the

burying of girls is a virtue”. Allah says in the Qur'an, *(And when the
female infant that was buried alive is asked; For what sin she was
killed. 81:9)*

The Prophet (a.s.) wanted, out of honoring his daughter Fatima (a.s.),
to make Muslims know her high position to him, and know her educational,
religious, and scientific virtues. She was extremely perfect, and
therefore, the Prophet (a.s.) wanted to make her as a high example for
his umma; men and women. Besides, he wanted to reinforce her situation
in jihad that she would undertake after him.

The Prophet (a.s.) established a new society that acknowledged the right
and the high position of woman, and acknowledged her importance in the
religion of Allah.

\*\*\*

The certain thing that has no bit of doubt is that the Prophet (a.s.)
did not follow any emotional or material tendency, for the importance of
prophethood was above that. He preferred the satisfaction of Allah to
everything else. He was sincere in all his conducts, for he was the
greatest propagandist of Allah who did not speak out of desire but a
revelation that was revealed to him.

And the certain thing that has no bit of doubt is that the veneration
and high respect the Prophet (a.s.) showed to his daughter besides his
preferring her to all the women of the worlds, as mentioned in the
traditions that were transmitted from him in the books of Hadith and
other books of history, were not out of the sentiment of fatherhood, but
it came out of the real infallibility, abstinence, and the deep faith in
Allah that Fatima (a.s.) had, besides her full perceiving of her
father’s heavenly mission. She was a treasure from the treasures of
Islam, a high example from the spirituality of prophethood, and a light
that guided the nation from ignorance to the truth.

\*\*\*

The principal of the women of the worlds (a.s.), since the beginning of
the Islamic mission, helped and assisted her father who met bitter
cruelty and persecution from the tyrants of Quraysh,**[1]** at the head
of whom was the Umayyad gang under the leadership of Abu Sufyan who
spared no effort in trying to put out the light of Islam and to revive
the characteristics of the pre-Islamic era with all its sins and vices.

Fatima (a.s.) was a young girl then. She comforted her father, treated
his wounds, and washed his clothes from the filths that the rude men of
Quraysh threw on him. Her soul melted for him, and she cried bitterly
for his sufferings in the way of the mission. She occupied the feelings
and sentiments of her father, and therefore, he had special love in the
deep of his heart towards her. He preferred her to the rest of his
children.

\*\*\*

Asceticism and turning away from the desires and pleasures of the
worldly life was the prominent feature in the life of Fatima (a.s). She
was satisfied with a very simple living. Historians say that her food
was not more than water and bread, and the furniture in her house was a
bed made of palm-tree branches, a sheep skin, some pillows stuffed with
palm-tree fibers, and some pottery. It had never been mentioned that she
had ever asked or insisted on her husband to bring her any of the
pleasures of life. She was satisfied with the simplest living that the
poorest people lived. It was a lesson for Muslim woman not to burden her
husband with heavy requests that he cannot carry out.

\*\*\*

It is nonsense and confusion, and in fact, it is out of the enmity to
Islam that which Lamans said in his book “Fatima and the daughters of
Muhammad”. He said that the Prophet (a.s.) hated Fatima (a.s.) because
he had married her to Imam Ali (a.s.) who was poor, and that the
furniture of her house was too simple. Lamans did forget that Islam had
established the marital relation on the basis of love

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The tribe which inhabited Mecca at the time of the Prophet
(a.s.) and to which he belonged.

and kindness between spouses paying no attention to the means of luxury.
The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘The best women of my nation are those whose
dowries are the least.’ Do furniture and means of luxury have any value
if the marital life is full of troubles, hatred, and spite?

\*\*\*

Allah the Almighty gave a prevailing victory to His slave and messenger
Muhammad (a.s.). Islam prevailed and defeated all enemies. Mecca, which
was the strong fort for the enemies of Islam, was conquered and people
entered the religion of Allah a troop after another. This short period
was the happiest period in the life of Fatima (a.s.), for Islam
triumphed and its enemies were defeated.

In this period, the principal of the women of the worlds undertook the
leadership of the women of Muslims. She taught them the Holy Qur'an and
gave lectures on the principles and values of Islam. She took the women
towards the nobilities of character and high ideals, and taught them the
rulings of Islam and woman’s duties towards her husband, children, and
family.

Fatima (a.s.) lived during that period in veneration and glorification
under the care and mercy of her father (a.s.), besides the great respect
and regard she got from the Muslim women and the Prophet’s companions.

\*\*\*

When the Prophet (a.s.) left to the better world, Fatima (a.s.) suffered
severe distresses and misfortunes. She received aversion and cruelty
from some of her father’s companions. They denied her high position and
importance to her father. She said in some poetry, or some poet said
describing her,

“Disasters were poured on me that if they were poured on days,

they would turn nights.”

What were those disasters that changed the happy days of Fatima (a.s.)
into dark nights?!

What were those pains that made her disgust life and wish eagerly to
join her father?!

The beloved daughter of the messenger of Allah (a.s.) lived a short
period after the death of her father surrounded by waves of distresses
and sufferings, and then she joined her father in the better world while
she was in the prime of youth yet.

\*\*\*

Disasters were not limited to Fatima az-Zahra’ the daughter of the
messenger of Allah alone, but they afflicted her children after her too.
Her eldest son Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) met from Mo’awiya different
calamities and pains until, finally, he was poisoned to death by him.

Her second son Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) was afflicted with disasters that
mountain would shake before. The great army of criminals that Yazid bin
Mo’awiya, the wicked Umayyad caliph, sent to fight Imam al-Husayn (a.s.)
surrounded the imam, his family, and companions in the desert of
Kerbala, and prevented them from water until women and children were
about to die of thirsty. The spiteful army of Yazid killed the best
choice of the progeny of the messenger of Allah, and the best of his
companions. Then swords came to Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) to tear him into
pieces and maim his holy body. They buried the corpses of their killed
ones, but left the pure corpses of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) and his family
and followers on the desert. Later on, some men from bani**[1]** Asad
buried these martyrs to change into light stands for Muslims who
circumambulated them and still do as they circumambulate the Kaaba, for
they have become symbols of justice, dignity, and all values that
Muslims pride of.

As for Fatima’s only daughter Zaynab, she also faced successive
calamities. She saw the murders of her brothers and all the members of
her family before her eyes. She saw the fierce attack of the wicked
criminals towards her and the daughters of prophethood while holding
flaming torches and crying out : “Burn the houses of the unjust!”

O my God!

The house of prophethood, the source of mercy, the center of wisdom

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bani means “the family of” or “the tribe of”.

and knowledge was “the house of injustice” due to those criminals,
whereas the house of the (illegitimate) son of Marjanah, and the house
of his master the drunkard Yazid were “the houses of justice”!!!

The criminals set fire to the tents of the Alawid women who ran away in
the desert followed by fire. The enemies of Allah robbed the jewels of
those women and all that they had, and then they were taken as captives
to the terrorist, criminal son of Marjanah, and then to his master Yazid
the grandson of Abu Sufyan who was the head of the polytheists. These
women of the house of prophethood were carried from a country to
another, and their faces were exposed to this and that.

These calamities that the Prophet’s progeny faced were, undoubtedly, a
result of the saying that some people called for after the death of the
Prophet (a.s.) that “prophethood and caliphate should not gather in one
house”.

From the direct results of this saying was that the Umayyads assumed the
rule and exceeded in killing the Ahlul Bayt (s)**[1]** and whoever
believed and followed them.

\*\*\*

The terrible events that took place in the first Islamic age tried
Muslims severely and left for them seditions and great evils. The sad
events that took place directly after the departure of the Prophet
(a.s.) were the source of the great sedition that afflicted Muslims and
separated their unity throughout their history. These events must be
studied as they were with no partiality or tendency.

From the most terrible events of that age was the attack against the
house of Fatima (a.s.) that caused her to miscarry her fetus. The
attackers, who were eminent companions of the Prophet (a.s.), threatened
to set fire to her house. Some past and present historians and authors
concealed, intentionally, these events to sanctify and exalt those
companions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**The prophet’s progeny.

I think that studying these events objectively and accurately will be
fruitful for all Muslims. It shall unite Muslims, remove confusions and
ambiguities, and show the truth, for the Islamic history had been mixed
with fabrications, distortions, and lies.

\*\*\*

He, who studies the history of the first age of Islam impartially and
away from emotions, will be certain that there was a plot intendedly
concluded against the Ahlul Bayt (s) in order to keep them away from the
political life, the rule, and all affairs of the state. People tried
their best to obtain the authority, the leadership of the nation, and
the wealth of the country. They gave deaf ears to what the Prophet
(a.s.) had said and they threw his traditions into the wastebasket. The
nation suffered, because of that, terrible problems and lost too much.

From the direct results of extorting the caliphate from the Ahlul Bayt
(s) was that people revolts broke out where rivers of Muslims’ blood
were shed. Sorrow spread everywhere and widows and orphans were in every
house. Surely, all that was because people deviated from the path that
the Prophet (a.s.) had established for his nation and guaranteed success
for it if it would keep to the Qur'an and the pure progeny.

\*\*\*

Certainly, authority and caliphate had no value near the Ahlul Bayt (s)
who had been created for virtue and perfection. They had no any tendency
to the rule. The importance of the rule to them was just to establish
the truth and spread justice among all people.

Once, Ameerul Mo'minin (Imam Ali) (a.s.) saw his vizier delighted for
the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.) who had a shoe made of palm-tree fibers
in his hand. Imam Ali (a.s.) said,

‘O ibn Abbas, what is the value of this shoe?’

Ibn Abbas said, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, it has no value.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘It is better to me than your caliphate except
that I establish the truth and resist falseness…’

For these noble aims that Muslims would enjoy, the wish of the Ahlul
Bayt (s) to the undertaking of the leadership of the nation was.

Imam Ali (a.s.) showed the motives behind his dispute with Abu Bakr
saying, ‘O Allah, You know that, which was between us and Abu Bakr, was
not a competition on authority or looking forward to something of the
pleasures of this world, but it was to carry out the rulings of Your
religion, and revive the annulled penalties of Yours, so that the
oppressed of Your people would be safe…’

And really, when the Islamic caliphate, which was the shadow of Allah in
the earth, was taken away from the Ahlul Bayt (s), the Umayyads and
after them the Abbasid jumped to it and it became as a play in their
hands. They spent the wealth of the nation on amusements and pleasures.
They ruled over the nation with injustice and oppression. At first sight
on the history of those kings, it shall be clear that they poured
terrible calamities and misfortunes on the nation.

The situation of Fatima (a.s.) towards the rule of Abu Bakr and her
resisting to him was just for the welfare of the nation and to protect
it against injustice and oppression.

\*\*\*

From the direct results and fruits of the resistance of Fatima (a.s.) to
the rule of Abu Bakr was the foundation of the school of the Ahlul Bayt
(s) that represented the real Islam with its deep legislations and
wonderful rulings that the infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (s)
spread.

The historic sermon that Fatima (a.s.) had made in the yard of her
father’s mosque put everything in its place. In that speech, she
declared the great dangers and crises that the nation would face because
of taking the caliphate away from the progeny of the Prophet (a.s.) who
were the house of revelation, the center of knowledge, and the pillars
of honor in Islam. By her will to her husband Imam Ali (a.s.), she
strengthened her situation that denied the rule of Abu Bakr.

She asked, in her will, Imam Ali (a.s.) to bury her, after death, in the
darkness of night, and not to let anyone of those, who oppressed and
deprived her of her rights, escort her pure corpse or attend her
funerals.

A part of Muslims followed the Ahlul Bayt (s), and the faith in them has
been an essential part in their religious life. The followers of the
Ahlul Bayt (s) depend on the traditions transmitted from the imams of
the Ahlul Bayt (s) in legislation, and not from other than them of the
other sects of Muslims.

\*\*\*

This study is not limited to the sufferings or the bad events that
Fatima (a.s) faced after the death of her father. It offers an inclusive
review on the high qualities of her great personality such as chastity,
purity, infallibility, deep faith in Allah, and other qualities that
were similar to her father’s. She was like her father, the messenger of
Allah, in most of his qualities by which he was preferred to all of the
other prophets.

Muslim women would better imitate Fatima (a.s) and make her their
example in everything. They might take the day of her birth as an
occasion to hold festivals for honoring this great Lady and taking
lessons from her conducts, morals, and teachings.

\*\*\*

I do not think that any of the personalities of Islam had got veneration
and glorification like that which the principal of the women of the
worlds had got. Muslim and non-Muslim scholars got the honor of
researching on her biography, conducts, and all details of her life,
sayings, and deeds. About three hundred books have been written about
her. Some of them are encyclopedias, like “Al-Kawthar fee Ahwal Fatima
bint an-Nabiy al-At~har” by Allama Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Musawi.
Another encyclopedia is “Know that I am Fatima” by Sheikh Abdul Hameed
al-Muhajir who had spent twenty years in writing this encyclopedia.

Lamans, the orientalist, has written a book on Fatima (a.s.), but he
attacked Fatima (a.s) claiming that her father had married her to Ali
who was poor and who took her to a simple house with poor furniture.
Great researcher as-Sayooti had mentioned in his book “Musnad Fatima”
the traditions that Fatima (a.s) narrated from her father (a.s.).

Anyhow, this book, which I hope it shall be useful and interesting, is
one of the books that have been written about Fatima (a.s), and the
judgment on it is left to readers.

\*\*\*

Before I end this foreword, I would like to offer my gratefulness to
Sayyid Jawad al-Wada’iy for his continuous help in publishing what I
have written about the lives of the infallible imams (peace be on them).

I offer my sincere gratefulness to Sayyid Abdullah Hashim al-Musawi for
his help in publishing my books praying Allah to reward him with the
best of His reward.

**Baqir Shareef al-Qurashi  
 Holy Najaf  
 23<sup>rd</sup>, Sha’ban, 1422 AH.**
