The Noble Lineage
=================

There is no lineage in the earth higher than the lineage of Fatima, the
principal of the women of the worlds.

Her father
----------

The father of Fatima (a.s) is the master of the creation and the chief
of mankind who had opened the horizons of intellect and light, and
established the civilization that had saved man from the abysses of sins
and superstitions that he had sunk in. Her father was a treasure from
the treasures of Allah and a gift from Him for His people to teach them
the Book and wisdom, though they were, before him, ignorant and in
manifest error.

It was her father who had changed the history of man, where the weak
were easy bites for the strong, girls were buried alive, and idols were
worshipped instead of the One and Only Creator, into a shiny life where
all people were equal, where there was no preference for man to woman,
and where reason ruled over man instead of superstitions. It was her
father who had freed man from ignorance, bad habits, and poverty.

It was enough for Fatima (a.s) that she was the daughter of the
messenger of Allah, His beloved, and His last prophet, and it was enough
for Fatima that she was the most beloved, and the closest to her father
from among all his children and from among all people.

Her mother
----------

The mother of Fatima (a.s) was Khadijah bint Khuwaylid who was called as
“the mistress of the women of Quraysh” in the pre-Islamic era, and “the
Mother of the Believers” in Islam. She was from a noble, honored,
glorious house. She met with the Prophet (a.s.) in Qusay who was the
fourth grandfather of the Prophet (a.s.) and the third grandfather of
her, and this lineage ended to Prophet Abraham

(a.s.). No woman from Quraysh was like her in her high position and
lofty rank. She was the first spark in the great Islamic Revolution that
spread light everywhere and destroyed the forts of atheism and
polytheism.

Here, we talk in brief about some concerns of this great lady who was
the mother of the best woman Allah had ever created in the earth; Fatima
(a.s) the mother of the Prophet’s two grandsons al-Hasan al-Husayn whom
the Prophet’s progeny stemmed only from.

### The wealth of Khadijah

Lady Khadijah was so wealthy that no one of the merchants of Quraysh had
wealth like hers. Historians say that the merchants of Mecca traded with
the capitals of Lady Khadijah. They went to some countries like Sham to
sell their goods there, and to bring clothes and some kinds of food that
the people of Mecca needed. Therefore, her wealth grew bigger and
bigger.

### The Prophet (a.s.) trades with her money

Prophet Muhammad (before prophethood) suggested to his uncle Abu Talib,
who loved him too much, that he wanted to trade with the money of Lady
Khadijah, and Abu Talib agreed to his suggestion.

Al-Wafidi says that it was his uncle Abu Talib, who encouraged him to
trade with the money of Lady Khadijah by saying to him, ‘O my nephew, I
am a man of no money, and life is difficult for us, and severe years
have struck us and left us neither with money nor with trade. These are
the caravans of your people ready to go to Sham, and Khadijah sends men
to trade with her money and get profits. If you go to her, she will
prefer you to all others because she has been informed about your
fidelity and purity, though I hate for you to go to Sham, and I fear for
you from the Jews. I was informed that she had hired so-and-so for two
camels, and we do not accept for you like what she had given to him. Do
you want me to talk to her about you?’****[1]****

The Prophet (a.s.) said, ‘As you like, uncle.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Uyoon al-Athar, vol.1 p.57. At-Tabari in his Tareekh, vol.2
p.126, mentioned that Khadijah had suggested to the Prophet (a.s.) to go
to Sham trading with her money.

The Prophet (a.s.), or his uncle Abu Talib asked Lady Khadijah to trade
with her capital, and she responded delightedly for she knew that
Muhammad was honest and with high morals unlike the youth of Quraysh who
were involved in play and pleasures.

She gave him some monies and sent with him her servant Maysarah. The
Prophet (a.s.) went to Sham. He sold his goods in Sham, bought others
from there, and came back. He made great profits that no one from those,
who traded with the money of Lady Khadijah, had ever made before him.
Maysarah was astonished by the wonders he saw in his travel with the
Prophet (a.s.). He saw a cloud moving over them to make a shadow for the
Prophet (a.s.), and he saw the Prophet’s special looks at the heaven
that showed deep faith in Allah.

Lady Khadijah was pleased with the talk of her servant. She loved the
Prophet (a.s.) and thought he would have a great future that would
include all the earth.

### The marriage of the Prophet with Khadijah

Lady Khadijah believed, with no bit of doubt, that Muhammad would be the
prophet by whose mission the world would shine. It was he whom the
prophets of Allah had brought good tidings about before. She proposed to
him to marry her, and she gave him some money (so that he would give it
to her as if it was his) to be as her dowry. The Prophet (a.s.) told his
uncle Abu Talib who became very pleased for that, because he knew
Khadijah and knew her high position and honor. He knew that she refused
to get married to the masters and chiefs of Quraysh when they asked for
her hand. Abu Talib, Hamza, and other uncles of the Prophet (a.s.) went
to Khuwaylid, the father of Khadijah, who received them warmly and was
pleased with this marriage.

### The speech of Abu Talib

On the occasion of the engagement of the Prophet (a.s.) and Khadijah,
Abu Talib made a speech saying,

“Praise be to Allah, Who has made us from the progeny of Abraham and the
offspring of Ishmael, and made for us an inviolable country, and a House
of pilgrimage, and made us the rulers over people. Then, Muhammad bin
Abdullah, my nephew, is one that no one of the

 youth of Quraysh is compared to him unless he is preferred to him by
his piety, virtue, determination, reason, discernment, and nobility,
though he is of little money, but money is a transient shadow and a loan
that shall be given back. He has a wish towards Khadijah bint Khuwaylid,
and she has like that. Whatever dowry you would like I shall
pay…”****[1]****

Khuwaylid agreed, and Khadijah, who was forty years old, was carried in
procession to the house of her husband Muhammad (a.s.) who was
twenty-five years old then.

Lady Khadijah got married by her own option and freedom, turning her
back to the traditions of her age that it was man who would propose to
woman and not vice versa. Khadijah took her big wealth with her to the
Prophet (a.s.) who spent it neither on himself nor on her, but on the
Islamic mission. The wealth of Khadijah was one of the pillars that
Islam depended on in its success.

The marital relation between the Prophet (a.s.) and Khadijah was based
on love, kindness, and sincerity. It was the best marital life in Mecca.
Khadijah was so sincere to the Prophet (a.s.) and the Prophet (a.s.)
found with her all love and care that he had missed because of the death
of his parents whom he had lost since his early childhood.

### In the cave of Hara’

The Prophet (a.s.) liked loneliness in the cave of Hara’. He spent long
times there pondering on the signs of Allah, and on all facts in the
universe that proved the existence of a Great Creator. His loyal wife
watched and cared much for him. She feared too much for him. She sent
some ones after him to guard him.****[2]**** She was certain that he
would be the great prophet that Allah had chosen to save man from the
darkness of ignorance.

In the cave of Hara’, the Prophet (a.s.) received the message of Allah
the Almighty. Gabriel came down to him, honored him with the
prophethood, and ordered him to recite a sura from the Book of Allah. It
was the sura of “Iqra’; al-Alaq”. The Prophet (a.s.) got up  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

****[1]**** Sharh Nahjol Balaghah by ibn Abil Hadid, vol.3 p.316.  
 **[2]** As-Seera an-Nabawiyyah by ibn Hisham, vol.1 p.253.

and the angel was with him. Wherever he turned he saw him. The Prophet
(a.s.) went home frightfully. He talked to his wife about what he saw
and heard, and she cried out,

“Allah guards us. O cousin, be delighted and be firm! I swear by Him, in
Whose hand the soul of Khadijah is, that I see you will be the prophet
of this nation. Allah will not disgrace you at all, for you keep
relation with your kin, are truthful in your speech, give deposits back
to their owners, carry food (for the needy), entertain guests, and
relieve the distresses of others.”**[1]**

This speech of Khadijah relieved the Prophet (a.s.) and made him feel
safe and calm. When the Prophet (a.s.) went to bed, Gabriel came to him
again carrying with him another Sura. The sura recited, (O you who are
clothed. Arise and warn… 74:1-2) It was no time for sleep. He had to
rise and struggle to save man from ignorance and the slavery to other
than Allah the Almighty. The Prophet (a.s.) jumped from his bed and told
his wife Khadijah what he saw again. She encouraged him with more
resolution.

### Khadijah with Waraqah

Khadijah went to her cousin Waraqah bin Nawfal who was a virtuous man
and had taken knowledge from the Torah and the Bible from priests and
scholars. Waraqah became delighted with the talk of Khadijah and said
enthusiastically and faithfully, ‘The Most Holy, the Most Holy! By Him
in Whose hand the soul of Waraqah is, you would believe me that the
Great Law, that had come to Moses and Jesus, has come to him. Surely, he
is the prophet of this nation. Say to him to be firm!’****[2]****

Khadijah went back to the Prophet (a.s.) and told him what Waraqah said.
She encouraged and gave him more confidence. The Prophet

(a.s.) was pleased to hear that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.1 p.205. **  
 [2]** Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.2 p.206, as-Seera an-Nabawiyyah, vol.1
p.254.

### Khadijah and Ali the first Muslims

All historians say that Khadijah was the first one who believed in Islam
and embraced the mission that Allah had revealed to His slave and
messenger Muhammad (a.s.) and then Ali Ameerul Mo'minin (a.s.).

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘…and there was no house, then, that gathered in
Islam save the messenger of Allah (a.s.), Khadijah, and me the third of
them.’**[1]**

Ibn Abbas said, ‘Ali was the first one who believed (in Islam) from
among people after Khadijah.’**[2]**

Imam Ali (a.s.), when he turned a Muslim, was seven years old, and it
was said nine years.**[3]**

Muhammad (a.s.) became prophet on Monday, and he, with Khadijah and Imam
Ali, who was a young boy then, offered the prayer in the Kaaba on
Tuesday.**[4]**

Afif al-Kindi said, ‘Once in the pre-Islamic age, I went to Mecca to buy
some clothes and perfumes for my family. I went to al-Abbas bin Abdul
Muttalib (one of the Prophet’s uncles) who was a merchant. While I was
with him sitting looking at the Kaaba and the sun was high in the sky, a
young man came, looked at the sky, and stood up towards the Kaaba. After
no long, a young boy came and stood on his right, and then a woman cam
and stood behind them. The young man bowed, and the boy and the woman
bowed with him. Then, the young man prostrated himself, and the boy and
the woman prostrated too. I astonishedly said,

‘O Abbas, it is a great thing!’

Al-Abbas said, ‘Yes, it is a great thing! Do you know who this young man
is?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Encyclopedia of Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali, vol.1 p.80, as-Seera
an-Nabawiyyah, vol.1 p.254. **  
 [2]** Imta’ al-Asma’, vol.1 p.16. **  
 [3]** Sahih of at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.301, Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol.3 p.21,
Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.400. **[4]** Tahthib al-Kamal, vol.20 p.482.

I said, ‘No.’

He said, ‘He is Muhammad bin Abdullah, my nephew. Do you know who this
young boy is?

I said, ‘No.’

He said, ‘He is Ali bin Abi Talib. Do you know who this woman is?’

I said, ‘No.’

He said, ‘She is Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, Muhammad’s wife. My nephew (he
appointed to Muhammad) told me that his Lord, the Lord of the heaven and
the earth, had ordered him with this religion. By Allah, there is no one
on the earth in this religion except these three ones.’**[1]**

Khadijah was with the Prophet (a.s.) all the time. She did not let him
alone even in his circumambulation around the Kaaba. Abdullah bin Mas’ud
said, ‘The first time I knew about the matter (prophethood) of the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) was that once, I came to Mecca with some
uncles of mine. We were guided to al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib who was
sitting at the well of Zamzam. While we were sitting with him, a young
man came from the gate of as-Safa. He was reddish-white…wearing white
clothes. He was like a full moon. On his right, there was a beardless,
beautiful young boy, and after him a veiled woman. He went to the
(Black) Rock and kissed it, and the young boy kissed it, and then the
woman did so. Then, he circumambulated the House (the Kaaba), and the
boy and the woman circumambulated with him.

We said, ‘O Abul Fadhl (al-Abbas), we have not known such a religion
among you. Has something happened?’

Al-Abbas said, ‘This is my nephew Muhammad, the boy is Ali bin Abi
Talib, and the woman is Khadijah.’

Ibn Mas’ud said, ‘By Allah, we have not known anyone on the face of the
earth worshipping Allah by this religion except these three
ones.’**[2]**

Khadijah and Ali (peace be on them) were the first ones who believed in
the Prophet (a.s.) and embraced the new religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Khasa’iss an-Nassa’iy, 3, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol.1
p.309, Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol.8 p.14. **  
 [2]** Majma’ az-Zawa’id by al-Haythami, vol.9 p.222, Kanzol Ummal,
vol.7 p.56.

### Moral assistance to the Prophet (a.s.)  

Khadijah, the Mother of the Believers, stood with the Prophet (a.s.)
supporting and assisting him in bearing the severest harms and
persecution he received from Quraysh.

Ibn Isaaq said, ‘Whenever the messenger of Allah heard something that he
hated (from the people of Quraysh) and accusing him of lying, Allah
relieved him by Khadijah. When he came back to her, she encouraged and
comforted him. She believed him and made the troubles of people easy to
him. She did so until she joined her Lord.’**[1]**

### Economical assistance

Lady Khadijah offered her great wealth to support Islam. She spent all
what she had to propagandize for the Islamic mission. When Quraysh
confined the Prophet (a.s.) and the Hashemites in Shi’b Abi Talib and
imposed a severe economical blockade on them, Khadijah supplied them
with all what they needed throughout the period of the blockade which
was more than two years.

Lady Khadijah offered to Islam all her wealth until she became poor
where she had no mat to sit on.

### Greetings from Allah to Khadijah

Lady Khadijah had a very high position near Allah the Almighty. Allah
had thanked her great services and assistance to the Prophet (a.s.) in
supporting Islam. Many true traditions were transmitted saying that
Allah had sent her greetings and peace through His slave and messenger
Muhammad (a.s.).**[2]**

### Her house in the Paradise

For the lofty position Khadijah had near Allah, Allah had endowed her
with a house in the High Paradise. It would be one of the high palaces
that Allah had prepared for the good believing men and good believing
women. It is related that the Prophet (a.s.) had said,   ‘I have been
ordered to bring good news of a house of reeds in the Paradise for
Khadijah. There will be neither clamor nor pains in it.’**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Isabah, vol.4 p.273, al-Istee’ab, vol.6 p.275. **  
 [2]** Al-Isabah, vol.4 p.274 quoted from Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 chap.
of “the Virtues of Khadijah” and from Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.3 p.186,
and others.  **[3]** Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.3 p.197, Sahih
al-Bukhari, vol.5 p.48.

This will be her reward from her Lord for the great services she did to
Islam and the great favors she did Muslims.

### Her position near the Prophet (a.s.)

Lady Khadijah occupied the feelings and emotions of the Prophet (a.s.)
and had a very high position near him. He loved her too much and was
loyal to her.

Aa’ishah, the Prophet’s wife, said, ‘The Prophet, when going out of
home, often mentioned Khadijah (after her death) and praised her. Once,
he mentioned her, but I became jealous and said, ‘She was but an old
woman that Allah has given you in place of her better than her.’

The Prophet (a.s.) became angry until his forelock shook because of
anger, and then he said, ‘No, by Allah, Allah has not given me in place
of her better than her. She believed in me when people disbelieved,
comforted me with her money when people denied me, and Allah had granted
me offspring from her where He had not granted me from other
wives.’**[1]** 

Once, Halah, Khadijah’s sister, came to Medina and visited the Prophet’s
house. When the Prophet (a.s.) heard her voice, which was like the voice
of Khadijah, in the yard of the house, he said, ‘O my Lord, she is Halah
bint Khuwaylid…’

Aa’isha could not control herself and she said, ‘What do you remember
from an old woman from the old women of Quraysh?... She died since long,
and Allah has given you in place of her better than her.’**[2]**

The Prophet (a.s.) became angry and he shouted at Aa'isha, ‘No, by
Allah, Allah has not given me better than her. She believed in me when
people disbelieved, believed me when people accused me of lying,
comforted me with her wealth when people denied me, and Allah granted me
offspring from her when he did not granted me from wives other than
her.’**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Fatima wel Mufadhdhalat min an-Nisa’ (Fatima and the preferred
women), p.66. **  
 [2]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.7 p.134. **[3]** Al-Istee’ab, vol.4 p.182.

When the Prophet (a.s.) slaughtered a sheep, he said (to servants),
‘Take (some meat) to the friends of Khadijah!’

Once, Aa'isha said to him, ‘Why do you do that?’

He said, ‘I do like her beloveds.’**[1]**

In another tradition, it was narrated that the Prophet (a.s.) had said,
‘I have been granted her love.’**[2]**

Envy overcame Aa'isha when she often heard the Prophet (a.s.) praising
Khadijah. She said, ‘I did never envy a woman like I did to Khadijah.
The messenger of Allah (a.s.) did not marry me except after her
death.’**[3]** 

The soul of Khadijah was with the Prophet (a.s.) whenever he went. His
soul was full of her love. He often and always remembered her and prayed
Allah to have mercy on her.

### The gifts of Allah on her

Allah the Almighty had endowed Khadijah with gifts that no any other one
of the Prophet’s wives had been endowed with. From the great gifts of
Allah to her was that Allah had made her the mother of the best woman
Allah had ever created in the earth since the beginning of the creation
until the Day of Resurrection; Fatima (a.s.) the principal of the women
of the worlds, and made her the grandmother of the two grandson of the
Prophet (a.s.), two infallible imams, and two masters of the youth of
Paradise; Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (peace be on them), and the
grandmother of Lady Zaynab, the first wronged and oppressed woman in
Islam. Allah had made Khadijah the grandmother of the infallible imams
who were his authorities on His people. These heavenly gifts that
Khadijah had been endowed with had not been given to any woman other
than her at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid. **  
 [2]** Sahih of Muslim, vol.7 p.134, al-Isabah, vol.8 p.63. **  
 [3]** Al-Isabah, vol.8 p.62.

### To the Paradise

Diseases attacked the Mother of Believers Khadijah and death approached
her soon. In the last moments of her life, she felt pain whenever she
looked at her only daughter Fatima az-Zahra’ (a.s.) who was a young
child then. She looked at Fatima (a.s) with pain and sigh. She
recommended the Prophet (a.s.) to take much care of her.

It was not long until Khadijah left to the better world and her pure
soul rose towards its Creator surrounded by angels and received by the
prophets with takbir and tahlil.**[1]**

The Prophet (a.s.) was afflicted by the great loss of Khadijah who
filled his life with satisfaction and tranquility, and relieved him from
the persecution of the oppressors of Quraysh. He was very sad when she
died.

Anyhow, he washed, enshrouded, and offered the prayer on her. He dug a
grave for her and buried her in it.**[2]** The loss of Khadijah caused
the Prophet (a.s.) a great sorrow until he called that year where also
his uncle Abu Talib died in it “the year of sorrow”.

Death took Khadijah, who was the most loyal to the Prophet (a.s.), the
most loving, and the best supporter to him and to his mission.

Khadijah left her daughter Fatima (a.s), who was a young child yet,
overcome by grief and sorrow. Fatima (a.s) lost her kind, loving mother
since her early years, and then she took the role of her mother toward
her father (a.s.) who still faced the harms and aggressions of Quraysh.
Fatima (a.s) comforted the loneliness of her father after her mother,
relieved his sufferings, and served him with her love and kindness until
she was called “the mother of her father”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Takbir is saying “allahhu akbar; Allah is great”, and tahlil is
saying “la ilaha illallah; there is no god but Allah”. **  
 [2]** Ad-Durr al-Manthur, p.180.
