PUBLISHER'S PREFACE
===================

***In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.***

Man performs material deeds. We can evaluate such deeds. Man sometimes
performs immaterial deeds. We cannot evaluate them. Rather, it is Allah,
the Exalted, Who evaluates them and rewards man according to them. The
deeds of the pure Ima\`ms, peace be on them, were immaterial. Hence, we
have no right to evaluate them, for they are far above evaluation. We
only publish and submit them to people to make use of them.

Gentle reader, the book before you has been written by Shaykh Ba\`qir
Sharïf al-Qarashi, who spared no effort to report the history of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. Mr. Ja\`sim
al-Rasheed has honestly translated the book from Arabic into English.
The book is not a mere writing about the life of one of the Ima\`ms,
peace be on them. Rather, it has skillfully been written about the
history of Isla\`m. So, we thank Allah for granting us success to
translate and print and publish this valuable book.

We hope that the book will intercede with Allah for us on the Day of
Judgment, “The day on which property will not avail, nor sons except him
who comes to Allah with a heart free (from evil).” In the name of Allah,
Most Gracious, Most Merciful Surely Allah chose Adam and Noah and the
descendants of Abraham and the descendants of Amran above the nations.
Offspring, one of the other, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing. Allah only
desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House,
and to purify you a (thorough) purifying. Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it except love for my near relatives. And whoever earns good,
We give him more of good therein. Surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful.


